
WILD BOUQUET 
Nature Poems 
by 
HARRY MARTINSON 
with drawings by the author 
Translated, and with an introduction, 
by 
WILLIAM JAY SMITH and 
LEIF SJOBERG 
BKMK PRESS 
College of Ans and Sciences 
University of Missouri-Kansas City 
107 Cockefair Hall, S 100 Rockhill Road 
Kansas City, Missouri 64110-2499 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Some of these translations have appeared in the following magazines and 
newspapers: The Christian Science Monitor, Norden, Poetry East, The Penny 
Paper, The Scandinavian Review, Translation, Practice of the Wind, Swedish 
Book Review (Wales), and The American Poetry Review. 
The translators wish to thank the editors of these publications for permis-
sion to reprint. 
The following poems were translated initially by W. H. Auden and Leif 
Sjoberg and have appeared earlier in a slightly different form: ''The Song in 
the Meadow," "The Cuckoo," "The Crumbling Cottage," "Butterfies," 
''Summer on the Lake,'' and ''The Song of the Thrush. '' The translators wish 
to thank the Estate of W .H. Auden and Edward Mendelson for permission 
to reprint them here. 
The originals of the poems included here are from the following books, all 
published by Bonniers, Stockholm, and all copyrighted in the years indicated; 
they are translated by permission ofBonniers: Vagnen. (1960), Dikter (1963) 
and 1974), Vinden plz marken (1964), Vildbuketten (1965), Tuvor (1973), Lings 
ekots stigar (1978). 
Cover Illustration: Harry Martinson. 
Copyright© 1985 by BkMk Press (University of Missouri-Kansas City) 
Grants from the Swedish Institute andfrom the Bernardin Fund of the Univer­
sity of Missouri-Kansas City helped make this book possible. 
Library of Congress Number: 84-093437 
ISBN: 
0-933532-48-2 
' 
BkMk Press-U.M.K.C. 
Dan Jaffe, Editor-in-Chief 
Pat Huyett, Associate Editor 

To 
the memory of W. H. Auden 

William Jay Smith 
WILLIAM JAY SMITH, poet, critic, and translator, is the author of 
eight books of poetry, two of which were final contenders for the Na­
tional Book Award. In 1980 he published three books: The Traveler's 
Tree: New and Selected Poems; Army Brat: A Memoir; and Laughing 
Time: Nonsense Poems (a selection of his children's poems). Mr. Smith 
has translated poetry from French, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, Rus­
sian, Swedish, and Hungarian. A Former Consultant in Poetry to the 
Library of Congress (1968:.1970), he has received many honors, in­
cluding in 1972 the Loines A ward from the American Academy and 
Institute of Arts and Letters, which elected him a member in 1975. 
Leif Sjoberg 
LEIF SJOBERG is Professor of Scandinavian Studies and Comparative 
Literature at Stony Brook, N.Y. He has published almost one hundred 
co-translations from Swedish, including Artur Lundkvist's Agadir (with 
William Jay Smith: International Poetry Forum, Pittsburgh, 1979 and 
Ohio University Press, 1980) and Gunnar Ekelofs A MOina Elegy (with 
Muriel Rukeyser, Greensboro, North Carolina, the Unicorn Press, 
1984). 

Introduction 
The Moment 
Giant Pine 
CONTE NTS 
The Wind Blows Quick and Cold 
Swirling Snow 
Winter Piece 
Dwarf Juniper 
Tussock 
Beach Tussock 
Cuckoo 
The Forest of Childhood 
The Song of the Thrush 
In Summer 
Snake 
Between Shadows 
The Song of the Meadow 
Butterflies 
Swan 
Summer on the Lake 
The Clear-eyed Mirror 
Image by Water 
Little Island 
The Butterfly 
June Bugs 
The Ground of the Glade 
Sphinx-Moth and Daddy-Longlegs 
Rooster 
The Henhouse 
Cabbages 
The Odd One 
Water-lily Water 
Loose Leaves 
The Final Year 
Peonies 
When Summer Is Worn Through 
7 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
24 
25 
26 
28 
28 
29 
30 
30 
31 
32 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
38 
39 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
50 
51 
52 

On Your Sleeve 
Wild Bouquet 
Ball of Fluff 
Harvest -Spider 
Earthworm 
The Crumbling Cottage 
Late-born Swarms of Flying Beings 
Leaf-Murmur 
Cutting Firewood in Autumn 
The Stump 
Idyll 
Wild Crab Apple 
Birch Heart 
Leaf-Fall 
The Maple Trails Its Cape of Fire 
Star-clear Frost Morning 
The Brook 
A Memory of Birches 
Santa Claus 
Tropical Myth 
Below the Stars' Distant Glow 
Nature Sculpture in the Andes 
Sorrow and I oy 
The Departure of Memories 
52 
53 
54 
54 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
61 
62 
63 
64 
66 
67 
68 
69 
70 
71 
72 
73 
74 
75 

Poets lead notoriously difficult lives, but surely few poets anywhere 
have begun life under more trying circumstances than Harry Martin­
son. When his alcoholic, sea-faring father died in 1910, his mother fled 
to California, leaving the six-year-old Harry, along with her four other 
youngest children, to public welfare. After humiliating years with his 
guardians, he ran away to sea at the age of fourteen, and from 1920 
to 1927 shipped out fourteen times, serving under the flags of various 
nations, in his words, "as deckhand, stoker, coaltrimmer, and all-round 
kitchen menace on eighteen ships, sometimes bumming around in the 
ports of the world, hiking for thousands of miles, especially in India, 
on the European continent, and in the Americas.'' Having acquired tuber­
culosis at sea, he came ashore for good, and his disease was arrested. 
Like Melville, whom he resembles in many ways, he spent the remainder 
of his life making use of these early experiences in his work. His first 
travel books, collected in English in one volume Cape Farewell (1934), 
won him wide acclaim, as did his fictionalized autobiography Flower­
ing Nettle (1935, English translation, 1936.) In Passad (Trade Winds) 
(1945) he abandoned traveling in an outward sense; instead he traveled 
inwardly, seeking the ties between the extrovert traveler, the ''world 
nomad,'' and the brooding introvert. The former sailor employed the 
concept of "trade wind" as a unifying symbol. "There exists something 
universally compelling that cannot yet be pinned down in a material 
way," he wrote. "The wind is a good symbol of this, and among the 
winds the trade wind is the best symbol of human reasonableness and 
of the human desire for airing things. It symbolizes a mental state that 
takes the sea atmosphere as a model, its openness uniting with the eye's 
openness for new vistas and new lands.'' The metaphor of travel ac­
quired a new dimension in Martinson's epic poem Aniara (1956), which 
tells of a giant spaceship hurtling through the universe on an irreversi­
ble journey with 8,000 evacuees on board, after technological man has 
made the earth uninhabitable and all imaginative possibilities have been 
neglected or rejected. In 1949 Martinson was elected to the Swedish 
Academy and in 1974 he shared the Nobel Prize for literature with Ey­
vind Johnson. He died four years later. 

Martinson's novel The Road (1948, English translation, 1955) preced­
ed Jack Kerouac's On the Road, and although it shares perhaps the lat­
ter book's impetus of protest against the evils of organized society, it 
is wholly different. The guiding spirit of Martinson's novel is a central 
intelligence, a focus of feeling that gives form to the wanderer's life. 
At the core of this intelligence is nature itself: ''There were a thousand 
reasons why one walked the highways year after year. One of the 
loveliest of those reasons was the woods, the forest. The Ƅoods had 
a way of hiding themselves behind themselves from tree to tree, from 
ridge to ridge, and of never ceasing to give promise of something hid­
den. Associated with the woods was a great and hop'eless attraction. 
There was no banishing it, for if you tried to drive it away, it merely 
flitted like a bird from tree to tree, called like a cuckoo or whistled 
like a thrush . .  .If you went into the forest as a child, idly, or just to 
pick berries. or to look for strayed cows, then the whole forest stepped 
forward, closed round you, poured its waves over you, and you were 
caught, at once terrified and expectant. The forest by its constant change 
of shape and sound persuaded the wanderer who walked in it that he 
must ever expect something, darkly urging upon him foreboding after 
foreboding, presentiment after presentiment, without end.'' 
Early in his career Martinson abandoned private symbolism and ex­
perience in his poetry for the largest theme of all, nature. He allied 
himself with a fine Swedish tradition that began even before the time 
of Linnaeus (1707-1778). As Lars Gyllensten points out, Marti"nson is 
similar to the famous botanist in his ''deeply original ingenuity, his sen­
sitive and unconventional alertness and attentiveness and also his 
humorous, unsentimental, and tender identification with the shape and 
form of every living thing." From a few square feet of the natural scene 
that the poet studies and observes, he finds his way to a broad, and 
even cosmic, perspective and to a magnanimous philosphy of life. 
In View from a Tussock (1963), Martinson complains that the descrip­
tion of natural scenery is subjected to constant critical attack. The fact 
that such description in Sweden has a long, fine tradition antedating 
Linnaeus does not mean that "nature prose" or "nature lyrics" have 

found acceptance as a genre or even as a sub-genre. On the contrary, 
such writing is always suspect. Martinson feels that anyone who per­
sists in depicting the natural scene and who becomes absorbed by the 
problems of ecology will a priori belong to an artistic minority. And 
a book concerned with nature, he points out, is usually reviewed in 
Sweden by scientists in order to make clear that it is distinctly different 
from belles-lettres. Martinson gives a characteristically modest defini­
tion of a "nature writer" : "He is an artist capable of expressing old 
simple truths in a way that makes them seem fresh: he can say that grass 
is green, that the cuckoo sings, that the sun glitters on the water. To 
achieve this one needs patience, sensitivity and the desire and ability 
to transport oneself into the special serene state of mind that in each 
instance is needed to attain an artistic-analytical contact with natural 
phenomena. '' 
Such a state, Martinson maintains, can be reached only "through 
solitude and silence." In his view the nature writer should research, 
study, observe, and describe nature and not merely identify with it (ex­
cept in the most general sense) or use it only to express private sym­
bolism or the happenings of an internal kind. What he may lose in in­
timacy or ambiguity through his research is more than compensated 
for by the exactitude with which he records every detail. In Martin­
son's view there exist no boundaries between descriptions of nature and 
belles-lettres: "Our encounter with nature is an encounter with life, 
with what is. If anyone knew what art was, it would be intolerable, 
and if we knew what nature was, that might be just as intolerable. What 
we meet in nature is its mystery, and in approaching it, a measure of 
what might be called 'shyness' is required . . . One who depicts nature 
should advance toward what he wishes to describe with deer-shy sen­
sitivity. It won't do to lock the description into heavy, cumbersome 
facts.'' 
Throughout his nature poems the senses are brought constantly into 
play: the leaves ''blink in the trees,'' the swan eats its way through 
the "putrid velvet of sludge," the butterflies "in voluminous oriental 
shawls" listen to the rays of the moon, the long jersey of the snake's 
skin ''shines white in the forest.'' What the senses retain time does not 
dissipate: 

When we cut firewood in the late autumn forest 
many things happened that the senses preserved, 
things that lay down in memory, fueling it with their own 
shiny birch bark; 
that part of the firewood never went up in smoke. 
The natural world that the poems present is without a human presence 
and yet humanity is everywhere implied: the cuckoo will "auction off 
his bankrupt estate" and soon "board out his son;" the beach tussock 
plays and quivers with "a blue salt note" for its ocean master; the rows 
of cabbage heads "puff into their chubby selves;" "t.ife and Death, 
the two great squanderers/ play a bold game at night.'' Natural objects 
are seen in terms of human accoutrements; the grebe's head turns almost 
full circle "like a bright weathervane;" the island floats forth, "a ship 
with a rigging of oaks;'' the wing sheathing of junebugs is muted ''like 
Indian brass;" an errant boulder is "a sturdy cupboard with the key 
turned on the inside and with moss in the lock.'' A humor akin to that 
of Christian Morgenstern adds a human dimension: "everyone named 
Otto" believes that "the cuckoo is calling him;" Santa Claus, "the 
nursery's Rasputin," shakes "his cotton-wad beard/ and high-booted 
forces his way into everybody's heart." When the naked mushroom 
in autumn offers up his "erect bun,'' we are made to witness a hilarious 
erotic scene. When a human speaker does appear in the poems it is as 
a servant of the natural world: 
· 
Bent like a servant I walk through the kitchen of the 
spruce grove. 
At the center of nature, Martinson always reminds us, is man: 
"Man, the seeker, is seeking himself." 
There is in Martinson's quiet, probing, sensitive approach something 
akin to the attitude of reverence of the American Indian, for whom the 
earth, in all its manifestations, is holy: 
The knot in the twig 
and the alder leaves' nerves: they exist for me 
and I am the sun spoken at the expense of the earth. 

This reverence accounts for the openness of the poems to which Robert 
Bly calls our attention: ''His poems have a curious and luminous grace 
of language. The poems slip on through their own words like a ship 
cutting through a quiet sea. Everything feels alive, resilient, fragrant, 
like seaweed under water. His poems feel in Swedish a little like 
Lawrence in 'Bavarian Gentians' or Whitman in some of the sea-passages 
of 'fish-shaped Paumonok.' A good Martinson poem is like a tunnel 
that is open at both ends; his poems never close with a snap." The very 
title Wild Bouquet indicates an offering, a reverence. And in presen­
ting its many aspects, Martinson never loses sight of the fact that 
everything in nature is interrelated, the smallest thing with the largest. 
''That is why one can feel secure in it,'' he said once. 
Martinson's years at sea gave him a sense of distance that makes him 
at al times a careful and accurate observer. As in the paintings of Degas, 
the distancing power of the artist's sharp eye makes for a remarkable 
kind of ironic tension. His subjects seem at the same time intimately 
warm and yet incongruously cold, as if fixed far-off in time and space. 
He looks on the peonies in bloom in his summer garden in the same 
timeless way as on the drifting Florida seaweed in this poem, translated 
by W. H. Auden: 
Out At Sea 
Out at sea one feels a spring or a summer merely as a 
passing breeze. 
Sometimes in the summer the drifting Florida seaweed 
blooms, 
and on a spring evening a spoon-bill stork flies in towards 
Holland. 
If the tone of voice in "Out at Sea" rings true, it is perhaps, as Auden 
suggested, because the poet establishes the sea as the center on which 
traffic moves in time and space, as through the sailor's consciousness, 
in real dimensions and in the reader's mind. The faces of the "cable 
fishermen'' are brought close up in the glow of their lanterns as they 
seal in the distant voices of their millionaire employers in 'The Cable 
Ship," also in Auden's translation: 

On latitude 15 degrees North, longitude 61 degrees West, 
between Barbados and Tortuga, we fished up the Atlantic cable, 
held up our lanterns 
and pasted fresh rubber over the wound in its back. 
When we put our ears to the injured spot, 
we heard how it hummed inside. 
One of us said: 
"It is the millionaires in Montreal and Saint Johns who are 
speaking 
about the price of sugar from Cuba and the lowering of our 
wages.'' 
In a circle of lanterns we stood there long and thought, 
we patient cable fishermen, 
then we lowered the mended cable 
down to its home in the sea. 
Martinson said that he never wrote about nature on the very day that 
he experienced it. The distance (in time), he claimed, erases the unim­
portant things and makes the memory of the experience intensely sharp. 
It tends to preserve the very problems that the camera eliminates: ''Take 
the snapshot of a water lily. Why does it turn out to be so banal when 
it is such a marvelous occurrence in reality? I have an explanation: When 
looking at the actual water-lily one participates with one's 'visual pro­
blems. ' One takes it in through a series of obstacles in the form of water 
glitter, flashes of sunlight, reflections and rank odors of mud and ooze.'' 
Martinson said at one point that he sometimes wrote poems with the 
greatest ease and then "stashed them away in an old bag, so that they 
might undergo a ripening process.'' He preferred to write about sum­
mer in wintertime; he called it his ''spiritual winter-fodder.'' Summer 
dominates Martinson's nature scenes. As a child accepting the bitter 
truths of his father's death and his mother's departure, the poet was 
afraid and hungry: "I felt cold at the heart of my childhood." It is natural 
then that in his nature years the poet should be drawn to summer's 
fullness and warmth: "One never finishes with one's memory of sum-

mer. It keeps returning-no need to add to it. Summers go on creating 
poetry on their own.'' In summer when the ''wild strawberry bleeds 
against the tongue with no taste of blood'': 
Life then is fully involved 
with what it is: an attempt at paradise. 
The dandelion became for the poet the symbol of summer and of a zest 
for life. Martinson told his artist-friend Brusewitz that he was attached 
to the dandelion in somewhat the same way as the Chinese and Japanese 
artists who for long periods devoted themselves to bamboo, lotus, 
cherries-or, as during the T' ang dynasty-to heavy, gorgeous peonies. 
Artur Lundkvist has pointed out that Harry Martinson's nature poetry 
is "singularly Swedish to the point of being untranslatable." Martin­
son was always an innovator, constantly creating new terms and new 
words; these inventions can usually only be hinted at in English without 
destroying the balance of the poem and so inevitably much of the com­
pactness of the original is lost. The translation of the poems in Wild 
Bouquet, selected from six of Martinson's books, has been undertaken 
over a period of ten years. A few of the translations, some left unfinished, 
are by W. H. Auden. The version of "The Song of the Thrush," for 
example, is almost entirely his. He very much admired this splendid 
projection of Martinson's lyrical appreciation of nature. We have 
dedicated this collection to Auden' s memory and have tried to produce 
a book he wquld have approved of, one in which we hope something 
of the freshness and fragrance of Martinson's Wild Bouquet comes across 
in its new setting. 
William Jay Smith 
Leif Sjoberg 


The Moment 
Before the moment bursts and perishes, 
the dragon-fly sits by the water-mirror. 
Each second a striking of death' s clock, 
each minute a funeral cortege of seconds. 
Let us linger closely by the moment 
now that the moth grazes against eternity 
before the moment bursts and perishes. 
15 

Giant Pine 
The giant pine; almost a forest in itself 
with its own storm song. 
Like everything in its own life but also all of life. 
Alone in the noise of multitudes, 
itself a quantity of secret places and fates. 
Silent winters, haystackcloud summers, 
pigeon and marten. 
At its top often a thrush 
singing of the years, 
long and many, 
that go sweeping by. 
16 

The Wind Blows Quick and Cold 
The wind blows quick and cold 
and the polished ice-floors arrange a ball. 
Broken in two by the winter wind 
and empty of delight, 
last year's reeds slide off 
on slippery polished floors. 
The reeds at first scud along, 
then straggle in side-swings, 
in intermittent gusts, directed 
by stiff breezes from the north. 
17 

Swirling Snow 
The swirling snow dances its rounds 
on shining ice-floors. 
One does not see any feet, 
only its cloak, 
light -sewn by snow 
quick as the northern lights 
with its pleats 
fastened together by needles of cold. 
18 

Winter Piece 
Delicate ermine tracks 
cross lightly 
in eights on the winter snow 
there where a hidden ice-brook with its white fur roof 
winds forward, 
there where the swirling water had scooped out 
a rippling bowl, 
the otter drinks from the ice-eye. 
When the children in red woolen caps come 
to hear the singing of this polar roof, 
the otter digs into his cave 
and watches their eyes through chinks in the ice. 
19 

Dwarf Juniper 
Nothing can more harshly interpret 
life's enduring struggle 
than a dwarf juniper on a coastal heath. 
Dumbfounded, you read 
its hard-life text, 
its created contortion, 
with its fierce-creeping battle-grip, 
swept into stiffened spirals by gale winds. 
20 

Tussock 
The tussock soaks up the sun 
and quietly and slowly expels 
the frost from its earth-body. 
It spurs on its growth with spring sighs of accumulated warmth. 
The tongues and edges of the nearest snowdrifts 
shrink visibly in the spring gale. 
The drippings from the roof begin to mark time in the barrel. 
21 

Beach Tussock 
On a blue-salt note 
the beach tussock shivers, 
sways with customary oscillations 
learned from the sea-wind. 
Between straw stems 
the tussock filters wind and sand 
patiently until it finds itself buried. 
Then at long last it stops playing and quivering' 
for its Ocean-master. 
Sea swell surges softly against the shore. 
22 


Cuckoo 
The voice of. spring is heard in the forest. 
Everyone named Otto 
believes that the cuckoo is calling him. 
But the cuckoo is merely auctioning off 
his bankrupt estate. 
Soon he will board out his son. 
24 

The Forest of Childhood 
Barefoot from tussock to tussock I ran 
seeking the farmer's cows, 
and saw how the mirrored firmament turned 
in the tarn its cloud-tufted wheel. 
In the summer's forests life played, 
and evening was deep with thrushes and the heaven high with swallows. 
Nothing came of all my dreams and deceits, 
but memory enlivens my life 
and memories are completed dreams. 
To lingonberry patches deep in 
summer's own parish 
my dream migrates at times 
like a crane in spring. 
25 

The Song of the Thrush 
Somewhere in the forest evening sits a thrush. We canot see him, 
but his song spreads abroad wider and wider like the ripples on a pond. 
Though it brings relief and is entirely unoppressive, what we mean by 
sadness and by "far-away" is there, everywhere among the silent mo­
tionless spruce trees - and the evening sun paints the tall trunks of 
the pine trees with that very color: far away. 
Everywhere on earth, but above al in its forests, resound such remote 
and expressive strings and what is meant by divination rushes restless­
ly over heaths and valleys. Lights and shadows of the same timbre come 
and go, liberate and bind. The ear begins to search. Where is the thrush 
sitting? Perhaps here, perhaps there. The eye helps the ear choose trees, 
but the song spirals down from so many hundreds of branches that it 
fades away and makes a riddle of itself. And new tones come, or are 
they for ever the same? Now are heard the tones of an inhaled melody. 
They seem to be moving backwards, thrown against the distant 
background. It seems to the ear as if a whole cubic mile on either side 
of the thrush is filled with this piercingly gentle inhalation. 
Instinctively he perches where the entrance to the forest valley becomes 
like a giant Tibetan lure, instinctively perches on the right branch, located 
where the air is like an eardrum. 
Somewhere in this very forest, in the still of the evening, among its 
thousand peaks, echo has its most sensitive crossroads. One can hear 
him trying out many different places and trees until he finds the very 
one which at this particular moment has the greatest resonance. 
He wishes to be heard and to hear himself spread his evening speech 
more richly and purely than ever before. But first his instrument has 
to be tuned. This he does by flying around to discover where, in the 
spacÓs of the forest, the most sensitive chords are heard this particular 
evemng. 
26 

It may take him an hour or two before he manages to find out how 
the layers of air tonight stand tuned in relation to each other. 
"Yes! Here!" he sometimes seems to cry. And then he tries out the 
atmospheric possibilities of that spot. But there is a heaviness in the 
air that he must tune away. More accurately than any mathematician 
he soon discovers that the worst part was caused by a current of air, 
rising from some smal remote dell in the recesses of the forest. His 
song must be repeated. But where? In some places he utters only a few 
notes. They are enough to tell him that this is not the right place. He 
flies off again. 
Sometimes he comes near to despair. Will he never perhaps find the 
right music?- Will he never fmd the tall pine tree where the finest inhal­
ed tones of the bird flute are in accordance with the whims and laws 
of the air-realm? 
Well, at long last, he comes near to it. Perfect he cannot be. Once 
in a thousand years perhaps, by sheer chance a single thrush achieves 
perfection. But he comes near to it, perches in the vicinity of clarity. 
The layers of air are fairly well outwitted, the echo possibilities fairly 
well employed in the direction he wishes. 
Then he strikes up his song, a small thrush playing on a giant instru­
ment, enormous masses of relatively obedient air cleanly absorbing and 
cleanly reproducing the sounds of his throat-flute. 
Thus he sings for a long time until dusk falls, and his song now con­
veys the image of the curve of a remote bow, strung together in the 
world of longing, with its honesties and dishonesties on a thread of the 
question that vanishes in the direction of the great Clock of Nothingness 
as it dissolves within the core of the setting sun. 
27 

In Summer 
In summer there is no cow on the ice 
and blue thundercloudberries may be picked in the woods. 
The wild strawberry bleeds against the tongue with no taste of blood. 
Life then is fully involved 
with what it is: an attempt at paradise. 
Snake 
Among the blueberry stems the snake sloughs off its skin. 
It struggles out of its long tight jersey, 
twists this way and that 
and turns it inside out, 
leaves it without looking back; 
and the long jersey lining shines white in the forest. 
28 

Between Shadows 
Between shadows oscillating like pointers 
light spots wander forth. 
In the glade of a July day they animate 
the creatures scuttling amid the mini-world's tussocks. 
In between the straw stalks 
the very ground of summer speaks of dangerous things. 
Every minute a thousand small events 
occur quickly and cautiously: 
The leaves blink in the trees. 
29 

The Song of the Meadow 
A blossomiþg meadow can only be described by its butterflies, 
only properly sung of by its bees. 
Fully to comprehend the flash of a thousand wings 
and fully to discern the song of the bees 
can only be done by those fairies 
who from eternity have trained themselves to listen. 
Butterflies 
Butterflies have no wings. 
They fly by means of voluminous oriental shaw Is. 
In this way nature has helped them. 
She has created these beautiful shawls 
so that the butterfly shall be harder to swallow. 
30 

Swan 
Voraciously the swan 
with the white crook of its neck, 
a slanting sickle, 
cuts into the forest of chickweed, 
bores with the awl of its beak 
into the putrid velvet of sludge, 
raises its head and looks 
coldly as a snake about the bay of dreams. 
31 

Summer on the Lake 
The angel of the mud, the water-lily, 
rose out of the depths and began its flight over the water-shadow, 
which hid her green chain in the waves. 
Quickly, then, from all sides, 
the water-spiders hurried to the spot on the water 
where the calm water-cloth was, to measure it 
before winds and foul weather began. 
Then, lofty and vigilantly white, 
over the island came the summer evening, 
with the vault of heaven lifting the night 
up into the wide-open light of day, 
as in the myth about Aino. 
32 

.--

The Clear-eyed Mirror 
When the swell quieted down 
the clear-eyed water-mirror awakened. 
In its depth 
it took the clouds 
which sailed away to the side 
in under the lake's eye-edges. 
The spruce trees were jagged, upside down in the mirror-sheen. 
A girl who rowed homeward 
' 
broke off her rowing and perched 
her tarblack boat in play 
like a dark pupil in the middle of the lake's eye. 
It was a June day, soon mirrored away by the years, 
but for a long, long while the boat she rowed 
darkened the pupil of the lake's eye. 
34 

Image by Water 
The reed's water forest 
rustles with inumerable pennants. 
An aspen-top quivers 
and its eager leafy whispers 
swarm off invisibly toward the small island. 
A woman is bathing; 
a grebe swims off. 
It turns its head almost full circle 
like a bright weathervane. 
35 

Little Island 
The grebe tÿms first its head and then its body, 
casts its neck 
like a colorful dart into water-rings, 
and the little island rocks, 
then floats forth like a ship with a rigging of oaks, 
tossing for a while with all its centuries in the wave of the present. 
36 

The Butterfly 
Born to be a butterfly, 
my cool flame flutters 
on the heavy velvet of the grass. 
Children chase me. 
Beyond the mallows and tussocks the sun is setting, 
I manage to escape into the night. 
The moon rises: it is far away. I am not afraid. 
I listen to its rays. 
For their protection my eyes film over. 
The dew makes my wings stick together. 
I sit on the nettle. 
37 

June Bugs 
This summer evening sky is like the beautiful white of the eyeball. 
The June bugs go by with their dull drone, 
their long hum. 
When occasionally they land, 
you see their old-fashioned odd splendor, 
the green-gold radiance of their wing-sheaths muted 
like Indian brass. 
The Ground of the Glade 
On the side lit by the sun 
the ground of the glade becomes a golden floor 
and its grass a sun-fell. 
At the heart of this forest chamber 
stands an errant boulder like a sturdy cupboard 
with the key turned on the inside, 
moss in the lock. 
38 

Sphinx-Moth and Daddy-Longlegs 
In the evening when dark is settling down, the stately sphinx-moth 
comes to the wild honeysuckle by the rock face. At dusk when one's 
impressions of color are blurred, it somewhat resembles a hummingbird 
in front of the flowers in a Brazilian forest glade. It has the same ad­
mirable ability with flickering intensity to stand still in the air, at which 
point the fantastic frequency of oscillation can no longer be perceived 
except as a cloud-image of whirling powder in the soft grey-white light. 
On its long trunk is a straw that appears to support and control the hover­
ing level. 
It is like a flying, peaceful honey-stiletto, whose wings function with 
dizzying precisien. When its long honey-stick has sucked up the secreted 
supply in the deep, narrow hiding places of the flower, it recoils an 
inch or more and then moves sideways to the next flower. 
For five or six evenings in a row it searches throughout the entire 
honeysuckle growth that covers almost half the rock face. 
The sphinx-moth is among the twilight's noctuidae moths, those that 
have the firmest and most inviting appearance. It has none of the daddy­
longlegs' spooky thinness and endless long-legged vacillation. The 
sphinx-moth always seems to have an errand, while the daddy-longlegs 
seems always to be coming at random like a spindle-thin emaciated piece 
of wreckage, carried about by the wind. The placid, cautiously strut­
ting daddy-longlegs is thinner even than the harvester-beetle. But it ex­
ists, it feeds itself and manages as we do. When it is smashed by an 
impatient hand, it quietly collapses. Then its remains mark the wall like 
a Chinese ink-drawn character, its legs stretched out like a lingering 
fragment in the frozen billows of death. 
39 

And there outside the wall flies the sphinx-moth with its proud, lynx­
marked body. And men, who are so far removed from insects, try to 
bring their thoughts into harmony with them, but they never can. 
Mystery seeps through all the crevices, and the clocks tick on. Reality 
arches itself in the mind as in a crucible. Man, the seeker, seeks himself. 
40 


Rooster 
The rooster. reads the field, 
scratches and examines, 
calls the hens 
to show them the trick. 
A worm, trying to rush back into the ground, 
is yanked out and gulped down 
in one gulp. 
42 

The Henhouse 
The hens, ariving early from the day's pickings, 
circle a few times around the henhouse floor 
and arrange themselves in the current pecking order. 
Only when this is made clear 
do they leap up to the roost. 
Soon they're all seated in rows around the rooster. 
He makes a stab or two at sleeping 
but there will be no sleep for a while. 
The hens fuss and shove. 
With peck and cawkle, he must quiet them down. 
Then there is a shifting and settling: 
one of the hens tries to remember the latest 
worm she caught, 
but the memory is already fading, 
on its way down her crop. 
Another hen, on the edge of sleep, recaling clearly 
the rooster's prowess, rolls her eyes heavenward, 
her fluttering eyelids shutting out the world. 
43 

Cabbages 
The rows of cabbage heads 
puff into their chubby selves, 
knotting themselves for their purpose early, 
closing themselves tightly and firmly 
in their own leaves against snails. 
Tightly bundled up 
in the mornings dewily blue-green, 
they reach kilo weight and market price. 
44 

The Odd One 
Deep within the well flutters 
the wild beard of the watergrass 
combing its dark wisps in the current. 
From here the frog climbs out 
at night and merrily croaks his song. 
Where evening shade 
sends its black onyx 
out to drink of the creek's white wine, 
the well's warty hermit sends forth 
as best he can his soul's cicada sound. 
Soon the surrounding swamps resound, 
but surprised in their deep recesses, 
they lack the euphony of the giver of the pitch. 
45 

Water-lily Water 
The water-lily water makes it mirror sharper. 
The day-suiface lies clear 
with wax-blank floating leaves. 
The lake's stillness is for a while its own 
with seeming celestial deeps sinking into the mud. 
The dragonflies take a few loops and turns 
over their own shadows. 
They soon find 
edible prey, but a beach-fly is dropped 
and a rippling movement spreads out 
from a point near a straw. 
Then a wind rises, 
first as a gust or breeze, 
but growing by the hour. 
46 

Loose Leaves 
All is so still and distinctly resonant 
this night in clear spring. 
In the bog the lapwing builds its lectern: twigs and branches 
criss-crossËd. 
For three months she will be the bog's weather sibyl 
and will predict the rains that will fall over the field's scarecrow 
in whose rags red ants live. 
But first she lays at the top three eggs 
a bit larger than a dove's. 
11 
The knot in the twig 
and the alder leaves' nerves: they exist for me 
and I am the song spoken at the expense of the earth. 
Bent like a servant I walk through the kitchen of the spruce grove 
on an evening in midge-filled June -
and there quietly and gratefully taste the sorrel's leaves 
as if they 'were already a soup. 
111 
Now the poplar shakes off the rain and the sky clears, 0 vast land! 
Scent of rain and scent of poplars, 
vast land! One absorbs you through the nose, vast land, 
and the happy fellow asks: did the lapwing not foretell this 
yesterday? 
0 vast land, and the rain-laden rye moving with raindrop-eyes 
in billows across the field on a mission of trade. 
To breathe in your nurturing aromas, 0 land! 
47 

lV 
A bell wanders 
tonight across the glades -
over the forest for miles: the black woodpecker's echoing sound. 
He awakens a fox, 
and the moss-covered block by the den's black eye 
gazes treacherously into its shadow 
but the sun's lizard-like glimpse is climbing the aspen's trunk. 
The lingonberries are in their youth. 
v 
In the heat where the rye stands wearing 
its driest cornflower dress 
the grasshopper has rested its days ah, so lightly 
on the toylike gloss of the neck. 
For the ear that cannot see 
but speaks to the inner eye, 
small amber cymbals stir in the shrill light 
and keep clicking: summer still! summer still! summer still! 
while the rye sighs of harvest. 
Vl 
Misty evening in the glowworm month: _shocks of grain in the 
field. 
Field mice run between them 
like kids between houses on long streets. 
But it soon quiets down and everyone sleeps. A further change: 
fog lays a hand on the waist of each sheaf, 
then dances out with it over the soaked and smoky floors. 
48 

Vll 
The Heron 
In pure autumn, the air is clear. 
God is breathed from the tree with every breath; the spring is 
stained yellow, 
and henna bleeds from the cut alder. 
The grey heron stood here one morning: 
stood in repose as the crane stands 
directly under the fog's light water veils. 
I watched it as it stood, 
unaware of all that has happened 
and all that has altered the world's vision. 
Frightened by the train's iron rumble beyond the mist, 
the heron fled with dignity 
as the train approached, 
oblivious, elegant, peaceful and wild. 
49 

The Final Year 
It was the year when the abandoned cottage in the woods 
was sold' for fire-wood. 
The woodcutters came with their truck 
and tore it down in three hours and a quarter 
and even took with them the well-frame. 
It was so small when they detached it from the well 
that they did not bother to smash it 
but put it up on the bed of the truck just as it was. 
And t:here it sat, a little gray chest covered with moss. 
When all was quiet again 
the weasel came out of the old fireplace. 
It summoned a cuckoo from the woods, 
and the two of them held a devotional hour. 
The cuckoo sang a cuckoo hymn. 
By then everything was over: 
Nothing after that was as it was before. 
But still the summer sauntered forth, 
loosening its grasses and garlands. 
50 

Peonies 
Summer grew, broadened out; 
thickened into positive clumps. 
Dark-red farm peonies bulged in the rain. 
When they opened their firm-knotted rag balls, she came by, 
the lusty queen. 
She looked for heavy bouquets, 
luxuriant repasts for the senses. 
The greenery was wet. Life-wet was the summer-saga: 
She had prepared only for life, not for autumn. 
Deep in her flesh defiantly she knew 
that in time Death would wave to her 
with his banner of hay. 
51 

When Summer Is Worn Through 
When summer is worn through sufficiently 
it no longer hides its worn spots. 
Its leaves and catches 
loosen and depart. 
The trees, with the first leaf-fall, 
begin to whisper among themselves. 
The worn-out bumble bee 
suddenly loosens its grip 
and falls, wasted, 
in its diaphanous tunic 
out of autumn's aconite. 
On Your Sleeve 
You had on your sleeve 
the last yellow butterfly 
mistakenly roused 
by the sun's mocking power. 
When it noticed how vain that rousing had been, 
1t darted away from your hand 
and interwove its flight with the falling leaves. 
52 

Wild Bouquet 
Gathered into a bouquet, the restless bluebells tremble, 
try to break through your absent-minded, wide-eyed gaze, 
with summer still here, dry and seedy. 
Radiant long dry days with a dessicating solar wind; 
from fragile, hairlike grass falls a dandruff of seeds. 
Wake up, my great-eyed dreaming girl, 
get back here before autumn takes over! 

Ball of Fluff 
The dandelion's luminosity has faded. 
Now its ball of fluff waits becalmed 
so that the light ball of wind-wool 
may be lifted off the extinguished lamp. 
Harvest-Spider 
The harvest-spider wanders on thread-thin high legs 
homeward over the leaves on a quiet evening. 
His body at the center looks as small as a seed. 
The eight legs fumble awkwardly about, spindly-slim. 
He takes up hardly any space, 
only its contours. 
54 


Earthworm 
Who respects the earthworm, 
the cultivator deep below the grasses in the soil? 
He keeps the earth constantly changing, 
working blindly through the soil. 
When the fields are dressed, ready for harvest, 
he farms the lower regions. 
Who respects him, 
deep, quiet cultivator, 
eternal gray little farmer deep within the soil? 
56 

The Crumbling Cottage 
The tender blossoms of white chervil 
become the last curtains of the crumbling cottage. 
The shattered roof has fallen in. 
The path is but a strip of grass which no one visits any more. 
But the juniper bush and the stone have moved closer to each 
other. 
In a hundred years they will marry. 
57 

Late-born Swarms of Flying Beings 
Late-born swarms of flying beings 
make their way under leafless trees. 
They stop suddenly at places in the lee of the wind 
and are seen dancing up and down 
where the autumn sun can still warm them. 
No one can utter their names or their species 
before the fall wind thrusts them out of the yea( 
toward homeless seas of air. 
If each one could be called a word, 
then a life-language blows away there on the wind. 
Life and Death, the two great squanderers, 
play a bold game at night. 
Uncounted, countless, most of what we see whirls 
forever away, permanently dispersed. 
58 

Leaf-Murmur 
The leaf-murmur is like the sound of innumerable wings 
from Time's flight; 
each leaf now has its own pair of wings. 
Listen and you can hear deep undemeÝth 
the intermingling of spring and summer 
in the crowns of the autumn trees. 
The winters draw freezingly close: 
Life-wind and Death-wind combine, 
speaking in gloom-dark cloud-night 
to the waves of Time. 
59 

Cutting Firewood in Autumn 
When we cut firewood in the late autumn forest 
many things happened that the senses preserved, 
things that lay down in memory, fueling it with 
their own shiny birch bark. 
That part of the firewood never went up in smoke. 
The wedge needed 
to split gnarled wood 
was beaten into memory as well. 
When the halved logs were split and stacked, 
all the years of the birch burst open, 
six feet at a time, 
with the smell of summer and winter. 
The memory of weariness was driven away 
as the woodpile grew higher. 
Memory guards the fme white bureau of cord wood 
in the middle of the autumn forest. 
60 

The Stump 
Within the wood Time begins to dig its holes: 
yellow wood-meal comes loose between the annual rings 
and blows away. 
Rain splashes about and cleans off twigs, hardstrings. 
Cowberry wires move up close 
and in time enclose the stump in their leatherleaf shawl. 
Soon the stump's hard spots are hidden 
like the kernel of a tussock. 
Idyll 
Small gusts sweep the wood-cutting hill. 
The leghorn rooster struts against the wind 
Close by the cutting-block, 
home to worms and to hens. 
61 

Wild Crab Apple 
Abandoned, the wild crab apple gazes into the water 
with its yellow leaves, 
shakes its fruit down into the spring 
and prepares an apple soup. 
It lives where it is, 
sharing the free hard fate of its kind, 
feeling freer 
than the tree of paradise. 
62 

Birch Heart 
The heart cut in birch bark 
has swollen with time. 
From the tree's sap it drew life and became like a bun. 
A few more years in the woods and it will start to beat. 
63 

Leaf-Fall 
The tree is forced by the wind to acknowledge its autumn. 
It disposes in golden yellow on the ground what it has put to 
good use in its summer life. 
Soon all the trees will be forced 
to give up the game this year. 
It has so quickly become fashionable to go naked. 
The mushroom, whose eye is dazzled, 
, 
offers up his erect red bun while it's still fresh. 
64 


The Maple Trails Its Cape of Fire 
The maple trails its cape of fire 
in rain that's put out summer's red; 
chilling storms knock at our door, 
crying that the green of the grass is dead. 
With arms full of leaves the hurricane 
sweeps gaily by in its long leaf-gown 
of flame, and, seizing the shady pine, 
the wood's great tower, brings it right down. 
66 

Star-clear Frost Morning 
Star-clear frost morning. 
Snow begins to crunch on the stairs, 
then resin-like squeaks and crunches higher and higher 
at every step toward the bam, 
whose door creaks, 
taken frozen-dry by surprise. 
Breath, clear steam, comes belching out: 
one smokes like a coffee pot. 
67 

The Brook 
The brook meanders and disappears 
as far as it can under the arching snowdrifts. 
It murmurs and ripples 
with a determined voice. 
It still keeps playing, spring or fall, 
but is ever more hushed, 
silenced little by little to the whisper 
of a puckered ice-mouth. 
68 

A Memory of Birches 
Birches white and daylight-legged 
pursue their avenue-steps up to the manor house. 
Others gather and form a clump, 
two small clumps. 
The leaves are still fresh. 
It is always spring 
in that annual childhood of trees 
when the landscape frolicks. 
69 

Santa Claus 
Each year when the trees tum white 
the hateful old smiler returns, 
the nursery's Rasputin. He shakes his cotton-wad beard 
and high-booted forces his way into everybody's heart. 
70 

Tropical Myth 
Rain cast its net over the forest, 
caught drought's demon. 
Lightning held high its lantern, 
flickered, went out, was lit again 
until it was all over and the trees shook off the moisture. 
Everything became clear again. 
The apes wove 
the ascending moon 
into a loose-braided basket of Hanas. 
The moon escaped 
but dropped embers 
on the buzzarding caraya monkeys in the branches 
of the mora 
trees: 
That is how fireflies were born. 
71 

Below the Stars' Distant Glow 
Below the stars' distant glow 
eternity exposed itself 
to the forest's twig-sharp cold. 
With the thin inscribed line 
drawn by a meteor 
a sharpened infinity marched in 
along the nerve of the nocturnal. 
72 

Nature Sculpture in the Andes 
The seething random rain, the scraping ice 
have from this granite sculptured a maiden. 
Lichen clings with its green wool 
to the patchy rock face 
around the rock-navel's mound, 
around the loins of gneiss. 
In vain ants tickle 
the stone maiden's enormous granite teats. 
Lightning has struck her neck. 
She's been leaning here for a thousand years 
and scoffs at lightning and all 
with a grooved ice-grin. Three-armed. One-eyed. 
An eternal gaze goes forth from her side eye 
of quartz. By her calf the brook 
speaks of dethroned just gods, 
sings with wet silver bells 
by the smooth giant ankle. 
73 

Sorrow and Joy 
Every deep sorrow has lost joy as its object. 
Do not lose that direction. 
Do not let sorrow forget its errand. 
Sorrow is the deepest honor that joy can obtain. 
74 

The Departure of Memories 
When memories are about to depart they come more often 
as if they wished to be wholly consumed. 
It is best to consume them like a favorite dish 
so often that they are no longer desired. 
Their value is thus diminished 
so that one day they fall prey to bold oblivion. 
75 


