www.ebook3000.com

Martial Arts of the World

A t l a n t i c
I n d i a n
O c e a n
O c e a n
A r c t i c  O c e a n
A r c t i c  O c e a n
P a c i f i c
O c e a n
Zimbabwe
Zambia
Yemen
Vietnam
Somoa
Venezuela
Vanuatu
Uzbekistan
Uruguay
United States
United Kingdom
U.A.E.
Ukraine
Uganda
Turkmenistan
Turkey
Tunisia
Trinidad & Tobago
Tonga
Togo
Thailand
Tanzania
Tajikistan
Syria
Switz.
Sweden
Swaziland
Suriname
Sudan
Sri Lanka
Spain
South Africa
Somalia
Solomon Islands
Slovenia
Slovakia
Sierra Leone
Senegal
Saudi Arabia
Sao Tome & Principe
Rwanda
R
u
s
s
i
a
R
u
s
s
i
a
Romania
Qatar
Portugal
Poland
Philippines
Peru
Paraguay
Papua
New Guinea
Panama
Palau
Pakistan
Oman
Norway
Nigeria
Niger
Nicaragua
New Zealand
Neth.
Nepal
Namibia
Mozambique
Morocco
Mongolia
Mold.
Mexico
Mauritius
Mauritania
Malta
Mali
Malaysia
Malawi
Madagascar
Mace.
Lux.
Lithuania
Libya
Liberia
Lesotho
Lebanon
Latvia
Laos
Kyrgyzstan
Kuwait
S. Korea
N. Korea
Kenya
Kazakhstan
Jordan
Japan
Jamaica
Italy
Israel
Ireland
Iraq
Iran
I
n
d
o
n
e
s
i
a
India
Iceland
Hungary
Honduras
Haiti
Guyana
Guinea-Bissau
Guinea
Guatemala
Greenland
Greece
Ghana
Germany
Georgia
Gambia
Gabon
French Guiana
France
Finland
Fiji
Ethiopia
Estonia
Eritrea
Equatorial Guinea
El Salvador
Egypt
Ecuador
East Timor
Dom. Rep.
Dijbouti
Denmark
Czech Rep.
Cyprus
Cuba
Croatia
Cote
d'Ivoire
Costa Rica
Congo
Dem. Rep.
of Congo
Colombia
C h i n a
China
Chile
Chad
Central African Republic
Cape Verde
C a n a d a
Cameroon
Cambodia
Burundi
Burma
Burkina Faso
Bulgaria
Brunei
B r a z i l
Botswana
Bolivia
Benin
Belize
Bel.
Belarus
Bahamas
Azerb.
Austria
A u s t r a l i a
Armenia
Argentina
Angola
Algeria
Albania
Afghanistan
Western Sahara
(Occupied by Morocco)
Bos. & Herz. Serb.
Mont.
www.ebook3000.com

Martial Arts of the World
An Encyclopedia of 
History and Innovation
VOLUME I
Regions and Individual Arts
Thomas A. Green and Joseph R. Svinth, Editors

Copyright 2010 by ABC-CLIO, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording,
or otherwise, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior permission
in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Martial arts of the world : an encyclopedia of history and innovation / Thomas A. Green and
Joseph R. Svinth, editors.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-59884-243-2 (hard copy : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-1-59884-244-9 (e-book)
1.  Martial arts—Encyclopedias.  I. Green, Thomas A., 1944– II. Svinth, Joseph R. 
GV1101.M29 2010
796.8—dc22
2010004149
ISBN: 978-1-59884-243-2
EISBN: 978-1-59884-244-9
14 13 12 11 10
1 2 3 4 5
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper 
Manufactured in the United States of America
www.ebook3000.com

Contents
Volume I: Regions and Individual Arts
List of Contributors
xi
Introduction
xvii
A Note on Romanization
xxi
Africa
1
Canary Islands Stick Fighting and Wrestling
1
Dambe
6
Gidigbo
10
Moraingy
14
Zulu Stick Fighting
18
Americas
25
52 Hand Blocks/Jailhouse Rock
25
Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu
31
Capoeira
37
Caribbean Martial Arts
42
Kenpo Karate
49
Central and Southwest Asia
55
Central Asian Archery
55
Iranian Martial Arts
66
Mongolian Martial Arts
77
Ottoman Martial Arts
81
Ottoman Oiled Wrestling
85
East Asia
89
China: Boxing Styles
89
China: Martial Arts
92
China: Martial Arts in Hong Kong
99

vi
Contents
China: Martial Arts in Taiwan
101
China: Martial Theories
105
China: Martial Women
108
China: Shaolin Temple Legends
110
China: Weapons
114
China: Wrestling
116
Japan: Jujutsu
120
Japan: Judo
127
Japan: Aikido
132
Japan: Kendo
139
Japan: Iaido
144
Japan: Jo
147
Japan: Kyudo
152
Japan: Naginata
158
Japan: Ninpo
162
Japan: Shorinji Kempo
172
Japan: Sumo
175
Korea: Hapkido
183
Korea: Kumdo
187
Korea: Ssireum
190
Korea: Taekkyon
195
Korea: Taekwondo
199
Okinawa: Karate
205
Europe
213
Amazons and Gladiatrices
213
Canne de Combat
217
Celtic Martial Arts
221
English Pugilism
228
Fighting Arts of the Hellenic, Hellenistic, and Roman Eras
233
Fighting Arts of the Early Middle Ages
240
Fighting Arts of the Later Middle Ages
242
Fighting Arts of the Renaissance
249
Savate, Chausson, and French Boxing
256
Oceania
263
Australia
263
Melanesia
265
www.ebook3000.com

Contents
vii
Micronesia
268
Polynesia: Tahiti, Hawai‘i, and Aotearoa (New Zealand)
270
South Asia
281
South Asian Martial Arts
281
Indian Wrestling
289
Thang-Ta
294
Southeast Asia
299
Arnis
299
Kuntao
312
Muay Thai
317
Silat
324
Index
I-1
About the Editors
Volume II: Themes
List of Contributors
xi
A Note on Romanization
xvii
Social Uses of the Martial Arts
xix
Belief Systems
331
Belief Systems: Africa
332
Belief Systems: China
338
Belief Systems: European Chivalry
345
Belief Systems: European Occult Sciences
352
Belief Systems: India
357
Belief Systems: Iran
363
Belief Systems: Japanese Budo, Bujutsu, and Bugei
369
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868
371
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868
382
Belief Systems: Silat
394
Commodiﬁcation of Leisure
405
Chinese Martial Arts and Money
406
Martial Arts Tourism
411

Expressive Culture
417
Folklore
423
Invented Traditions
428
Globalization of Martial Arts
435
Asian Martial Arts in the United States and Canada
442
Bartitsu
451
Capoeira in Europe
455
Finnish-Canadian Wrestlers
460
International Boxing
465
International Freestyle and Greco-Roman Wrestling
471
International Karate
474
Jeet Kune Do
479
Mixed Martial Arts
485
Professional Wrestling
491
Reality-Based Defense
496
Sambo
502
Women’s Boxing, 1972–Present
514
Women’s Freestyle Wrestling
520
Martial Media
527
Film and the Martial Arts
527
Gunﬁghters
534
Television and the Martial Arts
539
The Internet and the Martial Arts
549
Written Texts: Japan
554
Military, Paramilitary, and 
Law Enforcement Methods
565
American Judo, 1942–1945
565
Bayonet Training in the United States
568
Judo in Japan, 1931–1950
573
Jukendo
578
Kapap and Krav Maga
583
Military Unarmed Fighting Systems in the United States
588
Police Defensive Tactics Training in the United States
593
Social and Cultural Evolution of Kendo
598
viii
Contents
www.ebook3000.com

Performing Arts
605
Action Design for Professional Wrestling
608
Stage Combat in the Elizabethan Tradition
611
Taiwanese Street Performances
615
Political Uses of the Martial Arts
619
Afrikan Martial Arts
625
Jujutsuffragettes
632
Political Conﬂict and Aikido, 1931–1942
638
Women in Combat: The U.S. Military, 2001–Present
643
Secret Societies and Fraternal Organizations
647
Plains Indian Warrior Societies
651
Social Aspects of Kata and Waza
657
Index
I-1
About the Editors
Contents
ix

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

List of Contributors
Contributing Editors
Jason Couch
Douglas S. Farrer
Carlos Gutiérrez García
Stanley E. Henning
Brian Kennedy
Gregory D. Mele
Tony Wolf
Editorial Assistant
Margie Serrato
Contributors
Monica Aceti
University of Franche-Comté
Besançon, France
Joseph Alter
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Jack Anderson
Queen’s University
Belfast, Ireland
Jeff Archer
Independent Scholar
La Mesa, California
Martin Bastide
Leeds Metropolitan University
London, England

William Baxter
President, International Federation of Celtic Wrestling
Glasgow, Scotland
Alexander Bennett
Kansai University; Editor, Kendo World
Osaka, Japan
William M. Bodiford
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, California
Paul Bowman
University of Cardiff
Cardiff, Wales
Jeff Broderick
Independent Scholar
Kanagawa, Japan
Graciela Casillas-Tortorelli
Oxnard College
Oxnard, California
Luc Cerruti
Independent Scholar
Montpellier, France
Vera Chan
Senior Editor, Yahoo!
San Francisco, California
Marié-Heleen Coetzee
University of Pretoria
Pretoria, South Africa
Jason Couch
Independent Scholar
Severn, Maryland
Rupert Cox
University of Manchester
Manchester, England
Philip Davies
Brunel University
London, England
Jean-Marc de Grave
University of Provence
Aix-en-Provence, France
xii
List of Contributors
www.ebook3000.com

Gabriel Facal
University of Provence
Aix-en-Provence, France
Jack Farrell
Independent Scholar
Houston, Texas
Douglas S. Farrer
University of Guam
Mangilao, Guam
Aaron Fields
Independent Scholar
Seattle, Washington
Karl Friday
University of Georgia
Athens, Georgia
Lance Gatling
Independent Scholar
Tokyo, Japan
Emelyne Godfrey
Independent Scholar
London, England
Peter A. Goldsbury
Hiroshima University
Hiroshima, Japan
Alexey Gorbylev
Independent Scholar
Moscow, Russia
Noah Gross
Independent Scholar
Zichron Yaakov, Israel
Elizabeth Nai-Jia Guo
Independent Scholar
Taipei, Taiwan
Carlos Gutiérrez García
University of León
León, Spain
Earl Hartman
Independent Scholar
Palo Alto, California
List of Contributors
xiii

C. Nathan Hatton
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Ontario
Stanley E. Henning
Independent Scholar
Honolulu, Hawai‘i
Leon Hunt
Brunel University
London, England
Felipe P. Jocano Jr.
University of the Philippines
Quezon City, Philippines
Brian Kennedy
Independent Scholar
San Diego, California
Kay Koppedrayer
Wilfrid Laurier University
Waterloo, Ontario
Glynn Leyshon
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario
Jean-François Loudcher
University of Franche-Comté
Besançon, France
WR Mann
Realﬁghting.com
New York, New York
Juan Carlos Martín
University of León
León, Spain
Trevor W. McKeown
Historian, Grand Lodge of British Columbia and Yukon
Vancouver, British Columbia
Gregory D. Mele
Chicago Swordplay Guild
Chicago, Illinois
Lauren Miller
Indiana University
Bloomington, Indiana
xiv
List of Contributors
www.ebook3000.com

Manouchehr Moshtagh Khorasani
Independent Scholar
Frankfurt-am-Main, Germany
Ron Mottern
University of Tennessee
Knoxville, Tennessee
Steven Murray
Mesa State College
Grand Junction, Colorado
Michael Pederson
St. John’s College
Santa Fe, New Mexico
Mikel Pérez Gutiérrez
University of León
León, Spain
Ernest Ratsimbazafy
University of Antananarivo
Antananarivo, Madagascar
Sohini Ray
Manipuri Dance Visions
Pasadena, California
Roy Ron
Historiographical Institute, University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
Margie Serrato
Texas A&M University
College Station, Texas
Bruce Sims
Midwest Hapkido
Lindenhurst, Illinois
Christopher Sparks
Texas A&M University
College Station, Texas
Kim Taylor
Publisher, Electronic Journals of Martial Arts and Sciences (EJMAS)
Guelph, Ontario
T.V. Tuleja
Saint Peter’s College
Jersey City, New Jersey
List of Contributors
xv

Tad Tuleja
Princeton University
Princeton, New Jersey
Peter Vail
National University of Singapore
Singapore
Lee Wedlake
Independent Scholar
Fort Myers, Florida
Chi-hsiu Weng
United States Shuai Chiao Association
Cupertino, California
Earl White
Ijo Ija Academy
Los Angeles, California
Lee Wilson
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, England
Tony Wolf
Fight Director
Chicago, Illinois
Phillip Zarrilli
University of Exeter
Exeter, England
xvi
List of Contributors
www.ebook3000.com

In November 2001, ABC-CLIO published Martial Arts of the World: An Encyclopedia. In 2002,
New York Public Library named the book “Best of Reference,” and the Reference and User Ser-
vices Association of the American Library Association named it an “Outstanding Reference
Source.” After the book went out of print, the publisher asked whether we would be interested
in doing a second edition. One thing led to another, and the result is this book, in which the
organization is entirely different, and about 75 percent of the text is original.
If the ﬁrst book was so good, why did we feel the need to rewrite it? Let’s begin by discussing
the organization.
In Martial Arts of the World, the structure was alphabetical. This is a traditional format for an
encyclopedia, but it did not seem to provide a logical way of discussing everything we wanted to
discuss.
The most common alternative to the alphabetical format involves arranging geographically
by continent, with further subdivision by region. In the geographical format, taekwondo would
appear under East Asia, while Brazilian jiu-jitsu would appear under the Americas. This second
format sounds obvious until you realize that it means nothing in a global society. Using a geo-
graphical format, how do you discuss capoeira in Europe or the martial arts practiced by
American soldiers participating in the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq?
We decided that it would be more logical to divide the book into two separate volumes. The
ﬁrst volume would be arranged geographically, while the second would be arranged topically. It
was hoped that this format, which is sometimes used in social science publications, would reduce
redundancy while still allowing for coordination and collaboration between entries.
Changing the organizational framework also caused us to change the title to one that more
accurately reﬂected our current editorial intent.
Once that was done, we started reviewing our existing entries. Some of the entries were start-
ing to show their age.
Since the late 1990s, academic interest in martial art topics has boomed. Areas of interest
include anthropology (martial arts as embodied culture), art history (arms and armor), how-to
(kinesics, police science), literature (novels and manga), military history (Crusaders, samurai,
and so on), and presentation arts (dance, theater, and the movies). Most of this work is being
done within established disciplines such as anthropology, foreign language, history, kinesics,
sociology, and theater. There is also serious research being undertaken in areas such as historical
re-enactment. Meanwhile, the University of Bridgeport (in Connecticut) has introduced a bach-
elor’s degree in martial arts, and Indiana University, Sewanee: The University of the South (in
Tennessee), Texas A&M University, and the University of Maine have all developed courses
that treat martial arts as primary subjects. Even more progress has been made in Europe. In
Introduction

Britain, the University of Bath has worked in partnership with the European Judo Union to offer
a 2-year judo-speciﬁc degree in “sports performance”; the idea is to duplicate the accomplish-
ments of comparable Japanese and South Korean programs. In Europe, colloquia devoted to the
martial arts are becoming regular events—the French Conference for Reﬂection and Research
on Combat Sports and Martial Arts (Journées de Réﬂexions et de Recherches sur les Sports de Com-
bat et les Arts Martiaux) has been held nine times since 1991. Martial arts topics are also appear-
ing more frequently in academic journals. Between 2006 and 2009, Journal of Sports Science &
Medicine (http://www.jsssm.org) published three special issues devoted to the physiology, psy-
chology, and sociology of combative sports. For an overview of international initiatives, see
Gutiérrez and Pérez 2009.
All this is a long way of saying that we needed to update many of our entries.
The next consideration was whom we should get to write the new entries. For the ﬁrst book,
all but one of the forty-two contributors was from the United States. If we intended to present
a global perspective, we needed to do better than that. This time, half of the contributors (34 of
67) are citizens of other countries, and several of the Americans currently live abroad. Other
nationalities represented include the United Kingdom (nine contributors), Canada (six), France
(ﬁve), Spain (three), Israel (two), New Zealand (two), and Iran, Madagascar, Philippines,
Russia, South Africa, and Taiwan (one each).
We also wanted to include more female authors. Last time, there was just one female author
(2.4 percent). This time, there are ten (14.9 percent).
Obviously, we knew authors’ areas of specialization before we asked them to write for us.
Beyond that, our editorial direction was simple: “Would you like to write a couple thousand
words on your topic for our encyclopedia?” This is why different entries have different formats.
Nonetheless, it is remarkable how many of the same themes appear, across time, across conti-
nents, and across arts. Perhaps there are universal themes. Alternatively, perhaps we have sim-
ply been inﬂuenced by the same intellectual models and Zeitgeist.
In these essays, ecology, history, and culture play important roles. Living in close proximity
in a common environment promotes similarities between people, subcultures, and societies; lore,
identity, and the concept of place (e.g., nationalism) mutually shape and are shaped by one
another. At the same time, we are aware that global forces such as ﬁlm and the Internet inter-
act in real time with local forces (i.e., one’s friends, classmates, and teachers). Consequently,
once our contributors got started, they were encouraged to discuss the interaction between the
folk community and what Amy Shuman (1993) called the “larger than local.”
Although this book has more than 120 separate entries, we did not get everything we wanted.
Sometimes we ran out of space; at other times the desired authors were not available or had other
commitments. On the other hand, we received several essays on subjects we had not previously
considered, written by authors we did not even know when we started the project. So, in the
end, things balanced out.
The previous paragraphs discuss what changed. The following are some things that did not
change.
First, we admit that our deﬁnitions of the martial arts are bounded by variables such as time,
place, and worldview. As such, they are destined to be less than universal.
Second, we note that previous attempts to determine the boundaries of what deﬁnes a mar-
tial art have drawn heavily—perhaps too heavily—on Japanese models. In the Japanese world-
xviii
Introduction
www.ebook3000.com

view, older forms are considered combative ancestors, while modern forms are characterized as
disciplines to be used as means of self-enhancement. Such compartmentalization is a product of
Japanese historical, social, and political experience, but it is not universal. Many of the world’s
martial systems do not teach armed methods as distinct from unarmed methods, as throwing or
grappling styles as distinct from striking arts. Even the notion of “art” is problematic. Are there
truly distinctions between aesthetic and utilitarian, work and sport, art and science? If so, they
break down when trying to explain Indonesian Silat or Brazilian capoeira, which are simultane-
ously dance, martial exercise, and methods for ﬁghting with edged weapons. In addition, efforts
to comprehend the nature of “martial art” invariably bog down on culture-bound distinctions
between self-defense, military combat, and sport. Yet, as George Godia (1989, 68) puts it, “To
kill a lion with a spear needs a different technique and different training than to throw a stan-
dardized javelin as far as possible.” Failing to recognize these distinctions may explain why so
many previous attempts to categorize and deﬁne martial arts have fallen so far short of the mark.
This volume retains two other working parameters from its predecessor.
First, martial arts are considered to be systems that blend the physical components of combat with
strategy, philosophy, tradition, or other features, thereby distinguishing them from pure physical reaction.
In other words, a technique applied purely by accident does not constitute a martial art. Only
after the technique becomes codiﬁed does it start moving toward becoming part of a martial art.
Second, this is not a how-to manual. Instead, the text describes social aspects of the arts.
In terms of acknowledgment, many people whose names do not appear in the list of contrib-
utors nonetheless made valuable contributions to this book. John Corcoran and Carlos Eduardo
Loddo deserve our mutual thanks.
Thomas Green would also like to thank Novell Bell, Gordon Franks, Ben Hill, Kilindi Iyi,
Thomas Lomax, Mfundishi Shaha Maasi, Daniel Marks, Dennis Newsome, Darrell Sarjeant,
Cliff Stewart, Shelley Wachsmann, Cynthia Werner, and as always, Alexandra, Colin, and
Valerie Green.
Joseph Svinth would also like to thank Ellis Amdur, Jeff Cook, Alex Gillis, Mark Hewitt,
J Michael Kenyon, Felipe Machado, Eric Madis, Patrick McCarthy, Rory Miller, Thomas
Militello, Antonio Rodrigues, Neil Yamamoto, and, of course, his wife, Huldah Martin.
—Thomas A. Green and Joseph Svinth
REFERENCES
Godia, George. 1989. “Sport in Kenya,” in Sport in Asia and Africa: A Comparative Handbook, edited
by Eric A. Wagner, 267–281. Westport, CT: Greenwood.
Gutiérrez García, Carlos, and Mikel Pérez Gutiérrez. 2009. “Study on Scientiﬁc Production in Mar-
tial Arts in Spain from 1990 to Present,” in Martial Arts and Combat Sports—Humanistic Outlook,
edited by W. J. Cynarsky, 90–115. Rzeszów, Poland: University of Rzeszów Press.
Shuman, Amy. 1993. “Dismantling Local Culture,” Western Folklore 52 (2/4), 345–365, via
http://www.jstor.org/stable/1500094, accessed October 16, 2009.
Introduction
xix

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

A Note on Romanization
In this book, we generally follow standard academic usage, with the caveat that macrons have
been omitted because of typographical considerations.
We admit that we were not always consistent. Consider the following: in 1979, the People’s
Republic of China (PRC) decided to employ the pinyin system of transliteration for foreign pub-
lications, and the pinyin system is the preferred method in the present volume. Before this deci-
sion by the PRC, the Wade-Giles system had gained wide international acceptance, and it
remains the government standard in Taiwan. In 2000, the Republic of Korea introduced a new
transliteration system for Korean. Before that, the McCune-Reischauer system was standard.
Achieving consistency in Japanese is no easier—is it jujutsu, jujitsu, or jiu-jitsu? Today, the pre-
ferred transliteration is jujutsu, using macrons, but the latter two spellings are how practitioners
of some of these systems actually wrote the word, and in the latter case, that spelling sometimes
represents a legal business name. Finally, there are political issues. To take a geographical exam-
ple, is the body of water called the Arabian Gulf or the Persian Gulf? The answer to that ques-
tion literally depends upon which shore you are standing on.
To get around this, we have tried to take the middle ground. When there was a political or
business issue, we used the method preferred by the subject of the entry, and when the person
spoke English, we used his or her preferred spelling. Otherwise, we tried to follow current aca-
demic guidelines.

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

xxiii
Children's judo class
in the Washington,
D.C. 
area, 
about
1904. (Special Col-
lections and Univer-
sity Archives, W.E.B.
Du Bois Library, Uni-
versity of Massachu-
setts Amherst)
Wrestlers in Ilyeu, Sudan, about 1952.
(Hulton-Deutsch Collection/Corbis)

xxiv
Former light-heavyweight boxing champion Archie Moore teaches boxing in the Los Angeles
area, early 1970s. (Regents of the University of California, UCLA Library)
Mongol archers display their skill with bow and arrow during a local contest (naadam) in Sep-
tember 2006. (Hamid Sardar/Corbis)
www.ebook3000.com

xxv
Makoto Kasui demonstrates the
old-style Japanese sword art
Ono-ha Itto-ryu at the Butoku-
den, in Kyoto, Japan, May 2009.
(Ron Beaubien)
Detail of a bas relief from
the tomb of C. Lusius
Storax, a freed slave who
was buried in Chieti, Italy,
about 40 CE. (Pizzoli
Alberto/Corbis Sygma)

xxvi
Man from the Huli culture performs in traditional costume during Papua New Guinea's annual
Mount Hagen Show, September 1998. (Bob Krist/Corbis)
A member of the Sikh Nihang Army
demonstrating gatka at Guru Nanak Sta-
dium in Amritsar, India, January 2009.
(Narinder Nanu/AFP/Getty Images)
www.ebook3000.com

xxvii
Haji Su and his son Mat Noor demonstrate
silat in Malaysia, mid-1960s. (Joseph Svinth
Collection)

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

Africa
Africa is the second largest continent on Earth. Homo sapiens (modern humans) originated in
East Africa several hundred thousand years ago, and the civilizations that arose along the Nile
River some 5,000 years ago are among the oldest on the planet.
World religions that arose in West Africa include Candomblé and Santeria. Coptic
Christianity has been present in Ethiopia since the fourth century CE, and today it is the largest
religion in that country. Elsewhere on the continent, Islam, indigenous religions, and Catholic
and Protestant Christianity are common.
The cultures that developed in the African countries bordering the Mediterranean Ocean
played vital roles in the development of world civilization. Egypt, Carthage, Moors, and Mam-
luks—these are all key names in world history. Farther south, Saharan and sub-Saharan Africa
developed important civilizations, but the region was also brutally exploited for human and nat-
ural resources.
Contemporary African martial arts include wrestling, boxing, and stick ﬁghting styles.
African arts are still presented primarily in the context of festival, so it remains unusual to see
them outside their regions or cultures of development.
CANARY ISLANDS STICK FIGHTING AND WRESTLING
The Canary Islands are an archipelago of seven large and assorted small islands off the
northwest coast of Africa, near the border of Morocco and Western Sahara. The name canaria
refers to wild dogs (canes in Latin) rather than birds. Politically, the archipelago is administered
by Spain.
There are two traditional martial arts in the Canary Islands. These are stick play (juego del
palo) and Canary Islands wrestling (lucha canaria). Although there have been and are women
with considerable skills in the two disciplines, both activities are overwhelmingly male pursuits.
THE GUANCHES: A SHARED ORIGIN
The origins of Canary Islands martial arts are attributed to the Guanches, the original inhabi-
tants. The Guanches settled in the islands hundreds of years before the Common Era. Linguis-
tic research suggests that they probably came from North Africa rather than Europe.
The Guanches spent their time tending their ﬂocks, and to a lesser extent growing crops, ﬁsh-
ing, or gathering wild foods. Although culturally they had an advanced society, their technolog-
ical development was at a Neolithic level, owing to the scarcity of raw materials, particularly
metals, in the islands’ subsoil.

This low level of technological development led the Guanches to have a ﬁghting culture
based on the use of stones and wooden weapons. Typical weapons included lances, spears, crooks,
sticks, maces, and darts. They also trained the body itself. This is documented in Iberian chron-
icles from the period of rediscovery (fourteenth century), conquest (ﬁfteenth century), and
eventual colonization of the islands.
Between 1402 and 1496, while the Kingdom of Castile was conquering the Canary Islands,
its military missions learned ﬁrsthand how lethally skillful the Guanches were at throwing rocks
and handling wooden weapons. There is also abundant documentary evidence that some of the
Guanches’ martial arts, such as stone throwing, ﬁghting with staffs, and wrestling formed inte-
gral part of their rituals, festivals, and leisure activities or were used as a way of resolving disputes.
The Spanish conquest and colonization of the Canaries was accompanied by great destruc-
tion, and traditional Guanche culture survived only in isolated rural villages, and through the
mixing between colonialists and Guanches. As is usual in conquests, methods for dominating
and controlling the native population included banning warlike arts, particularly those involv-
ing the use of weapons. These bans did not apply to wrestling, perhaps because wrestling was
seen as less of a risk or perhaps because it was also popular with the Spanish. In any case, over
time, there developed two main forms of martial arts in the Canaries: stick ﬁghting (juego del
palo) and Canary Islands wrestling (lucha canaria).
JUEGO DEL PALO (STICK FIGHTING)
History and Development
The progressive disappearance of the Guanche culture and its sidetracking into isolated rural
pockets, the secrecy so typical of the transmission of forbidden martial arts, and the great range
of staffs and ways of using them encouraged the development of numerous styles of Canary
Islands stick ﬁghting. The sports and leisure nature of this “game” (juego) only became a deﬁn-
ing feature in recent years.
Historically, there were gamelike occurrences of stick play, as with many other forms of war-
fare. However, the essential purpose of the staff was as a tool for coping with the environment
(for example, as an aid in making one’s way across the normally rugged volcanic terrain of the
islands), working (e.g., herding ﬂocks and controlling the animals), and waging warfare. Other
elements of change recorded by some authors are the characteristics of individual stick-masters,
the geography of different parts of the islands, times when there was immigration from or to the
Canaries, and even the various strokes used by camel drivers. (Camels were introduced to the
Canary Islands during the late ﬁfteenth or early sixteenth century.)
From the sixteenth until the end of the nineteenth century, the written sources about
Guanche stick ﬁghting methods are sparse. However, they are sufﬁcient to show the skill and
effectiveness with which the islanders handled their staffs during ﬁghts with pirates, during their
frequent disputes about ﬂocks or pastures, or in contests for honor, pride, or entertainment.
Despite prohibitions, the stick continued to be an inseparable companion of Canary Islands
shepherds. Thus, it can be assumed that, far from stagnating, staff ﬁghting went on evolving dur-
ing these three centuries.
The end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth centuries were a deﬁning
moment of transition from the old way of stick ﬁghting into the new way of stick sport. One
2
Canary Islands Stick Fighting and Wrestling
www.ebook3000.com

of the most crucial features of this change was the creation of open schools of participants,
thereby moving away from the traditional transmission within families and friends. Encouraged
by the general growth in sports activity, “open occurrences” of stick play bloomed, and this was
reﬂected in the public practice of various styles of stick use throughout the islands. Nonetheless,
there were still “closed occurrences,” less public and more linked to real ﬁghting. This situation
changed radically in mid-century as a result of the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939) and the
strongly repressive regime that followed. The popularity that stick play had known shrank, until
at times it practically disappeared from public view.
During the 1950s and 1960s, while stick play was still struggling to recover from this deep cri-
sis, new issues such as emigration, the modernization of farming work, and the growth of other,
more “up-to-date” activities such as soccer made this problem worse. Only a few schools of stick
play managed to survive, mostly in a very perilous condition.
Attempts to revitalize stick ﬁghting began during the 1970s. Heartened by the worldwide
trend to rescue and revalue traditional culture as a way of reasserting ethnic identity, and aided
by the development of local autonomies in Spain, various groups put great efforts into reviving
and promoting traditional games and sports. In the Canary Islands, stick play was one of their
main vehicles.
During the 1990s, two associations were set up: the Federación de Juego del Palo Canario
(FJPC) and the Federación de Lucha del Garrote Canario (FLGC). In 2009, FJPC had clubs on the
islands of Fuerteventura, Gran Canaria, La Palma, Tenerife, and Lanzarote, and it brought
together practitioners of various formats of stick play. For its part, FLGC concentrates on staff
ﬁghting and has clubs only on Gran Canaria. FJPC promotes practice of a more traditional sort
(as a game, without the competitions or strict regulations of a fully organized sport). In contrast,
FLGC adds, over and above this approach, sports competitions. To minimize injuries, the staff
has been modiﬁed by adding a cover and padding.
At present, it seems that stick play has an assured future in the Canary Islands, and there are
some attempts being made to extend and promote it elsewhere. This includes countries such as
Cuba or Venezuela, where emigrants from the Canaries were very numerous and where there are
local forms of stick ﬁghting derived from, or at least inﬂuenced by, Canary Islands stick play.
Technique
There are several formats of stick play, which may be classiﬁed on the basis of the size of stick
used.
First are long-stick formats (garrote, lata, asta, astia, lanza), principally Staff Play (juego del gar-
rote) and Lata Play (juego de la lata). Length of a long staff can vary from chest height to a quar-
ter taller than the player. Long staffs are of uniform thickness, averaging around 5 centimeters (2
inches) in diameter. To prepare a staff, a light, hard, durable wood is subjected to a complex
process involving straightening, heat treatment, debarking, washing, sanding, drying, and oiling.
Second are medium-stick formats (vara). Medium-stick formats are found in almost every
island of the archipelago. A number of traditional styles are recognized: Déniz, Morales, Acosta,
Verga, Conejero, Quintero Zamora, and Hernández Medina or Garaﬁano. Medium sticks reach
to somewhere between the waist and the chin of the participant, mostly coming up to chest
height. Medium sticks are prepared the same way as long staffs but have a thinner end (punta)
and a thicker end (trozo), roughly 2.5 centimeters (1 inch) in diameter.
Canary Islands Stick Fighting and Wrestling
3

Third are short-stick formats (palo camellero, macana, sorinque, bastón). Short-stick formats
have practically disappeared, although initiatives to revive them are in place. The length of the
short staffs is always less than waist height on the participant. They come in various forms, with
a thickness similar to that of the long staffs, and are made as described above.
During long-stick bouts, participants take up a comfortable position standing face to face,
holding their staffs in the center with both hands, separated by a distance equal to their shoul-
ders’ width. In contrast, in medium stick-formats, players adopt positions (cuadras) offset to the
right or left, holding the stick by one of its ends (called the punta, in most styles).
Players change grip constantly in accordance with the stroke they intend to use. Attacking
strokes (mandados, tirados, or golpes) include sweeps (circulares or palo largo) and thrusts (pun-
zantes or clavadas). Attacks are aimed at any part of the body, but mostly the head. In juego del
garrote games, throwing the opponent to the ground is also very common. This is done by using
the enlarged end of the staff (enganches) or using the body, as in wrestling.
One of the defensive techniques (atajados) most often used is the recogido or parada lateral.
This consists of placing the stick to one side vertically to the ground so as to fend off circular
sweeps. Especially in medium-stick formats, when two experts meet, the play is tremendously fast
and ﬂuid, with a giddying succession of changes of position, grasps, and attacking and defensive
sequences. During bouts, there is usually a “good fellow” (hombre bueno), or person of recognized
prestige, who acts as referee.
LUCHA CANARIA (CANARY ISLANDS WRESTLING)
History and Development
Lucha canaria, the Guanches’ local form of wrestling, was easily taken over into the new soci-
ety built up after the colonization of the Canaries by the Kingdom of Castile. Because it was an
activity shared and understood by both cultures, it had the effect of uniting them. Thus, there
are numerous references to wrestling in the context of Canary Island games and festivals from
the ﬁfteenth century onwards. Besides their entertainment value, competitions (luchadas)
brought into play the prestige, skill, intelligence, and honor (or “sporting nature”) of the various
peoples of the islands who challenged each other during celebrations.
Starting in the middle of the nineteenth century, luchadas came to be major public shows,
attracting thousands of spectators and the attention of the press. Although the wrestlers were
mostly from humble social backgrounds, they were supported by important businessmen and
intellectuals. At this time and later, thanks to emigration, Lucha Canaria was also exported to
Latin American countries such as Argentina, Cuba, Uruguay, and Venezuela and to colonies
elsewhere such as Spanish Sahara on the African mainland.
Until the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939), Canary Islands wrestling was evolving in the
direction of becoming a sport. However, it did not yet meet all the requirements to be consid-
ered such: the rules for bouts were unique to each luchada, there was no ofﬁcial governing body,
and features such as the number of participants on each side, or the length of matches, were not
preset.
By the end of the 1940s, Canary Islands wrestling began to be transformed deﬁnitively into
a sport. Rules and regulatory bodies were established, aspects of practice were uniﬁed, and cate-
gories were set up. These developments led to rapid growth, which continues to the present day.
4
Canary Islands Stick Fighting and Wrestling
www.ebook3000.com

Today, Canary Islands wrestling is a sport that, at its highest levels, can be described as pro-
fessional. It is promoted by several government bodies, by private enterprises, and by the mass
media. Since 1985 the sport has even been televised. However, outside the islands, Canary
Island wrestling is seen only on very speciﬁc occasions, such as sporting or cultural exhibitions
or championships of traditional sports. This has allowed it to maintain its own idiosyncratic
features. Nevertheless, it faces challenges from other, more “up-to-date” sports, especially soc-
cer. The consequence is less interest from society in general and a decrease in the number of
those involved in this form of wrestling. This constitutes the greatest challenge to the future
of this sport.
Technique
One characteristic peculiar to present-day Canary Islands wrestling is the absence of any
absolute weight categories, except in individual competitions by weight. This means that the
biggest wrestlers may weigh over 140 kilograms (over 310 pounds) and stand more than 2 meters
(78 inches) tall. Instead, there is a classiﬁcation by levels, the highest being the A level (pun-
tales A), the other categories being B, C, and unclassiﬁed. There are also various types of team
and individual competition, and there is a female category.
Bouts (agarradas) have a maximum length varying between one and a half minutes and three
minutes and take place in the ring (terrero), which is a large circular surface covered with sand.
The wrestlers wear a T-shirt or jersey and a special type of shorts rolled up to mid-thigh.
Bouts commence with a preset position and grip: the trunk of the body leans forward until
the right shoulders are in contact, the left hand grasps the fold of the opponent’s shorts, and the
right hand is held vertically, in full contact with the opponent’s, hanging down to the ground.
This starting stance may change as the bout progresses. At all times the wrestlers try to maintain
a grip on the opponent’s shorts, as this is the main way of controlling their rival’s ability to move.
The Canary Islands wrestling style has many techniques (mañas). These involve arms, legs,
hips, or combinations of them, as a function of the part of the body that is making the basic
move. During bouts, there is an alternation between tactical situations that are essentially static,
in which the wrestlers seek greater control, to tire, or to cause loss of balance, and sudden, explo-
sively rapid technical moves of great elegance.
Despite the fact that there is no known link between them, Canary Islands wrestling shares
many similarities with ssireum (the traditional Korean wrestling style), especially in aspects such
as the ﬁghting ring and the sort of grip used.
—Carlos Gutiérrez García and Juan Carlos Martín
See also: Arnis; Canne de Combat; Caribbean Martial Arts; 
Celtic Martial Arts; Fighting Arts of the Renaissance; 
Japan: Jo; and Zulu Stick Fighting (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Amador, Fernando. 1996. Manual completo de Lucha Canaria [Complete Handbook of Canary Islands
Wrestling]. Las Palmas de Gran Canaria: EDECA.
Antequera, Franciso Javier. 1996. La lucha canaria. Algo más que un deporte [Canary Islands Wrestling:
More Than Just a Sport]. La Laguna: Centro de la Cultura Popular Canaria.
Canary Islands Stick Fighting and Wrestling
5

Domínguez, Jorge. 2000. Lucha del garrote. Catón [Staff Play: A Primer]. La Laguna: Centro de la
Cultura Popular Canaria.
González, Ángel, and Guillermo Martínez. 1992. El juego del palo canario [Canary Islands Stick
Fighting]. La Laguna: Centro de la Cultura Popular Canaria.
Hernández, José, Ulises Castro, and Vicente Navarro. 2003. Los juegos y deportes tradicionales de
Canarias [Games and Traditional Sports of the Canary Islands]. Las Palmas de Gran Canaria:
Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria.
Wolf, Tony. 2000. “‘Juego del Palo’—Stick Fencing of the Canary Islands,” Journal of Western Martial
Art, http://ejmas.com/jwma, accessed August 9, 2008.
DAMBE
Dambe is a traditional combat sport of the Hausa people, most of whom still live in the Saharan
regions of Nigeria and Niger. Dambe is a striking art, and blows using any of the three anatomical
weapons (head, hands, and feet) to any part of the body are permitted. Punches are delivered
using only the stronger of the ﬁghter’s two hands, and the “weaker” hand, held with palm facing
one’s opponent, is employed to block and trap incoming strikes. The dambe ﬁghter’s dominant
hand is balled into a ﬁst and swathed in a cloth strip (kara). Competitors bind the cloth-wrapped
ﬁst with a knotted cord called a zare. The binding is wrapped until it extends well up the fore-
arm. Historically, the covered striking ﬁst was sometimes dipped in ground glass (Powe 1994,
22). In another variation called “iron boxing” (damben karfe), a triangular metal instrument
called mazagi protrudes from the striking ﬁst. Although illegal in public competition, both of
these rugged practices allegedly continue in secret.
ORIGINS AND HISTORY
Although no reliable records establishing the origin of dambe have survived, Edward Powe, a
pioneering researcher in the area of traditional Nigerian martial culture, notes that “the single
bound ﬁst and salute in Dambe . . . bears a remarkable resemblance” to images of Egyptian box-
ers of the Twelfth and Thirteenth Dynasties (1975–1640 BCE), known as the Middle Kingdom
or Classical period (Powe 1994, 5). Hausa oral tradition, however, only provides links to the
Bornu Empire in the area of Lake Chad, and this in turn dates only to the Islamic period (in
Central Africa, after the eighth century CE) (Rattray 1913, 2–34).
In precolonial times, dambe competitions were staged as components of Hausa village fes-
tivals, and they have been perpetuated into the present among members of the butchers’
guild. Both scholars and practitioners of the martial sport contend that its original intent was
to teach military skills to novices and to hone the combat skills of adults. Modernization of
the regional culture, including the means of settling conﬂict, called for a shift in the func-
tions of dambe; over time, it became a means for boxers (especially guild members) to
demonstrate masculinity, accrue personal prestige, and bring honor to their family and vil-
lages (Powe 1994, 20).
Undoubtedly, dambe training develops physical strength and instills courage in competitors,
but the only direct connection dambe retains to modern warfare lies in its efﬁcacy as a form of
hand-to-hand combat. In its contemporary form, its usefulness in the ﬁeld seems limited. On the
other hand, the terminology of the modern game includes metaphors of warfare. For example,
6
Dambe
www.ebook3000.com

the striking hand is referred to as a “spear” and, like a spear preliminary to a cast, it is held well
back in a “cocked” position. The defensive hand extends toward the opponent; poised to ward
off blows, it is called the “shield.” The defensive hand may be used to grasp an opponent’s
“shield” hand, entangle (and perhaps break) the opponent’s ﬁngers, and grapple, all of which are
likely tactics in battleﬁeld contexts in which a soldier must ﬁght using only a spear. Also, tour-
naments are held between groups (“armies”) who meet in dueling pairs on a “battleﬁeld” (dan-
dali) (Powe 1994, 18). During tournaments, each participant attempts to deliver a “fatal blow”
(kwab daya), which means a strike that knocks the opponent unconscious, causes him to fall ﬂat,
or forces his hand or knee to come into contact with the ground.
CONTEMPORARY DAMBE
Dambe matches take place in the dandali. The term dandali traditionally described the cleared
space within a Hausa village. Today, although bouts may have moved to urban areas, the general
physical conﬁguration of the dandali adheres to the traditional model. Bouts are surrounded by a
circle of spectators.
Percussive music accompanies dambe bouts. The music is provided by an ensemble consist-
ing of primary drums (usually kalangu, double-headed hourglass-shaped drums hung from the
drummer’s shoulder) and secondary drums (generally the smaller kuntuku). Music is not played
during the matches themselves, but drumming accompanies the taaken dambe (individualized
summons for the boxers) and the kirarin dambe (praise chants) that precede and follow matches.
During these chants, contemporary singers and their ensembles frequently use microphones and
loudspeakers.
As the competitors prepare to enter the combat space, many stoop brieﬂy to touch the earth.
This is probably a holdover from indigenous religious practice. Comparable customs exist in
other African and African-descended martial games, such as Brazilian capoeira.
There are about a dozen distinct stances. As a rule, opponents stand in a knees-ﬂexed ready
position. The ﬂex of the knees and weight distribution of the stances vary according to what the
boxer intends to do. For example, rijiya entails equal weight distribution with the ﬁghter bent
forward at the waist, thus giving him the opportunity for throwing a rising punch while mini-
mizing the target offered to the opponent. Gatarin baya is a higher backward leaning posture that
is used defensively. Advancing or retreating in these stances is accomplished by “scooting” or
stepping footwork.
All common stances require the bound hand to be kept well to the rear unless actually strik-
ing. Strikes may take the form of overhand hammering blows, uppercuts, wide roundhouse
hooks, backhand strikes on a horizontal plane, or straight punches.
The usual position of the front hand (“shield”) allows a boxer to parry blows to the inside,
outside, high, or low. The shield hand also may be used to grab and hold the opponent’s head or
arm. Thus, in his description of a modern match, Uthman Abubakar (2005) writes of the dambe
ﬁghter standing “with the open ﬁst [the shielding hand] shaking mischievously to grab the wrist
or hook the ﬁngers of his opponent.”
In the past, the lead leg (the leg corresponding to the shield hand) was wrapped with a chain
that extended from ankle to knee. Known as akayau, this chain increased the destructive power
of a kick. Potentially, the chain wrapping could permit a more effect method of blocking incom-
ing kicks with the defender’s shin. Probably in an effort to encourage greater public acceptance
Dambe
7

of the sport, the akayau is no longer used in contemporary dambe. Nonetheless, the preferred
kicking leg is still wrapped in cloth. Unlike the hands, where only the wrapped hand delivers
blows, either foot can deliver a kick. Dambe’s varied kicking arsenal includes three moves:
1.
Slap kick (bulala), delivered by the rear leg, which travels at a 45-degree angle diagonally from the
ground and targets the head or upper torso)
2.
Stomp kick (tokare), reminiscent of the high stomping movements seen in Zulu dance
3.
Sweep kick (tadiyar), which crosses the kicker’s body at a low level and is intended to sweep the
opponent’s feet out from under him
Traditionally, combatants were evenly matched in size, but there were never formal weight
classes in the sense of modern international boxing. Thus, contemporary professional dambe
matches may legally pit “bantamweights” (about 54 kilograms/118 pounds) against “heavy-
weights” (86 kilograms/190 pounds and above).
Matches are scheduled for three rounds. A round ends when there is a long period of inac-
tivity, a boxer’s hand binding becomes loose, or either ﬁghter “voluntarily breaks his ﬁghting
stance” (Powe 1994, 20).
PREPARATION
Like other athletes, dambe competitors engage in an intense training regimen. The training at
Nigeria Afromartial Club in Kano City, Nigeria, under the direction of Carambe Jarimi (birth
name, Ibrahim Yahuza) is typical. Workouts are held morning and evening ﬁve days a week.
Some drills and exercises are peculiar to Hausa arts; others are not. For example, in order to
“strengthen the head” (and its “shock-absorbers,” the neck and trapezius muscles), the boxers
“do push-ups with the head,” meaning an exercise that is similar to the neck bridges practiced
by wrestlers. One-armed push-ups, using a single ﬁnger to support the weight of the body,
strengthen the punching hand and arm. Other exercises are the same calisthenics one sees in any
modern combat sport. Here, Carambe draws on his academic degree in health and physical edu-
cation and on his career as an international competitor in taekwondo (Green 2005).
In addition to physical preparation, dambe competitors also may use supernatural prepara-
tion, usually called “medicines.” Medicines usually take the form of physical items such as
amulets and are used to protect against and/or inﬂict various types of physical or psychological
damage. Amulets and charms are provided by a specialist known as a boka (“holy man” or
“person able to channel supernatural power”). The use of these medicines is illegal in contem-
porary amateur matches, but power-laden physical objects are nonetheless smuggled into
competition. As Carambe explains, “The amulets may be clenched in the striking hand, or
wrapped inside the kara.” In professional competition, the medicines are worn openly as
bundles at the neck, arms, and waist. The small packets contain sources of power ranging from
the skins or body parts of sacriﬁced animals to verses from the Koran. Carambe elaborates:
“There is ritual as given by Islamic scholars. Ritual acts. Your mullah [mallam, in Hausa; the
reference is to an Islamic scholar] would tell you to recite verses from the Holy Qur’an a certain
number of times, like seven times or eight times for a certain number of days, and maybe at
times he’ll tell you to fast like three days. There are some boxers who even go to the extent of
even going to the graveyard and dipping their boxing hand into the grave [of a famous boxer].
8
Dambe
www.ebook3000.com

They’ll sleep overnight in the graveyard. . . . On the advice of their boka, they go to the
graveyard” (Green 2005).
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Carambe, like many contemporary teachers of traditional martial arts, has the problem of
interesting young athletes in traditional games rather than football (soccer). The Nigerian
government subsidizes many sports, and even sponsors a biannual sport festival that includes
traditional games. The government’s emphasis, however, is on Olympic rather than
traditional sport.
Even so, dambe is undergoing a renaissance. As Nigerians emigrate, both into other African
countries or to Europe and the Americas, they take with them their indigenous culture. As a
result, dambe is developing an international following, both as sport and as cultural artifact.
Dambe has even been featured as a demonstration sport in international sports festivals such as
the All African Games. Inevitably, this internationalization changes traditional sport. For
example, the Traditional Sports Federation of Nigeria has forbidden the use of head-butts, wrap-
ping the cloth kara with the knotted zare, or using ground glass or other injurious material in
hand wraps. As noted above, the leg chain no longer is used in either amateur or professional
competition. The ﬁghting attire has been modiﬁed, too—contemporary ﬁghters have replaced
the traditional loincloth (warki) with modern athletic shorts.
To ensure fair competition based on physical prowess, the use of medicines has been banned
in the amateur ranks. Banning medicines in cross-cultural competition is common across Africa.
For example, the African Boxing Union (ABU) banned the presence of all sangomas (diviner
priests in the tradition of the Nguni-speaking peoples), umthakathis (“witches”), juju
(magical/spiritual power) men, and other spiritual advisors. This is meant seriously, and in 2005,
a championship wrestling match in Lukasa, Zambia, was halted when Lubandi Mamba Mulozi
“entered the ring covered in white powder and carrying charms” (Gondwe 2005). Although such
bans have yet to affect professional dambe competitors and are easily circumvented in amateur
competition, the rulings of the ABU and the Zambian incident suggest that internationalization
will lead to conﬂicts beyond standardized equipment and attire.
—Thomas A. Green
See also: Gidigbo; Moraingy; Zulu Stick Fighting; 
and Caribbean Martial Arts (in this volume); Belief Systems: 
Introduction; Belief Systems; Africa; Belief Systems: European 
Occult Sciences; Expressive Culture; and Globalization of 
Martial Arts (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Abubakar, Uthman. 2005. “Dambe: Professionalising a Traditional Sport,” Abuja Daily Trust, May 24,
via http://allafrica.com/stories/200505240248.html, accessed January 18, 2010.
BBC Sport. 2002. “Witchdoctors Banned from Nations Cup,” January 16, via http://news.bbc.co.uk/
sport1/hi/football/africa/cup_of_nations/1764864.stm, accessed September 2, 2008.
Blewett, Bert. 2005. “Vabaza, Makepula Top the Bill,” South African Sunday Tribune, February 20,
via http://www.sundaytribune.co.za/index.php?fSectionId=245&fArticleId=2417592, accessed
September 2, 2008.
Dambe
9

Dambe Instructional Video. 2006. Kano City, Nigeria: African Martial Arts Academy.
Gondwe, Kennedy. 2005. “Wrestlers Get to Grips with Muti,” BBC News: World Edition, February
8, via http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/4247561.stm, accessed September 2, 2008.
Green, Thomas A. 2005. “Dambe: Traditional Nigerian Boxing,” InYo: Journal of Alternative
Perspectives on the Martial Arts, http://ejmas.com/jalt/2005jalt/jcsart_Green_0905.html, accessed
September 2, 2008.
Pakistani Daily Times. 2002. “Traditional Butchers’ Boxing Is Reborn,” April 25, via http://www
.dailytimes.com.pk/default.asp?page=story_25-4-2002_pg2_7, accessed September 2, 2008.
Powe, Edward. 1994. Black Martial Arts Volume I: Combat Games of Northern Nigeria. Madison, WI:
Dan Aiki Publications.
Rattray, R. Sutherland. 1913. Hausa Folk-Lore: Customs, Proverbs, Etc. London: Clarendon Press, via
http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
GIDIGBO
Gidigbo is a term used by the Yoruba people of West Africa to describe their indigenous form of
wrestling. The Yoruba are located primarily in contemporary Nigeria, but they also inhabit other
areas of west central Africa; the area of the largest concentration is often designated Yorubaland.
Igbo (Yoruba, “head-butt”), the second part of the word gidigbo, signiﬁes striking with the head
during wrestling. Thus, the word suggests one of the techniques that practitioners regard as
typical of the contest. In general, gidigbo has come to be used as a label to cover all types of
Yoruba wrestling. Two other terms used as synonyms for Yoruba wrestling—eke and ijakadi—
have a more restrictive use.
RULES
Despite the possible etymology of its name, contemporary gidigbo does not feature head-butting
or, indeed, any striking. As such, it is analogous to other sporting forms of wrestling in West
Africa. Its rules are more or less negotiable and subject to local decisions at the town level, but
at the level of a larger ethnic or regional group, or in special cases such as Eje (the New Yam
Festival that marks the beginning of the harvest season), rules are predetermined by the occa-
sion. In general, however, the following rules apply. Wrestlers are male and matched within their
age group. Medicines (i.e., charms or other magic) are discouraged publicly, but widely used
privately. Strikes and groin grabs are illegal. A contest is lost when a competitor’s knees or back
come in contact with the ground.
The wrestling ground consists of a plot of sandy ground or, if that is not available, ground that
has been tilled to make it soft enough for play. As with most other African martial contests,
gidigbo matches are accompanied by traditional drumming.
Challenges may take the form of a wrestler literally “calling out” a speciﬁc competitor by
going to the competitor’s house and shouting, “Gidigbo! Gidigbo! Gidigbo!” A response of
“Eeyaa!” signiﬁes acceptance. More formal patterns of verbal taunting are an element of festival
tournaments, such as the wrestling at the Oroyeye, discussed below.
Eke literally describes the actual jockeying for position during standing grappling, but the
term is also applied to the wrestling play of boys. In addition to recreation for preadolescents, eke
is used in rites of passage. Wrestling at this level serves to create a bond within the community.
Eke takes place at the family compound around sundown. The area in which it is done is
10
Gidigbo
www.ebook3000.com

prepared by elders who turn the soil to make it soft for falling. Fathers and uncles participate as
coaches and trainers for the youths.
By strictest deﬁnition, the term ijakadi refers to an all-out ﬁght that makes use of the head, ﬁst,
elbow, feet, knees, and even the ﬁngernails for scratching. Hand strikes (ese) may be enhanced by
the use of rings, bracelets, or medicines. The medicines commonly take the form of a special
substance (oogun) or incantations (ofoashe). About seven days before a wrestling festival, herbal
medicines containing (among other ingredients) guinea pepper (probably Aframomum melegueta)
is prepared. Competitors ingest this before ﬁghting. Supernatural medicines prepared by an expert
in traditional medicines (onisegun) are regarded as having greater power.
A physical technique speciﬁc to ijakadi proper is agbeleedi; the rough translation is “to cross
the lower back or buttocks area over the knee to break the opponent.” The technique is executed
by lifting the opponent up, kneeling on one knee and dropping the opponent over the other
thigh. Another technique, emu, means “to pinch or squeeze” (as in a bear hug). In this position,
the knuckles are positioned to cause pain on the spine or, from the back, on the solar plexus or
bladder. Hip throws and shoulder throws are found as well. There is a throw similar to wrestling’s
ﬁreman’s carry. There are sweep leg throws, throws using the thigh that are similar to judo’s ushiro
goshi, single- and double-leg take downs, ground positions, seated positions using the legs to top-
ple an opponent, chokes, and arm twists.
The terminology used for the various forms of wrestling varies depending on region. At the
Edi Festival at Ile Ife, the term ijakadi used to be a label for less-violent wrestling matches
between young men (Walsh 1948).
WRESTLING AS RITUAL THEATER
Wrestling is a component of the ritual theater associated with Yoruba annual festivals. In late
March, the Festival of the Grandmothers (Oroyeye) takes place in the kingdom of Ayede Ekitiki
in Northeastern Yorubaland. During this time, eight female elders (yeye, grandmothers) who
serve as priestesses of Iyeye (the orisha charged to punish wrongdoers) are permitted to deliver
social criticism (Apter 1998, 69). A fourteen-day wrestling tournament takes place during this
festival. The young men are divided into two teams. One team represents the kingdom’s original
inhabitants; the other represents the “strangers” who immigrated to the area later and who
introduced a competing dynasty for the rule of Ayede (Apter 1998, 76). The young women asso-
ciated with the two factions devote their energies to hurling generalized insults and directed
magical attacks (“curses”) that, over the course of the competition, target individual wrestlers
from the opposition. The wrestling therefore dramatizes in the play world the historical and
political conﬂicts that affect the community and kingdom.
The Êdi Festival at Ile Ife, which takes place after the yams are harvested (October–-
November), commemorates events from the Yoruba sacred narratives (Odu Ifa) and historical
conﬂict between the Yoruba and their neighbors. According to Yoruba sacred narrative,
Oduduwa descended from the sky on a chain and defeated the divinity (orisha) Obatala in a
wrestling match. Oduduwa then founded Ile Ife and established the dynasty from which all
subsequent Yoruba Oni (“kings”) claim descent. This event from sacred history is re-enacted on
the ﬁrst day of Edi, when the current Oni (who is said to be descended from Oduduwa) and the
Chief Priest of the orisha Obatala engage in a mock wrestling match. Dramatizing the mythic
archetype, the Priest of Obatala is defeated. Afterwards (and on each of the next six nights of
Gidigbo
11

the festival), real competitions between boys and young men take place. These real matches are
coupled with songs and the use of supernatural medicines.
TRAINING, TOOLS, AND RELATED ARTS
Training traditionally begins within the family circle. Opportunities to test the skills acquired in
the family compound are provided by formal festivals and informal, impromptu contests between
families, villages, and other local social units. Aside from these informal matches, and general
abstention from smoking or alcohol, no formal training regimen is prescribed. The labor
attendant on farming, and participation in dances and drumming, is generally seen as sufﬁcient.
From a dietary standpoint, yams are alleged to promote strength, so competitors are encouraged
to eat them before matches.
On festival occasions, wrestling is accompanied by an instrument called an agidigbo. This is a
type of lamellophone, or “thumb piano,” which is played by plucking the metal keys and by
drumming on the end with a large ring.
Both rings and drumming may be related to ijakadi in a more direct fashion. During all-out
ﬁghting, ﬁnger rings (oruka) help during pinches and lend force to slaps. Hand slaps are an
important element of ijakadi, and the effects of a slap are multiplied by the use of the rings and
bracelets. Slapping is also the primary method for stickless drumming. Therefore, drumming can
provide a certain amount of hand conditioning, strength, speed, coordination, and overall
muscle and arm endurance.
There may be an implied relationship in the fact that the word for drum in the Yoruba
language is ilu, while the word for strike or hit in Yoruba is lu. Oral tradition maintains that in
ancient Yoruba culture there was a relation between drumming and ﬁghting. Today, this
relationship is not very popular with (or at least, acknowledged by) most contemporary Yoruba
drummers. An exception was Nigerian-born Babatunde Olatunji (1927–2003). Olatunji is
regarded as the father of African drumming in the United States. During an interview with the
author of this entry in September 1999, Olatunji shared the story of his court appearance
resulting from an altercation. The presiding judge, after seeing the damaged face of the other
party involved, asked Olatunji about his hands. On telling the judge that he was a drummer, the
judge warned that his hands could be considered a deadly weapon. Olatunji concluded the story
by acknowledging the role drumming had played, and declared, “These hands can kill!”
WRESTLING AND WORLDVIEW
Wrestling’s role as a core metaphor in Yoruba culture is demonstrated by its appearance in
scriptures (odus) from traditional Yoruba religion. For example, Orunmila is the orisha of wisdom
and knowledge. He is the son of the supreme deity, Oludamare, and he is also known as Ifa.
Orunmila is said to have introduced a form of divination to the Yoruba that interprets the
relationships between odus and the conﬁgurations of sixteen palm nuts that are cast down by the
diviner (babalawo, “father of secrets”). According to the Odu Ifa scripture known as Ose Meji,
Orunmila was a well-known wrestler before becoming a diviner. He traveled all over ancient
Yorubaland to study ijakadi, and defeated all sixteen major kings of Yorubaland. After his fame
had spread, wrestling was not a proﬁtable living for him—no one would wrestle with him any
more. Discouraged, he visited Eshu, the Trickster. Eshu advised Orunmila that he would change
12
Gidigbo
www.ebook3000.com

his luck if he sometimes let his opponents win. Orunmila did not like the idea of losing
intentionally, especially after being the champion of ijakadi. Eshu explained that he proposed
contests in which the winner must agree to pay the loser. In this way, he could once again proﬁt
from his reputation as a great wrestler.
This concept of wrestling is also a metaphor for Ifa divination. Called da fa (throwing,
Ifa/Orunmila), it is a system that is central to Yoruba religion and world view.
Orunmila’s tale is not unique. For example, the supreme deity Oludumare once decided to
determine which orisha had the strongest spiritual power (ashe) in the universe. As part of the
trial for supremacy, all the orishas had to wrestle each other. Ultimately, Ori (the deiﬁed mani-
festation of destiny and personal essence) won. The verse states, Orisa Loko ba ori dimu/Ori da a
o da si ita. (“Orisanla was the ﬁrst to defy his authority/Ori ﬂoored him.”) In the preceding verse,
da (translated as “ﬂoored”) is the same verb employed in da-fa (divination), where it is translated
as “throw down” or “cast down.”
Yoruba oral literature such as oriki (“praise poetry”) is ﬁlled with similar incidents and
references to various forms of wrestling.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The combat culture of the Yoruba is best described as fragmented. Traditional wrestling forms such
as eke and gidigbo continue to be practiced, but the number of people familiar with the all-out ver-
sions of ijakadi diminishes annually. At state level, traditional wrestling receives some ﬁnancial
support through organizations such as Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
which hosted traditional wrestling competitions in Lagos in 2007. When a Nigerian team made its
debut in the Fifth West African Traditional Wrestling Championship held in Niamey, Niger
Republic, in 2007, the Nigerians won three gold medals, one silver medal, and one bronze medal,
and left as overall winners. Nigeria hosted a world traditional wrestling championship in 2009 as
part of the Abuja Carnival, organized annually by the Nigeria Tourism Development Corporation
(NTDC). However, the establishment of rules that encompass a diverse range of cultures resulted
in the elimination of important traditional elements such as medicines. In addition, many
corporate and government sponsors would probably prefer that local athletes focused less on
traditional wrestling than on Olympic-style sports such as international freestyle wrestling.
—Earl White
See also: Dambe; Caribbean Martial Arts (n this volume); Belief Systems: 
Africa; Expressive Culture; Globalization of Martial Arts; International Freestyle 
and Greco-Roman Wrestling; and Martial Tourism (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Abimbola, Wande. 1997. Ifa Will Mend Our Broken World. Boston: Aim Books.
Apter, Andrew. 1998. “Discourse and Its Disclosures: Yoruba Women and the Sanctity of Abuse,”
Africa 68, 68–97.
Levy, Patricia. 1996. Nigeria. New York: Marshall Cavendish.
Ogundele, Samuel Oluwole. 2007. “Aspects of Indigenous Medicine in South Western Nigeria,”
Ethno-Medicine 1, 127–133, via http://www.krepublishers.com/02-Journals/S-EM/EM-01-1-000-
000-2007-Web/EM-01-2-000-000-2007-Abst-PDF/EM-01-2-127-07-023-Ogundele-S-O/EM-01-
2-127-07-023-Ogundele-S-O-Tt.pdf, accessed November 4, 2008.
Gidigbo
13

Ojeme, E. O. 1989. “Sport in Nigeria,” in Sport in Asia and Africa: A Comparative Handbook, edited
by Eric A. Wagner, 249–266. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Opoku, KoﬁAsare. 2006. “Traditional African Religious Society,” in Oxford Handbook of Global
Religions, edited by Mark Juergensmeyer, 537–544. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Walsh, Michael J. 1948. “The Edi Festival at Ile Ife,” African Affairs 47, 231–238.
MORAINGY
Moraingy (also transliterated as morengy and mrengé) is a traditional martial art of Madagascar
that has expanded towards other islands off the southeast coast of Africa: Comoro Islands, La
Réunion Island, Seychelles, and Mauritius.
Linked to traditional practices dating to the Maroseranana dynasty (ca. 1675–1896), the art
has been transmitted through ritual at the folk level of society. Moraingy started as an element
of male culture in the Sakalava ethnic group, located on Madagascar’s western coast, but by the
early twenty-ﬁrst century, it was practiced by Malagasy people in general. Originally participa-
tion was limited to boys. Now, however, it is practiced also by girls. It is essentially a striking art
(with bare-ﬁsted punches), as opposed to a wrestling art. Weapons are not used.
ORIGINS
Moraingy is part of indigenous Sakalava physical culture. In Sakalava tradition this form of
combat has served as an activity through which elders can test the strength and physical per-
formance of youths. The youths in turn strengthen their character and gain prestige. Thus,
youths view participation as a privilege and are motivated to participate in the game.
In this context, moraingy is practiced in an atmosphere of loyalty and mutual respect. The
prevailing spirit is “neither grudge nor disagree.” It serves as physical education; it is also a means
of promoting moral values among youths and of inculcating in them a strong sense of cultural
identity. Competition acts as a school in which young people learn to face obstacles and to
resolve problems without parental help. For adults, teaching moraingy and staging competitions
requires interaction among various groups within the village. Thus, the practice develops and
maintains community cohesion. So, beyond the performance, beyond the victory, the moraingy
game represents a real-time learning of life rules in the traditional community—while people
cheer the winners, they also support the losers.
The origins of this game in Madagascar present an enigma quite as puzzling as the origin of the
Malagasy people themselves. Folk history maintains that in prehistoric times, pygmy-like peoples
inhabited Madagascar. Austronesian people, probably sailing from Borneo or Indonesia, began
settling on Madagascar after 300 BCE, and people from East Africa began settling on Madagascar
after 500 CE. Between the seventh and tenth centuries CE, Arabs also began establishing settle-
ments, and in 1500, Portuguese landed on Madagascar. When and where did moraingy ﬁrst appear?
All we know is that it existed before the arrival of the Europeans in the sixteenth century.
It seems likely that the origin of moraingy is associated with the birth and the expansion of the
Maroseranana Dynasty (a powerful Sakalava royal line). This kingdom grew from relative obscurity
in central Madagascar before European contact to the point of conquering most of the island by the
early nineteenth century. Originally, moraingy may have represented a means of physical defense
that developed into a combat sport. Alternatively, it may always have been a combat sport that had
14
Moraingy
www.ebook3000.com

functions in common with similar games in similar contexts. As such, it may have symbolized a com-
munity’s power and wealth. Unfortunately, there is no means of determining moraingy’s imprint in
Merina culture. In any case, the practice spread across Madagascar during the seventeenth century,
which coincides with the rise of the Sakalava dynasty on the west coast of Madagascar. Folk tradi-
tion indicates that the practice was inherent to members of the Maroseranana royal family.
PRACTICE
Most contests in moraingy pit young people from two or more clans (or villages) against one
another. Matches may be between persons of the same village, however.
The ﬁghters are typically villagers. All groups are represented: farmers, ﬁshermen, and
oxen guards. Participants are usually male and range from 10 to 35 years old. Most do not
have children yet. The ﬁghters are called kidabolahy (young people) or kidabo mpanao
moraingy (young people who practice moraingy). In the village, they are adulated, respected,
and feared by others.
The champions are called behoho and andrarangy, which are names meaning leaders and
skillful combatants. Names for champions and favorite techniques differ from one region to
another, but the essential structures of moraingy do not change. The participants parade around
the area of competition in search of adversaries. The audience shouts provocations and
stimulating songs. After matches are announced, the battle ensues, followed by the victory
shouts of the whole clan. These rituals persist regardless of locality or local rules, showing how
the practice of moraingy has endured and remained anchored in popular culture through time.
From a technical standpoint, after the parade and the ritual challenge, each ﬁghter enters the
arena. Then the match begins. Although there can be regional variations, usually the match
consists of a single round, which does not end until one ﬁghter is awarded a decisive point. The
judges and referees are chosen from the groups representing both antagonists.
In general, victory is declared when a combatant is seriously injured, when a combatant is hit
by so many successive blows that it becomes obvious that he is no longer able to defend himself,
when there is a voluntary or unintentional exit of the ﬁght area, or if one combatant faints or is
knocked out. Battle is also stopped in case of obvious inequality between the combatants.
Whatever the reason for stoppage, no protest is allowed.
TECHNIQUES
Moraingy involves a succession of unpredictable offensive and defensive situations. Nonetheless,
most tactics fall into predictable patterns.
Attacks are mostly punches. Straight punches (mitso) are punches thrown directly towards
the adversary, as in international boxing. The mandraoky is similar to the hook-punch used in
international boxing. The vangofary is a punch that follows a slanting trajectory; it imitates the
downward angular stroke used to cut sugar cane (the word vangofary means “to cut sugar cane”).
The vangomioriky goes the other direction from the vangofary, and is almost the equivalent of
the uppercut in international boxing.
Defenses are composed of guard positions and miolotsy (dodge-based defenses). Low, high, left
proﬁle, and right proﬁle guards are all common. Common dodges include total dodges, partial
dodges, and sidesteps. All of these are used to divert the trajectories of oncoming hits.
Moraingy
15

Despite the shared features of each of these techniques, moraingy remains a folk art. The
blows and defensive postures are not standardized as in some martial arts. All these techniques
have variations according to the ﬁghters, their trainers, and their village of origin.
Tactics common in moraingy are as follows. The taribahy consists of successive punches
delivered immediately after the opponent’s attacks. The kapindry is a retort using the same blow
as the opponent. The kilatsaky is a stopping punch (e.g., striking the opponent as he launches his
attack). The bararatamay is a series of hits that comes so fast that it sounds like the crackling of
a burning reed (bararata). The tankatoky is a way of holding the opponent by the neck (hatoky)
in order to deal him a blow.
Strategically, moraingy is a half-distance or long-range ﬁghting sport. Common strategies
involve alternatively accelerating and slowing down, attacking with feints, and establishing
control of the defensive space, either by controlling the ﬁght distance or by pretending to leave
and then suddenly charging the opponent.
Victory is not possible without maintaining certain attitudes and principles. Premier among
these is self-control. The young person who practices moraingy must know how to control
himself or herself. Confrontation must be accepted, fear of punches must be overcome, calm
must be maintained, and revengeful feelings must be avoided. Pacing, technique, and defense are
all vital to success.
Moraingy competition entails a temporary rivalry between two ﬁghters who aim for the same
purpose: victory. In this way, moraingy, a ludic or recreational practice, serves as a method of
physical culture while simultaneously providing opportunities for male bonding within the
framework of traditional society.
EVOLUTION
Historically, moraingy competitions accompanied important events of the annual harvest cycle.
In those days, organizers were elders supported by the clan or community. Today, a moraingy ﬁght
happens every weekend and on each government holiday. Anyone can organize a match,
assuming the promoter meets public authorities’ preliminary agreements and meets safety
conditions stipulated for athletes and spectators (e.g., medical service and public security).
In the past, organizers often left the spaces where they held their matches ﬁlled with trash.
Today, there are more rules, and they are more strictly enforced. Big matches are more likely to
be held in soccer ﬁelds that welcome the business. If the events are large enough, covered
facilities also may be hired.
The musical accompaniment that is required for matches has evolved, also. Originally,
nonampliﬁed drums were used. Now, drums are used rarely, except in remote areas. They have
been replaced by powerful and strident electronic sound systems. In both cases, the musical
accompaniment is required because a strongly ampliﬁed sound source produces a sort of
collective trance speciﬁc to moraingy competition.
Music and dance always go together in these events. The dance, marked by deﬁant gestures
made toward the opposite team, gets more and more provocative as match goes on. Meanwhile,
in the ring, two referees keep watch on the ﬁght and designate the winner. Speciﬁc rules change
depending both on the village and the organization involved.
Probably inﬂuenced by international boxing bouts, ﬁght organizers generally split a match
into two or three rounds of two or three minutes, spaced out by a break. The length of the break
16
Moraingy
www.ebook3000.com

varies according to the level of competition, and sometimes according to the intervention of the
soothsayer (ombiasa).
Cash and prizes are awarded to winners of moraingy bouts. The size of the prize increases with
the size of the competition. Consumer products are particularly appreciated. Examples include
hi-ﬁsystems, sound system devices, television sets, mountain bikes, and automobiles. Even if the
competitor does not know how to ride a bicycle or drive a car, the simple fact of having the item
brings pride and prestige.
In the past few decades, the role of women has changed. Traditionally, female involvement
in the physical ﬁghts of moraingy was rare, but today, there is much less segregation between men
and women, and in recent times, moraingy has been presented as an educational activity. Thus,
girls are increasingly encouraged to participate in moraingy, as it is said to shape their personality
and make them more enterprising and thoughtful.
FUNCTIONS IN SOCIETY
Moraingy is a sociocultural activity closely connected to the culture of the Sakalava ethnic group
of Madagascar. For the Sakalava, moraingy practice embodies moral virtues and collective rep-
resentations. For modern Malagasy people of other ethnic groups, this playful and ancient phys-
ical activity is considered as a traditional estate, a cultural inheritance for both ﬁghters and the
community.
To summarize, moraingy provides the following:
•
Education. The practice of moraingy distinguishes the vigorous individual from the
phlegmatic. Its practice serves as a school in which young people learn to face obstacles, to
resolve problems on their own. Moraingy is a complete educational instrument, a kind of
“life manual.” Various roles are taught to young people so that they can absorb them, thereby
preparing them for their lives as adults. Then, later, as adults, they become trainers, coaches,
and organizers, which are of course simply other roles, for different stages of life.
•
Socialization. In the context of contemporary urban society, traditional moral and social
values still have a huge role to play. Moraingy is a means of communication and
expression that triggers an immediate reaction among participants: “We are Malagasy.”
•
Social cohesion. Transmitted orally and hands-on from generation to generation,
moraingy promotes pride—pride of teacher, pride of village, pride of region, pride of
people. Thus, tournaments between villages serve the function of building or creating
community cohesion. Success in moraingy becomes a desired goal. Victory symbolizes
virility among male participants, physical strength, and the effectiveness of the village’s
martial art. It represents the pinnacle of honor and glory, generates a legitimate feeling
of pride. The village cohesion is even better strengthened.
•
Entertainment. Moraingy is a form of regional folklore, but it is also popular entertain-
ment. Moraingy is above all a spare-time activity. True, it has social functions, and it is
closely connected with Malagasy (and especially Sakalava) philosophy and religion. But
it is also an excuse to come together. The choirs of singers (often women and children),
the free and individual dances, the feasts, and even the hiking tourists who come in
search of folklore and exoticism—these all serve as entertainment.
This mixture brings changes and development in the tradition. Competitions are better
organized, and professionals are arising. This means a raised standard of living for some ﬁghters
Moraingy
17

and their families, but at the same time, modernization risks irreversibly obscuring traditional
moraingy. The balancing act for the present generation is therefore to protect the identity of the
traditional practice while still acknowledging that the art must also embrace change if it is to
remain relevant to future generations.
—Ernest Ratsimbazafy
See also: Dambe; Capoeira; Caribbean Martial Arts; and 
Oceania (in this volume); Belief Systems: Africa (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Elias, Norbert. 1969. The Civilizing Process: Vol. I: The History of Manners. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Powe, Edward. 2005. “The Mrengé Combat Dance Tradition of Moheli,” via http://www.blacfoundation
.org/black_martial.html, accessed November 5, 2008.
Raﬁdison, J. Y. 1996. “Le moraingy dans la région sakalava du Menabe” [Moraingy in the Sakalava
Region of Menabe]. Mémoire de CAPEN, ENS/EPS. Antananarivo: University of Antananarivo.
Ratsimbazafy, Ernest. 2006. “Deux pratiques traditionnelles de combat à Madagascar: savika du
Betsileo et moraingy du Menabe, signiﬁcations historiques, sociales et culturelles” [Two Traditional
Practices of Combat in Madagascar: Savika of Betsileo and Moraingy of Menabe. Historical,
Social, and Cultural Signiﬁcance]. Unpublished doctoral thesis, University of La Réunion.
ZULU STICK FIGHTING
The Zulu people are one of the Northern Nguni peoples of Southern Africa. Their military
history in the nineteenth century instilled fear, respect, and admiration in indigenous and
colonial foes alike. Singing, dancing, and stick ﬁghting at ceremonies today reinforces Zulu
people’s ties to this military history.
The Zulu people identify themselves through shared value systems, beliefs, history, language,
and cultural practices. Some of these cultural practices span centuries and have remained an
important part of Zulu life, despite urbanization and modernization. Among these cultural
practices is the martial art of Zulu stick ﬁghting.
The Zulu people are not a homogeneous cultural group, and their cultural practices, though
demonstrating a common thread, may differ from region to region. Stick ﬁghting is no exception.
Nonetheless, there are strong similarities amongst Zulu stick ﬁghting practices across kwaZulu-
Natal, which this entry will focus on. Zulu people are today spread across South Africa, but their
heritage and cultural practices travel with them.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
Zulu stick ﬁghting is known as umladlo wezinduku, umshiza, donga, ukudlalisa induku, and other
terms. It is transmitted from elders to the younger and is characterized by distinctive physical
techniques, weaponry, and protocol. Stick ﬁghting draws its meaning from its sociocultural
context and its historical ties with the military institutions of the Zulu nation of old. Stick
ﬁghting is intertwined with many cultural practices and rituals and stands testimony to a com-
munal valorization of the male gender. It inculcates cultural values and gender roles, reiterates
and embodies what it means to be a Zulu man. Stick ﬁghting is a constantly renewable symbol
of masculinity, cultural identity, and tradition.
18
Zulu Stick Fighting
www.ebook3000.com

Presumably, stick ﬁghting was part of precolonial Zulu life. However, documented oral
histories trace the supposed originators of Zulu stick ﬁghting only to the 1670s, when the
Ntunga Nguni clan settled in the Umhlatuze valley in what is today northern kwaZulu-Natal.
During the time of the warrior-king Shaka kaSenzangakona (1787–1828), who is credited with
forming the Zulu nation, stick ﬁghting surfaces in written history. Shaka used stick ﬁghting as
training for warfare and for men to earn themselves positions in his military ranks. The
techniques and maneuvers used in stick ﬁghting are similar to those implemented in Zulu war-
fare, with the biggest difference being the weapons used.
Today, stick ﬁghting is still an opportunity for men to build courage and skill, earmark
themselves for leadership positions, and earn respect in the community. Although the outcome
of a stick ﬁght can have serious physical and social repercussions, and despite its ties to self-
defense and Zulu military history, stick ﬁghting generally is not an act of atrocity. Instead it is
an engagement in a game of combat. It is perhaps for this reason that Zulu people call it
“playing sticks.”
SOCIAL PRACTICES
Zulu stick ﬁghting is not taught through formal training processes. It is a skill learned through
assimilation, observation, imitation, experimentation, and sparring (ukungcweka). The physical
and mental skills that equip a combatant to be proﬁcient in stick ﬁghting are developed and
reﬁned over many years and are shaped by peer-education, self-directed learning, and instruction
from elders. Although speciﬁc techniques are associated with stick ﬁghting, each ﬁghter eventu-
ally develops his own style of interpreting and implementing the techniques.
Zulu boys are expected to take on responsibilities in their communities at a young age.
Herding cattle begins as young as 5 or 6 years of age. While herding cattle, young boys spar with
switches or small sticks under the supervision of the leader of the herd boys. This not only is
meant to build courage, skills proﬁciency, and peer recognition but is a functional demand in a
context where cattle and people must be safeguarded from predators.
After they have passed puberty, boys begin to ﬁght at public ceremonies such as weddings,
the lung-festival (iphapu), ﬁrst-fruit festivals, and interdistrict stick ﬁghting competitions
(umgangela). During public competition, a warrior captain regulates and adjudicates stick ﬁghts.
His job is to ensure that the ﬁght is fair, that protocol is followed, and that nobody gets unnec-
essarily hurt. Stick ﬁghting was and is a means of impressing women, and a good stick ﬁghter is
an asset to any family. Fighting is considered to be an activity mostly for the young or middle-
aged, and boys or men ﬁght their peers. Stick ﬁghting can take place as single or group combat,
depending on the nature of the occasion on which it takes place. Single combat often takes place
at weddings (umshado), while group combat often takes place in interdistrict competitions. In
addition, there is a dueling subculture. Here, men known as amashinga travel around in search of
stick ﬁghts or in search of well-known stick ﬁghters. Their motivations for ﬁghting differ from
that of ordinary Zulu men: these men ﬁght for the sake of ﬁghting. They look toward building
their reputation by defeating well-respected stick ﬁghters and amassing victories at stick ﬁghts.
Amashinga often have unkempt appearances and dress like vagabonds. This is both to provoke
and to show contempt toward other men. Once word of the arrival of such people in the area,
they often have to struggle to ﬁnd people to ﬁght them. Thus, they will use nearly any means to
provoke a ﬁght. In cities such as Johannesburg, amashinga often ﬁght for prizes or money.
Zulu Stick Fighting
19

A battle does not take place without a motivation, and neither does a stick ﬁght. The moti-
vation may be ﬁctional or real. Men often engage in verbal skirmishes, by playfully insulting one
another or by pretending to be interested in another man’s girlfriend. More serious motivations
could relate to territory, disputes between parties, or feuds between families. In the case of blood
feuds, the intent is to inﬂict serious injury to the opponent. In this case, the playful dynamics of
the ﬁght disappear.
A natural but deﬁnite arena is set aside for a stick ﬁght. The exact location is usually
determined by the warrior captain, according to practical criteria. The spectators are the
architectural element deﬁning the arena. Spectators mainly consist of men and unmarried
women. The spectators actively participate in the action by ululating, dancing, and through ver-
bal utterances. The established interactions between audience and combatants convey a sense
of communitas and reassert cultural identity and symbolic autonomy.
Attire can single out combatants or companies of men going into combat. Traditionally,
attire for males was made of cowhide, but in contemporary times, a variety of attire is worn. At
an umgangela, men from the same region will wear selected attire that identiﬁes them as belong-
ing to a certain region. The attire can range from sashes to hairstyles to decorated ﬁghting sticks.
WEAPONS
Today, things are different, but historically, a Zulu man owned his own set (or sets) of ﬁghting
sticks, which he carried around with him. Both historically and today, the stick ﬁghter could
make his own sticks or employ a specialist to make them. Sticks are made from a variety of
different species of wood, but all of them are very hard wood. Fighting sticks can differ accord-
ing to the regions in which they are used, and the names for the weapons are also subject to
regional differences, but the terms used here are generally accepted.
The weaponry in stick ﬁghting consists of two sticks that are used either offensively or
defensively, and a small shield made of cowhide. The offensive weapon (induku) is held in the
right hand and is signiﬁcantly shorter than the defensive weapon. The top of the stick is
weighted so as to increase mobility and impact, and it tapers down to a sharp point that is often
hidden from view by a whisk made from a cow tail. The grip is usually wrapped with cowhide.
Both the shield and the defensive weapon (ubhoko) are held in the left hand. The lengths of
the weapons depend on the physique of the combatant. The shield (ihawu) is cushioned with
sponge or sheepskin to protect the knuckles. The design of the ﬁghting sticks, together with
targets and cultural body and movement patterns, determine the stylistic characteristics and
techniques of this martial art.
WAR MAGIC
Stick ﬁghters psychologically prepare themselves for a ﬁght using war magic. The magic is
employed before and during a battle to help men gain heightened control over a combative
context. Contemporary practices cite these historical rituals, although the context has changed.
Historically, war magic took on the form of traditional medicines (e.g., impi kayiboni was to
blind the enemy) or verbal utterances (e.g., praise poetry or izibongo and war chants or izigiyo).
To prepare traditional medicines and charms, stick ﬁghters may consult a traditional healer or
herbalist. They also may enlist the help of a diviner.
20
Zulu Stick Fighting
www.ebook3000.com

Traditional medicines used in a stick ﬁght take various forms and are used and administered
in many ways. Medicine can be applied directly to the ﬁghting sticks or the combatant’s body or
conveyed to the combatant through an enchanted object.
Verbal utterances consisting of praise poetry and war chants accompany stick ﬁghting. The
combatant’s peers or family generally recites these verbal utterances, thereby using social
collaboration to complete and enhance the war magic. These utterances are a form of peer
recognition; they also assist in iterating masculinity, of recognizing the ﬂuidity between the past
and present, and of verbally summoning mythological allusions. If the praise poems link the
combatant to an animal totem, the combatant may symbolically “become” the animal, or, at
least, embody the imagery conjured up through the verbal utterances. Cattle are very important
to Zulu people, so stick ﬁghting techniques are often tied to the spirit, images, language, and
symbols related to bulls. Utterances also can recount signiﬁcant incidents in a stick ﬁghter’s
personal or family history. This associates the ﬁghter with heroism in past generations and
previous battles. This practice also creates a sense of continuity between knowledge of the
warrior tradition of the Zulu people and the mediated enactment of today.
STRUCTURE OF A STICK FIGHT
Stick ﬁghting has strict rules and protocol that govern its practice, and men can prove their
supremacy at stick ﬁghting only in the context of this protocol. Thus, it must be a fair ﬁght (impi
yamanqanu).
Zulu people believe that a man should enter a ﬁght with a clean conscience and with focused
concentration. The pattern, generally, is dance, challenge, ﬁght, and surrender.
Historically, a ceremonial war dance (ukugiya) was used to psychologically prepare warriors
for battle, both as an intimidation tactic and to reafﬁrm martial prowess. The Zulu dance was
a ﬂamboyant and athletic display of stick ﬁghting skills against an imaginary opponent. The
methods showed derived from ﬁghting in single combat. Today, solo dances still take place
before a stick ﬁght. The dance is a symbolic and embodied statement of intent, and serves as
a challenge to a ﬁght. It can include comical elements and it does not follow any set
techniques or step patterns; each individual can display his own style and ﬂair. The audience
accompanies the dancing with praise poetry and war chants. Fighters sometimes re-enact past
events using ukugiya; this is believed to summon the martial power of their ancestors to
support them. While ukugiya can demonstrate ﬁghting skill and scare off opponents, it can also
draw attention to a combatant’s weak points or repetitive actions, and that can work to his
disadvantage in a ﬁght.
After the dance comes the challenge. If a person steps into the arena, he has accepted the
challenge. There are physical and verbal cues to indicate that a challenge is given and accepted.
After a challenge has been accepted, ﬁghters square up and spar. They start by exchanging
blows to the shields. This gives them a chance to warm up to the situation and size up the
opponent further. The sparring develops into a full-blown ﬁght only after the initial exchanges.
Rushing into the ﬁght is not considered chivalrous.
The aim is to strike the opponent’s head (ukuweqisa). Thus, blows delivered to the body are
an attempt to create an opening in the opponent’s defense so as to make an opening for strikes
to his head. The knees, joints, and ribs are important secondary targets because striking them
Zulu Stick Fighting
21

impedes the opponent’s mobility and allows easier access to his head. A stick ﬁght is incredibly
fast, and good footwork and defensive techniques are imperative.
A ﬁght stops with the surrender. This occurs when ﬁrst blood is drawn, a combatant is clearly
outmatched, or the referee intervenes. Sportsmanship is very important, as both the winner and
loser have to accept the outcome with humility and dignity. In accordance with the generally
playful nature of stick ﬁghting, it is customary to demonstrate that no animosity remains after a
ﬁght. The victor is expected to help wash off blood, dress wounds with medicinal substances, and
otherwise tend to the injuries of the opponent.
RULES AND PROTOCOL
The convention of providing speciﬁc terminology for speciﬁc ﬁghting techniques is not as promi-
nent in Zulu stick ﬁghting as in some other martial arts. Nonetheless, there are technical terms
and collective concepts that describe a particular style of ﬁghting, maneuvers of the ﬁghting
sticks, and footwork. The movements and concepts are intertwined with complex sociocultural
thought patterns and symbolism.
To demonstrate that this is a friendly contest rather than an actual ﬁght, permission for a
match should be sought (and granted) by the elders or leaders present. The ﬁght should be
between peers. Ideally, men should literally ﬁght their own battles, but in practice, a more
proﬁcient ﬁghter may stand in for his less experienced friend or relative.
No hits or stabs to the eyes are allowed. There are feints that mimic stabbing that are meant
to open the opponent’s defenses, but a combatant may not use the weapons for stabbing.
Defensive and offensive sticks are to be used for their respective purposes, and shields may not
be used to hit the opponent. Locking shields in the air or wrestling about with interlocked sticks
and shields demonstrates a lack of skill. A combatant may not strike a disarmed opponent or an
opponent that has been struck down. An opponent who surrenders or who decides to turn his
back and walk away from the ﬁght may not be attacked. No tripping, kicking, or other means
beyond skills directly related to stick ﬁghting are allowed.
STICK FIGHTING TODAY
Stick ﬁghting allows Zulu people to reafﬁrm their ties with past traditions while moving into
the future. It remains a living tradition in a changing country. Stick ﬁghting still takes place in
its traditional contexts, especially in rural areas, but it has also transcended its traditional
borders. Under apartheid legislation, black people were prohibited from carrying weapons,
traditional or otherwise. For self-defense purposes, men carried inconspicuous sticks or
umbrellas that could be turned into weapons. This practice continues in present-day South
Africa. The techniques associated with using these objects as weapons relate strongly to stick
ﬁghting techniques.
Meanwhile, in some urban areas, organized stick ﬁghts take place on Friday or Saturday
evenings, and migrant workers offer instruction in stick ﬁghting to interested parties. Stick
ﬁghting is popular at Shaka Day celebrations and other occasions celebrating South African
heritage. Stick ﬁghters sometimes travel beyond the borders of South Africa to give
demonstrations at martial arts festivals. Renewed interest in indigenous cultural practices,
indigenous knowledge systems, and heritage has led to television exposure, academic study,
22
Zulu Stick Fighting
www.ebook3000.com

and practice across contexts. Thus, stick ﬁghting remains an integral cultural practice for
many Zulu people.
—Marié-Heleen Coetzee
See also: Canary Islands Stick Fighting and Wrestling; Caribbean 
Martial Arts; Japan: Jo; Canne de Combat; Celtic Martial Arts; 
Fighting Arts of the Renaissance; and Arnis (in this volume); 
Belief Systems: Africa (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Coetzee, Marié-Heleen. 2000. “Playing the Sticks: An Exploration of Zulu Stick Fighting as
Performance,” South African Theatre Journal 14(1), 97–113.
Coetzee, Marié-Heleen. 2002. “Zulu Stick Fighting: A Socio-Historical Overview,” InYo: The Journal
of Alternative Perspectives on the Martial Arts and Sciences, September, http://ejmas.com/jalt/
jaltart_Coetzee_0902.htm, accessed December 15, 2008.
Derwent, Sue, Barry Leitch, Roger De La Harpe, and Pat De La Harpe. 1998. Zulu. Cape Town: Struik
Publishers.
Krige, Eileen Jensen. 1965. The Social System of the Zulus, 2nd edition. Pietermaritzburg: Shuter &
Shooter.
Zulu Stick Fighting
23

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

Americas
Although North and South America are physically connected, they are usually considered to be
two separate continents. Greenland, the world’s largest island, is also part of the Americas, as are
the many islands dotting the Caribbean. Between them, these American landmasses comprise
just over a quarter of the world’s surface.
Humans may have arrived in the Americas as far back as 40,000 years ago, and they were cer-
tainly in the Americas 12,000 years ago. Although Africans, Asians, and Europeans landed in the
Americas before the ﬁfteenth century, their initial impact was not very signiﬁcant. Then, in 1492,
the Europeans started systematically colonizing the Americas, and over the next four centuries,
European colonists and their African slaves demolished the Native American civilizations.
Mass emigration from Europe and Asia to the Americas began during the mid-nineteenth
century. This emigration is the largest voluntary mass migration in history. In the Americas,
there was signiﬁcant cultural homogenization. For example, just four languages—English, Span-
ish, Portuguese, and French—dominate the two continents. At the same time, there remain
deep ethnic, sectarian, nationalistic, and political divisions. So martial arts of the Americas are
often presented in a way that waves the local ﬂag while acknowledging roots somewhere else.
52 HAND BLOCKS/JAILHOUSE ROCK
Jailhouse Rock (JHR), also known as “Jailhouse,” “52 Hand Blocks,” or “52s,” is an African
American vernacular style of ﬁghting historically associated with penal institutions in the
United States. Thus, the origin of the term Jailhouse is obvious. The name “Jailhouse Rock” prob-
ably alludes to the Elvis Presley (1935–1977) ﬁlm and song of that name (MGM, 1957). The
most popular etymology for 52 refers to the prank in which a victim is invited to play “52-card
pick-up.” If the victim agrees to play, the prankster then scatters a deck of playing cards and tells
the butt of the joke to pick them up. The connection of the prank to the ﬁghting method lies in
the ﬁghting system’s use of trickery to improvise within a virtually inﬁnite range of possibilities.
No convincing explanation for the term “52 Hand Blocks” has been provided.
Although general interest in JHR is a late twentieth- and early twenty-ﬁrst-century phenom-
enon, articles on African American prison ﬁghting styles began to be published at least as early
as 1974 (Darling and Perryman 1974). Martial arts instructor Dennis Newsome (1947–) ﬁrst
brought Jailhouse Rock to national attention (and, according to some, popularized the name) dur-
ing the 1980s by virtue of his work as ﬁght choreographer for the ﬁlm Lethal Weapon (Warner
Brothers, 1987) and the publicity generated by a subsequent article featuring photographs of Mel
Gibson (1956–) executing JHR techniques (O’Neill 1987).

26
52 Hand Blocks/Jailhouse Rock
Throughout the 1990s, martial arts practitioners argued about whether Jailhouse Rock existed
outside Newsome’s imagination. Then the lyrics of the Brooklyn hip-hop artist GZA (Gary Grice,
1966–), a founding member of Staten Island’s Wu Tang Clan, began mentioning a ﬁghting system
called “52s” or “52 Hand Blocks.” For example, “Cold World,” on Liquid Swords (Geffen Records,
1995), states that against handguns, “your ﬁfty-two handblocks was useless.” There is also an oral
tradition that maintained that the hip-hop dance style known as “up rocking” shared movement
patterns with an African American urban ﬁghting system.
People who said the system existed thought there might be connections between Jailhouse
Rock and the ring strategies of professional boxing champion Archie Moore (born Archibald
Wright, 1913–1998), Floyd Patterson (1935–2006), and Mike Tyson (1966–), all of whom had
learned to box while inmates in juvenile detention facilities (Century 1999, 79–80; Darling and
Perryman 1974, 21; Stickgrappler 2002).
An opposing camp argued that both Patterson and Tyson credited white trainer Constantine
“Cus” D’Amato (1908–1985) with their peek-a-boo style. Critics also noted that prison administra-
tors usually discourage inmates from training in unsupervised martial arts. The naysayers also noted
that prison ﬁghts tend to be gang ﬁghts and employ shanks (contrived blades) (Stickgrappler 2002).
For many critics, a signiﬁcant turning point came in 1999, when journalist Douglas Century
began publishing descriptions of gangs, crime, and hip-hop culture in Brooklyn. In a book called
Street Kingdom: Five Years inside the Franklin Avenue Posse, in a subsequent article in Details maga-
zine, and in e-mail dialogs, Century clearly documented the existence of a Brooklyn street version
of JHR known as the 52s.
When asked, Newsome and others maintained that the obscurity was intentional, that JHR
had been intentionally obscured from white view. As Daniel Marks, who later became a leader
in the effort to perpetuate and revive the 52s, asserted (correspondence, 2003), “During the ’60s,
it was a war tactic [of the Nation of Gods and Earths, also known as the Five Percent Nation,
founded in 1964 by former Nation of Islam member Clarence 13X (born Clarence Smith,
1928–1969)], and used to combat racism.” Therefore, those who knew the style made efforts to
conceal the system from public view—especially white public view.
Century, who is white, paints a more pragmatic and less political explanation for the formerly
clandestine existence of JHR. He says that the reason that African American street-ﬁghting
methods were little known in the white community is that whites rarely interacted freely with
Brooklyn gangster society. As evidence of the lack of secrecy, he points out that he was freely
shown and even allowed to photograph techniques.
ORIGINS
Africanists speculate that the roots of JHR may be found in the ﬁghting systems that slaves
brought with them to the Western Hemisphere during the colonial era (Daniel Marks, corre-
spondence, 2005; Newsome, no date). These methods survived into the present by being taught
in prisons, where they remained a black method of defense, in a country in which racist courts
and penal laws created a system of de-facto slavery.
Proponents of a pretwentieth century origin for JHR have found intriguing references
in the historical record. In 1733, a South Carolina newspaper notice offered a reward for
the capture of a runaway slave who was a “famous Pushing and Dancing master” (Rath 2000,
www.ebook3000.com

109–111). A century later, Henry Bibb, who ran away from slavery in nineteenth-century
Kentucky, reported that male slaves were sometimes forced by their masters to ﬁght. During
these contests, “The blows are made by kicking, knocking, and butting with their heads; they
grab each other by their ears, and jam their heads together like sheep” (Bibb 1850/1969, 68;
see also: Wiggins 1977). During Reconstruction in South Carolina (1868–1876), reference to
“knocking” arose during the trial of African American Paul Harris. Harris was charged with
assault and battery. The attack was labeled “knockin’” and was described as consisting of
strikes to the eyes, kicks to the shins, and a head-butt to the belly of the plaintiff (Gonzales
1922). An article in the Brooklyn Eagle (November 23, 1902) describes several episodes
involving an African American farm worker who achieved notoriety in rural Louisiana as a
street-ﬁghter by use of his skill at head-butting. Decades later, attention was drawn to a style
that John Gwaltney described as “Knockin’ and Kickin’.” Among other references to this style,
Gwaltney wrote that, circa 1980, Jackson Jordan, Jr. “still gives occasional lessons and
demonstrations . . . in knocking and kicking” (Gwaltney 1980, 94). Yale student Christopher
J. Kouri (1992), through interviews with Gwaltney and his own ﬁeld research, added to the
historical record descriptions of an African American ﬁghting style labeled knocking (striking,
probably with the head) and kicking.
Although an indisputable route from the antebellum rural South to the contemporary urban
Northeast may be impossible to establish, proponents of organic ties between a continental
African art, JHR, and the 52s contend that an African-descended art survived during bondage
in the South and was subsequently perpetuated in the Northeast in urban settings. The need to
ﬁght in ethnic ghettos kept the art alive in diluted, but still viable, forms. Advocates (Daniel
Marks, correspondence, 2003; N. V. Herivea, correspondence, 2005) further suggest that immi-
grant West Indian and Filipino populations added to the mix in the 1950s, followed by contact
with Brazilian capoeira during the 1970s and 1980s.
A related area of debate focuses on “family” relationships among the ﬁghting styles. For
example, Jailhouse ﬁghting may refer to systems used within the physical constraints and defen-
sive necessities of prisons. The 52s, in contrast, is adapted to the street environment. The con-
tention remains that, in spite of these stylistic differences, “Both forms of the art were born from
the same [African] parent system” (Daniel Marks, correspondence, 2003).
This is not necessarily a street opinion. According to Douglas Century (correspondence,
2003), “The guys who ﬁrst showed me about 52 had no consciousness of it being ‘African’ or a
vestige of slavery and Jim Crow persecution; to them it was just some ill ‘science’ for tearing a
dude up in prison or the street.”
Others who have an intimate familiarity with JHR/52s adamantly oppose both the theory of an
African origin and any inherent stylistic distinction between the 52s and JHR. In fact, some
(Novell Bell, correspondence, 2004; Rudolph Curry, correspondence, 2005; Ben Hill, correspon-
dence, 2009) attribute the origin of the method to a speciﬁc time, place, and person in recent his-
tory. This theory posits that the 52s/JHR was created in the 1970s, in New York City’s Rikers Island
jail facility, by an inmate known as Mother Dear. On their release and return to their home bor-
oughs, prisoners who had learned the ﬁghting method from Mother Dear incorporated elements of
boxing, Asian martial arts, and dance to create individual and local versions of the 52s.
Brooklyn, the Bronx, Queens, and Staten Island are commonly credited as having developed
characteristic styles. Even when not credited with inventing the 52s, oral tradition makes
52 Hand Blocks/Jailhouse Rock
27

frequent references to Mother Dear as a master of the method. The particulars of Mother Dear’s
biography vary.
Other ﬁghters from the 1970s are almost as legendary. In particular, members of the Nation
of Gods and Earths (the Five-Percent Nation) are renowned under their street names of Justice,
Born God, Kali, Life, King Saladin, Tweety Love, and Understanding. However, none of their
reputations rose to the prominence of Mother Dear.
An intermediate perspective is offered by Sifu Ghazi, a 52s ﬁghter turned traditional Chinese
martial arts teacher. Ghazi (correspondence, 2005) contends that the conﬂicts over origins are in
part due to a “generation gap,” that similar ﬁghting methods existed in prison prior to Mother Dear
and were brought to the streets when prisoners were released. In commenting on conﬂicts between
the schools of thought discussed above he reasons, “[T]he methods change and evolve with each
generation, so while Novell [Bell] may not have the history as far back as others, doesn’t mean that
what he is talking about is inaccurate, as it is his life’s experience and folklore. Many of that time
believe Mother Dear started it [JHR], but I . . . never heard any mention of Mother Dear as the
originator of it when I ﬁrst learned it. . . . I can tell you the Five-Percent [Nation members] that
Novell knew as a young male were serious and well-known and respected.”
Whatever the sources, similar forms of urban and prison ﬁghting have been reported in New
York and elsewhere. An early reported example is Stato (for “upstate New York”). Other exam-
ples are the Comstock and Coxsackie styles (named after New York State correctional facilities)
and Jacktown (named after the Michigan State Prison in Jackson, Michigan). During the 1970s,
techniques identical to those identiﬁed with the 52s were seen in street ﬁghts in urban
Richmond, Virginia (Michael Hume, personal communication, 2005), and during the late
1980s, a speciﬁcally African American method was observed regularly by a martial arts instructor
employed as a corrections ofﬁcer in the prison units outside Huntsville, Texas (Hubert Childress,
personal communication, 1989).
CHARACTERISTICS
Following the exposure of JHR to the general public in the late 1990s, the form that has received
the greatest exposure is one based on a boxing paradigm to the extent that many (particularly its
detractors) describe as “dirty boxing.” The emphasis on the boxing model may be due to assertions
that contemporary boxers Bernard Hopkins (1965–), Mike Tyson, and Zab Judah (1977–), among
others, showed glimpses of the 52s in the ring. There are a variety of paradigms covered under the
52s umbrella, however. According to martial arts teacher Novell Bell (correspondence, 2009), the
following local types are among the ones that are recognizable in the New York Metro area.
•
Brooklyn style is known for aggressive, crazy attacks. Most attacks are directed to the head,
aiming for a knockout. Because of the fast aggressive attacks, knockouts are common.
•
Queens 52 blocks practitioners use more strategy. Generally, Queens 52s experts are coun-
terﬁghters. They like to evade, redirect, and catch their opponents off balance and then
ﬁnish them. Queens 52s ﬁghters are showmen. They like to look good, and the best were
so good that they would verbally humiliate an opponent while physically destroying him.
•
Bronx 52 ﬁghters rely on kicking, sweeping, and grappling. They try to apply low kicks to
attack the legs of the opponent. Bell suggests that the Bronx 52 style uses the legs more
because all the hills they have to walk up in that area builds leg strength.
28
52 Hand Blocks/Jailhouse Rock
www.ebook3000.com

Ben Hill (correspondence, 2009) adds that literally striking up and down an opponent’s body
from ankles to the top of the head was typical of the “Bronx beatdown.”
Some tactics and techniques appear to be shared across the systems. The following are
representative. The ideal is to look good while beating an opponent. The “kiss move”—clapping
the forearms together to trap a jab, kissing the trapped ﬁst, and then throwing back the attacking
ﬁst—illustrates this element of the 52s. Tactically, every part of the body is a target. Elbow
strikes, hammer ﬁsts, knees, and head-butts are used. There are attacks to muscles and nerve
centers that are designed to temporarily incapacitate opponents. Flurries of strikes are thrown
from “unorthodox” angles.
Assuming that movement styles develop through habit rather than ethnicity, Century says
that Jailhouse Rock has such a distinctive body movement style that whites who have not
grown up in the neighborhoods described really cannot master it. “Once you’ve seen it,”
Century says (Stickgrappler 2002), “you’ll know that it could only be a ‘black’ style.” Daniel
Marks (correspondence, 2004) reinforces Century’s observations, adding, “There’s a lot of trick-
ery and cunning in the movements not to mention the rhythm moving in and out of the beat.”
Marks also notes that classic 52s movement is based on a square and governed by a three-count
rhythm, and suggests that this important feature of the style may derive from blade techniques
(correspondence, 2009). For instance, the phrase “protect ya neck” (from the Wu Tang Clan
song of “Protect Ya Neck,” Wu-Tang label, 1991) is said to allude to the relationship between
the 52s and the blade. Because the style is not regulated by a curriculum, however, all accom-
plished ﬁghters have their own idiosyncrasies and rhythms.
HOW LEARNED
Jailhouse was never taught systematically as a martial art, just as a way of ﬁghting. Thus, it is an accu-
mulation of tactics, rhythms, and attitudes that could only be learned hands-on. This is a unanimous
point of agreement among all who have actually been exposed to this style of ﬁghting.
Ben Hill (correspondence, 2009), a teacher of traditional Chinese martial arts and student
of martial arts history, contends that the heyday of Jailhouse and its subdivisions such as the
52s was in the 1970s, and that it was related to the same creative spirit that gave rise to hip-
hop and break dancing. He states that people who fought in this way already had a basic move-
ment method on which to build. In his experience, most often the core of the ﬁghting method
was boxing, mostly because boxing is what was taught in Brooklyn and the Bronx in the 1950s
and 1960s.
Skill at the 52s developed in the heart of a ﬁght, either in prison or in the street, or by obser-
vation of such ﬁghts. In some cases, an experienced elder might take a younger protégé aside and
share techniques with him (Rudolph Curry, correspondence, 2009), but even in these cases the
drills and repetition of traditional martial arts were nonexistent. Asking for a “refresher course”
was likely to result in a beating (Daniel Marks, correspondence, 2004).
Some activities that are not exclusive to JHR are cited as developing the general attributes
that were subsequently applied to the 52s. Break dancing has already been mentioned. In addi-
tion, games such as slap-boxing (boxing using open-handed strikes rather than ﬁsts) were used
to sharpen technique and reﬂexes and to develop the ability to absorb punishment. Daniel Marks
(correspondence, 2004) states there were also some advanced training methods. “Get yourself a
52 Hand Blocks/Jailhouse Rock
29

sparring partner. Agree that you both are going to ﬁght bare knuckle, full contact to the body,
and every target (except the groin of course) is ‘game.’ First, you get on a wall and play ‘defense’
you are not allowed to throw any punches back you must defend only.”
REVITALIZATION AND COMMODITIZATION
As interest grew in the 52s during the late 1990s, and as the existence and nature of the 52s and
JHR were hotly debated on Internet forums, the desire for legitimate knowledge intensiﬁed. By
virtue of his media exposure during the 1980s, Dennis Newsome was often sought as a resource.
Although Newsome has appeared in photos (Soet 2001), he has refrained from providing pub-
lic instruction in the 52s and remains steadfast in his desire to maintain 52s as a closed art within
the African American community. Others, however, have attempted to commercialize on the
interest in the style, either by using the actual term “52s” or by marketing contrived styles cob-
bled together from basic boxing techniques, Wing Chun, modern versions of Jeet Kune Do, print
sources, and, since the launch of YouTube in 2005, video clips posted on the Internet. Books,
DVDs, and workshops began to appear hawking 52 Hand Blocks, Ghetto Boxing, Ghetto Blocks,
and so forth.
In 2003 (meaning around the time that the 52s were gaining attention in the martial arts
community via popular media), Douglas Century created opportunities for Big K (Kawan
Adon, his primary resource person for Street Kingdom) to connect with martial arts researcher
Daniel Marks, who sought to recognize, record, and revitalize not only the 52s but also the
related dance and physical training traditions. During the next 5 years, Adon, Marks, and even-
tually, ﬁlmmaker Kamau Hunter and urban ﬁtness innovator Hassan (“Giant”) Yasin came
together to document practitioners from the heyday of the style in the 1970s to 1980s and to
develop a curriculum for the boxing-based style of JHR/52s. Organized in 2008 as Constellation
52 Blocks Combat and Fitness, this consortium represents the most ambitious effort to date
toward documenting the role of Jailhouse Rock, the 52s, and related practices in African Amer-
ican cultural history.
—Thomas A. Green
See also: Capoeira (in this volume); Jeet Kune Do; Reality-based Defense; 
The Internet and the Martial Arts; and Afrikan Martial Arts (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Bibb, Henry. 1850/1969. Narrative of the Life and Adventures of Henry Bibb, an American Slave, Written
by Himself, 3d stereotype ed. With an introduction by Lucius C. Matlack. Miami, FL: Mnemosyne
Publishing Co.
Brooklyn Daily Eagle. 1902. “Mule Got the Worst of It,” November 23, 36, via http://eagle.brooklyn-
publiclibrary.org/, accessed October 13, 2009.
Century, Douglas. 1999. Street Kingdom: Five Years inside the Franklin Avenue Posse. New York: Warner
Books.
Century, Douglas. 2001. “Ghetto Blasters: Born in Prison, Raised in the ’Hood, the Deadly Art of 52
Blocks Is Brooklyn’s Baddest Secret,” Details 19(9), August, 77–79.
Darling, Ann, and James Perryman. 1974. “Karate behind Bars: Menace or Means of Spiritual
Survival,” Black Belt, July, 16–21.
30
52 Hand Blocks/Jailhouse Rock
www.ebook3000.com

Gonzales, Ambrose E. 1922. Tales of the Black Border: Gullah Stories of the Carolina Coast. Columbia,
SC: The State Company; see also: the edited version introduced by Joe Long at http://ejmas
.com/jalt/jaltart_long_1203.html, accessed April 19, 2009.
Green, Thomas A. 2003. “Freeing the Afrikan Mind,” in Martial Arts in the Modern World, edited by
Thomas A. Green and Joseph R. Svinth, 229–248. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Gwaltney, John L. 1980. Drylongso: A Self-Portrait of Black America. New York: Random House.
Hunter, Kamau, and Daniel Marks. 2007. Break the Glass: The Ofﬁcial 52 Hand Blocks Documentary.
Blockstar/Fwape/Bartendaz Production. Video.
Kouri, Christopher. 1992. “The Search for Knockin’ and Kickin’.” Unpublished thesis. African-
American Studies Department, Yale University.
Marks, Daniel, and Kamau Hunter. 2007. Boxing for Combat. Blockstar/Fwape. Video.
Newsome, Dennis. No date. “Jailhouse Rock,” http://www.malandros-touro.com/jailhouserock.html,
accessed April 25, 2009.
O’Neill, Terry. 1987. “Terry O’Neill Interviews Mel Gibson,” Fighting Arts International, 10–14.
Rath, Richard Cullen. 2000. “Drums and Power: Ways of Creolizing Music in Coastal South Carolina
and Georgia, 1730–1790,” in Creolization in the Americas, edited by David Buissert and Steven
G. Reinhardt, 99-130. College Station: Texas A&M University Press.
Soet, John S. 2001. Martial Arts around the World II. Burbank, CA: Unique Publications.
Stickgrappler. 2002. “Stickgrappler’s Martial Arts Archives,” http://stickgrappler.tripod.com/52/52.html,
accessed April 19, 2009.
Wiggins, David. 1977. “Good Times on the Old Plantation: Popular Recreations of the Black Slave in the
Antebellum South, 1810–1860,” Journal of Sport History 4, 260–284, via http://www.la84foundation
.org/SportsLibrary/JSH/JSH1977/JSH0403/jsh0403d.pdf, accessed October 29, 2009.
BRAZILIAN JIU-JITSU
Brazilian jiu-jitsu is a system of jacketed and belted wrestling that is similar to judo. It has sport
and combat forms, and professional, amateur, and recreational divisions.
Brazilian jiu-jitsu emphasizes groundwork, chokes, and joint locks. As practitioner Carley
Gracie (1949–) put it, “Let somebody else throw the punches or kick and just use your training
to take them down” (Clifton 1997).
ROOTS
Brazilian jiu-jitsu has Japanese roots. From a technical standpoint, the chief root is Kodokan
judo, especially as it was performed before 1931. This chronological distinction is made because
Kodokan judo underwent signiﬁcant conceptual changes during Japan’s Fifteen Years War of
1931–1945 and further conceptual changes following World War II. For a discussion, see the
articles listed at the end of this article.
At the same time, the word “Brazilian” refers to more than just geography. For example,
Kodokan judo does not have the concepts of malícia and malandragem, Brazilian Portuguese words
that translate as guile, trickery, or deceitfulness. From the standpoint of martial arts, malícia and
malandragem are most commonly associated with capoeira, but in Brazil the concepts are more uni-
versal than that. As another example, jiu-jitsu teachers in Brazil, like soccer players, are described
in the press (and addressed to their faces) by nickname or ﬁrst name. No disrespect is intended.
Such informality would have been unthinkable in pre–World War II Japan. Such ideas and prac-
tices are hardly idiosyncratic to Brazilian jiu-jitsu, but they are not Japanese—they are Brazilian.
Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu
31

Brazilian jiu-jitsu also has been inﬂuenced by vale tudo, luta-livre, and capoeira.
•
Vale tudo means “anything goes,” and is the name of a kind of fairground ﬁghting that was
popular in Brazil throughout the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century. These were knockout
ﬁghts, fought for cash prizes. As in Australian tent ﬁghting and American circus sideshow
wrestling, participants were free to use virtually any unarmed technique except for eye-
gouging, biting, and so on. Vale tudo bouts continued until somebody quit or passed out,
so they emphasized control and strangulation techniques. However, if a competitor pre-
ferred to kick or punch an opponent into submission, that was ﬁne, too.
•
Luta-livre means “free wrestling.” During the 1930s and 1940s, the Brazilian papers were
careful to distinguish luta-livre from “catch-as-catch-can,” which is how they described
the American style of professional wrestling. The papers made this distinction because
luta-livre matches supposedly did not have prearranged results. Whether this was true or
not is irrelevant. Instead, the important element is the theatrical context and presenta-
tion. Like luta-livre, Brazilian jiu-jitsu is not taught or presented solely as self-defense,
sport, or martial art; it is also taught and presented as a form of sports entertainment.
•
Capoeira, discussed in the next article, is a Brazilian martial art having roots in Africa.
Although the Gracies and their Japanese counterparts did not practice capoeira, their
opponents often did. During the early twentieth century, Brazilian police and military per-
sonnel received training in capoeira (or at least, capoeiragem, rough ﬁghting). Military and
police capoeiragem was not done as a dance or a leisure activity; there was little or no music,
and it was strictly a ﬁghting art. There was also street capoeira, in which working men
fought for honor and money. The unarmed techniques of police and street capoeira
included head butts, open-handed slaps, elbow strikes, takedowns, and a variety of kicks
and trips. Since all those techniques work in ﬁghts, they were often used during vale-tudo
contests. The capoeira concept was to come out hard and fast, knock the opponent down,
and then keep knocking him down. In this context, said Carlson Gracie (1935–2006), “It
is worth mentioning that jiu-jitsu’s strategy is the opposite of capoeira’s: the more the jiu-
jitsu ﬁghter saves energy, [the] more chances he will have to succeed” (Lacé Lopes 2004).
DEVELOPMENT
Until 1892, Asians could not ofﬁcially settle in Brazil, and the ﬁrst full boatload of Japanese immi-
grants did not arrive in Brazil until 1908. Of course there were exceptions. During the 1880s, a
Japanese carnival worker named Takezawa Banji was part of the imperial court of Dom Pedro II
(1825–1891) (Lone 2001, 20). Twenty years later, following the Japanese victories in the Russo-
Japanese War of 1904–1905, Brazilian military and naval ofﬁcers investigated the possibility of hav-
ing Brazilian sailors and marines train in judo. As a result of problems getting qualiﬁed instructors,
they decided to base their program on Rio-style (Carioca) capoeira instead.
At the beginning of the twentieth century, northern Brazil had a booming economy based on
the production of natural rubber from latex, which was native to the Amazon basin. Entertain-
ers followed the money to Amazon cities such as Belem and Manaus. These entertainers
included boxers and wrestlers, and in 1914 the wrestlers included the Japanese professional
wrestler Mitsuyo Maeda (Maeda Mitsuyo, 1878–1941).
As a boy, Maeda had considered a career in professional sumo, but at just 165 centimeters
(65 inches) in height, he was too short for that. Consequently, he switched to Kodokan judo in
32
Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu
www.ebook3000.com

high school and college. Following graduation, he got a job teaching judo in a Japanese high
school, but in 1904 he decided to give that up and move to the United States instead.
In the United States, Maeda tried to make a living teaching judo. During 1905, he gave judo
exhibitions at Princeton University, the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, and YMCAs in
Rhode Island and New York. He also taught at a gym in New York City. He found that teaching
judo did not pay very much, so in late 1905, he began wrestling professionally.
From 1906 to 1908, Maeda wrestled and taught judo in England and Scotland, and he made
occasional trips to Belgium and Spain. He ﬁnanced these trips by wrestling on stage. From 1908
to 1913, Maeda was in Cuba, Mexico, and Central America, still teaching judo and supple-
menting his income by wrestling.
In November 1914, Maeda went to Brazil, where he wrestled in theaters and taught judo.
During late 1916 or early 1917, a Brazilian youth named Carlos Gracie (1902–1994) began
studying judo with Maeda. At the time, Maeda was associated with the Circo Queirolo
(Queirolo Brothers Circus), which was an Italian-Argentine circus that operated in Brazil. Car-
los’s father, Gastão (1872–1955) was also associated with the Queirolo circus, apparently in a
ﬁnancial capacity.
In 1925, Carlos Gracie established a jiu-jitsu academy in Rio de Janeiro. His assistants
included his younger brothers Oswaldo (1903–1943), George (1905–1985), Gastão
Jr. (1906–1965), and Hélio (1912–2009). The Gracies’ school was a commercial success, in part
because the Gracies were good wrestlers, in part because they were good businessmen, and in part
because their family was politically well connected—early students included the future Brazilian
ﬁnance minister Oscar Santa Maria Pereira (1901–1961). Over the following decades, the
Gracies established jiu-jitsu academies throughout Brazil, reaching Belo Horizonte by the late
1920s, São Paulo by the early 1930s, Fortaleza by the mid-1940s, and Bahia by the late 1950s.
During the early 1930s, Carlos and George Gracie had a falling out, and they subsequently ran
rival jiu-jitsu organizations. There were also judo and jujutsu teachers who were not afﬁliated with
the Gracies. The latter included a Japanese man named Geo Omori (ca. 1898–1938). In 1928,
Omori, a recent immigrant to Brazil, was wrestling for Queirolo’s circus in São Paulo. He subse-
quently fought Carlos Gracie several times (the results were draws). In 1931, Omori opened a
jujutsu academy in São Paulo. He dreamed big—his academy was in the Ediﬁcio Martinelli,
which was Brazil’s ﬁrst skyscraper. Unfortunately, this was also the depth of the Great Depression,
and he had to go back to prize-ﬁghting to earn his living. He died from food poisoning in 1938.
Brazilian jiu-jitsu practitioners of the 1920s and 1930s frequently competed against oppo-
nents who were not practitioners of judo or jujutsu. For instance, during late 1931 and early
1932, George Gracie had several contests with capoeira practitioner Mario Alexio. During 1932,
Hélio Gracie, who had trained in amateur boxing as well as jiu-jitsu, made his pro debut against
a boxer called Antonio Portugal; the result was a win for Gracie. Later that same year, Geo
Omori and Hélio Gracie each wrestled the touring American professional wrestler Fred Ebert
(biographical dates unknown). Both of these matches ended in a draw. This suggests that Ebert
had improved in skill and presentation since November 1930, when a New Zealand newspaper
had described him as a “roly-poly boy” who would have to catch an opponent “blind paralytic
[drunk] to have a chance of winning” (NZ Truth 1930).
In the press, Brazilian professional matches were generally presented in ways that emphasized
national or ethnic origins. A sample headline: “Jiu Jitsu Beats Brazilian Capoeira: Diminutive
Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu
33

Japanese Conquers Huge Negro” (New York Times 1928). The unnamed Japanese mentioned in
this article was probably Geo Omori.
Throughout the 1930s, Brazil suffered under the Great Depression. To ensure jobs for exist-
ing residents, the Brazilian government began passing a series of laws that effectively stopped
Japanese immigration into Brazil. At the same time, the Brazilian government became increas-
ingly dictatorial, and Japanese already living in Brazil were told that they needed to do a better
job of assimilating (Lone 2001, 137–141).
Brazilian jiu-jitsu was not exempt from this policy of cultural assimilation. On the contrary,
Gracie Jiu-Jitsu was presented as an example of how assimilation should work. Supporters of this
story included Brazil’s dictator, Getúlio Vargas (1882–1954), who was a fan of Hélio Gracie. At the
same time, Brazilian judo was, on its own, beginning to transform from a Meiji-era Japanese martial
art into an international amateur sport. Leaders in this transformation of Brazilian judo included
Ogawa Ryuzo (1883–1975), Okochi Tatsuo (1892–1965), and Naito Katsutoshi (1895–1969), all
of whom started teaching Kodokan judo in Brazil during the mid-1930s. Moreover, during August
1942, Brazil entered World War II on the American side. During World War II, Brazil’s Japanese-
language primary schools were closed, and Japanese Brazilian community leaders were interned. The
Brazilian legislature even considered passing laws that would prohibit any future Japanese immigra-
tion into Brazil. Thus, there were many good reasons why Brazilians of the 1930s and 1940s began
emphasizing the differences rather than the similarities between judo and Brazilian jiu-jitsu.
In August 1945, Japan surrendered; in October 1945, the dictatorship of Getúlio Vargas ended;
and during the early 1950s, Japanese immigration into Brazil resumed. These post–World War II
Japanese immigrants brought with them the full range of Japanese martial arts and combative
sports, and to them, Brazilian jiu-jitsu was foreign. This in turn meant even greater differentiation
between Brazilian jiu-jitsu and Kodokan judo. During the early 1960s, South Koreans also began
immigrating to Brazil, and some of these Koreans brought taekwondo with them. To avoid losing
business to the proliferation of aikido, judo, karate, and taekwondo schools, the Gracies did what
they had always done: they adapted. Thus, Reyson Gracie (1941–) trained men to ﬁght in a Rio
de Janeiro television show called Heróis do Ringue (Heroes of the Ring, 1959–1960), while Rolls
Gracie (1951–1982) began cross-training in judo, sambo, and international freestyle wrestling.
During the oil crisis of 1973–1974, the Brazilian economy sagged, and thousands of educated
Brazilians decided to move to North America. These emigrants included Carley Gracie (1949–;
eleventh child of Carlos Gracie) and his cousin Rorion Gracie (1952–; oldest son of Hélio
Gracie). Both men opened martial arts schools in California, where they found that business
models that had been developed in Brazil worked equally well in the United States.
In 1986, Rorion Gracie, then living in Torrance, California, was picked to be a ﬁght chore-
ographer for the Mel Gibson movie Lethal Weapon (Warner Brothers, 1987), and in 1989, an
article in Playboy magazine described Gracie as “the toughest man in the west” (Jordan 1989).
These two events brought Gracie into contact with advertising people in California, and in
1993, Gracie became one of the designers of the ﬁrst Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC).
UFC was an open competition designed for pay-per-view television. The idea was that com-
petitors trained in different styles would ﬁght each other. Inspiration for the tournament may
have included the movie Bloodsport (Cannon Group, 1988). In this ﬁlm, Jean-Claude Van
Damme (1960–) played a competitor in a martial arts tournament in which the rules were
simple: throw the opponent from the ring, make him submit, or knock him unconscious. In any
34
Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu
www.ebook3000.com

case, those were essentially the rules of the ﬁrst UFC contest, held in Denver, Colorado, in
November 1993, and, as Rorion hoped, the winner of the ﬁrst UFC contest (and several
subsequent competitions) was Rorion’s younger brother Royce (1966–).
The success of Gracie Jiu-Jitsu in the heavily marketed UFC contests helped spread Brazilian
jiu-jitsu into Europe and Australia and attracted the attention of the U.S. Army. Explained Matt
Larson, one of the soldiers who subsequently modiﬁed Brazilian jiu-jitsu for use by the U.S. Army
(personal communication, July 2002), “The lesson that the Gracies had to teach was that a real-
istic training plan is necessary if you expect results. The guys they fought in the early Ultimate
Fighting Championships had unrealistic training plans, whereas the Gracies had a training plan
speciﬁcally geared toward that sort of competition.”
Success has its price, and the combination of rapid growth and increased revenues led to frac-
tures within North America’s Brazilian jiu-jitsu community. The disputes led to the Federal court
case Gracie v. Gracie, 217 F.3d 1060, 1071 (9th Cir. 2000), in which Carley and Rorion Gracie
fought in court over the use of the name Gracie Jiu-Jitsu as a trade name. The ﬁnal decision was
that both men could use the name Gracie Jiu-Jitsu, but only Rorion could use the logo.
Meanwhile, people who wanted to ﬁght against all comers began drifting toward the new (or,
at least, rapidly evolving) style called Mixed Martial Arts (MMA), which was designed speciﬁ-
cally for use in Ultimate Fighting Championships and similar contests. People who wanted to
compete in the Olympics continued to look to judo or wrestling. People who wanted to ﬁght in
self-defense turned to still newer methods, such as reality-based martial arts, with their foam-
padded suits. And people who still liked the original Brazilian mixture found themselves in
schools that said they were teaching traditional Brazilian jiu-jitsu.
TECHNIQUES
Although advertising sometimes asserts that one can learn the basics of Brazilian jiu-jitsu in just
forty lessons, learning to apply these techniques against uncooperative opponents requires years
of practice. To show relative ranking in classes and to make competitions fairer, Brazilian jiu-jitsu
uses a system of uniforms and colored belts. In the most common grading scheme, youths (age 15
and under) are ranked using white, yellow, orange, and green belts. Except under exceptional cir-
cumstances, youths under the age of 16 years are not promoted higher than green belt. For adults
(age 16 and over), the standard color scheme is white, blue, purple, brown, and black. Youths
entering this scheme as green belts are usually placed at blue or purple levels. As a rule, blue belts
are allowed to teach under supervision but are not allowed to operate schools of their own.
During voice-overs accompanying the video Gracie Jiu-Jitsu in Action (Brajitsu, 2004), Rorion
Gracie said that 90 percent of real ﬁghts go to the ground. This is exaggeration; the actual statistic
is probably closer to 62 percent (Leblanc 2007). But, in any event, the assumption in Brazilian jiu-
jitsu is that ﬁghts will end up on the ground, with the participants using a variety of joint locks and
choke holds that will ultimately cause the other person to submit (i.e., tap out, or quit).
Standard ground positions include the mount and the guard.
•
The mount is an offensive position. In the mount, both participants are on the ground.
The opponent is on his back. The practitioner on top, the person in the mount position,
is straddling the opponent’s abdomen. During training, the practitioner on top tries to set
a choke or armbar, whereas on the beach at Rio, says Rorion Gracie, “the Gracie brother,
Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu
35

now mounted on the man who was claiming to be the champ, will punch him until he
admits that jiu-jitsu still reigns” (Menezes Teixeira 2008, 44, footnote 23) A variation is
the “side mount,” in which the practitioner lies on top of an opponent, chest-to-chest at
a 90-degree angle.
•
The guard is a defensive posture, but this statement needs to be qualiﬁed by adding that
many counterattacks start from the guard position. In the guard, the practitioner is lying
on his back or side, and trying to keep the opponent from achieving the mount. A com-
mon guard places the opponent between the practitioner’s legs, which encircle the oppo-
nent just above the hips. If the ankles of the encircling legs are crossed, then it is a
“closed guard.” If the ankles are not crossed, then it is an “open guard.” An alternative is
the “half-guard,” in which the practitioner uses his or her legs to trap one of the legs of
the opponent who is attempting to mount.
—Thomas. A. Green and Joseph R. Svinth
See also: Capoeira; Japan: Jujutsu; Japan: Jujutsu-based Systems; and Japan: Judo 
(in this volume); Commodiﬁcation of Leisure; Globalization of Martial Arts; 
Mixed Martial Arts; Professional Wrestling; Judo in Japan, 1931–1950; 
and Military Unarmed Fighting Systems in the United States (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Barbosa de Medeiros, Rildo Heros. No date. “The History of Judo: The Arrival to Brazil: Count Koma,”
http://www.Judobrasil.com.br/komtr.htm, accessed August 16, 2009.
Clifton, Paul. 1997. “Carley Gracie: The Lion of the Gracie Family,” Combat Magazine, December,
http://www.gracie.com/pubs/uk-combat1297.html, accessed August 29, 2009.
Colégio Brasileiro de Genealogia. 2005. “Archive Paul Carneiro da Cunha-11 Title: Gracie,”
http://www.cbg.org.br/arquivos_genealogicos_g_01.html, accessed August 29, 2009.
Green, Thomas A., and Joseph R. Svinth. 2003. “The Circle and the Octagon: Maeda’s Judo and
Gracie’s Jiu-Jitsu,” in Martial Arts in the Modern World, edited by Thomas A. Green and Joseph
R. Svinth, 61–70. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Jordan, Pat. 1989. “Bad,” Playboy 36(9), September, via http://stickgrappler.tripod.com/bjj/bad.html,
accessed May 28, 2009.
Lacé Lopez, André Luiz. 2004. “Two Words—Carlson Gracie,” http://www.kompac.com.br/lace/Ingles2
.htm, accessed August 28, 2009.
Leblanc, Chris. 2007. “Going to the Ground: Lessons from Law Enforcement,” Journal of Non-lethal
Combatives, http://ejmas.com/jnc/2007jnc/jncart_Leblanc_0701.html, accessed August 23, 2009.
Lone, Stewart. 2001. The Japanese Community in Brazil, 1908-1940: Between Samurai and Carnival.
Hampshire, UK and New York: Palgrave.
Menezes Teixeira, Antonio Claudio Engleke. 2008. “Esporte e violência no jiu-jitsu: o caso dos ‘pitboys’”
[Sport and Violence in Jiu-Jitsu: The Case of the “Pitboys”]. Master of Arts thesis, Pontifíca
Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro, via http://www.maxwell.lambda.ele.pucrio
.br/Busca_etds.php?strSecao=resultado&nrSeq=11860@2, accessed August 29, 2009.
New York Times. 1928. “Jiu Jitsu Beats Brazilian Capoeira: Japanese Conquers Huge Negro in
Contest,” September 12, 10, via http://news.google.com/archivesearch, accessed October 18, 2009.
NZ Truth. 1930. “The Guff Parade,” November 6, 12, via http://paperspast.natlib.govt.nz, accessed
October 13, 2009.
Svinth, Joseph R. 2003. “Martial Arts Meet the New Age: Combatives in the Early Twenty-First-
Century American Military,” in Martial Arts in the Modern World, edited by Thomas A. Green and
Joseph R. Svinth, 263–274. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Taylor, Gerard. 2007. Capoeira: The Jogo de Angola from Luanda to Cyberspace. Berkeley, CA: North
Atlantic Books.
36
Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu
www.ebook3000.com

Tenório Wanderley, Paulo Fernando. 2001. “Histórico do Judô no Rio de Janeiro” [History of Judo in
Rio de Janeiro], http://www.judorio.org.br/ﬁque_ligado/hisorico/hist_judo_rj.doc, accessed August
29, 2009.
Wang, George. 1997. “History of Gracie Jiu-Jitsu,” http://www.fortunecity.com/olympia/bannister/8/
osculate.html, accessed August 16, 2009.
Wertheim, L. Jon. 2009. Blood in the Cage: Mixed Martial Arts, Pat Miletich, and the Furious Rise of the
UFC. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt.
Williams, James, and Stanley A. Pranin. 1994. “Interview with Rorion Gracie,” Aikido Journal 10,
http://www.aikidojournal.com/article?articleID=90, accessed August 16, 2009.
CAPOEIRA
Capoeira is a comparatively playful Afro-Brazilian martial art that puts acrobatic attacks and
defenses to the accompaniment of percussive instruments, principally the berimbau (a single-
stringed percussion instrument with a gourd resonator). Practitioners of capoeira are called
capoeiristas and “play” rather than “ﬁght” capoeira. Ideological differences between two key
capoeiristas in the early twentieth century led to the two main styles that are played today,
capoeira regional and capoeira Angola; Mestre Bimba created the former and Mestre Pastinha
represented the latter. The ideas of both men are explored more fully below. Several schools, pri-
marily coming out of Rio de Janeiro, do not claim afﬁliation with either lineage. Many trace
their descent to capoeira Carioca, which refers to capoeiristas in the early 1900s who acted as tra-
dition bearers despite ofﬁcial repression (see Talmon-Chvaicer 2008 for more on capoeira in
Rio). There are also multitudes of capoeira hybrids, such as capoeira-box or hydro-capoeira, that
have recently appeared in the ﬁtness world. Purists tend to recognize only capoeira Angola and
capoeira regional, and these are the only two given coverage here, but it is worth calling atten-
tion to the emerging style known as capoeira contemporânia because this group is actively trying
to blur the divide between the two major styles, incorporating movements and musical rhythms
from both styles in their own practice. The concessions necessary to conform to these styles
marked a break with the world of disorder, and both regional and Angola styles can be considered
invented traditions (Hobsbawm and Ranger 1983).
The regional and Angola styles share several similarities. They are linked through the history
of slavery and transport to the Americas. Both styles incorporate instruments and singing in
their play. Many of the songs recall the perils of slavery, commemorate both Catholic saints and
African deities, and celebrate daily life in Brazil. These songs are sung in both styles, but are gen-
erally sung faster in the regional than in the Angola style. The basic step in both styles is the
ginga, a swaying motion from which many movements originate and a neutral stance to which
players may return at any moment during the game.
Despite these similarities, the two styles are readily distinguishable from one another.
Capoeiristas in the regional style commonly wear white clothing for their training and games.
This is allegedly a holdover from the early days when capoeira masters wore their ﬁnest white
suits to play. Being able to survive the day’s games without soiling your clothes was a mark of
skill. Angola players, on the other hand, more often wear black pants and their academy’s T-
shirt. The color of the T-shirt may signify a player’s afﬁliation and lineage within capoeira. A
common color combination is black and yellow, because these were the colors of Mestre
Pastinha’s favorite soccer team. Regional players wear a colored belt to denote their rank. There
Capoeira
37

is no standardized color system for belts, and the schemes vary from one academy to the next,
though most schools choose color combinations based on the colors of Brazil’s national ﬂag.
Capoeira Angola does not use belts to rank players. Capoeira regional tends to be played at a
faster pace than capoeira Angola. The body is also held more upright in capoeira regional and
players focus on fast, high kicks, often executed from a spinning base. Aerial movements such as
back-ﬂips or back-handsprings are often seen in this type of play. Angola players keep their
movements closer to the ground. The most common attack movements are kicks, spinning or
straight, executed from a crouched position with one or both hands on the ground for support,
and players are often inverted with their head on the ground. Evasive movements are kept close
to the ﬂoor and require more strength and control than speed. However, they do occasionally
return to a standing position, particularly during the chamada. The chamada is an interlude dur-
ing play that is sometimes used as a recovery period but that also may exhibit greater signiﬁcance.
Speciﬁcally, it is a sophisticated, ritualistic aspect of the capoeira game unique to the Angola
style. Of course there are many exceptions to these generalities, and the style of play varies
greatly from one group to another and is highly dependent upon the group’s particular lineage.
The ideological differences between these two styles are more complex and are largely the result
of historical developments in Bahia in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
The roots of capoeira as we know it today are deep and far-reaching with tendrils in different
countries, cities, and decades. Although precise origins continue to be debated, there are concrete
reference points for understanding the development of modern capoeira. Here, the enactment of
Brazil’s Penal Code of 1890 is a pivotal moment.
Like many African-derived pastimes, capoeira had been marginalized and persecuted as a
general type of disorder or vadiação (vagrancy) since the early nineteenth century. However, it
was not until the Penal Code of 1890 that capoeira was speciﬁcally identiﬁed by name and ofﬁ-
cially outlawed. It is largely believed that one of the motivating factors in this legal decision was
the prevalence of capoeira gangs in Rio de Janeiro; the gangs caused confusion and disorder dur-
ing public festivals in an attempt to outshine rival gangs, and they were also closely associated
with the monarchy, whose legacy the Republicans—newly in power since 1889—were trying to
eliminate (de Sousa Reis 2004, 192).
Some capoeiristas hold that the intensiﬁed persecution of capoeira under the new code trans-
formed capoeira into a less aggressive pastime accompanied by drinking, betting, and general
sociability (Almeida 1986, 29). Certainly, capoeira underwent important transformations as a
result of this persecution, and a more playful form developed. Nonetheless, persecution did not
eliminate capoeira in Rio de Janeiro.
It is a myth that touring folklore exhibitions from Bahia, combined with a southward migra-
tion pattern, caused capoeira to spread throughout Brazil during the twentieth century. As early
as 1909 there were documented cases of ﬁghts between capoeiristas and other types of ﬁghters
(Assunção 2005, 129), and Mestre Bimba himself was challenging practitioners of other martial
arts in the ring during the 1930s (de Sousa Reis 2004, 196–197).
In bricolage fashion, capoeiristas took from other styles what they thought would be effective
in actual ﬁghts. For example, in Rio de Janeiro, Mestre Sinhozinho (born Agenor Moreira
Ferreira, 1892–1960) taught capoeira, without music, to middle-class white students (Taylor
2005, 444). Sinhozinho’s practice was built upon a legacy in Rio of promoting capoeira to the
likes of military personnel. Therefore, Mestre Bimba was not the ﬁrst, or only, individual to
38
Capoeira
www.ebook3000.com

promote a cleaner image of capoeira. However, largely as a result of the evangelical zeal of his
protégés, Bimba deserves credit for sanitizing and codifying capoeira and raising it to the level of
a national icon. The popularization of capoeira regional, then known as Bimba’s “regional ﬁght
from Bahia,” led to capoeiristas’ liberation from the 1890 Penal Code. The reason this happened
in Bahia rather than Rio is probably that Bahia was further removed from the seat of Republican
power, which was actively trying to repress the capoeira gangs on the basis of their afﬁliation
with the Empire (Araujo 2004, 92).
Between the institution of the 1890 Penal Code and the ofﬁcial registration of Bimba’s
academy in 1937, capoeira existed between the worlds of order and disorder. Documentation of
capoeira during this period is currently better for Bahia than for the other regions of Brazil.
Therefore, Bahia developments are discussed here.
During this period, Baian life was lived largely in the streets. Plazas and cobblestone streets
were places of work, socialization, and, for the poor, residence. Only a few decades after the abo-
lition of slavery, education and employment opportunities for Afro-Brazilians were limited.
Many men had unsteady employment as porters, ﬁshermen, stevedores, and such in the bustling
port of Bahia. Competition for work was stiff, but when these men’s services were not in demand,
they spent their free time playing capoeira. Although exceptions exist, capoeira was principally
the domain of men. Thus, capoeira was ensconced in the world of disorder alongside knife-
ﬁghters, prostitutes, petty thieves, and other undesirables, and the only time popular pastimes
such as capoeira or samba were publicized to the larger society was on the unfortunate occasions
that these games turned into actual ﬁghts. At the same time, however, capoeiristas were crossing
into the world of order by obtaining employment as secret police, bodyguards, casino bouncers,
and security guards. Many of the legendary ﬁgures in capoeira lore were active during this period;
examples include Besouro Cordão de Ouro (born Manoel Henrique Pereira, 1897–1924), who
is one of the most highly revered ﬁghters in capoeira folk history.
During the 1920s, Baian mestres began making their ﬁrst attempts at creating an ofﬁcial
capoeira organization (Cruz 2006, 22). Many government agents patronized capoeira rodas
(capoeira games), but the tendency for capoeiristas to be associated with underhanded activities
prevented them from claiming legitimacy during the early years of the New Republic. During the
late 1920s and early 1930s, Mestre Bimba diminished this stigma by instituting standardized ped-
agogy and selectivity in accepting students and by incorporating elements of academic, religious,
and military traditions to legitimize his style in the eyes of the Brazilian public (de Sousa Reis
2004, 201).
Mestre Bimba (born Manuel dos Reis Machado, 1899–1974) was born in a borough of
Salvador, Bahia, and he learned capoeira in what is now the neighborhood of Liberdade. It is
alleged that in his teaching he incorporated elements of batuque, “a rough kind of dance-ﬁght
that he learned from his father” (Almeida 1986, 32), as well as elements of Asian martial systems
then in vogue in Brazil. He almost certainly drew upon the commercial success of the Gracies’
Brazilian jiu-jitsu, and he may have been taught by a jiu-jitsu teacher within the same lineage as
Carlos Gracie (Taylor 2005, 62). Without doubt, Bimba instituted formal training sequences (a
process quite different from the informal apprenticeship method by which most capoeiristas had
previously learned the art) and introduced colored scarves as a means of ranking his students.
This type of a system guaranteed steady income, as students had to complete a prescribed amount
of training before they could advance to the next level. Bimba was highly selective in his
Capoeira
39

students. To gain admittance to his academy, students had to be gainfully employed or enrolled
in school. Bimba regulated his students’ conduct outside of the academy and prohibited them
from ﬁghting in public.
This aura of respectability was extremely important at a time when prejudice against Afro-
Brazilian culture was rampant. These changes also attracted a middle- to upper-class group of
students, who tended to come from the lighter-skinned segments of society. Consequently, in
1936, Mestre Bimba and his students were invited to give a demonstration of capoeira at the
presidential palace in Salvador. Although originally leery of this invitation, Mestre Bimba
accepted. The performance was acclaimed, and Bimba was the ﬁrst to be granted the right to
teach capoeira legally, if only in a closed academy. Although others such as Mestre Sinhozinho
in Rio were teaching capoeira clandestinely (De Sousa Reis 2004, 194), Bimba achieved even
more respectability in 1953, after Brazilian president Getúlio Vargas (1882–1954) saw Bimba in
Salvador and subsequently acclaimed capoeira as Brazil’s “national ﬁght” (Talmon-Chvaicer
2008, 123).
Bimba’s movement toward modernization polarized capoeiristas; not everyone approved of
his modiﬁcations. Capoeiristas such as Mestre Pastinha were ﬁrmly opposed to the introduction
of movements from other martial arts, which provided such inspiration for Mestre Bimba’s
capoeira regional.
Mestre Pastinha (born Vicente Ferreira Pastinha, 1889–1981) learned capoeira while still a
child. His teacher was reportedly an African from Angola named Benedito. After ﬁrst teaching
capoeira to his fellow students at the Escola de Asprirantes da Marinha, Pastinha opened a
capoeira school in 1910. Although Pastinha’s contemporaries continue to be revered in
capoeira lore and songs, stylistically, most contemporary practitioners of capoeira Angola trace
their lineage through Mestre Pastinha’s students. These students include Mestres João Grande
(born João Oliveira dos Santos 1933–) who was still teaching in New York City in 2009, and
João Pequeno (born João Pereira dos Santos, 1916–) who, as of 2008, at age 92, continued to
oversee rodas at his academy in Salvador, Bahia. Both of these individuals accompanied
Pastinha to Dakar, Senegal, in 1966 to participate in the First World Festival of Black Arts, a
historic journey in which Pastinha and his students introduced this distinctly Brazilian inﬂec-
tion of African bodily practice to the motherland. Although adherents to Pastinha’s teachings
often pride themselves on being purists, Pastinha too modiﬁed the “street capoeira,” which was
common in the early 1900s by discouraging some of the more treacherous movements such as
the dedo no olho or eye-poke.
The ideals to which Brazilian society of the mid-twentieth century aspired were embodied in
the more physically streamlined capoeira regional, which valued efﬁciency and efﬁcacy over
African folk tradition. Mestre Bimba transformed the learning process from informal
apprenticeship to codiﬁed pedagogy. This innovation has since been adopted among advocates
of the Angola style as well, and today most capoeira training takes place in academies under the
guidance of established mestres. The transition from informal learning by apprenticeship to for-
mal training in academies had a profound effect on capoeira (Downey 2005, 39–40), especially
with respect to the power structure and economic ramiﬁcations. The steps Mestre Bimba took to
legitimize capoeira in the eyes of Brazilian society, including his regulations on who was permit-
ted to train in his academy, has led some to call capoeira regional a “whitened” form of capoeira
(Downey 2005, 176–181; de Sousa Reis 2004, 195). In practice, it is not possible to determine
40
Capoeira
www.ebook3000.com

a capoeirista’s stylistic afﬁliation based solely on skin color or nationality. Nonetheless, from an
ideological standpoint, it can be argued that capoeira regional places more emphasis on the
Brazilian contributions to the art, thereby mirroring the racial democracy myth that is popular
in modern Brazil. This racial democracy myth holds that because miscegenation was responsible
for the genesis of the Brazilian people, African, Portuguese, and indigenous practices alike are
owned equally by all Brazilians. Angoleiros differ from players of capoeira regional by stressing
the African contributions to the art. In fact, some have pointed to the N’Golo dance, an initia-
tion rite practiced in Africa, as the predecessor to capoeira. This theory became deeply
entrenched among capoeira Angola players after Mestre Pastinha’s adoption of it in the mid to
late 1960s (Capoeira 2002, 297). This assertion is not universally accepted, so researchers such
as Mestre Cobra Mansa (born Cinézio Feliciano Peçanha, 1960–) are still researching the bod-
ily practices of Africa, hoping to ﬁnd less controversial antecedents (Assunção and Mansa 2008).
In any case, capoeira Angola has been used as a symbol in both Afro-Brazilian and African
American political movements.
Globally, capoeira has enjoyed incredible growth since the 1970s. It has become ubiquitous
in “globalized metropolises” and provides individuals with a new, elective identity (Assunção
2005, 2). The unique corporeality of capoeira offers non-Brazilian capoeiristas a new way of
viewing the world (Almeida 1986, 4). For Brazilians, the international popularity of capoeira,
much as with samba and soccer, reafﬁrms their cultural heritage in the face of globalization.
Capoeira has been documented in English-language newspapers and tourist publications
since the 1950s. The actual practice was seen in New York City during the early 1970s, and it
gradually gained broader public exposure through theatrical performances. An example is the
1975 Broadway performance of The Leaf People by Jelon Viera and Loremil Machado. Good
reviews paved the way for subsequent waves of capoeiristas who came to teach in the United
States; examples include Mestre Acordeon (Bira Almeida, 1943–), who began teaching at
Stanford in 1978.
In Europe, formal capoeira instruction became available in 1971, with the arrival of Nestor
Capoeira (Nestor Sezefredo dos Passos Neto, 1946–) in London. However, capoeira was slower
gaining a foothold in Europe than in the United States (Assunção 2005, 192).
The “First International Encounter” of capoeira, held in Salvador, Brazil, in 1994, was organ-
ized by Grupo de Capoeira Angola Pelourihno (GCAP; Pelourinho Capoeira Angola Group). It
was attended by North American and European capoeiristas (Assunção 2005, 189). Similar
international gatherings are now a regular feature of the international capoeira community, and
this allows for both real and imagined closeness between widely separated capoeiristas. Non-
Brazilian capoeiristas, in particular, take advantage of both international encounters and domes-
tic workshops hosting Brazilian mestres to improve their skills and increase their own perceived
authenticity in an art that comes from a culture different from their own.
The Brazilian government has acknowledged this global popularity with an ofﬁcial
recognition of capoeira. On July 15, 2008, capoeira joined an impressive list of cultural items
named part of Brazil’s intangible cultural patrimony. According to newspaper coverage of these
events, the Instituto de Patrimônio Histórico Artístico Nacional (IPHAN; Institute of National
Historic Artistic Patrimony) is presently trying to make reparations for both ofﬁcial and subtle
discrimination against capoeira, meaning not only discrimination during the period of prohibi-
tion, but also the period during which capoeira was marginalized within Brazilian society at large.
Capoeira
41

The motivation for this pronouncement appears in part to have come from the overseas interest
in capoeira, which has helped it gain legitimacy within Brazil. Such developments speak to the
complexities of global culture.
—Lauren Miller
See also: Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu; Caribbean Martial Arts (in this volume); 
Martial Arts Tourism; Capoeira in Europe; and Political Uses of the 
Martial Arts; Afrikan Martial Arts (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Almeida, Bira. 1986. Capoeira, a Brazilian Art Form: History, Philosophy and Practice. Berkeley, CA:
North Atlantic Books.
Araujo, Rosangela Costa. 2004. Ie, Viva Meu Mestre: A Capoeira Angola da ‘escola pastiniana’ como
praxis educativa [Ie, Long Live My Mestre: Capoeira Angola from the “Pastinhian Lineage” as
Educative Praxis]. São Paulo: Universidade de São Paulo Faculdade de Educação.
Assunção, Matthias Röhrig. 2005. Capoeira: A History of an Afro-Brazilian Martial Art. New York:
Routledge.
Assunção, Matthias, and Mestre Cobra Mansa. 2008. A dança da zebra [The Dance of the Zebra], Revista
de Historia da Biblioteca Nacional 40, via http://www.revistadehistoria.com.br/v2/home/?go=detalhe
&id=1445, accessed October 13, 2009.
Capoeira, Nestor. 2002. Capoeira: Roots of the Dance-Fight-Game. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books.
Cruz, José Luiz Oliveira. 2006. Historias e Estorias da Capoeiragem [Histories and Stories of Capoeiragem].
Bahia: P555 edições.
de Sousa Reis, Leticia Vidor. 2004. “Mestre Bimba e Mestre Pastinha: a capoeira em dois estilos”
[Mestre Bimba and Mestre Pastinha: Capoeira in two styles], in Artes do corpo [Arts of the Body],
Memoria-Afro-brasileira, Volume 2, edited by Vagner Gocalves da Silva, 189–224. São Paulo: Selo
Negro Edicoes.
Downey, Greg. 2005. Learning Capoeira: Lessons in Cunning from an Afro-Brazilian Art. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Hobsbawm, Eric, and Terence Ranger. 1983. The Invention of Tradition. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Talmon-Chvaicer, Maya. 2008. The Hidden History of Capoeira: A Collision of Cultures in the Brazilian
Battle Dance. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Taylor, Gerard. 2005. Capoeira: The Jogo de Angola from Luanda to Cyberspace, Volume 1. Berkeley,
CA: North Atlantic Books.
CARIBBEAN MARTIAL ARTS
At the end of the ﬁfteenth century, Europeans began establishing a permanent presence in the
Americas, and by the end of the sixteenth century their slavers were transporting more than a
thousand persons a month from Africa to the Western Hemisphere. By the late nineteenth cen-
tury, about ten million Africans had reached the Americas via this slave trade (Klein 2007,
126–127). Most of these Africans came from Western and Central Africa. The populations from
which slaves were drawn varied over time. At the outset of the American slave trade, most
African slaves came from Senegambia (modern Senegal and the Gambia), but over time, the
trade moved south and east, through modern Sierra Leone, Benin, Nigeria, the Congo region,
and ﬁnally Angola.
42
Caribbean Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

By the late eighteenth century, the largest source for slaves exported to the Americas was the
Congo–Angola region; the second largest source was the area bordering on the Bight of Biafra
(a region including modern Nigeria, Cameroon, and Equatorial Guinea, among other countries).
Most of the African slaves brought to the Americas during the eighteenth century originated in
these two areas (Klein 2007, 65, 115).
Besides their labor, these captives also brought their indigenous traditions. Therefore, the
cultures of the Bight of Biafra (especially the Yoruba) and the cultures of West Central Africa
(designated as Kongo cultures to distinguish them from the various Congo political entities) had
an enduring impact in the New World colonies established by England, France, Holland, Spain,
and Portugal. In all these former colonies, African retentions can be found in music, dance, food,
and even martial arts.
The following discussion touches on the African-based stick ﬁghting systems found in
Barbados, Trinidad, Cuba, and Haiti. The descriptions are representative but not exhaustive.
SURVIVALS
Although resemblances to continental African prototypes are often striking, the concept of
“retention” should not be construed as unaltered survivals of historical African traditions. In ini-
tial attempts to explore African American culture, W. E. B. Du Bois (1868–1963) (1903)
asserted that although slavery damaged African institutions severely, parts persisted—especially
in the realms of music and religion—to form the core of African American culture. Sociologist
E. Franklin Frazier (1894–1962) disagreed, saying that the damage had been more severe than
Du Bois admitted. American slavery, Frazier contended (1939), had obliterated any viable
African past. Frazier’s position dominated for several decades, despite compelling evidence
offered by anthropologist Melville J. Herskovits (1895–1963), who compiled a list of hundreds
of American practices having African precedents (Herskovits 1941).
By the mid-1970s, Herskovits’s ideas and research combined to argue for an autonomous
African-derived culture that existed alongside the imposed culture of slavery. The result was a
notion of creolized culture similar to the concept of creolized languages. Noting that creolized
languages change surface elements (such as French or English words) but hang on to a deeper
grammatical structure (in this case, an African language), scholars began looking for “deep”
underlying values and beliefs, on the assumption that since they existed at a deeper level, they
had a better chance of surviving the trauma of forced relocation and deculturalization (Mintz
and Price 1992). For example, historian Richard Cullen Rath reports that in the Carolinas,
African-descended bondsmen provided ﬁddle music for the slave-owners’ entertainment. While
the violin was bowed in the European tradition, a percussive use of the bow known as “knock-
ing” evolved. Rath (2000, 115) sees this as “a re-invention of the drum music so feared by the
planters: though the form (drumming) was banned, an underlying value . . . was expressed in a
new creolized way that was simultaneously (but not synonymously) European and African.” Sim-
ilar features appear in both Central Africa and Brazil, where the single-stringed berimbau is used
to accompany the martial game of capoeira.
The “deep structure” of the African-descended martial arts of the Americas includes an
emphasis on music and dance, “competing voices” (in the form of both verbal and physical
duels); association with festival, ritual, and other departures from the everyday; and spirituality.
Caribbean Martial Arts
43

CUBA
Cuba, like most regions of the African American diaspora, has a strong Central African inﬂu-
ence, especially from the Kongo–Angolan cultures. Eminent Africanist Robert Farris Thompson
(2005, 286) points to the existence of an extraordinary number of cabildos (“self-help confrater-
nities”) in nineteenth century Cuba that derived their names from “specialized references to
[Kongo] geography and sub-ethnicities.” This inﬂuence appears, among other places, in popular
Afro-Cuban dance forms such as the “rumba complex” (Daniel 1995, 29). The rumba complex
comprises a variety of styles. Of these, rumba Columbia has greatest relevance to Cuban martial
culture. Columbia is danced only by men, and it is characterized by extreme bravado, with the
dancers taking turns competing in shows of athletic ability, creativity, and style. The combative
nature of this dance is dramatized by those performances in which the dancer wields knives or
machetes.
The roots of Columbia are found in the yuka. In Africa, the yuka is danced in a circle by men
who enter the circle to demonstrate their physical prowess. The yuka rhythms are fast and
aggressive in order to inspire the dancer to greater efforts. The yuka is danced to the rhythms set
by three drums: the big caja, the mid-sized mula (the drum that carries the central beat), and the
smaller cachimbo. These drums are patterned after the Kongo/Bantu drums known as ngoma. The
rumba also uses three other drums, known as conga drums, which are also derived from Kongo
drums. Certain drum rhythms are said to constitute a combat language, telling ﬁghters when to
attack or defend. Therefore, the music and dance culture of Africa and African America is con-
ducive to the ﬁghters’ being agile, ﬂexible, and elusive.
Traditionally, the yuka dance has been used to set the stage for the danced martial art known
in Cuba as maní or bambosa. The competitors, known as maníceros, after displaying their
strength and physical prowess in the yuka dance, entered the ring of dancers to ﬁght, much in
the manner of Brazilian capoeira players entering their circle (roda) to ﬁght. Unlike
contemporary capoeira, an art that relies heavily on kicks, the maní arsenal includes punches,
palm, elbow, forearm, and head strikes. Maní also employs blocks, parries, and evasions.
Common weapons in maní include the machete, a standard agricultural tool in the Caribbean
and Latin America. The emphasis is less on fencing than on using the machete as a dance prop
or religious implement (Daniel 2005, 63). The stick-ﬁghting aspect of maní is seen in modern
Cuban folk dance (folclórico) groups; this choreographed stick-ﬁghting dance is appropriately
called palo, meaning “stick.”
Maní has indirect connections to the religion of Palo Mayombe (also known as Palo Monte),
a Cuban manifestation of the spiritual system brought by slaves from the Kongo. The cabildos
mentioned above were organized according to ethnic afﬁliations and this helped preserve much
of the African culture in Cuba. Many of the Kongo Cabildos were led by men appointed as
“kings” who were simultaneously elder priests (tata ngangas) of Palo Mayombe. The connection
between Kongo tradition and maní may come from the word for the art itself. According to
scholar Fu Kiau Bunseki from the Democratic Republic of the Congo (interview, 2007), maní is
a corruption of the word “mwene,” a Kikongo word meaning king. Bunseki says that the
Europeans had trouble saying the word mwene, and it became pronounced as maní, a homonym
with “peanut” in Spanish. Nonetheless, connections to Kongo spiritual practice have not been
unequivocally established. If the Kongo connection is valid, maní could be derived from Central
African libanda, a form of traditional martial art found in the present-day Democratic Republic
44
Caribbean Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

of the Congo. Although usually classiﬁed as wrestling, libanda traditionally encompassed
punching, kicking, elbowing, head-butting, and nerve-striking as an adjunct to wrestling.
There is supernatural medicine in maní. The knowledge of both the medicines and the spir-
itual systems that validated them is the province of the tata ngangas. Maniceros traditionally vis-
ited the tata ngangas to receive medicine to protect them from blows as well as to add power to
their striking.
Martial elements are also associated with other Afro-Cuban religions. Lucumí (known also as
Santería) has its roots in the spiritual system of the Yoruba people. The Yoruba are associated with
modern Nigeria, the region from which the last great inﬂux of slaves was brought to Cuba. Among
the Yoruba tradition, there are 401 deities (orisha). Two of the most popular deities include Eshu
(also known as Elegba in the Caribbean) and Ogun (or Ogou, Ogu, and similar names). Eshu’s war-
rior attributes are evident in his praise names: Eshu Agongo-Ogo (“Eshu who carries the heavy
club”) and Eshu Akogo (“Eshu the Club-Carrier”). These combative attributes identify him as a
stick-ﬁghter and so are found in the dance of this orisha. In Cuba the dance with which Eshu is
most closely associated is the garabato. This dance features a hooked stick. This same stick is called
the lungoa in Palo Mayombe and is found on the altars of the Palo spirit Zarabanda, a warrior. The
second warrior orisha, Ogun, is responsible for the removal of obstacles in one’s spiritual path. As
a result, Ogun is associated with machetes and other iron tools. In Ogun’s dance, the dancer is bel-
licose as he slices diagonally, cuts, and stabs at the air in imitation of clearing the forest or cutting
down an opponent (Daniel 2005, 138). Impressive stick work with implied martial intent is also
an element of the pre-Lenten Gagá processions. These are derived from the Rara bands introduced
into Cuba by Haitian immigrants during the late 1790s.
HAITI
On Haiti, the Rara parade is a pre-Lenten (Carnival) display. It features competing groups of
singers and musicians playing homemade instruments. Rara songs are built on local gossip,
scandal, and praise of well-known ﬁgures. This content is typical of Carnival in general and the
Caribbean varieties in particular. Each Rara group is led by a major jonc (also, major jonk, majó
jon). The major jonc carries a baton known as a jonc. This baton is about 100 to 137 centime-
ters (39 to 54 inches) in length, and it is brandished and twirled much as a drum major twirls his
baton in a military or collegiate marching band.
Like the musical instruments carried by the bandsmen, the jonc is supernaturally strength-
ened. In Haiti, the practice of supernaturally strengthening ﬁghting sticks (mayombo), thereby
giving the owners both protection and the ability to defeat opponents, has been documented as
early as the eighteenth century (Debien 1972). The major jonc’s skill at twirling is believed to
be related to his magical and ﬁghting abilities. Thus, he is that ﬁgure that folklorist Roger
Abrahams (1983, xvi) labeled “the man of action, the physically adept one.” Many major joncs
are in fact accomplished stick-ﬁghters. Practical use of this talent may be tested, too, because
when one of the bands encounters another, the confrontation can move from verbal or musical
duels to actual ﬁghting.
According to Haitian folk history, the baton work exhibited during the Rara was acquired by
Africans from the indigenous Taino, who used the stick as both a weapon and a dance prop.
Nonetheless, the most convincing contemporary analysis of baton twirling, both by major joncs
Caribbean Martial Arts
45

and the baton-twirlers at North American athletic events, traces it to northern Kongo sources
(Thompson 2005, 298–299).
In some parts of Haiti, village competitions in wrestling (pingé) were also held in connection
with Rara (Courlander 1985, 108).
The Haitian expression of African spirituality is known as Vodun (also, Vodu and Vodou),
whence comes the English word voodoo. The word comes from the Fon vodu (“spirit”). Vodun
incorporates religious traditions from West and Central Africa, and it ﬁrst emerged as a separate
means of religious expression in Cuba. The Vodun pantheon of deities (lwa or loa) is divided into
“nations”: the Rada nation (descended from the Fon and Yoruba orishas of continental Africa
and comparable to the Cuban Lucumí deities), the Congo nation (descended from the
Kongo–Angolan supernaturals and comparable to the Palo deities), and the Petro nation (lwa
exhibiting Kongo inﬂuence and regarded as more aggressive than the Rada lwa).
Like Lucumí, Vodun has a warrior deity derived from the Yoruba orisha Ogun, who in Haiti
is known as Ogou. As elsewhere, Ogou ﬁghts and dances with a machete or sword. The devotee
who is “ridden” (possessed by) the lwa during a Vodun rite takes up the machete dedicated to
Ogou and performs an aggressive dance ﬁlled with chopping and stabbing movements, as in
Lucumí, and also punches, kicks, grunts, and growls (Daniel 2005, 63).
While in Haiti during the 1940s and 1950s, folklorist Harold Courlander (1908–1996)
encountered a stick-ﬁghting game called mousondí, which he described it as a “battle dance” of
the Vodun Congo nation. In the version observed by Courlander, combat was merely mimed,
with a give-and-take among six dancers carrying 30-inch (76-centimeter) sticks, which they
held “like sabers.” On a signal from the dance leader, the ﬁghters leaped into the air to exchange
strikes to one another’s sticks. The action was accompanied by percussion provided by a pair of
“conga drums” and a plank beaten with hardwood sticks. Some of Courlander’s older informants
reported that the dance was also known as calinda (Courlander 1985, 131–132), a term discussed
in the next section. There may also be a relationship between mousondí and the stick and
machete ﬁghting form called muti.
TRINIDAD
The term calinda is as widely distributed as the stick ﬁghting arts it labels. This, along with sim-
ilar terms such as colinda, kalinda, kalenda, bois [“wood”], and stick-licking, are used throughout
the West Indies and the southern United States to describe stick-ﬁghting games that constitute
the most widely distributed African American combat displays in the Northern Hemisphere.
In Trinidad, as elsewhere in the region, calinda is found in conjunction with Carnival. The
festival and the martial traditions attached to this holiday bear the marks of the Spanish, French,
African, and English-descended populations of the island.
Historically, Christmas and Easter were festival periods when Africans in Trinidad were
relieved of some of the strictures surrounding daily life in a plantation society and given license
to celebrate, and the Carnival events that preceded Lent were particularly riotous (Liverpool
2001, 104, 147–148).
Trinidadian stick-ﬁghting is an element of Canboulay (from French cannes brulées, meaning
burned cane). Various explanations have been offered for the origins of Canboulay, including a
celebration to mark the burning of the sugar cane before reaping; that is, the end of a sugar
46
Caribbean Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

plantation’s annual work cycle. In any case, Canboulay opens Carnival by means of a torchlight
parade, street dances, satirical song, and stick ﬁghting. At various times, these stick ﬁghts have
been martial dances, staged exhibitions between noted stick-ﬁghters, and downright street
brawls involving stones, broken bottles, and knives in addition to sticks.
Masquerade is an integral part of Trinidad’s Carnival. One of the most popular masquerades
among the European gentry of the eighteenth-century French Caribbean involved playing at being
nègres de jardin (French, “ﬁeld laborers”) or, in Creole, Négue Jadin (Liverpool 2001, 128), and
since then, the Négue Jadin masquerade has been favored by many Trinidadian stick-ﬁghters.
Another popular masquerade involves Pierrot, here transformed from the European king of fools
into a ﬁghter as masterful with words as he is with sticks and whips. Pierrot is a primary focus of
masquerade throughout much of the Caribbean. He punctuates his elaborate speeches (typically
full of insults for his opposing masquers) with cracks of the whip he carries as a symbol of his power.
Whenever the debate becomes too intense, he turns the whip on his opponents (Hill 1997).
The stick used for these matches is generally 3 to 4 feet (95 to 125 centimeters) in length and
less than an inch (2.5 centimeters) in diameter. Sticks are cured and are prepared supernaturally
by a process called “mounting.” Fighting in pairs to the rhythm of drums, the ﬁghters (batonniers)
hold one end in each hand, which allows practitioners to deliver strong blocks with the rela-
tively thin stick and to strike unpredictably by releasing one end. Attacks can be delivered using
either a right- or a left-handed attack. Such strikes are as more like cuts than clubbing blows.
Stick-ﬁghters hone their defensive skills by means of a practice called “breaking.” This
involved stones being thrown at the batonnier, who parried with his ﬁghting stick (Burton 1991,
14). When ﬁghting, the goal is to “look good” while delivering blows and insults to the oppo-
nent. Any strikes above the waist are permissible, although the head is a preferred target. In the
event of a blow to the head that induced bleeding, tradition dictated that blood from the wound
needed to be drained into a hole in the ground within the playing area or bled on the drums.
BARBADOS
Barbados was a British colony from 1627 until 1966. The missionaries there were Protestant, so the
Catholic Carnival had little inﬂuence on the martial traditions of the inhabitants of this island.
The primary martial expression of the island, a form of stick ﬁghting known as stick-licking,
was associated with Crop Over. In colonial times, Crop Over was a festival at the end of the sugar
harvest. Traditional Crop Over went into decline during the early twentieth century, but during
the 1970s it was revived as a tourist holiday.
The origins of stick-licking are presumably African, as the name also appears in creole com-
munities in the Carolinas. Stick-licking was originally practiced by the island’s black males for
self-defense and sport. However, the versions seen today probably include elements of South
Asian stick ﬁghting (lahti), due to a signiﬁcant South Asian population in modern Barbados.
Twentieth-century police stick ﬁghting methods also may have left traces.
Barbados stick-licking uses a single stick. The sticks are made from shrubs rather than trees;
common species include guava (Psidium spp.) and black sage (Lantana spp.). The ﬁghting stick
measures 38–40 inches (about a meter) in length and is an inch (2.5 centimeters) in diameter
at the handle, tapering away toward the tip. The practice stick used is much smaller, more like
a thick switch than like a baton.
Caribbean Martial Arts
47

Stick-licking practitioners traditionally recognize four distinct styles: Johnson, Queensbury,
Donnely, and Swab. Not all systems are practiced by every stick-licker. These styles teach vari-
ous ﬁghting postures used in conjunction with their strikes to designated targets and blocks. Dis-
arms with or without the stick are practiced.
Stick-licking went into decline in the 1940s, concurrently with the decline of Crop Over.
Today, stick-licking exists as a form of cultural heritage with exhibitions staged in conjunction
with a commercial Crop Over that was consciously modeled after the Trinidad Carnival.
Although a small number of stick-ﬁghters teach publicly, the art still has a culture of secrecy that
probably dates to colonial times.
CONCLUSION
In the Caribbean, African-descended martial arts found refuge in “free space,” historically in fes-
tivals and more recently in folk heritage performances. The fact that these African-descended
martial arts were (and are) practiced in tandem with music and dance offered a degree of pro-
tection within the African American diaspora and facilitated transformations that allowed them
to persist as a combination of expressive culture (art), popular entertainment, and tourism ven-
ues. The popularity of these arts in tourist venues will probably lead to support (and attached
strings) from local governments, but also to exposure to countries and cultures outside the
Caribbean. Brazilian capoeira successfully navigated this transition, but the circumstances that
permitted this to happen may be unique.
—Earl White
See also: Capoeira (in this volume); Belief Systems, Africa; Commodiﬁcation 
of Leisure; Expressive Culture; Globalization of Martial 
Arts; and Afrikan Martial Arts (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Abrahams, Roger D. 1983. The Man of Words in the West Indies. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Burton, Richard D.F. 1991. “Cricket, Carnival and Street Culture in the Caribbean,” in Sport, Racism
and Ethnicity, edited by Grant Jarvie, 7–29. London: Routledge Palmer.
Courlander, Harold. 1985/1960. The Drum and the Hoe. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press.
Daniel, Yvonne. 1995. Rumba: Dance and Social Change in Contemporary Cuba. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
Daniel, Yvonne. 2005. Dancing Wisdom: Embodied Knowledge in Haitian Vodou, Cuban Yoruba, and
Bahian Candomblé. Champaign: University of Illinois Press.
Debien, Gabriel. 1972. “Nighttime Slave Meetings in Saint-Domingue (La Marmelade, 1786),” Annales
historiques de la Révolution française 44 (April), translated by John Garrigus, via http://www.vancouver
.wsu.edu/fac/peabody/voodoo.htm, accessed July 12, 2009.
Du Bois, W. E. B. 1903. The Souls of Black Folk, 2nd edition. Chicago: A.C. McClurg and Company.
Frazier, E. Franklin. 1939. The Negro Family in the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gerstin, Julian. 2004. “Tangled Roots: Kalenda and Other Neo-African Dances in the Circum-
Caribbean, New West Indies Guide 78(1/2), 5–41, via http://www.kitlv-journals.nl/index.php/nwig/
article/viewFile/3539/4300, accessed July 12, 2009.
Herskovits, Melville J. 1941. The Myth of the Negro Past. New York: Harper and Brothers.
48
Caribbean Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

Hill, Errol. 1997/1972. The Trinidad Carnival: Mandate for a National Theatre. London: New Beacon Books.
Klein, Herbert S. 2007. The Atlantic Slave Trade. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Lewis, Maureen Warner. 2004. Central Africa in the Caribbean. Kingston, Jamaica: University of the
West Indies Press.
Liverpool, Hollis. 2001. Rituals of Power & Rebellion: The Carnival Tradition in Trinidad & Tobago,
1763–1962. Chicago: Research Associates School Times Publications.
Mintz, Sidney W., and Richard Price. 1992. The Birth of African-American Culture: An Anthropological
Perspective. Boston: Beacon.
Rath, Richard Cullen. 2000. “Drums and Power: Ways of Creolizing Music in Coastal South Carolina
and Georgia, 1730–1795,” in Creoligation in the Americas, edited by David Buissert and Steven G.
Reinhardt, 99–130. College Station: University of Texas at Arlington Press.
Thompson, Robert Farris. 2005. “Kongo Inﬂuence on African American Artistic Culture,” in Africanisms
in American Culture, 2nd edition, edited by Joseph E. Holloway, 283–325. Bloomington: University of
Indiana Press.
KENPO KARATE
Kenpo karate (from the Japanese words kenpo, “ﬁst law,” and karate, “empty hand”) was brought to
the mainland United States in 1954 by Hawaiian-born Edmund Kealoha Parker (1930–1990). Parker
was a prominent martial arts innovator. A long list of martial arts practitioners and celebrities pointed
to Parker as having either inﬂuenced them or opened doors for them. His Kenpo system spread rap-
idly across the United States and then migrated overseas. Hollywood was enamored of Parker as well,
with two Pink Panther movies showcasing Parker and his art. There are also many television shows
that highlighted the man and his system. His contributions to American karate are numerous; among
them, he is credited with creating the ﬁrst English-language lexicon of martial arts terminology.
Parker’s American Kenpo system is based on the martial arts that Parker learned in Honolulu
from William Kwai Sun Chow (1914–1987). In turn, Chow’s art was based on what he had learned
from his father. Thus, it has a strong Chinese inﬂuence. Parker called his art American Kenpo
because he believed that it suited the way Americans thought (and fought) at the time he was
developing it. The system would go by a variety of names over the years, changing as the system
changed. Kenpo karate was what Parker brought from Honolulu. In the United States, it would
also be known as Chinese Kenpo, American Kenpo, Ed Parker’s Kenpo Karate, and Ed Parker’s
American Kenpo Karate. The most uniform use of a colloquial name now seems to be Parker
Kenpo, with Ed Parker’s American Kenpo being the predominant formal version of the name.
The physical techniques of Kenpo karate are related to the methods of motion used in Chinese,
Indonesian, and Polynesian arts. It is a combination of circular and linear motion in a sequential
ﬂow. If one were to attempt to classify it as a hard or soft system, it would fall in between. Thus, it
is commonly referred to as a medium system. Although it places emphasis on street self-defense, it
includes a traditional curriculum of basic fundamentals (blocks, kicks, punches, strikes, etc.), forms
(kata), and freestyle sparring. Partner practice with liberal body contact is a hallmark of the system.
Parker’s Kenpo karate is known for “overkill,” meaning that a practitioner uses numerous
(seemingly too many) blows during a technique sequence. Parker did this to program the
practitioner to continue attacking even if he or she missed the target or did not get the intended
result because the blow glanced off or failed to penetrate, or if the attacker simply did not react as
anticipated. His series of standard techniques act as attack simulations and are designed to
Kenpo Karate
49

anticipate both the intentional and unintentional attacks and counters of an opponent. Although
his curriculum evolved over the decades (examples include changes to number of required
techniques before the award of a given belt), keystone principles have remained intact, and
seniors in the system continue to reinforce and develop them and associated Kenpo concepts.
Parker created terminology for his technique. He wanted students to have a language for
principles and techniques as other professions have, rather than simply learning through mim-
icry. This work resulted in other systems and practitioners borrowing his words.
Parker was certiﬁed as a black belt under William Chow on June 5, 1953. He got his start as
a karate teacher while studying at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah. In 1956, he
graduated from Brigham Young with a B.S. in sociology and a minor in psychology. In 1955,
while still a college student, he opened the ﬁrst commercial karate studio in the United States.
Others have laid claim to opening the ﬁrst karate school or club in the United States, but the
distinction here lies with Parker having opened the ﬁrst commercial school. This is why Inside
Kung-Fu magazine labeled Parker as “The Father of American Karate” in its May 1974 issue.
Parker and his wife, Leilani (1928–2006), relocated to Pasadena, California, in 1956. This move
positioned him to meet, teach, inﬂuence, and be inﬂuenced by movers and shakers of the American
entertainment industry. At that time, actors, singers, directors, and musicians were becoming
involved in the newly popularized Asian martial arts, and Parker was at the epicenter of this new
activity. Thus, the March 3, 1961, issue of Time magazine named him the “high priest of Hollywood’s
fast-growing karate sect.” His karate business grew, and he soon opened a second studio in the Santa
Monica area of Los Angeles. The Santa Monica school was the one where so many celebrities, their
friends, and families would train in the art that was rapidly evolving into American Kenpo.
The list of Parker’s celebrity students is a Who’s Who of Hollywood. Actors Nick Adams
(1931–1968), Warren Beatty (1937–), Robert Culp (1930–2010), Gary Cooper (1901–1961),
George Hamilton (1939–), Rick Jason (1923–2000), Darren McGavin (1922–2006), and Robert
Wagner (1930–) were all Parker students. Film composer Bronislaw Kaper (1902–1983) and direc-
tor Blake Edwards (1922–) were also students. Edwards, who directed six Pink Panther movies, mar-
ried actress Julie Andrews (1935–) in 1969, and Parker stated he drew inspiration from Andrews’
ability to sing fast but with perfect enunciation. As he developed his system of karate, Parker used
her example to describe something he called “diction of technique.” This meant that a practitioner
should execute each movement as quickly and precisely as Andrews pronounced words. He further
expanded on this idea by saying that “pronunciation” of a move meant little without “deﬁnition”
of a move. Other people inspired Ed Parker similarly.
Parker’s Hollywood experiences were not limited to teaching stars. He made many appear-
ances in movies and on television, playing both bit parts and starring roles. Blake Edwards cast
him in several of the Pink Panther movies. Parker also starred in Kill the Golden Goose, later
renamed Kill the Golden Ninja (Edde Entertainment, 1994), Seven (USA Home Video, 1997),
Buckstone County Prison (also known as Seabo) (EO Studios, 1978), and others. His television
appearances included parts on The Courtship of Eddie’s Father (ABC, 1969–1972), and Parker
played the prowler in an episode of I Love Lucy titled “Lucy and Viv Learn Judo,” which made its
debut on February 25, 1963. In addition, he was a guest on talk shows hosted by Art Linkletter
(1912–), Regis Philbin (1931–), and Dinah Shore (1916–1994).
Hollywood owes a debt to Ed Parker for introducing American ﬁlm companies to Bruce Lee
(Li Xiaolong, 1940–1973) and Carlos “Chuck” Norris (1940–). During the early 1960s, Parker
50
Kenpo Karate
www.ebook3000.com

held some of the largest karate tournaments in the United States, starting in 1964 with his Inter-
national Karate Championship (IKC). This was held annually in the Long Beach Sports Arena,
in Long Beach, California, and at its peak, 4,500 competitors attended. Parker ﬁlmed Bruce Lee
doing a demonstration and later showed the ﬁlm to television producer William Dozier
(1908–1991), who was looking for an “Oriental” sidekick for the Green Hornet character he
planned for a television show of that name. Dozier thought Lee was perfect, and cast him in the
show, which was the launching pad to stardom for Lee. Meanwhile, Norris was a Tang Soo Do
(tangsudo) stylist who was grand champion at later Internationals. Norris and Lee paired up in
Lee’s movie Return of the Dragon (Golden Harvest, 1972), and Norris later became an action ﬁlm
star with a string of movies and then a television show called Walker, Texas Ranger (CBS,
1993–2001). Other martial artists with a Parker connection would make movies, too. These
included Bong Soo Han (1933–2007), Tadashi Yamashita (1942–), Joe Lewis (1944–), Benny
“The Jet” Urquidez (1952–), and Jeff Speakman (1958–).
Entertainer Elvis Presley (1935–1977) was the most famous celebrity to train in the Parker
system. Presley had learned karate while serving in the U.S. Army in Germany, and in 1960, fol-
lowing his discharge from the Army, Presley met Parker at the Beverly Wilshire Hotel health
club, where Parker was doing a karate demonstration. Impressed, Presley approached Parker, and
the two began a friendship that would last until Presley died in 1977. Presley eventually was
awarded an honorary seventh-degree black belt in Parker’s Kenpo, and he had Parker’s IKKA
logo emblazoned on his guitar. Presley also held a sixth-degree black belt in a Korean system
under Kang Rhee (1938–) of Memphis, Tennessee. Parker stated that Presley was a very good
martial artist. He also told a story about going to a Tom Jones (Thomas Woodward, 1940–)
concert with Elvis. Jones introduced Elvis to the crowd, which resulted in the concert coming
to a halt; eventually, Parker and Presley had to be escorted to Jones’ dressing room to allow the
show to go on. Afterward, when Jones ﬁnished singing, they were all conversing and Jones said
that he had heard that Elvis was taking karate, and wanted to know what it was like. Elvis was
about to get up to demonstrate, but Parker stopped him, saying that he was there to relax.
Instead, he, Parker, would demonstrate. Jones lived up to his “Doubting Thomas” namesake,
interjecting with “but” and “what if?” Finally, Parker struck Jones in the solar plexus, knocked
the wind out of him and said, “To hear is to doubt, to see is to be deceived, but to feel is to
believe.” This is an example of some of Ed Parker’s philosophy of the arts.
Parker wrote and published numerous books on Kenpo karate, starting with Kenpo Karate, The
Law of the Fist and Empty Hand (1960). He followed with Secrets of Chinese Karate (1963), Ed Parker’s
Guide to the Nunchaku (1975), The Woman’s Guide to Self Defense (1988), and the ﬁve-volume work
entitled Inﬁnite Insights into Kenpo (the volumes were released yearly from 1982 until 1987). In 1978,
he released Inside Elvis, about his departed friend. Other Kenpo-related works were Zen of Kenpo
(1988), a collection of his thoughts and sayings, and Encyclopedia of Kenpo (1992), a book that con-
solidated his previous volumes’ glossaries and added new terminology and deﬁnitions. He also
authored numerous belt requirement manuals under the heading of Ed Parker’s Kenpo Karate Accu-
mulative Journal, IKKA member handbooks, and a basic booklet for beginners, and he had other
manuscripts in process at the time of his death. The production of the Accumulative Journal started
in 1970, when it was copyrighted, and the name indicates when the system began to bear his name.
Many other published works refer to him. Martial artists of many systems acknowledge him
for what he did to promote the arts in general and their system in particular. Reference books
Kenpo Karate
51

even document his lineage. He was born into what would have been the ruling house in the
Hawaiian Islands had it continued instead of being supplanted by British rule—Roots and
Branches of Parker and Veiera (1999) was written by Eva Parker Newman to document this (and
his Portuguese heritage as well). In 1997, Parker’s wife Leilani published Memories of Ed Parker
to preserve a record of his accomplishments.
Parker received Black Belt Magazine Hall of Fame awards in 1976, 1979, and 1990. These were
just a small portion of the certiﬁcates, plaques, trophies, and honorary diplomas he received
during his career. He was featured on the cover of almost every martial art magazine at some time.
Parker even published his own magazine, Action Karate, but it failed after four issues, lasting for
about a year (from 1968 into late 1969).
Within the Kenpo system, it is acknowledged that it was the Tracy brothers, Al (Alva, 1936–),
Will (Wilbur, 1937–), and Jim (James, 1940–), who were instrumental in the spread of Kenpo. The
brothers were Parker students in California during the late 1950s and early 1960s, and they left him
when they were brown belts. He would say they later became black belts, and in 1982, he included
them on his family tree of black belts. In any case, it was the Tracy brothers who integrated a busi-
ness model taken from a dance studio chain into their karate business, and this in turn allowed
them to operate a successful franchise across the United States. Other franchise attempts were
made with Parker’s direct involvement, but they failed. Parker himself had eleven schools in Los
Angeles and lost all but one because of an unscrupulous employee. This left him with a huge debt
to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), and that in turn caused him to sell his schools, keeping only
the Pasadena headquarters. Thus, an argument can be made that it was really the Tracy brothers
who popularized Kenpo in the United States rather than Parker.
On December 15, 1990, Parker suffered a fatal heart attack in the Honolulu airport. His body
was ﬂown back to Pasadena, California. Thousands attended the funeral and wake, which were
held in Pasadena. He was buried in Glendale.
Before his death, Parker had not designated a successor. Some people have said that the
executive vice-president of his association should have been accepted as the new Grandmaster.
Others have said that Parker’s son, who was not a black belt at the time of his father’s passing,
should have gotten the title. And among the seniors in the system, there was no agreement as
to which of them should be the new head of the lineage. This resulted in fragmentation. Thus,
today, from a political standpoint, there is no single guiding association for practitioners of
Parker Kenpo. From the practical view, there are several highly competent ﬁrst-generation sen-
ior instructors still teaching; eight were promoted by Parker to seventh degree. Other senior
instructors hold high rank but teach their own versions of Kenpo. Although the curriculum may
vary, the essence of the system is unchanged. The surviving seniors are working to preserve the
system’s core and are doing research and development on facets of Parker’s original system. This
will ensure that the system will work for future generations, even as the world around them
changes, just as it did for those who came before.
—Lee Wedlake
See also: Commodiﬁcation of Leisure; Asian Martial Arts in the United States 
and Canada; International Karate; Jeet Kune Do; Film and the Martial 
Arts; and Television and the Martial Arts (in Volume II).
52
Kenpo Karate
www.ebook3000.com

REFERENCES
Haines, Bruce. 1968. Karate’s History and Traditions. Rutland, VT: Charles E. Tuttle.
Reilly, R. L. 1970. The History of American Karate. Little Ferry, NJ: Semper Fi Co., Inc.
Time. 1961. “Sport: Violent Repose,” March 3, via http://www.time.com/time/magazine/
article/0,9171,897682,00.html, accessed October 13, 2009.
Tracy, James E. 2007. “When We Were Black Belts,” http://www.thetracyfamilyhistory.net/Cx_80
_About_the_Author.htm, accessed January 16, 2010.
Wedlake, Lee. 2001. Further Insights into Kenpo. Fort Myers, FL: Lee Wedlake’s Karate Studio, Inc.
Kenpo Karate
53

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

Central and Southwest Asia
Eurasia is the largest and most populous continent. In its center is a vast steppe that extends from
Eastern Europe to Central China. Until the sixteenth century, this steppe was traversed by the
fabled Silk Road, the primary trade route between Eastern Europe, the Mediterranean world, and
East Asia. Consequently, until the ﬁfteenth century, when Europeans developed methods for
sailing around Africa and the Americas, Central Asia was a comparatively wealthy region.
For its part, Southwest Asia (also known as the Middle East) has some of the oldest cities in
the world. The region was home to several world religions, including Judaism, Zoroastrianism,
Christianity, and Islam, and many powerful empires. Empires build walls, and nomadic horsemen
need open range. Thus, there has always been conﬂict between empires and nomadic horsemen.
The names tell the story: Babylonian, Persian, Byzantine, Arab, and Ottoman empires versus
Scythians, Huns, Turks, Mongols, Timurids, and Cossacks.
Except for vestigial sword and stick dancing, traditional swordsmanship is almost extinct in
Central and Southwest Asia. Instead, it has been replaced by Olympic-style fencing. However,
traditional wrestling styles ﬂourish throughout Central and Southwest Asia, and traditional
archery never lost its popularity in areas having ethnic Mongol populations.
CENTRAL ASIAN ARCHERY
Central Asia (also called Middle Asia) is made up of the ﬁve former Soviet republics of Kazakhstan,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, and the Kyrgyz Republic; the province of Xinjiang, China;
and parts of southern Siberia. Lately, some authors have added parts of Afghanistan and Tibet into
this cultural zone, but Mongolia is still considered separately. Collectively, the region is also known
as Turkestan (“the place of the Turks”), as it is the homeland of the Turkic peoples (as well as many
others). Thus, in this essay, the term “Turkic” is intended to include all the diverse Turkic-speaking
peoples and not just the peoples of modern Turkey.
Discussions about cultural exchanges with neighboring areas such as India, Mongolia, and
China proper are included. Terms such as Scythian, Hun, and Mongol are not intended to indi-
cate race or ethnicity but instead describe cultures and confederacies. The reason is that archery
is ancient in Central Asia, and the technology was widespread. The Silk Road crossing through
the area, combined by particularly intense warfare (born of, and in reaction to, the mix of
nomadic and sedentary lifestyles) served to transmit Central Asian archery across Eurasia. One
can ﬁnd no other place on earth where archery was historically practiced more diligently and in
such a variety of forms. Today, however, Central Asian archery can be studied only through the
history book, archaeological record, or museum display; in contrast to Bhutan, Mongolia, Korea,
and Japan, traditional archery is practiced very rarely in Central Asia.

56
Central Asian Archery
THE SOURCES
How can we know about ancient archery? For the modern eye, there is no evidence better than
a burial bow. However, it takes a special type of culture to bury a warrior with a bow. Christians,
Jews, and Muslims generally did not include weapons in burials, but shamanists, Zoroastrians,
and even Buddhists did. In addition, a bow, being made entirely of perishable materials, lasts
only in extremely dry, frozen, or oxygen-starved environments. Fortunately, there are places in
Central Asia that ﬁt these complex conditions.
Arrowheads are another ubiquitous and irrefutable type of evidence. For every surviving
1,000-year-old bow, a million arrowheads have been found. Unfortunately, there are limitations
on what one can conclude about archery or culture through arrowheads alone.
Artwork is another lasting tribute to archery. Rock art sites featuring archery scenes are numer-
ous, but their dating and meaning are arguable. Gold and silver Scythian burial goods are more reli-
able sources for what a bow from the ﬁrst millennium BCE should look like. Other artwork, such as
the Orlat Plaques (ca. ﬁrst century CE), demonstrate how a bow was used in the Sogdian culture of
ancient Uzbekistan (historical Samarkand). Coinage is another valuable tool for dating bow styles.
Ancient books such as Herodotus’ Histories (ﬁfth century BCE) are precious for insight on a
people but rarely do more than mention bows and arrows. In addition, ancient bow makers did
not write down instructions; instead, apprentices were taught directly, master to apprentice and
father to son. This explains the lack of manuals on bow construction until the late Middle Ages,
by which time ﬁrearms had already begun replacing bows for military and hunting purposes.
Illustrated books of medieval and early modern Iranian or Turkic origin are helpful, but when
looking at these sources, one must always consider the historical accuracy of the artwork. Finally,
ethnographic collections ﬁll in part of the archery story.
MESOLITHIC
By 10,000 BCE, small rectangular blades of ﬂint (“microliths”) were being made across Eurasia.
These microliths were glued into grooves of wood and bone arrowheads to produce sharp cutting
edges. In the absence of bow ﬁnds, the presence of microlithic technology in Central Asia sug-
gests that archery existed there.
A convincing number of self-bows, meaning bows made from a single piece of wood, have
been found in Europe, the British Isles, and Scandinavia. The possibility that bows were present
in the late Paleolithic has also been raised. Self-bows have been used throughout the world into
modern times. General evidence for Central Asian self-bows demonstrates that their preferred
use was for hunting. However, this does not rule out their use for warfare.
NEOLITHIC
Starting about 4000 BCE, arrowheads in triangular and teardrop shapes begin to appear across
Central Asia. Later versions are stemmed and notched. The best of these points are well made.
Light, thin and sharp, they are not inferior to modern metal points in cutting ability, but they
are fragile.
The self-bows may have been formidable, as Neolithic bows found in Europe can conﬁrm.
Unfortunately, Central Asian examples of such antiquity are lacking. In a site near Lake Baikal,
Siberia, late Neolithic graves yielded antler slats that had originally reinforced sixteen composite
www.ebook3000.com

bows. These fragments of composite bows are the earliest bow remains of Central Asia (Rausing
1967).
BRONZE AGE
By about 2000 BCE, bronze arrowheads with “tang” mountings begin to be found. A tang is a
rodlike extension of the arrowhead that is inserted into a matching hole in the end of the arrow
shaft. Points were cast and then hammer-forged. Stone points continued to be used when neces-
sity required.
The casting of socketed bronze points followed. These had a point with a hole in the end into
which a wooden arrow shaft was inserted. Socketed arrowheads with two blades were used
throughout the ﬁrst millennium BCE. The early Bronze Age bow would have been the wooden
self-bow, with composites becoming more prevalent.
THE COMPOSITE BOW
The real genius of Central Asian archery, the thing that made it different from other archery,
was the widespread use of composite bows, meaning bows made of multiple materials. Generally,
these materials included wood, horn, sinew, and bone, all held together by animal glues.
The layering of these materials into myriad bow shapes, a process that developed over thou-
sands of years, is the heart of Central Asian archery. The process of construction of composite
bows (also called horn bows) is complex, and when done by persons of high artistic talent, the
result is comparable to violin making or jewelry making. While the techniques developed over
thousands of years are no longer necessary or even practical, horn bow manufacture as an art
form still clings on precariously in a few places.
Although many of the people of Central Asia were nomads, manufacture of composite
bows implies a heated workspace. Bow making was typically a wintertime activity, when
other work was difﬁcult. For example, the glue is slow-cooked from skin, sinew, and ﬁsh parts
into a gelatinous liquid. Clamping is a preliminary skill; preparing the horns and bones of
cattle, ibex goats, wild sheep, and water buffalo takes time (and suggests metal tools); and
curing can take a year or more. In addition, particular species of wood are required. It is often
posited that the manufacture of these complex bows is a response to a lack of suitable bow
wood, but in fact, the wood core of a composite bow needs to be of superlative quality.
Suitable horn and sinew and glue must be of equally high quality. When the construction
time is added in, the sum is a bow many times more costly than a wooden self-bow. The
advantage, though, is that the distance that a composite can cast an arrow may be double (or
more) than the range of a self-bow.
It is not known when or where the ﬁrst composite bows using horn, wood, and sinew were
made. However, around 1800 BCE (meaning 1,000 years before the oldest known horn bows
were made in Central Asia), there were experiments with these composite bow designs in Egypt.
These Ancient Egyptian bows were apparently based on designs introduced by the Hyksos, for-
eign rulers some of whom may have originated around the Black Sea. In any case, around 1300
BCE, King Tutankhamun was buried with thirty-two angular composites, fourteen self-bows, and
more than four hundred arrows. McLeod (1970, plate XIV) demonstrates amply the masterful
yet truly experimental nature of the Egyptian composite bow making in this period, postulating
Central Asian Archery
57

at least fourteen different methods of layering together wood, horn, and sinew into the angular
composite bow of the day.
THE SCYTHIANS
Around 800 BCE, Central Asian composite bows were represented in petroglyphs (images
pecked into rocks). Today, these petroglyphs are associated with the early semi-nomadic
Scythian culture.
The Scythian bow is instantly differentiated from the self-bow by its serpentine curves, a
shape that no wood bow could assume. The shape of the bow can also be used to date petroglyphs
(Samashev 1993, 49).
Scythian culture covered a vast territory, from west of the Black Sea to the Mongolian
steppes. The Greeks, who had trading centers along the Black Sea, were familiar with Scythians,
and the best surviving images of Scythian archers are seen in gold works of Hellenic design
buried with Scythian royalty (Stoddert 1975, cat. no. 80, plate 18, plate 33). Metal works found
in Kazakhstan are no less elaborate but show less Hellenistic inﬂuence. Representations of
Scythians made by their own artisans are rare (Akhmetkaliev et al. 2006, 125), but a good sense
of the nature of these peoples can be found in the Histories by the Hellenic writer Herodotus,
especially Book Four. The Scythians themselves lacked a written language, or at least, no texts
of theirs have been found.
Scythian armaments set the Central Asian standard for the next 2,500 years, with archery
totally integrated into an equestrian lifestyle. Thus, some description is required. The
Scythian mounted warrior was usually, but not always male; Scythian women were found
buried as warriors, and some of the bodies even carried battle wounds (Davis-Kimball 2002,
106). Scythian-type mounted warriors wore various items of scale armor made of leather or
metal. The weapon of ﬁrst choice was the composite bow, as it was the weapon of long range.
Bows and arrows were carried in the gorytus, which was a combination quiver and bow case
suspended from a belt on the left side. A gorytus had two pockets; one for the bow and another
for the arrows. Many appear to have been of a substantial construction, in the manner of mod-
ern luggage (Reeder 1999, 112–113). Burial gorytoi (plural) contained from several dozen to
more than a hundred arrows. Arrowheads were bronze and two- or three-sided, and they some-
times included a single-barbed spur. Some of the Scythians’ arrows may have been poisoned.
At medium range, a lance and sometimes a shield were their weapons. At close range, the war-
riors resorted to sword, dagger-ax, or bludgeon. Nonetheless, the bow became the symbol of a
warrior’s authority.
Because of some shared construction techniques between some of the known Scythian bows
(Yanghai bows; ATARN 2009) and bows from early Egypt, it is possible that these two traditions
share a common lineage. Certainly, both bow types feature side-by-side laminate cores and the
use of thin wood edge strips. Rausing (1967, 145–151) offers a lineage of composite types.
THE HUNNIC BOW
By the second century BCE, the Scythian culture had evolved into the more settled Sakan culture.
They also had a powerful new enemy, namely the Central Asian people known to the Romans as
the Huns and to the Chinese as the Xiongnu. The mountainous Altai region of Xinjiang in
58
Central Asian Archery
www.ebook3000.com

northwestern China and southern Siberia was the Huns’ refuge and homeland. The Huns were a
major, multiethnic confederation that was able to dominate China for most of the Han Dynasty
(202 BCE–220 CE). The Chinese attempted to protect their client states along the Silk Road by
adopting the Huns’ bow type and mounted archery, down to the clothes and horse tack.
Hunnic bows soon became standard throughout Central Asia (Hall 2006, 65), and they
remained popular for more than 1,000 years. Hunnic bows were typically wide of limb with long
narrow tips. When unstrung, these horn bows were crescent-shaped and required a certain knack
to reverse into the strung position. The strung bow became double convex. Straight handles and
tips were reinforced with bone plates on the edges to immobilize these parts (Hall 2006, 65–66).
By focusing the bend above and below the grip, cast was ampliﬁed. At least ten complete bows
of this design have been found in graves in Turkestan (Hall 2005, 29–30). Parts of others have
been found in Southwest Asia and Eastern Europe, and their bone reinforcing laths have been
found scattered across Eurasia from Korea to Scotland, thus attesting to the success of this bow
design.
Archers of Turkestan preferred wood arrows with barreled shafts—that is, tapered to both
nock and point from mid-shaft. This formula required much laborious hand work; consequently;
arrows were a valuable commodity. Hunnic-type arrowheads were made of bronze in a socketed,
three-blade conﬁguration until just before the Common Era, at which time steel became com-
mon enough to use for this disposable purpose. All arrowheads of Turkestan were subsequently
made of steel with tang mounting.
When good arrow wood was lacking, serviceable arrows were made using the common reed
(Phragmites australis). Suitably sized reeds had a wood “foreshaft” inserted to accept the arrow-
head. Either the nock was cut directly above the cane joint or a wooden nock plug was inserted
into the end. Such arrows have been found in Xinjiang desert areas, and Turks of the late
medieval period paid their taxes by making these arrows.
Much has been made about the Asians’ use of thumb rings. There is a disappointing lack of
archaeological evidence of thumb rings in Central Asia, and many reports have represented a
case of wishful thinking. It is not necessary to wear a thumb ring to draw a bow with the thumb
if a glove or other leather-type protector is used. Leather items would of course be perishable in
burial conditions and not raise much attention in written records. It is also possible that the
thumb was used bare on a wrapped area of the string or that some other method of drawing the
string was used.
During the 1980s, two engraved bone belt plaques known today as the Orlat Plaques were
found in a ﬁrst-century Sogdian burial near Samarkand (Kalter and Pavaloi 1997, 37). In the
Hunting Plaque, three riders chase wild sheep, wild donkeys, and ﬂeeing deer. Asymmetric bows
bend deeply as terriﬁed game ﬂees. In the Battle Plaque, eight warriors in scale armor maim each
other with sword, lance, ax, and bow and arrow. Taken together, the Orlat Plaques are an ency-
clopedia of ﬁrst-century archery techniques.
Murals found in old Penjikent, in Tajikistan, dating to the eighth century show knights car-
rying two Hunnic-type bows each. These were kept in gently curved cases carried on the left side.
Other ﬁgures bend asymmetric bows during a mythical battle of the Rostam saga (Belenitsky
1968, 137–138).
Arabs conquered widely through Central Asia during the eighth and ninth centuries, but it
is not known which bow type they favored.
Central Asian Archery
59

THE TURKIC TRIBES
Around the start of the second millennium of the Common Era, Turkic culture became the mil-
itarily dominant culture in Central Asia. In September 1191, a Muslim army made up mostly of
Central Asian Turks engaged the Crusader King Richard I of England (1157–1199) in the bat-
tle of Arsuf (historical Apollonia, today a port city near Tel Aviv). Because of a Muslim’s eye-
witness account, it is possible to understand the Turks’ skillful use of archers to press an attack
on a numerically superior force (Paterson 1965, 20–23).
Meanwhile, in Turkestan, the Mongols named their own Universal Lord, a man known to
history as Genghis Khan (born Temujin, ca. 1162–1227). Genghis Khan soon subjugated the
Turks. Every warrior in the conglomerated Mongol army was a mounted archer, supplemented
by lance and sword or mace or ax. Mongol archers were covered in varying degrees with scale
armor made of heavy leather or iron.
Mongol bows known from graves appear to be derivatives of the Hunnic bow, but they were
more symmetric and lacked bone reinforcing plates on the recurves. A single plate of bone on
the belly (the side facing the archer) of the grip separates the horn laths. Large numbers of these
bone grip plates have been found. The wood core joinery is uncertain because of the heavy lay-
ers of sinew and birch bark that covered the bows. A strong lateral backing (on the side facing
away from the archer) would have been necessary to balance against the horn layer. Because of
all the culturally diverse troops in the Mongol army and the small number of surviving bows,
many types of bows were probably used.
Quivers of the Mongol era were long constructions. They were usually made from birch bark
and thin wooden slats. Worn from a belt on the right side, the Mongol quiver totally encased
ten to twelve arrows, which were carried point up. The arrow points found in burial quivers are
of many different shapes and size. This corresponds to arrow points collected from battle sites of
Central Asia. Points of this era included bullet shape, bodkin, chisel point, leaf point, spatulate,
pyramidal, rhomboid, broad head, and even forked. By carrying the arrows point up in the
quiver, the archer could pick out a particular desired type of arrow by feel, thereby using the
quiver as a toolbox to anticipate the next target. Arrow whistles, which are found sporadically
in earlier eras, became more common. Thus, there is some military use implied.
During the thirteenth century, every major city in Central Asia yielded to or was conquered
or destroyed by the Mongol Khans and their Turkic, Arab, and Chinese auxiliaries. Only the
Egyptian Mamluks (themselves horse archers from Central Asia) successfully resisted them.
Nonetheless, the Mongol control over Central Asia was short-lived.
TIMURID PERIOD
During the 1300s, Amir Timur (“Tamerlane,” 1336–1405), a Turkic-speaking Muslim who
claimed descent from Genghis Khan, militarily controlled Central Asia. The Timurid capital was
at Samarkand in what is now Uzbekistan. Timur brought untold numbers of captive craftsmen
from the Near and Middle East, Iran, and India to build his capital, and this resulted in an
inevitable mixing of traditions. Fourteenth-century bows are not available in any known
museum collections, but some very late (eighteenth-century) Central Asian weapons have char-
acteristics of Iranian and Indian bows (Kalter 1997, 181).
60
Central Asian Archery
www.ebook3000.com

Although experimentation with bow construction had been going on for hundreds of years,
by the Timurid period a radically different method had replaced other styles. Speciﬁcally, three,
ﬁve, or even seven pieces of wood were V-spliced end to end to create the core. This represented
a clear break from all previous construction methods. To this spliced wood core, a belly of horn
slats and a sinew backing were still added.
Timurid bows, also known as Turkic bows, were shorter than previous bow types. At about
142 cm (56 inches), Turkic bows were able to cast light arrows further while still being able to
handle medium weight arrows. Unstrung bows assumed a deep C-shape, which needed to be
turned inside out to string—an art in itself (Karpowicz 2008). Mughal, Tatar, Chinese, Arab,
Iranian, and Turkish bows all eventually adopted this V-spliced core construction method, and
the method continued to be used until the end of military archery.
INDIAN ARCHERY
During the early sixteenth century, Tamerlane’s descendant Babur (1483–1531) conquered
India, thereby establishing the Mughal Empire. In India, every kind of archery was known and
was recorded in monuments.
Indian crafts were apparently arranged into guilds, with speciﬁc jobs being done by special-
ists. Bamboo arrows of the highest quality were decorated by artisans and tipped with quality
steel points. Arrowheads were made in many varieties but were no longer made in the
exaggerated sizes used by the Mongols. Armies often included divisions of trained women archers
armed with bamboo bows and carrying two hundred arrows each. Shield bearers sometimes
accompanied archers (Pant 1993).
The Sind horn bows of Pakistan and Afghanistan have snaky curves, reminiscent of old
Scythian bows, but were probably stronger. These tastefully painted bows are seen in ethno-
graphic collections, but it is not known whether they were built on a Turkic-style core or what
inﬂuenced their development.
The shining jewel of Indian archery was the so-called “crab bow” of the northern areas, so
named because the shape of the relaxed bow resembles a crab. It has been reported that a crab
bow has a core of at least seven pieces of wood V-spliced together end to end, indicating that it
belongs in the same sphere of development as the Turkic bows. In a relaxed state, the tips of this
bow nearly touch, and, as with other composites, the bow must be totally reversed to string.
Archery played a major military function in India until 1857, when the British dismantled
the ﬁnal remnants of the Mughal Empire. Some rajahs continued the ancient practice of hunt-
ing with composite bows until there were no more useful bows remaining, and remote villages
still hold contests using traditional bamboo bows and arrows. G. N. Pant (1940–) published
Indian Archery in 1978, and no more deﬁnitive work on the subject is to be had.
TURKESTAN
Following the Timurid wars, trade on the overland portions of the Silk Road began a drastic
decline. Merchant ships by this time traveled directly by sea to Indonesia and India, with trans-
shipping to Europe via an overland passage at Suez. The Central Asian khanates of Khiva,
Bukhara, and Khokand rose, but the real wealth was gone, not to return.
Central Asian Archery
61

Archery continued to be used militarily in Central Asia well into the 1800s. In the
Samarkand Museum, a bow is displayed that shows a melding of Turkic, Indian, and Iranian
inﬂuences. Another, at the Old City in Bukhara, is similar to Persian bows from India. A third,
in the Textile Museum in Bukhara, is a child’s version of a pellet-shooting bow common to
China. Pellet bows continued to be used to shoot varmints and fowl until the 1880s, at which
time they began to be replaced by elastic rubber slings.
Chinese bows manufactured from the seventeenth to nineteenth century are also found in
museum collections in Tashkent and to a greater degree in the State Museum in Kazakhstan and
elsewhere. This may indicate a waning in local production, whereas the supply remained strong
in China export bows. More bows of all types exist in museum collections whose catalogues have
not been published.
Adam Karpowicz documents the construction of late Turkish bows, which would be relevant
to Turkestan during the late period.
AFGHANISTAN
With its diverse cultures and ethnicities and central location on the Silk Road, it could be assumed
that Afghanistan shared the archery traditions of its neighbors. However, beyond the Sind bow
previously described, the only other bow type actually recorded in Afghanistan is the Hunza bow.
These long, crudely made bows feature two or three thin horn slats laid side by side along the limbs,
with a standard sinew backing. The limbs are lashed at intervals along the length of the bow, and
the entire bow is painted black. Wood-framed leather quivers, decorated with metal ﬁttings, car-
ried about ten hardwood arrows. A Hunza bow (and many others from Asia and around the world)
can be seen in the Grayson Archery Collection at the University of Missouri at Columbia. Most
of the Grayson collection is in storage, but some photos can be viewed via the Internet.
CHINA
Contemporary artwork conﬁrms that the Han Chinese were quick to adopt the Hunnic bow for
use by the Chinese military. During the thirteenth and fourteenth century, the Chinese dropped
the Hunnic design in favor of the bow of their Mongol conquerors. Over time, bows based upon
Turkic designs gradually replaced Mongol designs. Crossbows, which had been used by Han
Chinese armies since antiquity, died out as a military weapon around the end of the Ming
dynasty (1368–1644). Crossbow points, distinct from arrowheads, are found in museums of
Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan.
During the sixteenth century, the Manchus conquered China, thereby establishing the ﬁnal
Imperial dynasty of China, the Qing (1644–1912). Although Manchurian bows look like Hun-
nic type bows, they had V-spliced tips based on Turkic construction. At up to 175 centimeters
(72 inches) in length, they were the tallest horn bows ever made.
Manchurian horn bows were decorated ranging from simple, diagonally cut strips of birch
bark to elaborate appliqués of birch, peach, or cherry bark. Some surviving examples also feature
sharkskin (shagreen) overlays, water buffalo nock inserts, and artistically painted decorations
(Selby 2003).
Qing-era quivers generally carried ten to twelve arrows. These arrows were made of poplar
wood and were about a meter (38 to 40 inches) in length.
62
Central Asian Archery
www.ebook3000.com

During the Qing era, the Chinese devoted much effort to their archery tackle. Bows were
made in ofﬁcially licensed Imperial workshops using water buffalo horns and were traded from
these workshops to areas in Turkestan, where foreigners often confused them with local produc-
tion. Qing-era bows are common in ethnographic collections, whereas bows of other periods are
almost unknown outside of China.
The Manchu military continued to prefer archery to ﬁrearms until the late nineteenth cen-
tury, and a few Chinese workshops continued to produce sporting horn bows into the early
1950s. Tibetans and Inner Mongolians continue to refurbish and shoot old bows (some of them
more than 100 years old) during national archery festivals. Stephen Selby offers an excellent
book on the subject for the novice, Archery Traditions of Asia (2003), and his deﬁnitive book for
the aﬁcionado is Chinese Archery (2000). See also: Peter Dekker’s material.
DEPICTIONS OF ARCHERY
Wealthy Mongols, Timurids, and Mughals often commissioned illustrations of archery practice,
and the art and texts made for these clients were frequently hand-copied by subsequent calligra-
phers and illustrators. Through these books and artistic depictions, the practice of medieval Cen-
tral Asian archery can be studied. In addition, single illustrations (and sometimes, entire books)
exist in museums and private collections (Ismailova 1980; Kalter 1997, 66, 70–71). Considera-
tions about the experiences of the artists, the time frame of the subject and the artist, and
whether the work is of a ﬁctional or historic nature come into play when deciding on the valid-
ity of the artwork.
Descriptions of recreational activities provide many clues to archery. For instance, “surround
hunting,” a popularly illustrated activity involving archery, was also a military exercise. In sur-
round hunting, an army is sent out to surround and drive game animals into an ever-tightening
circle, where, at the center, the upper ranks shot the game.
Kabak (“gourd shooting”) is also seen in illustrations and described in texts. In Kabak, riders
charged at a tall pole. As they passed, they shot upward and backward at a target on the top of
the pole, trying to knock it off. Hedef is a second kind of target archery. Here, a ﬂat leather bag
shaped like a gourd is the target. Puta is a similar game in which a long paddle, sometimes held
by an assistant at arm’s length, is the target. There were also contests for penetrating metal
objects.
The most important archery game among the Turkic tribes was probably ﬂight archery, and
Chinese literature refers to ﬂight archery among the Turkic peoples as early as the ﬁfth century
CE. In this game, competitors attempted to shoot light arrows to a great distance, and monu-
ments of stone with inscriptions of the names and dates and distances of the bowshot still sur-
vive in Istanbul. Mongolia also has at least one stone commemorating a famous bowshot
distance.
LITERATURE
The West Semitic Poem of Aqhat (fourteenth century BCE) contains the earliest known written
description of the construction of a horn bow. Early books of the Bible are rich in archery allu-
sion, and the Quran and the Analects of Confucius also contain admonitions about the practice
of archery and its relationship to correct living.
Central Asian Archery
63

More recently, the Kyrgyz Epic of Manas describes the Turkic warrior hero Manas. Since the
text of this epic runs many times longer than the Iliad and Odyssey combined, it would seem to
be a good source for archery information once it has been entirely translated into English. On
the other hand, the story was not written down until the nineteenth century, so there are prob-
ably several centuries of storytelling included in its half million lines.
Arab Archery (1945), Saracen Archery (1970), and Turkish Archery and the Composite Bow
(1993) are three English-language texts based on late medieval or early modern Arabic texts that
bear directly on Central Asian archery. The Dhanurveda text of India (Science of the Horn Bow,
fourteenth or ﬁfteenth century) is similarly ﬁlled with useful insight into Mughal-era archery,
and together, these four texts have origins at least as old as the oldest extent English-language
archery text, Roger Ascham’s (ca. 1515–1568) Toxophilus (1545).
WHAT HAPPENED TO ARCHERY?
Firearms made archery obsolete. By the 1280s, Mongol khans in China were ordering the con-
struction of bronze siege cannons, and the Ottomans and Mamluks were not far behind. During
the 1300s, military rockets were developed in India and China for the purpose of breaking cav-
alry charges, and by the 1450s, the Ottomans were replacing their Janissaries’ bows with hand
cannons. The reason was not that rockets and matchlocks were intrinsically better weapons, or
even cheaper or easier to make. Instead, it was that black powder weapons were better suited for
the political needs of the early modern monarchies. Any adroit person could be trained in a few
weeks sufﬁciently to become a nuisance with a musket. Thus, mass armies could be raised in a
fairly short time, and even old men and children could defend a town or wagon laager in an
emergency. The same could not be said of archery—good archery skills take years to nurture. In
addition, muskets could be taken away after a battle, meaning that the surviving peasants and
burghers could be sent back to their labors unarmed. Archers, on the other hand, could never be
completely disarmed, as they could always make a new bow and breed (or steal) a new horse.
Consequently, it was in the interests of governments to encourage the adoption of black powder
weapons and to discourage the use of bows.
CENTRAL ASIAN ARCHERY TODAY
In areas bordering Central Asia, strong traditional archery traditions still exist. In Bhutan, var-
ious mountain villages have never stopped holding traditional archery competitions. During
these Bhutanese competitions, bamboo self-bows and bamboo arrows are used. In Tibet, some
Muslim communities still use horn bows for target shooting, generally reworking antique
Chinese weapons. Ethnic minorities in the Inner Mongolia region of China do the same. There
is a smattering of horn bow making in Mongolia; enough for the local archers and a few to sell
to foreigners. In South Korea, horn bow archery (Goong Do) remains comparatively popular, and
a few “living treasure” bow and arrow makers hold out against an onslaught of inexpensive sport-
ing bows made of synthetic materials. In Turkey, a few dedicated individuals are attempting to
translate archery texts from ancient scripts and rediscover the venerable bow making techniques
of their ancestors.
However, traditional archery is not common in the Turkic areas of the former Soviet Union.
In Siberia, Buryats and Tuvans gather each summer to hold bow contests; some archers use
64
Central Asian Archery
www.ebook3000.com

antique weapons, others have begun to revive ancient bow making skills, and still others use
modern bows of synthetic materials. Of the “three manly sports” (horse racing, wrestling, and
archery), only archery is missing today in Central Asia. If the ancient tradition is true, all that
is needed is for prosperity to return is for people to take up the ancient pastime of their
ancestors—archery.
—Jack Farrell
See also: Iranian Martial Arts; Mongolian Martial Arts; 
Ottoman Martial Arts; China: Martial Arts; 
China: Weapons; and Japan: Kyudo (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Akhmetkaliev, R., K. Akishev, and K. Baipakov. 2006. Of Gold and Grass, Nomads of Kazakhstan,
edited by Claudia Chang. Bethesda, MD: The Foundation for International Arts and
Education.
Asian Traditional Archery Research Network (ATARN). 2009. “The Scythian-Type Bows from
Yanghai (Shanshan),” http://www.atarn.org/chinese/yanghai.htm, accessed February 9, 2009.
Belenitsky, Aleksandr. 1968. Central Asia, translated by James Hogarth. Geneva: Nagel Publishers.
Curators of the University of Missouri. 2003. “Grayson Archery Collection,” http://anthromuseum
.missouri.edu/grayson/grayson.shtml, accessed October 14, 2009.
Davis-Kimball, Jeannine, and Mona Behan. 2002. Warrior Women: An Archaeologist’s Search for
History’s Hidden Heroines. New York: Warner Books, Inc.
Dekker, Peter. 2008. “Manchu Archery,” http://www.manchuarchery.org/, accessed October 3, 2009.
Faris, Nabih Amin, and Robert Potter Elmer, translators and editors. 1945. Arab Archery: An Arabic
Manuscript of about A.D. 1500. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; via at http://www
.sacredarchery.com/arab%20archery%20anno%20domini%201500.pdf, accessed March 26, 2009.
Hall, A. 2005. “Some Well-Preserved Composite Bows,” Journal of the Society of Archer-Antiquaries 48
28–36.
Hall, A. 2006. “The Development of Bone-Reinforced Composites,” Journal of the Society of Archer-
Antiquaries 49, 65–76.
Herodotus. 1998. The Histories, translated by Robin Waterﬁeld. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Ismailova, A. M., editor. 1980. Oriental Miniatures. Tashkent: Gafur Gulyam Literature and Art Pub-
lishing House.
Kalter, Johannes, and Margareta Pavaloi. 1997. Uzbekistan: Heirs to the Silk Road. London: Thames
and Hudson.
Karpowicz, Adam. 2008. Ottoman Turkish Bows, Manufacture and Design. Sackville, New Brunswick:
Adam Karpowicz.
Klopsteg, Paul E. 1987. Turkish Archery and the Composite Bow. Manchester, UK: Simon Archery
Foundation.
Latham, J. D. 1970. Saracen Archery: An English Version and Exposition of a Mameluke Work on Archery
(ca. A.D. 1368). London: The Holland Press.
McLeod, W. 1970. Composite Bows from the Tomb of Tutankhamun. Oxford, UK: Grifﬁth Institute at
University Press.
Pant, G. N. 1993/1978. Indian Archery. Delhi: Dr. Agram Prasad.
Paterson, W. F. 1965. “The Battle of Arsuf,” Journal of the Society of Archer Antiquaries 8, 20–23.
Rausing, Gad. 1967. The Bow: Some Notes on Its Origin and Development. Bonn: Acta Archaeologica
Lundensia, No. 6.
Reeder, Ellen D. 1999. Scythian Gold. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Samashev, Zainolla. 1993. Petroglyphs of the East Kazakhstan as a Historical Resources [sic]. Almaty,
Khazakstan: Rakurs.
Central Asian Archery
65

Selby, Stephen. 2000. Chinese Archery. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Selby, Stephen. 2003. Archery Traditions of Asia. Hong Kong: Hong Kong Museum of Coastal
Defense.
Stoddert, Katherine H. B., editor. 1975. From the Land of the Scythians. New York: Metropolitan
Museum of Art.
IRANIAN MARTIAL ARTS
Iran is the name of an ancient country in the Middle East. Its historic culture is often known as
Persian, after the Greek name for the indigenous language.
During ancient times, Iran was home to several vast empires. These included the Achaemen-
ian Empire (559 BCE–330 BCE), the Parthian Empire (ca. 250 BCE–ca. 228 CE), and the
Sassanid Empire (ca. 241 CE–651 CE). During this 1,100-year period, the principal Iranian
religion was Zoroastrianism.
The Muslims conquered Iran in 651 CE. Over the next few centuries, most (but hardly all)
Persian-speaking people converted to Islam. Most Iranians chose Shiite Islam as a form of reli-
gion to oppose the mainstream Sunni Islam. This was done as an attempt to keep their national
identity and culture.
In 1219 CE and 1256 CE, the Mongols conquered Iran. Most Mongols were shamanists or
Tibetan Buddhists, but in 1295 CE, Iran’s Mongol ruler, Ghazan Khan (1271 CE–1304 CE),
converted to Sunni Islam.
Today, most Iranians are Shiite Muslims. Shiite Islam became Iran’s ofﬁcial state religion dur-
ing the ﬁfteenth century CE, under the Safavid dynasty.
Ethnic groups living in Iran include Persians, Azerbaijani, Kurds, Balochi, Turkmens, and
Arabs. Besides Islam and Zoroastrianism, other world religions in the region include Christian-
ity (mostly Armenian Apostolic) and Judaism.
For the past 3,000 years, the region’s main language has been Persian. The scripts used to
write this language have changed over time. Old Persian (spoken to about 300 BCE) was writ-
ten using an alphabet derived from cuneiform script. Middle Persian (spoken to about 800 CE)
was written using a variety of Aramaic scripts. Modern Persian (spoken from about 800 CE to
present) is written using a variant of Arabic script with some letters speciﬁc to Persian, and it
was the language of government in many late medieval and early modern Mongol, Turkic, and
Indian kingdoms.
Despite invaders and merchants constantly bringing new technologies and beliefs into Iran,
the foreign elements were assimilated and made an integral part of Iranian culture. Part of what
makes the Iranian culture so resistant to external inﬂuence is the culture’s longstanding rever-
ence of its warrior tradition. This tradition started with the Iranian chariot riders of antiquity,
ﬂourished during the ancient imperial period, and reached its literary apogee during the Muslim
period.
Many grand epics have been written in Persian. The best known include Ferdowsi’s Shah-
nama (Book of Kings, completed ca. 1010 CE), Asadi’s Garshasp-nama (Book of Garshasp, com-
pleted before 1072 CE), and Mostawﬁ’s Zafar-nama (Book of Victories, completed ca. 1334 CE).
Yet, while these epics inspired people and preserved culture, one does not learn to wrestle, fence,
or shoot a bow by reading about wrestling, fencing, or archery. One has to actually do them.
66
Iranian Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

Unfortunately, how-to manuals about these topics are scarce until early modern times. Conse-
quently, this entry will focus on the arts of late medieval and early modern times.
ARCHERY
Archery, along with horsemanship, has played a crucially important role throughout Iranian his-
tory; in Iran, the bow was used for war, for sport, and for ritual purposes (Paul 1916, 20).
There is not much reliable information about the type of bows used in truly ancient Iran.
Some illustrations from the archaeological sites of Hasanlu and Marlik are dated between 1200
BCE and 800 BCE. In particular, there is an illustration from Hasanlu that depicts a northern
Iranian archer with a triangular bow that was made of different parts joined at the grip (Zutter-
mann 2003, 136, 160). Archery is also mentioned in the Zoroastrian holy book, the Avesta (Pur
Davud 1969, 58).
More information is available about archery in the Achaemenian era (559 BCE–330 BCE).
The Achaemenian bow was carried in a case together with the arrows. This bow case, which was
called gorytos in Greek, was of an Iranian design, and pictures show it carried by men clothed in
typical Persian garb and wearing riding costumes. During the Achaemenian period, the bow sym-
bolized kingship and sovereignty, and aristocrats used the bow to show their martial abilities and
courage (Koch 2000, 260; Zuttermann 2003, 142). That is why a famous sculpture at Bisutun
shows King Darius I (ca. 549 BCE–486 BCE) stepping on his defeated rival Gaumata (died 522
BCE) with his left foot and, at the same time, resting his bow on his left foot. Elsewhere, it was
said that Darius I was an equally good archer on foot and on horseback (Sharp 1964, 85).
During the Achaemenian period, both Persians and Medes used the bow as their main
weapon. This was in contrast to the Greeks, who preferred close-ranged weapons (Kani 1847,
289). The Achaemenian army started the battle with archers and slingers, who used their arrows
and stones to confuse the enemy lines. After this was done, heavily armed cavalry attacked from
the ﬂanks. This tactic proved useless against Greek hoplites, who were well-protected with
shields and armor (Wiesehöfer 2002, 138).
During the Parthian era (ca. 250 BCE–ca. 228 CE), archery played a central role. During
this period, there were two types of cavalry: horse archers and heavy cavalry. In English, the lat-
ter are known as cataphracts, after a Greek word meaning armored. Tactically, the horse archers,
who were equipped with composite bows, weakened the enemy’s units by shooting long-range
arrow ﬁre. After that, the heavy cavalry attacked the now-disrupted enemy lines with lances
(Wiesehöfer 2002, 202; Wilcox 2000, 9). In 53 BCE, the Parthians used this tactic to crush a
Roman army at Carrhae (near Harran, Turkey). By shooting all their arrows at Roman legionar-
ies and riding back to waiting camels to load their quivers with more arrows, and by rapid ﬁre
achieved by holding three arrows in the bow hand, the Parthian horse archers were able to
maintain a continuous rain of arrows, yet still ride away any time Romans tried to close
(Wiesehöfer 2002, 203; Wilcox 2000, 9). The famous term “Parthian shot” describes the
Parthian technique of feigning retreat and luring the enemy to follow them, only to turn back
and shoot them down.
The Sassanids (ca. 241 CE–651 CE) used infantry archers as well as mounted archers.
Sassinid archers used wattle mantlets as defensive walls and shot from behind them (Nicolle
1996, 21). In the early Sassanid period, bows were similar to those used by Parthians. Equipment
Iranian Martial Arts
67

changes occurred later as the Sassanids made changes to their infantry that were meant to help
during sieges of walled cities.
Like the Parthians, the Sassanids used composite bows. It is not clear whether the Sassanid
archers used the Turco-Mongolian thumb-draw or the Persian draw. In the Mongolian draw, the
bowstring is drawn with the thumb. Therefore, a ring is placed over the thumb joint to protect
it from the strike of the bowstring (Curators of the University of Missouri 2003). In the Persian
draw, the string is drawn with the middle and ring ﬁngers, with the index ﬁnger stretched along
the arrow shaft. The little ﬁnger had no role, and there is no certainty regarding the role of the
thumb in Sassanid archery (Farrokh 2005, 14).
Infantry archers remained important in Iran until the end of the Umayyad Caliphate in the
mid-eighth century CE. Afterwards, mounted archery, performed in the Central Asian or
Parthian style, started to be the dominant factor again. Mostly, this development was due to the
inﬂuence of large forces of horse archers from Khorasan who served the Abbasid caliphs and
played a crucial role in the defeat of the Ummayyads and the rise to power of the Abbasids
(Nicolle 1996, 22).
The Abbasids (749 CE–1258 CE) were heavily inﬂuenced by Iranian culture. Various types
of bows were used during this time, and Persian manuscripts begin clearly differentiating
between these different types of bows. Texts mentioning archery include Nowruz-nama (Book of
Nowruz), attributed to the famous Persian poet Khayyam Neishaburi (1050–1123 CE), and Adab
al-Harb va al-Shoja-e (The Customs of War and Bravery), written by Mobarak Shah before 1229
CE. The bows from the Abbasid period were mostly of composite construction, made of wood,
horn, sinew, and glue.
The Mongol horse archers who conquered Iran in 1219 CE and again in 1256 CE used com-
posite bows. Horse archers played an equally important military role during the subsequent
Timurid period (1370 CE–1506 CE), and the tradition retained its importance through the
Safavid period (1502 CE–1736 CE). During the Safavid period, the Mongolian thumb draw was
deﬁnitely in use. Although the Safavid-era thumb rings seen in museums today are made of ivory,
wood, metal, or precious stones, most archers probably used leather rings for daily use.
European travelers to Iran remarked the dexterous archery of the Safavid dynasty founder
Shah Ismail I (1487 CE–1524 CE), who was said to be able to shoot twelve apples with his
arrows without missing even once (Mir’i 1970, 205). Then, in 1514 CE, an Ottoman army armed
with muskets and cannons soundly defeated an archery-based Safavid army (Newman 1995, 21).
After that, the Safavids started to introduce ﬁrearms into their units. Archery still played an
important role, however, because early matchlock muskets were slow to load and discharge and
difﬁcult to use on horseback.
Meydan Shah (Shah’s Square) in Isfahan had an archery ground that had royal patronage
(Latham and Paterson 1970, 78). Exercises done at this location included riding at full speed and
shooting upward at a cup placed on top of a mast. If the shah was present, the cup was ﬁlled with
gold. This exercise was called ghapoghandazi. The exercise was observed by Sir John Chardin
(1643–1713), a French traveler to the Safavid court. Chardin also described other exercises such
as bending the bow, handling a heavy bow, and shooting at the mark (Chardin 1988, 199–200).
With the introduction of ﬂintlock muskets and the subsequent percussion cap muskets, archery
started to play a lesser role on the battleﬁeld, but it continued to be used in hunting and as a
pastime activity.
68
Iranian Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

Persian archers were expected to follow a moral code called javanmardi. The word is usually
translated as chivalry, but after the eleventh century CE the term was also associated with trade
guilds and Suﬁs.
Persian manuscripts talk about twenty-two principles that need to be observed by efﬁcient
archers. The outline sounds remarkably like a modern how-to manual:
1.
Know the characteristics of the bow.
2.
Know the characteristics of the bowstring.
3.
Be acquainted with the characteristics of the thumb ring.
4.
Understand the characteristics of the arrow.
5.
Know the characteristics of the arrowhead.
6.
Carry the necessities of an archer, which includes having two bows, and for each bow, two strings,
a shield, and a quiver.
7.
Have good equipment.
8.
Wear strong, comfortable clothing.
9.
Know the wind and weather.
10.
Handle the bow correctly—an archer reveals his skills by the way he handles the bow.
11.
Study archery.
12.
Know the way of shooting an arrow.
13.
Know how to take a standing or sitting posture.
14.
Know how to assemble the bow.
15.
Know how to grasp the handle of a bow.
16.
Know how to put the hand in the correct position.
17.
Know how to aim.
18.
Know the thumb draw.
19.
Know how to draw the bow.
20.
Learn to estimate ranges.
21.
Learn to release a bowstring.
22.
Learn how to disassemble a bow (Jonnati Ata’i 1970, 118–130).
In some archery manuals, technique is described in enormous detail. Regarding drawing the
bow, some Persian manuscripts differentiated between mustache draw (borutkesh), eyebrow draw
(sormekesh), and chest draw (sinekesh). Drawing to the eyebrow was considered poor form,
whereas drawing to the mustache was believed to be a superior technique (KasheﬁSabzevari
1971, 362; Afshar 1968, 84). Note that these terms refer to the height of the arrow in relation
to the face, not the length of the draw, although in the case of the eyebrow, the hand usually
stopped there. When drawing to the ear, it was possible to draw the arrow past the mustache,
past the lips, or to a position between the lips and the chin.
The fourteenth-century manuscript Futuvvat-nama-ye Soltani (Royal Book of Spiritual Chivalry)
identiﬁes four different methods for gripping the handle of a bow (KasheﬁSabzevari 1971, 362):
1.
Round grip (qabze-ye gerd).
2.
Square grip (qabze-ye morabba’),
3.
Falconer’s grip (qabze-ye changal-e baz; literally, hawk’s claw grip; also called laughing grip (qabze-
ye khandan).
4.
Round grip (qabze-ye modavvar).
Iranian Martial Arts
69

Unfortunately, no explanations of these bow gripping techniques are provided in the manuscript
and these descriptive names are not self explanatory.
In Saracen Archery (1970), four grasps are described. Arab Archery (1945) has somewhat dif-
ferent attributions, but the types are constant. These modern texts provide practical detail.
First was the square grasp (al-qabdah al-murabba`ah in Arabic, qabze-ye morabba’ in Persian).
Square grasp was associated with the schools of Ishaq ar-Raffa and Abu Hashim al-Bawardi, both
of which were important Central Asian archery styles said to date to the early Muslim period.
Second was the oblique grasp (al-qabdah al-muharrafah). Oblique grasp was associated with
the Persian archery style of Tahir al-Balkhi. The oblique grasp involved holding the belly of the
grip against the proximal phalanx (innermost joint) of the thumb by turning the ﬁst to the right.
This was described as rounding the wrist. The oblique grasp was said to be good for people who
had short arms and deep chests.
Third was an intermediate grasp associated with the Ishaq ar-Raffa school.
Fourth was jinkilbaz, which would be pronounced changal-e baz in Persian. The Persian qabze-
ye changal-e baz is the same as the Arabic jinkilbaz.
The fourteenth century manuscript Resale-ye Kamandari (Afshar 1968/1347, 81) describes
three ways of holding a bow, namely 1) qabze-ye changal-e baz, 2) qabze-ye bahrami and 3) qabze-
ye morabba’. It also provides explanations for each. According to this source, in the qabze-ye
changal-e baz grip, the thumb and the index ﬁnger are separated from each other and the top
portion of the thumb nail is placed on the back of the bow. In qabze-ye bahrami, the handle of
the bow is held tightly with the root of the thumb, the palm of hand is kept empty, and the ﬁn-
gers are bent. In qabze-ye morabba’, the handle of the bow is held with the thumb on the index
ﬁnger.
The Safavid-period manuscript Jame al-Hadayat ﬁElm al-Romayat (A Complete Guide in the
Science of Shooting) provides a detailed account of how to hold a bow while performing
the above-mentioned techniques. To hold a bow, the archer must stand up and hold the bow.
The ear of the lower arm of the bow should rest on the left thigh above the knee. (This assumes
a right-hand draw, but the text says one can also place the bow on the right thigh.) The archer
should raise his heel from the ground a bit and then raise the bow from the thigh. Then the
archer should place the back of the handle between the cup of his ﬁngers (that is, between his
ﬁngers and the palm of his hand). He should use the ﬂesh of the palm of the hand close to the
ﬁngers and the ﬂesh of the palm of the hand close to the forearm to hold the handle of the bow
and keep the rest free. Then he should squeeze or tighten the middle of his hand so that the skin
of the palm of the hand is tightened, resulting in the tight grip of the handle of the bow. Then,
he will turn his three ﬁngers (namely the small, ring, and middle ﬁngers) around the handle of
the bow so that the ﬂesh of the ﬁngers does not slide and moves to the back of the ﬁngers. From
the beginning, he should get a good and tight grip so that upon releasing the thumb the bow does
not turn. Thus, the handle of the bow is tightly held with these three ﬁngers. The ﬁst’s grip
should be in the same line as the handle of the bow, as if it overlapped the handle; otherwise,
the bowstring will hit the forearm upon release. The back of the hand should be in the same line
as the forearm, and the ﬁst should not be on the bow. Instead, it needs to be in the same line, so
that the bowstring will not strike the belly (middle) of the forearm. Then, the archer should
place the thumb on the handle of the bow above the middle ﬁnger so that there is a distance of
one core of a date between them. The side ﬂesh of the thumb should be placed higher than the
70
Iranian Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

thumb itself so that the arrow does not slide out. The archer must not raise the middle joint of
the thumb, and he must not raise the tip of the digit either. The root of the thumb and the tip
of the thumb should be even and at the same level and should be even with the bowstring. This
position is called duct, canal, or bridge. When the archers say that the bridge should be above,
this means that the tip of the ﬁnger and the root of the ﬁnger should not be lower or higher. If
the tip of the thumb is placed higher, it will be bad and trouble the arrow. If the middle joint
of the thumb is placed higher, it will be burnt and injured (due to the strike of the bowstring),
and the root of the thumb will also be injured. The index ﬁnger is placed on the back of the bow
handle until it reaches the free space of one core of a date between the thumb and the middle
ﬁnger. When the tip of the index ﬁnger reaches the thumb and the middle ﬁnger, this way of
gripping a bow is called changal-e baz (hawk’s claw grip), because when a hunter holds his falcon,
he cannot free one ﬁnger. If the thumb and the middle ﬁnger are open, this grip is also called
qabze-ye khandan. If the archer lets the skin between the index ﬁnger and the thumb be placed
on the grip of the bow so that it covers it, that is a mistake because it is not visually aesthetic. If
the index ﬁnger is placed between the distance of the thumb and the middle ﬁnger and is the
same length (at the same level) of other ﬁngers, and other ﬁngers are positioned on their place,
this way of holding the bow is called qabze-ye morabba’ (square grip). When all four ﬁngers—
that is, the index, middle, ring, and small ﬁngers—are placed on their positions and the thumb,
which is responsible for the release of the arrow, is raised and positioned between the index ﬁn-
ger and the middle ﬁnger, this way of holding a bow is called qabze-ye modavvar. This grip is more
used with bows with a round grip: qabze-ye gerd.
SWORDSMANSHIP
Although no school of medieval or early modern Persian swordsmanship has survived the pas-
sage of time, the traditional stick ﬁghting and stick dancing that are practiced in different parts
of Iran reveal techniques that presumably derive from sword and spear techniques of the past.
In the province of Sistan, in southeastern Iran, a traditional dance called raghs-e shamshir
(sword dance) includes many defensive and offensive techniques. During this dance, both
dancers use steel swords and shields, and as they demonstrate different types of attacks and defen-
sive techniques, they gradually intensify the speed and the executed power of their techniques
during the course of the dance.
Swordsmanship techniques were practiced in the zoorkhane (house of strength) in varzesh
pahlavani (champion’s sport; the traditional martial art of Iran) alongside wrestling and associ-
ated exercises until the late 1920s or early 1930s. After this period, training in traditional
swordsmanship ceased to be practiced. Nevertheless, varzesh pahlavani offers a comprehensive,
all-round martial-system, as it included training exercises for ﬁghting with swords, bows, maces,
and shields (Luijendijk 2006, 6–7).
According to Chardin (1988, 201), mid-seventeenth-century Iranian sword masters trained
students to handle the weight of the sword by handling weights in each hand. The student turned
the weight (which could be the sword) up and down, in front and behind, quick and forceful
movements. Swordsmen also placed two weights, which were shaped like horseshoes, on their
shoulders. This exercise was done to make their joints more pliable and their nerves suppler. In a
dueling game, combatants started with their arms (a straight saber and a buckler) on the ground
Iranian Martial Arts
71

at their feet. On command, they knelt down, kissed the weapons, and touched them with their
foreheads. Then, at the sound of a drum, the duelists, stood, took up their weapons, and began
going through dancing and skipping movements, all the while performing postures and motions
with their weapons. After the preliminaries, the combatants attacked with saber strikes while
defending with bucklers. At longer distances, they used the point of the saber to strike.
Persian manuscripts mention systematic test-cutting exercises. For instance, the Safavid Tarikhe
Abbasi (Chronicle of Shah Abbas) narrates a test cutting procedure used during the rule of Shah
Abbas (1571 CE–1629 CE). It was said that the sword strike of Shah Abbas was so powerful that
he was able to slice two goats placed on top of each other into four parts (Falsaﬁ1996, 453).
Many literary accounts mention swordsmanship. Examples include Ketab-e Samak ‘Ayyar
(The Book of Samak Ayyar, ca. 1100 CE), Mobarak Shah’s Adab al-Harb va al-Shoja-e (The Cus-
toms of War and Bravery, ca. 1229 CE), Mostowﬁ’s Zafar-nama (Book of Victories, ca. 1334 CE),
and Dastan-e Hossein Kord-e Shabestari (The Story of Hossein Kord Shabestari, ca. 1600 CE).
Obviously, one cannot trust chivalric romances too far, but at the same time, general detail was
presumably accurate enough for audiences to accept and actors to duplicate. Collectively, these
accounts describe methods of carrying, drawing, and sheathing the sword and shield. In addition,
they classify sword strikes by the angle of attack. For instance, vertical downward attacks target the
top of the head, both shoulders, both arms, both wrists, and the lance shaft. Vertical upward attacks
target the armpits, genitals, and lance shaft. Horizontal strikes attack the neck, face, and mouth,
the back and the sides of the body, and the legs, shins and knees. There are diagonal attacks, which
are directed at the back of the neck and the abdomen. Although there are accounts of stabbing
with swords, stabbing was generally reserved for lances and spears. The manuscripts also describe
how to strike using the unsharpened back of swords. Targets included the helmet, which would dis-
tract an opponent, and the side of the neck. The target on the neck was the vagus nerve and
carotid arteries, where a good blow would cause the person being struck to lose consciousness. To
avoid unnecessary damage to swords, edge-to-edge parrying was discouraged. Instead, the back of
the sword was used to deﬂect and parry. In Persian swordsmanship, the shield was used both defen-
sively and offensively. Defensive uses included blocking vertical sword strikes against the head and
shoulders and horizontal strikes to the body, while offensive uses included striking with the shield
buckles or intentionally striking the shield against the opponent’s sword edge (Moshtagh Kho-
rasani 2009a and 2009b).
IRANIAN WRESTLING
Wrestling, known as koshti in Modern Persian, played a crucial role in preparing Iranian warriors for
the battleﬁeld. The tradition goes back to antiquity. A gilded silver plate from the Sassanid period
shows two warriors wrestling after they broke all their man-made weapons (Robinson 1995, 25;
Nicolle 1996, 59). A thousand years later, Shah-nama (ca. 1010 CE) described Turkic and Iranian
warriors wrestling after their lances, swords, maces, and swords were broken (Ferdowsi 1995, 208).
Persian epics and manuscripts also report on the importance of wrestling. See, for example, the
eleventh-century epic Garshasp-nama by Asadi Tusi (1938, 396) or the thirteenth-century war trea-
tise Adab al-Harb va al- al-Shoja-e by Mobarak Shah Fakhr-e Modabbar (1995, 468).
Pastime activities of the Iranian nobility involved watching wrestling matches. Their
champions were called pahlavanan. (The ethnic term pahlavi refers to the Parthians and also to
72
Iranian Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

pahlavanan, champions.) Like an archer or swordsman, a pahlavan was expected to follow the
chivalric code called javanmardi. As entertainment, championship wrestling (varzesh pahlavani—
this term can be used interchangeably with koshti pahlavani, as later in this section) became very
popular during the last half of the Safavid period. When not wrestling, the strongmen sometimes
worked as bodyguards or night watchmen. This employment is described in the Safavid-period
manuscript Dastan-e Hossein Kord-e Shabestari (The Story of Hossein Kord Shabestari).
There are different opinions regarding the etymology of the word koshti. Persian-language lex-
icons published during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries give the meaning of koshti as
ﬁghting between two people who intend to wrestle. Another opinion relates the name to another
word, kosti, which means to pound. This etymology holds that over the passage of time, the word
kosti transformed to the word koshti. However, this argument is not supported in period manu-
scripts and lexicons (Beizai Kashani 2003, 94). A third hypothesis holds that the roots of the word
koshti go back to pre-Islamic times. In Zoroastrianism, there was a special belt, called kustik in
Middle Persian. This belt was made of 144 threads of white lamb wool twisted together into 72
thicker threads. These threads were then woven into six strands, with each strand consisting of
twelve threads. These numbers had numerological signiﬁcance. The numeral 72 refers to the 72
Yasna (primary texts) of the Zoroastrian holy text Avesta. Twelve represents the months of the
year, while six relates to the religious festivities of the Zoroastrian year. The kustik belt was knit-
ted by the priestly class and wrapped around the waist three times, thereby symbolizing the three
fundamental principles of the Zoroastrian religion: good thoughts, good speech, and good deeds.
According to this etymology, the term kustik was transformed into koshti in Modern Persian, and
was used generically to refer to the belt worn (and grabbed) by wrestlers during matches. Nowa-
days, it is used to refer to wrestling in general (Mohammad Jahani 1999, 7–9; Beizai Kashani
2003, 94–95).
The French traveler Chardin (1988, 201) described Safavid-era wrestling. He said that the
place the Iranians wrestled was called the zoorkhane (house of strength) and that the wrestlers
were called pahlavan. Therefore, his reference is to varzesh pahlavani, a martial practice that was
patronized by Safavid aristocrats. According to Chardin, the wrestlers wore a linen cloth around
their waists and hips, and leather shoes. Although oil is not used in any traditional wrestling art
in modern Iran, Chardin reported that Safavid wrestlers covered themselves with oil. Even their
leather shoes were oiled. Chardin said that oiling was done to make holding a ﬁrm grip impossi-
ble. During the wrestling match, the combatants tried to overthrow their opponent. The wrestler
who caused his opponent to land ﬂat on his stomach won the match.
The Zand dynasty ruled Iran from 1750 CE to 1794 CE, and its members patronized varzesh
pahlavani. Indeed, some of its nobility were wrestlers themselves. The Zand Dynasty was toppled
in 1794. The next ruler of Iran, Agha Mohammad Khan Qajar (1742 CE–1797 CE), did not
patronize wrestling, but subsequent Qajar rulers did.
During the Qajar era (which lasted until 1925 CE), wrestling and warrior training began to
be practiced separately rather than concurrently. This was so that athletes could devote more
time to wrestling, which was still popular, without also having to spend time learning obsolesc-
ing skills such as archery and swordsmanship (Mir’i 1970, 417–418). Nevertheless, zoorkhane
remained places of strength, endurance, and training using traditional methods, not only in
physical techniques but also in moral values and etiquette. During the past two centuries, this
combination has played a role in Iranian social and political planning, as the strongmen were
Iranian Martial Arts
73

used to defend Iran from foreign invaders (or at least, their ideas) (Jacob 1985, 16; Lebedynsky
1992, 26; Mir’i 1970, 122).
A modern zoorkhane is built around a wrestling pit. The pit is situated in the middle of the
structure. The pit has a diameter of 6 meters (about 20 feet) and a depth below ground level of
80 centimeters (about 31 inches).
Each zoorkhane has a sardam, which is the alcove where the morshed (drummer-chanter) sits,
using his drum and bells, and sings songs from the Shah-nama or poems that praise Muslim saints.
There are ranks within the zoorkhane. The highest is the morshed, the elder who runs the gym.
The next senior is the sadat, who often serves as miydandar, meaning the person who leads the
exercises in the middle of the wrestling area with the rest following him (Aghili 1999, 27, 29, 38).
In the zoorkhane, athletes use equipment that resembles the arsenal of a warrior. The ﬁrst
item is the sang, which represents a shield. It is made of two wooden planks with a handle. Each
sang measures 110 centimeters (43 inches) in length and 80 centimeters (311⁄2 inches) in width.
The thickness is about 6 centimeters (2.3 inches), and the weight is 35 to 40 kilograms (77 to
88 pounds). The practitioner places a blanket or a carpet on the ﬂoor and lies on his back. He
then takes the handles of two sang, so that each hand is holding one sang. Various exercises are
then done. One, called galtan (turning), involves turning to the left, stretching the right elbow
and arm, thereby raising the right-hand sang. This is followed by bending the elbow, turning to
the right, and stretching the left elbow and arm, raising the left-hand sang. Another exercise,
named joft (couple), involves lifting both sang simultaneously (Aghili 1999, 29, 41).
A second piece of equipment is called takhte shena. This is a wooden plank used for sword
training. Its measurements are 1 meter (39 inches) in length and 10 centimeters (3.9 inches) in
width. It comes with two triangular, wooden supports. This wooden plank is used for performing
a number of different push-ups, such as push-ups with open arms and legs, push-ups with legs
close to each other, single push-ups, push-ups done with fast movements, and push-ups in which
the athlete turns to the right and left side while pushing (Aghili 1999, 41).
A third piece is called kabbade. This is an iron or steel bow whose string is made of iron chain,
and it builds strength for archery. The kabbade is 150 centimeters (59 inches) in length and
weighs 20 kilograms (44 pounds). It has a handle in the middle. In a typical exercise, the prac-
titioner holds the handle with the right hand while the left hand holds a metal rod positioned
in the middle of the chain/string. Then, the practitioner holds the kabbade above the head and
swings it above his head to the left and right side of his body (Aghili 1999, 41).
A fourth tool is the meel. This is a wooden mace, and in the nineteenth century, Indian
wrestlers were often pictured carrying these. Thus, in Europe and the Americas, they are usually
called Indian clubs. In Iran, a meel weighs between 5 and 50 kilograms (11 to 110 pounds), but
for training purposes, the weight usually varies between 8 and 25 kilograms (17.6 to 55
pounds).To perform this exercise, each athlete holds two meel, one in each hand. Following the
rhythm of the drum and song of the morshed, he swings his meel over his shoulders. The pattern
is to turn to the left and swing the right meel, then turn to the right and swing the left meel
(Aghili 1999, 31, 42).
In Golestan (The Rose Garden, completed 1258 CE), the famed poet Sa’di (1184 CE–ca. 1283
CE) wrote that there were 360 techniques of wrestling. In Iranian culture, the numeral 360 has cos-
mological importance—it is the number of degrees in the complete circle such as the Zodiac—and
not all of these 360 techniques have been recorded in detail in Persian manuscripts.
74
Iranian Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

The fourteenth century manuscript Adab al-Harb va al-Shoja-e (The Customs of War and
Bravery) describes wrestling techniques such as getting hold of the wrist and turning the arm,
getting hold of the neck and turning it, getting hold of the legs and exercising force on them,
getting hold of the waist and exercising force, and putting one’s leg behind the opponent’s leg
and throwing him down.
The Safavid-era manuscript Masnavi Gol-e Koshti, written by Mir Nejat in verse form around
1700 CE, provides the names of 109 wrestling techniques and describes them in detail. Examples
include yan bashi (holding the opponent’s right hand with both hands and placing the right leg
behind his leg and sweeping him); pay bastan (putting the thigh on both the opponent’s legs,
placing the hand behind the opponent’s back, and turning and sweeping him); and kohar
(pulling the opponent toward oneself, crossing or getting close, and getting hold of his leg).
Some of these techniques and their corresponding names are still used in Iranian freestyle
wrestling. An example is mashk sagha, consisting of holding the opponent’s right hand with the
left hand, pulling him over his own neck, grabbing his right leg with the right hand, and then
throwing him over (Beizai Kashani 2003/1382, 115–120).
In addition to koshti pahlavani (which is practiced in pants that reach to the knee, as in Ottoman
oiled wrestling), another traditional Iranian wrestling art, performed mostly by Kurds in Khorasan,
is called koshti ba chukhe. Outwardly, this style resembles judo in that the wrestlers wear belts, wool
jackets, and trousers that reach to the knee. During ba chukhe, the wrestlers grab each other’s jackets
and try to throw each other to the ground hard. Ba chukhe’s roots lie on the battleﬁeld, so this
system does not have a ground game. Its techniques are classiﬁed as follows: (1) techniques pre-
dominantly performed with the legs; (2) techniques predominantly performed using hands and arms;
(3) techniques predominantly performed using the neck and the waist; and (4) techniques where all
parts of the body have to work together at once (Mohammad Jahani 1988, 31).
Some traditional wrestling arts of Iran allow punching and kicking. An example is koshti gil
mardi, which is native to northern Iran, and especially the province of Gilan. During this type
of wrestling, the wrestlers wear pants that reach to the ankles (Ghezel Ayaq 2000, 597). During
the match, the wrestlers execute and defend against both punches and kicks, and when they get
close, they start to grapple, using both hands. Once grappling has started, no further punching
or kicking is allowed. The wrestlers then try to throw each other down. If either wrestler loses
balance and hits the ground with his knee or hand, he loses the match. Thus, there is no ground
work in this type of wrestling. There are also certain prohibited blows. These include striking
the top of the head, gouging eyes, striking testicles or shins, striking from behind, striking dur-
ing grappling, blocking the opponent’s mouth or nose, and scratching.
Other forms of traditional wrestling in Iran include koshti zir va bala (literally, wrestling of
lower parts and upper parts), which is found in the city of Kermanshah in Kurdistan, koshti lori
and koshti jang (war wrestling) from Luristan, koshti lucho from Mazandaran, koshti sistani from
Sistan, and koshti torkamani from Khorasan.
—Manouchehr Moshtagh Khorasani
See also: Central Asian Archery;Mongolian Martial Arts; 
Ottoman Martial Arts; South Asian Martial Arts;
and Indian Wrestling (in this volume);
and Belief Systems: Iran (in Volume II).
Iranian Martial Arts
75

REFERENCES
Afshar, Iraj, editor. 1968 [AP 1347]. “Resale-ye Kamandari” [Archery Manuscript], Majjale-
ye Barrasihaye Tarikhi [Journal of Historical Research] 2(3), consecutive number 14, 75–88.
Aghili, Esfandiar. 1999 [AP 1378]. Seiri dar Varzesh Bastani va Koshti Pahlavani Iran va Lorestan [A
Survey of Varzesh Bastani and Pahlavani Wrestling in Iran and Luristan]. Khoramabad: Amirkabir.
Asadi Tusi, Hakim Abu Nasr-e Ali ben Ahmad. 1938 [AP 1317]. Garshasp-nama [The Letter of
Garshasp]. Annotated by Habib Yaghmai. Tehran: Ketabfurushi va Chapkhane Barukhim.
Beihaghi, Dorudbashi, and Nezameldin Ahmad ibn Mohammad ibn Ahmad Shojaeldin. 1975 [AP
1354]. “Jame al-Hadayat ﬁElm al-Romayat” [A Complete Guide in the Science of Shooting],
annotated by Mohammad Taghi Daneshpajuh, Farhang Iran Zamin 11, second edition.
Beizai Kashani, Hossein Parto. 2003 [AP 1382]. Tarikh-e Varzesh-e Bastani Iran: Zoorkhane [The
History of Ancient Sport of Iran: The House of Strength]. Tehran: Entesharat-e Zavvar.
Chardin, John. 1988. Travels in Persia 1673–1677. New York: Dover Publications.
Curators of the University of Missouri. 2003. “Archers’ Thumbrings,” http://anthromuseum
.missouri.edu/online/thumbring/thumbring.shtml, accessed August 1, 2009.
Falsaﬁ, Nasrollah. 1996 [AP 1375]. Zendeghani Shah Abbas [The Biography of Shah Abbas]. Tehran:
Chapkhaneye Maharat.
Faris, Nabih Amin, and Robert Potter Elmer. 1945. Arab Archery. Based on an Arabic Manuscript of
about A.D. 1500: Kitab ﬁBayan Fadl al-Qaws Wa-s-Sahm Wa-Awsaﬁhima [A Book on the Excellence
of the Bow and Arrow and the Description Thereof]. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Farrokh, Kaveh. 2005. Sassanian Elite Cavalry AD 224–642. Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing Ltd.
Farrokh, Kaveh. 2007. Shadows in the Desert: Ancient Persia at War. Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing Ltd.
Ferdowsi, Hakim Abolqasem. 1995 [AP 1384]. Shah-nama Ferdowsi (bar Asas-e Noskhe-ye Mashhur be
Chap-pe Mosko) [The Book of Kings by Ferdowsi (based on the version of the Manuscript published
in Moscow)]. Tehran: Entesharat-e Alam.
Ghezel Ayaq, Sorayya. 2000 [AP 1379]. Rahnamaye Bazihaye Iran [Guide to the Games in Iran], with
the cooperation of Shahla Eftekhari, supervised by Dr. Abbas Hori. Tehran: Daftar Pajuheshha-ye
Farhangi.
Jacob, Alain. 1985. Les Armes Blanches du Monde Islamique: Armes de Poing: Épées, Sabres, Poignards [The
Swords of the Islamic World: Hand Weapons: Swords, Sabers, and Daggers]. Paris: Jacques Grancher.
Jonnati Ata’i, Abolqasem. 1970 [AP 1349]. “Kamandari va Tirandazi dar Adabiyyat-e Farsi” [Archery
and Shooting in Persian Literature], Part 1, Majjale-ye Tarikh va Tahqiqat-e Iranshenasi: Nashriye-ye
Setad-e Bozorg-e Arteshdaran—Komite-ye Tarikh-e Nezami [Journal of Historical Research] 1(5),
consecutive number 25, April–May, 113–144.
Jonnati Ata’i, Abolqasem. 1971 [AP 1350]. “Kamandari va Tirandazi dar Adabiyyat-e Farsi” [Archery
and Shooting in Persian Literature], Part 2, Majjale-ye Barrasihaye Tarikhi [Journal of Historical
Research] 2(6), consecutive number 32, June–July, 241–276.
Kani, Mustafa. 1847. Telhîs-i Resâilü’r-rumat [Excerpts from the Writings of the Archers]. Istanbul,
translated by Joachim Hein, under the title “Bogenhandwerk und Bogensport bei den Osmanen”
[Bow Making and Archery of the Ottomans] in Der Islam (Berlin/Leipzig), 1925, 14, 289–360;
1926, 15, 233–294.
KasheﬁSabzevari, Molana Hossein Va’ez. 1971 [AP 1350]. Futuvvat-nama-ye Soltani [The Royal Book
of Spiritual Chivalry], annotated by Mohammad Ja’far Mahjub. Tehran: Entesharat-e Bonyad-e
Farhang-e Iran.
Al-Kateb al-Rajani, Faramarz ben Khodadad ben Abdollah. 2004 [AP 1383]. Samak Ayyar.
Annotated by Seyyed Ali Shahari, two volumes. Tehran: Seday-e Moasser.
Kazemini, Kazem. 1964 [AP 1343]. Naqsh-e Pahlavani Va Nehzat-e Ayyari dar Tarikh-e Ejtema’i va
Hayat-e Siyasi-ye Melat-e Iran [The Role of Pahlavanan and the Ayyari Movement in Social
History and Political Settings of Iran]. Tehran: Chapkhane-ye Bank-e Melli Iran.
Koch, Heidemarie. 2000. Es kündet Dareios der König: vom Leben im persischen Grossreich [Saith Darius
the King: Of Life in the Persian Empire], 3rd edition. Mainz: Philip von Zebern.
Latham, J. D., and W. F. Paterson. 1970. Saracen Archery: An English Version and Exposition of a
Mamluke Work on Archery (ca. A.D. 1368). London: The Holland Press.
76
Iranian Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

Lebedynsky, Iarslav. 1992. Les Armes Orientales [Oriental Weapons]. La Tour du Pin, France: Editions
du Portail.
Luijendijk, D. H. 2006. Zoorkhane: History and Techniques of the Ancient Martial Art of Iran. Boulder,
CO: Paladin Press.
Mir’i, Hasan. 1970 [AP 1349]. Ayneye Pahlavan Nama [The Mirror of Pahlavan]. Tehran: Mihan.
Mobarak Shah Fakhr-e Modabbar and Mohammad ben Mansur ben Said. 1967 [AP 1346]. Adab al-Harb va
al-Shoja-e [The Customs of War and Bravery], annotated by Ahmad Soheili Khansari. Tehran: Eghbal.
Mohammad Jahani, Ali. 1999 [AP 1377]. Koshti Kordi Ba Chukhe [The Kurdish-style Wrestling of Ba
Chukhe]. Tehran: Nashre Beh Afarin.
Moshtagh Khorasani, Manouchehr. 2006. Arms and Armor from Iran: The Bronze Age to the End of the
Qajar Period. Tübingen: Legat Verlag.
Moshtagh Khorasani, Manouchehr. 2009a. “El Combate con Armas Blancas Cortas en la Esgrima
Persa” [Combat with Short Swords in Persian Swordsmanship], Revista de Artes Marciales Asiáticas
4(2), 38–53.
Moshtagh Khorasani, Manouchehr. 2009b. “Las Técnicas de la Esgrima Persa” [The Techniques of
Persian Swordsmanship], Revista de Artes Marciales Asiáticas 4(1), 20–49.
Moshtagh Khorasani, Manouchehr. 2009c. “Persian Firearms Part One: The Matchlocks,” Classic
Arms and Militaria 16(1), 42–47.
Moshtagh Khorasani, Manouchehr. 2009d. “Persian Firearms Part Two: The Flintlock.” Classic Arms
and Militaria 16(2), 22–26.
Moshtagh Khorasani, Manouchehr. 2009e. “Persian Firearms Part Three: The Percussion Cap Lock,”
Classic Arms and Militaria 16(3), 18–23.
Mostawﬁ, Homadollah 1999 [AP 1377]. Zafar-nama be Enzemam-e Shah-nama Abolghasem Ferdowsi
[Zafar-nama together with Shah-nama of Abolqasem Ferdowsi], with an introduction by Nosratol-
lah Rastegar. Tehran: Markaz-e Nashr-e Daneshgahi.
Newman, Andrew J. 1995. Safavid Iran: Rebirth of a Persian Empire. London: I. B. Tauris.
Nicolle, David. 1996. Sassanian Armies: The Iranian Empire Early 3rd to Mid-7th Centuries AD.
Yorkshire: Montvert Publications.
Paul, F. V. 1916. “Mohammedan Arms and Armour,” Museum of Fine Arts (Boston) Bulletin 14, 19–21.
Pur Davud, Ebrahim. 1969 [AP 1347]. Zin Abzar [Armament]. Tehran: Chapkhane-ye Arteshe
Shahanshahi.
Robinson, H. Russell. 1995. Oriental Armour. Mineola, NY: Dover Publications.
Shabestari, Abbas Shabgahi, editor. 2003 [AP 1382]. Dastan-e Hossein Kord-e Shabestari [The Story of
Hossein Kord Shabestari]. Tehran: Moaseseye Entesharat-e Farhangi.
Sharp, Ralph Norman. 1964 [AP 1343]. Farmanha-ye Sˇahansaha-e Haxamanesi [The Edicts of
Achamenid, Kings of Kings]. Shiraz: Danesgah-e Adabiyat-e Danesgah-e Pahlavi Shiraz.
Wiesehöfer, Josef. 2000. Das antike Persien: von 550 v. Chr. bis 650 n. Chr. [The Ancient Persians,
from 550 BC until 650 AD]. Dusseldorf and Zurich: Artemis und Winkler Verlag.
Wilcox, Peter. 2000. Rome’s Enemies (3). Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing.
Zutterman, Christophe. 2003. “The Bow in the Ancient Near East, a Re-Evaluation of Archery from
the Late 2nd Millennium to the End of the Achamenid Period,” Iranica Antiqua 38, 119–166, DOI:
10.2143/IA.38.0.137, via http://poj.peeters-leuven.be/content.php?url=home, accessed October
16, 2009.
MONGOLIAN MARTIAL ARTS
“The three manly games” of Mongolia are wrestling, archery, and horse racing. It is important to
understand that the three “heavenly games,” as they are also called, are tied closely to the pas-
toral nomadic traditions of the Central Asian steppe. In essence, a Mongol was in constant
preparation for war, with horse and bow being tools of daily survival as well as weapons of war.
Today, as means of economic production have changed, so have the three manly games.
Mongolian Martial Arts
77

Although still revered, they have for the most part have been codiﬁed into martial sport, with
much of the original military or social application no longer practiced or obvious.
WRESTLING
Mongolian folk wrestling dates into antiquity and still holds a position of unrivaled cultural
importance.
Mongol wrestling is standing wrestling. (Although rarely practiced today, mounted wrestling
was also done in the past.) The objective is to get the opponent to touch any part of his back,
elbows, or knees to the ground. A wide variety of throws, trips, and lifts are employed to topple
the opponent, but strangles and striking are illegal. There is no groundwork. The absence of
groundwork in Mongolian wrestling is based on history. The Mongol military was entirely com-
posed of cavalry units (except in the case of conscripts); therefore a soldier on the ground would
likely be trampled by horses or killed by his opponent with a weapon.
Today, Mongolian wrestling matches are generally held outdoors on grass. There are no time
limits and no weight classes. Wrestling tournaments are held during most holidays, but the most
important tournament is held during the second week of July, during the annual Naadam (mean-
ing “competition”) festival.
Each match is supervised by two men who act as both referees and “corner men.” These men
determine the winners and prompt the individual wrestlers to action when necessary. These indi-
viduals are arbitrarily appointed to each wrestler before each match. They also direct the action
away from the spectators and other matches in progress.
There is also a panel of judges. The judges are solely spectators and are not actively involved
with individual matches. On the other hand, the judges handle the logistics of the tournament
and serve as the ﬁnal word in disputes about takedowns.
Each wrestler has a ranking that is determined by the number of rounds successively won in
each Naadam festival. A round for an individual is made up of one match, with the winner mov-
ing to the next round and the loser being eliminated from the tournament. The winner then
waits for the remainder of the matches to ﬁnish before the next round commences.
Rank can be attained only during the Naadam festival, and therefore it is not uncommon for
a wrestler to wrestle his whole career without rank, though he may be successful in other tour-
naments throughout the year. The ranks (in order from lowest to highest) are unranked, bird,
elephant, lion, and titan. The privilege of rank is that the highest-ranked wrestlers choose their
opponents in each round. In addition, after each match, the lower-ranked wrestler passes under
the right arm of the senior, win or lose.
Mongolian wrestling matches begin with each wrestler exhibiting a ritual dance of a great
bird in ﬂight. At the end of a match, the victorious wrestler engages in a more elaborate version
of the dance.
There are various opinions as to the bird being imitated. Some say the bird is a great falcon.
Others say it is an imitation of the Garuda bird from Buddhist mythology. In Inner Mongolia,
the dance is one of an eagle running before it ﬂies. Anyway, if the dance is done correctly, it is
exhibits the wrestler’s power and technique, and it also serves to loosen the muscles before the
match. While performing the dance, the wrestler is supposed to mentally focus on Tengri (sky or
heaven) for skill and blessing and gazar (earth) for stability and strength.
78
Mongolian Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

Attire is the point of most divergence between the Mongolian and Inner Mongolian ver-
sions of this wrestling style. The Mongolians wear a traditional Mongolian cap (which is
removed by the referees before each match), traditional Mongolian boots, briefs, and a short,
tight-ﬁtting top. The briefs and top were historically made of heavy cloth and silk, but today,
rip-stop nylon often replaces the silk. The top has long sleeves and comes midway down the
back. The front of the top is cut away, exposing the chest. Legend says that the increased expo-
sure of the chest and the switch to briefs in Mongolia were the result of the success of a female
wrestler who won matches while dressed as a man. If true, this happened several hundred years
ago. A rope is attached to both sides of the top and is tied around the stomach. This keeps the
top on the wrestler and is used as a grip point for the opponent.
Inner Mongolians wear a heavy leather top with metal studs, which is short-sleeved and
exposes much less of the chest. Inner Mongolians wear long, baggy pants and more ornate boots.
They do not use the cap at all, but add a necklace, called a jangga, for wrestlers of rank.
Inner Mongolian wrestling has traditions and rules different from those practiced in
Mongolia. The Inner Mongolian wrestler cannot grab an opponent’s leg with his hands. In
addition, any part of the body above the knee touching the ground signals a loss. Another major
feature change is that in certain tournaments, a circle is used as a ring boundary and a time limit
is employed.
ARCHERY
The Mongol empire owed its successes to the Mongols’ mastery of the bow and the hoof. The
image of Mongol soldiers astride their mounts raining waves of arrows down upon their enemies
is recorded in many histories throughout the Eurasian continent.
No account of Mongolian archery would be complete without ﬁrst examining the construc-
tion of the bow (num). The Mongol bow dates back at least 6,000 years and is what is today
called a recurve bow. This means that both ends of the bow curve forward away from the archer.
This feature greatly increases the power of the bow.
By about 900 BCE, Mongolians were developing versions of composite bows. Mongol
composite bows joined a wooden core to a horn belly with sinew backing. The parts were fas-
tened together with collagen-based glue made from animal skin or various ﬁsh parts. Some
composite bows had separate bone parts afﬁxed, perhaps for decorative or metaphysical
reasons.
The Mongol bow was comparatively short, measuring about 120 centimeters (48 inches)
in length. The pulls of historic Mongol bows were enormous, commonly exceeding 45 kilo-
grams (100 pounds), with some pulling in the range of 70 kilograms (160 pounds). Today,
however, few bows have pulls greater than the 25 to 30 kilograms (50 to 70 pounds). With
historic bows, extreme ranges of up to 500 meters (yards) were possible, and records of even
longer distances exist. However, effective range was probably more like 50 to 100 meters
(yards).
With a Mongol bow, a good archer could loose between six and twelve arrows per minute.
One of the advantages of a recurve bow is that after the initial pull, the bow “works with the
archer” and is easier to hold at full draw. The manner in which the Mongol bow is drawn (or in
this case pushed) is different from the way that European archers generally loosed arrows. In
Mongolian Martial Arts
79

Mongol archery, the bow is primarily pushed away from the string, rather than the string being
solely pulled away from the bow. This feature has a twofold purpose. Not only is the bow stronger
and often more ﬂexible than the string, but there is an advantage, biomechanically, to pushing
rather than pulling.
Mongolian archers often wear thumb rings made of metal, horn, bone, or ivory. The rings are
used to ease the pressure of the string on the thumb. With the thumb release (also called the
Mongolian release), the arrow is nocked above the thumb and cradled by the index ﬁnger.
In times past, Mongols practiced archery both afoot and mounted, but today, mounted
archery is rarely practiced. Though there still exist several styles of archery within Mongolia,
there has been a gradual shift toward a standardized version for competitive reasons.
Modern bows are not traditional Mongol designs. Instead, they are based on Qing Dynasty
(1644–1911) bows of Manchurian derivation. Reworked Qing bows are still sometimes seen and
used in competition. Also seen in competition are early twentieth-century Chinese bows and
bows of Siberian Buryat manufacture. Instead of wooden cores and ibex horn bellies, Chinese
bows have bamboo cores and water buffalo horn bellies and sinew layers. Today, because of the
lack of workshops in the People’s Republic, Mongolians have resumed the total production of
their bows. Bows made in Mongolia today are usually wood core with horn bellies and sinew lay-
ers made from Tien Shan ibex (Capra sibirica alaiana). The sinew is covered in birch bark, leav-
ing the horn exposed. Today, epoxy glues are sometimes used rather than traditional ﬁsh or
animal-based glues, but purists say that the traditional glues last longer. The design, however, is
almost always Qing, which is to say in the Manchurian style.
Bowstrings were historically made from horsehide or other animal skins, but today they are
often made of polyester ﬁbers instead.
Mongol archers had a wide range of arrowheads, and there are different designs and mate-
rials for war arrows, hunting arrows, target arrows, ﬁre arrows, signaling arrows, and so on.
Modern Naadam arrows are wooden, with blunt points made of antler. Fletches are made
from vulture feathers. Modern Naadam arrows are approximately 75 centimeters (about
30 inches) in length.
Targets in Naadam festivals are heavy rawhide open cylinder baskets measuring 8 centime-
ters by 8 centimeters (about 3 inches by 3 inches). These targets are stacked in various manners
on the ground, and the point of the contest is see which archer can knock over the most bas-
kets. The range is typically 60 to 80 meters (yards). Archers who are not shooting stand near the
targets and dodge arrows while singing out the results.
All archers competing in the Naadam are required to wear traditional robes, boots, and hat.
Insignia may denote ranking archers.
HORSE RACING
The central feature of traditional Mongolian society was the horse. The horse was used in every
facet of steppe life. Herding, hunting, and war all took place on horseback. This lifestyle allowed
the Mongols to perfect and practice the skills that gave them the military success that carried
them across Eurasia.
Mongols historically learned to ride as soon as they could walk. Children were even placed
on sheep to practice riding when they were still too small for horseback. Obviously, some com-
peted, and that meant horse races.
80
Mongolian Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

Mongol horses are not usually raced until about 2 years of age. The races take place over nat-
ural terrain tracks that range in distance from 15 to 35 kilometers (9 to 21 miles). The riders are
children, usually between 5 and 12 years of age. Most races allow the use of saddles, but sometimes
riders use modiﬁed saddles, or no saddles at all, as Mongols commonly did in the past.
As for the winners, both horse and rider are celebrated equally. Mongol horse breeders pay
close attention to winners, and place equal emphasis on both mare and sire when making
breeding decisions.
Prizes are given for the ﬁrst few ﬁnishers. Ceremonial songs are sung for the victorious horses.
An interesting side note is that the last-place ﬁnisher also receives a ceremonial song of encour-
agement and promise for a strong showing next year.
—Aaron Fields
See also: Central Asian Archery; 
Iranian Martial Arts; Ottoman Martial Arts;
and China: Weapons (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Beck, Salim. 1926. The Mongolian Horse. Tientsin [Tianjin]: Société Française de Librairie et d’Edi-
tion.
Erdene, G. 1992. Bairldax Or [Wrestling Masterfully]. Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.
Grousset, Rene. 1970. The Empire of the Steppes. Camden, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Jagchid, Sechin, and Paul Hyer. 1979. Mongolia’s Culture and Society. Folkestone, UK: Westview.
Keirman, Frank, and John K. Fairbank. 1974. Chinese Ways in Warfare. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Munkhtsetseg. 1999. “Mongolian National Archery.” Instinctive Archer,
Spring, via
http://www.atarn.org/mongolian/mn_nat_arch/mn_nat_arch.htm, accessed September 17, 2008.
Needham, Joseph. 1994. Science and Civilization in China. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Schafer, Edward. 1964. The Golden Peaches of Samarkand. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Sinor, Denis. 1990. The Cambridge History of Early Inner Asia. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Smith, John. 1984. “Mongol Campaign Rations: Milk, Marmots, and Blood?” Journal of Turkish Stud-
ies 8, 223–229.
Vernam, Glen. 1972. Man on Horseback. New York: Harper and Row.
OTTOMAN MARTIAL ARTS
Tradition dates the founding of the Ottoman Empire to 1299 CE. The name honors its founder,
a Turkic emir called Osman Bey (1258–1326).
Over the next several centuries, Ottoman armies overran the Byzantines, occupied
Mesopotamia, Syria, Egypt, Arabia, and coastal North Africa, and beat on the gates of Vienna.
The Ottoman zenith was between 1453, when the Ottomans captured the Byzantine capital of
Constantinople, and 1571, when a European alliance ﬁnally checked Ottoman expansion in
the eastern Mediterranean. During those years, the Ottoman Empire was fabulously wealthy,
due to its control over the entire western end of the old Silk Road. However, during the
Ottoman Martial Arts
81

ﬁfteenth century, the Portuguese learned how to sail to Asia directly, and during the sixteenth
century, many European countries established colonies in Africa, Asia, and the Americas. The
new sea routes and colonies drove the Silk Road into decline, and with it the Ottoman
economy. The ﬁnal collapse of the Ottoman Empire occurred during 1922–1923, in the after-
math of World War I (1914–1918). Nonetheless, to this day, the mental map most people have
of the Middle East coincides almost exactly with regions that were once part of the Ottoman
Empire.
As one would expect from one of world’s great empires, Ottoman literature and history is
replete with stories of archers, swordsmen, and wrestlers. The ﬁrst section discusses Ottoman
archery. The next section discusses another Ottoman tradition, namely oiled wrestling.
OTTOMAN ARCHERY
The Ottomans distinguished between cavalrymen from Europe and cavalrymen from Central
Asia. The latter, known as sipahi, were essentially Ottoman knights. They were recruited from
the sons of landowners, and they had to be able to show blood relationship to ethnic Turks of
appropriate lineages. Sipahi tactics and weapons were essentially Central Asian. Armor con-
sisted of mail coats, shields, and conical helmets. Weapons included swords, lances, and bows.
Byzantine sources made mention of Central Asian archers carrying as many as a hundred arrows
in their quivers, their bow cases, and even their boots. Writing in awe of the range, speed, and
power of these archers, Western chroniclers of the Crusades reported uninterrupted three-hour
arrow showers.
During the early period of Ottoman expansion, women as well as men sometimes trained in
archery. The Suﬁtradition of female warrior order known as Baciyan-i rum carried on this pre-
Islamic practice, and as late as the 1430s, the Burgundian pilgrim Bertrandon de la Brocquière
(ca. 1400–1459) met an aristocratic Turkmen woman who was an archer. There were of course
many more male archers, to include some who were members of the Suﬁorders known as Ahiyan-
i rum and Abdal-i rum.
Ottoman ofﬁcers often carried bows as badges of rank. From 1683–1698, the armies of
Austria, Poland, Venice, and Muscovy fought the Ottomans throughout Eastern Europe, and
booty secured during that war by Margrave Ludwig Wilhelm of Baden (1655–1707) includes an
outstanding collection of Ottoman war bows and associated paraphernalia. This collection of
war trophies is now part of the collection of the Badisches Landesmuseum Karlsruhe. War bows
in the Karlsruhe collection are beautifully decorated and embellished with verses from Persian
poetry that extol religious discipline, courage, and honor.
Into the early eighteenth century, the Sultan’s bodyguards, the solak troops, continued to be
armed with bows and swords. Until the end of the eighteenth century, Crimean Tartars, allies of
the Ottomans whose troops were part of the Ottoman army, kept their bows in use, and Turkic
peoples living in the Caucasus and on the shore of the Black Sea continued the horse archery
tradition into the nineteenth century.
The provisions Ottoman rulers made for disciplined training underscores the importance
they placed on archery. Tradition traced the practice of archery back to the Prophet Muhammad
(ca. 570–632 CE), and as an activity of both martial and religious signiﬁcance, archery was care-
fully regulated. The ﬁfteenth century saw the creation of permanent archery grounds in Ottoman
82
Ottoman Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

urban centers. These were known as ok meydanı (literally “ﬁeld of the arrow”). The earliest were
built in Edirne and Bursa, but during the 1450s, Sultan Mehmet II (1432–1481) established an
Ok Meydanı in Istanbul (the former Constantinople) almost immediately after his conquest of
the city in 1453. In addition to the ranges, other installations at the archery grounds included
tekke-i rumât (the guild hall), a mosque, and an open-air praying terrace, the namazgâh.
Archery grounds were used for both training and ﬂight shooting. In ﬂight shooting, archers
competed to see whose arrows ﬂew the longest distance. Ranges corresponding to the directions
of the prevailing winds were laid out at the different archery grounds under the authorization of
range masters (s¸eyhül-meydan). Over the centuries, there is documentation of at least ﬁfty differ-
ent archery ranges.
Archery guilds were closed societies whose regimens governed all aspects of the behavior
and decorum of their members. A novice undertook years of rigorous physical, mental, and
spiritual training under the guidance of the guild master, a man whose knowledge, religious
discipline, and skills qualiﬁed him for that status. The novice was considered proﬁcient only
after achieving a documented shot, either at 900 gez (594 meters/1,948 feet) with a pis¸rev
arrow, or at 800 gez (528 meters/1,732 feet) with an azmayis¸ arrow. Arrows were categorized
into different types, varying by length, materials, and purpose. Both pis¸rev and azmayis¸ arrows
were barreled-tapered ﬂight arrows; the pis¸rev had an ivory bullet-like point and shorter
ﬂetches, while the azmayis¸ had a metal point and longer, low-proﬁle ﬂetches. Ottoman tradi-
tion likewise classiﬁed their highly sophisticated horn–wood–sinew composite bows accord-
ing to usage and design.
Following his documented successful shot, the novice was admitted into the guild in a cere-
monial transmission of tradition (icâzet). This ritual was similar to rituals found in other tradi-
tional arts. The archery ritual involved the presentation of a bow to the graduate, a rite that
literally as well as symbolically conferred the acolyte’s qualiﬁcation to hold a bow.
Competitions were highly ceremonial occasions. Meticulous records were kept at each site.
When an archer set a record, a stone monument was erected where the arrow landed. Called
menzil (“shooting lane”) stones, many are monumental in size, especially the ones erected in the
memory of a record shot by a sultan or highly ranked bureaucrat. Poetic verses incised in the
ﬁnest calligraphy memorialized these feats, recording the archer’s name, the distance, and
the date. Listings of these records, over three hundred in all, are found in the seventeenth-
century Kâtib Abdullah Effendi’s archery treatise. Shooting spots were ordinarily marked with
smaller stones called foot stones (ayak tas¸ı); when the shooting lane was ﬁrst opened by a sultan,
the foot stones are larger and more commemorative.
Ottoman archery training included target shooting. One form involved shooting large,
pear-shaped leather targets (puta) set at distances from 165 to 250 meters (541 to 820 feet),
distances believed to be optimal in warfare. At closer distances, similar training was done
using hand-held targets, other stationary targets, or large baskets. Another war-related prac-
tice, darb (piercing), used small bell-like objects or metal plates as targets. This simulated
armor piercing.
Mounted archery took place at special grounds. Equestrian events included kabak, a compe-
tition in which a gourd (the kabak) or another target was erected at the top of a tall column.
Simulating the Parthian shot, the archer approached at full speed, rode past the column, and
then, rotating his upper body, turned back to aim upwards at the target.
Ottoman Martial Arts
83

Ottoman archery had roots in hunting as well as military activities. Kabak shooting, for
example, may be related to shooting at ﬂying birds. For hunting, archery continued to be popu-
lar for centuries after ﬁrearms replaced bows as weapons of war.
Toward the end of the eighteenth century, archery began falling out of practice, but dur-
ing the early nineteenth century the patronage of Sultan Mahmud II (1785–1839; ruled
1808–1839) revived interest. A toxophile, the Sultan apprenticed in an archer’s guild and
refurbished Istanbul’s Ok Meydanı, and in 1835 he set the record of 810.48 meters (2,659
feet, 0.66 inches), a distance unsurpassed with traditional archery tackle. That same year, the
Sultan issued a decree to Mustafa Kani to document Ottoman archery traditions, and the
resulting treatise, published in 1847, preserved a wealth of knowledge that otherwise might
have been lost.
Events of the twentieth century contributed to Ottoman archery’s decline as a sport. Dur-
ing World War I, some archery grounds were converted into military bases, and after the war,
the Ottoman government was overthrown. In 1925, the successor Republic of Turkey banned
Suﬁpractices, and this effectively closed the archery guilds. As part of his push for modern-
ization, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk (1881–1938), the ﬁrst president of the Republic of Turkey,
preferred archery clubs modeled after Western sports organizations. The ﬁrst, Okspor, opened
in 1937, but it closed in 1939, one year after Atatürk’s death. Archery based on the regula-
tions and equipment speciﬁed by the International Archery Federation (FITA, Federation
Interationale de Tir a L’Arc, established 1931) became standard during the 1950s, and for the
next 40 years, museum pieces seemed all that was left of Ottoman archery. Then, during the
early twenty-ﬁrst century, there was a new wave of interest, and today, a transnational move-
ment studying earlier archery traditions and the reproduction of the complex horn composite
bows is revitalizing Turkish archery. Turkish archers now represent Ottoman traditions at
international gatherings, and international bowyers are now recreating ﬂight bows and ﬁne
examples of Ottoman bows.
—Kay Koppedrayer
See also: Central Asian Archery; Iranian Martial Arts;
and Mongolian Martial Arts (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Effendi, Kâtib Abdullah, and Mustafa Kani. 2005/1847. Sacred Archery: The Forty Prophetic Traditions
(Telhîs-i Resâilü’r-rumat), translated by Radhia Shukrullah. Somerset: Himma Press.
Kani, Mustafa. 1847. Telhîs-i Resâilü’r-rumat [Excerpts from the Writings of the Archers]. Istanbul,
translated by Joachim Hein, under the title “Bogenhandwerk und Bogensport bei den Osmanen”
[Bow Making and Archery of the Ottomans] in Der Islam (Berlin/Leipzig), 1925, 14, 289–360;
1926, 15, 233–294.
Karpowicz, Adam. 2006. “Ottoman Bows in the Topkapi Palace Collection,” Journal of Archer-
Antiquaries 49, 44–49.
Karpowicz, Adam. 2009. Ottoman Turkish Bows, Manufacture & Design. New Brunswick, Canada:
Self-published.
Klopsteg, Paul. 1987 (reprint of 1934 edition). Turkish Archery and the Composite Bow. Manchester,
UK: Simon Archery Foundation (The Manchester Museum).
Özveri, Murat. 2009. “Turkish Traditional Archery: Part I,” Turkish Cultural Foundation,
http://www.turkishculture.org/pages.php?ChildID=170&ParentID=15&ID=71&ChildID1
=748&miMore=1, accessed July 23, 2009.
84
Ottoman Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

Petrasch, Ernest, et al. 1991. Die Karlsruhe Turkenbeute [The Karlsruhe Turkish Bows]. Munich: Badis-
che Landesmuseum.
Yücel, Unsal. 1997. “Archery in the Period of Sultan Mahmud II,” translated by Edward McEwan.
Journal of the Society of Archer-Antiquaries
40, 68–80, via http://www.bhaa.org
.uk/new/Archery% 20in%20the%20Period%20of%20Sultan%20Mahmud.doc, accessed July
26, 2009.
OTTOMAN OILED WRESTLING
Although there are many different wrestling styles associated with the cultures and ethnic groups
that were once part of the Ottoman Empire, the system best known today is oiled wrestling (yagˇlı
güres¸).
The practice of slathering the wrestlers in olive oil is probably Byzantine or Iranian in origin.
The purpose of the oil is to force wrestlers to learn to rely on patience and balance rather than
size and strength.
The techniques of oiled wrestling are Central Asian, and a similar non-oiled style known as
karakucak (“dark embrace”) is still practiced in tribal communities in Turkey. Drums, horns, and
wrestling go together in Turkic tribal communities, especially as part of wedding ceremonies and
religious feasts.
Oiled wrestlers wear distinctive leather pants (kisbet). These pants have leather strings at
waist and knees. The pants give the wrestlers something to grip, while the strings symbolize
moral ideas: “a morally immaculate and virtuous behaviour is achieved through carefully knot-
ting the trouser-cord” (Frembgen 2004, 56).
During tournaments and wedding ceremonies, women and girls watch oiled wrestling. To
maintain propriety, the areas from which females viewers watch the bouts are physically sepa-
rated from the areas where males congregate.
In oiled wrestling, there were (and are) junior, youth, and adult divisions, and in the adult
ranks, there were (and are) separate divisions for recognized champions, journeyman wrestlers,
and novices.
There are referees, and the rules include wrestling’s usual prohibitions—no eye-gouging, no
grasping the genitals, and so on. Since there are no weight divisions, top-ranked adult champi-
ons (bas¸ pehlivan) are invariably large, powerful men. At national levels, there has been testing
for steroids since the late 1990s.
Until recently, draws were not allowed, and if a match was not over by nightfall, then it sim-
ply started over again next morning. Because that traditional pace does not meet with the desires
of modern audiences, time limits were introduced in 1975.
Today, the wrestling season extends from late March to early November, and in between,
there are hundreds of local, regional, and national tournaments. Only a few men make a full-
time living from their wrestling; the rest have day jobs. Historically, wrestling was not much
different—contests took place on saints’ days, at festivals such as the Christian Great Lent or
the Islamic Ramazan, and at weddings. The rest of the time, men worked.
Each Ottoman community had its own wrestling champion. A rich man or a committee associ-
ated with the local church or mosque provided the champion with room and board in return for
training the community’s wrestlers. Toward acquiring divine protection for the health and safety of
the wrestlers, this training usually took place on property owned by a church, mosque, or Suﬁorder.
Ottoman Oiled Wrestling
85

The Turkish word for the place in which wrestling takes place is tekke, which is the same word used
to describe a Suﬁlodge. Tournaments started with prayers and invocations, and wrestlers sometimes
wore protective amulets that contained quotes from the Bible or Koran, as appropriate.
At the local level, contests took place on feast days and at weddings. Local matches were
done mostly for status within the community. A youth who did not wrestle was unlikely to be
respected by his peers or to marry well.
Winners at local tournaments could participate in regional tournaments. Regional tourna-
ments were associated with both trade fairs and religious holidays. Organizing the wrestling tour-
nament and providing prizes was the responsibility of the people sponsoring the trade fair or
religious celebration. The grand prize at a regional tournament was typically a ram or an ox,
meaning an animal that could be shared with the village via a feast. However, for the wrestlers,
the real reward was the travel itself—if the young men did not travel to these district tourna-
ments, then they might never see the country.
Rich men scouted the regional tournaments and hired champions to be their village or per-
sonal champions. If a wrestler was hired as a village or personal champion, his reward became
room, board, and a small stipend.
Rich men sometimes sent their champions to participate in an annual national-level tour-
nament called Kirkpınar. The Kirkpınar tournament dates to the fourteenth century. According
to tradition, two early Ottoman soldiers, brothers named Ali and Selim, wrestled day and night
(the latter by lantern light) to see who was best. Eventually they died of exhaustion without any
winner being determined. This led their pasha, the son of the ﬁrst Ottoman sultan, to establish
an imperial wrestling tournament in their memory. This Ottoman tournament was called
Kirkpınar (“Forty Springs”) because of the many springs in the area where the brothers were
buried. The Kirkpınar tournament has been held at Edirne, Turkey, since 1924. The exact geo-
graphical location of the original Kirkpınar tournament is not known, but it was probably inside
modern Greece.
In Ottoman times, ﬁrst place at a wrestling tournament was usually reserved for the wrestler
representing the tournament’s patron. The competition was therefore to see who would take sec-
ond. Thus, the sultan’s chief wrestler was never beaten at Kirkpınar. He might be told to retire
before the tournament, but he was not beaten there. However, this is not to say that no one ever
beat a local governor’s champion, especially during times of unrest. Thus, there are stories in
Thrace (the European portion of the Ottoman Empire) about Christian wrestlers sparking sec-
tarian violence by defeating a local Ottoman garrison commander’s chief wrestler, just as there
are stories in Central Asia about Muslim wrestlers sparking sectarian violence by defeating a
Russian garrison commander’s chief wrestler.
Much changed in oiled wrestling following the establishment of the Republic of Turkey in
1923. The new president, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, did not have a stable of wrestlers, and more
importantly, he viewed Ottoman practices as being out-of-step with modern times. Conse-
quently, from 1923 to the present, Kirkpınar has been a straightforward sporting contest. Today,
no matter who sponsors them, few wrestlers win Kirkpınar more than once.
In 1925, the Republic of Turkey abolished the Suﬁorders that traditionally provided wrestlers
with space in which to train. With that, oiled wrestling became essentially secular.
Urbanization led to additional changes. Into the 1960s, rural landowners (agˇa) continued to
sponsor village tournaments, but by the 1980s, most landowners had moved to the city. This left
86
Ottoman Oiled Wrestling
www.ebook3000.com

municipal governments to become the chief patrons of oiled wrestling tournaments. Meanwhile,
rural youth poured into Turkey’s cities, and in urban settings, traditional wrestling, of any kind,
has a hard time competing with soccer.
Recently, globalization has begun affecting oiled wrestling. In 1997, Turks living in Holland
began staging oiled wrestling tournaments in Amsterdam. Although the Dutch event was a
success, European wrestlers without Turkish or dual citizenship have had problems getting
permission to enter tournaments in Turkey, and this has led to the establishment of unafﬁliated
oiled wrestling organizations elsewhere in Europe.
—Joseph Svinth
See also: Iranian Martial Arts; Mongolian Martial Arts;
Indian Wrestling (in this volume); Globalization of Martial Arts;
and International Freestyle and Greco-Roman Wrestling (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Frembgen, Jürgen Wasim. 2004. “Tying and Untying the Trouser-Cord: Dimensions of Normativity,
Morality, and Emotion in Pakistani Body Behaviour,” Asia Paciﬁc Journal of Anthropology 5(1)
April, 49–70, DOI: 10.1080/1444221042000201698, via http://www.ingentaconnect.com/,
accessed October 16, 2009.
Goulimaris, Dimirios, Vasileios Serbezis, and Evangelos Albandis. 2008. “Organization of Folk Ath-
letic Games in Thrace,” Folklore: Electronic Journal of Folklore 40, 87–100, http://www
.folklore.ee/folklore/vol40/thrace.pdf, accessed June 28, 2009.
Hershiser, Carl Mehmet. 1998. “Blood Honor and Money: Turkish Oiled Wrestling and the
Commodiﬁcation of Traditional Culture.” Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Texas at
Austin.
Ottoman Oiled Wrestling
87

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

East Asia
East Asia includes China, Korea, Japan, Taiwan, Mongolia, and the Russian Far East. Although
the northern and western portions of East Asia are made up of tundra, steppe, and desert, the
southern portions include some of the most fertile regions on the planet. Almost a quarter of the
world’s population lives in East Asia, and the region’s direct cultural inﬂuence extends into
Central Asia, Southeast Asia, and Oceania.
Religions and philosophical systems closely associated with East Asia include Buddhism,
Confucianism, Shintoism, and Taoism, but shamanism, Islam, and Christianity are also well
represented.
Most of the ﬁghting methods that are popularly described in English as “martial arts” origi-
nated in areas directly inﬂuenced by East Asian culture, and the modern English phrase “martial
arts” is a literal translation of the Japanese bugei and the Chinese wushu.
CHINA: BOXING STYLES
China is a vast country with a complicated topography. Its population includes both the Han
majority culture and dozens of minority cultures. In this environment, people used martial arts
for a variety of reasons—community or personal defense, festival arts, moving meditations. All
these aspects are reﬂected in contemporary descriptions of martial art activities in both Kaifeng
and Hangzhou, capitals of the Northern and Southern Song dynasties respectively (960–1279),
and continue to this day.
Thus, the outstanding characteristic of the Chinese martial arts is the incredible prolifera-
tion of styles. At least 42 styles are named in Ming-period (1368–1644) writings. In 1993, the
ofﬁcially sponsored Chinese Martial Arts Boxing and Weapons List (Zhongguo Wushu Quanxie Lu)
recognized 71 styles, while an independent work published in 2006 listed 180 different styles.
As a rule, Chinese styles were named for animals (e.g., monkey, eagle, and Mandarin Duck
Foot); geography (e.g., northern, southern, and western); historical or literary ﬁgures (e.g., the
ﬁrst Song Emperor and Zhang Fei of Three Kingdoms fame); individual practitioners (e.g., Chen
Family taijiquan); symbolic images (e.g., Boy Prays to Guanyin Spirit); or techniques (e.g., short
hitting and long ﬁst). Unfortunately, such names do not always accurately describe the supposed
unique characteristics of those systems.
Regardless of what one calls an art, there is always the depth of knowledge and talent of the
practitioner, plus the blending and mixture of other systems the practitioner might know or see.
Examples of this blending include taijiquan (tai chi chuan), many of whose original Chen-style
forms appear to owe their origin to the Thirty-Two Forms promulgated by Qi Jiguang

90
China: Boxing Styles
(1528–1588). There is also overlap. For instance, many techniques shown in Michuan Duanda
Fa (Secretly Transmitted Short Hitting Methods) in Wubei Xinshu (New Book of Military
Preparedness) (1630) are actually grappling methods.
In terms of documentation, most Chinese martial styles have little documentary evidence on
which to pin down their claims. This does not mean that they were invented out of thin air.
Instead, it simply means that the arts have folk origins. Consequently, many unveriﬁable claims
have been made.
One example involves a Shaolin monastery in Fujian Province. During the nineteenth cen-
tury, Heaven and Earth Society documents referred to a southern Shaolin monastery in Fujian
Province from whence so-called southern Shaolin martial arts styles such as Hong Quan report-
edly originated. Although this assertion has been repeated many times, and claimants from three
locations (Quanzhou, Putian, and Fuxing) have each made a case for their location, none of the
claimants has been able to provide much evidence to support their claims.
A similar example involves a northern Shaolin monastery that was formerly located on
Mount Pan, near Jizhou, north of Tianjin. This Shaolin “branch” monastery was built with the
permission of China’s Mongol rulers (1279–1368), who had a good relationship with Fu Yu
(1203–1275), the chief abbot at the Songshan Shaolin monastery in Henan province. Fu Yu
received permission to build a total of ﬁve “branch” Shaolin monasteries, but only the Pan Shan
monastery was actually built. In recent years, efforts have been made to show that the Pan Shan
monastery supported martial arts practices from its inception. Again, these arguments are not
convincing. For one thing, the Mongols placed strict prohibitions on Han Chinese martial arts
practices, and for another, there is no signiﬁcant documented history of martial arts practices at
the Pan Shan monastery, as there are for Songshan. Nonetheless, concerted efforts were made to
try and reconstruct the Pan Shan Shaolin monastery in time for the 2008 Olympics.
Another aspect of the Shaolin story subject to misperception is the impression that martial
arts called “Shaolin staff,” “Shaolin boxing,” etc., were actually developed at a Shaolin Temple.
After the Songsan Shaolin monastery gained fame as a result of some of its monks participating
in mid-sixteenth-century operations against Japanese pirates, itinerant martial artists seeking to
earn a living began claiming close association with the monastery. Recruiters for organizations
such as the Heaven and Earth Society also used stories about Shaolin prowess to recruit mem-
bers. And, of course, playwrights and novelists created stories. This makes it difﬁcult to conﬁrm
whether any speciﬁc style originated at any speciﬁc location, let alone at Songshan Shaolin
monastery in Henan.
As for the Wudang (i.e., the so-called Taoist) styles, this attribution is almost certainly liter-
ary. In 1669, Huang Zongxi (1610–1695) wrote Epitaph for Wang Zhengnan, and in his text,
Huang claimed that Wang’s Internal School boxing, which was reportedly developed by a Taoist
hermit named Zhang Sanfeng, could easily defeat External School (e.g., Shaolin) boxing.
Considering the political circumstances during which Huang wrote, his text was almost certainly
intended to be an anti-Manchu allegory rather than a literal discourse on martial art technique.
Nonetheless, his statement was subsequently taken at face value by martial artists.
Understanding all this is important. For example, many people view taijiquan as the quin-
tessential example of the Internal School. Yet, according to the story of the Maiden of Yue
(ca. 100 CE), all forms of hand combat are based on the interaction of Yin and Yang. Even the
Sword Classic, written around 1562 by the Ming general Yu Dayou (1503–1579), describes
www.ebook3000.com

interactions using examples of hard force and pliant/soft force. Thus, taijiquan is not unique,
merely in accordance with generally accepted Chinese martial arts principles. Helping to con-
ﬁrm the artiﬁciality of this inner/outer dichotomy is the fact that most proponents of taijiquan,
baguazhang, and xingyiquan did not declare their styles to be Internal School martial arts until
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Similarly, after one becomes familiar with Boxing Classic: Essentials of Boxing (1784), the
main extant boxing manual believed to have been written (or at least used) by a monk at
Shaolin Monastery, it becomes clear that it is a mistake to view Shaolin martial arts as belong-
ing to a so-called External School. Shaolin arts are governed by the same principles as other
Chinese martial arts, not some arbitrary External School construct.
Because their basic theories are the same, it is therefore inadequate to categorize Chinese
bare-hand martial arts schools into the categories of Internal and External. Consequently, a more
useful typology involves describing styles based on their fundamental techniques. Arranged thus,
one has: Long Fist (e.g., Tongbi Boxing); Short Hitting (e.g., xingyiquan and some forms of
Southern Boxing, such as Wing Chun [Yong Chun] and White Crane); Long Fist–Short Hitting
(e.g., a composite of both Long Fist and Short Hitting; examples include Qi Jiguang’s Thirty-Two
Forms and, by extension, taijiquan); leg maneuvering styles, such as Chuojiao (Stabbing Foot)
and Tantui (Spring Legs); and grappling, as a way of describing boxing systems such as
baguazhang that incorporate seizing and throws.
—Stanley E. Henning
See also: China: Martial Arts; China: Martial Arts in Hong Kong; China: Martial Arts in Taiwan;
China: Martial Theories; China: Martial Women; China: Shaolin Temple Legends; China: Weapons;
China: Wrestling; Kuntao (in this volume); Belief Systems: China; Chinese Martial Arts and Money;
Taiwanese Street Performances; and Secret Societies and Fraternal Organizations (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Chen Bingcai, editor. 1984/ca. 1589. Zhen Ji Zhu Shi [Battle Record Annotated]. Beijing: Junshi
Kexue Chubanshe.
Cheng Zongyou. 1982/ca. 1621. Shaolin Gunfa Chanzong [Elucidation of Shaolin Staff Methods]. In
Shaolinsi Ziliao Ji [Collection of Shaolin Monastery Materials: Continuation], edited by Wu Gu.
Beijing: Shumu Wenxian Chubanshe.
Han Xue. 2006. Zhongzhou Wushu Wenhua Yanjiu (Zhongzhou [Henan] Wushu Culture Research].
Beijing: Renmin Tiyu Chubanshe.
Huang Zongxi. 1935/1669. Nanlei Wending [Nanlei’s Deﬁnitive Works]. Shanghai: Zhonghua Shuju,
qianji 8, 5.
Li Ji [Record of Rites]. 1927/ca. 200 BCE. Shanghai: Zhonghua Shuju, juan 6, 16a.
Liu Shuangsong. 1612. Xin Ban Zengbu Tianxia Bianyong Wenlin Miaojin Wanbao Quanshu [New,
Revised, Easy to Use. Complete Book of Miscellany], Songlin Anzhengtang Liu Shuangsong
Engraved Edition. Harvard-Yenching Library, juan 13, 4a–9a.
Meng Yuanlao et al. 1962/ca. 960–1279. Dongjing Menghua Lu: Wai Sizhong [Dreams of the Eastern
Capital, and Four Others]. Shanghai: Zhonghua Shuju.
Qi Jiguang. 1988/ca.1562. Jixiao Xinshu [New Book of Effective Discipline], edited by Ma Mingda.
Beijing: Renmin Tiyu Chubanshe.
Shi Nai’an. 1970. Shuihu Zhuan [Water Margin]. Taipei: Sanmin Shuju.
Tang Shunzhi. 1973/ca. 1618. Wu Bian [Martial Compendium], Qinding Suku Quanshu, Volumes
133–135. Taipei: Taiwan Shangwu.
China: Boxing Styles
91

Wang Guangxi. 2006. Zhongguo Gongfu [Chinese Great Skill (in Martial Arts)]. Shenzhen: Haitian
Chubanshe.
Xie Sanbin, editor. 1630. Wubei Xinshu [New Book of Military Preparedness], Shouzu Pian Zengbu
[Hand and Foot (e.g., bare-hand ﬁghting) Section Additions]. Tokyo Metropolitan Central
Library, Ichimura Collection, juan 5, 15a–28b.
Yu Dayou. ca. 1561. Jian Jing [Sword Classic], in Qi Jiguang, op. cit., juan 12, 250–280.
Zeng Zhaosheng et al. 1983. Nan Quan [Southern Boxing]. Guangdong: Guangdong Renmin
Chubanshe.
Zhang Kongzhao, Cao Huandou, and Xu Qiude. 2000/ca. 1784. Quanjing Quanfa Beiyao [Boxing
Classic: Essentials of Boxing]. Miaoyuan Congshu, Taipei: Academia Sinica, Fu Sinian Library.
Zheng Ruozeng. 1971/ca. 1568. Jiangnan Jinglue [Strategic Situation in Jiangnan]. In Qindiang Siku
Quanshu, Volumes 179–181, juan 8, shang 3b–4a.Taipei: Taiwan Shangwu.
Zhongguo Wushu Quanxie Lu Editorial Board, editors. 1993. Zhongguo Wushu Quanxie Lu [Chinese
Martial Arts Boxing and Weapons List]. Beijing: Renmin Tiyu Chubanshe.
CHINA: MARTIAL ARTS
Over time, different terms have been used to describe Chinese martial arts, which are now
known as wushu. The term jiangwu or “teach military matters” was a comprehensive concept
comprising training in general and martial arts in particular. In the State of Zhou
(475–221 BCE), this military training took place during the fall and winter, while farming
occupied the other three seasons.
From early times the martial arts emphasized weapons skills. The Book of Rites (Li Ji, parts of
which may be as early as the tenth century BCE) lists ﬁve weapons (wurong):
1.
Bow and arrow
2.
Gong shi (the spiked spear used in chariot combat)
3.
Spear
4.
Dagger-ax (ge)
5.
Halberd (ji)
Spear ﬁghting was practiced in the fall, and archery (she), charioteering (yu), and wrestling
(jueli) were practiced in the winter. Wrestling was the earliest form of weaponless combat. In the
section on music, Book of Rites further describes martial dances with shield and ax and choreo-
graphed halberd and spear movements–early examples of combining ritual with martial tech-
niques into routines commonly known in modern parlance as taolu (forms).
The ancient Chinese aristocracy doubled as priests. Religion and governance converged, and
there were rites to support military as well as peacetime activities. Thus, these concepts were
adopted by the followers of Confucius (Kong Zi, 551–479 BCE), whose philosophy, according to
the Record of History (Shi Ji), emphasized that “where there are civil matters there must [also] be
military preparedness.”
Rites of Zhou (Zhouli, second century BCE) listed the military skills of archery (she) and
charioteering (yu), along with music (yue), writing (shu), calculation (shu), and rites (li), as com-
prising the Six Arts (Liu Yi) for educating leaders in civil-military affairs.
Incidents described in early writings such as the Spring and Autumn Annals (Chun Qiu, after
481 BCE), Commentary of Zuo (Zuo Zhuan, after 468 BCE), and Gongyang and Guliang
92
China: Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

Commentaries (Gongyang Zhuan and Guliang Zhuan, second century BCE) indicate that a form of
bare-hand combat, similar to what is now known as Chinese boxing, with its kicks, punches,
seizing, and throws, already existed, possibly as early as the Shang period (sixteenth–eleventh
centuries BCE). Various terms were used. For example, the term jiji, meaning “attack” or “skilled
striking,” was used in reference to the troops of the State of Qi (who occupied much of the pres-
ent Shandong province between 480 and 221 BCE). Some have claimed that this term refers to
boxing. As a minimum, it refers to individual hand-to-hand combat, both barehanded and with
weapons, which were the conditions under which Chinese boxing actually developed. The term
shoubo (empty-handed striking/seizing) was apparently ﬁnally selected during the Former Han
period (206 BCE–8 CE), and the Book of Han (Han Shu, completed 111 CE) lists a six-chapter
boxing manual (Shoubo Liupian) under the category “military skills” (bing jiqiao).
The entries on archery, straight sword, boxing, and football (more like soccer, which required
considerable agility as well as endurance) in the Han histories reveal that manuals were written
on important martial arts and related skills, although those extant date back no earlier than the
Ming (ca. sixteenth century). Boxing/grappling was the basic skill that supplemented training in
weapons and certain boxing-related techniques were used on horseback as well as on foot (espe-
cially weapons-seizing techniques). For example, General Deng Zhan of Wei (ﬂourished
220–226 CE) was known for his skill with the “ﬁve weapons” and his ability to take on armed
opponents empty-handed. During a campaign in 582 CE, Sui troops, outnumbered and their
“ﬁve weapons” depleted, successfully fought off a Tujue (Turkic tribal) force with their bare ﬁsts
with such ferocity that “the bones in their hands were visible.” General Weichi Jingde (ca.
627–649) of Tang could ride into an opposing army, dodge the enemy’s lance thrusts, seize an
enemy lance, and use it against the enemy.
When the military examination system was established in 702 CE, the martial arts empha-
sized for leaders were lance and spear from horseback, and archery from horseback and on foot.
There was a test of strength as well that consisted of lifting a large city gate log bolt ten times
(based on a story that Confucius had displayed great strength by singularly lifting and placing
just such a bolt), and carrying a weight equal to ﬁve bushels of rice a distance of twenty paces.
(A bushel of rice was a variable weight, but using the modern weight of 20 kilograms per bushel
of unhusked rice, that would be about 220 pounds). Common soldiers were categorized based on
their skills with archery, dagger-axe, spear, sword, and halberd and their daring in hand-to-hand
combat. As the Tang period military treatise, Classic of the Planet of War (Taibai Yin Jing, ca. 759
CE), reveals, a premium was placed on strength and endurance, and elite troops were rewarded
variously for maintaining a high degree of physical ﬁtness through distance running, swimming,
and weight lifting, as well as their knowledge of tactics and ability to overcome obstacles, inﬁl-
trate enemy forces, spy on them, and take prisoners.
During the Song period (960–1279), emphasis on military studies was added with the estab-
lishment of a military academy in 1042. Ironically, it was during the same period that civilian
supremacy over the military became the standard. This perhaps reinforced perceptions of elite
Chinese slighting of military affairs, including martial arts. From the Song period to the twenti-
eth century, the Chinese martial arts have been primarily called wuyi, which translates directly
into “martial arts” in English, and reﬂects skills associated with the “profession of arms” in Chi-
nese. Interestingly, use of the term wuyi, whether or not intentional, placed the martial arts in
the same category as the Confucian Six Arts, at least linguistically.
China: Martial Arts
93

Song-period literature provides a peek at martial arts activities in and around the Southern
Song capital, Hangzhou (1127–1279). The military forces scheduled training exercises every
spring and autumn at designated locations, where, amid the crash of cymbals and beating of
drums, they practiced combat formations and held archery competitions, polo matches, and
martial arts demonstrations such as spear and sword ﬁghting. Associations were organized
among the citizenry by those interested in wrestling, archery, staff ﬁghting, football, polo, and
nonmartial activities. Outdoor entertainment at certain locations in the city included wrestling
matches (both men’s and women’s), martial arts demonstrations, acrobatics, and other activi-
ties. Some of these activities (considered folk entertainment, not religious activities) could still
be seen at temple festivals (combination county fair and swap meet) and other festive occasions
well into the twentieth century. It was also during the Song period that we ﬁrst note the say-
ing, “There are thirty-six types of weapons and the bow is the foremost, there are eighteen types
of martial arts and the bow (archery) is the ﬁrst.” From this time on, exceptional martial artists
were commonly described as “skilled in the eighteen martial arts.” The Song period Essentials
from the Military Classics (Wujing Zongyao, ca. 1044) includes illustrations of the variety of
weapons used by the military. In 1126, also during the Song period, the monk Zhen Bao set an
example for Shaolin monks when he led the monks on Mount Wutai (Wutai Shan), in Shanxi,
against Jin (Tungus) invaders. His efforts were unsuccessful, however, as he was captured and
executed.
Under Mongol (Yuan) rule (1278–1368), Han Chinese martial arts practices, described as
“attack and stabbing skills” (gongci zhi shu), were strictly prohibited, and the real weapons deco-
rating temples had to be replaced by wood, clay, or paper copies. During this short but restrictive
period, the opera stage was the primary venue available for open display of martial arts–related
practices. This limiting of martial arts displays to opera performances may have been a factor
encouraging popular “ﬂowery” performance-oriented martial arts practices, a phenomenon
ridiculed by Ming general Qi Jiguang (1528–1587) after he was called upon to train and com-
mand a voluntary force of farmers against Japanese pirate attacks in China’s coastal provinces.
The Ming (1368–1644) was a long period of Han Chinese rule. During this period, the martial
arts were developed to an unprecedented degree. This was due to a combination of factors. The
Ming Dynasty was a Han Chinese ruling house, and its members viewed martial arts as part of the
culture rather than a direct threat. Meanwhile, with woodblock printing, the Chinese publications
industry was expanding to satisfy a wider readership. Finally, the Ming response to widespread
Japanese pirate incursions into China’s coastal provinces during the mid-sixteenth century was to
place the responsibility for defense on local authorities. Thus, the standard response was to use
locally raised volunteers rather than regular forces. To train these militia forces, General Qi Jiguang
produced illustrated training manuals to support his efforts. In his New Book of Effective Discipline
(Jixiao Xinshu, 1561), he included an illustrated chapter on Chinese boxing, “Boxing Classic:
Chapter on Essentials” (Quanjing Jieyao Pian), which is the earliest such manual still extant. Dur-
ing the same timeframe, General Yu Dayou (1503–1579) produced a staff-ﬁghting manual titled
Sword Classic (Jian Jing), which Qi included in his book. Another senior military ofﬁcial, Tang
Shunzhi (1507–1560), provided valuable insights in his Martial Compendium (Wu Bian).
The Ming period anti–Japanese pirate operations also provided the opportunity for Shaolin
monk participation and resultant lasting fame. The monks’ martial arts practices (especially
Shaolin staff ﬁghting) were widely known during the Ming period. In 1517, a stele was dedicated
94
China: Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

that contained a story about a kitchen worker at the end of the Yuan Dynasty (that is, 150 years
earlier) who was supposedly transformed into a giant protective guardian, King Jinnaluo, and who
then grabbed a ﬁre stoker and scared away a gang of Red Turban rebels intent on pillaging the
monastery (that is, 150 years earlier). The truth of the matter is that the monastery was largely
destroyed at the close of the Yuan period and took many years to recover. The stele may have
actually been meant to warn subsequent monastery residents to protect it. In any case, at least
120 Shaolin monks successfully participated in an encounter with Japanese pirates in 1555. They
were praised for their participation and won the appellation “Shaolin Monk Soldiers” in history.
Around 1621, Cheng Zongyou (1561–?), who claimed to have spent ten years studying
staff ﬁghting at Shaolin Monastery, published his illustrated Elucidation of Shaolin Staff Meth-
ods (Shaolin Gunfa Chanzong) as well as a combined manual, titled Skills Beyond Farming
(Gengyu Shengji), that desecribed crossbow, spear, and Japanese sword methods. (Ming-period
generals had been especially concerned with the quality of Japanese swords and ﬁghting skills.)
The illustrated Encyclopedia of Military Preparedness (Wubei Zhi) also spread awareness of mar-
tial arts to a wider audience. Another contemporary encyclopedia titled Complete Book of Ten
Thousand Treasures (Wanbao Quanshu, 1621), includes illustrations of grappling techniques
that may have inﬂuenced the development of Japanese jujutsu, and this material, in turn,
appears to have been taken from a rare and more complete work titled New Book of Military
Preparedness (1630).
The Manchu conquest and establishment of the Qing Dynasty in 1644 resulted dissatisfac-
tion in Chinese intellectual circles. One of these unhappy intellectuals, Wang Yuyou
(1615–1684), nicknamed the Man from Mount Wugong, became a recluse and wrote several
military treatises and one martial arts manual. The latter was titled Thirteen Broadsword Methods
(Shisan Daofa). Among his followers were Yan Yuan (1635–1704) and his disciple Li Gong
(1659–1733), who founded the Practical School of Learning, which emphasized concern for
both civil and military affairs and a combination of intellectual and physical discipline, includ-
ing martial arts practice. Another intellectual, Wu Shu (1611–1695), wrote a detailed, com-
bined manual on styles of spear ﬁghting titled Record of the Arm (Shoubi Lu).
In 1669, the historian Huang Zongxi (1610–1695), who initially supported the Southern Ming
cause against the Qing conquerors, wrote an epitaph for a former low-level Ming military ofﬁcer
(possibly a military martial arts drill instructor) called Epitaph for Wang Zhengnan (Wang Zhengnan
Muzhi Ming), which has inﬂuenced the way that Chinese (and now non-Chinese as well) view
Chinese martial arts. This is the concept that Wang practiced so-called Internal or Wudang box-
ing, which was able to defeat External or Shaolin boxing. Huang’s son, Huang Baijia (1643–1709),
also wrote a piece titled Internal School Boxing Methods, but, while it lists the so-called Internal
School forms and routines, it still fails to clarify how it differs from the so-called External School.
Another member of the gentry class in Henan, Chang Naizhou (1724–1783), nicknamed the
“Scholar Boxer,” had studied various martial arts and then developed his own style. These meth-
ods were preserved in a manual, and this manual was edited and published by Xu Dong in 1936
under the title Chang’s Book of Martial Skills (Chang Shi Wuji Shu). In the early 1850s Wu Yuxiang
(1812–1880), another member of the gentry class, studied Pao Chui (Cannon Pounder), a
boxing style from Chenjiagou Village in Henan. Wu also had a manual titled Taijiquan Theory
that was attributed to an obscure individual named Wang Zongyue (ca. 1790s), and in its honor,
Wu called his Chen-style boxing “taijijquan.”
China: Martial Arts
95

At the beginning of the twentieth century, during the Boxer Uprising of 1899–1901, a col-
lector of rare books named Luo Zhenchang obtained a boxing manual titled Boxing Classic:
Essentials of Boxing (Quan Jing Quanfa Beiyao). As the manual contains a mix of material from
several different sources written over an unknown period of time (it is dated 1784), subsequent
claims to original input from a Shaolin monk are questionable.
In any case, all of this intellectual involvement in martial arts during the Qing period has
resulted in a confusing mix of real and perceived information that must be cautiously digested by
the serious reader.
Standing between intellectuals and the common man were the martial artists who ran Pro-
tection Agencies (Biaoju/Biaohang). These businesses, which provided bodyguards for the
wealthy and escorts for transporting gold, silver, and other valuable consignments, ﬂourished
during the Qing period. Commerce and martial arts were interdependent during this period. The
manager of the Shunyuan Protection Agency in Beijing, Wang Zhengyi (1844–1900), better
known as “Big Broadsword Wang Number Five” (dadao wangwu), was killed while participating
in the Boxer Uprising. The last Protection Agency ﬁnally closed its doors in 1921.
At the common man’s level, the Qing regime used the term quanbang (boxing and staff) regime
to describe popular martial arts practices. This meant group practice outside the military, primarily
among the Han Chinese majority, as opposed to Manchu practices of wrestling and mounted
archery. The term especially referred to the practices of heterodox religious groups and secret soci-
eties. In traditional Chinese society, martial arts practice was not so much spiritual as it was the
equivalent of keeping ﬁrearms. Heterodox religious groups and secret societies were often considered
subversive by the authorities and, indeed, some were. For example, the Taipings (Kingdom of Heav-
enly Peace) were a quasi-Christian cult that grew into a major threat to the regime, and between
1850 and 1863, the Taipings occupied a large portion of Southeast China. One of the Taiping lead-
ers, Shi Dakai (1831–1863), was said to be highly versed in martial arts and to have trained several
hundred followers in boxing. He was supposedly adept in Mandarin Duck Feet, a form of leg maneu-
vers and kicks originally credited to the famous Water Margin hero, Wu Song, and he is said to have
broken a stone tablet with his ﬁst in a ﬁght with another martial artist. The reference to Mandarin
Duck Feet may be an apocryphal reference, although the style is still practiced today.
Perhaps the saddest martial arts displays near the end of the Qing period came from some of
the Boxers United in Righteousness (Yihetuan), who discovered that their martial arts, fortiﬁed
by magic talismans, were no defense against modern ﬁrearms of the Eight Nation Expeditionary
forces (Austria–Hungary, Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia, and the United States).
According to the Comprehensive Study of Documents (Wenxian Tongkao, 1756), there were as
many as nineteen varieties of broadswords and sixteen types of poled weapons categorized as
spears. Thus, a bewildering mix faced military martial arts drill instructors. By the mid–
nineteenth century, ﬁrearms came into general use, but it was not until 1901 that the old military
examination system, emphasizing archery (both on horseback and on foot) and various strength
tests, was ﬁnally terminated.
Following the Revolution of 1911, there were mixed feelings about the place of martial arts
in Chinese society. On one hand, there were nationalist-oriented advocates such as warlord
commander Ma Liang (1878–1947) in Jinan, Shandong, who supported them. Thus, he patron-
ized the publication of a series of textbooks titled Chinese New Martial Arts (Zhonghua xin wushu)
that were to be used in military and police training and in public schools. On the other hand,
96
China: Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

there were those such as essayist and social critic Lu Xun (1881–1936), who attacked the “new
martial arts” concept as following in the failed footsteps of the Boxers of 1900.
The Nationalist (Kuomintang) government adopted the term guoshu or “national arts” in 1927 to
associate the Chinese martial arts with modern Chinese nationalism. As a result, the term guoshuguan
or “national arts hall” has carried over to the present in some overseas Chinese communities.
The Kuomintang (Guomindang in Pinyin) also established a Central Martial Arts Institute. The
founders of the Central Martial Arts Institute were faced with the daunting task of attempting to
satisfy the sensitivities of numerous martial arts factions within a national program. They got off to
a troublesome start by dividing their training into Shaolin and Wudang branches. The Wudang
branch included only instruction in taijiquan, xingyiquan, and baguazhang, while the Shaolin
branch arbitrarily comprised all other martial arts styles. This arrangement was based on the popu-
lar belief that Chinese boxing consisted of an External or Shaolin School (Buddhist), which empha-
sized strength and speed, versus an Internal or Wudang School (Taoist), which emphasized use of an
opponent’s strength and speed against him. This overly simplistic view originated with Huang
Zongxi’s 1669 Epitaph for Wang Zhengnan. In 1669, the epitaph was probably meant as a veiled polit-
ical jab at the foreign Manchu regime rather than a serious discussion of boxing theory, but in the
twentieth century the division of the institute into these two branches resulted in inﬁghting, so the
branches were dropped. Next, the institute embarked on training program to provide martial arts
instruction nationwide. Pioneer martial arts historian Tang Hao (1897–1959) was supervisor of the
institute’s publication section for a short time. Unfortunately, the second Sino-Japanese War
(1937–1945) intervened, and the program never reached its full potential.
The Communist leader Mao Zedong (1893–1976) advocated rigorous exercise and referred
favorably to the Japanese practice of jujutsu (roushu in Chinese), which he patriotically noted
had evolved from Chinese skills. After the Communist takeover in 1949, traditional sports includ-
ing the martial arts were placed under a government-run Physical Culture and Sports Commission.
In English, the modern Chinese term wushu translates into “martial arts,” but the term shu (art,
skill) does not reﬂect the same nuance of individual insight as does the older term yi (art). Under
government direction, martial arts used in nationwide competition were standardized into three
major categories of boxing (changquan, nanquan, and taijiquan). Changquan, or “long boxing,” rou-
tines have combined techniques from the more acrobatic so-called “northern” styles of boxing,
while nanquan, or “southern boxing,” has combined the “short hitting” emphasis on arm move-
ments prominent in most styles of boxing found in South China (especially in Fujian and Guang-
dong provinces). Standardized taijiquan, including a shortened routine of twenty-four forms, was
based on the widely practiced Yang-style taijiquan. Training with weapons was also standardized.
Weapons were limited to four basic types (broadsword, straight sword, staff, and spear), and rou-
tines were standardized. Archery was not generally included in the mix, although during the early
twenty-ﬁrst century there has been some interest, both inside and outside China, in reviving the
distinctive Manchu archery style.
Many of the traditional Chinese martial arts styles have continued to be practiced individually,
and more liberal policies in recent years have resulted in the resurgence of some, such as the orig-
inal Chen-style taijiquan. At the other extreme, during the 1980s, sports authorities experimented
with freestyle sparring (sanda or sanshou), probably with the idea of getting them adopted into the
International Olympics. The Chinese martial arts were not accepted as a formal entry in the 2008
Olympics; with judo and taekwondo already well established, this goal will be difﬁcult to achieve.
China: Martial Arts
97

Finally, the term kung fu (gongfu) merely means “skill” or “effort” in Chinese. In the eigh-
teenth century, a French Jesuit missionary in China used the term to describe Chinese yoga-like
exercises. It was accepted for English usage in the United States during the 1960s to describe
Chinese hand combat practices seen outside Mainland China as being similar to karate. It was
used in the Hong Kong movie scene and widely popularized by the Kung Fu television series
(ABC, 1972–1975). Consequently, it is now a household word around the world, even in China,
where it is used to describe the highly gymnastics-oriented genre of martial arts movies (gongfu
pian). This term also seems to evoke a fanciful, exaggerated association of the martial arts with
Shaolin Monastery—a distorted image of these arts, whose origins go back much farther and
whose practice was far more widespread than this image evokes.
—Stanley E. Henning
See also: China: Boxing Styles; China: Martial Arts in Hong Kong; China: 
Martial Arts in Taiwan; China: Martial Theories; China: Martial Women; 
China: Shaolin Temple Legends; China: Weapons; China: Wrestling; Kuntao 
(in this volume); Belief Systems: China; Chinese Martial Arts and Money; 
Taiwanese Street Performances; and Secret Societies and Fraternal 
Organizations (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Bu Binquan. 1996. Yuanyang Jiao Zhidi Jueji [Mandarin Duck Feet: Wonderful Technique to Subdue
an Opponent]. Beijing: Tiyu Daxue Chubanshe.
Cheng Dali. 1995. Zhongguo Wushu—Lishi yu Wenhua [Chinese Martial Arts—History and Culture].
Chengdu: Sichuan University Press.
Dekker, Peter. 2008. “Rediscovering Manchu Archery,” TurkishArchery.info, http://www
.turkisharchery.info/?p=!wtafpresentations&slide=The+Netherlands, accessed October 3, 2009.
Fang Biao. 2004. Jingcheng Biaohang [Capital City Protection Agencies]. Beijing: Xueyuan Chubanshe.
Graff, David, and Robin D. S. Higham, editors. 2002. A Military History of China. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
Gu Shi. 1987. Hanshu Yiwenzhi Jiangshu [Commentaries on the Han History Bibliographies].
Shanghai: Shanghai Guji Chubanshe.
Guojia Tiwei Wushu Yanjiuyuan, bianzuan [National Physical Culture and Sports Commission Mar-
tial Arts Research Institute, editors and compilers]. 1997. Zhongguo Wushushi [Chinese Martial
Arts History]. Beijing: People’s Physical Culture Publishers.
Henning, Stanley E. 1981. “The Chinese Martial Arts in Historical Perspective,” Military Affairs
(now Journal of Military History), 45(4), 173–178.
Henning, Stanley E. 1997. “Chinese Boxing: The Internal Versus External Schools in the Light of
History and Theory,” Journal of Asian Martial Arts 6(3), 10–19.
Henning, Stanley E. 1998. “Observations on a Visit to Shaolin Monastery,” Journal of Asian Martial
Arts 7(1), 90–101.
Henning, Stanley E. 1998. “Southern Fists and Northern Legs: The Geography of Chinese Boxing,”
Journal of Asian Martial Arts 7(3), 24–31.
Henning, Stanley E. 1999a. “Academia Encounters the Chinese Martial Arts,” China Review
International 6(2), Fall, 307–320.
Henning, Stanley E. 1999b. “Chinese Boxing’s Ironic Odyssey,” Journal of Asian Martial Arts 8(3), 8–17.
Henning, Stanley E. 1999c. “Martial Arts Myths of the Shaolin Monastery, Part I: The Giant with
the Flaming Staff,” Journal of the Chenstyle Taijiquan Research Association of Hawaii 5(1), via
http://seinenkai.com/articles/henning/mythsofshaolin.pdf, accessed October 3, 2009.
98
China: Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

Henning, Stanley E. 2001. “What’s in a Name: The Etymology of Chinese Boxing,” Journal of Asian
Martial Arts 10(4), 8–19.
Henning, Stanley E. 2003. “The Martial Arts in Chinese Physical Culture,” in Martial Arts in the
Modern World, edited by Thomas A. Green and Joseph R. Svinth, 13–35. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Hua Yue. 1972. Cuiwei Xiansheng Beizheng Lu—Cuiwei Xiansheng Nanzheng Lu [Mr. Cuiwei’s Records
of Campaigns in the North and South]. Taipei: Guangwen Press.
Huang Zongxi. 1936. Nanlei Wending [Nanlei’s Deﬁnitive Works]. Shanghai: Zhonghua Shuju.
Kuang Wennan. 1990. Zhongguo Wushu Wenhua Gailun [A General Discussion of Chinese Martial
Arts Culture]. Chengdu: Sichuan Jiaoyu Chubanshe.
Li Jinlong, and Liu Yinghai. 2007. Qingdai Biaoju yu Shanxi Wushu [Qing Period Protection Agencies
and Shanxi Martial Arts]. Beijing: Beijing Tiyu Daxue Chubanshe.
Li Quan. 1969/ca. 759. Taibai Yin Jing [Dark Classic of Planet Venus]. Taipei: Wenyou Shudian.
Lin Boyuan. 1996. Zhongguo Wushushi [Chinese Martial Arts History]. Taipei: Wuzhou Chuban
Youxian Gongsi.
Lu Xun. 1989. “Quanshu yu Quanfei” [Boxing and Bandit Boxers], in Lu Xun Quan Ji [Complete
Works of Lu Xun], Volume 8, 81–86. Beijing: Renmin Wenxue Chubanshe.
Ma Li. 2006. Zhongguo Gudian Wuxue Mijilu [Chinese Classical Martial Studies Collection], two
volumes. Beijing: Renmin Tiyu Chubanshe.
Ma Mingda. 2000. Shuo Jian Conggao [Discourses on the Sword: Collected Manuscripts]. Lanzhou:
Lanzhou Daxue Chubanshe.
Ma Mingda. 2003. Wuxue Tanzhen [Seeking the Facts in Martial Studies], two volumes. Taipei: Yiwen
Chuban Youxian Gongsi.
Meng Yuanlao et al. 1962. Dongjing Menghualu Waisizhong [Record of Reminiscences of the Eastern
Capital and Four Other Works]. Shanghai: Zhonghua Shuju.
Morris, Andrew D. 2004. Marrow of the Nation: A History of Sport and Physical Culture in Republican
China. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Watson, Burton, translator. 1963. Hsun Tzu: Basic Writings. New York: Columbia University Press.
Xi Yuntai. 1985. Zhongguo Wushushi [Chinese Martial Arts History]. Beijing: Renmin Tiyu Chubanshe.
Xu Ke. 2003. Qingbai Leichao Jiyong Lei [Qing Unofﬁcial Categorized Extracts, Martial Talent
Category], Volume 6, 2921–2922. Beijing: Zhonghua Shu Ju.
Zhou Weiliang. 2003. Zhongguo Wushushi [Chinese Martial Arts History]. Beijing: Gaodeng Jiaoyu
Chubanshe.
Zi, Étienne. 1896. Pratique des Examens Militaires en Chine [Practice of Military Examinations in
China]. Shanghai: Imprimerie de la Mission catholique à l’orphelinat de T’ou-sè-wèi, via
http://books.google.com, accessed January 18, 2010.
CHINA: MARTIAL ARTS IN HONG KONG
Hong Kong became a British crown colony in 1842. Chinese emigrants to the British Empire
and the United States generally came from or through Hong Kong, and so it has had signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on overseas Chinese martial arts.
The Japanese occupied Hong Kong during World War II. In 1945, the colony was returned
to British control, and during the Chinese civil war of 1945–1949, many former Nationalists ﬂed
to Hong Kong. In 1997, Hong Kong reverted from British administration back to Chinese
administration, but, under a policy called One Country—Two Systems, Hong Kong is supposed
to retain considerable local autonomy until at least 2047.
Today, Hong Kong is a cosmopolitan city with an international outlook, and, from the stand-
point of international martial arts, the city is probably best known for its movie industry’s
China: Martial Arts in Hong Kong
99

production of wuxia (martial hero) or kung fu (gongfu) movies. The city is also home to numer-
ous martial arts programs.
The Hong Kong Chinese Martial Arts Association Limited (HKCMAAL) was incorporated
in 1969, with eighty-four organizations listed. Representatives of twenty-three martial arts styles
performed at the ﬁrst anniversary incorporation celebration in 1970. While many members prac-
ticed more than one style, as should be expected, southern styles dominated. Of these, Cai Li Fo
Boxing led by a large margin, followed by Hong Boxing and White Crane Boxing.
Yip Man (Ye Wen, 1893–1972), who was Bruce Lee’s (Li Xiaolong, 1940–1973) yongchun
(wing chun) teacher, moved to Hong Kong from Foshan, Guangdong, around 1950, and greatly
inﬂuenced Overseas Chinese martial arts activities. Yongchun has, along with several other
styles, been categorized as Southern Boxing, which describes the fact that they have all been
most widely practiced in Fujian and Guangdong, China.
Yongchun appears to be named for the county in Fujian where it supposedly originated.
Yongchun is near the city of Quanzhou, which was a major seaport on the Fujian coast, and
Yongchun Gazetteer includes an entry crediting Woman Ding Number Seven as introducing
boxing to Yongchun county during the Kangxi era (1662–1722). There are a number of other
stories as to the origins of yongchun boxing, none of which have been satisfactorily conﬁrmed,
and in fact, several of these stories appear to be associated with secret society mythology. A
credible hypothesis concerning the development of so-called Southern Boxing styles is that
they reﬂect close combat–oriented, military “short hitting” techniques introduced by General
Qi Jiguang (1528–1588) to train volunteers to ﬁght pirates attacking southeastern China
during the mid-sixteenth century. This thesis is supported by Zhou Lianggong (1612–1672) in
Fujian Sketches (Min Xiaoji), wherein he describes the boxing prevalent in Fujian as “Short
Hitting.”
A famous Yang-style taijiquan teacher, Tung Ying-chieh (1886–1961), moved to Hong Kong
around 1945. Tung had been a student of Yang Chengfu (1883–1936) in Shanghai, and he wrote
an excellent book titled Taijiquan Shiyi (Explaining Taijiquan). His son Tung Hu-ling
(1917–1992) settled in Hawai‘i, and he wrote a book titled Taijiquan Shiyongfa (Practical
Taijiquan). Tung Ying-chieh’s daughter Tung Moli (Jasmine Tung, 1940–2009) was Honorary
President of the Hong Kong Wushu Union and active in international martial arts activities.
Other well-known martial arts masters who taught in Hong Kong include Wu Gongyi
(1900–1970) and Wu Gongzao (1903–1983). Both were grandsons of Wu Quanyou
(1834–1902). Wu Quanyou was an ethnic Manchu, an Imperial Guard ofﬁcer, and originator of
Wu-style taijiquan. Their father, Wu Jianquan (1870–1942), also taught taijiquan in Beijing and
Shanghai. The Wu family style of taijiquan is known for its smaller movements (in comparison
with Yang style, from which it evolved) and leaning posture, quite possibly inherited from
Manchu wrestling practices.
Lee Ying-Arng (Li Ying’ang, Jason Lee), a doctor of chiropractic and acupuncture residing in
Hong Kong during the 1970s, was very active in the Hong Kong martial arts community, and,
through his Unicorn Press, he contributed to maintaining knowledge of Chinese martial arts
during the knowledge blight of the Cultural Revolution (1966–1976). His book Lee’s Modiﬁed
Tai Chi for Health (1968) is perhaps the best early book in English on the subject, both for his-
torical background and for practice. His reprints of pioneer martial arts historian Tang Hao’s
Shaolin Wudang Research (Shaolin Wudang Kao, originally published in 1930) and other critiques
100
China: Martial Arts in Hong Kong
www.ebook3000.com

on aspects of taijiquan history and Shaolin boxing were especially valuable for maintaining
access to knowledge of Chinese martial arts history. Lee moved to Guatemala in the 1970s,
where he is said to have been murdered. At any rate, details have never been made public—a
sad fate for such a knowledgeable martial artist and ﬁne individual.
—Stanley E. Henning
See also: China: Boxing Styles; China: Martial Arts; China: China: Martial Arts in 
Taiwan; China: Martial Theories; China: Martial Women; China: Shaolin Temple Legends; 
China: Weapons; China: Wrestling; Kuntao (in this volume); Belief Systems: China; 
Chinese Martial Arts and Money; Asian Martial Arts in the United States and Canada; 
Film and the Martial Arts; Television and the Martial Arts; and Secret Societies 
and Fraternal Organizations (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Anonymous. 1968. Guben Shaolin Zongfa Tushuo [Old Volume, Shaolin Style Methods Illustrated and
Explained]. Hong Kong: Unicorn Press.
Dong Huling. 1956. Taijiquan Shiyongfa [Taijiquan Practical Methods]. Hong Kong: Yingjie Jianshen Yuan.
Dong Yingjie. 1969. Taijiquan Shiyi [Taijiquan Explained]. Taipei: Wuzhou Chubanshe.
Hu Yisheng. 1970/1931. Tujie Zimen Quanfa Zhengzong [Illustrated Orthodox Zi Style Boxing]. Hong
Kong: Unicorn Press.
Lee Ying-arng. 1966. Taiji Shisan Qiang Pu Zhu [Taiji Thirteen Spear Manual Annotated]. Hong Kong:
Unicorn Press.
Lee Ying-arng. 1968. Lee’s Modiﬁed Tai Chi for Health. Hong Kong: Unicorn Press.
Lee Ying-arng. 1971. Bairi Sucheng Tieshazhang Gong [Iron Palm in 100 Days]. Hong Kong: Unicorn
Press.
Tang Hao. 1968/1930. Shaolin Wudang Kao [Shaolin Wudang Research]. Hong Kong: Unicorn Press.
Tang Hao. 1969/1935. Taijiquan Zongshi Wang Zongyu Kao [Taijiquan Master Wang’s Zongyue Research].
Hong Kong: Unicorn Press.
Tang Hao. 1969/1935. Wang Zongyue Taijiquanjing Yanjiu [Wang Zongyue Taijiquan Classic Research].
Hong Kong: Unicorn Press.
Xianggang Zhongguo Guoshu Zonghui [Hong Kong Martial Arts Association Limited]. 1970 (August).
First Anniversary Celebration Booklet.
Xu Zhiyi. 1969. Wujia Taijiquan [Wu-Style Taijiquan]. Hong Kong: Xinwen Shudian.
CHINA: MARTIAL ARTS IN TAIWAN
The history of martial arts on Taiwan can be divided into four major periods. Each of these
periods has a certain leitmotif.
During the Qing Dynasty period (late 1600s to 1895 on Taiwan), the emphasis was on
martial arts as combat, in particular as group combat. Training was focused on village militias,
using the basic weapons of traditional Chinese warfare (i.e. staff, spear, saber, and shield) in
group formations. The so-called southern Shaolin systems predominated.
The arrival of the Japanese in 1895 changed the course of Taiwanese martial arts
development. Under the Japanese, martial arts were used primarily as a way to “convert” the
Taiwanese into Japanese culture. The two primary arts were judo and kendo, and the primary
teaching venues were police stations. Traditional Chinese martial arts were outlawed.
China: Martial Arts in Taiwan
101

The arrival of the Kuomintang government in 1949, following the Communist victory in the
Chinese Civil War, brought an inﬂux of northern-based martial arts systems including taijiquan,
xingyiquan, and baguazhang. Although the focus in Taiwan returned to traditional Chinese mar-
tial arts, the emphasis was now on martial arts as a recreation or exercise rather than combat.
Since the deaths of the Communist leader Mao Zedong (1893–1976) and his Kuomintang
rival Chiang Kai-shek (1887–1975), there have been two new trends. First, there has been an
increase in exchanges with mainland China, with Taiwanese martial arts teachers traveling to
China to learn, and an increased focus on sport martial arts such as judo, kendo, taekwondo, and
san da (Chinese kick-boxing).
QING DYNASTY (CA. 1683 TO 1895)
Taiwan was home to non-Chinese aboriginal groups for thousands of years. The Polynesians, for
instance, are thought to have originated in Taiwan. There is speculation that these non-Chinese
people may have had systematic forms of martial arts, but if they did, little is known about those
arts beyond the fact that the aboriginals left a variety of knife designs in the archaeological
record.
The ﬁrst large-scale inﬂux of Chinese immigrants occurred during the seventeenth century,
leading to a Qing annexation in 1683, and one can assume that Chinese martial arts arrived in
Taiwan with these immigrants. These immigrants fell into two distinct ethnic groups. From
Guangdong Province came the Hakka, while from Fujian Province came the Hoklo.
The Hakka—known in Mandarin as “guest people”—are racially Chinese, but they have a
unique culture and dialect that sets them sharply apart from other Han Chinese. The Hakkas
were a minority group, and they were often the targets of discrimination and violence from the
Fujianese Hoklo, who made up the majority of immigrants into Taiwan during the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries. This demographic is relevant to Taiwanese martial arts history for two
reasons. First, each of these ethnic groups had distinct martial arts systems, which they brought
with them. Second, ethnic animosities gave them ample opportunity to test their martial arts.
In those days, Taiwan was China’s “Wild Wild East.” This “Wild Wild East” culture was
fostered by several factors. Some of the earliest Chinese immigrants were workers brought to
Taiwan by pirates. One pirate leader, known as Yen Ssu Tsi, brought 3,000 Chinese immigrants
to his base in Peikang in 1621. These Chinese villages faced threats from aboriginal tribes—
some of whom were still headhunters. At the same time, there were disputes between Hoklo
and Hakka. Although there were some imperial troops stationed in Taiwan, as a practical mat-
ter villages had to depend on themselves for protection. Towards that end, most villages
formed militias.
Qing-era immigrants brought with them the so-called southern Shaolin systems. Fujian
Province was reputed to be home to one of the Shaolin Temples that ﬁgure so prominently in
martial arts folklore. According to this folklore, this was why Fujian and Guangdong provinces
were the birthplace and home to many southern Shaolin systems. On the other hand, since
there is not much physical evidence of this southern Shaolin monastery, a modern historian
might opine that the reason those two southern provinces had so many different systems of mar-
tial arts was that rebel bands and secret societies were constantly being formed and disbanded
in those provinces, resulting in a large number of people who had some training and interest in
martial arts.
102
China: Martial Arts in Taiwan
www.ebook3000.com

In any event, Fujian and Guangdong provinces did produce a wide variety of martial arts
systems, and many of these southern Shaolin systems were practiced in Taiwan. From Hakka
immigrants, known systems include Hakka Boxing and Yue Fei Boxing. Hoklo immigrants
brought with them such systems as Forever Spring Boxing, Fujian Buddha’s Disciples Boxing,
Grand Emperor Boxing, Great Achievement Boxing, and varieties of Crane Boxing.
JAPANESE PERIOD (1895–1945)
Chinese martial arts were severely curtailed during the Japanese period. Closed-door training
(e.g., the training of senior students directly by the master) continued much as before, but pub-
lic performances, such as at temple celebrations, were eliminated. Thus, the Japanese period had
a negative impact on the development of Chinese martial arts in Taiwan. Because training had
to be carried out in private, there were very limited opportunities for practitioners of different
systems to meet and improve their arts through cross-training.
On the positive side, many Japanese ofﬁcials posted to Taiwan practiced forms of Japanese
martial arts. The two most common were judo and kendo. The Japanese government used the
appeal of judo and kendo as a way to make Japanese culture attractive to both the Chinese and
indigenous Taiwanese. Towards that end, Japanese police agencies established judo and kendo
training halls all over Taiwan. These Japanese training halls all ﬁt into a ranking system that
assigned each training hall a level between three and nine, based on the number of students. Belt
ranks were introduced to facilitate even matchups. Tournaments were held annually, and the
champions of cities and prefectures were sent to Tokyo to participate in national tournaments.
The tournaments were meant to promote the Japanese martial spirit and Japanese culture.
Many of the Japanese martial arts groups still operating in Taiwan trace their roots to groups
founded by the Japanese police. For example, Taipei’s oldest continuously operating judo hall,
located in the oldest part of Taipei, the Wen Hwa District, is situated on the rooftop of the Wen
Hwa police station.
The biggest impact on Taiwanese martial arts that resulted from the Japanese period was an
organized structure to martial arts practice. Before the arrival of the Japanese, martial arts in
Taiwan had no overarching organization, no rankings of people or levels to training halls, no cer-
tiﬁcates or belt rankings, and no government oversight. After the Japanese, all those things
became part of Taiwanese martial arts. Today in Taiwan, almost all major martial arts systems, be
they of Chinese or Japanese origin, have some national organization that provides rankings and
certiﬁcates.
THE KUOMINTANG PERIOD (1949 TO LATE 1970S)
After the Japanese surrender in World War II, Taiwan was given back to the Nationalist Chinese
(Kuomintang). On the Mainland, the Communists and Kuomintang then began ﬁghting an out-
right civil war. Although the Kuomintang held onto Taiwan, the Communists won the civil war,
and during the late 1940s and early 1950s, Taiwan’s population of about six million was supple-
mented by two million refugees arriving from the Chinese mainland. These refugees brought
with them the whole range of Chinese martial arts—northern Shaolin, taijiquan, xingyiquan,
baguazhang, and the grappling art known as shuaijiao.
The Kuomintang period on Taiwan was marked by a continuing shift that was started by the
Japanese government. The emphasis in the Japanese period was on martial arts being used as a
China: Martial Arts in Taiwan
103

method of introducing Japanese culture. The Japanese focus was on individual sports
competition, and the training was not geared toward actual battleﬁeld training. During the
Kuomintang period, the focus shifted even farther away from actual combat. The focus became
more on martial arts as simply an adult recreation. People got together in parks to practice more
as a hobby or exercise than anything else.
This era was important for Taiwanese martial arts history because, for the ﬁrst time,
Taiwan-based martial artists became famous throughout the world. This fame came about
largely through the writings of the American Robert W. Smith. Smith (1926–) lived in Taipei
during the late 1950s and early 1960s, and his books were published at a time when non-
Chinese people were ﬁrst beginning to ask for descriptions of Chinese martial arts. Smith’s
books introduced international readers to Taiwan-based teachers such as Chen Pan Ling
(1892–1967), Cheng Man-Ching (1902–1975), Wang Shu Jin (1904–1981), and Hung 
I-Hsiang (1925–1993).
MODERN DEVELOPMENTS (LATE 1970S TO PRESENT)
With the passing of Communist leader Mao Zedong (1893–1976) and Nationalist leader Chiang
Kai-shek (1887–1975), restrictions on travel between Taiwan and China eased, and Taiwanese
martial artists began to travel to China, both to learn the systems and to garner various
certiﬁcations from mainland teachers and organizations.
During the 1980s, there was increased interest in getting martial arts included in the
Olympics. In particular, there was a gigantic surge in interest in international taekwondo.
Taiwanese athletes have been quite successful in international taekwondo. For example, dur-
ing the 2004 Athens Olympics, Taiwan, listed as “China Taipei,” won two gold medals and a
silver medal in taekwondo. Two years later, in 2006, Taiwan hosted the World Kendo
Championships. Taiwan also remains relatively strong in international judo and kendo
competition.
Taiwan has seen some initial development of san da and Mixed Martial Arts competitions.
San da, sometimes known as san shou, is the sport of Chinese kick-boxing. There have been
various san da events staged, but the sport has not yet really gained a foothold in Taiwan. In a
similar vein, Mixed Martial Arts events have also been staged in Taiwan.
—Brian Kennedy and Elizabeth Nai-Jia Guo
See also: China: Boxing Styles; China: Martial Arts; China: Martial Arts in Hong 
Kong; China: Martial Theories; China: Martial Women; China: Shaolin Temple 
Legends; China: Weapons; China: Wrestling; Kuntao (in this volume); 
Belief Systems: China; Chinese Martial Arts and Money; Taiwanese Street 
Performances; and Secret Societies and Fraternal Organizations (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Allee, Mark A. 1995. Law and Local Society in Late Imperial China: Northern Taiwan in the Nineteenth
Century. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Kennedy, Brian, and Guo, Elizabeth. 2005. Chinese Martial Arts Training Manuals: A Historical Survey.
Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books.
Smith, Robert W. 1974. Chinese Boxing: Masters and Methods. Tokyo: Kodansha International.
104
China: Martial Arts in Taiwan
www.ebook3000.com

CHINA: MARTIAL THEORIES
Like other traditional Chinese skills, the Chinese martial arts are based on theories and princi-
ples. Transmission of theory and principles was done orally and through actual practice. Because
martial arts were potentially life-and-death skills, care was taken to protect stylistic secrets. For
example, the Taoist scholar Ge Hong (290–370 CE), who studied martial arts and served as a
military commander, notes in his autobiography that the martial arts all have certain closely held
techniques that, if described in an abstruse manner, allow one to gain the advantage against an
unwary opponent.
Martial arts did not have a high priority in Confucian society. Literate practitioners generally
kept their notes to themselves, and many practitioners were illiterate. Techniques were passed
down through demonstration or gained through individual insight. Key principles and techniques
were encapsulated in easy to memorize “secret formulas” or rhymes, which, in themselves, were not
normally transparent to the uninitiated, nor always clear even to other experienced practitioners.
Finally, there was the general secretiveness prevalent in Chinese clan- and family-oriented society.
The result is a dearth of written material on the subject. Nonetheless, a reasonably clear
understanding of martial arts theory and principles can be pieced together using the literature
that does exist, especially Ming-period military-related writings, Qing-period manuals, and mis-
cellaneous early twentieth-century writings.
In Chinese military writings, a common theoretical thread runs from the strategic level down
to the level of individual hand-to-hand combat. This is that advice on the marshaling of armies
is equally applicable to individual martial arts. One author, Jie Xuan (late sixteenth to early sev-
enteenth centuries) even used the earliest term for boxing, bo, meaning “hand-to-hand struggle,”
to describe military maneuvers.
Yinyang theory, which is an essential element of the traditional Chinese world view, is
another foundation for Chinese military thought. This interplay of opposite attributes and con-
tinual change explains martial arts tactics and techniques. Thus, situations are described as weak
versus strong (empty versus full) and pliant versus rigid (soft versus hard).
The earliest extant published exposition of this theory applied directly to the martial arts is
a vignette about a young woman of Yue that appears in the Spring and Autumn Annals of Wu and
Yue (ca. 100 CE). This story is found in a chapter titled Gou Jian’s Plotting. Gou Jian, king of Yue
(reigned 496–465 BCE), is said to have sought the best military minds, armorers, and martial
artists to serve him. One of the ﬁnest Chinese bronze swords yet unearthed has actually been
identiﬁed as Gou Jian’s. According to the story, the young woman was summoned to appear
before the King of Yue because of her famed swordsmanship. Along the way, she met an old man
in the forest. He said his name was Old Yuan. He had heard of her skill, and he wanted to see
her in action. When she agreed, Old Yuan broke a piece of bamboo and the young woman got
the short end. Old Yuan lunged at her three times, but she eluded his thrusts and jabbed him
each time. Suddenly, he jumped up into a tree and was transformed into a white ape (ape in Chi-
nese is pronounced the same as his name, Yuan). The young woman bade him farewell and
resumed her journey.
When the King of Yue interviewed the young woman, he asked her what the key to swords-
manship was. She replied that, deep in the forest with no one around, she had no teacher. How-
ever, she loved to practice constantly, and the answer came to her in a ﬂash of insight. The key
China: Martial Theories
105

was subtle but easy, and the meaning quite profound. It included frontal and ﬂanking aspects,
and yin and yang; open the frontal, close the ﬂank, yin subsides and yang arises. In all hand-to-
hand combat, the spirit wells up within, but the appearance is calm without; one looks like a
proper woman, but ﬁghts like an aroused tiger. Pay attention to your physical disposition and
move with your spirit; be distant and vague like the sun, and agile like a bounding rabbit. Pur-
sue your opponent like a darting reﬂection, now bright now gone. Breathe with movement, and
do not transgress the rules. Whether straight or crossing, initiating or responding, nothing is
detected by the opponent. By this means, one can confront a hundred, and a hundred can con-
front ten thousand. The king was so pleased that he gave the young woman the title Maiden of
Yue and had her teach his commanders and top warriors so that they could, in turn, teach the
rest of the troops.
These few principles expounded in the story of the Maiden of Yue comprise the core of
Chinese martial arts. For example, the phrase, “. . . the spirit wells up within, but the appearance
is calm without . . .” is found in Chang Naizhou’s eighteenth-century boxing manual and one of
Wu Yuxiang’s nineteenth-century taijiquan commentaries. This phrase describes the psycholog-
ical aspect of the martial arts, which is inseparable from the physical. An unﬂappable, focused
mind is a must in hand-to-hand combat. An unsettled mind portends defeat. Moreover, a good
martial artist seeks to confuse his opponent. As described in Tang Shunzhi’s (1507–1560)
Martial Compendium, this is done by mastering the principle of emptiness (xu) versus fullness
(shi), meaning deception by feints and diversions (emptiness represents the deception and
fullness the real move).
The principle of negating oneself and accommodating others is found in the Book of History
(second century BCE), and again in Taijiquan Theory (between 1795 and 1854). General Yu
Dayou (1503–1580) describes the martial arts interpretation and practical application of this
concept in his Sword Classic: “Flow with the opponent’s circumstances, use his force . . . wait
until his ‘old force’ has dissipated and before his ‘new force’ has been released.” This approach is
derived from a popular formula, “Hard prior to his force, pliant following his force, the opponent
is busy and I quietly wait, know the timing, let him struggle.” This principle is a key, not only to
conservation of one’s own energy, but also to timing for use of force and, indeed, what type of
force to use. The importance of timing is emphasized in Principle 9 of Shaolin Monastery Short
Hitting Body Technique Combined Boxing Manual, a major section in the Boxing Classic: Essential
Boxing Methods (1784). Timing (reﬂected in the term, xuanji, profound opportunity), combined
with appropriate response, is fundamental to effective ﬁghting.
Stability is another principle. Basic training invariably emphasizes developing ﬁrm, rooted
stances. Examples are the widely practiced Horse Riding Stance and xingyiquan’s Three-Part
Stance. Effective issuance of force is primarily dependent on the lower body, up through the
waist. Thus, the saying, “The feet hit seventy percent, the hands hit thirty percent.” This does
not mean kicks outnumber punches, but that the majority of force in a punch is generated from
the feet through the waist, rather than independently through the arms and hands. As Xu Ke
(1869–1929) said in Qing Unofﬁcial Categorized Extracts, “If the lower body is not stable, no
matter what, it will be inadequate to confront a big opponent, and one will drop as easy as an
autumn leaf.”
As described in the story of the Maiden of Yue, “to breathe with movement” means to
breathe naturally. Generally inhale when amassing force and exhale when releasing it. Releasing
106
China: Martial Theories
www.ebook3000.com

force involves combined psycho-physiological focus and even taijiquan theory; Wu Yuxiang
(1812–1880) compared release of force to shooting an arrow. Emitting a sound when releasing
force was considered a normal phenomenon among past practitioners of taijiquan, but this aspect
came to be viewed as uncouth during the twentieth century, as the martial arts came to be
practiced more for exercise than as ﬁghting art.
Tang Shunzhi, in his Martial Compendium (1973), explains that there are two main categories
of bare-hand ﬁghting techniques: long ﬁst (changquan) and short hitting (duanda). Long ﬁst
involves changing overall form or stance. This method is used to close the gap between oppo-
nents. Short hitting involves maintaining one’s overall form or stance during close-in ﬁghting.
Tang also explains that individual forms have inherent characteristics. They change in transi-
tion when executed, but ultimately retain their essential nature.
In his record of the wisdom of late nineteenth and early twentieth century martial artists,
True Narratives on the Meaning of Boxing, Sun Lutang (1860–1932), describes xingyiquan mas-
ter Guo Yunshen’s (1829–1900) description of the three phases of the martial arts learning
process:
1.
Basic, observable (hard force) phase. At this elementary level, one practices forms and routines
(taolu).
2.
Learn release of force. At this intermediate, hidden (soft/pliant force) phase, one develops the abil-
ity to take advantage of an opponent’s use of force against him.
3.
Ultimate, transformed, spontaneous response phase. At this combined psycho-physiological level
where form and spirit combine, one counters an opponent in an apparently effortless manner. As
the Chinese phrase describes it, spontaneity is the point where one has attained the level of “box-
ing but no boxing, intent but no intent; with no intent there is real intent.”
—Stanley E. Henning
See also: China: Boxing Styles; China: Martial Arts; China: Martial Arts in Hong Kong; 
China: Martial Arts in Taiwan; China: Martial Women; China: Shaolin Temple Legends; 
China: Weapons; China: Wrestling; Japan: Ninpo; Japan: Shorinji Kempo; Kuntao; Belief 
Systems: China; Belief Systems: Japanese Budo, Bujutsu, and Bugei; Belief Systems: 
Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868; Chinese Martial Arts and Money; 
Taiwanese Street Performances; and Secret Societies and Fraternal Organizations.
REFERENCES
Davis, Barbara. 2004. The Taijiquan Classics: An Annotated Translation. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic
Books.
Henning, Stanley E. 1997. “Chinese Boxing: The Internal Versus External Schools in the Light of
History and Theory,” Journal of Asian Martial Arts 6(3), 10–19.
Henning, Stanley E. 1998. “Southern Fists and Northern Legs: The Geography of Chinese Boxing,”
Journal of Asian Martial Arts 7(3), 24–31.
Henning, Stanley E. 2006. “China’s New Wave of Martial Studies Scholars,” Journal of Asian Martial
Arts 15(2), 8–21.
Henning, Stanley E. 2007a. “Ge Hong: Famous Daoist Thinker and Practical Martial Artist.” Journal
of Asian Martial Arts 16(3), 22–25.
Henning, Stanley E. 2007b. “The Maiden of Yue: Fount of Chinese Martial Arts Theory,” Journal of
Asian Martial Arts 16(3), 26–29.
China: Martial Theories
107

Henning, Stanley E. 2009. “Taijiquan: Symbol of Traditional Chinese Martial Arts Culture,” Journal
of Chinese Martial Studies 1, 76–83, via http://www.martialstudies.com.hk/article6.html, accessed
October 4, 2009.
Kennedy, Brian, and Elizabeth Guo. 2005. Chinese Martial Arts Training Manuals: A Historical Survey.
Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books.
Sun Lutang. 2003. A Study of Taijiquan, translated by Tim Cartmell. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic
Books.
Ware, James R., translator and editor. 1981. Alchemy, Medicine and Religion in the China of A.D. 320:
The Nei P’ien of Ko Hung (Pao-p’u tzu). New York: Dover Publications.
Wells, Marnix. 2005. Scholar Boxer: Chang Naizhou’s Theory of Internal Martial Arts and the Evolution
of Taijiquan. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books.
Wile, Douglas. 1996. Lost T’ai-Chi Classics from the Late Ch’ing Dynasty. Albany: State University of
New York Press.
Wile, Douglas. 1999. T’ai Chi’s Ancestors: The Making of an Internal Martial Art. New York: Sweet Ch’i
Press.
CHINA: MARTIAL WOMEN
Chinese women have practiced martial arts from early times. A signiﬁcant reﬂection of this is
the story of the Maiden of Yue, a legendary swordswoman who is said to have trained the troops
of Gou Jian, King of Yue (reigned 496–465 BCE), and whose story contains one of the earliest
records of basic martial arts principles. It is even possible that this story of a swordswoman is
meant to symbolize the fact that brute strength, which was depicted as a common trait of mar-
tial artists in ancient times, was not necessarily most important to defeating an opponent.
An early example of a female Chinese martial artist is Fu Hao, consort to Shang King
Wuding (1259–1201 BCE). Archaeological evidence reveals that Fu served as a general and led
troops into battle. Although we do not have further details, she was likely familiar with archery
and sword at a minimum, and, as a leader of troops, she was probably skilled in use of weapons.
China’s military examination system, which comprised basic martial arts skills and under-
standing of the military classics, was established in 702 CE under the reign of a woman, Empress
Wu Zetian (625–705). As fate would have it, the Chinese Empire also met its demise under
West Dowager Empress Cixi (1835–1908) not long after she encouraged the anti-foreign Boxer
Uprising of 1899–1901.
During the Eastern or Later Han Dynasty (25–225 CE), the threat from Qiang tribes to the
area now comprising Shanxi province was so great that women in that region were reported to
have carried halberds and bows and arrows, and practiced spear routines alongside the males.
During the Tang Dynasty (618–960 CE), one of Chinese culture’s grandest periods, martial
skills were valued alongside intellectual pursuits. The poet Du Fu (712–770) immortalized the skill
of a woman in his “On Watching a Sword Dance by Madam Gongsun’s Disciple.” In Chinese,
sword dancing has always been synonymous with the practice of actual sword techniques. It was a
favorite pastime of the female revolutionary, Qiu Jin (1875–1907), who was executed on the eve
of the Revolution of 1911, and memorial statues often depict her standing deﬁantly with a sword.
During the Song Dynasty (960–1279 CE), popular culture in the capital city (ﬁrst Kaifeng
and then Hangzhou) included both male and female wrestling matches in the market place.
Women demonstrating martial arts routines were used to draw crowds to these matches. In 1062,
the scholar and government ofﬁcial Sima Guang (1019–1086) derided the spectacle of scantily
108
China: Martial Women
www.ebook3000.com

clad women wrestlers among the entertainers who gathered outside the Gate of Great Virtue
during New Year celebrations. Noting the irony of these public displays in front of this symbol
of national decorum, he petitioned the throne to prohibit women’s wrestling.
Throughout the Song period, China was under threat of invasion from various northern
nomadic groups, and the Mongols ﬁnally conquered the Song in 1279. Song historical records
describe several heroines of the ﬁghting against the invaders. Among these was the younger sister
of one leader named Yang An’er. She was called Woman Number Four, and the history describes
her as clever and ﬁerce, and good at riding and archery. This period also spawned the legend of the
woman warrior Hua Mulan, who was variously said to have lived prior to the founding of the Tang,
but about whom no ﬁrm historical record exists. The story of Hua substituting for her father by
joining the military disguised as a man served as a dual symbol of patriotism and of ﬁlial piety.
Ever since the legendary Maiden of Yue, who supposedly lived around 200 BCE, women mar-
tial artists have had roles in popular literature. Of the 108 main characters in the Ming novel
Outlaws of the Marsh (also known as All Men Are Brothers and Water Margin), three were women.
Stories about women martial artists abounded during the Qing period (1644–1911). Some
describe ﬁctional characters such as the skilled young Buddhist nun in Strange Stories from a
Chinese Studio. There are also vignettes about real people in the Stone Studio Illustrated News of
the 1880s and 1890s, the Qing Unofﬁcial History Categorized Extracts (completed in 1917), and
the ofﬁcial Yongchun County Gazetteer, from the home of yongchun (wing chun) boxing.
Based on the record in Yongchun County Gazetteer (Fujian Province), one can at least tentatively
assume that what is now known as yongchun boxing likely evolved from the skills introduced there
by Woman Ding Number Seven (ca. 1644–1722). Ding is said to have come to Yongchun with her
father and taught some of the locals. One of these local men, Zheng Li, supposedly improved the art
further using skills he learned from an itinerant Buddhist monk, who had picked up some Shaolin
techniques. These skills were in turn passed on by his students to the twentieth century.
Vignettes in the Categorized Extracts and Stone Studio Illustrated News reveal a variety of sit-
uations involving women martial artists. Typically, these women beat multiple male rufﬁans.
One of the most compelling stories is about Widow Qi Number Two, who, sometime between
1795 and 1820, rescued a wrongfully imprisoned old nun, joined a group of White Lotus Sect
rebels, and eventually became their leader. Women martial artists also served in the ranks of the
Taiping rebels (1850–1863), Nian rebels (1853–1868), and the Boxers (1899–1901). All this
reﬂects a society in turmoil, where both men and women might be forced to defend themselves.
Under these circumstances, the wealthy and well-placed depended on escort or protection agen-
cies. Women served in some of these enterprises as well.
Following the Revolution of 1911, women continued to make their mark in the martial arts,
and they were prominent in the team that performed at the 1936 Olympics in Berlin. They con-
tinue to play an important part in China’s current physical education program, which includes
standardized routines for nationwide competition. Most recently, they have participated in inter-
national martial arts tournaments, to include tournaments involving contact competition.
—Stanley E. Henning
See also: China: Boxing Styles; China: Martial Arts; China: Martial Arts in Hong Kong; 
China: Martial Arts in Taiwan; China: Martial Theories; China: Shaolin Temple 
Legends; China: Weapons; China: Wrestling; Amazons and Gladiatrices; Kuntao 
China: Martial Women
109

(in this volume); Belief Systems: China; Chinese Martial Arts and Money; Expressive 
Culture; Invented Traditions; Taiwanese Street Performances; Women in Combat: The U.S.
Military, 2001–Present; Women’s Freestyle Wrestling; Women’s Boxing, 1972–Present;
Jujutsuffragettes; and Secret Societies and Fraternal Organizations (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Brownell, Susan. 1995. Training the Body for China: Sports in the Moral Order of the People’s Republic.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dianshizhai Huabao [Dianshi Zhai Illustrated News]. 1897; for an introduction to this source, see
“Introduction: The Dianshizhai Pictorial and Print Culture in Shanghai,” http://www
.bc.edu/research/chinagateway/culthist/dianshizhai_intro.html, accessed October 19, 2009.
Henning, Stanley E. 2007. “The Maiden of Yue: Fount of Chinese Martial Arts Theory.” Journal of
Asian Martial Arts 16(3), 26–29.
Liu Xu. 1936. Jiu Tang Shu [Old Tang History]. Shanghai: Zhonghua Press.
Meng Yuanlao and others. 1962/ca. 960–1279. Dongjing Menghua Lu: Wai Sizhong [Dreams of the
Eastern Capital, and Four Others]. Shanghai: Zhonghua Shuju.
Peterson, Barbara Bennett, editor. 2000. Notable Women of China: Shang Dynasty to the Early Twenti-
eth Century. Armonk, NY, and London: M. E. Sharpe.
Pu Songling. 1880. Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio, translated by Herbert A. Giles. London:
Thos. De La Rue, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Tuo Tuo. 1936. Song Shi (Song History). Shanghai: Zhonghua Press.
Twitchett, Denis, and Michael Loewe. 1986. The Cambridge History of China. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Wang Genlin, editor. 1985. Sima Guang Zouyi [Sima Guang’s Memorials to the Throne]. Taiyuan:
Shanxi People’s Press.
Xu Fang. 1985. Du Fu Shi Jinyi [A Modern Translation of Du Fu’s Poems]. Beijing: Renmin Ribao.
Xu Ke. 1917. Qingbai Leiqiao [Qing Unofﬁcial Categorized Extracts]. Shanghai: Commercial Press.
Zhang Jue. 1993. Wuyue Chunqiu Quanyi [Complete Translation of the Spring and Autumn Annals
of Wu and Yue]. Guiyang: Guizhou People’s Press.
Zheng Qiaosong, editor. 1975/1930. Yongchun Xian Zhi (Yongchun County Gazetteer). Taipei: Cheng-
wen Press.
CHINA: SHAOLIN TEMPLE LEGENDS
Although members of Chinese secret societies and heterodox religious sects practiced martial
arts, the martial arts were not necessarily directly related to the belief systems of these societies
and sects (Henning 1999). Instead, the Chinese martial arts were simply ﬁghting arts, stage arts,
athletic events, physical conditioning, and so on, dependent upon the context in which they
were executed. Obviously, the range of contexts was enormous and could (and did) include reli-
gious sectarians, organized crime syndicates, mutual aid societies, political groups, sworn broth-
erhoods (some of which were actually sororities), and popular media. But, put more simply:
before the Chinese Freemasons were a mutual aid society and the Kuomintang was a political
party, there were the Hongmen (Vast Family) and the Chee Kung Tong (Fine Public Court).
Before the Hongmen and the Chee Kung Tong was the Tiandihui (Heaven and Earth Society).
Before all these was a legend.
In 1644, Qing armies captured Beijing. Assorted sworn brotherhoods (jiebai xiongdi) contin-
ued armed resistance for a generation. Although sworn brotherhoods existed both before and
110
China: Shaolin Temple Legends
www.ebook3000.com

after the 1640s, these early Qing-period groups were mostly small and always independent. Being
Chinese, their members were undoubtedly inspired by Romance of Three Kingdoms (Sanguo
Yanyi), Outlaws of the Marsh (Shuihuzhuan), and the like, romantic tales involving sworn broth-
erhoods, blood oaths, and martial arts. As far as we know, their groups were without formal
names, ceremonies, or traditions. As for their ﬁghting arts, they were presumably whatever the
army was currently teaching, for many of their members were discharged soldiers turned bandit.
Some years later, during the Yongzheng era (1723–1735), unrelated mutual aid societies
known as hui began to appear in Qing China. Some of these mutual aid societies had formal
names. An example is the Father–Mother Society, established in Fujian Province in 1728.
Called a fumuhui, its purpose was to allow working men to pool money for burials. Other hui
existed to allow people to borrow the money to buy land, livestock, or a business. Hui still exist
in Chinese communities throughout the world. Some hui are essentially cooperative credit
unions and insurance companies, some are professional guilds, and some are simply pyramid
schemes. However, only a dozen or so such societies appear in archival records before 1755. Ming
restoration was not mentioned in connection with any of these mutual aid societies.
The society known today as Tiandihui was founded at Guanyinting (Goddess of Mercy pavil-
ion), Gaoxi township, Fujian Province, sometime in 1761. The founder was Zheng Kai
(ca. 1711–1779), also known as Ti Xi. The society’s name literally means the society (hui) of
heaven (tian) and earth (di). The practice of Tiandihui members was to address heaven as their
father, earth as their mother, and one another as Brother or Sister. This form of address carries
speciﬁc social connotations (Jordan 1985), but to provide a simpliﬁcation, the Tiandihui
represented a form of poor man’s huiguan, or native place association, for déclassé migrants far
from home. The huiguan provided meeting grounds and regulation of trade for ﬁnancially stable
members and lodging and ﬁnancial assistance for less ﬁnancially stable members. In the case of
the original Tiandihui, both the founders and members came from the lowest and most marginal
ranks of Chinese society. Since they did not own real property, they were preoccupied with the
issue of survival, and their motives were not political gain but personal proﬁt. Individual
members often resorted to robbery, swindling, smuggling, and extortion.
By the 1780s, the Tiandihui was no longer exclusively a product of a mobile alien migrant
population. Instead, it was becoming assimilated into indigenous communities. As such, mem-
bers began extending interests into local feuding, collective violence, and even open rebellion.
An example is the Lin Shuang-wen affair in Taiwan (1787–1788). Sometimes called the ﬁrst
brotherhood rebellion in modern Chinese history, this began with a family feud but ended with
Imperial military intervention (Ownby and Heidhues 1993). From Qing records, we read of
Tiandihui initiates sacriﬁcing a rooster before an incense altar, swearing their brotherhood in
blood, and crawling under crossed swords. Later reports included mixing chicken or cockerel
blood with wine or ash, and sometimes blood from the initiate’s middle ﬁnger, and swallowing
it. Anti-Manchu rhetoric, slogans, and confessions are noticeably absent from Qing records of
the 1780s and 1790s, as are any mention of Zheng Chenggong (Koxinga, 1624–1662), or evi-
dence of the Xi Lu (southern Shaolin) legend. Instead, according to Dian Murray (1994, 82):
“At the end of the eighteenth century the Tiandihui, at least as far as we now know from the
documents at hand, was quite unlike the White Lotus or other religious sects whose customs and
beliefs were grounded in sutra or scriptures. Its branches tended to spring up spontaneously,
formed by leaders who were themselves often confused about the nature of their undertaking.”
China: Shaolin Temple Legends
111

During the early 1800s, many separate (but similar) Chinese societies began adopting names
that had the number three in them. There was numerological signiﬁcance, of course, but the
name also alluded to the ﬁrst Ming Emperor, whose reign name was Hongwu (Vast Military; Zhu
Yuanzhang, 1328–1398), and the family name Hong, which was shared by people who had taken
part in blood covenant rituals (Haar 2002). For example, Sanhehui (San Hop Hwai, Three Har-
monies Society, founded on January 4, 1812, as a mutual aid society in Guangdong Province)
and the Sandianhui (Three Dots Society; originally, the Increase Brothers Society) were early
nineteenth-century societies whose names echoed the number three. Groups with “three” in
their names shared common blood oaths, passwords, and phrases. One example is, “When pass-
ing objects, never forget ‘three’” (kaikou buli ben; chushou buli san) (Cai 1984, 493). It was the
commonality of threes that led the nineteenth century British missionaries and administrators
to label these societies Triads. Nonetheless, it is important to keep in mind David Jordan’s cau-
tion (1985): “Sworn brotherhood, like so many other cultural institutions, is an empty vessel,
into which a very wide variety of different contents may potentially be poured.”
Around the same time, stories began to associate the Tiandihui with anti-Manchu sentiment.
Forty years earlier, Tiandihui had not been visibly anti-Manchu. The slogan in those days was
“Obey Heaven and follow the Way,” a time-honored expression unrelated to rebellion. Two
existing documents, an oath and a register dating from 1787, make no reference to the Ming but
do refer to ﬁctional heroes from Romance of Three Kingdoms. The ﬁrst written evidence of Ming
restoration only dates from 1800, when the phrase “Restore the Ming House” was part of an oath
taken by members of Qiu Daqin’s Tiandihui society in Guangdong. This was noted in reports of
a rebellion in Guandong Province that took place in September and October 1802. Leaders of
this uprising included an Increase Societies brother named Chen Lanjisi (1776–1802). The
Guandong uprising was promptly smashed, but over the years there were additional uprisings
whose slogans called for the restoration of the Ming. But, in fact, the rebels were not seeking to
restore the Ming. Instead, as Liangguang Governor-General Ruan Yuan (1764–1849) wrote in
1811: “Their intention is only to obtain wealth to use; they are not plotters of illegalities [rebel-
lion], but their intention to incite good people to rob is a local evil” (Murray 1994, 76).
During the Taiping wars (1851–1864), the slogan fan Qing fu Ming (“Oppose the Qing, support
the Ming”) was used. During the same period, the term traveled to North America, Singapore,
Indonesia, the Philippines, and Australia with immigrant Chinese. Nonetheless, intellectual efforts
to depict the Tiandihui as anti-Manchu date only to the late nineteenth and early twentieth cen-
turies. In 1903, Tao Chengzhang (T’ao Ch’eng-chang, 1878–1912) wrote an article called “Jiohui
Yuanliu Kao” (The Evolution of China’s Secret Societies) that directly linked the name Hongmen
to the dynastic founder of the Ming Dynasty. Tao also associated the Tiandihui with the anti-Ming
general Zheng Chenggong, claimed Chen Jinnan as an earlier founder of the Tiandihui (this name
appears nowhere in the Qing records), and associated various religious sects with the Tiandihui.
Sun Yat-sen’s (Sun Yixian, 1866–1925) Three Principles of the People (1924) further elaborated on
these themes, but Sun was neither scholar nor historian, and he relied on the anecdotal evidence
of society members who were fellow revolutionaries. Thus, the 1915 book called Secrets of Shaolin
Boxing (Shaolin Quanfa Mijue) should be viewed as part of this twentieth-century Republican
(Kuomintang) tradition rather than part of the documented history of Shaolin boxing.
If the anti-Manchu history of the Tiandihui is unsupported by evidence, what of the history link-
ing the Tiandihui to the Shaolin Temple? The traditional history is that the monks of Shaolin
112
China: Shaolin Temple Legends
www.ebook3000.com

Temple aided the Emperor in repelling the depredations of some ill-deﬁned Xi Lu (Western
Barbarians). The monks refused the offered reward. The monks were subsequently accused of plot-
ting rebellion; their temple was destroyed by the Emperor’s forces, and only ﬁve monks survived. The
destroyed temple is variously described as being in Gansu Province, Jiulian Mountain in Jiangxi
Province, or Fuzhou Province, with the events taking place somewhere between 1728 and 1732.
So far, no one has found an actual historical site for this temple destruction, and it has not been
through a lack of trying. Instead, from what is currently known, the Xi Lu legend appears to rep-
resent the merging of at least seven separate stories. If there is a historical basis to the story, then
it probably involves a conﬂation of an historical event involving monks of the real Shaolin Temple
at Mount Song in Henan Province with messianic “Luminous King” (mingwang) traditions dating
to the sixth century (Glick and Hung 1947; Ter Haar 2002). Alternatively, it may simply represent
a version of romantic tales told during the Boxer and Republican eras and put to paper about 1915
by the “Master of the Studio of Self-Respect” in his book Secrets of Shaolin Boxing.
In a separate conﬂation of Tiandihui legends, one of the ﬁve surviving monks is said to have
gone to Canada to establish what is now known as the Chinese Freemasons of Canada. A second
reportedly went to New York, where he established the Chee Kong Tong Supreme Lodge Chinese
Freemasons of the World. A third reportedly went to San Francisco, where he established the Hung
Moon Chee Kung Tong. Although the historical veracity of these particular legends is no longer
promoted, there does not seem to have been much attention paid to correcting them, either.
Several remarks are required in conclusion. First, Triad is an English word meaning “Union of
Three.” In recognition of the prevalence of the number three in the various societies’ names, the
Scottish missionary William Milne (1785–1822) was the ﬁrst to apply the term “Triad” to
Chinese secret societies, in a posthumously published work called “Some Account of a Secret
Association in China, entitled the Triad Society” (1825). There being no Chinese word for secret
societies, Chinese writers instead referred to sects (jiaomen) or political associations (huidang).
Second, the word tong, meaning “meeting hall” and describing any organization that meets in a
hall, is common in Chinese. This is mentioned because the terms Triad and Tong, while often
used to describe Chinese criminal gangs (Paciotti 2005), have alternative meanings and usage
that extend to legitimate benevolent societies. Third, the metaphorical and symbolic use of the
square, compasses, level, and plumb rule in early Chinese writings does not demonstrate any early
form of Freemasonry or link between Freemasonry and the Tiandihui or Hongmen societies.
Again, it was Milne who started scholars on the search for a Masonic connection. The number of
subsequent freemasons who have taken an interest in the Tiandihui is noteworthy. Carl Glick
(1890–1971), John S. M. Ward (1885–1949), and William G. Stirling (1887–?) are among the
researchers who were Masons, and it is to these early researchers that we can assign responsibility
for the once widely held belief that there was a common heritage between European Freemasonry
and the Tiandihui. The common origin theory has since been disavowed, the few surface similar-
ities being more than offset by the equally obvious differences, notably the ideological gulf that
separated regular, recognized European Freemasonry from the Tiandihui.
—Trevor W. McKeown
See also: China: Boxing Styles; China: Martial Arts; China: Martial Arts in Hong 
Kong; China: Martial Arts in Taiwan; China: Martial Theories; China: Martial 
Women; China: Weapons; China: Wrestling; Kuntao (in this volume); Belief Systems: 
China: Shaolin Temple Legends
113

China; Chinese Martial Arts and Money; Taiwanese Street Performances; and 
Secret Societies and Fraternal Organizations (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Cai Shaoqing. 1984. “On the Origin of the Gelaohui,” Modern China 10(4), October, 481-508, DOI:
10.1177/009770048401000406, via http://online.sagepub.com/, accessed October 16, 2009.
Glick, Carl, and Hung Sh’eng-hua. 1947. Swords of Silence: Chinese Secret Societies, Past and Present.
New York: Whittlesey House.
Haar, Barend ter. 2002. “Myth in the Shape of History: Elusive Triad Leaders,” via http://www
.leidenuniv.nl/~haarbjter/169_014.pdf, accessed November 19, 2008.
Henning, Stanley. 1999. “Academia Encounters the Chinese Martial Arts,” China Review
International 6(2), 319–332, via http://www.muse.jhu.edu/demo/china_review_international/v006/
6.2henning.pdf, accessed November 18, 2008.
Jordan, David K. 1985. “Sworn Brothers: A Study in Chinese Ritual Kinship.” In The Chinese Family
and Its Ritual Behavior, edited by Hsieh Jih-chang and Chuang Ying-chang. Taipei: Institute of 
Ethnology, Academica Sinica (Monographic Series B, No. 15), 232–262, 303–304, and 310–316,
corrected Internet edition, 2003, http://www.anthro.ucsd.edu/~dkjordan/scriptorium/jyebay.html,
accessed November 18, 2008.
Leung, Matthew. 2003. Canada 1863–2003: The Chinese Freemasons Contribution for 140 Years.
Vancouver, British Columbia: Overseas Press.
Milne, William. 1825. “Some Account of a Secret Association in China, entitled the Triad Society,”
Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland 1(2) (microform).
Morgan, W. P. 1960. Triad Societies in Hong Kong. Hong Kong: Hong Kong Government Press.
Murray, Dian H., and Qin Baoqi. 1994. The Origins of the Tiandihui: The Chinese Triads in Legend and
History. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Newbold, T. J., and F. W. Wilson. 1841. “The Chinese Secret Society of the Tien-Ti-Huih,” Journal
of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland 6, 137–142.
Overseas Chinese Affairs Commission. 2008. “Tiandihui,” http://edu.ocac.gov.tw/culture/chinese/
cul_kungfu/e/5-3-2-3.htm, accessed November 17, 2008.
Ownby, David, and Mary Somers Heidhues. 1993. “Secret Societies” Reconsidered: Perspectives on the
Social History of Modern South China and Southeast Asia. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe.
Paciotti, Brian. 2005. “Homicide in Seattle’s Chinatown, 1900–1940: Evaluating the Inﬂuence of
Social Organizations,” Homicide Studies 9(3), 229–255, DOI: 10.1177/1088767905277201, via
http://online.sagepub.com/, accessed October 16, 2009.
Pan, Lynn. 1997. Sons of the Yellow Emperor: A History of the Chinese Diaspora. New York: Kodansha
Globe.
Schlegel, Gustave. 1866. Thian Ti Hwui: The Hung-League or Heaven-Earth-League. Batavia: Lang &
Co., via http://books.google.com, accessed October 19, 2009.
Stirling, W. G., and J. S. M. Ward. 1925–1926. The Hung Society or the Society of Heaven and Earth,
three volumes. London: Baskerville Press.
Sun Yat-sen. 1970. Memoirs of a Chinese Revolutionary. New York: Arms Press.
Teng Ssu-yu. 1963. “Dr. Sun Yat-sen and Chinese Secret Societies,” in Studies on Asia, edited by
Robert Sakai, 81–99. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
CHINA: WEAPONS
Shang battles (sixteenth to eleventh centuries BCE) were fought with chariots and on foot, with
axes (fu and yue), spears (mao), long-poled dagger-axes (ge), halberds (ji, apparently evolved
from the dagger-axe) and a later variation, the hooked spear (goulian qiang, similar to American
114
China: Weapons
www.ebook3000.com

Civil War Confederate-issue pikes), large, spiked spears (shu, possibly a symbol of leadership and
used in chariot combat), and bows (gong), which were of composite construction by the end of
the Shang. This list, minus the ax, comprised the “ﬁve weapons” (wurong), recorded in the
Record of Rites (Li Ji, second century BCE), as practiced by farmer-soldiers in the winter.
Archery was held in high esteem from earliest times, all the way to the end of the old military
examination system in 1901. Crossbows (nu) were in use in China by the ﬁfth century BCE and
quickly became an important element in the warfare of the Warring States period (475–221 BCE).
Archery and charioteering, along with music, writing, calculation, and rites, constituted the Six
Arts thought essential to educating leaders in both the civil and military aspects of governance.
The ﬁrst description of Chinese martial arts as consisting of eighteen kinds, with the bow as
ﬁrst, appeared in a thirteenth-century memoir titled Mr. Cui Wei’s Northern Expedition (ca.
1210). However, except for the bow, the other seventeen weapons were left to one’s imagination.
The Song period (1127–1279) text called Complete Martial Classics (Wujing Zongyao)
provides illustrations of spears, halberds, axes, ﬂails, clubs, straight swords, and broadswords.
Listings of the supposed eighteen weapons began to be compiled during the Ming period
(1348–1644). Several of the listings include hand combat (baida, another term for Chinese-style
boxing, with its kicks, punches, seizes, and throws) as the last item. The list in the Ming-period
novel Water Margin, one of China’s most popular works of ﬁction with a strong martial arts
theme, differs slightly from all the others, but appears to be the most practical: spear (mao and
qiang), hammer (chui), bow (gong), crossbow (nu), musket (chong), whip (bian), iron whip (jian),
sword (also jian, but spoken with a different tone), chain (lian), ﬂying claw (wo), axes (fu and
yue), dagger-axe (ge), halberd (ji), shield (dun), staff (bang), and fork/trident (cha). In addition,
General Qi Jiguang (1528–1587) included shield-carrying javelin throwers and troops armed
with iron weapons that were said to look like bamboo branches (langxian, “cruel bamboos”).
These latter weapons purportedly were designed by Qi and were apparently used as a defense
against onslaughts by Japanese pirate swordsmen.
Cheng Zongyou, in his Shaolin Gunfa Chanzong (Elucidation of Shaolin Staff Methods,
1621), notes that the staff was considered the leader of weapons, as it allowed for practice of the
basic skills necessary to master the other poled weapons, while the spear was considered the king
of weapons, because it was the most versatile in combat. Cheng also claimed that Shaolin staff
technique actually comprised 70 percent spear and 30 percent staff techniques, probably allud-
ing to the effectiveness of stabbing as opposed to swatting and beating.
Archery also evolved during the Qing period. The Manchu bow was a different weapon from
the old Mongol bow, and most old bows found today are made after Manchu designs rather than
Mongol patterns.
In summary, archery, double-edged straight swords, single-edged, curved broadswords, and
long-poled weapons of various designs were common up to the twentieth century. Although
other weapons are in the canon, the most common weapons practiced today in ofﬁcially spon-
sored martial arts programs are straight sword, broadsword, staff, and spear.
—Stanley E. Henning
See also: China: Boxing Styles; China: Martial Arts; China: Martial Arts in Hong Kong; 
China: Martial Arts in Taiwan; China: Martial Theories; China: Martial Women; China: 
Shaolin Temple Legends; China: Wrestling; Kuntao (in this volume); Belief Systems: China; 
China: Weapons
115

Chinese Martial Arts and Money; Taiwanese Street Performances; and Secret 
Societies and Fraternal Organizations (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Cheng Dong et al., editors. 1990. Zhongguo Gudai Bingqi Tuji [Ancient Chinese Weapons—A
Collection of Pictures]. Beijing: Chinese People’s Liberation Army Publishing House.
Cheng Chongdou. 2005/1621. Shaolin Gunfa Chanzong [Elucidation of Shaolin Staff Methods].
Taipei: Hua Lian Chubanshe.
Duan Ping and Chu Yanpeng. 2007. Hanying Yinghan Wushu Cidian [Chinese–English and
English–Chinese Martial Arts Dictionary]. Beijing: China People’s Sports Publishing House.
Giles, Lionel, translator. 1910. The Art of War [by Sun Tzu], via http://classics.mit.edu/Tzu/artwar
.html, accessed October 3, 2009.
He Liangchen. 1984/1591. Zhenji Zhushi [Record of Tactics Annotated], edited by Chen Bingcai.
Beijing: Junshi Kexue Chubanshe.
Hua Yue. 1972. Cuiwei Xiansheng Beizheng Lu–Cuiwei Xiansheng Nanzheng Lu [Mr. Cuiwei’s Records
of Campaigns in the North and South]. Taipei: Guangwen Press.
Kang Gewu, editor. 1990. Zhongguo Wushu Shiyong Daquan [Chinese Martial Arts Complete Practical
Reference]. Beijing: Jinri Zhongguo Chubanshe.
Kennedy, Brian, and Elizabeth Guo. 2005. Chinese Martial Arts Training Manuals: A Historical Survey.
Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books.
Qi Jiguang. 1988/ca.1562. Jixiao Xinshu [New Book of Effective Discipline], edited by Ma Mingda.
Beijing: Renmin Tiyu Chubanshe.
Tang Shunzhi. 1973/ca. 1550. Wu Bian [Military Compendium], Volumes 133–135, Qianji, juan 5,
qinding siku quanshu. Taipei: Shangwu Yinshuguan.
Wu Shu. 1935. Shoubi Lu [Record of the Arm]. Shanghai: Dadong Shuju.
Xie Zhaozhe. 1935/ca. 1600. Wu Za Zu [Five Miscellaneous Offerings]. Shanghai: Zhongyang Shudian.
Yang Hong. 1983. Gudai Bingqi Shihua [Historical Discussion of Ancient Weapons]. Shanghai: Kexue
Jixu Chubanshe.
CHINA: WRESTLING
Wrestling or grappling is the nucleus for Chinese bare-handed martial arts, going back to the dawn
of Chinese civilization. It has consisted of various forms and been called by different names over
the centuries based on changing times, China’s vast geographical setting, and multiethnic society.
From earliest times it was a basic military combat skill that complemented weapons techniques.
Chinese wrestling’s mythological origins are found in the ﬁght between the Yellow Emperor
(Huang-di, legendary reign ca. 2697 BCE) and his rival Chi You, the inventor of weapons. Chi
You’s followers are said to have donned animal-horn headdresses to butt their opponents in
hand-to-hand combat. Thus, one of the earliest names for wrestling was juedi (horn butting).
Another early term, used as a verb, bo (to seize or strike), to describe bare-handed ﬁghting,
including wrestling, was apparently also used as a noun to describe boxing. Thus, we can see the
complementary relationship between Chinese wrestling and boxing, which, in earliest times,
were likely barely distinguishable.
During the Spring and Autumn Annals period (770–476 BCE), exceptional wrestlers were
selected to serve as bodyguards to accompany ﬁeld commanders in their chariots. This tradition
is vividly portrayed centuries later in the powerful guardian ﬁgures associated with Buddhist art.
In the Record of Rites (Li Ji, second century BCE), wrestling, termed jueli (compare strength),
is described, along with archery, as a major element of military training carried out during the
116
China: Wrestling
www.ebook3000.com

winter months after the harvest. During the Qin period (221–207 BCE), wrestling (juedi, the
accepted formal name) was ofﬁcially designated as the ceremonial military sport.
During the Former Han period (206–208 BCE), wrestling and boxing (shoubo [hand strik-
ing]) became more clearly distinguishable, the former more of a sport emphasizing holds and
throws, and the latter retaining the deadlier, no-holds-barred, hand-to-hand combat skills.
However, wrestling’s full evolution as a sport with rules and limits was uneven. The ofﬁcial Tang
History (618–960 CE) mentions wrestling matches held in the imperial palace in which heads
were smashed, arms broken, and blood ﬂowed freely.
Another trend discernible during the Former Han was the exchange of martial arts skills
between China and the nomadic peoples to the north. One of Han emperor Wu’s (140–87 BCE)
bodyguards, Jin Ridi, a Xiongnu (ancestors of the Mongols), used a skill called shuaihu (a neck-
lock throw) to defeat a would-be assassin. A similar term, shuaijiao (leg throw), ultimately
became the modern common name for Chinese wrestling. This was also likely the period when
both Chinese boxing (shoubo) and wrestling (juedi) were introduced to the Korean peninsula
through military colonies established and maintained as far south as Pyongyang between
108 BCE and 313 CE. These were the terms used for bare-handed Korean military martial arts
throughout the Koryo period (918–1392) and into the following early Yi period.
Wrestling tournaments were grand occasions for both commoners and the elite. Folk matches
drew crowds from many miles around, while imperial tournaments were accompanied by much
pomp, with rows of military drummers on either side of the wrestling ring. Tang emperor Zhuang
Zong (924–926) personally challenged his guests and offered prizes if they could beat him. One
individual defeated him and was made governor of a prefecture.
Some of what we know about wrestling can be found in the Record of Wrestling (Jueli Ji,
ca. 960), the very existence of which is testimony to the role of wrestling in Chinese popular cul-
ture. In addition to the older terms, juedi and jueli, it lists several later terms, including xiangpu,
a colloquial form for popular folk wrestling (the term ﬁrst appears between 265 and 316 CE); the
term adopted in Japan for sumo, and xiangfei, a local term used in Sichuan and Hebei.
Contemporary descriptions of society in the Song Dynasty (960–1279) capitals of Kaifeng
and Hangzhou reveal that wrestling enjoyed widespread popularity. Wrestling associations were
among the specialty groups abounding in the capital of Hangzhou. Open-air matches were held
at specially designated areas in and around the city, sometimes in spacious temple grounds. Peo-
ple came from all around to watch and participate. The wrestlers included both men and women,
and there were even mixed male–female matches, such as the one described in the novel Water
Margin (also known as All Men Are Brothers or Outlaws of the Marsh). In this episode, a woman,
Woman Duan Number Three, confronts Wang Qing. Wang fools her and ﬂips her to the ground,
but immediately snatches her up with a move called “Tiger Embraces His Head.” The scholar-
ofﬁcial Sima Guang, in a memorial to court (1062), opposed the spectacle of scantily clad
women wrestlers. Moreover, the elite palace guards or Inner Group were all top-ﬂight wrestlers.
The Mongols who ruled China from 1271 to 1368 emphasized the “men’s three competitive
skills” of riding, archery, and wrestling. They were key elements tested in competition for lead-
ership positions. To say that these were only men’s skills, however, is somewhat misleading, for
women also practiced them. Travels of Marco Polo (ca. 1300) describes one instance where the
daughter of Kaidu Khan (1230–1301, grandson of Ogodei Khan, 1186–1241) agreed to marry
any man who could best her in wrestling. But, much to the dismay of her family and other well-
wishers, she took her skill seriously, defeated all hopefuls, and remained single. The Mongols
China: Wrestling
117

prohibited the Han Chinese from practicing their own traditional martial arts, which by this
time consisted mainly of boxing and weapons routines.
Like the Mongols, the Manchus, who ruled China between 1644 and 1911, stressed riding,
archery, and wrestling. They too attempted to place restrictions on Han Chinese martial arts
practices, which they associated with subversive activities. Emperor Kangxi (1662–1722) is said
to have established an elite Expert Wrestlers Banner (Shanpu Ying) to reward the
strongmen/bodyguards he used to keep palace intrigues in check. Manchu emperors actively
encouraged wrestling, called buku, among their own people and used it as a political and diplo-
matic tool in their relations with the Mongols. The Tibetans were also fond of wrestling, and this
activity is depicted in a wall mural in the Potala Palace.
The main objective of Chinese wrestling, regardless of local variations of style (such as Beijing,
Baoding, Tianjin, or Mongolian), is to throw the opponent to the ground by a combination of
seizing techniques, arm maneuvers (twists and turns), and leg maneuvers (sweeps and hooks). A
rough-and-tumble folk sport, it was practiced under Spartan conditions, without mats, and
wrestlers practiced rolling in a fetal position to lessen the impact from hitting the ground.
In the turmoil following in the wake of the Communist rise to power in China and ﬁnally
the split between the People’s Republic of China and Taiwan in 1949, a number of Chinese
wrestling masters emigrated to Taiwan. Among them was shuaijiao (or, as it is more commonly
spelled outside China, shuai-chiao) champion Chang Tung-sheng (1908–1986). Chang and his
students were instrumental in popularizing the system outside of Asia.
Chinese wrestling was popularized in the twentieth century as the sport shuaijiao. The modern
form is a type of jacketed wrestling, although practitioners assert that throwing in shuaijiao does not
depend on grabbing the opponent’s jacket or clothing. The priority is to grab the muscle and bone
through the clothing in order to control and throw down the opponent. However, the use of the
competitor’s heavy, quilted, short-sleeved jacket, which wraps tightly around the torso and is tied
with a canvas belt, adds variety to the techniques used in controlling and throwing the opponent.
Fast footwork using sweeps, inner hooks, and kicks to the opponent’s legs are combined with the use
of the arms to control and strike in order to create a two-directional action, making a powerful throw.
There is no mat or groundwork in shuaijiao. After the opponent is thrown to the ground, one
strives to maintain the superior standing position. This is particularly the case against a larger
opponent, who because of greater body weight will generally have the advantage in grappling on
the ground. In a self-defense situation, after the opponent is thrown a shuaijiao, the practitioner
immediately applies a joint lock and executes hand strikes or kicks with the knee or foot to vital
areas of the falling or downed opponent.
Modern shuaijiao training utilizes individual drills, work with partners, and exercises employ-
ing apparatus. Balance, ﬂexibility, strength, and body awareness are developed through move-
ment such as hand and foot drills. After attaining proﬁciency in solo drills, the trainee advances
to work with a partner. Practicing with a partner allows one to add power and coordination to
techniques. Drills against full-speed punches, kicks, and grappling attacks are practiced to aid in
training for san-shou (Chinese freestyle kickboxing) and self-defense. Learning, remembering,
and deploying martial arts techniques quickly, while difﬁcult in training, becomes even more
difﬁcult under stress. In order to teach effective physical applications of shuaijiao techniques,
free sparring drills and related mock-physical-encounter situations are of paramount importance
in the training. Work with various types of equipment (striking and kicking the heavy bag,
118
China: Wrestling
www.ebook3000.com

weight training, and work with canvas bags ﬁlled with steel shot) supplements the solo and part-
ner practice of techniques.
Contemporary shuaijiao utilizes a ranking system divided into ten levels. The ﬁrst version of
the ranking system was created by Chang Tung-sheng for the Central Police College of Taiwan.
The ranking system follows the Japanese model of beginner (chieh) levels in descending order of
ﬁfth through ﬁrst to expert (teng) levels of ﬁrst through tenth. A colored belt signifying rank is
worn with the uniform. The current ranking system was developed by Chang and the author of
this article and is recognized by the International Shuai-chiao Association and the United States
Shuai-chiao Association (USSA).
Shuaijiao has developed an international following. In the United States, the USSA over-
sees the activities of the system, and in the spring of 2000 the Pan-American Shuai-chiao
Federation was established in São Paulo, Brazil. The ﬁrst Pan-American Shuai-chiao tourna-
ment was held in the following year.
—Chi-hsiu D. Weng
See also: China: Boxing Styles; China: Martial Arts; China: Martial Arts in 
Hong Kong; China: Martial Arts in Taiwan; China: Martial Theories; China: 
Martial Women; China: Shaolin Temple Legends; China: Weapons; Kuntao 
(in this volume); Belief Systems: China; Chinese Martial Arts and Money; 
Taiwanese Street Performances; and Secret Societies and 
Fraternal Organizations (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Chen Panling. 1969. Shuaijiaoshu [Wrestling]. Taipei: Zhenshanmei Press.
Cheng Dali. 1995. Zhongguo Wushu—Lishi yu Wenhua [Chinese Martial Arts—History and Culture].
Chengdu: Sichuan University Press.
Guo Panxi. 1996. Zhongguo Minjian Youxi yu Jingji [Chinese Folk Games and Competitive Sports].
Shanghai: Shanghai Joint Publishers.
Latham, Michael, translator. 1976. The Travels of Marco Polo. New York: Penguin Books.
Liu Bingguo. 1987. Zhongguo Gudai Tiyu Shihua [Remarks on Ancient Chinese Physical Culture
History]. Beijing: Cultural Relics Press.
Meng Yuanlao et al. 1962/ca. 960–1279. Dongjing Menghua Lu: Wai Sizhong [Dreams of the Eastern
Capital, and Four Others]. Shanghai: Zhonghua Shuju.
Smith, Robert W. 1974. Chinese Boxing: Masters and Methods. New York: Kodansha International.
Smith, Robert W. 1999. Martial Musings: A Portrayal of Martial Arts in the 20th Century. Erie, PA: Via
Media Publishing Company.
Tiao Luzi. 1815/ca. 960. Jueli Ji [Record of Wrestling], edited by Hu Ting. Linlang Mishi Congshu.
Tong Zhongyi. 1968/1935. Zhongguo Shuaijiaofa [Chinese Wrestling Techniques]. Taipei: Hualian Press.
Weng, Chi-hsiu D. 1984. Fundamentals of Shuai Chiao: The Ancient Fighting Art. Privately printed.
JAPAN: JUJUTSU-BASED SYSTEMS
Jujutsu (literally “ﬂexible art”) is an art of ﬁghting, generally without weapons, that was
developed in Japan.
Historically, jujutsu was known by many names, including torite, ju, wa, taijutsu, kogusoku,
kenpo, and hakuda, but jujutsu and yawara were the most common. Early sources noted that
Japan: Jujutsu-based Systems
119

jujutsu was designed to attack physiological weak points using joint locks, throws, chokes,
strikes, and kicks. The idea was to throw or kill an opponent. Notionally, kenpo and hakuda
schools used more striking and kicking techniques (atemi waza), whereas toride and kogusoku
styles tended to focus on seizing and controlling an opponent.
There are a bewildering array of jujutsu schools, so here we have chosen to describe jujutsu
in general before describing two modern descendents, namely Kodokan judo (i.e., the method
developed by Kano Jigoro, 1860–1938) and aikido (i.e., the method developed by Ueshiba
Morihei (1883–1969).
JUJUTSU
The fundamental principle of jujutsu is ju, a word meaning “ﬂexibility” or “pliancy.” The origi-
nal reference is to Huang Shi Gong’s Three Strategies (San Lue, ca. third century BCE), which is
one of the “Seven Military Classics” of ancient and medieval China. The text was also popular
in Japan, and in English, the ﬁrst stratagem of the three can be read “In yielding there is
strength” (in modern Japanese, ju yoku go o sei suru) (Kodokan 1955, 5). The phrase describes a
strategy in which force is not met with force but rather deﬂected, redirected, or otherwise used
against the attacker. Some jujutsu styles (ryu-ha) stress a variety of philosophic principles (typi-
cally involving neo-Confucian or Taoist concepts), while other styles emphasize esoteric Bud-
dhist teachings (mikkyo) that provide spiritual support and protection against evil or physical
harm.
Because jujutsu techniques are potentially deadly or incapacitating, they are traditionally
practiced via kata (predetermined forms) rather than free sparring (randori). Nonetheless, there
were competitions between jujutsu schools, and over time, informal rules were developed that
laid the groundwork for twentieth-century competition rules. In jujutsu competition rules, the
most dangerous techniques were restricted, and bouts typically ended when one competitor was
in submission, pinned, thrown ﬂat on his back, or incapacitated. Despite these efforts, early
jujutsu competition was dangerous, and some competitors bid their families farewell before com-
petition, knowing they might not return alive (Yamada 1997, 95).
ORIGINS
Jujutsu is based on indigenous Japanese battleﬁeld grappling techniques, with inﬂuences from
China and, more recently, the rest of the world. Japanese history records the grappling battles of
great warriors, the earliest recorded in the Nihon Shoki (Chronicles of Japan, ca. 720 CE).
As a military art, jujutsu is one of the traditional “eighteen martial arts” (bugei juhappan) pre-
scribed for the ultimate samurai. There is not one standard list, but surviving lists typically
include methods for using bows (kyujutsu), spears (sojutsu), regular-length swords (katana), short
swords (kodachi), sword drawing (battojutsu), metal truncheons (jutte), throwing knives
(shuriken), glaives (swordlike blades mounted on poles; naginata), quarterstaffs (bo), ﬁrearms
(hojutsu), sickle-and-chain weapons (kusari-gama), grappling and seizing (e.g., jujutsu), various
binding or tying skills (hojojutsu), horsemanship (bajutsu), swimming (suiei jutsu), and espionage
(ninpo). In reality, lower-ranking samurai charged with security duties might focus on skills in
120
Japan: Jujutsu
www.ebook3000.com

jujutsu and truncheons while higher-ranking samurai might focus on the bow, horsemanship,
and the sword. The conceptual perfect samurai would master all eighteen martial arts, but the
preeminent battle martial arts during the pre-musketry era were the bow, horsemanship, sword,
and spear (Sasama 2003, 611).
Because early jujutsu was ﬁrst and foremost a battleﬁeld art, it was assumed that both oppo-
nents would be wearing full Japanese armor. Thus, the kicks and punches normal in unarmored
combat would be ineffective. Accordingly, early systems developed distinctive techniques for
armored grappling (yoroi kumiuchi). In armored grappling, the idea was to control the opponent’s
entire body, either by grasping openings in the armor or by controlling large joints such as the
elbow. The goals were either to throw the opponent to the ground headﬁrst, thereby breaking
his neck, or to pinion him on the ground where he could be stabbed with a dagger. To this day,
some koryu (old-style) jujutsu styles such as Yagyu Shingan ryu still practice armored techniques.
As the use of full armor declined, as a result of both the advent of ﬁrearms and the general peace
of the Tokugawa Era (1603–1868), jujutsu techniques increasingly focused on unarmored com-
bat. As applications became increasingly civilian in nature, systems also began including non-
combative techniques such as arresting and resuscitation methods, along with simple sport
(Matsuda 1978, 105).
EARLY SYSTEMS
Between 1530 and 1860, jujutsu systems proliferated. During the 1960s, historian Imamura
Yoshio (1989, 339–344) compared six different historical works published between 1716 and
1912, and among those six texts, he documented an astonishing 167 separately named jujutsu
schools. Most of these were derivative systems, because only ﬁve of these systems were named by
all six sources.
The oldest extent jujutsu system is Takeuchi ryu (often written Takenouchi ryu), founded in
1532. In 2009, the Takeuchi family, currently the ﬁfteenth generation descendants of the
founder, still practiced and taught the art. Typical of sixteenth-century Japanese martial arts,
Takeuchi ryu is a comprehensive martial art (sogo bujutsu) that includes not only unarmed
jujutsu but also long weapons and a variety of small weapons. In comprehensive systems, even
standard household items such as ﬁreplace tongs and serving trays can have deadly uses. Such
uses can be offensive, as in assassinations, or defensive, as in situations where a samurai suddenly
attacked might not have his primary weapons. Takeuchi ryu is the root of one of the largest fam-
ilies of jujutsu styles; it spawned over thirty branch ryu and was taught in over thirty clans.
Schools derived from Takeuchi ryu still practiced include Sousuishitsu ryu jujutsu and Araki ryu
torite-kogusoku, but others are lost to history and are known today only by name and lineage
(Takenouchi Ryu Hensan I-in Kai 1979, 252).
Yoshin ryu was an important jujutsu system that appears to have been inﬂuenced by Chinese
philosophy, and perhaps techniques. The name means “willow spirit school,” and the idea was
to capture the spirit of the willow tree’s ﬂexibility. According to the story, the system’s founder,
Akiyama Shirobi (ﬂourished 1630s), studied medicine in China, where he learned a variety of
resuscitation techniques (kappo). Upon returning to Japan, Akiyama opened a jujutsu school.
The school soon failed, reportedly because Akiyama’s techniques were few and crude. He
Japan: Jujutsu
121

retreated to a temple to practice and ponder his art, and when he returned, he had a greatly
expanded number of more sophisticated techniques. In any event, his school grew into one of
the most widespread jujutsu ryu, and it spawned many inﬂuential branches.
A third popular system was Kito ryu. As early as 1710, some Kito ryu teachers termed their
art judo, the “way of ﬂexibility,” to highlight that their actions and philosophy represented a path
to personal spiritual development rather than simply a school of combative techniques. Certain
Kito ryu scrolls (densho) cite the duality of nature using the concepts of yin and yang (Japanese:
in’yo), and explore philosophic aspects of attack and defense using similarly esoteric concepts
(Watanabe 1971). Although Kito ryu was taught throughout Japan throughout the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries (and taught in Oregon and British Columbia into the 1920s), it is
essentially extinct today. Nonetheless, Kodokan judo’s Koshiki-no-Kata (Ancient Form) pre-
serves a distinctive Kito ryu kata, which was originally intended for the grappling of armored
warriors; accordingly, although performed in lightweight judo gi, it is performed as if both per-
formers are clad in heavy armor (Kodokan 1955, 227). Demonstrated proﬁciency in this kata is
a requirement for promotion for high-graded judo practitioners, and it is generally considered to
be the most esoteric and difﬁcult judo kata.
A fourth important system was Tenjin Shin’yo ryu (“Divine True Willow School”). This system
dates to the 1830s. It was taught in clan schools throughout Japan, and at the Kobusho, the shogu-
nate’s ofﬁcial military academy, from 1856 to 1866. The Kobusho itself was part of a last-ditch effort
by the Tokugawa government to modernize its military in the face of Western incursions. Thus, stu-
dents learned artillery techniques and studied Western languages, but even at this late date, it was
still considered important for the cream of the samurai class to study the traditional martial arts.
Some were proprietary systems (otome ryu, internal schools), and even displays of their tech-
niques to outsiders were forbidden. An example is the Yagyu Shingan ryu, which was taught only
to members of the Date clan of northeast Honshu. But most styles were widely taught in multi-
ple clans across Japan, and there were other systems that were taught publicly, even to com-
moners (Imamura 1989, 375).
Schools teaching archery (kyujutsu), swordsmanship, and glaive ﬁghting (naginata) often
taught simple jujutsu techniques to break an opponent’s grasp, or to defend one’s person when
the primary weapon failed. The names of these techniques are recorded in instruction scrolls and
lists of techniques (mokuroku). For example, Yamato ryu kyujutsu (archery) scrolls cite a series of
jujutsu techniques, as did the Niten ryu of the famous swordsman Miyamoto Musashi
(1582–1645). Unfortunately, only the names have survived; most of the actual techniques have
been lost (Yokoyama 1943, 381).
Most of jujutsu’s techniques were developed in Japan, but China is a legendary source of
inspiration. China and Japan have exchanged visitors for over 1,000 years, and travelers and vis-
iting warriors brought grappling and striking techniques with them. From a jujutsu standpoint,
the most famous of these Chinese visitors is Chin Genpin (1587–1671; Pinyin, Chen Yuanyun;
also transliterated as Chen Yuan-pin). According to the story, during the early seventeenth cen-
tury, Chen lodged at the Kokushoji Temple in Edo. His companions included three ronin. Chin
taught the ronin some quanfa (Chinese martial art) techniques, and later, the ronin established
their own jujutsu ryu, which in turn spawned a number of other schools, some very inﬂuential.
Thus, Chin became legendary in Japan. However, Chin was not a warrior. Instead, he devoted
his life to pottery and poetry and was never again noted to have practiced or written about
122
Japan: Jujutsu
www.ebook3000.com

martial arts. Regardless of the legend, numerous records clearly indicate that jujutsu predates his
arrival in Japan (Kodokan 1955, 6).
JUJUTSU AFTER 1868
Following the Meiji Restoration of 1867–1868, the old samurai ways fell into ofﬁcial disfavor. Per-
haps the biggest blow to traditional jujutsu came in 1871, when the government abolished clans.
With this action, the ﬁnancial and social support for most traditional jujutsu schools disappeared,
and teachers had to seek new employment. Public perception of jujutsu plunged, as some instruc-
tors sought to survive by participating in sensational public spectacles pitting jujutsu against sumo-
tori (sumo wrestlers), or taught their arts to rufﬁans and criminals (Lindsay and Kano 1887).
Jujutsu was not without its advocates, and as early as 1883 the Ministry of Education com-
missioned a study to evaluate the advantages and drawbacks of adopting jujutsu and kenjutsu as
physical education courses in the Japanese public school system. The decision of this study was
not to adopt them, largely over concerns about possible harm to young, developing bodies
(Yorizumi 2002, 145). Nonetheless, jujutsu was evolving, and about the same time, Nihon den
Kodokan judo was developed.
Kodokan judo is a modern jujutsu style founded in 1882 by Kano Jigoro. Today, this system
is generally known simply as “judo,” but well into the 1910s it was often called Kano ryu jujutsu.
Kano was a prominent educator with good connections in the Japanese government. While still
a young man, he had received certiﬁcates of mastery in both Tenjin Shin’yo ryu and Kito ryu
jujutsu, and these arts provided the technical basis for Kodokan judo. He was a relentless, tal-
ented, and well-known researcher, and he often spoke publicly of jujutsu as a Japanese national
heritage to be cherished and protected. Thus, several jujutsu instructors presented their secret
knowledge to him rather than have it disappear forever.
The Tokyo Metropolitan Police was another institution that played an important role in pre-
serving and developing modern jujutsu. The Tokyo Metropolitan Police was established in 1874, and
it was Japan’s ﬁrst modern police force. Many of its earliest patrolman recruits were former samurai,
accustomed to strenuous martial arts training, but others were raw beginners. The earliest formal
instruction involved kenjutsu, partly because patrolmen were armed with swords, and partly because
the ﬁrst commissioner, Kawaji Toshiyoshi (1836–1879) was himself a former sword instructor.
Instructors were hired from a variety of traditional ryu. For example, Totsuka Hikosuke (1813–1886),
a prominent police instructor of the 1870s and 1880s, was from the Yoshin ryu (Baelz 1932, 74;
Yorizumi 2002). The objective of these police jujutsu trainers was to teach defenses against unarmed
attacks, weapon retention, and methods for arresting suspects. The famous police jujutsu competi-
tion of 1886 helped launch the success of Kodokan judo, but the Metropolitan Police continued to
employ jujutsu instructors for years afterwards. In the interests of standardization, police jujutsu
instructors began experimenting and developing their own jujutsu-based kata. Japanese police con-
tinued teaching these jujutsu-based grappling techniques in parallel with their study of judo until
after World War II, when they adopted their current arresting techniques (taihojutsu) (Metropolitan
Police Agency 1965, 397). Today, prewar police kata are only rarely demonstrated. After 1908, the
Japanese prison system also began providing jujutsu training to guards. This latter program was based
on theories discussed in the United States but not implemented there (Stutsman 1931, 68).
A third institution involved in the centralization and modernization of jujutsu was the Dai
Nippon Butokukai (Greater Japan Martial Virtues Society). The Butokukai, a national-level
Japan: Jujutsu
123

martial arts association, was established in Kyoto in 1895. Originally, it was intended to be the
central governing body of kenjutsu, but in 1899 it organized a jujutsu division, and soon that divi-
sion was developing rules for regional interdisciplinary competitions (shiai). In 1906, to standard-
ize instruction, the Butokukai organized a jujutsu kata research committee in Kyoto. The
committee was chaired by Kano Jigoro, and its members included eighteen heads or senior mem-
bers of several of the largest traditional systems, including Takeuchi ryu, Takeuchi Santo ryu, Kito
ryu, Yoshin ryu, Shiten ryu, and Fusen ryu. The committee recommended two standard Butokukai
jujutsu kata: Nage-no-Kata (Throwing Forms) and Kime-no-Kata (Decisive Forms, a series of
defenses against armed and unarmed attacks) (Kano 1906, 3). Nage-no-Kata was later modiﬁed,
but both kata continue to be practiced today as two of the eight main Kodokan judo kata.
OVERSEAS TRANSMISSION
Some of the earliest demonstrations of Japanese martial arts overseas were made by jujutsu prac-
titioners. Often the largest and most noted Western wrestlers, faced with a bewildering array of
unknown techniques and the unfamiliarity of “jacketed wrestling,” were subdued by much
smaller Japanese opponents. For example, on December 22, 1904, Higashi Katsukuma (dates
unknown) gave a demonstration to the New York Police Department. Higashi was 
160 centimeters (63 inches) tall, and weighed about 54 kilograms (120 pounds). He took on an
88-kilogram (195-pound) policeman named Selig Whitman. According to a report published in
the Titusville Morning Herald on December 26, 1904, “The Japanese allowed the wrestler to select
a hold that pleased him and in half a minute the big fellow had collapsed, black in the face and
unconscious. That was quite enough for the rest of the big men.”
Many of the earliest European and American practitioners of Japanese martial arts were
originally jujutsu practitioners. Examples include E. J. Harrison (1873–1961), who started
training in jujutsu in Yokohama in 1897; E. W. Barton-Wright (1860–1951), who studied
jujutsu while working in Japan during the 1890s; and Risher Thornberry (1875–1937), who was
graded in Jigo Tenshin-ryu jujutsu in 1905. In 1902, Barton-Wright brought two Japanese,
including Tani Yukio (1881–1950), to London to teach jujutsu at his Bartitsu Club. In 1920,
Tani was recruited into the Kodokan by Kano himself, and Tani went on become one of the ﬁrst
instructors of Kodokan judo in England. After 1907, Thornberry became a pioneer of Japanese-
based self-defense methods (goshinjutsu) in California. Meanwhile, during the early 1910s, Har-
rison published one of the ﬁrst English-language books to describe Japanese martial culture
accurately (Harrison 1913). Some overseas jujutsu instructors capitalized on the growing repu-
tation of Kodokan judo by renaming their own art judo or appropriating the name “Kano.” See,
for example, the jujutsu documented in The Complete Kano Jiu-Jitsu (1906). The exact style
described in this book is not presently known, but it is not Kodokan judo. At the same time,
other people began using the term “jujitsu,” or some variant thereof, to describe eclectic arts
originally based on Japanese methods that did not maintain direct ties to any speciﬁc Japanese
tradition. Examples include S. Henry Okazaki’s Danzan Ryu jujutsu and Gracie Jiu-Jitsu.
MODERN (GENDAI) JUJUTSU
Kano Jigoro was not the only Japanese person to try to adopt jujutsu techniques to the modern
world. Other groups that tried to compete with judo included Higo ryu taijutsu, a 1902 synthesis of
124
Japan: Jujutsu
www.ebook3000.com

six famous Kumamoto schools, and Rokugo ryu, a syncretic style based in Tokyo. Most of these
schools died out, unable to compete with judo. Nonetheless, some descendent schools survive.
Examples of gendai jujutsu practiced in Japan today include Nihon jujutsu¸ developed after World
War II by Sato Shizuya (1929–), a former Kodokan judo instructor and a student of aikibujutsu
under Tomiki Kenji (1900–1979, founder of Shodokan aikido), and Daiwado ryu, developed by
Sato Kinbei (1925–1999), based on his study of numerous ancient styles. Both systems have grow-
ing international connections and associated foreign dojo (training halls) (Nihon Jujutsu [no date];
Sato 1998). Among the more unusual adaptations is Wado Ryu karate, which combines a com-
plete, embedded Shindo Yoshin Ryu jujutsu syllabus with a comprehensive karate training program.
Today, traditional Japanese jujutsu styles are practiced mostly in small clubs. While some
styles have several active dojo across Japan, others remain active only in a single location. The
largest old-style (koryu) organizations are the Kobudo Shinkokai and the Kobudo Kyokai. Both
these organizations foster legitimate traditional martial arts, and between them they have some
forty active traditional koryu jujutsu member groups (Nihon Budo Kyokai).
Increasingly, the senior practitioners of koryu jujutsu in and outside Japan include foreigners.
RANK AND GRADING
Traditional jujutsu schools do not use a color belt system. Color belts were introduced only dur-
ing the 1880s, by Kano Jigoro. Instead, as in many traditional Japanese arts, the traditional
schools award rank via a series of certiﬁcations.
Typical names for these certiﬁcations include shoden, chuden, and okuden (the ﬁrst, middle,
and ﬁnal, or “secret” teachings or principles), but there are other names. Each certiﬁcation rep-
resents successful mastery of an increasing range of the system’s curriculum and philosophy.
An additional intermediate certiﬁcation sometimes awarded is the mokuroku (complete list-
ing of the system’s techniques). The ultimate in many schools is the menkyo kaiden (complete
licensing) or similar documentation that acknowledges the recipient as a full master of the art.
These certiﬁcates are typically long lists of techniques, and instructions are sketchy at best. A
few mokuroku and menkyo kaiden documents list techniques in sequence and also include
detailed sketches of some techniques. However, they are not instruction manuals, and typically
only fully trained adepts can decipher them. In other schools, the ﬁnal stage involved okuden
(secret oral teachings—sometimes just called kuden). These teachings often included philo-
sophic or religious indoctrination, usually esoteric Buddhist teachings, usually from the ancient
Tendai or Shingon Buddhist esoteric sects (mikkyo) or shamanistic teachings (shugendo).
Although religious concepts are not an essential (or even common) central theme in jujutsu,
some schools (or at least, their teachers) used these quasi-religious teachings to steel warriors for
combat and to control evil, as post-traumatic stress was then termed.
—Lance Gatling
See also: Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu; China: Wrestling; Japan: Ninpo; Japan: Shorinji Kempo; Korea:
Hapkido (in this volume); Belief Systems: Japanese Budo, Bugei, and Bujutsu; Belief Systems:
Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and 
Religion since 1868; Judo in Japan, 1931–1950; Globalization of Martial Arts; Asian 
Martial Arts in the United States and Canada; Bartitsu; Sambo; Written Texts: Japan; American
Japan: Jujutsu
125

Judo, 1942–1945; Military Unarmed Fighting Systems in the United States; Police Defensive 
Tactics Training in the United States; Social and Cultural Evolution of Kendo; Political 
Conﬂict and Aikido, 1931–1942; and Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Baelz, Erwin. 1932. Awakening Japan: The Diary of a German Doctor: Erwin Baelz, edited by Toku
Baelz, translated from the German by Eden and Cedar Paul. New York: Viking Press.
Danzan Ryu Jujutsu. No date. “Danzan Ryu Jujutsu [Hawaiian Style Jujutsu].” http://www.danzan.com,
accessed November 29, 2008.
Draeger, Donn F. 1982. The Martial Arts and Ways of Japan, Volume II: Classical Budo. Tokyo: John
Weatherhill.
Hancock, H. Irving, and Katsukuma Higashi. 1906. The Complete Kano Jiu-Jitsu, Jiudo: The Ofﬁcial
Jiu-Jitsu of the Japanese Government. New York: G. P. Putnam.
Harrison, E. J. 1913. The Fighting Spirit of Japan and Other Studies. London: Fisher Unwin.
Imamura Yoshio. 1989. Jukyu Seiki ni Okeru Nihon Taiiku no Kenkyu [Studies in Nineteenth-Century
Japanese Physical Education], corrected edition. Tokyo: Daiichi Shobo.
Kano Jigoro, Chairman. 1906. Dai Nippon Butokukai Seitai Jujutsu Kata [Greater Japan Martial Virtues
Society Standard Jujutsu Kata]. Kyoto: Dai Nippon Butokukai.
Kodokan. 1955. Kodokan Judo. Tokyo: Kodansha.
Lindsay, Thomas, and Kano Jigoro. 1889. “Jujutsu: The Old Samurai Art of Fighting without
Weapons,” 192–205, Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, Volume XVI, Part III, via
http://judoinfo.com/kano6.htm, accessed November 11, 2008.
Matsuda Ryuchi. 1978. Hiden Nihon Jujutsu [The Secrets of Japanese Jujutsu]. Tokyo: Shin Jinbutsu
Ourai-sha.
Metropolitan Police Agency Patrol Division Education Section. 1965. Keishicho Budo Kyuju-nen Shi
[Metropolitan Police Agency Martial Arts 90-Year History]. Tokyo: Metropolitan Police Agency.
Nihon Jujutsu. No date. “Nihon Jujutsu [Japanese Jujutsu].” http://www.nihonjujutsu.com, accessed
November 30, 2008.
Nihon Kobudo Kyokai. No date. “Nihon Kobudo Kyokai [Japanese Old Martial Way Association].”
http://www.nipponbudokan.or.jp/shinkoujigyou/kankeidantai_03.html, accessed November 12, 2008.
Sasama Yoshihiko, editor. 2003. Nihon Budo Jiten [Japan Martial Arts Dictionary]. Tokyo: Kashiwa Shobo.
Sato Kinbei. 1998. Jujutsu Nyumon [Jujutsu Introduction]. Tokyo: Baseball Magazine.
Small Circle Jujutsu. No date. “Small Circle Jujutsu,” http://www.smallcirclejujitsu.com, accessed
November 30, 2008.
Stutsman, Jesse O. 1931. “The Prison Staff,” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social
Science Volume 157, Prisons of Tomorrow, September, 62–71, via http://www.jstor.org/
stable/1018581, accessed October 14, 2009.
Takenouchi Ryu Hensan I-in Kai. 1979. Takenouchi Ryu [Takenouchi Style]. Tokyo: Nochibo
Shuppan Sha.
Titusville Morning Herald. 1904. “A Jiu-Jitsu Demonstration,” December 26, 4, via http://www
.newspaperarchive.com, accessed October 20, 2009.
Todo Yoshiaki, and Murata Naoki. 2002. Jujutsu no Genryu: Takeuchi Kogusoku Koshinomawari ni
kansuru Kenkyu [The Roots of Jujutsu: A Study of “Takenouchi-ryu Kogusoku–Koshinomawari”]
Tokyo: Bulletin of the Association for the Scientiﬁc Studies on Judo, Report IX.
Watanabe Ichiro, editor. 1971. Shiryo Meiji Budo Shi [Meiji Budo History—Historical Documents].
Tokyo: Shin Jinbutsu Ourai-sha.
Yamada Minoru. 1997. Yawara: Shirarezaru Nihon Jujutsu no Sekai [Yawara: The Unknown World of
Japanese Jujutsu]. Tokyo: BAB Japan.
Yokoyama Kendo. 1943. Nihon Budo Shi [Japan Budo History]. Tokyo: Shimazu Shobo.
Yorizumi Kazuaki. 2002. “E. Berutsu no kenjutsu jujutsu rikai ni kansuru ichiyosa” [E. Baelz’s Under-
standing of Kenjutsu and Jujutsu]. Supo-tsu Shi Kenkyu [The Japan Society of Sport History] 15, 145.
126
Japan: Jujutsu
www.ebook3000.com

JUDO
Judo is a modern Japanese martial art (gendai budo). It was developed from jujutsu by the Japan-
ese physical educator Kano Jigoro (1860–1938) during the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries. It was introduced into the Japanese public schools during the 1910s, and since 1972,
it has been an ofﬁcial Olympic sport.
Today, judo ranks among the most popular Asian martial arts in the world. Because it is an
Olympic sport, judo has a very well-deﬁned set of rules. Nonetheless, judo in the larger sense
aims to transcend the sporting context and to include aspects related to education, health, and
both physical and emotional self-defense.
PHILOSOPHY
The Japanese martial art of judo is a product of its time and place. In Japan, after the Meiji
Restoration of 1868, society was undergoing enormous changes, and young people such as judo
founder Kano Jigoro looked to both Confucian tradition and European philosophy for answers
and ideas. Thus, while Kano was educated by British, American, and German teachers, he also
studied the old martial arts of Tenshin Shin’yo Ryu and Kito Ryu jujutsu.
In 1882, Kano established judo or “the ﬂexible way,” as a new jujutsu style that emphasized
the education of the individual at least as much as the development of self-defense ability or
sporting talent. To Kano, judo was the art (and philosophy) of conducting one’s life in accor-
dance to the principle of Maximum Efﬁciency in Use of Mind and Body (seiryoku zen’yo).
According to Kano (Maekawa and Hasegawa 1963, 10), “Both spiritual and physical strength
must be most effectively used in conformity with the objective.”
In a social context, this led to the principle of Mutual Welfare and Beneﬁt (Jita Kyoei). As
Kano wrote (Maekawa and Hasegawa 1963, 8), “In order to truly beneﬁt oneself, one must also
take into consideration the beneﬁt of society. The greatest prosperity to oneself can only be
attained through service to humanity.”
Kano deﬁned three levels in judo. First was lower-level judo, which was focused in training
for sport and physical defense. This was the ﬁrst judo to be learned. Second was middle-level
judo. This was a by-product of training for sport and physical defense, but centered on the cul-
tivation of mind and body. The third (and highest) level was deﬁned by the use of judo princi-
ples for the beneﬁt of society (Kano 2005, 95).
TECHNIQUES AND PRACTICE
Traditional jujutsu is taught using forms (kata). This method requires partners who know what
you will do next. An innovation popularized by Kano was randori, which means free practice
with noncompliant partners. To Kano, kata represented grammar while randori represented free-
ﬂowing conversation. At the philosophical levels, the blend of kata and randori were thought to
teach and develop methods for conducting one’s life that were in accordance with judo princi-
ples such as Maximum Efﬁciency and Mutual Welfare.
Judo kata are prearranged and sequenced movements that teach and reveal the fundamentals
of the style. Kodokan judo has both ofﬁcial and unofﬁcial kata. Listed in the order in which they
are usually taught, the ofﬁcial Kodokan kata include Nage-no-Kata (forms of throwing),
Katame-no-Kata (forms of grappling), Kime-no-Kata (forms of decision), Ju-no-Kata (forms of
Japan: Judo
127

yielding), Kodokan Goshinjutsu (Kodokan self-defense techniques), Itsutsu-no-Kata (form of
ﬁve [principles]), and Koshiki-no-Kata (ancient forms). In addition, there are several ofﬁcially
recognized kata that are less commonly taught. These include Seiryoku Zen’yo Kokumin Taiiku
(maximum efﬁciency national physical education), Go-no-Kata (forms of strength), and Joshi
Goshinho (women’s self-defense techniques). There are also several unofﬁcial kata that are
widely practiced. These include Nage-no-Ura Kata (reversals of Nage-no-Kata, developed by
Mifune Kyuzo, 1883–1965), Katame-no-Ura Kata (reversals of Katame-no-Kata), and Go-no-
sen-no-kata (forms of reversals, a favorite of Kawaishi Mikonosuke, 1899–1970). Each kata
teaches some different aspect of judo; examples include randori, self-defense, physical education,
and judo theory. All judo kata except the ﬁrst part of Seiryoku Zen’yo Kokumin Taiiku are per-
formed by two people, working together.
As for randori, it “is practiced under conditions of actual contest. Randori includes
throwing, choking, holding the opponent down, and bending or twisting his arms or legs.
The two combatants may use whatever methods they like provided they do not hurt each
other and obey the rules of Judo concerning etiquette, which are essential to its proper
working” (Kano 1932).
International-style randori emphasizes throwing techniques (nage waza) performed in stand-
ing position, but judo also has grappling techniques (katame waza) that are done on the ground.
Judo groundwork is divided into holds (osaekomi waza), chokes (shime waza), and joint locks
(kansetsu waza). Although locks to various joints are taught for use in self-defense (and remain
important parts of other jujutsu-based arts such as aikido), only elbow locks are allowed in inter-
national judo. Striking techniques (atemi waza) are not allowed in international-style randori
because of the risk of injury, but they are taught in kata (most notably, in Seiryoku Zen’yo
Kokumin Taiiku).
For Kano, winning or losing a match was not as important as experimenting and learning.
However, for students, coaches, and alumni associations, the outcome of a contest is often of
great importance—will the athlete get a scholarship, will the coach get a better job, will the
school or country win a medal? Consequently, there has developed a conﬂict between training
directed toward “pure” competition, meaning competition intended to help practitioners resolve
peculiar problems of combat, and training directed toward contests (shiai), in which the objec-
tive is solely winning a medal.
JUDO EXPANDS
In 1882, Kano established the Kodokan (“school for the study of the way”) in the storeroom of
a small Buddhist temple in Tokyo. Following what was for the time a severe training regime, the
original handful of Kodokan students ultimately defeated the champions of other jujutsu schools,
and by the 1890s the Kodokan system had begun achieving governmental recognition and sup-
port. By the 1910s, judo was part of the curriculum of Japanese schools and universities and was
being taught to policemen, prison guards, and military personnel.
By the late 1920s and early 1930s, national-level judo championships were being held in big
cities such as Kyoto and Tokyo. The Japanese universities and the Kyoto-based martial art group
known as Dai Nippon Butokukai (Greater Japan Martial Virtues Society) were leaders in this
development. During these years, the Kodokan increased its philosophical inﬂuence, mostly
because it was an educational institution as well as a training center. For example, it had its own
128
Japan: Judo
www.ebook3000.com

black belt association, a cultural club, a magazine, and even a research section devoted to devel-
oping judo for women and children.
Neither judo nor the Kodokan escaped the process of militarization undergone by Japan dur-
ing the 1930s, and by 1942, both judo and the Kodokan were fully subservient to the Japanese
war effort. When World War II ended in August 1945, the Japanese assumed that judo teach-
ers would be free to resume teaching judo in the same way that they had taught it before the
war. However, this was not the case, because on October 22, 1945, the Americans, through
SCAP Directive 550, informed the Ministry of Education that all “militaristic and ultrana-
tionalistic ideology will be prohibited and all military education and drill will be discontinued”
(Svinth 2003). Because many judo teachers were former military men, this effectively meant
no teaching of judo in the public schools for several years. In addition, organizations such as the
Kodokan, which were privately owned and therefore exempt from this prohibition, wanted to
avoid problems with the authorities. Therefore, they too began emphasizing the strictly sportive
aspects of judo.
Meanwhile, more non-Japanese people began doing judo. During the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries, Japanese immigrants had taken jujutsu to Europe, Oceania, South
Asia, and the Americas. Abroad, jujutsu was exhibited and practiced in a variety of scenarios.
Examples include circuses and music halls, gymnasiums and physical culture clubs, military and
police academies, universities, and Japanese community halls. From an advertising standpoint,
the method beneﬁted from Japan’s new image as an Asiatic power, particularly after Japan’s suc-
cesses in the Sino-Japanese War (1894–1895), the Boxer Uprising (1899–1901), and the
Russo–Japanese War (1904–1905). Propagandists even claimed that jujutsu was the secret of
Japanese army training—it was the secret Japanese art where “the weak defeats the strong.”
Although jujutsu is what went abroad ﬁrst, judo was not far behind. For example, between
1903 and 1906, Yamashita Yoshiaki (also known as Yamashita Yoshitsugu, 1865–1935), one of
Kano’s ﬁrst students and judo’s ﬁrst 10-dan, taught Kodokan judo to President Theodore
Roosevelt (1858–1919) and other prominent Americans. Likewise, Taguchi Ryoichi (dates
unknown) taught Kodokan judo at Columbia University in New York throughout the 1920s. At
the same time, immigrants introduced judo into Japanese communities all across the Americas.
Thus, there were Kodokan judo clubs in Seattle by 1903, in New York City by 1905, in Los
Angeles by 1910, and in Honolulu by 1913. There were also clubs in British Columbia and Brazil
by the late 1920s.
The foreign involvement in judo contributed to a conceptual transformation. In 1909,
Kano became the Japanese member of the International Olympic Committee, and for the next
29 years, he was often in Europe on Olympics business. On one of these trips, Kano took
British jujutsu, in the form of a London club called the Budokwai, into the Kodokan fold. On
other trips, Kano did the same with Austrian, French, German, Italian, Swiss jujutsu clubs,
and this in turn contributed to the establishment of the European Judo Union in 1932 and the
start of European championships in 1934. Another important foreign innovation occurred in
1935, when Kawaishi Mikonosuke (1899–1969) began teaching judo in Paris. Kawaishi’s
methods were innovative and included an exhaustive classiﬁcation and numeration of judo
techniques, the standardization of color belts for beginning and intermediate students (e.g.,
white, yellow, orange, green, blue, and brown), and greater emphasis on self-defense
techniques than was common in Japan. All this helped adapt judo to the European mind.
Japan: Judo
129

As Kawaishi put it, “Judo is like rice or corn. It must be adapted to its soil” (Brousse and Mat-
sumoto 1999, 103).
JUDO AFTER WORLD WAR II
The Japanese surrender in August 1945 represents a watershed in the development of Kodokan
judo. Until the 1930s, judo was practiced mostly in Japan. In Japan, judo teachers emphasized
character development (which in Imperial Japan meant loyalty to the Emperor and a disdain for
socialism) and preparing youth for military service. During the 1930s and 1940s, judo was con-
sciously militarized, and judo began to be taught mostly as a means for preparing youth for
military service. This militarization occurred around the world, not just in Japan. The British
Olympic wrestler and Budokwai judo man Stanley “Sonny” Bissell (1906–1999) taught modiﬁed
judo to British commandos. In Germany, judo training was provided to members of the Hitler
Youth. In the United States and the Soviet Union, youths were taught military hand-to-hand
ﬁghting methods that included techniques borrowed from judo.
The end of World War II brought a different set of challenges. For one thing, judo was now
an international activity. In addition, there was a Cold War from 1945 through 1991. Thus, dur-
ing the late 1940s and early 1950s, the emphasis in judo shifted from ﬁghting on the battleﬁeld
to competing in the Olympic Games. New superpowers such as the United States and the Soviet
Union wanted to ﬂex their muscles; old imperial powers such as Britain, France, Germany, and
Japan wanted to show that they were rebuilding; and former colonies were becoming proud new
countries. Thus, the foundation of the International Judo Federation in 1951 afﬁrmed that judo
would become a global patrimony rather then simply another Japanese martial art.
Both the global patrimony and the competitiveness were conﬁrmed during the 1964
Olympics, which were held in Tokyo. Judo was a demonstration sport, and Dutchman Anton
Geesink (1934–), who was for many non-Japanese the most relevant judoka since Kano, shook
Japanese hegemony over the sport by being proclaimed Olympic champion in the Open division.
In both the organizational and the technical sense, sporting competition and globalization
have induced deep changes in judo. Although such changes have provoked strong criticisms
from traditionalists and advocates of sport for sport’s sake, the changes have generally resolved
in favor of the better-funded advocates of international competition.
From the philosophical perspective, judo’s potentialities were limited by making competition
the goal rather than the medium. By focusing on competition, even the most talented athletes
were not likely to go past Kano’s ﬁrst level of judo. This led to important changes in judo cul-
ture: it affected training methods related to competition, marginalized instruction in kata and
self-defense, and downplayed or eliminated etiquette and ritual aspects. In short, Olympic judo
moved away from its Confucian and jujutsu roots and toward becoming Greco-Roman wrestling
done in jackets and belts.
A polemic change involved the establishment of weight divisions. Weight divisions go against
the classical conception of judo as the art where “the weak defeats the strong.” On the other hand,
weight divisions increased the number of championships possible. Since national-level sport is all
about winning medals, weight divisions were essentially mandatory by the early 1950s.
The evolution of judo techniques for Olympic success was another subject of frequent criti-
cism. Speciﬁcally, classical grips, postures, techniques, and other features have been progressively
transformed into methods that emphasize winning within the rules rather than what is safest or
130
Japan: Judo
www.ebook3000.com

most efﬁcient for the masses. Many of these changes started after Eastern European wrestlers
trained in sambo started entering international judo competitions during the 1960s.
Equally contentious changes (at least during the 1950s and 1960s) involved the integration
of women into high-level sporting competition. Although the Kodokan has had a women’s sec-
tion since the 1920s, Kodokan women’s judo emphasized kata until well into the 1960s.
Women’s competitive judo dates only to the 1950s. The ﬁrst women’s World Judo Champi-
onships were not held until 1980, and women’s judo has been an ofﬁcial Olympic sport only
since 1992.
During the late 1990s, another contentious choice was made that involved the introduction
of blue-colored competition uniforms (judogi). The chief reason for this introduction was that it
facilitated viewing by television audiences. Although the introduction also reduced refereeing
error, it provoked controversy within the judo community, because many practitioners associated
the traditional white or beige uniform with the supposed purity of traditional judo. Also, the pro-
fuse modiﬁcations of judo regulations (penalties, prohibited acts and techniques, competition
area, durations of rounds, etc.), are widely believed to have been introduced primarily to increase
judo’s market share on television.
Following World War II, the administrators of national and international judo shifted their
attention from character building (however they cared to deﬁne the term) and preparation for
military service to developing a high-level performance sport. This change in focus led to swift
changes, as coaches and practitioners kept abreast of scientiﬁc analysis of competitions (e.g.,
rationalization of training processes, talent selection, etc.), and as promoters and ofﬁcials
acceded to the requests of funding sources. There has even been a small but new and interesting
line of evolution involving kata competition based on athletic paradigms.
Obviously, high-performance judo is not the only valid interpretation of judo. Thus, separate,
distinct, and less publicized branches of judo have developed, usually under names such as “tra-
ditional judo” or “judo for all.” Traditional judo tries to recover the essence and components of
Kano’s judo (philosophy, training methods, etiquette, rituals, etc.) described above. This inter-
pretation is often idealized, usually to the point of overlooking the jingoism inherent in
pre–World War II judo. Meanwhile, judo for all represents a reaction to Olympic judo’s focus on
high-performance sport. Rather than concentrating on elite athletes, judo for all represents an
effort to accommodate the needs and interests of every age, ability, and person. Thus, it includes
aspects of education, physical maintenance, social relations, and practical self-defense. Of the
various directions in which judo is going, judo for all may be the closest to Kano’s original phi-
losophy that a modern world is likely to get.
—Carlos Gutiérrez García, Mikel Pérez Gutiérrez, and Joseph Svinth
See also: Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu; China: Wrestling; Japan: Ninpo; Japan: Shorinji Kempo; 
Korea: Hapkido (in this volume); Belief Systems: Japanese Budo, Bugei, and Bujutsu; Belief
Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts 
and Religion since 1868; Globalization of Martial Arts; Asian Martial Arts in the United 
States and Canada; Bartitsu; Sambo; Written Texts: Japan; American Judo, 1942–1945; 
Judo in Japan, 1931–1950; Military Unarmed Fighting Systems in the United States; Police
Defensive Tactics Training in the United States; Social and Cultural Evolution of Kendo; Political
Conﬂict and Aikido, 1931–1942; and Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in Volume II).
Japan: Judo
131

REFERENCES
Bowen, Richard. 2003. “Origins of the British Judo Association, the European Judo Union, and the
International Judo Federation,” in Martial Arts in the Modern World, edited by Thomas A. Green
and Joseph R. Svinth, 173–183. Westport, CT: Greenwood.
Brousse, Michel, and David Matsumoto. 1999. Judo: A Sport and a Way of Life. Seoul: International
Judo Federation.
Brousse, Michel, and David Matsumoto. 2005. Judo in the U.S.: A Century of Dedication. Berkeley,
CA: North Atlantic Books.
Kano Jigoro. 1932. “The Contribution of Jiudo to Education,” Journal of Health and Physical Education
3, 37–40, 58; via http://www.judoinfo.com/kano.htm, accessed October 19, 2008.
Kano Jigoro. 1994. Kodokan Judo. New York: Kodansha International.
Kano Jigoro. 2005. Mind over Muscle: Writings from the Founder of Judo. Tokyo: Kodansha International.
Maekawa Mineo, and Hasegawa Y. 1963. “Studies on Jigoro Kano. Signiﬁcance of His Ideals of Phys-
ical Education and Judo,” Bulletin of the Association for the Scientiﬁc Studies on Judo, Kodokan, Report
2, 1–12, via http://www.bstkd.com/judorev/jobo1.htm, accessed June 23, 2008.
Murata Naoki. 2005. “From ‘Jutsu’ to ‘Do’: The Birth of Kodokan Judo.” In Budo Perspectives, edited
by Alexander Bennett, 141–154. Auckland, New Zealand: Kendo World.
Otaki Tadao, and Donn F. Draeger. 1997. Judo Formal Techniques: A Complete Guide to Kodokan Ran-
dori No Kata. Rutland, VT and Tokyo: Charles E. Tuttle Co.
Svinth, Joseph R. 2003. “Documentation Regarding the Budo Ban in Japan, 1945–1950,” Journal of
Combative Sport, http://ejmas.com/jcs/jcsart_svinth_1202.htm, accessed October 19, 2008.
Watson, Brian N. 2000. The Father of Judo: A Biography of Jigoro Kano. Tokyo: Kodansha International.
AIKIDO
Aikido is a Japanese martial art (budo, martial way) that was fashioned in the twentieth century
by Ueshiba Morihei (1883–1969). It is based on Ueshiba’s training in jujutsu and kenjutsu,
speciﬁcally in Daito-ryu, meaning the methods taught by Takeda Sokaku (1860–1943). It was
transformed during the 1950s and 1960s when it was systematized by his son Ueshiba
Kisshomaru (1921–1999) and spread overseas. Aikido is now practiced all over the world and,
while it keeps to its Japanese terminology and concepts, it is practiced for reasons ranging from
the strictly martial to the strictly spiritual, with the general maintenance of health and well-
being occupying the middle ground between these two extremes.
TERMS AND TEACHING METHODS
Aikido attributes its effectiveness to the use of aiki. Aiki as taught in aikido, relates to the desta-
bilizing of the opponent, whether by unbalancing, or by absorbing or projecting power, but it has
never been deﬁned precisely. Some recent interpretations separate the two characters and give
ai-ki the wider sense of harmonizing energy. The practical focus of aikido lies in pinning and
joint-twisting waza (techniques). Aikido emphasizes empty-handed encounters, but it also uses
weapons and teaches methods for dealing with armed opponents.
Ueshiba Morihei himself did much individual training, sometimes with weapons, and his
waza went hand-in-hand with constant practice in physical/mental conditioning and “breath
power” (kokyu ryoku). Ueshiba showed his knowledge, rather than explicitly taught; he also
expected his students to “steal” the skills they acquired. He did this for two reasons. The ﬁrst is
that the personal, individual, aspect of his own training was central to Ueshiba’s conception of
132
Japan: Aikido
www.ebook3000.com

his art, which, in any case, he never articulated very clearly. Ueshiba believed that his art was a
unique budo, but he later explained it using concepts taken from the Omoto religion and Japan’s
creation myths, making full use of the ambiguities inherent in the Japanese language. His
disciples rarely understood these explanations, so they tended to focus on the waza, which they
could more easily grasp. The second reason is that Ueshiba followed his teacher, Takeda, in
having students “steal” his skills by “receiving” his waza. The Japanese term for receiving waza is
ukemi (“receiving body”). Like the waza, ukemi covers a wide spectrum of skills, and the learning
experience was thus far more complex and subtle than a simple exchange of information, in the
form of explanations from the teacher.
Ueshiba practiced using weapons typically available in early twentieth-century Japan: the
sword, spear, staff, glaive (naginata), and bayonet. He sent some of his students to train in other
arts and then improvised from what they brought back with them to suit his own purpose and
goals for his own vision of budo. After he moved to Iwama in 1942, Ueshiba trained more inten-
sively with the sword and short staff (jo), and a number of set forms (kata) evolved from this
training. Many of his disciples later devised their own weapons kata and taught them to their
students. The result is that in modern aikido schools, one ﬁnds a variety of weapons kata, taught
in different ways according to the school.
EARLY HISTORY: TAKEDA AND DEGUCHI
Ueshiba Morihei was born in the country town of Tanabe, which is on Honshu’s Kii peninsula.
He practiced martial arts from an early age. After serving in the army during the Russo-Japanese
War (1904–1905), he returned home and resumed his training until 1915, when, ﬁnanced
largely by his uncle Inoue Zenzo (1861–1928), he set off with a group for Hokkaido. He settled
in the village of Shirataki, where he soon heard about the legendary martial arts teacher Takeda
Sokaku. Ueshiba met Takeda and became his student. He trained with Takeda intermittently
over a 4-year period, but on hearing that his father was terminally ill, Ueshiba prepared to return
to Tanabe. On the way, he visited Ayabe, near Kyoto, to consult with Deguchi Onisaburo
(1871–1948), the master of a Shinto-based religion called Omoto (“Great Source”). The con-
sultation did not save his father, but Ueshiba clearly found something else that he was seeking,
because in 1920, he moved to Ayabe with his family to become Deguchi’s disciple. With
Deguchi’s encouragement, Ueshiba soon opened a dojo in Ayabe, where he taught martial arts
to Omoto believers.
Omoto was one of Japan’s “new” religions, created in response to the social upheavals con-
nected with the end of the Tokugawa era and the ensuing Meiji Restoration (e.g., the transi-
tional period of the 1860s and 1870s). Its doctrines were a blend of Shinto, Buddhist, and
Christian beliefs, and the religion was dedicated to yo-naoshi (world renewal). Deguchi was an
astute leader, and he adapted the doctrines of the religion to match changing political circum-
stances. During the 1920s, Omoto preached a return to traditional Japanese values, exempliﬁed
by the martial arts and farming—which was exactly what Ueshiba Morihei was doing in
Ayabe–and the establishment of a “New World Order” in which all nations gathered in peace
and harmony.
In 1922, Takeda Sokaku visited Ueshiba in Ayabe. During the six months Takeda spent in
Ayabe, Ueshiba undertook intensive training, and when Takeda left, he gave Ueshiba kyoju-dairi,
meaning ofﬁcial permission to teach Daito-ryu as an instructor. Meanwhile, at the prompting of
Japan: Aikido
133

Deguchi, Takeda changed the name of his art to Daito-ryu Aiki-Jujutsu, and Ueshiba, too, prac-
ticed and taught the art under this name until around 1936.
Over the next few years, Ueshiba’s fame as a budo expert spread, and some high-ranking
ofﬁcers attached to the naval base at Maizuru, in Kyoto, visited the Omoto compound and
experienced Ueshiba’s art personally. Their information about Ueshiba eventually reached a
retired admiral named Takeshita Isamu (1869–1949). Takeshita witnessed Ueshiba’s art for him-
self in 1925. He was impressed and began training; he also persuaded Ueshiba to move to Tokyo.
THE MOVE TO TOKYO
Ueshiba’s move to Tokyo marks a watershed. Before going to Tokyo, he was obscure, but in
Tokyo he met many inﬂuential people in military, political, and ﬁnancial circles and people con-
nected to the imperial household. The result was the opening of the Kobukan Dojo in 1931. The
move to Tokyo also marks a gradual estrangement between Ueshiba and Takeda, which became
ﬁnal in 1936, and also a gradual separation from Deguchi. There was still a personal connection,
however, and Ueshiba collaborated in the creation in 1932 of an Omoto paramilitary organiza-
tion called the Dai Nippon Budo Senyokai (Greater Japan Martial Enhancement Society). In
Tokyo, Ueshiba had his own dojo, and this enabled him to recruit uchi-deshi (live-in students).
He attracted some extremely talented individuals, among them Tomiki Kenji (1900–1979),
Mochizuki Minoru (1907–2003), and Shioda Gozo (1915–1994).
Two technical manuals survive from this period. The ﬁrst, entitled Budo Renshu, appeared in
1933 and is the record of an intensive training session at the Kobukan Dojo. The work contains
explanations and sketches of 166 waza and was given to especially promising disciples. The sec-
ond work appeared in 1938. Budo is a collection of 50 waza and was compiled at the request of
a high-ranking military ofﬁcer. Signed copies were also given to promising students. Both works
contain a similar technical introduction and are of importance for the changes they reveal in
Ueshiba’s art.
THE PACIFIC WAR (1941–1945) AS A WATERSHED
Mention has already been made of Ueshiba’s association with inﬂuential people in military,
ﬁnancial, and political circles. During the late 1920s and early 1930s, Japan was becoming a mil-
itary state and preparing to wage war. Deguchi changed Omoto doctrine to take account of this,
and during the 1930s, the Omoto “new world order” was to be achieved under the benevolent
(although absolute) rule of the Japanese emperor. Articles published under Ueshiba’s name in
the Omoto press indicated that he shared this belief. Yet the decision to wage war evolved by
means of a violent political process that included the assassination of political ﬁgures. These
assassinations were plotted by young radical ofﬁcers, some of whom actually met in Ueshiba’s
dojo. At the same time, Ueshiba’s association with high-ranking military ﬁgures and his reputa-
tion as a martial arts expert led to teaching assignments in a large number of military schools.
He was ﬁrmly connected with Japan’s military establishment.
Meanwhile, Ueshiba began seeking an heir who would marry into his family and carry on his
art. His two sons had died in infancy, and his third son, Kisshomaru, born in 1921, initially
showed little interest in martial arts. Several uchi-deshi were approached and one, a sword
expert named Nakakura Kiyoshi (1910–2000), agreed to marry Ueshiba’s daughter and was
134
Japan: Aikido
www.ebook3000.com

adopted into the family as Ueshiba Morihiro. The marriage was unsuccessful, and Nakakura left
the Kobukan. Ueshiba eventually settled on his son Kisshomaru as his heir. Ueshiba Kisshomaru
(1921–1999) began to practice actively while he was still at school, and he was joined in the
dojo by the ﬁrst of a second generation of disciples, to include Osawa Kisaburo (1911–1991),
Tohei Koichi (1920–), and Okumura Shigenobu (1922–2008).
In 1935 the Japanese government suppressed the Omoto religion. Deguchi and his family
were arrested, and Ueshiba was brieﬂy detained. The suppression effectively ended Ueshiba’s
relationship with Deguchi. The following year, Takeda Sokaku unexpectedly appeared at
Ueshiba’s dojo in Osaka. Ueshiba avoided meeting Takeda on this occasion, and Takeda took
over control of the dojo. This incident effectively marked the end of Takeda’s relationship with
his pupil, who had begun calling his art aiki-budo.
Between 1935 and 1940, most of Ueshiba’s senior students were called up for military serv-
ice. For ease of running the dojo in wartime, the Kobukan Dojo became a foundation in 1940,
and in that same year Ueshiba adopted the dan/kyu ranking system used in judo. However, there
is evidence of Ueshiba’s growing dissatisfaction both with Japan’s conduct of the war and with
increasing military interference in his instruction methods. Thus, in 1942, Ueshiba turned over
the administration of the Kobukan Dojo to his son Kisshomaru and retreated to a small house
he had purchased in Iwama, a township in Ibaraki Prefecture to the north of Tokyo. There he
returned to the combination of personal training and farming that he had practiced in Ayabe in
the 1920s. Ueshiba Kisshomaru continued to run the dojo in Tokyo until the ﬁre bombings of
1945 made this impossible.
POSTWAR REVIVAL AND EXPANSION IN JAPAN
Following Japan’s surrender in August 1945, Ueshiba was joined in Iwama by a few students.
Among these students was Saito Morihiro (1928–2002), who partnered with Ueshiba in the
latter’s intensive weapons training. To avoid arousing any suspicion from the Occupation
authorities, emphasis was ﬁrmly placed on farming. In any case, there was a general desire to do
away with all traces of the old militarism, and in this respect, aikido was a microcosm of Japan
as a whole.
The training in Iwama was matched by a gradual revival of the old Kobukan Dojo, which
became fully operational around 1955. The dojo became the Aikikai, and was energetically
administered by Ueshiba Kisshomaru, who also began creating a new network. He actively
promoted the new “peaceful” form of self-defense in Japan’s universities and revamped armed
forces. During the mid-1950s, Ueshiba Morihei also began to travel around Japan, generally
to visit his old students. Many outstanding deshi were recruited, among them Yamaguchi
Seigo (1924–1996), Arikawa Sadateru (1930–2003), and Tada Hiroshi (1929–). These were
part of a nucleus of teachers with Kisshomaru at the center. Thus began a “golden age” of
aikido.
The differences from prewar aikido were striking. Although Takeda Sokaku had had a few
close students (of whom Ueshiba Morihei had been one), he was a peripatetic teacher who gen-
erally taught his students in seminars. Ueshiba Morihei acted differently. Before the war, in the
Kobukan Dojo, he vetted the students he accepted, requiring a recommendation from two emi-
nent persons. Thus, Ueshiba’s close students formed a select, elite group. After the war, Ueshiba
Japan: Aikido
135

Kisshomaru abandoned the elite concept and transformed aikido into a “mass” martial art that
anyone could practice. In addition, Ueshiba Kisshomaru was dedicated to spreading the postwar
Japanese blend of peace and spiritual development, the latter shorn of any direct association
with religious doctrine. Finally, he advertised. For example, in 1956, Ueshiba Morihei accepted
his son’s request to stage an aikido demonstration for the general public on the roof of a Tokyo
department store—something he had never contemplated previously. Ueshiba Kisshomaru
never tried to replicate the unique qualities of his father. Still in the latter’s shadow, he shone
more as an administrator than as a technician, and this allowed the second generation of deshi
freedom to develop their own aikido. Thus, the Aikikai became more of an organization, rather
than a particular style of aikido.
EXPANSION ABROAD
During the 1960s, Ueshiba Kisshomaru sent select students (deshi) abroad to teach aikido. Some
spent only a few years outside Japan, but others left Japan permanently. These pioneers had pow-
erful personalities, and all left their own unique stamp on the students they taught. They were
supported by other Japanese who lived abroad for varying periods and who taught aikido in their
spare time. Some of these were judoka, who either practiced aikido themselves or allowed aikido
training in their own dojo. A small number of foreign students, returning home after training at
the Aikikai in Tokyo, also added to the mix.
The result was a gradual expansion of aikido training overseas, at ﬁrst in the United States
and Europe, and later throughout the world. The pioneers generally tried to replicate the
conditions they had experienced in Japan and created local versions of the Aikikai. In this
connection, a curious phenomenon became apparent. Whereas the relationship between the
teacher and students was inevitably vertically structured, with the teacher at the pinnacle,
the organizations these pioneers created tended to be horizontally structured. Put another
way, the teacher was head of the aikido training in a certain territory and students were not
encouraged to cross boundaries, the assumption being that the teacher in the territory was
the best available and that any search for difference in quality destroyed this vertical
relationship. Gradually, however, the local dojo started regional—and later national—
organizations, and these were structured as equals. Aikikai recognition was accepted as
sufﬁcient indication of quality: the head of the organization was recognized as competent to
teach, examine, and issue grades in aikido in his region, in accordance with local laws. This
horizontal structure was further enhanced in 1976 by the creation of an international
federation, comprising all the recognized national organizations in the Aikikai. There are
currently forty-ﬁve organizations in this federation, which is controlled by a democratically
elected board.
AIKIDO AS A GENERAL MARTIAL ART
As aikido expanded, waza were systematized, and instruction manuals proliferated. It is probable
that Ueshiba Morihei began the systematization of waza, but he never produced technical man-
uals. Moreover, his discourses on aikido were highly abstract and emphasized the importance of
aikido as a means to bring the entire universe into harmony. Ueshiba Kisshomaru, on the other
hand, began to produce instruction manuals in Japanese as early as 1957, and these were soon
136
Japan: Aikido
www.ebook3000.com

translated into English. Other teachers followed his example. No longer must students “steal”
knowledge of the waza—now it was readily available and in as digestible a form as possible.
The result is that training in aikido, whether in Japan or abroad, follows a distinct pattern.
Students begin by doing some stretching or warming-up exercises. These are remnants of far
more extensive religious rituals that Ueshiba Morihei undertook before each practice. After
practicing forward or backward rolls and break-falls, students begin training in kihon (beginning
or foundation) waza (techniques). Kihon waza are numbered and end with a pin or joint lock.
Attacks are also stylized and given names, with a forward strike to the head or a grasp of the hand
being central. From the pins, students move to four additional kihon waza. These focus on
controlling the head, elbow, wrist, or shoulder and usually end in a throw (hence the need for
ukemi). The training session ends with practice in general throws (called koyu-nage), free
practice, or sometimes randori (quasi-competitive sparring).
One major issue involves quality. Old-style (koryu) Japanese martial arts generally have a
small number of participants, and emphasis is placed on mastering kata. In such systems, there
was never any need to measure quality by means of a match. Moreover, both Takeda Sokaku and
Ueshiba Morihei were professionals. They trained all day, every day, and attracted students who
did the same. This emphasis on training, coupled with a good measure of natural talent,
produced aikido technicians of unusual quality. Few modern aikido practitioners train so hard.
In other modern martial arts such as judo and karate, selection is determined, in part, through
practitioners winning contests regulated by rules and referees. Although competition has
become an accepted way to discern the best practitioners, it has also created an uneasy blend
between the traditional and modern aspects of the respective arts. Aikido (and especially the
Aikikai) has resisted any development of aikido as a sport, and even the competitive aspects of
some aikido schools are treated as an adjunct to training rather than as a major goal in their own
right. This means that there can be wide variations in technical ability, despite the supposed
equality of the dan/kyu grading system.
THE FLAVORS OF AIKIDO
During the post–World War II revival of aikido, former Kobukan uchi-deshi sometimes started
organizations. Shioda Gozo returned home from China in 1950 and found employment in the
security force of a steel company. He created the Yoshinkan in 1956. After World War II,
Mochizuki Minoru established the Yoseikan. Although he retained the old name of aiki-budo,
he incorporated karate and judo into his training curriculum. Hirai Minoru (1903–1998), who
had been instrumental in the adoption of the name aikido, created Korindo aikido during the
1950s. Tomiki Kenji returned to Japan from the Soviet Union, where he had been a prisoner of
war, to become a professor at Waseda University. Also a judo expert, Tomiki established a form
of competition as a method of training. This did not meet with Ueshiba Morihei’s approval, so
Tomiki created his own school known as Shodokan. Finally, Tohei Koichi separated from the
Aikikai in 1974 to establish the Ki no Kenkyukai. He did so because of 
important differences with Ueshiba Kisshomaru concerning aikido instruction and the
importance placed on ki, its development and focus within the art.
Each “ﬂavor” of aikido has adopted the general pattern of training sketched earlier,
combining this with increased emphasis on other aspects, in accordance with the organization’s
Japan: Aikido
137

overall aims. Some schools favor more vigorous attacks, thought to be closer to what one might
encounter in the street. Some give closer attention to preparation, with emphasis placed on cor-
rect form, slowly and precisely executed. Some favor circular or ﬂowing waza, with emphasis on
blending and extending ki, right from the beginning. Some provide training with weapons from
the beginning, whereas others wait until the student has gained proﬁciency in basic movements
and waza. Some place strong emphasis on the spiritual aspects of the art, especially its Japanese
roots. Others leave the students to develop spiritual aspects for themselves. Beyond this, there is
the wide variety inevitably found in individual countries and schools. It is therefore a measure
of Ueshiba Kisshomaru’s genius as an administrator—and the postwar success of the Aikikai—
that all of these variations coexist in this one organization.
—Peter A. Goldsbury
See also: Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu; China: Wrestling; Japan: Jodo; Japan: Ninpo; 
Japan: Shorinji Kempo; Korea: Hapkido; (in this volume) Belief Systems: Japanese Budo, 
Bugei, and Bujutsu; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 
1868; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868; 
Globalization of Martial Arts; Asian Martial Arts in the United States 
and Canada; Bartitsu; Sambo; Written Texts: Japan; American Judo, 
1942–1945; Judo in Japan, 1931–1950; Military Unarmed Fighting Systems 
in the United States; Police Defensive Tactics Training in the United States; 
Social and Cultural Evolution of Kendo; Political Conﬂict and Aikido, 
1931–1942; and Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in volume II).
REFERENCES
Aikido Journal, www.aikidojournal.com.
Amdur, Ellis. 2000. Dueling with O-Sensei: Grappling with the Myth of the Warrior Sage. Seattle, WA:
Edgework.
Amdur, Ellis. 2009. Hidden in Plain Sight: Tracing the Roots of Ueshiba Morihei’s Power. Seattle, WA:
Edgework.
Pranin, Stanley A. 1993. Aikido Masters: Prewar Students of Morihei Ueshiba. Tokyo: Aiki News.
Saito Morihiro. 1973–1976. Traditional Aikido: Sword, Stick and Body Arts. Tokyo: Minato Research.
Shioda Gozo, and Shioda Yasuhisa. 1996. Total Aikido: The Master Course, translated by David
Rubens. Tokyo: Kodansha International.
Shishida Fumiaki and Nariyama Tetsuro. 2001. Aikido: Tradition and the Competitive Edge. Berkeley,
CA: Shodokan Publishing.
Tohei Koichi. 1963. This is Aikido. Tokyo: Japan Publications Inc.
Tohei Koichi. 1979. Book of Ki: Coordinating Mind and Body in Daily Life. Tokyo: Japan Publications Inc.
Ueshiba Kisshomaru. 1963. Aikido, translated by Tanahashi Kazuaki and Roy Maurer, Jr. Tokyo: Hozansha.
Ueshiba Kisshomaru. 1984. The Spirit of Aikido, translated by Unno Taitetsu. Tokyo: Kodansha
International.
Ueshiba Kisshomaru. 2004. The Art of Aikido: Principles and Essential Techniques, translated by John
Stevens. Tokyo: Kodansha International.
Ueshiba Kisshomaru. 2008. A Life in Aikido: The Biography of the Founder Morihei Ueshiba, translated
by Izawa Kei and Mary Fuller. Tokyo: Kodansha International.
Ueshiba Kisshomaru and Ueshiba Moriteru. 2002. Best Aikido: The Fundamentals, translated by John
Stevens. Tokyo: Kodansha International.
138
Japan: Aikido
www.ebook3000.com

Ueshiba Morihei. 1991. Budo: Teachings of the Founder of Aikido, translated by John Stevens. Tokyo:
Kodansha International.
Ueshiba Morihei. 1997. Budo Training in Aikido, translated by Larry E. Bieri and Seiko M. Bieri.
Tokyo: Sugawara Martial Arts Institute.
Ueshiba Morihei. 2007. The Secret Teachings of Aikido, translated by John Stevens. Tokyo: Kodansha
International.
Ueshiba Moriteru. 2003. The Aikido Master Course: Best Aikido 2, translated by John Stevens. Tokyo:
Kodansha International.
JAPAN: KENDO, IAIDO, AND JODO
Kendo (sword way) is a Japanese method of physical culture that involves fencing with bamboo
foils. The name is modern and was not commonly used until the 1920s. Before that, appellations
such as gekito, gek(i)ken, tachi-uchi, kenjutsu, or kempo were usually used instead.
Iaido (way of immediate reaction) is a modern name for methods of drawing and sheathing
the Japanese sword. Older names include batto-jutsu, meaning “sword drawing techniques.”
Jodo (way of the stick) is a modern name for a Japanese method of ﬁghting with sticks, staffs,
and batons.
Today, all three systems are often taught concurrently, under the aegis of kendo associations,
so they are logically discussed together rather than separately.
KENDO
EARLY HISTORY
From a military standpoint, the sword was arguably no more than a subsidiary weapon for ancient
and medieval Japanese soldiers. Depending on the era in question, weapons of choice were either
bows and arrows or spears. The single-edged two-handed sword (Nihon-to or katana) served as the
last line of defense and was mostly used in the rather ignoble act of removing the heads from
fallen enemies. Nevertheless, by the ﬁfteenth century some composite martial schools (ryuha)
emerged that afforded special signiﬁcance to sword techniques. Progenitors of early ryuha such as
Tenshin Shoden Katori Shinto-ryu, Kage-ryu, and Nen-ryu systemized battle-tested techniques
and philosophy and taught them to students through the medium of kata (choreographed
sequences of combat techniques).
During the Tokugawa period (1603–1868), Japan enjoyed an era of relative peace. With no
more major wars, samurai warriors no longer had recourse to prove their mettle in battle. Society
was structured with samurai at the top and farmers, artisans, and merchants positioned below
them. Even so, samurai retained their status as professional warriors under the Tokugawa regime
and were obligated to maintain military preparedness. Thus, specialist ryuha proliferated during
the seventeenth century, and by the nineteenth century there were as many as six or seven hun-
dred schools of kenjutsu (sword methods).
The highly ostentatious and unpractical nature of many of the Pax Tokugawa kenjutsu
schools and their dynamic kata drew the scorn of some contemporary warriors and scholars.
As the Confucian scholar Ogyu Sorai (1666–1728) put it (quoted in Rogers 1988, 150): “All
Japan: Kendo
139

swordsmanship of today is almost entirely the creation of people living in a time of peace. . . .
They make great display of their strikes, and place some primary emphasis on winning in a
spectacular fashion. Some samurai [teaching the art] today do quite well for themselves and
debate lofty theories. Other samurai concentrate on perfecting their choreography and
gesture.”
To remedy this trend, which was known as “ﬂowery fencing” (kaho kempo), and to overcome
other perceived limitations of training only in kata, an initiative of full-contact training (shinai-
uchikomi-geiko) using bamboo swords (shinai) was developed during the Shotoku era
(1711–1716). Leaders in this development included Naganuma Shirozaemon Kunisato
(1688–1716) of the Jikishin Kage-ryu and Nakanishi Chuzo Tsugutake (died 1801) of the Itto-
ryu. Besides using shinai, contact fencers also wore protective equipment (today called bogu or
kendo-gu), which meant that they could engage in unrestricted relays of striking without fear of
injury or injuring. This formed the precursor to the modern art of kendo, which began to be cod-
iﬁed into its modern form during the late 1890s and early 1900s.
EQUIPMENT
Since the invention of the full-contact training method, the design of protective armor and shi-
nai has changed very little, except for restrictions placed on shinai length and some modiﬁca-
tions to equipment to improve safety.
The prototype of the shinai was the leather-wrapped fukuro-shinai ﬁrst used by the Shinkage-
ryu in the eighteenth century. In those days, the weapon consisted of bamboo slats placed inside
a leather pouch. Today, most shinai are made from four slats of bamboo measuring 12 centime-
ters (5 inches) or less. These slats are ﬁxed at three points with a leather cap at the point (kissaki
or kensen), a spot about a quarter of the way down from the tip (nakayui), and near the grip
(tsuka). In recent years, the Carbon Shinai made by Hasegawa Chemical Industry Co. has
become popular, especially among young practitioners, due to its durability. The Carbon Shinai
is permitted in ofﬁcial competitions but is generally shunned by high-ranking practitioners, who
tend to prefer the feel of bamboo. A cord (tsuru) that connects all pieces together runs up the
back of the shinai and represents the noncutting edge of the blade. There is also a hand guard
(tsuba). The hand guard is usually round, but other shapes are seen. Hand guards were histori-
cally made from leather, but today they may be plastic.
Armor consists of mask (men), chest guard (do), lower-body protector (tare), and gauntlets
(kote). The do is made from lacquered bamboo or ﬁberglass, and the bars on the mask (mengane)
are made from metal or thick transparent acrylic plastic. The rest of the protective equipment
is made from thick padded cotton or analogous synthetic materials. The total weight is
approximately 10 kilograms (22 pounds) and provides ample protection for absorbing the shock
of shinai blows.
Practitioners also wear thick cotton tops (kendo-gi), and cotton or synthetic split-skirt
trousers (hakama). The name and afﬁliation of the practitioner (zekken) is attached to the front
ﬂap of the tare.
There is protocol in putting on and removing this equipment. The practitioner puts on his
or her kendo-gi, then the hakama. Once dressed, the practitioner sits in the formal kneeling
position (seiza) to attach the tare, do, tenugui (the towel that is wrapped around the head), the
men, and ﬁnally, the kote.
140
Japan: Kendo
www.ebook3000.com

TECHNICAL FRAMEWORK
There are two dimensions to training in kendo: kata training and shinai training. Kata in mod-
ern kendo refers to the Nihon Kendo Kata. These kata were developed by the Dai Nippon
Butokukai in 1912 to unify the kendo instruction in public schools, and today there are ten
separate patterns to learn. During kata training, practitioners are not required to wear protective
equipment, and instead of shinai they use wooden swords (bokuto). As a ceremonial beginning
to tournaments, pairs of high ranking instructors wearing formal kimono will often perform
kendo kata using blunted blades. Kata are also an integral part of promotion examinations.
There are ﬁve stances (kamae) found in modern kendo: chudan (middle), jodan (high), hasso
(behind the head), wakigamae (pommel toward the opponent), and gedan (low). All of these
kamae are used in the kendo kata, but in shinai training the two trainees or competitors gener-
ally face each other at sword’s length (issoku-itto-no-maai) in the standard middle ﬁghting stance
known as chudan-no-kamae. Some practitioners ﬁght from the overhead jodan stance, and there
are a small number of people who use two swords (nito), but by far the most common method is
chudan. In fact, it is only permissible to use jodan from high school level or older and nito from
university level. Thus, all beginners start their study of kendo by learning to ﬁght from chudan.
The targets in kendo are restricted to strikes to the men, do, and kote, plus a thrust to the throat
(tsuki). For the attack to be deemed valid, several conditions need to be met, summarized in Table 1.
The typical training session consists of intensive repetition of basic moves (kihon) so that the
practitioner learns to embody the necessary criteria for valid strikes (yuko-datotsu). This includes
stance, posture, accurate blade direction (hasuji), manipulation of the shinai, footwork, and
appropriate distance (maai). For a point to be deemed valid, the attacker must accurately strike
the target (datotsu-bui) with the correct part of the shinai (datotsu-bu). The strike must be made
with the blade edge of the shinai about an eighth of the way down from the tip. If the strike is
too shallow or deep, the point will not be awarded. The attack must be made in full spirit. This
means a vocalization (kiai), which often includes the name of the target being shouted out as it
is struck. The idea is to show spirit, sword, and body in complete unison (ki-ken-tai-itchi). After
making the cut, the attacker must demonstrate continuing physical and mental alertness
(zanshin), thereby showing readiness to react to a counterattack. All of these criteria must be
executed in a smooth sequence starting from the basic kamae.
In contests, there are both individual and team matches. Team competitions usually consist
of ﬁve or seven ﬁghters on each side. During matches, three referees holding red and white ﬂags
maneuver around the court to adjudicate the techniques of the competitors to assess whether an
attack is valid, and judge whether any fouls (hansoku) have been committed. Two fouls equals
one point for the opponent. Match duration depends on the level of the tournament, but is usu-
ally between three and ﬁve minutes. The ﬁrst competitor to score two points within the desig-
nated time is the victor. If only one point is scored, the victory goes to whoever has the point.
If there is a tie of 0–0 or 1–1, a team match ends in a draw, but during individual competition
the match time is extended (encho) and the bout continues until the ﬁrst point is scored.
THE “SPIRIT” AND SIGNIFICANCE OF KENDO
During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the Tokugawa government wanted warriors
who could demonstrate self-control and who were paragons of morality. This led to the
Japan: Kendo
141

142
Japan: Kendo
Technical Outline for Scoring a Point in Kendo
Deﬁnition of Yuko-datotsu (Valid Strike)
“Yuko-datotsu is deﬁned as an accurate strike or thrust made onto the datotsu-bui of the
opponent’s kendo-gu with shinai at its datotsu-bu in high spirits and correct posture, being
followed by zanshin.” Source: Article 12, “The Regulations of Kendo Shiai and Shinpan,”
International Kendo Federation, 2000.
Table 1
Striking Process
On-guard stance (kamae) 
Mutual probing and applying pressure (seme-ai) 
Detection of
openings (see “striking opportunities”) and selection of appropriate technique 
Execution of a
valid strike with ki-ken-tai-itchi 
Physical and psychological alertness after the attack (zanshin).
Factors:
Shisei (posture)
Kiai (vocalisation)
Maai (interval)
Tai-sabaki (footwork)
Kikai (striking opportunities)
Tenouchi (grip)
Conditions:
Datotsu-bui (accurately striking the target)
Datotsu-bu (with correct part of the shinai)
Hasuji (correct direction of the cutting edge)
Kyodo (adequate strength of the cut)
Sae (crispness of the cut)
Ki-ken-tai-itchi (unity of sword, body and spirit)
Zanshin (continued physical and mental alertness)
Striking
Opportunities
When opponent is
stationary or
unbalanced
When opponent is on
the verge of moving
When opponent
moves
As his technique 
takes form
In the middle of his
technique
When his technique 
is nearing completion
After his attack is
completed
Ippon-uchi-no-waza
Single strikes to men, kote, do, and thrusts
Harai-waza
Deﬂecting opponent’s shinai then striking
Ni/sandan-no-waza
Combination techniques
Hiki-waza
Reverse techniques executed from close-
quarters
Katsugi-waza
Shouldering the shinai before striking
Maki-waza
Flicking opponent’s shinai away with a circular
motion
Katate-waza
One-handed techniques
Jodan-waza
Techniques executed from the overhead stance
Oji-waza
Debana-waza
Striking just as the opponent moves
Suriage-waza
Parrying techniques
Kaeshi-waza
Parrying then striking the reverse side
Uchiotoshi-waza
Knocking the opponent’s shinai down
Nuki-waza
Dodging opponent’s strike then 
counterattacking
Technique Selection
Shikake-waza
www.ebook3000.com

promulgation of codes of ethics known collectively as Bushido (way of the warrior). These codes
were inﬂuenced by Confucian concepts, and they encouraged peace, order, and dutiful service
rather than overt aggression. The martial arts passed through a kind of “civilizing process,”
thereby adapting with the times into spiritual “Ways” where warriors not only trained their bod-
ies but also their minds.
As a vestige of this era, ideals of ningen keisei (human development) and jiko kansei (self per-
fection) are promoted as the ultimate goal of kendo training. The ideological coloring of this
development changes with the times. For example, from 1931 to 1945, kendo, along with the
other Japanese martial arts, was used by the government to instill nationalistic fervor into
Japanese youth. As a result, the Allied occupation government in Japan curtailed participation
in martial arts during the immediate postwar period. In 1952, kendo was reinstated as a sport
suited for a newly democratic society. Match rules were revised, kendo was reintroduced back
into schools, and tournaments grew steadily in number and competitiveness.
The idea of using kendo as a way of developing morality was initially discouraged. The
idea was to distance kendo from the militaristic overtures and ideological education of the
war years. This purging process led to another perceived transformation in kendo, namely
that practitioners primarily focused on learning tricks to score points and win matches.
Traditionalists deplored this trend, so in 1975 the All Japan Kendo Federation formulated
the official “Concept of Kendo and Purpose of Practicing Kendo,” and in 2007, it published
the “Mindset of Kendo Instruction.” “Concept of Kendo” states that the purpose of
practicing kendo is “to mold the mind and body” so that one is able “to love his/her country
and society,” while “Mindset of Kendo Instruction” emphasizes “lifelong kendo,” meaning
devotion to the development of character throughout their lives (All Japan Kendo
Federation 2007).
Ulterior motives for promulgating these doctrines include encouraging practitioners to
understand that the shinai is not simply a bamboo staff used for hitting one’s opponent.
Instead, it represents a sword. This understanding affects basic usage, as in kendo, one is to
keep the techniques close to how a sword might be used rather than resorting to tricky tap-
ping or simple bludgeoning. This is also meant to remind practitioners of the spiritual grav-
ity associated with using a real sword in mortal combat. An appendage to article one in
“Mindset of Kendo Instruction” states, “The ‘shinai-sword’ should be not only directed at
one’s opponent but also at the self. Thus, the primary aim of instruction is to encourage the
uniﬁcation of mind, body and shinai through training in this discipline” (All Japan Kendo
Federation 2007).
In other words, the shinai is not supposed to be viewed as a sporting implement per se, but
instead as a spiritual or highly philosophical medium for developing one’s humanity. Although
these may appear to be abstract concepts, many practitioners really do try to operate in a system
in which they are trying to score valid points while simultaneously nurturing an attitude that
victory or defeat is not decided solely by the attributes of one’s opponent, but also by one’s own
strengths and weaknesses.
In the training hall (dojo), one often is taught tenets of wisdom and philosophical
concepts that can be traced directly back to samurai culture. Many of these teachings focus
on the use of the mind more than issues of technique. The student of kendo is encouraged to
confront his or her fear, surprise, confusion, and hesitation (shikai), and then maintain a
Japan: Kendo
143

placid state of mind (heijoshin) that allows him or her to engage conﬁdently with any
opponent with respect, pride (kigurai), total commitment (sutemi), and ongoing physical and
psychological vigilance (zanshin). Through the process of kendo training over many years,
the practitioner is expected to embody these attributes to an extent that affect his or her
deportment and ability to deal with situations outside of the dojo as well. Thus, the kendo
practitioner is expected to have a positive effect on other people and be able to make an afﬁr-
mative contribution to society.
—Alexander Bennett
See also: Japan: Ninpo; Korea: Kumdo (in this volume); Belief Systems: Japanese Budo, 
Bugei, and Bujutsu; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868; 
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868; Globalization of Martial 
Arts; Asian Martial Arts in the United States and Canada; Written Texts: Japan; Jukendo; 
and Social and Cultural Evolution of Kendo; Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
All Japan Kendo Federation. 2003. Kendo no Rekishi [History of Kendo]. Tokyo.
All Japan Kendo Federation. 2007. “The Concept of Kendo” and “‘The Mindset of Kendo Instruction
and Its Explanation,” http://www.kendo-ﬁk.org/english-page/english-page2/concept-of-Kendo
.htm, accessed December 22, 2008.
Bennett, Alexander. 2008. “Spiritual Sports: The ‘Civilizing Process’ of Japanese Swordsmanship
from the Tokugawa Period and Beyond,” Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, Bulletin No. 5
(May), http://www.asjapan.org/web.php/lectures/2008/04, accessed January 18, 2010.
Guttmann, Allen and Lee Thompson. 2001. Japanese Sports: A History. Honolulu: University of
Hawai‘i Press.
Hurst, G. Cameron. 1988. Armed Martial Arts of Japan: Swordsmanship and Archery. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.
Rogers, John M. 1988. “The Development of the Military Profession in Tokugawa Japan.”
Unpublished Ph. D. dissertation, Harvard University.
IAIDO
Iaido is the Japanese martial art of drawing and cutting in the same motion, or “attacking from
the scabbard.” It dates from the mid-sixteenth century, when Japanese warriors began wearing
their swords through the belt with the edge upward.
Iaido is usually practiced solo with real blades, in set routines called kata. Some iaido styles
practice kata with a partner, using wooden swords or training blades with rebated edges. Some
styles incorporate test cutting, whereas others regard cutting as peripheral to the art.
Iaido is considered a method of self-development, but it is also practiced as a sport, with two
competitors performing kata side by side, and a panel of judges declaring a winner.
The idea of cutting from the draw may have originated as early as the eleventh century, but
modern iaido dates to about 1600. Most styles trace their origin to Hayashizaki Jinsuke
Shigenobu (ca. 1546–1621). His students and those who followed developed hundreds of differ-
ent styles, dozens of which are still practiced. Today the most commonly practiced styles include
Muso Jikiden Eishin-ryu and Muso Shinden-ryu.
144
Japan: Iaido
www.ebook3000.com

During the mid-twentieth century, two major governing bodies for iaido were formed: the All
Japan Iaido Federation and the iaido section of the All Japan Kendo Federation. Both organiza-
tions developed common sets of kata that allowed students of different styles to practice and
compete together. Some older styles of iaido have never joined a major organization. The leaders
of these older styles argue that an organization containing several styles and a common set of
techniques leads to modiﬁcation or dilution of the pure movements of the individual style and
that eventually all styles will look alike. In the case of the Kendo Federation, that argument is
sometimes extended to speculation that the movements of kendo will eventually inﬂuence the
movements of iaido.
The art has had many names over the years, but the current name, iaido, was accepted about
1930. “I” comes from the word ite (presence of mind) and “ai” is an alternative pronunciation of the
word awasu (harmonize), taken from the phrase kyu ni awasu (ﬂexible response in an emergency).
Iaido is a Japanese budo (martial way), and as such, it is intended mainly as a method of self-
development. The concentration and focus needed to perfect the movements of drawing and
sheathing a sharp sword while watching an (imaginary) enemy have a beneﬁcial effect on the
mind. The art demands excellent posture and the ability to generate power from many positions.
The art appeals to those who are looking for something deeper than a set of ﬁghting skills. For
many years, iaido was considered esoteric, and it was often assumed one had to be Japanese to
understand it fully. In the past decades, that thinking has changed as iaido has spread around the
world. Yet, no matter where iaido is done or which style is practiced, there is no doubt that it
remains rooted in Japan. With the advent of ﬁlm and video, scholars can see that the art does
change over time, but as the natural consequence of physical skills that are passed from teacher
to student, not from deliberate attempts to improve it.
The main practice is done alone. Apart from its exotic look, iaido does not generally appeal
to spectators, because it is (or should be) restrained and quiet in its performance.
Individual kata contain four parts:
1.
The draw and initial cut (nuki tsuke)
2.
The ﬁnishing cut (or cuts) (kiri tsuke)
3.
Cleaning the blade (chiburi)
4.
Replacing the blade in the scabbard (noto)
The different patterns of movement represent ways for dealing with imaginary enemies, who may
attack alone or in groups from various angles.
One of the simplest iaido kata is done as follows: From a kneeling position, the sword is
drawn from the left side, and a horizontal cut is made from left to right while the practitioner
steps forward, still on his or her knees. The sword is raised overhead, and a two-handed down-
ward cut is made. The blade is then circled to the right, and the imaginary blood is ﬂicked off
while the practitioner stands up. The practitioner switches feet while checking the condition of
the opponent, and the blade is placed back into the scabbard as the practitioner kneels.
Practitioners train with three weapons:
1.
Long sword (over 60 centimeters [over 2 feet])
2.
Short sword (30 to 60 centimeters [1 to 2 feet])
3.
Knife (less than 30 centimeters [less than 1 foot])
Japan: Iaido
145

Many styles also include partner practice in the form of stylized kata. For safety, partner kata are
performed with wooden blades.
The two governing bodies have formal grading systems. The All Japan Kendo Federation and
the International Kendo Federation base their curriculum mainly on a common set of ten
techniques, whereas the All Japan Iaido Federation has a set of ﬁve. Both organizations use the
kyu-dan system of ranking, with several student (kyu) grades and ten senior (dan) grades. During
grading tests, the swordsman is required to perform a number of techniques from the common
sets. For senior grades, techniques from an old style (koryu) also must be performed. A judging
panel observes the performance and passes or fails the challenger.
Iaido competitions are becoming more common, especially outside Japan. The usual format
consists of two competitors performing several kata side by side, with a panel of judges deciding
on the winner, who then moves on to the next round. The judging is done on several criteria
and is similar to that done in gymnastics or skating.
The major organizations hold a number of competitions each year, and the International
Kendo Federation is considering a world championship for iaido. The European Kendo
Federation and its national bodies hold European and national championships. In North and
South America there are occasional meets, but no organized competitive schedule as yet. As
in many martial arts, there is an ongoing discussion as to whether competition is a good thing
in an activity that is supposed to improve the practitioner. Those in favor of competition
point out that all sports beneﬁt the players. Opponents suggest that the beneﬁts of martial
arts are quite different and that they are incompatible with the beneﬁts derived from
competition.
—Kim Taylor
See also: Japan: Ninpo; Korea: Kumdo (in this volume); Belief Systems: Japanese Budo, 
Bugei, and Bujutsu; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868; 
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868; Globalization of Martial 
Arts; Asian Martial Arts in the United States and Canada; Written Texts: Japan; Jukendo; 
Social and Cultural Evolution of Kendo; and Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Budden, Paul. 1992. Looking at a Far Mountain: A Study of Kendo Kata. London: Ward Lock.
Craig, Darrell. 1988. Iai: The Art of Drawing the Sword. Tokyo: Charles E. Tuttle.
Draeger, Donn F. 1974. The Martial Arts and Ways of Japan. New York: Weatherhill.
Finn, Michael. 1982. Iaido: The Way of the Sword. London: Paul H. Compton.
Fujii Okimitsu. 1987. ZNKR Seitei Iai [All Japan Kendo Federation Ofﬁcial Sword Drawing [Forms]].
London: Kenseikai Publications.
Hoff, Feliks F. 1983. Iai-Do: Blitzschnell die Waffe Ziehen und Treffen [Iaido: Quick Drawing the Sword].
Berlin: Verlag Weinmann.
Lowry, Dave. 1986. Bokken: Art of the Japanese Sword. Burbank, CA: Ohara Publications.
Masayoshi Shigeru Nakajima. 1983. Bugei Ju-Happan: The Spirit of Samurai. Tokyo: G.O.
Maynard, Russell. 1986. Tanto: Japanese Knives and Knife Fighting. Burbank, CA: Unique Publications.
Mitani Yoshiaki. 1986. Muso Jikiden Eishin Ryu [Peerless, Direct Transmission Eishin School]. Tokyo:
Kendo Nihon.
Nalda, José Santos. 1986. Iaido–Todas las Bases y los Katas Exigidos para Cinto Negro [Iaido: Basics and
Kata Required for Black Belt]. Barcelona: Editorial APas.
146
Japan: Iaido
www.ebook3000.com

Obata Toshishiro. 1987. Crimson Steel: The Sword Technique of the Samurai. Westlake Village, CA:
Dragon Enterprises.
Obata Toshishiro. 1986. Naked Blade: A Manual of Samurai Swordsmanship. Westlake Village, CA:
Dragon Enterprises.
Otake Ritsuke. 1978. The Deity and the Sword, translated by Donn F. Draeger, Terue Shinozuka, and
Kyoichiro Nunokawa. Tokyo: Minato Research and Publishing.
Power, Guy H. 2001. “History of Nakamura Ryu,” http://www.webdiva4hire.com/kenshinkan/
history.html, accessed October 3, 2009.
Reilly, Robin L. 1989. Japan’s Complete Fighting System—Shin Kage Ryu. Tokyo: Charles E. Tuttle.
Sasamori Junzo and Gordon Warner. 1964. This Is Kendo. Tokyo: Charles E. Tuttle.
Suino, Nicholas. 1994. Eishin-Ryu Iaido: Manual of Traditional, Japanese Swordsmanship. New York:
Weatherhill.
Suino, Nicholas. 1995. Practice Drills for Japanese Swordsmanship. New York: Weatherhill.
Taylor, Kim. 1992, 1994. Kim’s Big Book of Iaido. Guelph, Ontario: Sei Do Kai.
Taylor, Kim, editor. 1987–present. The Iaido Newsletter (now The Iaido Journal). http://ejmas.com/tin/
tinframe.htm, accessed October 14, 2009.
Warner, Gordon, and Donn F. Draeger. 1982. Japanese Swordsmanship. New York: Weatherhill.
Watanabe Tadashige. 1993. Shinkage-ryu Sword Techniques, Traditional Japanese Martial Arts, translated
by Ronald Balsom. Tokyo: Sugawara Martial Arts Institute.
Yukawa Yoshi. 1990. Japanska Svard [Japanese Sword]. Stockholm: Berghs.
Zen Nippon Kendo Renmei. 1990. Zen Nippon Kendo Renmei Iai [All Japan Kendo Federation Sword
Drawing]. Tokyo: Kendo Nihon.
JO
The Japanese ideogram for jo means stick, staff, or cane. In the Japanese martial arts, the term is
used to denote a round wooden stick that is shorter than a bo, meaning the wooden staff that
night watchmen and others with police duties traditionally carried. In general, a jo is about
armpit high. The important distinction is that a jo is short enough to be easily grasped at both
ends at once, whereas a bo is not.
Today, there are two different names given to martial arts that routinely use the jo as a
weapon: jojutsu and jodo.
Jojutsu is translated as “stick technique,” and is the name used by various classical martial arts
systems (bugei ryuha) that include training with sticks in their curricula. Such systems include
Tendo Ryu, Yoshin Ryu, Muhi Muteki Ryu, Suio Ryu, Owari Ryu, and Tenshin Ryu. Some Ninpo
(ninjutsu) schools also teach stick techniques. For the most part, these systems treat the jo as a
subsidiary weapon, and some, such as Tendo Ryu, used the sticks to simulate ﬁghting with the
handle of a spear or halberd after the original weapon is broken.
Jodo (“way of the stick”) is the name used by martial art systems that focus primarily on the
use of the jo. Prominent jodo systems include the classical (koryu) Shindo Muso Ryu (hereafter
SMR) and the modern (gendai budo) Zen Nihon Kendo Renmei (ZNKR) Jodo, which derived
directly from SMR.
Another jo term is aiki-jo, which describes the use of the jo in aikido. In terms of numbers of
practitioners found worldwide, aikido has the most jo practitioners. Ueshiba Morihei (1883–1969)
created aikido during the early twentieth century, and the jo techniques he developed are largely his
own creation. Ueshiba’s inspirations probably included traditional spear techniques as well as his
own thoughts on the subject. Subsequent aikido instructors (notably Saito Morihiro, 1928–2002)
Japan: Jo
147

also developed their own techniques for using the jo. Regardless of who created them, aiki-jo tech-
niques are based on aikido principles rather than those of classical Japanese stick ﬁghting. Aiki-jo
methods are taught using solo forms (kata), speciﬁc techniques (kumi-jo), and blending techniques
(awase). Through these methods, aikido practitioners learn to use a jo to defend against attacks with
swords, knives, and bare hands, and, conversely, learn to defend against attackers armed with sticks.
HISTORY
The ideograms for Shindo Muso Ryu are sometimes pronounced Shinto Muso Ryu. Training in
SMR consists of learning solo forms (kata) that teach the use of the jo against an opponent
armed with a sword or swords. SMR has forms for dealing with the normal length sword (katana),
short sword (kodachi), and even two swords—one long and one short. During jo practice,
wooden training swords (bokuto) stand in for steel weapons. In SMR (and also ZNKR jodo), the
dimensions of the jo are speciﬁed using old Japanese measurements. Thus, a jo’s length is meas-
ured as 4 shaku 2 sun 1 bu, rather than 128 centimeters (50 inches), and the diameter is meas-
ured as 8 bu, rather than 2.4 centimeters (1 inch).
The founder of Shindo Muso Ryu was Muso Gonnosuke Katsuyoshi (ﬂ. ca. 1590–ca. 1620).
According to Matsui (1994), there are no known records of Gonnosuke’s birthplace, birth date,
or social status. Indeed, it appears that just three things are known for certain. First, Gonnosuke
received a license (menkyo) in the Tenshin Shoden Katori Shinto Ryu sometime during the
instruction of the seventh generation master (soke) of that system, which means sometime
between 1573 and 1592. Second, during the early seventeenth century, he began teaching jo
techniques to retainers of the Chikuzen Kuroda clan, in what is today Fukuoka Prefecture. Third,
a monument to his memory was established on the grounds of Homanzan Kamado Shrine in
Dazaifu, Fukuoka, in 1967.
Although there are few facts known about Gonnosuke, there are many legends. The most
popular version of the legend begins sometime during the Keicho era (1596–1615). According
to this story, Gonnosuke went to Edo (now Tokyo), where he had many contests with famous
swordsmen, and during these contests he was unbeaten. Then he met the famous swordsman
Miyamoto Musashi (1582 [not 1584]–1645), who trapped Gonnosuke’s stick using his famous
two-sword technique. Unable to advance or retreat without exposing himself to certain death,
Gonnosuke admitted defeat. The precise techniques used by Musashi are a subject of contro-
versy, but in any case, Gonnosuke met his ﬁrst defeat.
Gonnosuke left Edo to consider what to do next. He ended up at Homanzan, which is a
mountain outside Fukuoka City. Homanzan was the site of several provincial temples
(kokubunji), and students often went there to pray for inspiration. While there, Gonnosuke
prayed to the Buddha of Homan, and after a time, it is said that the Buddha rewarded him
with a divine vision, in the form of a young boy who came to him in a dream. In the dream,
the boy said: “Wielding a round stick, know the reﬂection of the moon” (Maruki wo motte,
suigetsu wo shire).
This is a double entendre, as suigetsu has the meaning of the moon reﬂected in water, but is
also a term for the solar plexus, which is one of the primary striking targets in jodo. Inspired by
this vision (hence the name of the style, which can be translated as “Divine Way of Dream
Thought”), Gonnosuke set about developing new techniques for his jo.
148
Japan: Jo
www.ebook3000.com

Once this was done, the oral history of SMR says that Gonnosuke challenged Musashi to
another duel. This time, when Musashi used his cross-block to trap Gonnosuke’s jo, Gonnosuke
reversed the jo end-for-end and attacked Musashi’s solar plexus, thereby winning the duel and
giving Musashi his only defeat. Note that this version of events appears only in the SMR tradi-
tion; most other histories of Musashi (including the Niten-ki, written by the latter’s students in
the 1640s) maintain that Musashi was never defeated in combat or contest.
According to Matsui (1994), the earliest known documentation of Gonnosuke’s system is a
license granted to fourth-generation headmaster Higuchi Han’emon in 1720. Kuroda clan doc-
uments indicate that a mid-level clan retainer named Nomura had a guard named Harada
Heizou Nobutada, and that Harada was the ﬁfth-generation headmaster of the Shindo Muso Ryu
founded by Muso Gonnosuke. The documents go on to say that Harada received a license from
Higuchi bearing the phrase Shinto Muso Ryu bojutsu. Matsui noted that different ideograms were
used to write these names: Higuchi’s license has the ideograms for “true way” (Shindo) whereas
Harada’s has ideograms that read “Way of the gods” (Shinto). This may have meant that the lin-
eage was splitting, as Harada was subsequently associated with separate, now apparently extinct,
lineage known as Heisai Ryu.
SMR history begins to emerge from the historical mists about the time of the seventh-
generation headmaster, Nagatomi Koshiro Hisatomo (1717–1772). In Nagatomi’s time,
teaching jojutsu to the clan samurai was a full-time job, and his school reportedly had more than
300 enrolled members. Ashigaru, or low-ranking samurai who were often tasked with police-type
responsibilities, were expected to learn the three “manly arts” (dangyo), which were stick ﬁghting
(jojutsu), grappling (jujutsu), and prisoner restraint (hojojutsu, rope restraint methods). Cognate
systems dating from this era that are still associated with SMR training include Ikkaku Ryu jutte-
jutsu (police truncheon techniques), Ittatsu Ryu hojojutsu, Isshin-ryu kusarigami-jutsu (sickle and
chain ﬁghting), and Kasumi Shinto Ryu kenjutsu (sword methods).
After Nagatomi’s death, the system split into two training centers, both of which were located
in what is today downtown Fukuoka City. The training center in the Haruyoshi district was headed
by Ono Hisasaku, while the one in Chigyo district was headed by Komori Kiyohei. Subsequently,
there were two main lines propagating simultaneously. These two lines probably diverged somewhat
in style because they were being taught more or less separately until the late nineteenth century.
At the time of the Meiji restoration in 1868, the headmaster in the Haruyoshi district,
Hirano Yoshizo Noei, had around a thousand students, and it is possible that a similar number
were training in Chigyo. Like most Japanese martial arts, SMR lost popularity following the
Meiji Restoration of 1868. In 1902, in an effort to overcome this downward trend, Hirano
Saburo Notoku (son of Yoshizo) and Yoshimura Hanjiro Yoshinobu, the respective masters of the
Hauryoshi and Chigyo groups, organized a joint practice session for their remaining students.
The idea was to consolidate the two streams and thereby promote SMR more effectively. Fol-
lowing this combined practice, six people received a joint license (i.e., one signed by the mas-
ters of both streams). Of these six people, Shiraishi Hanjiro Shigeaki (1842–1927) was the only
double-license holder to establish a dojo that attracted any signiﬁcant numbers of students.
During the last years of the Tokugawa Shogunate, Shiraishi worked as a guard, but after 1868,
he worked at a coal mine. He later made a living selling the sticks used to make writing brushes.
His influential students included Takayama Kiroku (ca. 1893–1938), Otofuji Ichizo
(1899–1998), and Shimizu Takaji (1896–1978).
Japan: Jo
149

After Shiraishi’s death, his students continued teaching in Fukuoka City. Takayama was the
main instructor, with Shimizu as assistant instructor. In 1930, Shimizu moved to Tokyo, and
Otofuji became the assistant instructor in Fukuoka City. Takayama continued to devote himself
to popularizing jodo until 1938, when he died suddenly at the age of 46. After that, Otofuji
became the chief instructor in Fukuoka City.
In Tokyo, Shimizu did a great deal to popularize jodo. For example, he obtained introductions
to prominent martial artists of the era, to include judo’s Kano Jigoro (1860–1938) and kendo’s
Nakayama Hakudo (ca. 1873–1958). These introductions were probably facilitated by Uchida
Ryohei (1873–1937), who was a jodo practitioner as well as an ultranationalist. Like Shimizu,
Uchida came from Fukuoka, was a license-holder (menkyo kaiden) in Shinto Muso Ryu jodo. Dur-
ing the 1880s, Uchida’s father, Uchida Ryogoro (1837–1921), had developed a method for ﬁght-
ing with European-style walking sticks (Uchida-ryu tanjo-jutsu) that was based on SMR principles.
Shimizu also succeeded in having the jo adopted into Japanese police training programs. To
this day, Japanese police ofﬁcers still receive training in police stick methods (keijo-jutsu) rooted
in SMR jodo. However, police sticks are often different from SMR jo. For example, the sticks
carried by police ofﬁcers on duty in front of police boxes are somewhat longer and thicker than
are SMR jo. There is also a riot baton that has a hole in the handle for a leather thumb thong.
In 1940, Shimizu established the Greater Japan Jodo Federation (Dai Nihon Jodo Kai). This
organization’s patrons included the powerful and inﬂuential ultra-nationalist Toyama Mitsuru
(1855–1944), who was a longtime associate of Uchida Ryohei. Of course, after World War II
ended, such connections proved problematical. Consequently, in 1955, the Dai Nihon Jodo Kai
was restructured and reorganized under the name of All Japan Jodo Federation (Zen Nihon Jodo
Renmei).
By the late 1950s, SMR jodo was being taught publicly in Tokyo. Early non-Japanese students
included Donn Draeger (1922–1982), Jon Bluming (1933–), and Bill Fuller (dates unknown),
all of whom began training with Shimizu during 1959–1960.
In 1968, Shimizu and Otofuji met in Tokyo to discuss Shimizu’s proposal to bring jodo
into the All Japan Kendo Federation (ZNKR). Following this discussion, twelve Jodo Seitei
Gata (Jodo Standard Forms) were created for use by the ZNKR. These forms were demon-
strated to the public for the ﬁrst time in 1969; Shimizu had the wooden training sword, and
Otofuji had the jo. The adoption of jodo by the ZNKR meant that the kendo federation
became the prime organization for jodo in Japan, and the Zen Nihon Jodo Renmei eventu-
ally ceased operation. A new Zen Nihon Jodo Renmei, seemingly focused primarily in Tokyo,
was established in 1985.
In 1970, Shimizu created the Shindo Muso Ryu Jodo Shinko Kai to promote the koryu, or
traditional, methods of SMR. This group periodically has gatherings and tournaments in Otsu (a
city along the shores of Lake Biwa, in Shiga Prefecture) and Fukuoka.
In 1978, Shimizu died, which left Otofuji as the senior jodo teacher in Japan. Lacking
Shimizu’s position and inﬂuence within the Japanese martial art community at large, Otofuji
proved unable to effectively lead the organization. Otofuji died in 1998.
TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION
The Japanese sword is renowned for its sharpness, and it poses an obvious threat to someone
armed with only a wooden stick. Nonetheless, the jo has some advantages of its own that make
it possible for a well-trained user to defeat a swordsman.
150
Japan: Jo
www.ebook3000.com

First is extra length. At about 128 centimeters (50 inches) in length, a jo is 20 to 30 centime-
ters (7 to 12 inches) longer than most swords. This extra length makes it possible for the jo user to
attack the swordsman while staying out of range.
Second is lighter weight. The jo, being made of wood, is half the weight of a sword, and can
be wielded with greater speed and acceleration.
Third is the jo’s different kind of strength. Historically, the Japanese made jo using
Mongolian white oak (Quercus mongolica), but today, jo are increasingly made using American
hardwoods such as ipe (Tabebuia spp.) and hickory (Carya spp.). Regardless of species, it is
unlikely that a sword will cut cleanly through a hardwood stick held at an angle.
Fourth is the different grip. The stick’s extra length allows its user to hold his hands farther
apart than the swordsman, thereby giving the jo user an advantage in power and leverage. More-
over, the user of the jo does not need to worry about cutting himself. Consequently, he can change
his grip from one end of the weapon to the other, or slide the weapon through his ﬁngers.
Fifth, a jo is a very ﬂexible weapon that can be used in an almost inﬁnite number of ways. As
an axiom of SMR puts it, “Cut like a sword, thrust like a spear, sweep like a naginata.”
Twelve fundamental movements (kihon) make up the core of jodo practice:
1.
Honte uchi (basic strike)
2.
Gyakute uchi (reverse-handed strike)
3.
Hikiotoshi uchi (pull and drop strike)
4.
Kaeshi tsuki (ﬂip over thrust)
5.
Gyakute tsuki (reverse-handed thrust)
6.
Maki otoshi (winding drop)
7.
Kuritsuke (roll and trap down)
8.
Kurihanashi (roll and release)
9.
Tai Atari (body check)
10. Tsuki hazushi uchi (turn aside a thrust and strike)
11. Do barai uchi (sweep aside a torso cut and strike)
12. Tai hazushi uchi (step back and strike)
These twelve movements are put together in various ways to make up the kata of SMR and
ZNKR jodo.
SMR and ZNKR jodo kata are performed by two people. The person using the wooden sword
(bokuto) is called uchidachi (“striking sword”), while the person using the jo is called shijo—
literally, “the person using a jo.” During practice, participants usually change roles numerous
times, but during formal events the sword wielder is the senior of the pair. Jodo training clothing
(keikogi) consists of the same clothing as is worn in kendo, namely the woven tunic (uwagi) and
split skirt (hakama); standard colors are indigo or white.
—Jeff Broderick
See also: Canary Islands Stick Fighting and Wrestling; Zulu Stick Fighting; Japan: Ninpo; Korea:
Hapkido; Canne de Combat (in this volume); Belief Systems: Japanese Budo, Bugei, and Bujutsu;
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial
Arts and Religion since 1868; Globalization of Martial Arts; Asian Martial Arts in the United States
and Canada; Written Texts: Japan; Police Defensive Tactics in the United States; Social and Cultural
Evolution of Kendo; and Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in Volume II).
Japan: Jo
151

REFERENCES
Draeger, Donn F. 1974. Modern Bujutsu & Budo, Volume III. Tokyo: Weatherhill.
Kaminoda Tsunemori, and Nakashima Asakichi. 1976. Shindo Muso Ryu Jodo Kyohan [Teaching
Manual of Shindo Muso Ryu Jodo].Tokyo: Nibo.
Krieger, Pascal. 1989. Jodo: The Way of the Stick. Geneva: Shang Do Kwan, via http://www
.ecoledubudo.com/krieger/index.htm, accessed September 20, 2008.
Matsui Kenji. 1994. Tenshin Shoden Shindo Muso Ryu Jojutsu [Pure Nature, Pure Transmission, Vision
[Inspired] Staff Technique School]. Saitama: Soshinsha.
Muromoto, Wayne. 1994. “Muso Gonnosuke and the Shinto Muso-ryu Jo,” Furyu 1(2), 14–19.
Rogers, John M. 1991. “Honcho Bugei Shoden Ch. 5” [Comprehensive Almanac of Martial Arts,
Chapter 5]. Monumenta Nipponica 46(2), 173–202, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/2385378,
accessed October 16, 2009.
Saito Morihiro. 1973–1976. Traditional Aikido. Tokyo: Minato Research and Publishing Company.
Skoss, Meik. 1985. “Shindo Muso Ryu Jodo: An Emic Description,” Hoplos 4(4), 12–17.
Skoss, Meik. 1996. “Sticks and Stones Will Break Your Bones: A Look at Jo and Bo,” Aikido Journal
106, 23(1), via http://www.koryu.com/library/mskoss7.html, accessed September 20, 2008.
Taylor, Kim A. 1994. “Use of the Knife and Short Staff in Aikido Training,” Journal of Asian Martial
Arts 3(4), 64, 103.
Taylor, Kim A. 2000. “A Brief History of ZNKR Jodo,” Journal of Non-lethal Combatives,
http://ejmas.com/jnc/jncart_taylor_0900.htm, accessed September 20, 2008.
Tribe, Eric, and Kim Taylor. 2000. The Little Book of Jodo. Guelph, Ontario: SDK Supplies.
JAPAN: KYUDO
Traditional Japanese archery is called kyudo (the way of the bow). It is practiced in Japan by peo-
ple in all walks of life, and since the 1950s it has become popular all around the world. The
worldwide kyudo population is currently estimated at about 500,000.
THE BOW
The modern Japanese bow (yumi) has two distinctive characteristics. First, with a standard
length of 230 centimeters (91 inches), it is the longest standard bow in the world. Second, it is
not gripped in the center of the bow stave but instead at a point about located about a third of
the distance from the lower tip. It is drawn using a version of the Mongolian draw, which means
the thumb is hooked around the string below the arrow, with the arrow held in place against the
right side of the bow with two or three ﬁngers placed over the thumb. The Japanese never
adopted the thumb ring favored by the Chinese, preferring instead a simple deerskin glove with
the inner part of the thumb reinforced with rawhide. Arrows are made from ﬁre-hardened reed
bamboo and usually ﬂetched with eagle or hawk feathers.
The earliest pictorial evidence of this design is found on a dotaku, a bronze, bell-shaped object
dating from the Yayoi Period (ca. 500 BCE–ca. 300 CE). The object is decorated with an image
of a man shooting a bow at a deer. The bow appears to be almost as long as the archer is tall, and
the archer is clearly gripping the bow below the center of the stave (Yamada 2001, 4). Wei-shu
(History of the Wei Dynasty), a Chinese chronicle complied during the late third century CE,
says that the Japanese used “a wooden bow that is short below and long above” (Yamada 2001,
4). Depictions of the Emperor Jimmu, legendary founder of the Japanese nation, usually show
him with his longbow. Jimmu’s traditional dates are 711 BCE–585 BCE, but the written
152
Japan: Kyudo
www.ebook3000.com

accounts only date to the eighth century CE. In any event, the historical record indicates that
the now-traditional shooting method was established from an early stage and that the Japanese
people have long looked upon the bow as being somehow of divine origin and bound up with
the founding of their nation.
Judging from surviving records and artifacts, Japanese bows from the third to eighth centuries
CE ranged in length from 173 centimeters (68 inches) to more than 250 centimeters (98 inches)
(Saito 1995, 43). The surviving bows are wrapped with thread, lacquered in various colors, and
ﬁtted with horn nocks (Saito 1995, 47). This shows that the early Japanese lavished a great deal
of care on the manufacture and decoration of their bows and that, from an early stage, the bow
was considered more than just a tool or weapon.
Sometime during the late Heian (794–1185) or early Kamakura Period (1185–1333), lami-
nated bows appeared in Japan. Early laminated bows were known as fusedake yumi (wood with a
bamboo facing) (Saito 1995, 110). Fusedake yumi were soon followed by the sanmaiuchi yumi,
meaning bows made from a wood core sandwiched between two strips of bamboo (Saito 1995,
118). By the 1470s, shihochiku no yumi, meaning bows made with a core of wood surrounded on
all four sides by bamboo strips, were in use (Saito 1995, 163). Finally, perhaps as early as 1555
(but certainly by the 1680s) the modern higo yumi was developed (Saito 1995, 164).
The higo yumi is made from a core of bamboo and/or wood strips (higo) bounded on both sides
with strips of hardwood and glued together to form a solid piece. The hardwood is usually
hazenoki (Japanese wax tree, Rhus succedanea). This core is then sandwiched between front-and-
back bamboo facings, and all the pieces are glued together. The grain of the higo is set perpendi-
cular to the grain of the bamboo facings, which gives the bow great ﬂexibility and strength. After
the pieces are glued together, the entire bow is wrapped with rope that is tightened down with
numerous bamboo wedges set in a speciﬁc pattern that allows the bow to be bent into the desired
shape as the glue dries. This construction has remained basically unchanged since the 1680s, the
only difference being that most modern bows are made with synthetic epoxy rather than the tra-
ditional natural glue.
The reason for this method of construction is the nature of bamboo: if over-stressed, it breaks.
As the Japanese bow developed, the draw became deeper, eventually reaching the point where
the arrow was drawn well behind the ear. (On the battleﬁeld, the draw was to the chin or chest,
so as to avoid catching the string on the archer’s helmet.) For this draw, a bow made of wood and
bamboo must be long. Otherwise, it cannot withstand the stresses placed on the materials and
the glued joints.
THE WAY OF BOW AND HORSE
In ancient China, archery was considered one of the “Six Gentlemanly Arts” that a cultured
person was expected to know. As Japan absorbed Chinese cultural inﬂuences in its early history,
this idea was imported into Japan and actively cultivated by the noble classes. The Record of Rites
(Li Ji, Raiki in Japanese; second century BCE), one of the Five Classics of the Confucian canon
and traditionally said to have been compiled by Confucius (Kong Zi, 551–479 BCE), describes
the ceremonial rites of the Zhou Dynasty (ca. 1050 BCE–256 BCE). A section of this document,
known in Japanese as the Shagi or “Meaning of the Ceremony of Archery,” emphasizes the need
for correct decorum and a pure spirit in shooting and teaches that the archer’s character can be
seen from the manner in which he shoots. It also teaches that when the archer’s spirit is pure,
Japan: Kyudo
153

his technique will be sound and his shooting successful, and that when his shooting is not
successful, he must not resent those who have bested him but must search for the cause of fail-
ure within himself. This gives archery a profound moral meaning, and the Raiki Shagi can be seen
as an early expression of the idea of archery being a “michi,” or “Way” for moral development.
This Confucian belief had a far-reaching effect on the development and practice of Japanese
archery. Speciﬁcally, the inﬂuence of the Raiki Shagi and the way of thinking it represented
meant that the proper practice of archery was bound by certain rules and fundamental principles
and so must be carried out with the correct procedure and spirit. This idea, combined with the
native Japanese reverence for the bow as a sacred object, gradually led to the development of cer-
emonies that featured the ritual and cultic use of the bow in a quasi-religious fashion where the
bow functioned as a semi-magical implement that had the power to purify space, exorcise evil
inﬂuences, and bring peace and prosperity. Some of these ceremonies have been preserved up to
this day.
The bow was also a practical weapon, and the Japanese aristocratic warrior of the ninth to
fourteenth centuries was an armored man who fought from horseback with the bow as his pri-
mary weapon. Members of the warrior class even adopted the phrases “Kyuba No Ie” (The House
of Bow and Horse) and “Kyuba No Michi” (The Way of Bow and Horse) to describe the way of
life they followed.
THE RYU
Into the sixteenth century, archery was passed on by kaden, or “family transmission.” From
roughly the end of the Sengoku Jidai (Warring States Period, meaning the late ﬁfteenth to early
seventeenth centuries) to the early twentieth century, archery was passed down through the
institution of the ryu (school or lineage). A ryu is headed by a soke, or headmaster, who passes
down the teachings of the lineage through a formal system of licenses (menkyo). In kyudo, this
organization by ryu dates to sometime after 1573 (Saito 1995, 99), by which time the bow had
lost its primacy as a battleﬁeld weapon.
Most authorities agree that the documented history of kyudo as we know it today can be traced
to Ogasawara Nagakiyo (1162–1242), the founder of the tradition that later came to be formally
called the Ogasawara Ryu. The original Ogasawara teachings were lost during the Muromachi
period (ca. 1333–1573) but subsequently revived by Ogasawara Heibei Tsuneharu (1666–1747)
under the instructions of the eighth Tokugawa shogun, Yoshimune (Yamada 2001, 5). The
Ogasawara Ryu taught mounted archery; the ritual, cultic, and ceremonial use of the bow; formal
etiquette; and ceremonial precedents.
Although the Ogasawara Ryu still exists today, most of the kyudo done today derives instead
from the unrelated Heki Ryu and its branches. The Heki Ryu was supposedly founded by a man
named Heki Danjo Masatsugu (ca. 1444–1502), who in turn taught Yoshida Shigetaka
(1462–1543) and Yoshida’s son Shigemasa (1484–1569). While scholars do not agree on
whether or not Heki Danjo actually existed, the history of the Heki Ryu is well documented from
the time of the Yoshidas to the present. The descendants and disciples of the Yoshidas went on
to found various branch schools (-ha) which ﬂourished all over Japan. Some of these Heki Ryu
branch schools, such as the Insai-ha and the Sekka-ha, still exist today. One of these schools, the
Satsuma Heki Ryu, based on the teachings of Yoshida Genpachiro Shigeuji (1561–1638; known
by the bow-name Issuiken Insai), still maintains the practice of armored battleﬁeld archery as
154
Japan: Kyudo
www.ebook3000.com

handed down in the Shimazu domain in Kyushu. There is also the Heki Ryu Chikurin-ha,
founded by a sixteenth-century Shingon Buddhist priest named Chikurin’bo Josei, who ofﬁciated
at a temple sponsored by the Yoshida family (Yamada 2001, 5).
With the introduction of the matchlock harquebus into Japan in 1542, the utility of the bow
as a weapon of war began to decrease, and archery as a viable military technology was dealt its
deathblow at the Battle of Nagashino in 1575, where peasant conscripts armed with matchlocks
under the command of Oda Nobunaga (1534–1582) decisively defeated the elite cavalry of
Takeda Katsuyori (1546–1582). However, archery was too closely intertwined with the ethos of
the bushi class for it to be given up entirely, and its practice was continued as a means of moral
and physical education.
During the Edo period (1603–1868), kyudo took on an increasingly formal and codiﬁed
aspect, and a contest called the toshiya became the chief impetus for advances in archery equip-
ment and techniques. In the toshiya, archers competed to see who could shoot the most arrows
the length of the veranda of the Sanjusangendo (Hall of the Thirty-Three Bays), a structure that
is part of the Rengeioin temple compound in Kyoto. This veranda is 120 meters (394 feet) long,
but the eaves of the temple that overhang the veranda are just 5 meters (16.5 feet) from the ﬂoor.
Thus, the trajectory of the arrow was limited, making it a difﬁcult task to shoot the length of the
veranda successfully. With no actual battles to be fought, the toshiya became the vehicle for the
various feudal domains to vie for supremacy in archery. It was, in a sense, a national sporting
event, and it was hotly contested. The main competition was the oyakazu, where archers would
compete for 24 hours straight. Beginning with 51 successful shots by Asaoka Heibei Shigemasa
in 1606, the never-to-be-surpassed record of 8,133 successful shots (out of a total of 13,053) was
set in 1686 by Wasa Daihachiro. This averages out to an astonishing one shot every six or seven
seconds for an entire day, a rate that is even more astounding when one considers that Wasa
reputedly took a two-hour rest. The prototype of the shooting glove in use today, which has a
stiff reinforced wrist and a thumb made of leather-covered wood with a groove for the string,
thereby allowing the archer to draw the bow without placing undue stress on the thumb, was
originally developed for use in the toshiya.
THE MODERN PERIOD
In September 1862, the Tokugawa government removed archery from the curriculum of the gov-
ernment-sponsored martial arts school (Murakami 1995, 208). A few years later, the samurai
class itself was abolished, and in the rush to adopt Western ways, archery, like many elements of
traditional culture, fell into disfavor.
The decades following the establishment of the Meiji government in 1868 were dark days for
kyudo. Instructors who had been employed by the now-defunct feudal domains were deprived of
their livelihood, and many set up shooting galleries where they taught archery to townspeople.
Having no experience in (or appreciation of) traditional warrior arts, the townspeople looked
upon archery as simply a pastime or amusement. They openly bet on the outcome of contests,
and the practice of archery soon came to be considered something in which respectable persons
did not engage (Saito 1995, 148).
Honda Toshizane (1836–1917), who had fought in the civil war that accompanied the fall
of the Tokugawa, strove mightily to redeem archery’s reputation. An archer of the Heki Ryu
Bishu Chikurin-ha and an archery instructor at Tokyo Imperial University, Honda established
Japan: Kyudo
155

an organization for the preservation of archery in 1889 (Sakurai 1981, 106). He soon gath-
ered other like-minded archers to his banner and pioneered a hybrid style partially inﬂuenced
by Western ideas of physical education that he thought would be better suited to the modern
world.
Younger but equally important individuals in the development of modern kyudo included
Ohira Zenzo (1874–1952) and Awa Kenzo (1880–1939), both of whom became disciples of
Honda midway through their kyudo careers. (Awa originally received certiﬁcation in the Heki
Ryu Sekka-ha from Kimura Tatsugoro, a vassal of the old Sendai domain [Yamada 2001, 8].) The
ideas of both Ohira and Awa showed strong Buddhist and spiritualistic tendencies. These
tendencies were probably inﬂuenced by the Zen boom that took place in Japan during the Taisho
(1912–1926) and very early Showa (1926–1931) periods, which in turn led to a movement in
the kyudo community to explain archery using Zen and Buddhist terminology. In 1923, Ohira
established his own kyudo organization, called the Dai Nippon Shagakuin (The Greater Japan
Institute for Awakened Archery), and took to calling himself Shabutsu or “The Shooting
Buddha.” In 1927, Awa established his own separate kyudo organization, Daishadokyo, or
“Teaching of the Great Way of Shooting.”
Of the two, Awa is best known outside Japan, because he was the teacher of Eugen
Herrigel (1884–1955), a German professor of philosophy who lived in Japan from 1924 to
1929. Herrigel studied with Awa for about three years. After his return to Germany, Herrigel
wrote a book about his experiences as Awa’s student called Zen in der Kunst des Bogen-
schiessens (1948; English: Zen in the Art of Archery, 1953; Japanese: Yumi to Zen, 1956).
Herrigel’s book is the primary reason many people outside of Japan mistakenly believe that
kyudo is a form of Zen meditation. Recent scholarship has shown that many elements of
Herrigel’s account are suspect, as are the conclusions he drew about the nature of kyudo
(Yamada 2001, 2005). For example, while Awa used a lot of Buddhist terminology in his
instruction, he himself never trained in Zen (Sakurai 1981, 223), did not approve of Zen
unconditionally (Sakurai 1981, 266), and did not teach his shado (shooting way) as a way
leading to Zen (Sakurai 1981, 238).
That said, Awa’s teachings were clearly quasi-religious in nature. Early in his career, Awa
emphasized accuracy and technique and actively participated in shooting contests, even becom-
ing national champion at one point. However, he later disavowed this approach, apparently par-
tially due to a powerful mystical experience that occurred during a strenuous practice session,
described by Sakurai as a “great explosion” (Sakurai 1981, 159). This experience led Awa to rad-
ically revise his views on the nature of kyudo. The character “kyo” or “teaching” can also be
translated as “doctrine” or “church,” and Awa’s students from that time attest that he taught
Daishadokyo as a religion. Awa himself referred to his travels to various places to teach as “mis-
sionary work” (Sakurai 1981, 210–211). In other words, although Awa viewed shado as a
method of spiritual awakening, his viewpoint was neither speciﬁcally Zen nor Buddhist. Instead,
his interpretation seems to have been formulated partly in opposition to traditional methods of
instruction, which he had come to disdain, and partly in an effort to recreate kyujutsu (the
method of the bow) as shado, much as Kano Jigoro (1860–1938) had done with the old jujutsu
and his new Kodokan judo. Herrigel’s preoccupation with Zen led him to misinterpret Awa’s
teachings (and kyudo in general) as Zen mysticism. In any case, while Awa was a highly skilled
archer of national repute, his deliberate recasting of archery as a self-consciously quasi-religious
156
Japan: Kyudo
www.ebook3000.com

practice, coupled with his open disparagement of traditional methods, met with vehement oppo-
sition from some quarters, so much so that some people considered him a lunatic (Yamada 2001,
9–10).
The Japanese government was anything but esoteric, and in 1895, it established the Dai
Nippon Butokukai (Greater Japan Martial Virtues Society) for the purpose of training martial
arts teachers and standardizing the practice of the martial arts nationwide. Kyudo was included
in its curriculum. In an effort to popularize and spread the practice of martial arts among the
general population, the Butokukai held annual national tournaments in Kyoto. These efforts
increased kyudo’s popularity, and over the years, the Butokukai made efforts to standardize its
practice. In its ﬁrst major effort, a committee of 27 archers from the various traditional schools
was called together, but standardization proved to be remarkably difﬁcult. Arguments were
technical. For example, should the standard method be the traditional shamen uchiokoshi
method of drawing the bow (where the bow is canted obliquely to the left before being raised
and drawn) or the new shomen uchiokoshi method of drawing the bow developed by Honda in
the 1890s (where the bow is lifted straight up before being drawn)? These questions proved
impossible to resolve.
In 1933, the Butokukai published a book called Kyudo Yosoku (Essential Rules of Kyudo) that
attempted to establish a uniform method that was a compromise between the two factions, but
in practice the compromise was widely ignored. The Butokukai tried again in 1944, with the
publication of another book called Kyudo Kyohan (Kyudo Textbook). The latter manual did not
attempt to impose a single method; instead, it recognized the traditional shooting methods. This
solution ultimately proved more popular. In 1921, the Butokukai also instituted the numbered
dan/kyu ranking system that is, with some changes, still in use today.
Following World War II, the Butokukai was dissolved, and for a few years following the end
of the war the practice of all martial arts in Japan was severely curtailed. As time passed, the
restrictions were lifted, and in February 1949, an organization called the Zen Nippon Kyudo
Renmei (All Nippon Kyudo Federation, or ANKF) was established.
Basing itself on the teachings expressed in the Raiki Shagi, the ANKF promulgated kyudo as
a method of moral and physical education. Fearing that Japan’s recent defeat and the resulting
cultural confusion would lead to an erosion of traditional values, the ANKF recast kyudo as a
way of promoting peace, harmony, and cooperation. Archery, the ANKF said, would instill tra-
ditional values such as self-cultivation, self-discipline, forbearance, humility, selﬂessness, and
self-reﬂection through hard practice.
The ANKF appointed a committee of masters to establish national standards for instruction.
This committee, drawing upon the commonalities shared between the various schools, distilled
the fundamental points of shooting into the Shaho Hassetsu, or the “eight stages of shooting.”
With the active involvement of the Ogasawara Ryu (the recognized authority on matters of
ceremony, etiquette, and decorum), the ceremonial aspects of kyudo, including the procedures
for group shooting and formal shooting ceremonies (which previously differed from school to
school) were standardized. The ANKF published the results in 1953, in a book called Kyudo
Kyohon (Kyudo Manual). The manual was widely accepted, and with this Japan ﬁnally had a
national standard for kyudo that respected the traditional shooting methods of the old schools
while simultaneously putting self-cultivation and moral training at the center of the practice.
This synthesis, which emphasized both the development of practical shooting skill and the
Japan: Kyudo
157

moral and spiritual development of the archer, ensured the ongoing place of kyudo in the
modern world.
—Earl Hartman
See also: Belief Systems: Japanese Budo, Bugei, and Bujutsu; Belief Systems: Japanese 
Martial Arts and Religion before 1868; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and 
Religion since 1868; Invented Traditions; Written Texts: Japan; Social and Cultural 
Evolution of Kendo; and Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Koyama Takashige. 1995. “Nihon Kyudo Gairon” [Overview of Japanese Kyudo], in Gendai Kyudo
Koza [Lectures on Modern Kyudo], Volume 1, edited by Uno Yozaburo. Tokyo: Yuzankaku Pub-
lishing Company.
Murakami Hisashi. 1995. “Gendai Kyudo no Hattatsu” [The Development of Modern Kyudo], in
Gendai Kyudo Koza, Volume 1, edited by Uno Yozaburo. Tokyo: Yuzankaku Publishing Company.
Saito Chobo. 1995. “Kyugu no Rekishi” [The History of Kendo Equipment], in Gendai Kyudo Koza,
Volume 4, edited by Uno Yozaburo. Tokyo: Yuzankaku Publishing Company.
Sakurai Yasunosuke. 1981. Awa Kenzo: Oi Naru Sha no Michi no Oshie [Awa Kenzo: The Teaching of
the Great Way of Shooting]. Sendai: Awa Kenzo Sensei Shotan Hyakunensai Jikko Iinkai.
Shoji Yamada. 2001. “The Myth of Zen in the Art of Archery,” translated by Earl Hartman, edited by
William M. Bodiford. The Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 28, nos. 1–2 (2001): 1–30; revised
edition, 2003, “The Myth of Zen in the Art of Archery,” in Martial Arts in the Modern World, edited
by Thomas A. Green and Joseph R. Svinth, 71–91. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Yamada Shoji. 2009. Shots in the Dark: Japan, Zen, and the West, translated by Earl Hartman. Chicago:
University of Chicago.
JAPAN: NAGINATA
A naginata is a Japanese polearm somewhat similar to a European halberd or, better, glaive. As
a medieval weapon, a sword blade was ﬁxed to a pole. The weapon was carried by infantry and
used to defend against cavalry. Into the nineteenth century, the weapon was also used for home
defense, especially by women. During the mid-twentieth century, naginata was taught in the
Japanese public schools, especially to girls, and since World War II, naginata has inspired a new
martial art called Atarashii Naginata (New Naginata).
HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT
The word naginata ﬁrst appears in historical literature during the mid-Heian period (794–1185),
when texts such as the Wamyo ruijusho (Classiﬁcation and Collection of Japanese Words, ca.
934) mention the naginata using Chinese ideograms denoting “long sword.” By the latter Muro-
machi period (1333–1568), the ideograms for “mowing sword” were used instead; the change in
spelling represented the sweeping motion of the weapon, which was used to slash at enemy war-
riors or the horses they were riding.
The use of the naginata in battle was common by the end of the Heian period, particularly
among warrior-monks (sohei), low-ranking aristocratic warriors (bushi), and peasant soldiers
(ashigaru). The military weapon was robust. It had a curved blade 30 to 60 centimeters (12 to
158
Japan: Naginata
www.ebook3000.com

24 inches) in length that was forged using the same method as swords. The blades were inserted
in oak shafts ranging from 120 to 240 centimeters (48 to 96 inches) in length, secured with bam-
boo pegs (mekugi), and then bound tightly in place using cords and metal rings. The butt of the
oval shaft, known as the ishizuki, was an important part of the weapon and was capped in metal,
to be used for bludgeoning fallen enemies.
Although a signiﬁcant weapon on medieval battleﬁelds, by the Warring States period
(mid-ﬁfteenth to early seventeenth centuries), its use declined, ﬁrst through the introduction
of regimented ﬁghting strategies involving spears (yari) and, later, through the introduction of
ﬁrearms. By the late sixteenth century, the naginata was essentially obsolete on the battleﬁeld.
Nonetheless, it survived as the preferred weapon of warrior monks and women in warrior fam-
ilies. The weapons were treated as an indispensable item in dowries and passed through gen-
erations from mother to daughter as family heirlooms; some of these latter weapons were even
decorated with highly ornate mother-of-pearl. During this period, the shafts were shortened in
length.
A survey of martial art ryuha (martial art lineages) practiced during the Tokugawa period
reveal none that specialized only in the naginata. Honcho bugei shoden (Comprehensive Almanac
of Martial Arts, 1717) records little regarding naginata-jutsu (naginata technique). Shinsen
bujutsu ryuso-roku (Record of Martial Art Masters, 1844) mentions naginata techniques in the
Anazawa-ryu, Sen’i-ryu, and Masaki-ryu—but only under the heading of sojutsu (spearmanship).
The Tendo-ryu, one of the main surviving traditions today, is recorded in the kenjutsu (sword
method) section of the 1844 text, but there is no reference to any naginata techniques. Shinto-
ryu (Anazawa-ryu), Nen-ryu, Araki-ryu, and Yoshin-ryu all included naginata techniques in
their curriculums, but again, no techniques are mentioned. Thus, it appears that naginata was
trained only as subsidiary components of these systems. Women trained in private, and the art
of naginata was treated as a “concealed” activity, hence the scarcity of information pertaining to
training methodology and techniques.
With the collapse of the Tokugawa government and the commencement of the Meiji period
in the 1860s, naginata-jutsu fell into decline. Like other traditional martial arts, it was consid-
ered symbolic of an outdated feudal hierarchy. Naginata-jutsu survived, however, due to interest
generated in the martial arts by traveling martial art shows (gekiken kogyo, sword attack shows).
These demonstration matches were initiated during the 1870s and 1880s by Sakakibara
Kenkichi (1830–1894), the son of a high-ranking ofﬁcial of the Tokugawa government and a
swordsman of the Jikishinkage-ryu, both as a way to revive martial arts and to provide
employment to martial arts experts. Swordsmen provided the majority of combatants in these
shows, but there were a small number of women such as Sonobe Hideo (1870–1963) who
competed with naginata as extra attractions in some of the shows.
During the 1890s, Japan’s growing sense of national identity encouraged a reassessment of
the value of traditional martial culture, and the Dai Nippon Butokukai (Greater Japan Martial
Virtues Society) was created in 1895 as a national organization to preserve and promote mar-
tial culture. In 1904, the Butokukai established a dedicated naginata division to promote the
art nationally, and at a Ministry of Education meeting held in May 1910 to discuss physical edu-
cation for girls, the topic of suitable extracurricular activities was raised. At this conference, it
was suggested that naginata, swimming, Japanese archery (kyudo), ice skating, and tennis were
appropriate.
Japan: Naginata
159

At the time, naginata was already being taught at a small handful of girls’ schools and
women’s universities. Pioneers included Mitamura Akinori, the fourteenth soke (head) of Tendo-
ryu, who introduced Tendo-ryu naginata into Doshisha Girls’ School in Kyoto in 1899. In 1901,
Yazawa Isako introduced Buko-ryu naginata into the Physical Education Department of Nihon
Women’s University. In 1908, Sonobe Hideo, the ﬁfteenth soke of Jikishinkage-ryu naginata-
jutsu, commenced instruction in that system at Himeji Normal College (precursor to the Faculty
of Education at Kobe University). Arai Tsuda started teaching naginata techniques from
Kyoshin-ryu at Nara Women’s Normal College (modern Nara Women’s University) in 1911.
National curriculum guidelines enacted in 1913 allowed for the inclusion of naginata in mid-
dle and higher schools as a regular physical education subject. This remained the case until 1936,
when naginata was made a compulsory school subject for girls.
To fulﬁll the requirement for additional instructors, the Butokukai created a teachers’ training
course for naginata in 1934. This school taught Tendo-ryu and was run by Mitamura Chiyo,
Nishigaki Kin, and Mitamura Kunihiko. In 1936, Sonobe Hideo established Shutokukan, a sepa-
rate training college for Jikishinkage-ryu teachers. Between them, these two schools were respon-
sible for training most of the naginata teachers who taught at Japanese schools from 1936 to 1945.
Because of its role in wartime militaristic education, naginata was included in the Allied
powers’ postwar ban on budo (martial arts). Training in martial arts was reinstated gradually, and
on May 4, 1955, Yamanouchi Teiko was appointed as the ﬁrst Chairwoman of the recently
organized All Japan Naginata Federation (AJNF). A special naginata research committee was
formed to develop a style of naginata that could be reintroduced into the public schools. It was
understood that this system would need to be a modern sport, with a completely new system of
techniques and training methodology, and that there would have to be clear distinction between
it and traditional systems.
The Ministry of Education accepted this proposal in 1959. Naginata education was author-
ized in junior high schools and above. Traditional ryuha afﬁliations were surpassed and the new
hybrid sporting version of naginata was announced.
The new system was initially called School Naginata (gakko naginata), but later the name
changed to Atarashii Naginata (New Naginata). The idea was to emphasize the break from
Japan’s militaristic past. For the same reason, the new name was written using phonetic hiragana
characters rather than the Chinese ideograms (kanji) used to write the names of traditional styles
such as Tendo-ryu and Jikishinkage-ryu. Furthermore, the Ministry directed the AJNF not to use
the sufﬁx “do” (Way) after naginata (i.e., naginata-do), with the intention of further distancing
New Naginata from previous moral and nationalistic nuances.
NEW NAGINATA
Atarashii naginata is an art very similar to kendo. Apart from the longer weapon involved, the
armor (bogu) is similar to that used in kendo, with the addition of sune-ate to protect the shins,
and split-ﬁnger gauntlets (kote). The basic criteria for scoring points in matches are similar, as
are ﬁghting stances (kamae). Naginata ﬁghting stances consist of chudan-no-kamae (middle),
gedan-no-kamae (low), wakigamae (ishizuki, or butt of the pole, toward opponent), jodan-no-kamae
(overhead), and hasso-no-kamae (vertical and side-on). Due to the additional length of the nag-
inata compared to a sword, naginata stances are side-on rather than front-on, and all techniques
and kamae can be executed from either the left or right side of the body.
160
Japan: Naginata
www.ebook3000.com

The weapon used in modern naginata is 210 to 225 centimeters (82.7 to 88.6 inches) in
length and must weigh over 650 grams (1 pound, 6.93 ounces). The blades (ha-bu) consist of
two slats of bamboo measuring 2 centimeters (0.5 inch) by 50 centimeters (19.7 inches) that
are placed together. The bamboo blades are joined to the shaft (e-bu) by winding white insu-
lation tape to form the sendan-maki. The shaft is made from white oak or pine and is oval in
shape, being slightly thicker at the butt (ishizuki). A leather cap is attached to the ishizuki and
the tip (kissaki) for safety. The stipulated target areas (datotsu-bui) are men (helmet; front,
left, right), do (chest protector; left, right), sune (shin guard; left, right, both inner and
outer), kote (gauntlet; left, right), tsuki (straight thrust to the throat). Basic methods for using
the naginata include furiage (lifting the naginata overhead and striking), mochikae (swapping
grip to enable attacking from the opposite side or from a different angle), furikaeshi (spinning
the naginata overhead), kurikomi (pulling the naginata in to shorten the length to strike
closer in), kuridashi (extending the naginata, thereby facilitating attacks from a further dis-
tance [maai]). In all cases, either the notional sharp side (monouchi) of the blade or the butt
end (ishizuki) must make contact with one of the ofﬁcial target areas for the point to be
counted as valid.
In Atarashii Naginata, practitioners dedicate much of their training time to perfecting the
shikake–oji forms. These are a set of eight sequential practice techniques in which shikake (chal-
lenger) is the initiator and oji (responder) is the counterattacker. The movements are predeter-
mined, and through them the student learns basic techniques (waza), etiquette (rei), postures
(kamae), grip (tenouchi), distance (maai), breathing, striking chances, principles of attack and
defense, mind–body–voice coordination (kiai), and so on.
There are two different kinds of competition in modern naginata. Shiai-kyogi is similar to
kendo competition. Armor (bogu) is worn, and competitors engage in sanbon–shobu. The ﬁrst to
get two points within the designated time limit wins. There are both individual and team
matches. Teams have three or ﬁve members. As in kendo, three referees (shimpan) adjudicate
matches. In shiai-kyogi, the criteria for valid points (yuko-datotsu) are deﬁned by the All Japan
Naginata Federation’s Tournament Regulations: “An accurate strike with the naginata’s datotsu-
bu (monouchi) must be made to a datotsu-bui (stipulated target area) with correct posture, vig-
orous spirit, while calling out the name of the target which is being struck.”
The other type of competition is called engi-kyogi. In this competition, a team of two is pitted
against another pair. Both teams perform set-forms or techniques. Within engi-kyogi, there are
two variations. One involves performing three or ﬁve of the shikake–oji techniques
simultaneously, and the other involves doing the All Japan Naginata Federation kata. This lat-
ter is a set of seven separate forms created in 1977. In the ANJF kata, a naginata with a solid
wood blade is used. Due to the intricacy of the kata and danger involved with solid wooden
weapons, these forms are in principle only practiced by senior practitioners (usually, third dan or
higher). Performances are graded on a number of factors, including accuracy and precision of
techniques, intensity, synchronicity, appearance, and attitude.
Before 1945, naginata training consisted mainly of kata featuring the naginata versus a sword.
Kata with naginata versus naginata was virtually unheard of, and whenever a naginata
practitioner donned armor and engaged in a match, it was almost always against a kendo
exponent. Postwar naginata, on the other hand, features almost entirely naginata versus nagi-
nata. However, as a supplementary attraction at naginata tournaments, a ﬁve-man team of local
Japan: Naginata
161

kendo experts is often invited to ﬁght against a team of naginata exponents. The naginata team
is usually victorious.
Although relatively uncommon, another division of naginata sometimes seen at tournaments
is “Rhythm Naginata.” In this event, teams complete routines of naginata techniques in time
with music. Participants are encouraged to develop a unique routine in accordance with music
and a theme of their choice. The result is a kind of dance routine using naginata in choreo-
graphed movements.
Promotion examinations are an integral part of modern naginata. The idea is to provide goals
for practitioners and revenue for the federations. Beginner grades range from eighth kyu (low) to
ﬁrst kyu (high). Intermediate grades are ﬁrst dan to ﬁfth dan. Above that are the honoriﬁc (shogo)
titles of instructor (renshi), master instructor (kyoshi), and teacher of teachers (hanshi). In Japan,
examinations up to fourth dan are conducted by the respective local federations, while ﬁfth dan
and above are national examinations held once a year at national headquarters. Honoriﬁc grades
are awarded according to technical mastery, understanding of the deeper philosophical principles
of naginata, personal character and attributes, and contributions made to promote the art.
During the early 2000s, an estimated 40,000 people practiced naginata in Japan, and a grow-
ing number practiced outside Japan. Although most of these naginata practitioners train pri-
marily in Atarashii Naginata, there are still some who train in a traditional style, either
concurrently or exclusively. The vast majority of participants in naginata are women, but in
recent years there has been a marked increase in the number of men studying naginata. This
resulted in the commencement of the annual All Japan Men’s Naginata Championships in
2002. World Championships are also held every four years, and as of 2008 the INF now has thir-
teen fully afﬁliated countries with more in the process of becoming members. The attraction of
naginata lies partly in its competitive aspects, partly in its grace and beauty of movement, and
partly in the perception that it can be a way for developing character and maintaining physi-
cal well-being.
—Alexander Bennett
See also: Japan: Kendo; Japan: Ninpo; Korea: Kumdo (in this volume); Belief Systems: 
Japanese Budo, Bugei, and Bujutsu; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion 
before 1868; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868; Globalization 
of Martial Arts; Written Texts: Japan; Jukendo; Social and Cultural Evolution 
of Kendo; and Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Amdur, Ellis. 2002. Old School: Essays on Japanese Martial Traditions. Seattle, WA: Edgework.
Bennett, Alexander. 2005. Naginata: The Deﬁnitive Guide. Auckland, New Zealand: KW Publications.
Knutsen, Roald M. 1963. Japanese Polearms. London: Holland Press.
JAPAN: NINPO
Ninpo (literally, “Universal Law of Perseverance and Endurance”) is a Japanese martial way
(budo) whose traditions were originated and developed by people who specialized in methods of
information gathering and special warfare. Until the eighteenth century, textual references to
162
Japan: Ninpo
www.ebook3000.com

this martial specialization, as a unique discipline, used the name ninjutsu (“stealth techniques”).
Subsequently, the name Ninpo began to appear in contemporary texts.
As an eclectic assimilation of martial traditions, modern-day Ninpo is an accumulation of the
combative applications of premodern martial traditions. Each of the traditions comprised in
Ninpo maintains its distinctive characteristics. For Ninpo’s unarmed combat, techniques mainly
include joint manipulation (jutaijutsu), bone-method (koppojutsu), ﬁngers-method (koshijutsu),
and special body maneuvers (taihenjutsu). Its armed combat includes a wide variety of concealed
and common weapons, as well as the combat application of ordinary tools such as those used for
farming and masonry work.
The cumulative physical aspect is called bumon, or the Martial Gate of Ninpo. Compli-
menting bumon is shumon, the Spiritual Gate that focuses on spiritual reﬁnement (seishinteki
kyoyo). The Spiritual Gate of Ninpo is informed by many belief systems, including Shugendo,
Buddhism, Confucianism, and Shintoism, plus spiritual attitudes developed by the warriors
themselves as a result of their experiences, leading to a distinct worldview.
BACKGROUND
Ninpo traces its roots to martial lineages (ryu) that formed as early as the tenth century CE in
the remote mountainous regions of Honshu’s Kii Peninsula. The peninsula lies south of the pre-
modern center of power and authority emanating from the capital at Heian (modern-day Kyoto),
and its mountainous terrain and numerous bays provided the perfect hiding place for renegades,
brigands, and pirates. Here we identify the roots of the Kishu and Negoro systems and also the
prototraditions of Ninpo, in groups such as the yamabushi (i.e., ascetic monks of the Shugendo
sect), other wandering ascetics, and independent warrior bands. Present-day systems that trace
their roots to this era include Gyokko, Koto, Togakure, Iga, Koga, and others. The accumulated
combat knowledge combined with religious practices and philosophies, together with Chinese
combat knowledge and military strategy delivered by Chinese and Korean migrants, pirates, and
mercenaries with whom the Japanese interacted, provided the breeding ground for the ancient
and medieval ninjutsu methods in which modern Ninpo traditions locate their origins.
Although military historians know fairly well the social and political context of the devel-
opment of warfare in premodern Japan, some aspects of the history of Ninpo seem to elude us.
This is mainly due to its relatively limited and obscure activity in a world dominated by overt
samurai culture. Thus, it is difﬁcult to determine whether ninjutsu was a specialized activity or
military specialization (e.g., ninjutsu experts), or perhaps a secondary skill that some warriors
acquired. Nonetheless, the records found in the Ninpo traditions, combined with the plethora
of information available in primary historical texts, portray a multifaceted military discipline
that cannot be removed from its social, political, and military context. What must be remem-
bered is that both the systems and the context changed and evolved through the centuries.
Until the medieval period (Kamakura period, 1185–1333), ninjutsu was probably not sys-
tematized. Essentially, the word described special military skills honed by individuals and small
groups. These individuals and groups lacked the characteristics of an organized tradition by
which a systematized body of knowledge is transmitted within a deﬁned hierarchical lineage. As
such, people specializing in ninjutsu were not recruited from any single social group or even a
speciﬁc level of the social and military hierarchy. In addition, there were some highly skilled pro-
fessionals whose expertise was limited to certain aspects of ninjutsu, whereas others had a broad
Japan: Ninpo
163

understanding of the discipline. Generals and warlords used ninjutsu, but its practice was not
restricted to serving soldiers. That is, there were regular warriors and samurai who had second-
ary knowledge of the discipline.
What remained constant over time was leaders’ innate need for gathering information
about rivals and enemies and the ability to conduct special warfare whenever circumstances
necessitated it. Sun Tzu (sixth century BCE), a legendary Chinese strategist, devoted a whole
chapter of his book, The Art of War (Sun Tzu Ping Fa) to espionage, and it was within that
context that the Japanese organized their knowledge of combat skills that were unique to their
expertise. Some of these Japanese experts established lineages, and thus formed ninjutsu
traditions.
What separates the physical aspect of ninjutsu traditions from samurai traditions?
1.
The extra attention that the ninjutsu traditions give to ﬁghting unarmed (or only lightly armed)
against an armed attacker.
2.
The use of concealed or specialized weapons.
3.
An emphasis on techniques of inﬁltration, concealment, and retreat.
While the samurai traditions emphasized archery and spears (i.e., weapons used on the open
battleﬁeld), the nature of ninjutsu activity dictated a markedly different approach. A person
sent on a mission of gathering information in enemy territory cannot be dressed in full body
armor and carry military weapons. Such a person also needed to know how to ﬁght effectively
against armed men. This meant the creation of a wide set of techniques, and also the develop-
ment of special aids such as blinding and distracting devices, concealment and retreating tech-
niques, and specially designed weapons that were limited only by their maker’s creativity and
innovation.
Spies also needed to remain especially focused on their mission. Therefore, ninjutsu
specialists adopted meditative and mind control techniques, as well as protective and offensive
talismans and spells from Buddhism and Shugendo. Although modern Ninpo traditions include
this accumulated knowledge in their curricula, transmission is determined by headmasters based
on their own particular disposition.
FIGHTING TECHNIQUES
The system of unarmed and weapon ﬁghting techniques of Ninpo that developed during the
Tokugawa or Edo period (1603–1868) is called Thirty-Six Ninpo Forms (Ninpo sanjurokkei). The
Thirty-Six Forms are further grouped into two major divisions: the Eighteen Martial Categories
(Bugei juhappan) of the samurai and the Eighteen Ninja Forms (Ninja juhakkei) of the ninjutsu
specialist, as listed in Table 2. Because of its reliance on multiple traditions, modern Ninpo is
more all-encompassing than were the premodern ninjutsu traditions.
Speciﬁc martial traditions (ryuha) provide content to the two Edo-era divisions. The Eighteen
Martial Categories are based primarily on Takagi, Asayama Ichiden, Shinden Fudo, and Kukishin
samurai traditions, while the Eighteen Ninja Forms are based on the Gyokko, Gikan, Koto, and
Togakure traditions.
Each tradition is identiﬁed by its characteristic approach to combat, the most fundamental
of which include grappling methods (jujutsu, “soft method”), body movement methods (taijutsu),
164
Japan: Ninpo
www.ebook3000.com

Japan: Ninpo
165
Jujutsu/Kenpo
Kenjutsu/Gekken jutsu
Iaijutsu/Battojutsu
Kusarifundojutsu
Bojutsu
Jojutsu
Sojutsu
Naginata
Suiren
Bajutsu
Kishajutsu
Kyudo
Yoroi kumiuchi
Hojojutsu
Juttejutsu
Hojutsu
Shuriken/Nagekenjutsu
Unarmed combat
Sword techniques
Sword-drawing
techniques
Weighted-chain
techniques
Quarterstaff
techniques
Short-stick
techniques
Spear techniques
Polearm techniques
Swimming
Equestrian
techniques
Mounted archery
Dismounted archery
Fighting while
wearing armor
Tying techniques
Iron truncheon
techniques
Firearm techniques
Blade throwing
techniques
Seishinteki kyoyo
Gunryaku heiho
Taijutsu
Kenpo/Bikenjutsu
Kusarigamajutsu
Bojutsu
Jojutsu/Hanbojutsu
Sojutsu
Naginatajutsu
Bisentojutsu
Kishajutsu
Shurikenjutsu/Senba
nnegajutsu
Intonjutsu
Hokojutsu
Hensojutsu
Kakushibuki
Ninyaku
Tenmon/Chimon
Spiritual reﬁnement
Strategy
Unarmed combat
Sword techniques
Sickle-chain
techniques
Quarterstaff
techniques
Short- and medium-
stick techniques
Spear techniques
Polearm techniques
Pole weapon
techniques
Mounted archery
Blade throwing
techniques
Disappearance
techniques
Walking techniques
Disguise
(camouﬂage)
techniques
Hidden weapons
Medicine
Astronomy and
topography
Ninpo sanjurokkei (Thirty-Six Ninpo Forms)
Bugei Juhappan 
(Eighteen Martial 
Ninja Juhakkei 
Categories of the 
(Eighteen Ninja 
Samurai)
Translation
Forms)
Translation
Table 2

166
Japan: Ninpo
bone-breaking methods (koppojutsu, “bones method”), weak points utilization (koshijutsu, “ﬁnger
locks”), and striking methods (dakkentaijutsu).
In the Eighteen Martial Categories, Takagi jujutsu is a good example of a well-rounded system
of unarmed combat for the common samurai. In this tradition, there are strikes, kicks, throws, and
a large variety of joint manipulation techniques, done from both standing and formal sitting posi-
tions. In addition, the tradition offers a category of techniques that are performed while wearing
one or two swords (as was customary for the samurai). There are even methods for disarming an
attacker armed with a sword, as might be necessary when taking prisoners or serving in a police
role. Asayama Ichiden taijutsu is another samurai tradition that offers a large variety of tech-
niques. This system uses strikes and kicks, but places special emphasis on joint manipulation tech-
niques and throws. At advanced levels, Asayama Ichiden practitioners also learn to ﬁght with
short sticks of approximately 25 centimeters (10 inches) in length. The techniques of Asayama
Ichiden tradition, similar to Takagi, are performed from standing or sitting stances.
Two aspects characterize the martial traditions of the Eighteen Ninja Forms. First is that the
lineage originated with warriors who specialized in ninjutsu, and second is the use of extraordi-
nary ﬁghting methods. Among the most important traditions of this division are Koto, Gikan,
Gyokko, Togakure, and Iga. Their techniques include various methods of armed and unarmed
combat, but also include methods for leaping, hiding, walking and running, evading sword
strikes, and special ways of moving the body. Similarly, their arsenal of weapons includes both
conventional weapons such as the sword (tachi) and spear (yari), but also unconventional
weapons such as shuko (“hand claws”), kusarifundo (“weighted chain”), and a variety of con-
cealed weapons (kakushi buki).
Obviously, not every technique in the curriculum of the Eighteen Ninja Forms displays any
unusual utilization of the body or weapons, and a close examination of techniques shows that
some techniques are similar to techniques of the Eighteen Martial Categories. However, some
techniques make a distinct usage of the body and weapons, while others appear normal at ﬁrst
but are actually special-weapons techniques that are performed without the weapons, or that use
the body in unique ways. An example is the unarmed performance of techniques for a weapon
called shuko (“hand claws”), whereby open-palm and closed-ﬁst knuckle strikes replace the iron
strap and protruding spikes of the weapon. Another example is the replacement of techniques
that incorporate eye-blinding (metsubushi) methods. Body movements are done to simulate the
use of the powders or devices, but these are hardly recognizable to the untrained eyes as blinding
techniques.
WORLDVIEW
Ninpo’s worldview (shumon) adheres to a heart of perseverance and a mind of endurance, and
this is the literal meaning of the ideogram nin in Ninpo. Meanwhile, the ideogram pronounced
po carries the Buddhist meaning of Law. Thus, the term literally means “Universal Law of Per-
severance and Endurance.”
From a universal perspective, the Ninpo world view promotes an existence harmonious with
nature, one that is sensitive and responsive to natural phenomena. This worldview is an amal-
gamation of religious philosophies and social ideologies that guide the Ninpo proponent. The
fundamental idea is to build mental strength and character through an understanding of human
www.ebook3000.com

nature and one’s role as a warrior, while at the same time developing an awareness and appreci-
ation of the laws of nature.
Within this worldview, esoteric Buddhism contributed a subscribed path to enlightenment,
Shugendo provided esoteric rituals and practices, Shinto enforced the great importance of being
in harmony with nature and its forces, and Confucianism provided strong notions of valor and
loyalty.
The opening lines of a section devoted to world view in the ninjutsu text Bansenshukai (“Sea
of Myriad Rivers Merging,” ca. 1676) inform us that:
The essence of nin is the correct heart and mind. The elements of nin are covert [activity], infor-
mation gathering, disguise, and surveillance. Without ﬁrst having a correct heart, it is impossible to
take advantage of strategy. Confucius [Kong Zi, 551 BCE–479 BCE] said that not cultivating [the
proper heart] will cause confusion and distress. The meaning of “correct heart” is the adherence to
virtue, righteousness, loyalty, and sincerity. Without maintaining virtue, righteousness, loyalty, and
sincerity, it will be impossible to have intrepid spirit.
In Bansenshukai, with its typical Edo-era emphasis on Confucian ideals of loyalty, the
ideogram nin encompasses the true essence of the worldview of Ninpo. But this is only a partial
explanation to the essence of Ninpo’s worldview. True, nin means endurance and patience, but
nin and its compound words are rarely used in daily Japanese to describe endurance or patience.
Instead, the word implies stealth, secrecy, and hiding and concealment, which would seem to
refer to a physical state. Thus, the Japanese dictionary Kojien (fourth edition 1993, 1974) deﬁnes
Ninpo as “skills of a ninja” or “methods of ninjutsu.” Most other Japanese-language dictionaries,
including dictionaries of military history and martial terminology, either ignore the term or
mention it only as the ﬁrst title word of an historical document (e.g., “Ninpo hikan” in Nippon
budo jiten 2003, 550). Further search in massive collections of premodern historical documents
ﬁnds no mention of the term, leaving us with only a handful of references in document titles
such as Iga ryu ninpo gokuhikan (Inner Secrets Scroll of the Iga Tradition, 1716), Ninposho (Ninpo
Records, 1721), Ninpo mizukagami (The Water Mirror of Ninpo, 1798), and Koshu ryu ninpo den-
sho rodanshu (Written Transmission of a Collection of Old Discussions of Koshu Ninpo
Tradition, 1830).
In Buddhist texts, ninpo describes the process of realizing the fundamental principle of the
Four Noble Truths:
1.
Life means suffering.
2.
The origin of suffering is attachment.
3.
The end of suffering is attainable.
4.
There is a path to the end of suffering. Achieving the end of suffering may take many lifetimes.
Ninpo is also identiﬁed with the sixth of the seven stages of becoming bodhisattva (an enlight-
ened person). At this stage, discernment and belief is the vehicle to realize and acknowledge
both Law of Causality (Sanskrit: karma) and the dichotomy of Delusion and Enlightenment.
By itself, nin is used in numerous compound terms that express the essence of nin in various
Buddhist contexts. For example, ninin (Two Kinds of Patience) is patience toward sentient
beings and calmness in the assurance of no-rebirth. Sannin (Three Kinds of Patience) includes
Japan: Ninpo
167

patience under hatred, physical hardship, and in pursuit of faith. Gonin (Five Kinds of Patience)
identiﬁes patience for self-control, ﬁrm belief, obedience, the realization of the non-birth of phe-
nomena, and realization of extinction.
There are many other examples of the word nin in Buddhist terminology, and they reﬂect
the central principle in the world view of Ninpo, namely that hard practice develops patience
and endurance to both physical and mental pain. This in turn leads to mental patience and
endurance similar to the kind expressed in Buddhism. Ultimately, the combined physical and
mental endurance should lead to optimal execution of physical techniques and provide both
mental and emotional strength.
HISTORY
Much of the origin of Ninpo is found in the history of the premodern Japanese espionage and
associated special warfare operations. Legendary ﬁgures of the early period of state formation
such as Prince Yamato Takeru (legendary son of the twelfth emperor Keiko) whose legends
appear in Kojiki (Record of Ancient Matters, 712 CE), and the seventh-century ascetic En-no-
Gyoja (legendary founder of Shugendo) are often attributed with unique military and magical
abilities that later became part of ninjutsu. Although their stories are commonly classiﬁed by
modern scholars as legends, they nevertheless were adopted by some traditions to bolster their
claims to authenticity and legitimacy.
Japanese adoption of Chinese methods of warfare and strategy since the early ancient period
brought dramatic changes. By the medieval period, Japanese military leaders based their employ-
ment of covert warfare—espionage and tactics—on deﬁned theories that they adopted from mon-
umental works such as Sun Tzu’s Art of War and others. Sun Tzu’s theoretical elaboration on the
ﬁve types of spies (gokan), which included the local agent (gokan, written using a different
ideogram for go), double agent (hankan), inside agent (naikan), expendable agent (shikan), and liv-
ing agent (shokan), was the basis for a Japanese system that adapted to local culture and customs.
Ninjutsu scholar Okuse Heishiro (1963, 19–25) cites Nihon shoki and Iga tradition sources to
argue that Prince Shotoku (573–621 CE), best known for his adoption of Chinese state ideol-
ogy in his Seventeen Articles constitution, employed shinobi (“stealth experts”) as secret mes-
sengers or information gatherers, including one called Otomo Komado (also, Saijin). Prince
Shotoku, like many Japanese after him, referred to Chinese sources for matters of state, and
apparently used the term kanja to speciﬁcally describe experts of espionage. (The term kanja,
together with the similar term kancho, were the Japanese rendering of the Chinese ideogram for
spy. These terms appear in multiple historical sources.)
These records indicate that espionage and covert warfare was used during the period of state
formation before the Heian period (794–1185), and later during military clashes. These military
uses contributed to further development of ninjutsu as a highly specialized form of warfare, and
also to its early systematization.
Another derivative of this ideogram was the use of the term sokkan to describe an espionage
agent who also performed assassinations. Records identify one such sokkan, a man by the name
of Takomi, as a personal attendant for Emperor Tenmu (reigned 673–686 CE) (Bansenshukai,
426; Nihonshoki, “Emperor Tenmu”).
By the Kamakura period (late twelfth to early fourteenth centuries), military houses, rene-
gade warriors, monks, and bandits all apparently had members specializing in aspects of ninjutsu.
168
Japan: Ninpo
www.ebook3000.com

The most famous included the generals Minamoto-no-Yoshitsune (1159–1189), who, the legend
informs us, acquired his supernatural ﬁghting skills from mountain goblins (tengu) and Kusunoki
Masashige (1294–1336). These men are listed as the founders of the Yoshitsune and Kusunoki
traditions, respectively. The monk Ippen (1234–1289, founder of the Jishu branch of Pure Land
Buddhism) was another historical ﬁgure who displayed unique unarmed combat skills associated
with Ninpo. According to the Yugyo shônin engi-e (“Illustrated Biography of the Wayfaring Holy
Man,” ca. 1307), Ippen was attacked by two armed bandits. Although unarmed, Ippen not only
avoided the attack, but he also disarmed one of the attackers and forced the other to retreat.
Such sword-disarming techniques are known in Ninpo as mutodori (“sword disarming”), and are
a specialty of the Gyokko tradition.
Intensive warfare followed the fall of the Kamakura military government in the 1330s.This
contributed to remarkable changes in warfare and military technology, to include increased
attention to covert warfare. The Warring States period (Sengoku), in the latter half of the
medieval period, lasted just over a century and marked the height of internal warfare in Japan-
ese history. More than at any other time in Japanese history, the bloody wars of the late medieval
period brought ninjutsu activity to its zenith, culminating in the formation of professional nin-
jutsu groups, especially in the Iga and Koga regions (both in the mountains of Honshu), but also
in other regions throughout the Japanese archipelago. With an almost constant state of war, nin-
jutsu professionals found eager employers who realized the indispensability of the discipline. This
reality led to technological advancement in methods of inﬁltration, weapons, tools, camouﬂage,
explosive devices, and poison formulas.
The feudal lord (daimyo) Takeda Shingen (1521–1573) of Shinano was especially keen at
employing ninjutsu. His “three men” (mitsumono) espionage system used warriors of low social
status (rappa, “wild wave”). Rappa were divided into those who specialized in collecting verbal
information, and two types of observers. Takeda’s most challenging rival, Uesugi Kenshin
(1530–1578), employed specialists whom he called tan’en (using characters than can also be
read nokizaru). The term referred to people who specialized in entering a house through the roof.
Another powerful warlord, Maeda Toshiie (1539–1599), hired bands of ninjutsu profession-
als from Iga to assist him in enforcing his control over his Kaga domain. The bands, numbering
some ﬁfty men, were called “thieves’ bands” (nusumigumi), and, after the domain achieved sta-
bility and strength, Maeda dissolved them.
Oda Nobunaga (1534–1582), the daimyo who began the process of consolidation and paci-
ﬁcation at the end of the Warring States (Sengoku) period, recruited agents from his enemies by
offering bribes and wine, while the Sanada clan used “grass people” (kusamono), meaning people
who observed the enemy while hiding in the bushes. These examples reﬂect the high level of
speciﬁc ninjutsu expertise (and specialization) available at that time.
Several ninjutsu bands operated independently of such powerful warlords. For instance, shi-
nobi-no-shu was a group of warriors formed sometime during the Keicho era (1596–1614) with
the support and patronage of the fortiﬁcation specialist Todo Takatora (1556–1630). This was
one of ﬁve groups called Iga musokunin, which comprised ﬁve bands of warriors each specializing
in a certain aspect of warfare. (A musokunin was a low-level samurai who usually made his liv-
ing by farming.) When Commodore Matthew Perry (1794–1858) ﬁrst arrived in Uraga Bay in
1853, one of those warrior musokunin, Sawamura Jinzaburo, went to Uraga to spy on Perry’s Black
Ships.
Japan: Ninpo
169

Another independent group of ninjutsu specialist was called suppa (also seppa; “transparent
waves”). Warriors of this group were thieves and mountain brigands who operated independently
in two bands—yaburi suppa and kakae suppa—with no known patronage of military leaders. A
known suppa in the early modern period was Fuma Kotaro (died 1603). He served with the Hojo
clan, but his lineage is unknown.
Throughout the Edo era (1603–1868), warriors associated with the ninjutsu communities of
Iga and Koga, which had assisted Tokugawa Ieyasu (1543–1616) during his rise to power, con-
tinued to serve the Tokugawa government in various ways. They were part of the Edo govern-
ment’s development of effective mechanisms of political and military control.
These warriors were considered especially trustworthy, as demonstrated by the third shogun’s
(Tokugawa Iemitsu, 1604–1651) initiation of a military duty called akeyashikiban that employed
these warriors as special castle guards whenever the shogun left the castle. However, their most
signiﬁcant contribution to the military government in Edo was their service as inspectors
(onmitsu) and supervisors (metsuke and ometsuke) in the domains. Their job was to report on the
leadership of the domains and to inform of potential threats to the government.
NINPO IN THE MODERN ERA
In modern times, Takamatsu Toshitsugu (1889–1972) was instrumental in perpetuating Ninpo
traditions. Takamatsu acquired his martial arts skills and knowledge from Toda Shinryuken
Masamitsu, Ishitani Matsutaro, and Mizuta Yoshitaro Tadafusa. From them, Takamatsu inherited
the title of soke (head of lineage) to the martial traditions of Shinden Fudo, Gyokko, Gikan,
Koto, and Togakure Ryu. In the 1920s, he formed close relationships with the head of the Kuki
House, who granted him access to Kuki documents. Then, after Viscount Kuki Takaharu
(1860–1940) assigned to him the task of reviving the military and religious tradition of the
house, Takamatsu was able to master the inner secrets of Kukishin tradition.
Takamatsu taught the martial traditions he inherited to many others, and eventually he
entrusted their transmission to a small group of disciples, to include Akimoto Fumio (1894–1962),
Ueno Takashi (1899–1976), Kimura Masaji (1901–2000), Sato Kinbei (1925–1999), and Hatsumi
(Masaaki) Yoshiaki (1931–). Of this group of close students, only Sato, who later specialized in
Chinese martial arts, and Hatsumi succeeded in attracting large numbers of students.
In 1984, Tanemura (Tsunehisa) Shoto (1947–), who was a student of and trained with Kimura,
Sato, and Hatsumi, established his Genbukan organization and began to propagate Takamatsu’s tra-
ditions. In 1996, Tanaka (Fumio) Unsui (1945–), a student of Hatsumi, began propagating Ninpo
traditions through his Jinenkan organization. Although the martial traditions taught in these three
organizations are based on transmission from Takamatsu, there are noticeable differences in their
interpretation of the traditions and knowledge and their approach to teaching.
Another person who contributed to the establishment of Ninpo during the modern era was
Fujita Seiko (1899–1966). Fujita made his contribution mainly as a writer. Although he claimed
Koga lineage and taught a few disciples, none was able to continue his lineage. If indeed he was
the legitimate head of the Koga lineage of ninjutsu, then that lineage ended with him. Thus, any
claims to the Koga tradition (and especially any claims made outside Japan) are highly suspect.
Other suspect claims include those made by performers at the Ninjutsu Museum in Ueno, Japan.
The city changed its ninjutsu museum into a culture center that promotes a mix of truth and ﬁc-
tion about ninjutsu for the entertainment of visitors.
170
Japan: Ninpo
www.ebook3000.com

Today, most Ninpo seen outside Japan is taught by members of the Japanese organizations
that carry on Takamatsu’s legacy, but a few borrowed Fujita Seiko’s legacy without properly
acquiring the necessary skills and knowledge to support their curriculum. What has been
contributing to this popular phenomena of self-appointed Ninpo experts is a combination of
naiveté and a misguided public image of Ninpo as a martial discipline of great mystery and
power, a perception that was largely created by the entertainment industry, first in late Edo-
era Japan with popular fiction and theater, later in modern Japan with movies such as the
Shinobi no mono (“Ninja: Band of Assassins”) film series (Daiei Studios, 1962–1964), and
finally, overseas, beginning with the James Bond movie You Only Live Twice (Danjaq, 1967).
This inaccurate image of Ninpo, not unlike the depiction of Wild West gunfighters in
movies, is slowly being revised by serious scholars and through the openness of Ninpo
organizations.
—Roy Ron
See also: Japan: Jujutsu-based Systems; Japan: Kendo, Iaido, and Jodo (in this volume); 
Belief Systems: Japanese Budo, Bugei, and Bujutsu; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial 
Arts and Religion before 1868; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion 
since 1868; Globalization of Martial Arts; Written Texts: Japan; Social and Cultural 
Evolution of Kendo; and Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Fujibayashi Yasutake. ca. 1676. Bansenshukai [A Sea of Myriad Rivers Merging]. Japan National
Archives.
Fujibayashi Yasutake. 1966. Bansenshukai [A Sea of Myriad Rivers Merging], in Nihon Budo Zenshu
[Compendium of Japanese Martial Arts], Volume 5, 413–482. Tokyo: Jinbutsu Oraisha.
Fujita Seiko. 1936. Ninjutsu hiroku [Secret Records of Ninjutsu]. Tokyo: Chiyoda Shoin.
Fujita Seiko. 2001. Koga ryu ninja ichidaiki [Diary of One Generation Koga Ninja]. Hatogaya: So Jinja.
Hatsumi Masaaki. 1981. Ninjutsu: History and Tradition. Burbank, CA: Unique Publications.
“Heijibu [Military Matters].” 1998, in Kojiruien [Dictionary of Historical Terms]. Tokyo: Yoshikawa
Kobunkan.
Iga Machi Yakuba, editor. 1979. Iga machishi [Iga Town History]. Iga: Iga Machi Yakuba.
Imamura Yoshio, editor. 1966. Hojutsu, Suijutsu, Ninjutsu [Rope Tying Arts, Swimming Arts, Stealth
Arts], in Nippon Budo Zenshu, Volume 4. Tokyo: Jinbutsu Oraisha.
Ito Gingetsu. 1991. Ninjutsu gokui hidensho [Secret Record of the Highest Level of Ninjutsu].
Kawaguchi: So Jinja.
Nakamura Hajime, editor. 1994. Bukyogo daijiten [Expanded Dictionary of Buddhist Terms], 8th
edition. Tokyo: Tokyo Shoseki.
Nawa Yumio. 1972. Shinobi no buki [Shinobi Weapons]. Tokyo: Shinjinbutsu Oraisha.
Nawa Yumio. 2001. Shinobi no mono 132 nin de-ta fairu [132 Data Files of Shinobi Warriors]. Tokyo:
Shinjinbutsu Oraisha.
Okuse Heishichiro. 1963. Ninjutsu: sono rekishi to ninja [Ninjutsu: Its History and Ninja]. Tokyo:
Jinbutsu Oraisha.
Sasama Yoshihiko. 2003. Nihon budo jiten [Dictionary of Japanese Martial Arts]. Tokyo: Kashiwa
Shobo.
Tanemura Shoto. 2003. Ninpo Secrets: Philosophy, History and Techniques, 3rd edition. Saitama:
Genbukan World Ninpo Bugei Federation.
Tobe Shinjuro. 2000. Ninja no nazo: sengoku kage no gundan no shinjitsu [Mystery of the Ninja: The
Truth about Sengoku Period’s Shadow Warriors]. Tokyo: PHP Kenkyusho.
Japan: Ninpo
171

Watatani Kiyoshi and Yamada Tadashi, editors. 1978. Bugei ryuha daijiten [Expanded Dictionary of
Martial Arts Schools], revised edition. Tokyo: Tokyo Copii.
Yamaguchi Masayuki. 2003. Shinobi to ninjutsu [Shinobi and Ninjutsu]. Tokyo: Yuzankaku.
JAPAN: SHORINJI KEMPO
The Japanese martial way (budo) known as Shorinji Kempo is a post–World War II phenomenon
that has grown rapidly to achieve a position of national recognition, and today it is one of eight
budo ofﬁcially acknowledged by Japan’s education ministry (Monbusho). It comprises a threefold
physical repertoire of “hard techniques” (goho: strikes, kicks and blocks), “soft techniques” (joho:
releases, locks, throws, and pinning methods), and the manipulation of nerve points for reme-
dial effect (seiho) and attack (appo). This is combined with a philosophical doctrine based on Zen
Buddhist principles, which require the practice of seated meditation (zazen) and advocate that
the fundamental role that teachers play shall be based on a nonremunerative relationship.
As a technical system and spiritual enterprise, Shorinji Kempo lays claim to the legacy of the
Shaolin Temple in China and is the creation of one man, Nakano Michiomi (1911–1980).
Nakano was born in Okayama prefecture, Japan, but his formative experiences were in
Manchuria, initially as a ward of his grandfather and later as an agent working for the Japanese
military. It was during these periods (from around 1921 to 1926 and from 1928 to 1946) that he
was instructed in a variety of martial systems: a form of aiki-jujutsu learned from his grandfather
and quanfa (Chinese martial art) techniques centered on the northern Shaolin White Lotus Fist
society, as taught to him by masters Chen Liang, Wen Taizong, and (reputedly) Huang Longbai.
It was the tutelage of these masters in technical systems that trace their roots to the Songshan
Shaolin Temple, alongside his study of Buddhist doctrine, that were the basis of his later claim
to have been appointed the twenty-ﬁrst sifu (master) of the northern Shaolin Yihemen Quan in
1936 and the controversial adoption of the name Shorinji Kempo (Fist Way of the Shaolin Tem-
ple) for his Japanese organization in 1947. Equally signiﬁcant to his motivation and purpose in
establishing Shorinji Kempo and central to its Zen Buddhist philosophy were his wartime expe-
riences in Manchuria and his return to the social and material devastation of postwar Japan. It
was his reﬂection on these experiences that led to his oft-stated realization: “The person, the per-
son: everything is in the quality of the person” (Hito! Hito! Hito! Subeta wa hito no shitsu ni aru).
The epiphany aspect of this foundational statement—which locates the responsibility for human
action and the value of social relationships in the physical capabilities and moral character of
the individual—reveals important connections to the “new religions” (shinko shukyo) of Japan
that also emerged in this immediate postwar period. Like these organizations, Shorinji Kempo
relied heavily on the charismatic authority of the founder, and Nakano took the honoriﬁc name
kaiso (founder) So Doshin.
The philosophy at the heart of the organization combines Kongo Zen (diamond Zen) with
elements of other existing religious traditions. In particular, the idea of shugyo (ascetic self-cul-
tivation) was derived from the esoteric Buddhist systems of Tendai-shu and Shingon-shu and
linked the actions of the body with changing states of consciousness. Together, this makes the
goal of Shorinji Kempo practice not combative proﬁciency as such, but rather the development
of an individual with physical conﬁdence and a sense of moral purpose. The idea is to live, as a
Shorinji Kempo saying puts it, “half for oneself and half for others,” thus addressing the organi-
172
Japan: Shorinji Kempo
www.ebook3000.com

zation’s desire to create self-reliant persons in a fragmented society. To this end, physical prac-
tice founded on the principle of paired form training (embu) was integrated with seated medita-
tion and regular study of the tenets of Zen Buddhism.
Early attempts to put these ideals into practice brought So and his followers into direct con-
ﬂict with some of the criminal groups (yakuza) operating in and around the town of Tadotsu on
the island of Shikoku, where the ﬁrst dojo (training hall) was established. These encounters
became part of an important early narrative for the organization and are the subject of lurid
embellishment in the movie about So Doshin’s life that goes by the unfortunate English title The
Killing Machine (originally Shorinji Kempo, Adness, 1975). This movie, starring Sonny Chiba
(Maeda Sadaho, 1939–) as So Doshin, was part of the stoicismu (stoical, or hard man) genre of
1970s action ﬁlm-making in Japan that identiﬁed martial arts such as Shorinji Kempo with a
resurgent nationalist agenda, popularly referred to as Nihonjinron (“Theories of Japanese-ness”).
At the same time, Shorinji Kempo was also associated in the popular imagination with the for-
eign world of the Shaolin Temple, and members of the organization from the temple at Tadotsu
(which was itself modeled on the architecture and imagery of the original in China) featured in
another ﬁlm, namely the highly successful Jet Li (Li Lianjie, 1963–) movie called Shaolin Temple
(Eastern Heroes, 1979). This claim on the Shaolin heritage was one of a number of attempts by
the organization to establish a connection that had been brought into question in 1972, when the
courts in Japan disproved many of the assertions of Chinese origins, legally requiring So to change
the name of the budo to Nippon Shorinji Kempo (Japanese Fist Way of the Shaolin Temple).
Although disputes over nomenclature and origins are not particular to Shorinji Kempo as a
martial art or system, they have created within the organization an increased sensitivity towards
the presentation of the organization. This was expressed in 2005 by the decision to change the
style’s identifying symbol worn on the chest of every member from a manji (a reversed swastika
symbol of Buddhist origin) to a less internationally emotive, abstract design on the theme of har-
mony using the Chinese elements yin and yang.
This management of the symbolic identity of Shorinji Kempo reﬂects the powerful and
effective structure of an organization that was founded on hierarchical and pedagogical prin-
ciples similar to other modern budo (e.g., aikido, judo, and karate-do), but which also
attempted to apply the older model of the iemoto seido (family system) of authority and suc-
cession that was (and is) standard to Japanese traditional arts. Following the death of So in
1980, the leadership of Shorinji Kempo passed to Nakano Yuki (1957–), his daughter from his
third marriage, who had ceased practicing when she suffered a knee injury as a child. This
decision could well have caused a split in the organization, as the relationships among ﬁve
long-serving practitioners (acknowledged by So as his most dedicated, skilled disciples), and
between those ﬁve practitioners and the rest of the membership, were reconﬁgured around the
ﬁgure of a young woman whose authority was based on heredity and not technical ability.
However, it did not. Instead, the teachers at the Shorinji Kempo headquarters in Tadotsu took
over So’s instructional role, thereby dissipating and containing the potential tensions that fol-
lowed this change in leadership. These teachers then established a centralized technical and
philosophical syllabus for dissemination and examination that, nevertheless, allowed for
degrees of autonomy in technical interpretation by the teachers of Japan’s several thousand
Shorinji Kempo dojo as well as those in a growing international community. The validity of
this autonomy, which provided for creative variations in technique, was framed in terms of the
Japan: Shorinji Kempo
173

traditional system of learning in the Zen arts, and the system followed a tripartite model of
developmental progression based on “guarding form” (shu), “modifying form” (ha), and “cre-
ating form” (ri). Such innovations as resulted from this ﬁnal stage of “creating form” existed
alongside a standardized technical curriculum that is now exhaustively represented in a num-
ber of media: illustrated textbooks, video, digital media, and interactive software. It has also
become the subject of signiﬁcant, ongoing sports science research into the biomechanics of
martial movement, especially at Tsukuba University and the International Budo University
(both in Japan).
This thoroughly rational, functional approach to the Shorinji Kempo technical repertoire
demonstrates a different orientation to the issues of authenticity and validity that Donn Draeger
(1922–1982) (1996/1973) raised in reference to the purported Chinese origins of Shorinji Kempo.
Draeger’s critique of this historicity rested on the cogent observation that the throwing, locking, and
pinning techniques and basic footwork of Shorinji Kempo outwardly resembles Japanese systems
such as Hakko ryu. Hakko ryu was a jujutsu system founded by Okuyama Yoshiji (1901–1987), based
on Okuyama’s training in Daito ryu aiki-jujutsu, and it was allegedly taught to So after his return
from China in 1946. This questioning of the physical resemblances in different martial systems is
based on the signiﬁcance attached to the establishment of an authoritative lineage of master-to-
master relationships and draws attention to the complex relationship between the processes of trans-
mission of martial movement and historical authenticity, all of which are important issues within a
traditional Japanese martial art lineage. The Shorinji Kempo organization chose to circumvent these
issues by letting go of precedent and instead looking toward its future, actively taking on additional
social responsibilities both in Japan and within an emerging global community. This forward-look-
ing emphasis is perceived not only in the modern, scientiﬁc approach to the movement system of
Shorinji Kempo but also through the enthusiasm by which the organization has supported the sys-
tem’s introduction into Japanese junior and senior high schools and universities, where Shorinji
Kempo currently enjoys considerable popularity as a less combative and ostensibly noncompetitive
alternative to other modern budo. It is also plain in the outward-looking attitude expressed in the
support the World Shorinji Kempo Federation (WSKO), founded in 1974 as a branch of the main,
domestic organization, provides for the community of foreign practitioners, who now practice in 33
countries besides Japan. Despite rapid growth, standards are maintained because many of the branch
masters and leaders of the foreign federations are drawn from graduates of the Nihon Budo Senmon
Gakko (Japanese Budo Specialist Academy). This academy is located within the temple complex of
the Shorinji Kempo headquarters at Tadotsu, and it attempts to recreate something of the environ-
ment and ethos of the legendary Shaolin Temple. It is a sign of the future direction of the organiza-
tion and its developing orientation to broad social and international concerns that this academy is
now offering a curriculum that brings it into line with the general educational requirements of spe-
cialist academies throughout Japan.
—Rupert Cox
See also: China: Shaolin Temple Legends; Japan: Jujutsu-Based Systems (in this volume); 
Belief Systems: Japanese Budo, Bugei, and Bujutsu; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts 
and Religion before 1868; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 
1868; Invented Traditions; Globalization of Martial Arts; Written Texts: Japan; and 
Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in Volume II).
174
Japan: Shorinji Kempo
www.ebook3000.com

REFERENCES
Cox, Rupert A. 2002. The Zen Arts: An Anthropological Study of the Culture of Aesthetic Form in Japan.
London: Routledge.
Draeger, Donn. 1996/1973. The Martial Arts and Ways of Japan: Volume III: Modern Bujutsu and Budo.
New York and Tokyo: Weatherhill.
Hurst, G. Cameron III. 1998. Armed Martial Arts of Japan: Swordsmanship and Archery. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.
So Doshin. 1973. What Is Shorinji Kempo. Tokyo: Japan Publications Incorporated.
JAPAN: SUMO
Sumo is Japanese wrestling. An individual wrestler is called rikishi, sekitori, or sumotori. Rikishi
means “strong man.” The name originally referred to ﬁerce bare-chested statues (ni-o)
installed at many Buddhist temples. Sekitori means “taken the barrier” and refers to high-
ranking wrestlers, while sumotori means “someone who does sumo” and refers to wrestlers in
general.
A sumo contest is straightforward. Two wrestlers, dressed only in reinforced silk or cotton
belts (mawashi), enter a sand-ﬁlled ring. Following preliminary rituals, the wrestlers rush
together, and the ﬁrst to be thrown from the ring or to have any part of his body other than his
feet touch the ground is judged the loser.
Although usually presented as complex, the history and tradition of sumo is actually straight-
forward—it is simply the oldest form of professional wrestling in Japan.
ORIGINS
Wrestling styles mentioned in old Japanese texts include amagoi-zumo (wrestling as a petition for
rain), buke-zumo (warrior wrestling), kanjin-zumo (beneﬁt sumo, meaning wrestling acts staged
by shrines and temples to raise money for construction projects), kogyo-zumo (“spectacle
wrestling,” meaning theatrical wrestling), kusa-zumo (literally “grass wrestling,” but meaning vil-
lage wrestling), onna-zumo (women’s wrestling), sechie-zumo (court wrestling, meaning the
wrestlers kept on salary by aristocrats) and tsuji-zumo (street-corner wrestling).
The codiﬁcation of these various styles into modern sumo occurred during the Tokugawa era
(1603–1868). The Tokugawa government wanted public order. Thus, it did not promote street
corner wrestling, or encourage bands of wrestlers (yo-sekata) to travel from town to town and fair
to fair, challenging all comers. On the contrary, in 1648 and 1661, it enacted laws prohibiting
unregulated wrestling. Of course these laws did not stop wrestling, but they certainly limited it.
Meanwhile, the cities of Edo (modern Tokyo), Osaka, and Kyoto were growing into
megalopolises. Their hundreds of thousands of residents, aristocrats, samurai, merchants, and
commoners alike, wanted—needed—entertainment. Consequently, there were negotiations
between wrestling promoters and government ofﬁcials, and between 1684 and 1699, a series of
agreements were reached.
Part of the agreement involved deﬁning the ﬁghting area (dohyo) and allowable techniques
(kimarite). Because safety was a concern, the ﬁghting area was sand surrounded by bales of straw.
The list of allowable techniques has changed over time, but hair pulling, eye gouging, and blows
with closed ﬁsts have always been considered fouls (kinjite).
Japan: Sumo
175

Another part of the agreement included ensuring outward decorum. The government was
not in favor of people stripping to their underwear in the street, and then going into alleys to
wrestle. Therefore, referees and other ofﬁcials were introduced, and wrestlers were encouraged to
wear special belts and elaborately coiffed hair. Finally, so that the government could appear prop-
erly pious in all this, promoters were told to advertise their tournaments as raising money for
beneﬁt projects rather than as commercial activities.
A third part of the agreement involved controlling the numbers of trainers and wrestlers.
Toward this end, a system for licensing and regulating training facilities (sumobeya, literally,
“wrestling rooms,” but usually translated as “stables”) was developed. During the 1790s, there
were 38 licensed stables, while by the 1840s there were 45 (Bolitho 1988, 25). As of October
2008, there were 52 active stables in Japan. Although all 52 present-day stables were organized
after 1862 (with most dating to the 1980s or later), their owners often claim direct lineage to
Tokugawa-era stables.
Major regional tournaments (honbasho) date to the late seventeenth century. In Edo, the ﬁrst
tournament was held at Tomioka Hachiman Shrine in 1684. In Osaka, the ﬁrst sumo tourna-
ments date to 1691. In Kyoto, wrestling tournaments date to 1699. Tournaments were restricted
to certain times of the year.
By the 1750s, sumo was popular enough that there was a national tournament circuit, with
spring and autumn tournaments in Edo, summer tournaments in Kyoto, autumn tournaments in
Osaka, and regional tournaments in between. Wrestlers competed for both individual and team
honors, and no matter where the tournament took place, the local wrestlers tended to win the
team championships. As Guttmann and Thompson (2001, 23) explain, “It was good business to
let the hometown heroes win.”
DEVELOPMENT
During the 1790s, sumo acquired a very inﬂuential patron, namely Shogun Tokugawa Ienari
(1773–1841). An important tournament was organized for Tokugawa’s amusement in 1791, and
he saw other command performances in 1794, 1802, 1823, and 1830. His successor, Tokugawa
Ieyoshi (1793–1853), also liked sumo, and he witnessed command performances in 1843 and
1849 (Bolitho 1988, 26–27).
The people who designed the rituals for these Tokugawa court performances were mostly
members of the Yoshida lineage (iemoto). The Yoshida lineage was not originally associated with
wrestling; instead, it was associated with Shinto rituals. The Yoshida lineage’s subsequent
authority over sumo ritual was based mostly on a license (menkyo) granted by the Tokugawa gov-
ernment in 1789. By 1951, the sumo association had stripped all power from the Yoshida line-
age, but people in that linage still have some ceremonial roles (Bolitho 1988; Guttmann and
Thompson 2001, 24; Thompson 1998, 176).
By the 1790s, sumo began changing from something done on the outskirts of town into some-
thing done in urban entertainment districts. Tokugawa-era entertainment districts were essen-
tially amusement parks. That is, they had vendors (teahouses, toothpick shops, and candy
shops), main events (comedy acts, magic shows, animal acts, and acrobats), and midway acts
(jugglers, archery booths, and athletic shows), all interspersed with snake-oil salesmen, jugglers,
and so on. Some of the athletic shows on the midway featured fencers and stick ﬁghters, and
176
Japan: Sumo
www.ebook3000.com

others featured wrestlers. In the wrestling acts, there were ugly wrestlers, over-sized wrestlers,
very short wrestlers, female wrestlers, and blind wrestlers; sometimes, they even had the blind
man wrestle the woman. Such acts were typically shrouded in religious piety. “Disabled humans
were exploited to underscore one of the best-known Buddhist teachings—a sinful act in this life
will result in deformity in the next” (Hur 2000, 61).
NATIONAL SPORT
In 1854, Commodore Matthew Perry (1794–1858) took a U.S. naval squadron into Edo Bay
for the second time in six months. In an attempt to impress the Americans with Japanese
power, Japanese ofﬁcials arranged for sumotori, in full regalia, to deliver 135-pound sacks of
rice to the American ships. Perry’s men reported that “two or three of the huge monsters were
the most famous wrestlers in Japan . . . Koyanagi [1791–1858], the reputed bully of the capi-
tal, was one of these, and paraded himself with conscious pride of superior immensity and
strength” (Harper’s 1856, 740–741). For his part, Perry responded by giving the Japanese ofﬁ-
cials a telegraph and a miniature railway, and having the rice delivered to his 6 foot 4 inch
(190 centimeter), 300-pound (140 kilogram) African American cook, William Grose
(1835–1898).
During the decade following Perry’s arrival in Edo Bay, the Tokugawa government collapsed.
During the mid-1860s, there was a civil war in Japan, and afterwards, the Japanese economy was
in shambles. However, as the Japanese economy recovered, so did sumo. Moreover, during the
1870s and 1880s, the new Japanese government decided that sumo could be used to help it
revive “true” Japanese culture (Bolitho 1988, 26; Light and Kinnaird 2002, 151; Maeda 2007, 8).
During the Meiji emperor’s reign (1868–1912), sumo was used to show the Japanese ﬂag
overseas. In 1885, sumo was among the events staged to celebrate the arrival of the ﬁrst Japanese
agricultural workers in the Kingdom of Hawai‘i. In 1905, a sumo tournament was staged in
British Columbia to celebrate a Japanese victory in the Russo–Japanese War of 1904–1905. In
1907, the reigning champion Hitachiyama (Tani Ichige, 1874–1922) went to the United States,
where he met President Theodore Roosevelt (1858–1919). From May to October 1910, a group
of 36 sumotori gave daily exhibitions at the Japan–British Exhibition in London. And, in 1912,
a sumo tournament was organized in São Paulo, Brazil, to mark the establishment of the ﬁrst
Japanese settlers’ association in that city. Subsequently, however, the Japanese government
tended to use judo rather than sumo for these nationalistic purposes; apparently its ofﬁcials were
insufﬁciently rewarded by foreign newspaper headlines announcing, “Japan’s ‘Mountain of Fat
and Muscle’ to Visit America” (San Francisco Call 1907) and “Japan’s Fat Wrestlers: The More
Adipose They Have the More They Are Admired” (Los Angeles Times 1914).
Inside Japan, both the government and the newspapers promoted sumo. The promotion
proved popular, and by the early 1900s, the old tournament facilities were no longer suitable.
Transportation in and out was a problem. Fans in the back could not see. Rain could disrupt
events. And perhaps worst of all, people could sneak in free. Consequently, in May 1906, con-
struction began on an indoor sumo stadium in Tokyo. This concrete-and-steel structure, called
National Stadium (Kokugikan), was completed in December 1908. At the time, National Stadium
was the largest athletic stadium in East Asia. In 1919, a smaller (but taller) sumo stadium was built
in Osaka. After World War II, both stadiums were replaced by even larger structures.
Japan: Sumo
177

SPECTATOR SPORT
During the late 1890s and early 1900s, Japanese journalists discovered that it was easier to sell
stories about individual champions than it was to sell stories about schools and lineages. To take
advantage of this discovery, individual wrestlers began getting presented (and promoted) differ-
ently. Part of this process involved codifying the ranks of yokozuna, sanyaku, and maegashira
(Guttmann and Thompson 2001, 111–112; Thompson 1998, 177).
The word yokozuna means “transverse cord” and refers to the ropes that some wrestlers wore
around their waists during prematch rituals. Although the term dates to November 1789, it was
used only occasionally between 1789 and 1909. It began to be used regularly after 1909, and
today, it means “grand champion.”
Sanyaku (“three positions”) refers to wrestlers who rank below the yokozuna. From highest to
lowest, the three positions are ozeki (“great barrier”), sekiwake (“to the side of the barrier”), and
komusubi (“small knots”).
Maegashira (“those ahead”) refers to all lower-ranked wrestlers. There are at least ﬁfteen
grades in the maegashira division, and today these wrestlers’ ﬁrst matches in a tournament usu-
ally pit them against elite wrestlers. Thus, winning a match is hardest for junior wrestlers (they
start out facing much better opposition), while competition is ﬁercest in the middle, where the
wrestlers are generally matched against opponents of comparable skill and desire.
Sumo underwent many other changes during the period 1885–1923. For example, referees
(gyoji) began to wear special costumes said to have associations with ancient court dress,
wrestlers began to wear old-style clothing in public, and canopies (tsuriyane) having alleged
Shinto symbolism began to be constructed over sumo rings. According to Lee Thompson (1998,
178), “The new emphasis on tradition was an integral part of a more fundamental process of the
modernization of sumo as a spectator sport.”
MAKING MONEY
Historically, few of sumo’s monetary proﬁts trickled down to active wrestlers. Therefore, between
1923 and 1932, Japan’s professional wrestlers struck several times for better pay and beneﬁts.
Although these strikes did not lead to signiﬁcant increases in wages for wrestlers, they did lead
to the establishment of retirement pensions and a mutual aid society.
In 1926, the Tokyo and Osaka sumo organizations merged. The resulting corporation is
known today as the Japan Sumo Association (Nihon Sumo Kyokai).
Structurally, the Japan Sumo Association is a closely held corporation (West 1997). Control
generally resides in the hands of 105 “elders” (toshiyori). The chief exception to this rule occurred
between May 1939 and November 1945, when the association chairman (rijicho) was a retired
admiral (Takeshita Isamu, 1869–1949).
Funding sources for the Japan Sumo Association include “support groups” (koenkai). Beneﬁts
that accrue from membership in a support group include better seats, access to special souvenirs,
and opportunities to meet the athletes. Cost for membership currently (2009) ranges from
around ¥10,000 (about US$100, in 2009 dollars) for “ordinary” memberships to as much as
¥100,000 for “special” memberships.
“Special members” frequently include gangsters (yakuza). The gamblers are not trying to get
the wrestlers to throw matches; they just want to be seen with wrestlers, and they are willing to
178
Japan: Sumo
www.ebook3000.com

pay handsomely for the privilege (Maeda 2007, 50). Nonetheless, there is considerable betting
in sumo. Bets can be placed on each bout, or whether a certain wrestler will advance to the next
bout, or whether he will become champion.
In sumo, smart bettors do not bet on the last day, because on that day, the odds are that the
wrestler with the higher rating will lose (Benjamin 1991, 231–254; Duggan and Levitt 2002). The
explanation is this: Wrestlers who do not achieve overall winning totals in a tournament are
demoted. Knowing this, a wrestler who has nothing to gain by winning another match on the last
day of the tournament may take a dive, thereby helping another wrestler retain his rank and status.
Here, an example from Japanese military sumo is instructive. As the World War II ﬁghter pilot Sakai
Saburo (1916–2000) explained it, cadets at pre–World War II Japanese military academies were
made to wrestle every other cadet, one after another in rapid succession, and if a cadet failed to
throw at least one opponent despite two tries through the line, then he was washed out of school.
In other words, if the peers of a wrestler (or aviation cadet) like him, then they will consider sacri-
ﬁcing to help him keep his job. But if they do not like him, then out he goes (Sakai 1978, 12).
Product endorsements are another way that the association, stables, and wrestlers earn
money. Commonly endorsed products include toys, food and drink, and autographed handprints
(tegata). At restaurants and clubs, wrestlers eat and drink free, because their appearances draw
crowds. At tournaments, walls are festooned with sponsors’ banners (kensho), and wrestlers’ skirts
(kesho-mawashi) and fans’ tournament ranking sheets (banzuke) all carry logos or advertisements.
None of these practices is particularly modern. The oldest surviving banzuke was created for a
sumo tournament held in Kyoto in 1733. Besides listing the wrestlers, referees, and promoters,
that ranking sheet also listed the tournament’s ﬁnancial sponsors.
Drum towers (yagura) are another form of advertising associated with sumo. During the nine-
teenth century, family-owned businesses made and constructed these drum towers, which they
transported from tournament to tournament. The purpose of these drum towers was advertis-
ing—the noise of the drumming (taiko-uchiwake) told townspeople that a tournament was at
hand, or audiences that the main event was about to begin, while the raised scaffolding served
as a place to hang the advertising banners of the sponsors.
Artwork, photographs, and videos are also sold. From the 1780s through the 1860s, wood-
block prints (ukiyo-e, pictures of the ﬂoating world) of sumo champions were popular in Japan.
The odd poses sometimes seen in prints of sumo matches were usually the result of business
needs. Sometimes, artists made the main block before the match and then added faces after the
results were known; other times, the face of last year’s champion was cut out and replaced with
the face of this year’s champion. The Katsukawa School was a major source of eighteenth-
century sumo prints, whereas from the 1810s to the 1860s the Utagawa School was preeminent.
During the 1860s, photographs and lithographs started replacing woodblock prints for the mass
market, mostly because they were faster to make and cheaper to reproduce.
Commercial demands drive sumo’s rituals in other, less obvious ways. When radio broadcasts
began in 1928, wrestlers were told to limit their prematch rituals to ten minutes. The present-day
preparation time of four minutes dates to 1950. The wrestlers know when it is time to stop the pos-
turing and start the match by watching how the referee moves his fan (gunbai) (Maeda 2007, 49).
From 1909 until 1952, the six-ton canopy (tsuriyane) that covered the sumo ring in Tokyo
was held up by huge wooden pillars. From 1909 until 1952, those pillars were said to have great
cosmological import. Then, in 1952, sumo matches began to be televised. The pillars blocked
Japan: Sumo
179

the cameras’ view. The pillars were promptly chopped down, and henceforth, the canopy hung
suspended from the ceiling (Gould 2008).
TRAINING
Sumo training takes place in schools called sumobeya. The root word is heya. Although usually
translated into English as “stable,” heya actually means “room.” The owner of the stable (oyokata)
is one of the 105 elders of the sumo association. The stable provides wrestlers with training,
room, board, and small cash allowances. In return, its owner receives most of the money that its
wrestlers receive via endorsements and gifts.
Sumo training is physically and emotionally demanding, and there is much hazing. Inside the
stable, rank is all that matters. “Those guys in the bottom division,” wrestler Cal Martin
(Araiwa, 1949–) remembered (Maeda 2007, 44), “they are like slaves. They do all of the [menial
work], they do everything else.” Higher-ranked wrestlers are often physically abusive toward
lower-ranked wrestlers. Martin remembered one morning when some intoxicated senior
wrestlers “started beating up on the little ones really bad. Bamboo poles, just beating them up.
That was it. I just hauled off. I took all three of them on.” After that, “My boss was the only one
who hit me and he did not do it often” (Maeda 2007, 47–48). In 2007, three journeyman
wrestlers were arrested following the beating death of an apprentice wrestler. The three jour-
neymen were convicted of manslaughter, their trainer was ﬁred, and the stable owner had to
make a public apology (Harden 2008).
DEALING WITH THE MEDIA
Like any corporation, the Japan Sumo Association works to burnish its image. Thus, it presents the
media with scripted and orchestrated presentations (Benjamin 1991, 201–207; Maeda 2007, 28).
Individual stable owners and wrestlers can tell stories that diverge from the ofﬁcial image, but
not too far. When American wrestler Cal Martin told a reporter on live national television that
the only thing he needed to do to prepare himself mentally for a sumo match was remember
Pearl Harbor, he was told to never say that again (Maeda 2007, 52–53). Presentation also
involves staying in character. This includes wrestlers speaking to reporters using vocabulary that
is sufﬁciently different from standard Japanese that, in Martin’s words, “Those guys can sit there
and talk in front of the media, and they [the reporters] don’t have a clue what they are talking
about” (Maeda 2007, 49; see also: Benjamin 1991, 201–202).
Ofﬁcial stories show keen awareness of commercial considerations. Consider the sumo asso-
ciation’s presentation of foreign wrestlers. There have been foreign wrestlers in sumo since the
1930s. In the 1930s, sumo was promoted as uniquely Japanese, so the stable owners created ﬁc-
tional back stories for their foreign wrestlers. Thus, Colorado’s Harley Ozaki (1920–1988)
became Toyonishiki Kichiro, while Korea’s Kim Sin-nak (1924–1963) became Rikidozan.
After World War II, Japanese wrestlers of Korean ethnicity continued to be presented as eth-
nic Japanese, as did wrestlers from Northern Japan whose parents included Russians (Maeda
2007, 46, 54). However, blatantly foreign wrestlers, such as California’s Cal Martin (Araiwa) and
Hawai‘i’s Jesse Kuhaulua (Takamiyama Daigoro, 1944–) were openly acknowledged as foreign
(gaijin) sumotori. In 1972, Kuhaulua became the ﬁrst foreign-born sumotori to achieve champi-
onship status. The problem with foreigners achieving championship status is that audiences
180
Japan: Sumo
www.ebook3000.com

rarely stand in line to watch foreign champions defeat local heroes. For that reason, the Japan
Sumo Association began publicly establishing quotas on the number of foreign wrestlers that a
stable could have. At the same time, the association knew that its members were having a harder
time recruiting sufﬁcient numbers of ethnically Japanese wrestlers. Indeed, in March 2007, no
Japanese youths applied to a sumo recruiting draft (Maeda 2007, 36). Despite what Japanese
audiences wanted, the number of foreign wrestlers had to increase if sumo was going to continue
competing with other sport entertainment options ranging from auto racing to video games. To
balance these conﬂicting requirements, early twenty-ﬁrst century foreign wrestlers tend to come
from Mongolia and China rather than the United States (Maeda 2007, 1).
A separate storyline involves women. Although there were female sumotori from the
Tokugawa era through World War II (Kaneda 1999), women’s sumo went into rapid decline
during the 1950s. The reason was the postwar development of American-style pro wrestling in
Japan; women’s professional wrestling started in Japan in 1948 and was widespread by 1955. Then,
in 2000, Osaka Prefecture got its ﬁrst female governor, Ota Fusae (1951–). For decades, the
ceremonial duties of the Osaka governor had included handing sumo champions the Governor’s
Cup trophy. So, every year from 2000 until 2007 (when she was voted out of ofﬁce), Ota told the
press that she wanted to award the trophy, and, every year from 2000 until 2007, the Japan Sumo
Association told reporters that she could not. In Japan, this resulted in favorable publicity all the
way around. For the governor, the story allowed her to present herself as a champion of Japanese
feminism. For the sumo association, the story allowed it to present itself as a steadfast guardian of
traditional Japanese values. Finally, for the corporate sponsors of a recently organized Japanese
women’s sumo promotion called Shin Sumo (“New Sumo”), it meant free advertising.
OTHER SUMO
Although professional sumo schools are found today mostly in Tokyo and other urban centers,
there is amateur sumo (amasumo) in Japanese universities and high schools, and semi-profes-
sional and amateur sumo overseas. Participants in overseas sumo have never been restricted to
just ethnic Japanese. Football players of all ethnicities competed in Hawaiian sumo matches, and
the champions of a Seattle sumo tournament of 1930 included Earl “Sam” Kraetz (1907–1990),
the 207-pound starting center for the University of Washington football team. In overseas sumo,
most of the ritual has been modiﬁed for local consumption. For example, athletic shorts or long
underwear are often worn underneath the wrestlers’ belts, and the elaborate ring aprons (kesho-
mawashi) are more likely hand-stitched by mothers than awarded by breweries or newspapers.
—Joseph Svinth
See also: China: Wrestling; Korea: Ssireum (in this volume); Commodiﬁcation of Leisure; 
Invented Tradition; Globalization of Martial Arts; and Professional Wrestling (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Azuma, Eiichiro. 2000. “Social History of Kendo and Sumo in Japanese America,” in More Than a
Game: Sport in the Japanese American Community, edited by Brian Niiya, 78–91. Los Angeles:
Japanese American National Museum.
Benjamin, David. 1991. The Joy of Sumo: A Fan’s Notes. Rutland, VT: Charles E. Tuttle.
Bickford, Lawrence R. 1994. Sumo and the Woodblock Print Masters. Tokyo: Kodansha International.
Japan: Sumo
181

Bolitho, Harold. 1998. “Sumo and Popular Culture: The Tokugawa Period,” in Modernization and
Beyond: The Japanese Trajectory, edited by Gavan McCormack and Yoshio Sugimoto, 17–32.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Duggan, Mark, and Steven D. Levitt. 2002. “Winning Isn’t Everything: Corruption in Sumo
Wrestling,” American Economic Review 92(5), December, 1594–1605, via http://www.jstor.org/
stable/3083266, accessed May 14, 2009.
Gilbert, Howard. 2004. “Wrestling with Foreign Yokozuna,” in Japanese Cultural Nationalism at Home
and in the Asian Paciﬁc, edited by Roy Starrs, 279–289. Folkestone, UK: Global Oriental.
Gould, Chris. 2008. “NSK meets NHK,” Sumo Fan Magazine 18 (April), 1–4, http://www
.sumofanmag.com/content/Issue_18/NSK_NHK.pdf, accessed May 14, 2009.
Guttmann, Allen, and Lee Thompson. 2001. Japanese Sports: A History. Honolulu: University of
Hawai‘i Press.
Harden, Blaine. 2008. “Brutal Beating Death Brings Sumo’s Dark Side to Light,” Washington Post,
March 10, via http://news.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Harper’s New Monthly Magazine. 1856. “Commodore Perry’s Expedition to Japan,” 72, May, 733–756,
via http://www.harpers.org/archive/1856/03/0037808, accessed October 16, 2009.
Hur, Nam-Lin. 2000. Prayer and Play in Late Tokugawa Japan: Asakusa Senoji and Edo Society.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Asia Center.
Kaneda Eiko. 1999. “Trends in Traditional Women’s Sumo in Japan,” International Journal of the
History of Sport 16(3), 113–119, DOI: 10.1080/09523369908714087, via http://www.informaworld
.com, accessed May 14, 2009.
Light, Richard, and Louise Kinnaird. 2002. “Appeasing the Gods: Shinto, Sumo and ‘True’ Japanese
Spirit,” in With God on Their Side: Sport in the Service of Religion, edited by Tara Magdalinski and
Timothy J. L. Chandler, 139–159. London: Routledge.
Los Angeles Times. 1914. “Japan’s Fat Wrestlers: The More Adipose They Have the More They Are
Admired, and More Solidly They Stand,” December 26, 17, via ProQuest, accessed October 16,
2009.
Maeda, Mitsuo. 2007. “Wild Men, Bad Boys and Model Citizens: The Integration [of] Foreigners in
Sumo Wrestling.” Unpublished Master of Arts thesis, University of Southern California.
Oinuma Yoshihiro, and Shimpo Mitsuru. 1983. “The Social System of the Sumo Training School,”
International Review for the Sociology of Sport 18(1), 5–19, DOI: 10.1177/101269028301800101, via
http://online.sagepub.com/, accessed January 18, 2010.
O’Neill, P. G. 1984. “Organization and Authority in the Traditional Arts,” Modern Asian Studies
18(4), Special Issue: Edo Culture and Its Modern Legacy, 631–645, via http://www.jstor.org/
stable/312340, accessed October 16, 2009.
Sakai Saburo with Sakai Saburoshi, Martin Caidin, and Fred Saito. 1978. Samurai! New York:
Bantam.
San Francisco Call. 1907. “Japan’s ‘Mountain of Fat and Muscle’ to Visit America,” August 25, via
http://cbsr.tabbec.com/, accessed October 16, 2009.
Sekaguchi Toko. 2005. “An Inside Look at Shin Sumo,” EastWest Lifestyle, June, http://www
.eastwestmagazine.com/content/view/46/40/, accessed February 14, 2009.
Thompson, Lee Austin. 1986. “Professional Wrestling in Japan: Media and Message,” International
Review for the Sociology of Sport 21(1), 65–81, DOI: 10.1177/101269028602100105, via
http://online.sagepub.com/, accessed October 16, 2009.
Thompson, Lee Austin. 1998. “The Invention of the Yokozuna and the Championship System, or
Futahaguro’s Revenge,” in Mirror of Modernity: Invented Traditions of Modern Japan, edited by
Stephen Vlastos, 174–187. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Tokugawa Iyemasa. 1912. “Japanese Wrestling,” Transactions and Proceedings of the Japan Society
London 10, 138–158.
West, Mark D. 1997. “Legal Rules and Social Norms in Japan’s Secret World of Sumo,” Journal of
Legal Studies 26(1), January, 165–201, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/724724, accessed October 16,
2009.
182
Japan: Sumo
www.ebook3000.com

KOREA: HAPKIDO
Hapkido (Way of Coordinated Power) is a Korean martial art that uses hand strikes, kicks, joint
locks, throws, restraints, and chokes. In its most speciﬁc usage, the name identiﬁes the art trans-
mitted to Ji Han-Jae (1936–) by Choi Yong-Sul (1904–1986). However, in a broader sense, the
term Hapkido also identiﬁes Korean martial arts that incorporate both strikes and grappling
according to the three guiding principles of Hapkido, and that derive from, or are heavily inﬂu-
enced by, the Japanese martial art Daito-ryu aiki-jujutsu. Into this category fall a wide range of
organizations (kwan), including (but not limited to) Mu Sul Kwan, Yon Mu Kwan, Hapki Yu
Sool, and Jung Ki Kwan. There are also various Hapkido federations and associations that use
the name; these include World Kido Federation, International Hapkido Federation, and Korean
Hapkido Association. Finally, in its widest usage, Hapkido may identify organizations and arts
whose intent is a greater representation of the Korean martial tradition. Although these organ-
izations’ heritages may derive in some part from the teachings of Choi Yong-Sul or his students,
the biomechanics of these arts are just as likely to reﬂect the Chinese and Buddhist heritage of
Korean culture. This latter category includes the arts of Kuk Sool Won, Han Mu Do, Hwarang-
do, Han Pul, Mu Yei 24 Ban, as well as the martial training practices of the Sun Monasteries.
THE FIVE CULTURAL INFUSIONS
Although Hapkido is less than a century old, it is the product of more than 2,000 years of mar-
tial tradition. This heritage is due to ﬁve major cultural infusions and a myriad of lesser cultural
inﬂuences.
The ﬁrst major infusion is ancient tribal technique (Sado Mu Sool). Ancient methods
included forms of combat waged by horsemen. These systems would have included archery,
lance, stone sword, and knife, as well as the brand of wrestling common across most of Central
Asia. Practiced by the migrating tribes of the steppes of northeastern Asia, these martial skills
formed one foundation for Korean martial tradition.
The second and third infusions to Korean martial culture were the introduction of Buddhist
and Confucian belief systems and administrative systems. These infusions were simultaneous.
They started during the fourth and ﬁfth centuries of the Common Era, and went on for the next
1,500 years.
The introduction of Buddhist beliefs is reﬂected in the establishment of various codes that
were established to guide the warrior’s efforts in meeting his responsibilities to his community
and country. Buddhist tradition pressed an accomplished warrior to submit to a code based on
patriotism (Chung), ﬁlial piety (Hyo), fraternity (Shin), justice (Yong), and benevolence (Im). In
this way, the role that Buddhist thought played for the Korean warrior was not unlike that the
role that the Catholic Church played in developing Western European chivalry.
For its part, the Confucian system advocated a reverence for governmental authority and
supported this through a hierarchy of levels, examinations, and ofﬁces. Such a strict hierarchi-
cal system readily lent itself to afﬁrming the rigid Korean class system, composed of the aristoc-
racy, bureaucracy, farmers, and slaves and emphasizing the supremacy of the king.
In addition to their respective religious and administrative inﬂuences, Buddhism and
Confucianism were venues for the introduction of a variety of cultural and martial traditions,
Korea: Hapkido
183

especially from China. Among these contributions were various weapons and martial skills,
strategies, tactics, history, science, medicine, and literature. These two belief systems (especially
via Buddhist inﬂuences on governmental policy) inculcated and supported central elements of
Korean martial tradition, particularly at the local and individual levels. The rise of the Confu-
cian ethic, however, ultimately led to the degradation of Korean martial systems through the
code’s minimization of militarism and the consequent relegation of militarism to internal and
defensive roles. Consequently, Korean military tradition may be characterized as an informal
patchwork quilt of cultural inﬂuences stitched together by immediate need. These forces
remained in effect up to the Japanese annexation of Korea in 1910.
Although the Japanese occupation was at ﬁrst relatively bureaucratic, the Japanese occupa-
tion forces faced steadily growing resistance by the Korean people. Thus, the Japanese instituted
harsh repressive measures, and by the 1930s, the Japanese had outlawed nearly all expression of
Korean culture and demanded the adoption of Japanese cultural counterparts. In addition,
Japanese nationals were brought to Korea to dominate the agricultural and industrial base of
Korea, and these Japanese brought with them such martial arts traditions as judo, jujutsu, karate,
aikido, kendo (fencing with bamboo swords), and kyudo (Japanese archery, which is much dif-
ferent from Korean traditional archery, known as goongdo). At the same time, Korean nationals
were relocated to Japan to service the needs of Japanese industry, farming, and domestic service.
The ﬁfth infusion to the Korean martial tradition followed the Japanese occupation. This last
infusion is exempliﬁed in the personal experiences of Choi Yong-Sul, whose teachings
subsequently set the foundation for much of modern Hapkido. According to tradition, Choi was
taken to Japan from Korea at the age of eight. There, he was abandoned, but subsequently taken
into the household of Takeda Sokaku (1859–1943), teacher of Daito-ryu aiki-jujutsu. Choi
reported that he remained in Takeda’s employ for some 30 years before being repatriated to Korea
at the end of World War II. To date, no documentation has been found to support Choi’s
statements regarding either his residence with the Takeda family or his instruction in the art of
Daito-ryu. Nevertheless, it remains clear that Choi, along with a very limited number of other
Korean nationals such as Jang In-Mok (1916–) and Choi Hong-Hi (1918–2002), returned to
Korea after World War II with skills in the Japanese martial arts.
In 1948, Choi began teaching a martial art that he called Yu Sool. The name Yu Sool means
“soft technique,” and suggests that the art’s techniques included joint locks and throws. Choi’s
early students included Suh Bok-sup (ca. 1924–). Suh was graded in judo and was the president
of a brewery at the time that Choi came to his attention. Subsequent to becoming Choi’s
student, Suh introduced a variety of innovations from his judo background, including the use of
a ranking system for tracking the development of student skills.
Following an incident in 1954 in which Choi’s student Suh used a side thrust kick in an
altercation, the name was changed from “Yu Sool” to “Yu Kwon Sool” (soft ﬁst technique),
indicating that the art utilized kicks and punches as well.
Ji Han-Jae (1936–) began to train with Choi in 1953. Working with a fellow student, Kim
Moo Hong (dates unknown), Ji organized the kicking repertoire that came to be identiﬁed with
Yu Kwon Sool. The sources for this kicking repertoire reportedly included the historic national
pastimes of taekkyon and su bahk, both kicking arts of long standing in the Korean culture. This
introduction of various kicking techniques by Kim and Ji into the Yu Kwon Sool curriculum came
to be identiﬁed as a derivative of the Yu Kwon Sool in which the focus was on the practice of the
184
Korea: Hapkido
www.ebook3000.com

art as a way of life, or -do, rather than a collection of techniques or sool. In this way, whatever
principles exist on the physical plane (e.g., motion, balance, leverage, timing, and focus), there
are additional principles existing on intellectual, emotional, and spiritual planes. For Ji, Hapkido
was as much a method of character development as a martial endeavor. To reﬂect this change in
philosophy, the practice was renamed Hapkido, a shortened variant of Hapki Yu Kwon Sool.
SCHOOLS AND ORGANIZATIONS
Today, the organization of Hapkido schools reﬂects accepted organizational practices common to
most martial arts in both Korea and Japan. A director (kwang jang nin) attends to the managing
affairs of the school, while an instructor (sabunim) oversees regular instruction. Nearly all Hap-
kido organizations have adopted a hierarchy of ascending student (guep) ranks numbering ten
through one and usually assigned a belt color indicative of rank. Individuals committed to con-
tinued study, following completion of the student ranks, are assigned a rank of one through seven
indicating various levels of competence and designated by a black belt. Ranks eight, nine, and
ten are essentially administrative positions. Consistent with the use of a Confucian educational
model, criteria for advancement, testing policies, certiﬁcation, and licensing vary greatly from
organization to organization and are regularly a source of negotiation and discussion in the Hap-
kido community regarding signiﬁcance and relative merit.
Most modern Hapkido practitioners trace their instruction back to Choi Yong-Sul, or to
Choi through Ji. Notable personalities who trained with Choi directly (or with Choi through Ji)
include Lee Joo Bang (1945–, HwaRangDo), Myung Jae-nam (1938–1999, International
Hapkido Federation), Myung Kwang-Sik (1940–2009, World Hapkido Federation), and Bong-
Soo Han (1933–2007, International Hapkido Federation). Martial descendants from Ji’s
tradition support Ji’s reputation as the “father of modern Hapkido.” There are also large networks
of contemporaries to Ji who have sought to introduce their own innovations to Hapkido. These
include Suh In-wonHyuk (Kuk Sool Won), Won Kwang-Wha (Moo Sool Kwan), and Lim
Hyun-Su (Jung Ki Kwan).
COMPARING HAPKIDO TO DAITO-RYU AIKI-JUJUTSU AND AIKIDO
There are similarities between Hapkido and the Japanese martial arts of Daito-ryu aiki-jujutsu
and aikido. All three arts support practice in both unarmed and weapons techniques. Although
curricula vary from organization to organization, all three arts hold to the position that tech-
niques remain biomechanically the same whether or not a weapon is used.
The weapons used in Hapkido show a certain consistency in biomechanics. The Japanese
iron fan (tessen) or iron truncheon (jutte) is represented in Hapkido by the short stick, or dan
bong. The Korean cane approximates the Japanese jo (stick). Sword, knife, and staff
techniques are often comparable in both Japanese and Korean martial arts, but the Korean
biomechanics often attest to Chinese inﬂuence by using circular rather than linear motion.
Also, Hapkido practitioners are more likely to incorporate rope or belt techniques and to use
larger Chinese fans.
Another point of intersection among Daito-ryu, Hapkido, and aikido is the fact that all apply
the same three principles on the physical, intellectual, emotional, and spiritual planes. These are
the Water Principle, the Point and Circle Principle, and the Economy of Energy Principle.
Korea: Hapkido
185

The Water Principle calls for adaptation to circumstances and a readiness to adjust an action
or response with ease. Sometimes characterized as “tenacity” or “relentlessness” (for the pene-
trating qualities of the liquid), the Water Principle is better represented by the manner in which
water adapts to the shape of the container that holds it. In this way, the practitioner accepts
whatever is given to work with and makes the most of it.
The Point and Circle Principle acknowledges that “all things are a cycle.” This is easier to
understand by means of cause and effect. A punch does not remain extended, but is “recycled”
to become perhaps a block, another strike, or a grab. The same can be said for a kick, or a throw,
or in fact any activity. Actions occur and are recycled to become other actions as thoughts recy-
cle to become other thoughts. In combat application, an appreciation of the cyclical nature of
events allows for anticipation according to a variety of options, and the execution of a particu-
lar option in a tangential rather than confrontational manner.
The Economy of Energy Principle encourages the practitioner to identify the most efﬁcient
way of accomplishing goals and admonishes the student to avoid working harder than the oppo-
nent. In this way, whatever one learns, one is under constant pressure to perform it more accu-
rately, efﬁciently, and effectively. Thus, a practitioner learns to “work smarter, not harder” in
dealing with conﬂicts.
Another signiﬁcant overlap among Daito-ryu, Hapkido, and aikido is their reliance on a subtle
hierarchy of sophistication. For the Japanese arts, the ﬁrst step in this hierarchy is known as ju jutsu
(gentle technique); in Korean, it is called yu sool. At this level, the art is based on strength, lever-
age, and speed, and expertise means the ability to force compliance through pain. Although this
skill level is said to be the least sophisticated of the three levels, it is nonetheless the level most
commonly seen. Thus, it contributes to Hapkido’s reputation as a no-nonsense form of self-defense.
The second level of sophistication is identiﬁed in the Daito-ryu tradition as aiki-jujutsu
(coordinated mind/spirit technique), in aikido as “blending,”and in Hapkido as hapki yu sool
(coordination of power in soft technique). This second level describes the ability to use the
attackers’ own physical structures (what Buckminster Fuller, 1895–1983, described as tensegrity)
against them. Disrupting the attacker’s foundation, balance, direction, timing, or focus allows
defenders to optimize their assets. A well-known level among aikido and Daito-ryu practition-
ers, this level is less well-known in the Hapkido community outside Korea.
The third level of expertise is designated aiki-jutsu (spirit techniques) and is the subject of
much debate within both the aikido and Daito-ryu aiki-jujutsu communities. Although rarely
seen (and less often proven), this level of expertise reportedly allows the adept to exploit the bio-
mechanical responses of the attacker’s own body, to include the attacker’s conditioned responses
and reﬂexes. The defender at this level is said to have the ability to incorporate the intent
behind the actions to defeat the attack.
—Bruce W. Sims
See also: Korea: Taekkyon (in this volume); Belief Systems: China; 
China: Martial Theories; Japan: Jujutsu-Based Systems (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Kim, Sang H. 2000. The Comprehensive Illustrated Manual of Martial Arts of Ancient Korea. Hartford,
CT: Turtle Press.
186
Korea: Hapkido
www.ebook3000.com

Kimm, He-Young. 1991. Hapkido. Baton Rouge, LA: Andrew Jackson College Press.
Kimm, He-Young. 2008. History of Korea and Hapkido. Baton Rouge, LA: Andrew Jackson College
Press.
Lee, Joo Bang. 1979. The Ancient Martial Art of HwaRangDo. Burbank, CA: Ohara Publications.
Lee, Ki-Baik (Yi Ki-baek). 1984. A New History of Korea. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lee, Peter H. 1993. Sources of Korean Civilization. New York: Columbia University Press.
Myung Kwang-Shik. 1982. Hapkido: Ancient Art of Masters. Seoul: World Hapkido Federation.
Omiya Shiro. 1992. The Hidden Roots of Aikido. Tokyo: Kodansha International.
Suh In Hyuk. 1987. Kuk Sool. Privately published.
Yang, Jwing-ming. 1992. Analysis of Shaolin Ch’in na. Jamaica Plain, MA: YMAA Publication Center.
KOREA: KUMDO
Haedong Kumdo is the name given to a system of Korean swordsmanship. Haedong means “East
Sea,” which is the name Koreans give to the Sea of Japan. Kumdo means “Way of the Sword.”
Traditionally, haedong kumdo was a part of muyedo (way of martial arts). Haedong Kumdo is also
a contemporary martial art.
EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL INFLUENCES
Perhaps the single most inﬂuential pressure on the development of traditional Korean swordsman-
ship was geography. Korea is a peninsula that provides a staging area for land attacks on the Chi-
nese mainland and naval encroachments into the region around the Sea of Japan. The peninsula
is of considerable strategic importance and has, therefore, been sought after as a possession by all
powers that had ambitions in the region. The Chinese Ming (1368–1644) and Qing (1644–1912)
dynasties sought control over the Korean peninsula, as did the Mongols and the Japanese. Both
Chinese and Japanese pirates raided Korean shores. Political strife between the Three Kingdoms
(57 BCE–668 CE) of Koryo, Baekje, and Silla also provided impetus for the development of musul
(martial techniques) in general, and kumsul (sword techniques) in particular.
Although the Koreans had no problems adapting military tactics (byunggi chongsu) from any
of their neighbors, the most widely acknowledged formal inﬂuence is the Chinese military clas-
sic Jixiao Xinshu (New Book of Effective Discipline; in Korean, Kihyo Shinsu). Compiled and
edited by the Ming general Qi Jiguang (1528–1587, Chuk Kye Kwang in Korean) in 1561, Jixiao
Xinshu was a comprehensive tome on martial strategy, tactics, and techniques. The Koreans
obtained a copy of the military classic from their Ming allies during the later stages of the Imjin
War (1592–1598), which was fought against the Japanese under Hideyoshi Toyatomi
(1536–1598). King Sunjo (1567–1608) ordered a man named Han Kyo to study the document
and create a manual of martial techniques that could be used by the Korean military. Han Kyo
condensed the material from the Jixiao Xinshu into six ﬁghting methods that were later published
under the title Muye Jebo (Martial Arts Illustrations). During the reign of King Yungjo
(1724–1776), the Muye Jebo was revised. During this revision, twelve additional ﬁghting
methods were added to the original six contained in Muye Jebo. The new text was called Muye
Shinbo (Martial Arts New Illustrations) and was published in 1759. During the reign of King
Chungjo (1776–1800), six additional methods were added to the manual, bringing the total to
24 methods. This material was combined with material from Mubiji (Book of Martial
Preparedness) and various other collections, and published in 1790 under the name Muye Dobo
Korea: Kumdo
187

Tongji (Comprehensive Military Manual of Martial Arts). Since then, Muye Dobo Tongji has
either directly or indirectly inﬂuenced Korean martial arts. As a reference for military training
in Korean martial history and as an inspiration and touchstone for contemporary martial arts,
the Muye Dobo Tongji is acknowledged as a resource representing the ability of the Korean peo-
ple to adopt and adapt foreign and domestic traditions and inﬂuences into a creation that is
uniquely Korean.
CONTEMPORARY HAEDONG KUMDO
In 1982, Na Han Il (1955–) and Kim Jeong Ho (ca. 1950–) created a system of sword training
that they called Haedong Kumdo. The style was a combination of gicheon (energy of the heav-
ens), shimgumdo (way of the mind sword), and daehan kumdo (a sporting form identical to
post–World War II Japanese kendo). Na and Kim had studied gicheon with Pak Dae Yang and
shimgumdo with Kim Chang Shik. Using the sword methods, breathing exercises, and empty-
hand forms contained in each of these systems and adapting them to their own tastes, they began
to disseminate Haedong Kumdo to the Korean public as Daehan Haedong Kumdo (Republic of
Korea East Sea Way of the Sword). In an attempt to promote the style, Na and Kim stressed the
relationship of the sword techniques found in their curriculum with historical techniques from
Muye Dobo Tongji.
In 1990, Na and Kim split and started separate organizations. Kim formed the World Haidong
Gumdo Federation, while Na formed the Hankuk (a traditional name for Korea) Haedong
Kumdo Federation. Although the separate styles alter the English spelling—Haedong Kumdo vs.
Haidong Gumdo—in an effort to distinguish themselves as separate organizations, the Chinese
characters used to represent Haedong Kumdo remain the same.
Other organizations have developed over the years, including the Muye Ishipsabun (Twenty-
Four Martial Arts). Muye Ishipsabun trains in traditional Korean martial methods, using tradi-
tional weapons, as found in the Muye Dobo Tongji, which its practitioners take as their training
bible. These methods included training in sword forms (including waegum, Japanese sword),
spear forms (long spear, bamboo spear, and ﬂag spear), halberd, spear sword (similar to the Japan-
ese naginata), trident, ﬂail (bladed and nonbladed versions), staff, use of the shield, and empty-
hand methods (kwonbup). Horsemanship (masangjae) is taught, and use of the various weapons
both on foot and mounted on horseback are practiced in accordance with instruction found in
the Muye Dobo Tongji.
Technically, Haedong Kumdo consists of training in basics (kibon), forms (pumsae), sparring
(kyukgum), breath and energy training (kigong), and cutting (begi). Training is done with split-
bamboo foil (chukgum), wooden sword (mokgum), and steel sword (chingum). Some schools
(dojang, places to study the Way) use blades with rebated edge or soft aluminum blades (kagum)
as transitional training tools between the wooden sword and the forged steel sword.
The Haedong Kumdo system includes training in various forms based in different sword
methods (kumbup):
1.
Ssangsu Kumbup, a method of using the two-handed sword that is considered the beginning method
of practice.
2.
Shimsssang Kumbup, heart/mind of swordsmanship, a method by which the swordsman learns to
draw his opponent into his strategy and defeat him.
188
Korea: Kumdo
www.ebook3000.com

3.
Yedo Kumbup, methods for using short swords and Chinese straight swords, often against multiple
opponents.
4.
Bonkuk Kumbup, indigenous Korean methods of swordsmanship.
5.
Chedok Kumbup (admiral’s sword method), which uses a large, straight-bladed sword popularly
identiﬁed with the Korean naval hero Yi Sun-sin (1545–1598).
6.
Wuisu Kumbup (single-hand sword method), which teaches attacks and defenses from many differ-
ent angles.
7.
Ssang Kumbup (double sword method).
8.
Jangbaek Kumbup, a method of using the sword as learned from Jangbaek (an inspirational
metaphor).
Most of these kumbup may be found, at least in name, in the Muye Dobo Tongji.
Forms for drawing (palto) and sheathing (ch’akgum) the sword are also used. These forms were
adopted from Japanese systems, and the similarities to iaido are obvious. Although contempo-
rary Haedong Kumdo makes no distinction between kumdo and drawing the sword, a traditional
difference is that paldo/ch’akgum involves the drawing and sheathing of the sword, whereas
kumdo begins when the sword is out of its sheath. Historical documents of Korean and Chinese
origin dealing with sword techniques do not contain training sections on drawing the sword, and
forms in the Muye Dobo Tonji begin with the sword already drawn. It will be remembered that
these documents dealt with battleﬁeld training and weapons tactics, where, presumably, the
soldier would already have his sword drawn.
Various forms of sparring (kyukgum) are used, including step sparring (yaksuk kyukgum; also
yaksuk daeryun) and free sparring (hada). Sparring is done with protective armor (hogu) and bam-
boo swords (chukdo) that were originally similar to kendo’s bogu and shinai but that have since
incorporated various types of innovative armor such as full-face acrylic face masks and various
types of padding. The trend has been toward developing armor that allows the use of wooden
swords and full-power blows. Sparring is also done without armor and with wooden swords; obvi-
ously, this requires practitioners to focus their strikes with precision to avoid injury. Chingum
kyukgum is step sparring using forged steel swords and no armor and is considered to be an
advanced practice.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
From its inception in the 1980s to the present, Haedong Kumdo has continued to change.
Originally using the forms of gicheon, shimgumdo, and sporting kumdo, Haedong Kumdo has
since incorporated other forms, drawn from modern interpretations of Korean historical docu-
ments such as the Muye Dobo Tongji and observing and participating in Japanese systems such as
kendo and iaido. Although such changes could tend to dilute the essence of the original system,
the additions have been handled with care, and as a result, the changes have actually served to
deepen the Haedong Kumdo system while simultaneously maintaining the spirit and integrity of
the original system.
Through these changes, the basics have remained relatively static, but the forms have
undergone modiﬁcations. Most modiﬁcations have been based on dynamic factors such as the
communicative and intellectual abilities of instructors and cross-cultural transmission. This
characteristic is noted because Haedong Kumdo is now international in distribution, with
Korea: Kumdo
189

federations currently in Australia and New Zealand, Europe (including Britain, Ireland, Italy,
Spain, and Finland), Brazil, Canada, Indonesia, South Africa, and the United States. As
Haedong Kumdo continues to spread and to be interpreted through different cultural paradigms,
it will undoubtedly continue to evolve.
—Ron Mottern
See also: Japan: Kendo, Iaido, and Jodo (in this volume); Globalization of 
Martial Arts; and Social and Cultural Evolution of Kendo (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Della Pia, John. 1994. “Korea’s Mu Yei Do Bo Tong Ji,” Journal of Asian Martial Arts 3(2), 62–69.
Della Pia, John. 1995. “Native Korean Sword Techniques described in the Mu Yei Do Bo Tong Ji,”
Journal of Asian Martial Arts 4(2), 86–97.
Henning, Stanley E. 2000. “Traditional Korean Martial Arts,” Journal of Asian Martial Arts 9(1),
9–15.
Kim, Sang H. 2000. Muye Dobo Tongji: Comprehensive Illustrated Manual of Martial Arts of Ancient
Korea. Wethersﬁeld, CT: Turtle.
Mottern, Ron. 2001. “Swordsmanship, Korean/Hankuk Haedong Kumdo,” in Martial Arts of the
World: An Encyclopedia, edited by Thomas A. Green, Volume 2, 597–602. Santa Barbara, CA:
ABC-CLIO.
KOREA: SSIREUM
Ssireum is a Korean form of grappling. Wrestlers grip each other’s satbas (folded sashes looped and
tied around the waist and right thigh) and compete inside a sand circle. The goal is to attempt
to make any part of the opponent’s body above the knee touch the ground. An extensive array
of leg, arm, and body techniques is used, but chokes, joint locks, strikes, and attacks to sensitive
areas (e.g., eyes, ears, and groin) that might cause serious injury are prohibited. No weapons are
used in ssireum.
Ssireum is done almost entirely in the Republic of Korea, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, and the People’s Republic of China. Although ssireum shares some similarities with
wrestling traditions found in nearby Mongolia, China, Japan, Russia, and even some non-
neighboring cultures (e.g. Spain’s Lucha Canaria), the method of play and use of the satba are
unique. In addition, ssireum competition is said to embody the Korean aesthetic philosophy of
Eum-Yang (yin-yang), meaning complementary oppositional forces, and to produce a sense of
communitas among those present. (Traditionally, major ssireum competitions are held on
important agricultural dates such as Fall Harvest and Lunar New Year.)
A complete history of the origins of ssireum and its terminology before the twentieth century
is not yet available in English. Information is available, however, in Korean; this includes inter-
views with wrestlers, newspapers, government documents, and Korean academic publications. In
modern accounts, ssireum is usually depicted as a form of self-defense that evolved from folk
game into national sport. Ssireum is considered by aﬁcionados and researchers to be in a state of
declining popularity. Partly, this decline is due to Korea’s national economic crisis during the late
1990s, but also to the growing interest among the nation’s youth in Western sports and among
government ofﬁcials and industrialists in Olympic sports. Nevertheless, ssireum maintains a
190
Korea: Ssireum
www.ebook3000.com

presence at nearly all levels of compulsory public education, attracts large crowds at regionally
and nationally organized competitions, and is broadcast on national television. Ssireum has
never been successfully popularized outside of Korea.
ETYMOLOGY
The origin of the word ssireum is not clear. Historical documents use a variety of Sino-Korean
characters to refer to anything ssireum-like. The root characters and historical contexts gener-
ally refer to grappling, but there is no clear evidence linking any of them to ssireum.
Because ssireum is written exclusively in the indigenous Korean phonetic alphabet and has
no direct equivalent in Sino-Korean writing, most scholars assume that the word is based on an
indigenous Korean word instead of a Sino-Korean root. The Korean verb ssireumhada literally
means “to ssireum,” as in “to wrestle [with something].” However, this word is derived from the
noun ssireum and not the reverse.
Current theories on the origins of the word link it to the indigenous verb sauda, which means
“to ﬁght,” or to the archaic verb saruda, which describes actions based on repetitive motions (e.g.
cranking an engine, attempting to lift something, or coitus). Another theory suggests ssireum came
from a Mongolian word for wrestling, sselnem. None of these theories is unanimously accepted.
PLAYING SSIREUM
In the case of semi-pro and professional ssireum, each wrestler represents one of two teams.
Wrestlers wear only red or blue skin-tight short pants and an oppositely colored satba to repre-
sent their team. Wrestlers’ names and organizational afﬁliations are printed in white letters
across the back and sides of the shorts, respectively. Amateur wrestlers, aside from men playing
topless, do not wear uniforms, but they are still color-coded with red and blue satbas.
To begin a ssireum match, the two wrestlers enter a round sand pit, bow, kneel in front of a
referee, grip each other’s satbas, and then stand and begin wrestling upon the referee’s signal.
Although all matches begin with wrestlers gripping the opponent’s satba, players may release
their grip in order to initiate a takedown. Because of how the satbas are gripped, techniques rou-
tinely involve both players toppling over. The ﬁrst player to touch any part of his or her body
above the knee to the sand loses. The referee is responsible for calling a winner and may be sup-
ported by two assisting referees.
Rounds tend to be explosive and brief, with a maximum time limit of less than a few min-
utes. Matches are usually decided by a “best two out of three” system. Should three rounds pass
without a winner, the wrestlers are weighed and the lightest is awarded the win.
Ssireum is a male-dominated sport, and women are allowed to play only at amateur levels. Career
wrestlers often begin team training in primary school and continue to participate until their mid or
late twenties. Training schedules and methods vary by institution, but at this level, daily practice
lasts several hours each day. Wrestlers generally learn to play toward their natural strengths and
exhibit a variety of defensive, offensive, lifting, leg-attacking, overpowering, leveraging, or beguil-
ing strategies. There are no speciﬁc styles or schools of technique as seen in many other martial arts.
For many wrestlers, ssireum becomes their principal concern in life. Training in a team envi-
ronment, wrestlers develop strong social connections, and many wrestlers retain lifelong ties
with teammates and coaches. Families may have multiple generations and members involved
Korea: Ssireum
191

with ssireum, either as players or spectators. Upon retirement, ssireum players may become
coaches, researchers, or sponsors, according to their desire and capacity.
EARLY HISTORY
The cultural signiﬁcance of ssireum has changed over time. Traditional histories claim ssireum
developed during the prehistoric tribal settlement of the Korean peninsula as a means of self-
defense used by human beings against other humans or animals. This apocryphal account por-
trays ssireum as a means of defense as opposed to offense. Current beliefs about the sport generally
give the same story. Such views echo the modern-day nationalist portrayal of Korea as militarily
nonaggressive throughout its history.
During the Three Kingdoms Era (ca. 57 BCE–ca. 668 CE), ssireum is said to have evolved into
a military training exercise for the armies of the emergent nations. Evidence includes Goguryeo
royal tombs, built sometime during the fourth century CE in the area of Manchuria and northeast
China now known as Tonggou, Jian prefecture, Jilin province. The forms of the two wrestlers in
the mural are strongly suggestive of ssireum, but there is no deﬁnitive conclusion to be drawn from
the painting about how ssireum was practiced or what it meant to people at that time.
During the centuries that followed the Three Kingdoms, ssireum apparently transitioned
from a military application to a folk pastime. Changing military tactics made grappling obso-
lete, and emergent Confucian ideals led elite members of society to emphasize education over
physical prowess. Extant historical evidence for ssireum comes primarily from Yi Dynasty court
documents dating from the fourteenth through seventeenth centuries. The History of the Goryeo
Dynasty has an entry reprimanding King Chunghye (1315–1344) for irresponsibly delegating
his ofﬁcial duties in order to spend time practicing ssireum with an errand boy inside the palace
grounds. Despite the criticism, the king’s participation reportedly continued. The Chronicles of
the Yi Dynasty record King Sejong (1397–1450) holding ssireum competitions between his sol-
diers while on a pleasure cruise. Another entry in the same work documents a man losing his
life in a ssireum match; his opponent was held accountable for funeral expenses but was not
otherwise prosecuted. A proclamation in King Myeongjong’s Chronicles (ca. 1571) prohibits
servants from playing ssireum inside palace grounds, but permits the practice among children.
An entry in King Hyeonjong’s Chronicles (ca. 1680) reports that a servant stabbed his opponent
after losing a ssireum competition. The eighteenth century painting Sangbak by Kim Hong-Do
(Danwon, ca, 1745–1806) depicts an outdoor ssireum competition where the wrestlers are sur-
rounded by a ring of spectators and a taffy vendor, strongly evoking a commoner’s pastime.
The way ssireum was practiced during these periods is unknown. The above evidence links
an awareness of ssireum to the highest levels of society and the military. However, it also dis-
tances the elite from ssireum and depicts practitioners as members of the lower rungs of Korea’s
stratiﬁed, class-based society. Additional traditional histories portray ssireum in contexts rang-
ing from a way of passing the time among peasants to being an important part of military train-
ing, agricultural festivals, consecration ceremonies, or burial rituals among elites. In any case,
the transition to a national sport does not occur until the second half of the twentieth century.
MODERN HISTORY
By the early twentieth century, ssireum had been abandoned as military training, and it was seen
primarily among the lower levels of the class-based Korean society. During the Japanese
192
Korea: Ssireum
www.ebook3000.com

occupation of Korea (1910–1945), ssireum competitions were allowed, reportedly because of the
similarity of ssireum to sumo.
The ﬁrst commercially sponsored ssireum tournament took place in 1912. The venue was the
Danseongsa Theater in Seoul. This was the ﬁrst movie theater in the country, and it opened in
1907. The promoter was the Yugakkwon Club. In 1915, the Kwangmundae Theater in Seoul
sponsored a ssireum tournament that lasted four weeks and awarded an ox, a traditional agricul-
tural symbol, as the grand prize. In September 1927, the Pan Joseon Ssireum Federation held its
ﬁrst competition at Whinmun High School in Seoul. In 1936, the Pan Joseon federation went
on to sponsor the ﬁrst Pan Ssireum Championship Contest at the Chosun Daily News audito-
rium. This event was the predecessor for the current National Ssireum Champion Contest, and
national ssireum tournaments have been held regularly since then.
On a side note, because ssireum competitions meant that large numbers of people could
gather legally, it has been reported that during the Japanese period, ssireum training and tour-
naments were sometimes used as covers for anticolonial group meetings.
Following the end of Japanese rule in 1945, ssireum entered a period of decline. Reportedly,
this was because nearly all able-bodied men were involved in reconstruction and had no time in
which to play ssireum. This decline did not end until after the Korean civil war of 1950–1953,
called the Korean War in the United States.
Little is known of ssireum in the People’s Republic of Korea (North Korea), but in the
Republic of Korea (South Korea), nearly all of ssireum’s present features and structure were cre-
ated after 1953. In 1958, the ﬁrst National Folk Arts Festival was held, and it included ssireum
in the category of ethnic sports. The 1962 Cultural Properties Protection Law designated ssireum
for preservation; it was also around this time that ssireum was recognized as a UNESCO intan-
gible cultural asset. In 1972, the Korean Broadcasting System televised a national championship
for the ﬁrst time. That meet was organized by the Daehan Ssireum Federation, took place over
three days at Jangchung Indoor Stadium, and attracted more than 10,000 spectators. This suc-
cess marked a rise in similar competitions around the nation primarily including student-level
athletes. In April 1983, the Korea Folk Ssireum Federation held the ﬁrst Universal Hercules
Contest. This also took place in Jangchun Indoor Stadium. This event drew an enormous crowd
that included the nation’s elite politicians and businesspeople; it also captured 80 percent of the
television viewing audience and thereby surpassed all other sports events in popularity in Korea
at that time.
During the 1980s, local governments and corporations created their own teams, and this con-
tributed to the growth of professional ssireum. Examples of corporate sponsors included Samsung,
Hyundai, and LG Group. This period also saw the standardization of many aspects of contemporary
ssireum competitions. Weight classes were adopted, uniforms for wrestlers and referees were devel-
oped, competition rules were codiﬁed, divergent regional satba wearing styles were merged into the
current form, and the emphasis on blue and red visual motifs symbolizing Eum-Yang were added to
the sport (e.g., blue and red shorts and satbas, ring trimmings, and background stage colors).
In 1997 the Republic of Korea’s banking system suffered a major crisis. The resolution of this
crisis eliminated the ﬁnancial tidal wave of support that had enabled professional ssireum to
expand. At the same time, government patronage for non-Olympic sports declined.
Consequently, all professional ssireum teams were disbanded because of insolvency. National and
regional events were also scaled back.
Korea: Ssireum
193

CURRENT STATUS
Western-style sports have grown in popularity in Korea over the past century and now surpass
ssireum in terms of participation. In 2007, there were an estimated ten soccer players at the high
school and college level for each ssireum player. Meanwhile, although taekwondo has become
popular around the world, ssireum has never been successfully established a presence outside of
the Korean peninsula. Even at the height of ssireum’s ﬁnancial backing during the 1980s and
1990s, there was no plan to export it to other cultures. Currently, the funds for such efforts do
not exist, and it remains unlikely that this will change.
Talented Korean wrestlers sometimes opt to pursue careers in sumo or professional wrestling.
Kim Sin-Nak (1924–1963), known in Japan as Rikidozan, started in sumo and then turned to
professional wrestling. Similarly, collegiate wrestlers might turn to Olympic freestyle or judo.
This realization has led some proponents of ssireum to worry over ssireum’s future and to seek
ways of popularizing it amongst younger Koreans. Such efforts generally focus on manipulating
the styling of ssireum competitions to either increase the traditional nature of the sport (e.g.,
adding contingents of traditional musicians and ceremonies) or, conversely, increase its modern
appeal (e.g., adding techno music and cheerleaders). Disputes within ssireum organizations often
revolve around how best to guide the future of the sport.
Despite concerns about declining popularity, ssireum is still practiced in Korean public schools
from elementary to collegiate levels. Regional and national competitions are still broadcast on tel-
evision. Former wrestlers have assumed high-proﬁle public careers in education, business, politics,
and entertainment, and their history with ssireum becomes an essential part of their public biog-
raphies. Thus, ssireum and the wrestlers who perform it maintain a discernible presence in Korean
popular media and culture. Ssireum’s history, presence in the public consciousness, and relative
geographic isolation continue to sustain it as a source of ethnic identiﬁcation in Korean culture.
—Christopher A. Sparks
See also: Mongolian Martial Arts; China: Wrestling; Japan: Sumo 
(in this volume); and Commodiﬁcation of Leisure (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Ch’oe Sang-Su. 1986. “Korean Style Wrestling, Ssirum,” Korea Journal 26, 15–19.
Choi Jong-Sam, Lee Jae-Hak and Son Soo-Beum. 2001. “A Study of Korean Folk Ssirum in
Accordance with Economic Growth” (in Korean), Korean Journal of Physical Education 4, 3–19.
Chung Chan-Mo, and Ji Chun-Man. 2000. “The Origin and Developmental History of Ancient
Ssireum in Korea” (in Korean), Korean Journal of History Physical Education, Sport, and Dance
5, 1–20.
Henning, Stanley E. 2000. “Traditional Korean Martial Arts,” Journal of Asian Martial Arts 9, 9–15.
Heung Jang-Pyo, Lee Jae-Hak, and Lee Tae-Hyeon. 2001. “A Study on the Change in Korean Folk
Ssireum Competitions” (in Korean), Korean Journal of Martial Arts 2, 249–270.
Hong Jang-Pyo, Chung Wi-Gon, and Lim Hi-Young. 1992. “A Study on the History of Development
of Korean Ssirum in Historical Periods” (in Korean), Institute of Martial Arts, Korea Sports Science
University 4, 41–47.
Joo Dong-Jin, Huh Yong, and Park Sung-Han. 2005. “A Study on the History of Ancient Ssireum in
Korea” (in Korean), Korea Sport Research 17:4, 1011–1027.
Lee Seungsoo. 2006. “The Invention of Korean Ethnic Sport,” International Journal of Sport and Health
Science 4, 125–130, via http://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/ijshs/4/Special_Issue_2006/4_125/_
article, accessed October 16, 2009.
194
Korea: Ssireum
www.ebook3000.com

Mangan, J. A., and Ha Nam-Gil. 2001. “Confucianism, Imperialism, Nationalism: Modern Sport,
Ideology, and Korean Culture,” The European Sports History Review 3, 49–76.
Nah Hyun-Sung. 1986. “A Survey on Korean Athletics of the Pre-Modern Era,” Korea Journal
26, 4–18.
Park Sung-Han. 1988. Ssireum: Korean National Wrestling (in Korean). Daegu, Korea: Regional
Development Research Center.
KOREA: TAEKKYON
Taekkyon is a Korean martial sport that emphasizes foot and leg techniques. In the modern game,
a player can win by making an opponent fall down with a sweep, trip, or throw, or by kicks to
the head or face. It is distinguished by its evasive and dancelike footwork. In the twentieth cen-
tury it has come to be seen as a living link with Korea’s past, distinct from foreign inﬂuence. It
has also provided a historical reference point for modern martial arts in Korea. Taekkyon was
recognized by the Korean government with the title of Intangible Cultural Asset in 1983.
The origins of taekkyon are highly speculative, though it probably has its roots in Chinese
practices imported to Korea. Today, however, it is so far removed from those sources that it does
not resemble anything identiﬁably Chinese. The name t’aek’kyon does not appear in Korean
records until the latter part of the Yi dynasty (1392–1910), though there are many prior refer-
ences to something called subakhi, “hand strike contest,” which specialized in hand and ﬁst
techniques. There are comparatively few references to taekkyon. The ﬁrst that is known is in
the Chaemulbo (Book of Treasures) written by Yi Song-ji (ca. 1790). It includes a passage that
states that subakhi had come to be called tak’kyon by the time the book was written. Although
there is no direct evidence, it is reasonable to assume that tak’kyon and taekkyon are identical.
Other historical references to tak’kyon describe something that greatly resembles modern
taekkyon.
Concerning the possible connection of subakhi to taekkyon (besides the statement in the
Chaemulpo), there is evidence pointing to a relationship. Among the taekkyon techniques that have
been preserved, there are several variations on punching techniques. A number of these are desig-
nated under the category of yaet pop, or “old skills.” This seems to ﬁt in with the notion that subakhi
changed over time, its preference for hand techniques being replaced with foot and leg skills, thus
requiring a different name. The name “old skills” itself seems to suggest an awareness of this process.
Current knowledge of taekkyon comes from two general sources: references to it in the liter-
ature and art of the late Yi dynasty, and the memories of those who learned and practiced
taekkyon in the ﬁrst decade of the twentieth century, before the Japanese colonization of Korea.
There are only two written sources that convey the speciﬁcs of taekkyon before the twentieth
century. One source is Korean Games, by American ethnographer Stuart Culin (1858–1929),
published in 1895. The other is Haedong Chukchi (East Sea Annals), a work of history by Choi
Yong-nyon (ca. 1850–?) published in 1921. There is also a painting by Hyesan Yu Suk
(1827–1873), completed in 1846, called Dae-Kwae Do (Scene of Great Cheer), which appears
to be showing a taekkyon match.
Based on conclusions drawn from the extant material, taekkyon was an activity of the com-
mon people. Also, it was practiced primarily as a game or sport, although it did have combat
applications. The poem in the Haedong Chukchi conveys a clear sense of admiration for the skills
involved and implies that those skills were not minor. Probably because it was associated with
Korea: Taekkyon
195

entertainment in a broadly social context, the notion developed that taekkyon promoted, or at
least coexisted with, vice, disorder, and dissipation, which led to its formal prohibition. That this
prohibition was not (and probably could not have been) complete accounts for the survival of
taekkyon to modern times.
Living knowledge of taekkyon comes almost exclusively from one man, Song Tok-ki. Born in
Seoul in 1893, Song began learning taekkyon around 1905, at the direction of his father.
According to Song Tok-ki, taekkyon was practiced almost exclusively by the common people:
shopkeepers, farmers, peasants, and gangsters. Its practice was restricted to the area of Seoul.
Taekkyon at that time was practiced in two general ways: as a game and as a form of combat.
In its play form, it could resemble a sport, with teams, rules, and an organized procedure, or it could
develop as a simple match between two people. It was most common on the occasion of large social
occasions. Along with ssireum (Korean wrestling), taekkyon was an important part of seasonal fes-
tivals in Seoul. Taekkyon also could be employed as a ﬁghting system. As such, it existed primarily
among gangsters, or their precursors. Song had experience in both types of taekkyon.
There was no conventional training system for taekkyon. It had no formal ranking struc-
ture, and there were no prearranged patterns to aid in learning or personal practice. Given its
status as a social, public activity, people were probably able to learn taekkyon piecemeal, at
random times and places with different teachers. One who wished to learn might imitate those
he saw practicing and eventually participate in games, without ever having had any formal
instruction. According to Song Tok-ki, serious students learned taekkyon in organized groups
under speciﬁc teachers, as in his experience. Most importantly, taekkyon itself clearly had a
distinct identity, with a common form and hence common techniques: pumbalki, triangular
footwork; hwalgaejit, general hand and arm movements for deception, blocking, and grabbing;
sonkisul (or sonjil), hand and arm techniques, including both open- and close-ﬁsted strikes,
traps, grabs, and grappling moves (head-butting is included in this category, presumably
because one grabbed an opponent behind the neck to pull his head forward); palgisul (or paljil),
foot and leg techniques, including both striking and pushing kicks, trips, sweeps, stamping,
and others.
Taekkyon was entirely a standing art. In the game, techniques were performed with pushing
instead of striking force. When it was used for ﬁghting, however, all techniques were used with
power.
In 1910, Japan annexed Korea. Although the Japanese discouraged the practice of taekkyon,
for several years Song still managed to practice with smaller groups, but pressure from both his
family and the police ﬁnally compelled him to quit. Though there was some surreptitious practice
during the occupation, it was rare and involved very few people. It would seem, however, that
though its practice was formally prohibited, it was not actively suppressed. It did not disappear so
much because of harsh repression as because its practitioners needed to look after themselves dur-
ing a harsh time and hence had neither the leisure nor the inclination to practice their skills.
Korea was liberated from the Japanese in 1945. The Korean War followed in short order, from
1950 to 1953. The ﬁrst opportunity Song Tok-ki had to demonstrate taekkyon after Korea’s inde-
pendence was on March 26, 1958. This was the birthday of South Korea’s president, Syngman
Rhee (Yi Seung-man, 1875–1965). For this occasion, Yi wanted to see displays of Korean ﬁght-
ing arts. Song heard of this and accordingly volunteered to give a demonstration. Because of the
event, Song achieved a moderate amount of recognition.
196
Korea: Taekkyon
www.ebook3000.com

The ﬁrst step in the development of modern taekkyon occurred in 1964, when Sin Han-sung
read a story about Song in the Hankuk Ilbo newspaper. Sin was born in 1928. As a child, Sin had
seen taekkyon being practiced at his grandfather’s home, though he himself had never learned
it. By 1964, he had experience in ssireum, Western wrestling, judo, and taekwondo. He had
become interested in traditional Korean martial arts, and the newspaper article about Song gave
him his chance to learn.
Sin opened his own school in Chungchu in 1973. Sin’s main goal over the next several years
was to get government recognition for taekkyon as part of Korea’s cultural heritage. He also
worked to spread and modernize the art so as to ensure its survival. To this end, he worked on
creating a standardized training system for it. This system, when completed, had four parts. The
ﬁrst consisted of individual exercises, both standing and walking. The second consisted of part-
ner exercises, demonstrating the application of techniques in the ﬁrst set as well as introducing
new ones. The third section consisted of competition, and the fourth a form, which was a com-
pendium of all the fundamental techniques involved in competition.
Sin was criticized for some aspects of his system, particularly the form. Some claimed that it
altered the original style of taekkyon, as taught by Song Tok-ki, too much. Several of these crit-
ics, who had also studied with Song, went on to establish their own associations. Even so, Sin is
generally given credit for having done the most to preserve and spread taekkyon. It would never
have attained government recognition without his efforts. Song Tok-ki and Sin Han-sung both
died in 1987, twenty days apart.
There are two ways to approach the inﬂuence of taekkyon on Korea and Korean ﬁghting arts.
The ﬁrst is the view that it had direct, technical connections with the modern styles. The sec-
ond is to concentrate on its conceptual inﬂuence—that is, the associations and images that the
name taekkyon evoked. The ﬁrst view has generated controversy. The most disputed is the view
that taekwondo grew directly out of taekkyon. In Korea, the leaders of the present taekkyon asso-
ciations disavow any direct connection with taekwondo. Experiential knowledge of taekkyon
can be conclusively traced to a very few individuals, and none were linked to those who later
went on to establish taekwondo.
Taekkyon’s conceptual inﬂuence is a much different matter. People who grew up during the
Japanese occupation and immediately after may have heard of taekkyon through older relatives,
but probably never saw it. Hence, the notion of taekkyon as the Korean way of ﬁghting grew in the
popular imagination, even among those who had never seen it. People knew that at one time there
had been a way of ﬁghting called taekkyon that specialized in kicking. References to taekkyon had
the effect of calling up associations with Korean life before the occupation and the war, a life of
which only traces remained. Song Tok-ki himself, as a survivor from that time, evoked the old life
as well. Taekkyon still retains these associations. It is this sense of history embodied in the name
taekkyon that has most inﬂuenced modern Korean martial arts. When the name taekwondo was sug-
gested as the new name for the martial arts practiced by the various Korean schools in the 1950s,
it was to connect these arts with the popular memory of taekkyon and the associations that it called
up. In these references, Korean ﬁghting meant ﬁghting mostly with the legs, a notion that proba-
bly contributed to the emphasis on kicking in modern taekwondo.
Whatever its presence in memory, taekkyon itself is still somewhat obscure in Korea, and
there are relatively few schools teaching it. Many Koreans identify the name with taekwondo,
associate it with Chinese martial arts, or simply are unaware of what it might be. There are signs
Korea: Taekkyon
197

that it is growing more popular, with taekkyon clubs in most large universities and competitions
broadcast on national television.
Each taekkyon association in Korea has a slightly different approach to competition, but the dif-
ferences are largely minor. There are two varieties of the game. One is the kind of informal match
that occurs in a gym as part of a class. The other is the more formal competition that takes place at
tournaments. It is usually played on mats, identical to the kind typically used for judo. Players wear
traditional white Korean clothes (hanpok). There are no rounds. A match continues until a player
loses or until a time limit elapses. The judges and referee then decide the winner. Hand techniques
are restricted to pushes, grabs, and traps. Grabbing the opponent’s clothes is not allowed. Among
the associations and even within them, a wide range of contact is permitted. It is typically medium
contact, though using higher levels is usually not penalized. No protection of any kind, such as
gloves or protective vests, is worn. There are two ways of scoring. One is to cause the opponent’s
knee or any part of the body above it to touch the ground. The other is a clean kick to the head or
face. For a head kick to score, it must clearly cause the head to move. Only push kicks to the body
are formally allowed. Such kicks do not score unless they directly cause the opponent to fall down.
The most distinctive quality of taekkyon in practice is its footwork, called pumbalki. Players
continuously step in a triangular pattern, shifting their weight and position. The object of this
footwork is never to have a foot in one place for long and to be prepared to move a foot from its
position if it is attacked. Hence, taekkyon footwork has a rhythmic, dancelike quality. Another
reason for this footwork is to facilitate evasive movements in all directions. Taekkyon has very
few blocking skills; evasion is preferred. The feet should be kept close, since wide steps provide
more opportunities for attacks, particularly sweeps. There are many kinds of sweeps and kicks. A
distinctive feature of all kicks in taekkyon, besides the front thrust kick, which is not allowed in
competition, is that they are performed with pushing rather than striking power.
The preferred response to kicks is to trap them, and then follow with a sweep to the oppo-
nent’s supporting leg. Trapping is accomplished by bringing the hand over or underneath the kick,
going with its force. The parts of the body subject to grabs are usually the neck and the shoulders.
If a sweep is attempted, a player pulls the opponent’s neck in the opposite direction of the sweep.
When attempting a throw, a player grabs an opponent around the neck with one hand, pressing
the arm to the side at the elbow with the other hand. There are also pushing moves, usually
around the shoulders and ribs; however, the two most common pushes are against the throat.
Hand strikes come in two categories: strikes against the face and head and against the body.
With one exception, strikes to the head are all open-handed. Targets include the nose, front and
side of the jaw, cheeks, ears, and forehead. There is also a hammer-ﬁst strike to the temple. Another
technique is to scrape down the face, pushing at the same time. Strikes to the body are always
punches, to the solar plexus or armpits, for example. The taekkyon repertoire also includes a set of
hand and arm motions called hwalgaejit. One can use them to confuse or distract an opponent.
There are currently four taekkyon associations in Korea. All four were established by people
who had studied with both Song Tok-ki and Sin Han-sung. They stress different aspects of
taekkyon, though their differences are minor. Each of the associations is growing, and it appears
that the future of taekkyon is ensured.
—Michael Pederson
See also: Korea: Ssireum; Korea: Taekwondo (in this volume); 
and Invented Traditions (in Volume II).
198
Korea: Taekkyon
www.ebook3000.com

REFERENCES
Culin, Stewart. 1895. Games of the Orient. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, via http://books
.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Pak Chong-kwan, and Song Tok-ki. 1998. Taekgyeon (in Korean). Seoul: Sorim Publishing Co.
Song Tok-ki. 1984. Interview. Cultural Seminar. Seoul: KBS.
Yi Yong-bok. 1990. T’aek’kyon (in Korean). Seoul: Hakminsa.
Yi Yong-bok. 1995. T’aek’kyon (in Korean). Seoul: Daewonsa Publishing Co.
Yo Chang-hwan. 1991. T’aek’kyon Textbook. Seoul: Yongon Publishing Co.
Yung Ouyang. 1997. “The Elevation of Taekkyon from Folk Game to Martial Art,” Journal of Asian
Martial Arts 6(4) 76–89.
KOREA: TAEKWONDO
In terms of numbers of practitioners, taekwondo ranks among the most popular martial arts in
the world, and since 2000, taekwondo has been an ofﬁcial Olympic sport, with both men’s and
women’s divisions.
The three Korean words that make up the word taekwondo translate into English as “kick ﬁst
way.” Using the McCune-Reischauer method of transliteration, the Korean words would be writ-
ten t’aekwo˘ndo. Using the Revised Romanization method introduced by the South Korean gov-
ernment in 2000, the Korean words would be transliterated as taegwondo. In this book, we have
tried to use standard American spellings without diacriticals whenever possible; consequently,
we follow the newspaper standard of taekwondo.
In international taekwondo, the emphasis is on competitive applications. International taek-
wondo emphasizes high, rapid kicking and encourages aggressive, continuous-action point ﬁght-
ing. Under the pressure of rules and scoring systems, there is currently little offensive use of the
hands in international taekwondo.
Taekwondo organizations that are not closely afﬁliated with international taekwondo often
present taekwondo as a martial art. Some of these latter organizations emphasize the martial
aspects. In such organizations, ﬁsts, elbows, feet, and knees are still used to end stand-up ﬁghts
with other people. Other organizations choose instead to emphasize the artistic and cultural ele-
ments. In such organizations, participants are encouraged to do their utmost in school or work
and to become valued members of their communities. In the latter groups, the ﬁght is with one’s
self, rather than with external opponents.
ROOTS
During the late nineteenth century, the Imperial Japanese government decided that it wanted to
extend its sphere of inﬂuence into Korea and Manchuria, and in 1910, Japan annexed Korea and
made it a colony.
There were three different periods for the Japanese colonial rule. From 1910 to 1919, the
Japanese militarily subjugated their new Korean colony. From 1919 to 1931, the Japanese
attempted cultural assimilation. Finally, from 1931 to 1945, the Japanese made Korea increas-
ingly subservient to the Japanese war efforts.
Throughout the entire Japanese imperial period (1910–1945), ssireum (Korean traditional
wrestling) remained popular, probably because it was similar to Japanese sumo. On the other
Korea: Taekwondo
199

hand, the Korean kicking game of taekkyon was discouraged, perhaps because it resulted in
unruly gatherings of young people.
During the Japanese period, Japanese martial arts such as judo (yudo in Korean), jujutsu
(yusul), and kendo (kumdo) were taught throughout Korea. Judo was taught at the Seoul YMCA
as early as 1909, and international boxing was offered at Keijo University (part of modern Seoul
National University) by 1926.
During these years, some Koreans received training in Japanese martial arts while working for
industrial ﬁrms or going to school in Japan. Thus, Hwang Kee (1914–2002), founder of the Moo
Duk Kwan style, trained in Shotokan karate while working for the Japanese-owned South
Manchuria Railways. Similarly, Yun Kwei Byung (1919–?) was a college student who started
training in karate at the Kanbukan (Korean Martial Arts Hall) in Tokyo around 1940. Upon
returning to Korea, Yun became a pioneer of the Jidokwan style. During the 1930s and 1940s,
Kanbukan (since renamed Renbukai) was famous for its full-contact sparring between ﬁghters
wearing modiﬁed kendo armor (bogu) (Madis 2003, 191–200).
Between 1937 and 1945, the Japanese government began devoting almost all of the Japanese
Empire’s efforts toward military purposes. Martial arts were seen as useful in wartime, so the Japan-
ese government continued to support martial arts groups. As a Korean colonial government doc-
ument of 1938 put it, “We should promote the Japanese traditional martial arts spirit to accelerate
the making of the imperial subject” (cited in Ok 2007, 346). Thus, two historically important
Korean karate organizations (Chungdohwe and Songmookwan) were established during 1944.
Japan’s war efforts redoubled following Japan’s attack on the Americans, British, and Dutch in
December 1941, and by May 1943, elementary school students in Korea were being taught Japanese
military drill and patriotic songs, while at the middle and high school levels, students received train-
ing in swordsmanship, bayonet ﬁghting, grenade throwing, and unarmed combat (Ok 2007, 342).
During 1944 and 1945, Japanese and Korean high school-level training for unarmed combat
included training in karate—or at least, the karate-like striking and kicking exercises from judo’s
Maximum Efﬁciency National Physical Education (Seiryoku Zen’yo Kokumin Taiiku) exercises.
Korean karate students of this era included Choi Yeoung-eui (1923–1994), who received train-
ing in military karate in Japan during 1944–1945. After the war ended, Choi stayed in Japan,
where he changed his name to Oyama Masutatsu, and in 1957, he established own karate style,
known as Kyokushin Kai.
Following the Japanese surrender in August 1945, the northern half of Korea fell into the Soviet
sphere of inﬂuence, while the southern half fell into the U.S. sphere of inﬂuence. The resulting
North Korean government became known as the People’s Democratic Republic of Korea (PDRK),
while the resulting South Korean government became known as Republic of Korea (ROK).
Between 1946 and 1950, several new Korean martial arts organizations (kwan) organized, and
several existing organizations reorganized. The following is a summary of major events (Gillis
2008, 36–42; Madis 2003, 191–202).
Chungdohwe (Blue Way System) was organized in 1944. It was reorganized and renamed
Chundokwan in 1953. Early leaders included a Shotokan stylist named Lee Won Kuk
(1907–2003). The system that the Korean army taught during the late 1950s and early 1960s
was based on Chungdokwan.
Songmookwan (Ever Youthful House of Martial Arts Training) was organized in 1944 and
reorganized in 1946. Leaders included Shotokan stylist Ro Byung Jik (1919–?).
200
Korea: Taekwondo
www.ebook3000.com

Chosun Yunmookwan (Korean Hall of the Way of Martial Arts) was originally the name of
one of the oldest judo clubs in Korea. A karate division was added in 1946. Early karate teach-
ers included Chun Sang Sup (dates unknown). After Chun disappeared during the opening
months of the Korean War (1950–1953), control of the club’s karate curriculum went to Yun
Kwei Byung. In 1953 the karate portion of Chosun Yunmookwan was renamed Jidokwan (School
of Wisdom).
YMCA Kwon Bop Bu (YMCA Kempo) was organized in 1946. Founders included Shudokan
karate practitioner Yun Byung In (1919–?). Yun also may have studied Chinese martial arts in
Manchuria or China. Yun was living in North Korea as of 1995.
Moo Duk Kwan (School of Martial Virtue) was formally organized in 1947, but the name
had been use before 1938, when the authorities told its members to merge with a Japanese-
controlled judo club (Ok 2007, 340–341). Its postwar leaders included Shotokan stylist
Hwang Kee.
The leaders of all these organizations had all achieved comparatively high rank through
Japanese martial arts associations. Thus, the practice forms (hyeong) they taught showed clear
Japanese roots. However, as a group, the Koreans were already beginning to place more empha-
sis on continuous sparring (kyorugi) and on breaking boards (kyukpa) than was usual in postwar
Japan. In Korea, this was probably due to the natural progression of the wartime focus on realis-
tic training, whereas in Japan, this was probably due to practitioners not wanting to attract
American attention toward their martial arts practice, which, while not actually illegal, was cer-
tainly proscribed.
Koreans were also pioneers in the development of protective sparring gear. During the
1930s and 1940s, sparring gear used in karate was usually modiﬁed from baseball or kendo
armor. The inﬂuence of Shudokan karate is possible here, as Shudokan schools had been
experimenting with armor during the 1930s, under the name “Nippon Kempo.” However, after
the Korean War, the Koreans were pioneers in the development of foam-padded sparring
equipment. For example, in the United States, Jhoon Rhee (Rhee Jhoon Goo, 1932–) holds
U.S. patent 3,769,722 (issued November 1973) for a “protective shoe adapted to be worn on
the foot in the arts and sports of karate, tae kwon do, kong fu (sic), kick boxing, etc.,” and U.S.
patent 3,855,633 (issued December 1974) for a “protective glove for use in karate sports and
the like.” Inexpensive foam-and-Velcro sparring equipment transformed sport karate and taek-
wondo and subsequently contributed to the development of “reality-based” ﬁghting systems,
in which trainees wearing heavily padded helmets and suits attack one another at nearly full
power and intensity.
DEVELOPMENT
In 1954, ROK president Syngman Rhee (Yi Seungman, 1875–1965) decided that karate should
be added to ROK military training. For this purpose, the historical Japanese nomenclature was
clearly inappropriate. Toward giving karate an appropriately Korean identity, the ROK military
organized a conference in 1955. Various names were proposed, but in the end, taegwondo, a
name created by the Shotokan practitioner (and ROK general) Choi Hong Hi (1918–2002),
was chosen.
In 1959, Choi organized the Korea Taekwondo Association. The civilian Subakdo
Association, led by Hwang Kee, opposed using the name taegwondo. Whereas Choi wanted
Korea: Taekwondo
201

to promote the idea that taekkyon was one of the major roots of Korean striking arts, Hwang did
not. Instead, Hwang wanted to promote the idea that modern Korean martial arts should be traced
to Muyedobotongji, a Chinese-inﬂuenced martial art manual dating to the 1790s. Ultimately, Choi
prevailed, mostly by providing government money and support to karate teachers who were will-
ing to use his origin theories and hindering the efforts of karate teachers who would not.
During the late 1950s, taekwondo and cognate arts started becoming international martial
arts. In part, this was because vast numbers of U.S. servicemen were stationed in South Korea
during and after the Korean War (1950–1953), and some of them trained in tangsudo, kongsudo,
and other Korean karate styles. For instance, during 1958–1959, U.S. Army First Lieutenant
William Johnson (dates unknown) of Mesa, Arizona, trained in Moo Duk Kwan tangsudo at a
club near his supply base, south of Seoul (Paciﬁc Stars and Stripes 1959). During the same years,
future action ﬁlm star Chuck Norris (1940–) began training in Moo Duk Kwan tangsudo at a
club near Osan Air Base, also near Seoul. Tangsudo and kongsudo continue to be practiced and
taught to this day, especially in the United States.
During the late 1950s, Korean expatriates also began taking kongsudo and tangsudo overseas.
In 1958, Jhoon Rhee began teaching Chungdokwan tangsudo in Texas, where he was a student
at Southwest Texas State College (modern Texas State University—San Marcos). Three years
later, Sihak Henry Cho (1934–) opened a nonproﬁt Jidokwan kongsudo club in New York City.
Cho subsequently promoted open-style karate tournaments in New York City (he even organ-
ized events at Madison Square Garden), and later, Olympic taekwondo. Clubs established by
Rhee and Cho remain active into the present.
In addition, the ROK military began sending military trainers overseas. For example, in 1959,
Major Nam Tae Hi (1929–) was sent to Saigon (present-day Ho Chi Minh City) to teach the
military version of Chungdokwan to South Vietnamese soldiers and police.
In May 1961, a military coup overturned the ROK government. The new president, Park
Chung Hee (1917–1979), did not like General Choi, so Park appointed him the Korean ambas-
sador to Malaysia, thereby getting him out of the country for a couple years. Choi spent his time
in exile writing books and modifying hyeong (forms) so that they became distinctively Korean
(Gillis 2008, 56–69).
Until the early 1960s, Korean tongsudo and kongsudo instructors had taught Japanese or
Okinawan kata in which the names of the forms were given Korean rather than Japanese pro-
nunciations. Thus, Pinan was called Pyung-ahn, while Taikyoku was called Kicho. General Choi
did not like this; he believed that taekwondo needed its own unique forms. Choi personally
advocated the adoption of the Chang Hon hyeong (or teul, another Korean word meaning pat-
terns or forms), which he created while he was in Malaysia. The name Chang Hon, “Blue
Cottage,” was Choi’s pen name.
Upon returning to Seoul in 1964, Choi resumed promoting his vision for taekwondo. One of
Choi’s accomplishments during the period 1964–1966 was the establishment of a world-class
exhibition team. During 1965 and 1966, this team toured Europe, Asia, South America, and the
Middle East, and taekwondo’s subsequent emphasis on spectacular spinning, jumping, and ﬂying
kicks is based in part on its many public exhibitions (Gillis 2008, 60–63).
At the same time, however, a new vision for taekwondo was developing in Seoul, and this
vision that did not include General Choi. For one thing, President Park still did not like General
Choi. In addition, Park was more interested in seeing Koreans win medals in the Olympics than
202
Korea: Taekwondo
www.ebook3000.com

he was in seeing American servicemen and Egyptian policemen training in taekwondo. There-
fore, he decided to devote his government’s limited resources to developing world-class per-
formances in many sports, not just taekwondo. Consequently, in 1966, Choi was maneuvered out
of all leadership roles in the Korea Taekwondo Association.
Choi tried to reassert his authority by establishing a separate organization called Interna-
tional Taekwon-do Federation (ITF). Although ITF proved to be an enormous organizational
success, Choi’s political power in Korea continued to weaken, and in 1972, both Choi and his
organization moved to Canada. In 1985, the international headquarters of ITF moved from
Toronto to Vienna, Austria, where it remains to this day.
Once Choi was out of the way, the Park regime began openly reorganizing taekwondo. An
initial step, taken in 1971, involved proclaiming taekwondo to be Korea’s national (kukki)
sport. A second step, begun in 1972, involved adding taekwondo to the physical education cur-
riculum of South Korea’s middle schools, high schools, and universities (Burdick 2001, 298). In
these school programs, emphasis was placed on identifying potential national-class athletes (in
all sports) and developing general physical ﬁtness. A third step, taken in 1973, involved put-
ting the presidency of the World Taekwondo Federation (WTF) into the hands of the Korean
Central Intelligence Agency (KCIA). The KCIA was renamed Agency for National Security
Planning in 1981 and National Intelligence Service in 1999, but its role always remained the
same: coordinating both international and domestic intelligence (Gillis 2008, 70–85).
From June 1973 to January 2004, the WTF president was Kim Un Yong (1931–). Kim was a
senior member of the KCIA, and during his 30-year tenure as WTF president, taekwondo was
given a new history that ignored the Japanese connections. Instead, the roots of taekwondo were
placed solidly in Korean prehistory (Olympic Review 1994). Equal attention was paid to getting
the Summer Olympics for Seoul, and then to getting taekwondo made a demonstration sport in
the Seoul Summer Olympics.
All this growth and expansion cost money. Funding sources included Korean industrialists,
the Korean government, the Uniﬁcation Church of Reverend Sun Myung Moon (Mun Seoon-
myeong, 1920–), and countless millions of taekwondo teachers and practitioners. Over the
years, money ﬂowed in. Books of ﬁction masquerading as history were published. Seoul got the
Summer Olympics in 1988. Taekwondo became an exhibition sport in the Summer Games of
1988 and 1992 and an ofﬁcial Olympic sport in 2000.
Then, during the late 1990s and early 2000s, stories began emerging about how Kim Un Yong
was misappropriating funds for personal use. The stories turned out to be true. In January 2004, Kim
was forced to resign his positions, and at the trial held in Seoul in June 2004, he was convicted of
embezzling about US$3 million. He was ﬁned and sentenced to a short prison sentence (Gillis 2008,
193–199). Meanwhile, in May 2002, General Choi died in a North Korean hospital. Although
Choi’s death and Kim’s humiliation are utterly unrelated events, they collectively represent the end
of the foundation era of taekwondo, both as a Korean martial art and as an international sport.
WHY TAEKWONDO IS NOT KARATE
Although taekwondo has roots in karate, taekwondo is not karate. Neither is it the natural pro-
gression of an older Korean martial art (taekkyon, for example). The explanation involves sig-
niﬁcant structural, conceptual, and technical differences.
Korea: Taekwondo
203

Structurally, taekwondo’s terminology, ofﬁcial histories, and biases reﬂect modern South
Korean sensibilities. To give some examples, its ofﬁcial and popular histories both emphasize
links to the Silla Dynasty (57 BCE–935 CE), which was located in the southern part of the
Korean peninsula, rather than to the Goryeo Dynasty (918–1392), which was located in the
northern part of the Korean peninsula. Naming conventions are equally nationalistic. Thus,
taekwondo forms (hyeong or teul in ITF, pumsae in WTF) are named for events or metaphysics
associated with South Korea. As a rule, ITF hyeong have nationalist names, whereas WTF pum-
sae have names representing the trigrams appearing on the modern South Korean ﬂag. The ITF
hyeong Dan-Gun, for instance, is named for the legendary founder of Korea, while the WTF pum-
sae Taeguk Sa Jang means Thunder. None of these are things that would have been allowed by
the Japanese between 1937 and 1945, or meant much to the street youth who traditionally
played taekkyon.
Today, taekwondo is widely represented as an international sport. This is a change from the
period of 1953–1964, when the ROK military devoted signiﬁcant resources to presenting taek-
wondo as an effective military combative (e.g., martial art in the literal sense). The conceptual
change is enormous. When teaching a purely military art, the emphasis is (or ought to be) on
principles of force justiﬁcation. Speciﬁcally, when, and to what extent, is the combatant author-
ized to use physical force to achieve the commander’s intent? Entirely different rules deﬁne both
folk and international sport. A sport’s rules can be simple (the one who falls down ﬁrst, loses) or
complex (maximum and minimum weights, certiﬁcation requirements for coaches and ofﬁcials,
procedures and expectations for testing and competition). Either way, the rules of engagement
are always clear. Biomechanical explanations and rationales are equally different. When train-
ing somebody to ﬁght for survival, instructors usually (or ought to) emphasize knees to groin and
weapon retention. In the context of street or battleﬁeld combat, physical ﬁtness is desirable, but
not necessary—one ﬁghts as one is, not as one might be. Alternatively, whenever preparing ath-
letes to perform in front of audiences, emphasis is placed on physical techniques, and especially
techniques that showcase the dedication of the athletes and the skills of the trainers. Finally, in
betting games such as professional boxing and traditional taekkyon, the motivation is simply sep-
arating the bettors from their money. In betting games, score is determined using gate receipts
rather than victories over opponents.
Technically, differences depend mostly on the individual system of karate or taekwondo
being viewed. For instance, in international taekwondo, scoring rules have caused practitioners
to strike using the feet almost exclusively, whereas in karate and noninternational style systems
of taekwondo, practitioners can (and do) strike using all the extremities—ﬁsts, open hands,
knees, and elbows included.
From the standpoint of sparring, taekwondo sparring is essentially continuous sparring, just
as one sees in amateur boxing. This is hardly unique to taekwondo (Kyokushin Kai karate and
its offshoots also emphasize continuous sparring), but it is very different from the one-point spar-
ring seen in Shotokan karate and its offshoots.
—Joseph Svinth
See also: Korea: Hapkido; Korea: Taekkyon (in this volume); Invented Traditions; 
Globalization of Martial Arts; International Karate; Military Unarmed Fighting 
Systems in the United States; and Political Uses of the Martial Arts (in Volume II).
204
Korea: Taekwondo
www.ebook3000.com

REFERENCES
Burdick, Dakin. 1997. “People and Events of Taekwondo’s Formative Years,” Journal of Asian Martial
Arts 6(1), 30–49.
Burdick, Dakin. 2001. “Taekwondo,” in Martial Arts of the World: An Encyclopedia, edited by Thomas
A. Green, 291–299. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Capener, Steven D. 1995. “Problems in the Identity and Philosophy of T’aegwondo and Their
Historical Causes,” Korea Journal, Winter, 80–94, via http://www.americanmoodokwan.com/
Capener_Essay(W-95).pdf, accessed October 16, 2009.
Gillis, Alex. 2008. A Killing Art: The Untold History of Tae Kwon Do. Toronto: ECW Press.
Ha Nam-Gil, and J. A Mangan. 2002. “Ideology, Politics, Power: Korean Sport-Transformation,
1945–92,” International Journal of the History of Sport 19(2-3), June-September, 157–188, via
http://www.ingentaconnect.com/, accessed October 16, 2009.
Henning, Stanley E. 2000. “Traditional Korean Martial Arts,” Journal of Asian Martial Arts
9(1), 8–15.
Jennings, Andrew. 1996. The New Lords of the Rings: Power, Money and Drugs in the Modern Olympics.
London: Pocket Books.
“Korea and Olympism.” 1979. Olympic Review 136, 99–106, via http://www.la84foundation.org/
OlympicInformationCenter/OlympicReview/1979/ore136/ore136u.pdf, 
accessed 
August
2, 2009.
Madis, Eric. 2003. “The Evolution of Taekwondo from Japanese Karate,” in Martial Arts in the Modern
World, edited by Thomas A. Green and Joseph R. Svinth, 185–207. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Ok Gwang. 2007 “Coercion for Asian Conquest: Japanese Militarism and Korean Sport, 1938–45,”
International Journal of the History of Sport 24(3), 338–356, DOI: 10.1080/09523360601101329, via
http://www.ingentaconnect.com/, accessed October 15, 2009.
Olympic Review. 1994. “Taekwondo: An Olympic Sport for the Year 2000,” Olympic Review 323,
475–477, via http://www.la84foundation.org/OlympicInformationCenter/OlympicReview/
1994/ore323/ORE323o.pdf, accessed August 2, 2009.
Pacific Stars and Stripes. 1959. “Officer Practices Deadly Ballet,” March 20, 27, via http://www
.newspaperarchive.com, accessed October 15, 2009.
OKINAWA: KARATE
The Ryukyu Islands lie between Kyushu (the most southerly of Japan’s main islands) and Taiwan.
The largest of the islands in the archipelago is Okinawa. The name Okinawa means “a rope in
the ofﬁng.” The martial art of karate is one of the cultural products of Okinawa.
Until the 1920s, Okinawans generally described karate using the word todi. Todi means “Tang
Hand,” and alludes to the art’s roots in the martial arts of Southern China. (Scrolls brushed dur-
ing Tang Dynasty, 618–907 CE, contain some of the ﬁrst known literary references to Okinawa.
Thus, the name gives karate roots in Chinese antiquity.) Other roots of karate include indige-
nous Okinawan ﬁghting arts (both armed and unarmed), assorted boxing and grappling systems
from Southern China, Japanese martial arts, and various skills learned in interactions with East-
ern and Western pirates and traders. Despite the inﬂuence of Japanese martial arts, karate is
designed for civilian uses rather than military uses, and a signiﬁcant portion of its curriculum is
designed to combat aggressors who lack formal training in the ﬁghting arts.
Karate’s development appears to be a linear process only when viewed in hindsight. This
historical optical illusion has caused much confusion among martial arts practitioners who want
to see karate as an unchanged and ancient tradition with a long and storied past. While karate
does indeed have a storied past, it is not a static and unchanged (or unchanging) system. Instead,
Okinawa: Karate
205

the history of karate is one of dynamic change and adaptation. Inﬂuenced by Japanese and
Chinese systems, as well as ﬁghting styles from Southeast Asian countries, martial practitioners
on Okinawa took what they considered to be useful and adapted their practice accordingly. This
eclecticism, which is anathema to many modern “traditionalists” in the karate community, is
actually one of the distinctive features of karate development.
OKINAWAN DI
Indigenous Okinawan ﬁghting is simply known as di (hand). In its earliest usage, di probably
referred to self-defense skills informally passed from fathers to sons. As foreign styles began
to enter the Okinawan culture, the term began to be used to identify any nonsystematized
combative form used by Okinawans, thereby distinguishing local forms from foreign ﬁghting
styles. As time passed, the indigenous ﬁghting styles began to pick up techniques and ideas
from the foreign systems, and the term di was retained. This allowed foreign inﬂuences to be
absorbed into what was still considered to be an indigenous system. It has been suggested that
the early Ryukyuan ﬁghting was actually composed of ﬁve distinct styles: di, the original civil
combative discipline of Okinawa; martial forms from Fujian, in Southern China; torite, a sys-
tem of seizing the body to inﬂict various physical responses; tegumi, derived from Chinese
grappling; and buki’gwi, the use of weapons (McCarthy 1996). Other perspectives suggest
that di was intimately associated with weaponry and that the movements of di were directly
utilized in weapons training (Bishop 1996). Karate was also inﬂuenced by the Bubishi
(Chinese, Wu Pei Chih), a comprehensive text on warfare originally compiled in seven-
teenth-century China by Mao Yuan I and later hand copied by Okinawan karate students
(Cook 2008). The Bubishi closely resembled earlier Chinese martial texts, including Jixiao
Xinshu (New Book of Effective Discipline), a tome on military arts compiled by General Qi
Jiguang (1528–1588) that advocated the practical rather than aesthetic aspects of ﬁghting
(Henning 1995).
That such a thing as di did exist is suggested in the folk tale of the origin of the hidari gomon,
the triple-comma symbol formerly used as the heraldic crest of the Ryukyuan kings and con-
temporarily used as a symbol of Okinawa. This tale also shows the importance of nationalism
in relation to ﬁghting styles, because other versions of the meaning of the hidari gomon are
equally nationalistic but lack the martial ﬂavor. Martial folklore states that the hidari gomon
came about when Jana Ueekata, a retainer of King Sho Nei (1564–1620), refused to submit to
the governance of Okinawa by the Satsuma clan of Japan. He was ordered to the Satsuma seat
at Kagoshima, and sentenced to be boiled alive in a vat of oil. Jana’s last request was that, as a
warrior of Okinawa, he be allowed to practice di before his execution. This request was granted,
and afterward his two executioners approached him to carry out the sentence—but Jana
grabbed both of them and leaped into the vat of oil. The bodies of the three men ﬂoated to the
top of the oil and began to swirl around the vat, looking like three linked commas. The folk-
lore places the use of di to sometime around 1609, the year of the Satsuma invasion of Okinawa
(McCarthy 1996).
Other explanations exist about the origin of di. One explanation suggests that di began with
the distant ancestor of the Motobu clan, Prince Sho Koshin, the sixth son of the Okinawan king,
Sho Shitsu (ruled 1648–1669), and was then passed through eleven generations to Motobu
Choyu (died 1926), who instructed the last of the Okinawan kings, Sho Tai (1841–1901)
206
Okinawa: Karate
www.ebook3000.com

(Bishop 1996; 1999). Where Prince Sho Koshin learned the style is not given, and by the
seventeenth century, it is likely that any indigenous Okinawan ﬁghting style had already been
inﬂuenced by Japanese and Chinese systems.
JAPANESE INFLUENCES
According to Japanese accounts, the ﬁrst Japanese inﬂuence on indigenous Okinawan ﬁghting
styles occurred during the Heian Period (794–1185 CE). Fleeing enemies on the Japanese main-
land, Japanese calling themselves the descendants of royal houses, but more likely pirates, used
Okinawa as a staging base for military campaigns. Their martial systems were likely copied by the
Uchinachu (Okinawan people) and assimilated into any existing combative arts.
While trade with Japan allowed opportunities for peaceful exchanges of martial arts knowl-
edge, the next major wave of Japanese inﬂuence came with the Satsuma invasion of Okinawa in
1609. Although Okinawa had a subordinate relationship with China, the Shimazu clan of
Kagoshima (Satsuma) demanded the Okinawan king, Sho Nei, pay tribute to Satsuma. King Sho
Nei (reigned 1589–1612) ignored the demand, as he had several others, and this precipitated
the invasion and eventual subordination of his kingdom. This placed Okinawa under the dual
subordination of both Japan and China. It was during this time that the Satsuma conquerors for-
bade the carrying of weapons by Okinawans, and tradition states that these bans encouraged the
practice of di.
Certainly, the occupation gave the Okinawans more opportunities to learn Japanese mar-
tial methods and styles. For example, in the seventeenth century, Bizen-no-kami-Shigekata
(1602–1659), second-generation headmaster of the Jigen Ryu (a sword system) was ordered
by one of the Shimazu lords (presumably Shimazu Tadatsune, 1576–1638) to teach combat-
ive disciplines to the people of Satsuma as a matter of civil defense preparation. These tra-
ditions were retained in the Jigen Ryu Bo Odori (staff dances) and included training with
the staff (bo), stick (jo), sword (ken), spear (yari), sickle (kama), and boat oar (eiku)
(McCarthy 1996). In any event, during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, several
Okinawans went to Satsuma to train in the Jigen style. Reportedly, both Sakugawa Satunuku
(“Todi” Sakugawa, ca. 1733–ca. 1815) and his student Matsumura Sokon (ca. 1797–ca.
1892) traveled to Satsuma to train in Jigen Ryu kenjutsu, and both reportedly passed down
weapons forms that influenced the development of karate (Nagamine 2000; but see also:
Noble 1988).
CHINESE INFLUENCES
In 1349, Satto, the military chieftain of one of the kingdoms on Okinawa, entered into a
tributary relationship with China. This tributary relationship continued until 1879, when the
Japanese formally annexed Okinawa and sent its last king into exile.
Folk legend states that this relationship was followed by the arrival of the Thirty-Six Families
from China in 1392. These families, whose number is probably ﬁgurative rather than literal (in
Chinese, “36” often refers to a large number rather than to a speciﬁc number) were said to have
arrived in Okinawa via Fuzhou and to have settled around Kume village (Kuninda, now part of
Naha). Continuing the tradition, the arts brought to Okinawa by these Ming envoys were said
to include Chinese martial arts.
Okinawa: Karate
207

Because the Okinawans had been trading with the Chinese before the arrival of the Thirty-
Six Families in 1392, it is probable that combative methods had already been exchanged
between the two cultures, if only in ﬁghts on the docks or during piratical raids. Nonetheless,
the development of formal relations between the two kingdoms and the subsequent establish-
ment of a Ryukyuan trade mission in Fuzhou facilitated closer cultural exchange of all kinds
(Ts’ao 1982).
The text known as the Oshima Writings reports that in 1762, the Chinese martial artist
known as Kusanku arrived in Okinawa with a group of his followers. Tradition states that
Sakugawa Todi was a student of Kusanku. Other notable Chinese instructors included the
military attaché Anson, who inﬂuenced the development of Zhao Lingliu (Shorei Ryu) through
his teaching of various Okinawan students in both the Shuri and Naha regions of Okinawa.
Matsumura Sokon (1809–1899) of Shuri studied what was said to be a form of Shaolin boxing
with the attaché Iwah. Matsumura was also a student of Sakugawa Satunuku.
That Sakugawa received the name Todi (Tang Hand) suggests that by the eighteenth
century, indigenous Okinawan di had been absorbed into (or at least obscured by) Southern
Chinese ﬁghting methods. Sakugawa, however, did not limit his studies to one style of ﬁght-
ing. He is said to have studied martial arts in Fuzhou, Beijing, and Satsuma. It was this eclec-
tic synthesis of styles that he passed to his student, Matsumura Sokon. Matsumura also
studied widely, training in swordsmanship in Japan, and he used this knowledge to create
what eventually became known as Shuri di, after its practice in and around the Ryukyuan
capital of Shuri.
KARATE DEVELOPS
Following the death of Matsumura, his students made further changes to the style. For exam-
ple, one of these students, Itosu Anko (also known as Itosu Yasutsune, 1831–1915) created the
ﬁve Pinan kata (forms) as a means of standardizing instruction and increasing the popularity
of karate. In 1901, Itosu introduced karate instruction into an Okinawan high school. These
efforts eventually led to karate being implemented as a part of the physical education curricu-
lum in schools throughout Okinawa. Asato Anko (also known as Asato Yasutsune,
1827–1906) was another prominent student of Matsumura. Asato and Itosu were among the
instructors of Funakoshi Gichin (1868–1957), who in turn was one of the pioneers of karate
in Japan.
In 1867, Higashionna Kanryo (1853–1915) traveled to Fuzhou, China, ostensibly to study
Chinese culture and trade, but actually to learn Chinese ﬁghting arts. Higashionna was even-
tually introduced to Xie Zhongxiang, also known as Ryu Ryu Ko (Older Brother Ko). Xie was
a martial arts instructor in the Fuzhou area. Although the parent system that Higashionna
learned from Xie Zhongxiang is unknown, it was apparently a combination of White Crane
style, Tiger boxing, and Monk Fist boxing (McCarthy 1996). It is possible that Higashionna was
initially inﬂuenced by the martial arts of the Kojo family, who maintained a dojo in Fuzhou
(Bishop 1999). Apparently, Higashionna never spoke about this system’s history and referred to
the style only as go no kempo ju no kempo (hard ﬁst method/soft ﬁst method). At any rate, it was
a Southern Chinese short-ﬁst system, and on returning to Okinawa, Higashionna taught these
208
Okinawa: Karate
www.ebook3000.com

methods to other Okinawans. His students included Kyoda Juhatsu (1887–1968), founder of
the To On Ryu; Miyagi Chojun (1888–1953), founder of the Goju Ryu; and Mabuni Kenwa
(1889–1952), who combined the Naha di of Higashionna with the Shuri di of Itosu Anko to
create the Shito Ryu.
All these men were eclectic in their practice of karate. Miyagi, for instance, began training
with Higashionna in 1902 and continued with Higashionna until the latter’s death. After
Higashionna died, Miyagi began changing his methods, adding and developing the junbi undo
(preliminary exercises) and creating the kata Tensho. Miyagi also took two trips to China to
research the origins of Naha di. He gained considerable information about the origin of Naha di
during these trips and later stated that the art taught by Higashionna was developed in 1828
(Higaonna 1996). The reason for his insistence of this date is unknown, but it is traditional that
when an existing ﬁghting style is changed in some way, a new style is formed by adoption of the
change. Thus, the date could represent when changes in a previous style were adopted to create
a new style.
Miyagi was also one of the founding members of the Okinawan Todi Research Club,
established in Naha in 1924. This organization fostered the expansion and development of karate,
especially into Japan, and exerted considerable inﬂuence on the future direction of karate on
Okinawa. Before the establishment of this group, karate was commonly known in Okinawa as bu
(martial arts). After its introduction to Japan in the early 1920s, karate became known as a do
(way), to conform to contemporary Japanese practice (e.g., judo rather than jujutsu, kendo rather
than gekken). To further assimilate karate in to Japanese culture, practitioners began adopting the
training uniforms (dogi) and belt ranking system (obi) used in judo. In Okinawa, karate had pre-
viously been practiced using the genkoki (village training hall) model (Sandoval 2008). In the old
model, no formal rank was needed (or awarded), and no recognizable uniform was worn. Classes
were taught in an informal manner, and students were assigned individual forms (tokuigata)
according to the discretion of the instructor. Such individualism was alien to the way that the
Japanese were teaching martial arts in their schools and police stations during the 1920s. Instead,
early twentieth-century Japanese martial arts were structured around the ryuha system propagated
by the Dai Nippon Butokukai (Greater Japan Martial Virtue Society). The ryuha system required
an historical lineage, a methodological transmission, and an ofﬁcially recognized pedagogical
style. The instructors of the Okinawan Todi Research Society realized that if karate was to be rec-
ognized by the Butokukai as a true martial art, then it would have to adopt certain modiﬁcations.
Although these changes were not uniformly adopted throughout the Okinawan karate commu-
nity, they formed the basis of what is today popularly known as karate.
In short, each generation of karate practitioners has inﬂuenced the form or practice of karate
in some way. Changes have been planned and deliberate as well as passively inﬂuenced by cul-
tural expansion, the communicative and intellectual abilities of various instructors, and stu-
dents’ understanding and comprehension of the material that is presented to them. Itosu Ankoh
and Miyagi Chojun, two of the most innovative instructors in Okinawan karate, originally
taught their students according to the students’ abilities to learn, creating situations where the
same form or technique was taught and learned in different ways. It is highly probable that other
karate instructors taught in the same manner. Arguments about the “correct” method were
rendered irrelevant in such situations, because each method was correct according to the
Okinawa: Karate
209

circumstance and how it was taught. Thus, far from being a static paradigm, the history of karate
is one of innovation and change.
—Ron Mottern
See also: China: Boxing Styles; China: Martial Arts; China: Martial Arts in 
Taiwan; China: Martial Theories; China: Shaolin Temple Legends (in this volume); 
Belief Systems: Japanese Budo, Bugei, and Bujutsu; Belief Systems: Japanese 
Martial Arts and Religion before 1868; Political Uses of the Martial Arts; and 
Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Bishop, Mark. 1996. Zen Kobudo: Mysteries of Okinawan Weaponry and Te. Rutland, VT: Tuttle.
Bishop, Mark. 1997. “Okinawan Kobudo Weaponry: Hidden Methods, Ancient Myths,” Bugeisha:
Traditional Martial Artist 4, 46–49.
Bishop, Mark. 1999. Okinawan Karate: Teachers, Styles and Secret Techniques. Boston: Tuttle.
Cook, Harry. 2008. “The Bubishi,” http://www.dragon-tsunami.org/Dtimes/Pages/article17.htm,
accessed November 13, 2008.
Estrada, Ernest. 1985. “Eizo Shimabuku Interview,” http://www.okinawankarateclub.com/
shorinryu/Shimabukuro_interview.htm, accessed July 14, 2008.
Funakoshi Gichin. 1981. Karate-do Kyohan. New York: Kodansha.
Funakoshi Gichin. 1982. Karate-do: My Way of Life. New York: Kodansha.
Henning, Stanley. 2006. “General Qi Jiguang’s Approach to Martial Arts Training,” http://seinenkai
.com/articles/henning/qijiguang.pdf, accessed November 13, 2008.
Higaonna, Morio. 1996. The History of Karate: Okinawan Goju Ryu. Westlake Village, CA: Dragon.
International Budo Institute. 2005. “Anko Azato,” http://i-budo.org/content/view/176/127/, accessed
August 11, 2008.
Kerr, George H., with contributions from Mitsugu Sakihara. 2000. Okinawa, the History of an Island
People. North Clarendon, VT: Tuttle Publishing.
Kim, Richard. 1982. The Weaponless Warriors: An Informal History of Okinawan Karate. Burbank,
CA: Ohara.
Kise Fusei. 2003. The Spirit of Okinawan Karate. Tilton, NH: Sant Bani.
Mattson, George. E. 1963. The Way of Karate. Rutland, VT: Tuttle.
McCarthy, Patrick. 1996. Bubishi: The Bible of Karate. Rutland, VT: Tuttle.
McCarthy, Patrick. 2008. “The Original Fighting Arts Practiced during Okinawa’s Old Ryukyuan
Kingdom Period,” http://www.koryu-uchinada.com/original_five_fighting_arts.htm, accessed
November 10, 2008.
Mottern, Ron. 2001. “Karate: Okinawan,” in Martial Arts of the World: An Encyclopedia, edited by
Thomas A. Green, 240–249. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Mottern, Ron. 2001. “Kobudo,” in Martial Arts of the World: An Encyclopedia, edited by Thomas A.
Green, 286–291. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Nagamine Shosin. 1991. The Essence of Okinawan Karate-Do: Shorin-Ryu. Rutland, VT: Tuttle.
Nagamine Shosin. 2000. Tales of Okinawa’s Great Masters, translated by Patrick McCarthy. North
Clarendon, VT: Tuttle.
Noble, Graham, with Ian McLaren and Prof. N. Karasawa. 1988. “Masters of the Shorin-ryu, Part
One,” Fighting Arts International 50 (9:2), 24–28, via http://seinenkai.com/articles/noble/noble-
shorin1.html, accessed October 15, 2009.
Okinawa Prefectural Government. 2003. “Karate and Martial Arts with Weaponry,” http://www
.wonder-okinawa.jp/023/eng/003/index.html, accessed July 11, 2008.
Sandoval, Anthony. 2008. “Genko Ki,” http://www.sandovalkaratekobudofederation.com/
Matsumura.html, accessed November 10, 2008.
210
Okinawa: Karate
www.ebook3000.com

Sanguinetti, Franco. 1997. “The Kobudo Legacy of Matayoshi Shinpo,” Bugeisha: Traditional Martial
Artist 4, 19–23.
Toguchi Seikichi. 1976. Okinawan Goju-ryu: Fundamentals of Shorei-kan Karate. Burbank, CA: Ohara.
Toguchi Seikichi. 1993. Essence of Karate Textbook No. 1: Okinawan Karate-do Goju-ryu Shorei-kan.
British Columbia: Shorei-kan Canada Karate Association.
Ts’ao Yung-Ho. 1982. “Pepper Trade in East Asia,” T’oung Pao, Second Series, 68(4/5), 221–247, DOI:
10.1163/156853282X00028, via http://www.ingentaconnect.com/, accessed October 16, 2009.
Okinawa: Karate
211

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

Europe
Europe is the westernmost portion of the Eurasian landmass. In the east, Europe starts at the Ural
Mountains. In the south, it borders the Caspian Sea. Its western and northern limits are established
by the Mediterranean, Atlantic, and Arctic Oceans. Iceland is considered part of Europe. Russia is
the largest of the European countries, while Vatican City is the smallest. However, the international
inﬂuence of Vatican City, headquarters of the Roman Catholic Church, is hardly insigniﬁcant.
Europe is home to some of the world’s ﬁrst cities, and during antiquity, Mediterranean Europe
(in particular, Greece and Rome) played key roles in the development of world culture. From the
sixteenth century to the twentieth, Atlantic European countries such as Spain, Portugal, Nether-
lands, France, and Britain established extensive colonies worldwide, while Russia established
colonies in Central Asia, Siberia, and Alaska. Via these colonial activities, European culture came
to dominate the Americas, Australia, New Zealand, parts of South Africa, and Siberia.
Philosophically, the secular belief system called Reason (or science) took root in Europe dur-
ing the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries and subsequently spread throughout the world.
Communism is another important belief system having roots in Europe.
Between the seventeenth and nineteenth centuries, traditional European martial arts were
superseded by combative sports, meaning physical activities in which results are measured by
instruments such as a stopwatch, reported in box scores, sponsored by nationalists, and sold as
commodities. However, during the late twentieth century, enthusiasts began making a conscious
effort to revive some of the late medieval and Renaissance martial arts, which in many instances
meant recreating those arts from books.
AMAZONS AND GLADIATRICES
According to Greek mythology, the Amazons were a ﬁerce tribe of warrior women, inhabiting
the regions of Asia Minor (the Anatolian portions of modern Turkey), the Kazakh steppes
(modern-day southern Russia), and the coast of North Africa (Davis-Kimball 2002, 120). They
worshiped Artemis, the virgin goddess of the hunt, and Ares, the god of war. The Amazons were
an all-female society who perpetuated their existence by mating occasionally with males from
neighboring regions and keeping any female offspring; the male offspring were either sent back
to live with their fathers, enslaved, or slain.
Herodotus (ca. 484 BCE–ca. 425 BCE) tells us that the term Amazon is two Greek words
combined to mean “without a breast” (a = without; mazos = breast), stemming from the belief that
the Amazons cut off their right breasts to make it easier to shoot a bow (Davis-Kimball 2002, 118).

214
Amazons and Gladiatrices
This belief, however, is truly fantasy. Artwork from antiquity displays Amazons with complete bod-
ies, and one only needs to observe modern female archers to see that removing a breast is not nec-
essary to be successful at shooting a bow. Modern linguists suggest that the term Amazon is actually
of Proto-Indo-European origin, with the meaning “no-husband one” (Davis-Kimball 2002, 118).
In addition to the bow, Amazons were believed to wield sword and ax, carry crescent-shaped
shields, and do all of this from horseback. They were supposedly ﬁerce warriors. Homer tells us
in the Iliad (eighth century BCE) that they were “the equal of men,” ﬁghting on the side of the
Trojans, where ultimately, the Amazonian queen Penthesilea was slain by Achilles.
Representations of the Amazons are numerous in Greek and Roman art. Often, Amazons are
shown ﬁghting Greek men in what is called an Amazonomachy. One of the most famous reliefs
depicting Amazons once adorned parts of the Parthenon in Athens, Greece, but is now housed
in the British Museum. In art, Amazons often are depicted wearing a short dress, called a chiton,
with one breast bared (Scanlon 2002, 107).
The Hellenic historian Herodotus tells us that a tribe of warrior women, roaming the steppes
of what would today be southwestern Russia, were called “mankillers” by the neighboring
Scythians, and were believed to be descendants of the Amazons (Zoll 2002, 39).
The ninth labor of Herakles (Latin: Hercules) involved the Amazons. Herakles had to
retrieve the girdle of Hippolyte, the Queen of the Amazons, who had originally received it from
Ares (Latin: Mars), the god of war. The legend has Herakles killing numerous Amazons, and
even the queen herself, to fulﬁll his ninth labor. In retaliation, the Amazons attacked Athens
but were ultimately defeated.
Despite the many references to Amazons in Greek and Roman art and literature, scholars used
to consider them mythological. In other words, Amazons were simply an ideological construct of
an inverted view of Greek’s male-dominated society (Zoll 2002, 40). However, recent archaeolog-
ical research in Pokrovka, on the Kazakh steppes, has unearthed numerous graves of ancient
females buried with artifacts such as swords, daggers, arrowheads, and quivers. The skeletons of the
women even indicate that the deceased were involved in combat—arrowheads were found embed-
ded into bone, and evidence for serious skull fractures from blunt trauma has been discovered
(Davis-Kimball 1997, 44–48). This evidence suggests that women were, indeed, warriors, but they
were not part of a female-only society, as male graves were also found in the cemetery.
GLADIATRICES
Not all Roman gladiators were male. Women also fought as gladiators in antiquity (Murray
2003). Historical evidence, from ancient writings and epigrams to governmental edicts and
physical artifacts, supports the existence of female gladiators.
The Roman emperors Nero (37–68 CE) and Domitian (51–96 CE) sponsored gladiatorial
games that featured female combatants. Suetonius (ca. 69 CE–after 130 CE) (4.1) recorded at least
one occasion when female gladiators fought by torchlight, which indicates that they may have
been the main attraction (Zoll 2002, 27). This adds to the notion that female gladiators were ﬁerce
and respected ﬁghters, not merely performing for the sexual titillation of the crowd. The idea of a
woman ﬁghting in the arena was controversial, and according to Dio Cassius (ca. 163–after 229
CE) (67.8.2), women sometimes participated with dwarfs, indicating that the event probably was
more for entertainment than legitimate competition, even though some scholars believe that they
www.ebook3000.com

were not directly paired in competition (Brunet 2004). Regardless of whether the women fought
in direct combat with dwarfs, we do know that they fought in the arena.
It was not just slaves or women of low social standing who appeared in the arena; Tacitus
(ca. 66–ca. 117) (15.32) wrote that women of the higher social standings also participated in the
gladiatorial games. The rationale was simple: these women wanted the excitement and notori-
ety that the games could provide, as they were already wealthy and in no need of money. The
number of women of high social standing willing to ﬁght in the arena was so great that laws were
created to prevent them from disgracing themselves by appearing in the arena (Zoll 2002, 103).
Several governmental edicts were passed that limited or even barred women from partici-
pating as combatants in the arena. A Roman Senate decree (senatus consultum) dating from
11 CE forbade any freeborn woman who had not achieved the age of twenty from participat-
ing in events on the stage or in the arena (note that freeborn males under twenty-ﬁve were
forbidden to participate as well). In 19 CE, a senatus consultum of the town of Larinum
(modern Larino) increased the penalties to the opprobrium of infamia (partial loss of civil
rights) to any person, man or woman, of high social rank (i.e., equestrian or senatorial rank)
who took part in events on the stage or who were combatants in the arena (Levick 1983;
Vesley 1998). In 200 CE, the emperor Septimius Severus (145–211 CE) banned all women
from competing in the arena.
While members of Roman high society found female gladiators publicly unacceptable, the
Roman mob of the arena found them to be highly entertaining. Male gladiators were highly
praised for their athleticism; yet, paradoxically, they were considered the lowest members of
society. The Romans could accept a man of high social status disgracing his family by ﬁghting in
the arena, but it was entirely unacceptable for a woman of the upper classes to disgrace herself.
Juvenal (early second century CE) (Satire 6.246–267) provides one of the most condemning
statements concerning female gladiators: “How can a woman be decent sticking her head in a
helmet, denying the sex she was born with?”
The existence of female gladiators is supported not only by written references from the
ancient world but also by direct archaeological evidence. Three speciﬁc archaeological items
exist: an inscribed shard of pottery from Leicester (in the English Midlands); an inscription from
the port of Ostia (outside Rome), and a marble relief picturing two female gladiators that was
found in Halicarnassus (Bodrum, in present-day Turkey) (Murray 2003).
The shard from Leicester is made of red pottery. On it are inscribed the following words:
VERECVNDA LVDIA LVCIVS GLADIATOR. Jackson (2000, 18) has translated the inscrip-
tion as follows: “Verecunda the dancer (or woman gladiator), Lucius the gladiator.” The pottery
may have been used as a necklace, but we have no way of knowing for sure. However, one can
speculate that Verecunda may have been a contemporary of Lucius, ﬁghting in the same troupe
as he did, but as a female gladiator.
Vesley (1998, 91) believes the inscription at Ostia is from a local magistrate and how he
claims to have been the ﬁrst person to have had women ﬁght in the arena. The inscription dates
from the third century CE, which would mean that Septimius Severus’s ban of 200 CE was not
completely successful. Coleman (2000, 498) describes how the diction of the inscription is
indicative that these combatants were “women” (mulieres), and not “ladies” (feminae). Because
there is no evident parody, Coleman (2000, 498) suggests that these women were participants in
a legitimate sporting event, and not simply some sideshow.
Amazons and Gladiatrices
215

The marble relief from Halicarnassus is the final, and most compelling, direct piece of
physical evidence for the existence of female gladiators (Coleman 2000; Ewigleben 2000).
It has been dated to the early second century CE, and it is currently on display in the British
Museum (Coleman 2000). Pictured on the marble relief are two female combatants; each is
clothed and equipped as a provocator, a gladiator wearing a loincloth (subligaculum), greaves,
and an arm protector (manica) on the sword-wielding arm. The women both hold a short
sword and a shield, but neither wears a shirt or a helmet. The female combatants are facing
one another, with their stage names, Amazon and Achillia, inscribed in Greek beneath
them. Their names indicate their sex as female (Zoll 2002, 36). The wording on the relief
indicates that the women fought to a draw and were discharged from the arena to fight
another day.
Archaeologists made a stunning discovery in 1996, when ancient artifacts and the remains
of a woman from the ﬁrst century CE were unearthed in London, England. Known as the Great
Dover Street grave, the burial site held a fascinating array of physical evidence that has led some
scholars to speculate that the occupant had been a female gladiator (Murray 2003).
Although the body of the Great Dover Street Woman had been cremated, forensic examin-
ers were able to verify the remains were those of a young, adult female. Alongside the remains,
archaeologists found several pieces of pottery in the grave that offered clues about the occupant.
There was an oil lamp that clearly portrayed a fallen gladiator and another depicting Anubis, the
Egyptian god of the dead. To the ancient Romans, Anubis was the equivalent of the warring
Roman god Mercury, a well-known symbol of Roman gladiatorial combat. These embellished
pottery objects seemed to indicate a strong interest in gladiatorial games.
Adding to speculation that the grave’s occupant had been a female gladiator were a number
of burnt pine cones from the stone pine, a tree known to grow only in the vicinity of a nearby
ancient Roman London amphitheater. What makes this ﬁnd so interesting is that the ancients
were known to burn this speciﬁc type of pine cone around the arena to mask unpleasant smells.
It was obvious the woman in the grave had been given an elaborate farewell beﬁtting a
respected member of society. Organic remains of an expensive and exotic funeral feast were evi-
dent, as well as some bits of gold, iron, and glass. Yet, despite the many indications of wealth and
respectability, the grave site was located outside the cemetery walls, indicating that the deceased
had been a societal outcast.
The contrast of the elaborate burial site and the location of the grave in an area for social
outcasts led Museum of London scholars to conclude that the woman was a female gladiator. Other
experts speculate that she was simply a fan of gladiatorial ﬁghting, or perhaps a devotee of a popular
Egyptian cult that worshiped Isis, a close associate of Anubis. Of course, it is quite possible the
Great Dover Street Woman could have been all or none of the above. The evidence found in the
grave does not fully support any single theory, leaving the question of her true occupation a
mystery. What is not a mystery, however, is the history of female gladiators. Women did ﬁght—and
likely die—in the ancient Roman arena, and the evidence for that is incontrovertible.
—Steven Ross Murray
See also: Central Asian Archery; Fighting Arts of the Hellenic, Hellenistic, 
and Roman Eras (in this volume); Belief Systems: Introduction; and 
Women in the Chinese Martial Arts (in Volume II).
216
Amazons and Gladiatrices
www.ebook3000.com

REFERENCES
Brunet, Stephen. 2004. “Female and Dwarf Gladiators,” Mouseion 4, 145–170.
Coleman, Kathleen. 2000. “Missio at Halicarnassus,” Harvard Studies in Classical Philology 100, 487–500,
via http://www.jstor.org/stable/3185234, accessed October 16, 2009.
Davis-Kimball, Jeannine. 1997. “Warrior Women of Eurasia,” Archaeology 50(1), January/February,
44–48, via http://www.archaeology.org/9701/abstracts/sarmatians.html, accessed October 16, 2009.
Davis-Kimball, Jeannine. 2002. Warrior Women: An Archaeologist’s Search for History’s Hidden Heroines.
New York: Warner Books.
Dio Cassius. 2000. Roman History, translated by Earnest Cary. Cambridge, MA: Loeb Classical Library
Harvard University Press.
Ewigleben, Cornelia. 2000. “‘What These Women Love Is the Sword’: The Performers and Their
Audiences,” in The Power of Spectacle in Ancient Rome: Gladiators and Caesars, edited by Ekhart
Köhne and Cornelia Ewigleben, 125–139. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Jackson, Ralph. 2000. “Gladiators in Roman Britain,” British Museum Magazine 38, 16–21.
Levick, Barbara. 1983. “The Senatus Consultum from Larinum,” Journal of Roman Studies 73, 97–115,
via http://www.jstor.org/stable/300074, accessed October 16, 2009.
Murray, Stephen Ross. 2003. “Female Gladiators of the Ancient Roman World,” Journal of Combative
Sport, http://ejmas.com/jcs/jcsart_murray_0703.htm, accessed November 21, 2008.
Pringle, Heather. 2001. “Gladiatrix,” Discover 22(12), 48–55, http://discovermagazine.com/2001/dec/
featglad, accessed October 16, 2009.
Scanlon, Thomas. 2002. Eros and Greek Athletics. New York: Oxford University Press.
Suetonius. 1957. The Twelve Caesars, translated by Robert Graves. Middlesex, UK: Penguin Books, Ltd.
Tacitus. 1989. The Annals of Imperial Rome, translated by Michael Grant. London: Penguin Classics.
Vesley, Mark. 1998. “Gladiatorial Training for Girls in the Collegia Iuvenum of the Roman Empire,”
Echos du Monde Classique 62(17), 85–93.
Zoll, Amy. 2002. Gladiatrix: The True Story of History’s Unknown Woman Warrior. New York: Berkley
Publishing Group.
CANNE DE COMBAT
The term canne de combat describes French staff fencing. Cannes (canes or sticks) and bâtons
(staffs) are among the oldest (and most useful) human implements. They are so ubiquitous,
however, that they are often not mentioned in books, except in passing: the old man had his
cane, the shepherd had his staff, and the policeman had his baton. As a distinct martial art, stick
and cane ﬁghting was practiced in France from medieval times until about World War I
(1914–1918). After World War I, stick and cane ﬁghting went into rapid decline in France, but
since the 1980s it has made a minor comeback under the aegis of the Fédération Française de
Savate et Boxe Française (French Federation of Savate and French Boxing).
PRECURSORS
European court records and legal edicts contain references to staff ﬁghting long before regular
styles began to be described in books. For instance, in August 1215, Philippe II Auguste, King of
France (1165–1223), announced to Blanche, Countess of Champagne (ca. 1181–1229), “that
he decided that in the future, champions would not be allowed to ﬁght with staffs whose lengths
exceeded 3 feet” (Desmaze 1867, 41). The length of the French royal foot varied over time, but
it was usually about 13 English inches. Thus, the stick was about a meter in length.
Canne de Combat
217

The ﬁrst European text in which staff fencing is known to have been mentioned was written
in 1389. The author was a fourteenth-century German priest named Hanko Döbringer. In this
text, Döbringer, who was in the Liechtenauer tradition, brieﬂy recommended that staff and
sword fencing be taught together. Staff ﬁghting was mentioned again in a book on the art of com-
bat published in Italy in 1410. The author was Fiore Dei Liberi, and the book was Flos
Duellatorum (Flower of Battle). It was mentioned next in Gladiatora, written by an anonymous
writer in 1425, and then, in 1459, in Manuscrit d’Ambras, a work attributed to Hans Talhoffer.
By the sixteenth century, the training for French masters-at-arms included staff fencing.
A dozen pages of the book Noble Science, written in French and published in Antwerp in
1538, were devoted to the staff, and until 1644, the aspiring master-at-arms had to have expe-
rience with the sword, the sword and the dagger, the halberd, and the two-ended staff
(Daressy 1888). During the late seventeenth century, the staff fell into disuse, and the only
skills demanded of would-be masters-at-arms were the assaut (soft combat) with the foil,
sword, and dagger.
Although formal societies and guilds of masters-at-arms were forbidden in 1791, the French
stick and staff ﬁghting tradition was perpetuated in fairs and places of entertainment. For exam-
ple, near the old city walls surrounding Paris, in 1791, “on Sundays and Thursdays, the butch-
ers, the cattle buyers, the residents of faubourgs [areas outside the city walls], staff fencers,
barﬂies, and owners of well-trained dogs” all assembled at the “combat wall” (Descombes 1856).
In the early nineteenth century, staff ﬁghting made a comeback, both in Paris and the provinces,
and staff fencers from Caen, Bordeaux, and Lille were particularly renowned.
LES COMPAGNONS AND THEIR CANNES
The nineteenth-century revival was owed to a speciﬁc group of people. Members of les Com-
pagnons (guilds of craftsmen; examples include stonecutters, locksmiths, and carpenters, to name
a few) traveled around the country, increasing their knowledge and skills. The symbols of their
guilds were carved into the cannes that members carried, thus showing immediately to which
guild the owner belonged, and reminding each of them of their commitment to their particular
trade. Apprentices even recognized the intentions of the owner of the canne by how he held it—
they could recognize suspicion, trust, contempt, provocation, or commitment. Some guilds paid
a master-at-arms or discharged soldier of the Empire to teach members how to handle the canne,
and in the hands of Compagnons, the canne remained a formidable weapon. Agricol Perdiguier
(1805–1875) wrote in his memoirs that in these times, “Members of each guild learned how to
knock out their man in short order: They knew how to handle staff and fought many times with
that weapon” (Perdiguier 1853, 132).
After 1817, masters-at-arms issued diplomas speciﬁc to canne and staff fencing, and by 1850,
the art of canne ﬁghting was taught in renowned clubs. One of these clubs was owned by Hubert
Lecour (1820–1871). On Friday, March 27, 1861, in its section on “Fencing and the Canne,” Le
Sport stated that Lecour excelled in his discipline because he “could strike 80 blows with the
canne in a quarter of a minute, which means 5 1/3 blows per second” (author’s translation).
During the mid-century, canne fencing began acquiring a bad reputation, as did savate
ﬁghting, with which it was often associated. This was due in part to serialized novels that fea-
tured canne and savate ﬁghts between men from seedy areas of Paris. Examples include
218
Canne de Combat
www.ebook3000.com

Eugène Sue’s (1804–1857) The Mysteries of Paris, which was published during 1842 and 1843,
and Alexandre Dumas’s (1802–1870) The Mohicans of Paris, which was published between
1854 and 1859.
EARLY TRAINING MANUALS
Louis Leboucher (1807–1866) was among the ﬁrst (and most successful) teachers of formal meth-
ods of canne and staff fencing. Leboucher also taught savate and English boxing, and in 1844 he
wrote a 25-lesson method for self-defense and gymnastics. In his opinion, his method served as
good training for young men who would go on to learn saber fencing in the military.
In 1852, A Practical Theory on the Art of Savate Fighting, called Chausson, and French Dexterity
in the Use of the Canne was published. The author was a student of Michel alias “Pisseux,” one of
the most famous savate masters at that time.
In 1856, Larribeau showed a more technical method in his A New Theory of the Art of Canne
Fencing. A former Navy seaman, Larribeau taught fencing and savate. His method differed from
others, in that the student was put in front of a dummy to practice his moves.
In 1862, Eugène Humé and J. Renkin of Brussels published their Treatise and Theory of Royal
Canne, in an attempt to give this art an important role in gymnastic programs. Due to changes in
gymnastics and the needs of physical education for young Frenchmen, canne and staff fencing
exercises were integrated into the physical exercise programs. Sample texts include The Manual
for Eclectic Gymnastics for All Ages by Henry Jarry de Bouffémont (1869).
By 1875, the French army had published its own Teachers’ Manual for Gymnastics and Fencing.
Both canne and staff fencing were taught in the Joinville Military School, and in January 1880,
a law was passed which made the teaching of gymnastics and canne and staff fencing obligatory
in all French schools.
AN ACADEMIC ART OF SELF-DEFENSE
By the late nineteenth century, canne ﬁghting was primarily taught in savate/French Boxing clubs.
Among the most famous of these clubs was one owned by Joseph Charlemont (1839–1914).
Charlemont taught cannes and their use mainly for educational and athletic purposes, and only sec-
ondarily as weapons. Charlemont described the techniques for canne ﬁghting in his book called The
Art of French Boxing and Canne Fencing (1899). Cannes were presented at the Olympic Games held
in Paris in 1900, but by the 1924 Games, they were used only in gymnastic exercises because it was
decided they were too dangerous and their use in combat had no sporting or educational value.
This change in attitude was because at the beginning of the twentieth century, social and
political unrest had engendered an increase in the number of both clubs and documents promot-
ing the canne as a viable weapon of self-defense against apaches, as the French called contempo-
rary hooligans. Many books and newspaper articles considered the three disciplines of canne
fencing, French Boxing, and jiujitsu as an ensemble. Emile André (1871–1933), Georges Dubois
(died 1934), and Jean-Joseph Renaud (1873–1953), all three fencers, each wrote books on street
self-defense in which they recommended a combination of canne ﬁghting, French Boxing,
wrestling, and jiujitsu. Self-defense using an umbrella was also practiced.
Around 1898, Pierre Vigny (1869–), a former soldier in the Swiss Army who taught
Charlemont’s style of savate/French Boxing in Geneva, founded a unique method of self defense
Canne de Combat
219

using both cannes and umbrellas. Vigny taught this method in England between 1900 and 1911,
before returning to Geneva in 1912.
Following World War I (1914–1918), the canne was no longer a fashion accessory, street
safety had improved, and many of the canne-fencing military teachers had been wounded or
killed during the war. In 1923, Superintendent H. G. Lang (dates unknown), a British ofﬁcer of
the Indian Police, wrote a book entitled The Walking Stick Method of Self Defence, which drew
largely from the Vigny system. During the 1940s, Lang’s book formed the basis of self-defense
training of tens of thousands of Jews living in Palestine. Elsewhere, however, the canne was
almost totally forgotten. Mention of it was to be found only in old-fashioned gymnastics and
physical education manuals and in some encyclopedias.
RENAISSANCE FOR CANNE DE COMBAT
The canne made its reappearance after World War II, when it was once more taught in savate
clubs. For instance, Roger Lafond (1913–) created a self-defense method called “combat medley”
in which defense techniques were borrowed from fencing, karate, savate, and canne fencing. For
reasons of efﬁciency and rapidity, Lafond’s moves were not totally developed. That is, they did not
involve a full circular rotation of the stick preceding each strike; instead, they started with a thrust-
ing forearm and a rotation of the wrist. Later, Maurice Sarry (1935–1994) published these meth-
ods. Because Sarry’s focus was on competition, he eliminated the most dangerous blows (coup de
bout, coup de pointe, revers). Attack moves done with the arm had to be completely executed, and
the arm holding the canne had to pass behind the axis of the spinal column. The ﬁrst drafts of the
technical and referee regulations applied during competitions deﬁned the touch zones (low
zone: between the ankle and the knee; middle zone: chest; high zone: sides and top of the head).
All the touches in the low zone had to be made on a bent knee. The changes included many moves
and spectacular jumps, but they were executed with standard techniques (coup latéral, enlevé, brisé).
There were no competitions for staff fencing, only demonstration assauts that included methods
for wielding two cannes at once.
By the 1970s, there was growing interest in competition in distinctively European martial
arts. Thus, in 1980, the ﬁrst French Championship for canne de combat took place in Paris, and
in 2004 the ﬁrst World Championship took place on Reunion, a country in the Indian Ocean.
In 2006, Alsace, France, hosted the ﬁrst European Championship.
Since 1983, canne and staff fencing have been taught and practiced by a fairly independent
committee in the Savate/French Boxing Federation. In 2008, the Federation had about 2,500
members. Aspects of Pierre Vigny’s canne self-defense curriculum have been revived within the
modern practices of Bartitsu and Defense dans la Rue, as well as preserved within the Israeli mar-
tial art of Kapap. Just recently, canne–chausson combat, a mix of canne fencing techniques and
savate kicking, has been added to the Savate/French Boxing Federation’s list of disciplines.
—Jean-François Loudcher and Luc Cerruti
See also: Canary Islands Stick Fighting and Wrestling; Zulu Stick Fighting; 
Japan: Jodo; English Pugilism; Fighting Arts of the Later Middle 
Ages; Fighting Arts of the Renaissance; Savate, Chausson, and 
French Boxing; Arnis (in this volume); Bartitsu; and Kapap 
and Krav Maga (in Volume II).
220
Canne de Combat
www.ebook3000.com

REFERENCES
Cerruti, Luc. “La Savate, la Canne, et le Bâton illustrés [Illustrated Savate, Canne, and Stick],”
http://monsite.wanadoo.fr/savate-canne-baton, accessed October 17, 2008.
Charlemont, Joseph. 1899. L’art de la boxe française et de la canne [The Art of French Boxing and
Canne]. Paris.
Daressy, Henry. 1888. Archive des Maîtres d’Armes [Files of Fencing Masters]. Paris: Maison Quantin.
Descombes, Charles-Maurice. 1856. Histoire anecdotique du théâtre et de la literature [Anecdotal History
of Theatre and Literature]. Paris: H. Plon.
Desmaze, Charles. 1867. Trésor judiciaire de la France. Curiosités des Anciennes Justices d’après leurs Registres
[Legal Treasury of France: Curiosities of Ancient Justice according to the Registers]. Paris: H. Plon.
Gross, Noah. 2004. “The Walking Stick in Mandatory Palestine and Israel,” http://www
.savateaustralia.com/Weaponry%20Essays/Walking%20Stick%20in%20Mandatory%20Palestine
%20and%20Israel.htm, accessed October 16, 2009.
Loudcher, Jean-François. 2000. Histoire de la savate, du chausson et de la boxe française: d’une pratique
populaire à un sport de combat [History of Savate, Chausson, and French Boxing: From Popular
Practice to Combat Sport]. Paris: L’Harmattan.
Perdiguier, Agricol. 1977/1853. Mémoires d’un compagnon [Memories of a Companion]. Paris: F. Maspero.
CELTIC MARTIAL ARTS
About 1000 BCE, an Indo-European culture began developing in Central Europe. Its origins
were near the headwaters of the Rhine, Rhone, and Danube rivers, and it soon began expanding
outward in all directions. Greek merchants who encountered this culture in the sixth century
BCE called its members Keltoi and Galatai, and the Romans called them Celtae and Galli. Today,
we call them Celts (pronounced “kelt”).
Although greatly diluted today, Celtic martial practices endure, especially in Scotland. To a
lesser extent, they also can be found in Ireland, Isle of Man, Wales, Cornwall, Brittany, and some
parts of Spain and Portugal.
SCOTLAND
In Scotland, examples of surviving Celtic martial practices include single-stick, backhold wrestling,
piping, and dancing.
Piping and dancing may seem a strange type of martial activity, but the classical music of the
Highland pipe (ceol mòr or píobaireachd) consists of praise music for the ancient clan chiefs. The
tunes instructed warriors to come to the chief, inspired the clans before and during battle, and
served as laments. During the past 650 years, ﬁrst the Scottish clans and then the Highland reg-
iments fought with the inspiration of their pipers. Pipers have even become national heroes. For
instance, Piper Bill Millin (1923–) piped British Commandos ashore at Normandy in June 1944,
and more recently, the pipers of the Royal Scots Dragoon Guards (a tank unit) recorded a CD
in Basra, Iraq (Spirit of the Glen, 2007). The equally popular civilian pipe band movement recreates
this Scottish military music.
As for dancing, Scotland’s Donald Dinnie (1837–1916), the world’s ﬁrst sporting superstar
(Webster and Dinnie, 1999), stated in a 1906 interview that his friend James Paton was the best
dancer and swordsman in Scotland. At ﬁrst glance, this is a surprising comment, because by
1906, the sword was an obsolescent weapon. Nonetheless, the British Army, uniquely among
Celtic Martial Arts
221

European land forces of that era, was comprehensively trained to combat sword- and spear-
carrying opponents at close range. During World War I (1914–1918), ofﬁcers in the Highland
regiments often carried swords during infantry charges, and during World War II (1939–1945),
there were still a few eccentric aristocrats who carried swords. An example is Mad Jack Churchill
(1906–1996), a Commando ofﬁcer who was captured in Yugoslavia in 1944.
Scottish sword dances are competitive events, and at the ﬁrst modern Highland Games
organized in 1815 (just 70 years after the last Jacobite rising), there was much debate over
whether it was proper for ladies to see ancient sword dances performed in public.
Scottish broadsword training methods included practice with the singlestick. The singlestick
is a wooden rod (usually ash) with a basket hilt. Length was usually 3 feet (just under a meter).
Diameter was about an inch (2.5 centimeters) at the handle, tapering to a bit less at the tip, and
the guard was made from wicker or leather. Target areas were generally to any part of the body
above the waist, but only blows to the head counted for points. With the development of light
fencing foils in the early twentieth century, and changes in society following World War I, sin-
glestick became uncommon after the 1920s.
Scottish military training included training with broadsword and Lochaber axe. The lat-
ter was a pole weapon similar to a billhook that was used in medieval times to break up the
charges of armored knights and, later, as a weapon for police constables. Major General
David Stewart of Garth (1722–1829) wrote that in 1743, three subalterns of 42nd Highland
Regiment of Foot, all related to clan chiefs, “performed the broadsword exercise and that of
the Lochaber axe, or lance, before his Majesty, the Duke of Cumberland [1721–1765], Mar-
shal [George] Wade [1673–1748], and a number of general officers assembled for the pur-
pose in the Great Gallery at St. James’s. They displayed so much dexterity and skill in the
management of their weapons, as to give perfect satisfaction to his majesty” (Stewart 1822,
250).
David Webster, the sports historian and author of the book Scottish Highland Games (1973),
has in his library a copy of the program for the St. Fillans’ Highland Games of 1826 that lists the
prizes given to winners of the Highland broadsword exercises. The winner got a three-volume set
of The Poems of Ossian (1773) by James Macpherson (1736–1796), while the runner-up got a
large silver brooch. In 1858, the “National Gathering” of the Glasgow Celtic Society offered the
then-substantial prize of £3 to the winner of “The Broad Sword Exercise.”
Webster (1973, 123) states that many Scottish swordsmen “prided themselves on the power
of their strokes rather than ﬁnesse; but you can have both.” Finesse was developed through
dance and singlestick, while the power of strokes was measured via competitions that involved
splitting logs or animal carcasses. The power behind a Highland two-handed claymore or a
backsword is conﬁrmed when one reads the reports of the Battle of Killiecrankie (Cath Raon
Ruaridh). In this battle, which took place in 1689, a confederation of Highland clans fought a
British force consisting mostly of Lowland Scots. The government army was equipped with
fusils (a type of ﬂintlock musket), as were some Highlanders, but after the Highlanders ﬁred
they did not reload. Instead, they threw down their muskets and pistols, unsheathed their
swords, and charged. The government troops did not have time to ﬁx bayonets, and the High-
landers forced the government army to retire with heavy casualties. The Scottish swords did
savage work: “Many of General [Hugh] Mackay’s [ca. 1640–1692] ofﬁcers and soldiers were cut
down through the skull and neck, to the very breasts; others had skulls cut off above their ears
222
Celtic Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

like nightcaps; some soldiers had both their bodies and cross-belts cut through at one blow;
pikes and small swords were cut like willows, and whoever doubts of this, may consult the wit-
nesses of the tragedy” (Ofﬁcer of the Army 1818, 35).
Another demonstration of the cutting power of a Highland broadsword happened in 1741.
The Black Watch regiment was stationed in the Central Highlands along the Tay and Lyon
Rivers. “An affray arose between a few of the soldiers and some of the people at a fair at
Kenmore. Some of the Breadalbane men took the part of the soldiers and, as many were armed,
swords were quickly drawn, and one of the soldiers was killed; when their opponents, with whom
was [John] Macnaughton [of Glen Lyon, in Perthshire], and a smith, (to whom he was then an
apprentice) retreated, and ﬂed to the ferry-boat across the Tay. There was no bridge, and the fer-
ryman seeing the fray, chained his boat. Macnaughton was the ﬁrst at the river side, and leaping
into the boat, followed by his master the smith, with a single stroke of his broadsword he cut the
chain” (Stewart 1885, footnote, 65).
At the Strathallan Meeting of 1879 (now called Bridge of Allan Highland Games; the
meets are held on the ﬁrst Sunday in August), Troop-Sergeant O’Rourke split a sheep’s car-
cass in two with one blow, using a standard military saber (Illustrated Sporting & Dramatic
News, August 9, 1879). Such demonstrations were popular parts of contemporary “Grand
Assaults at Arms,” and in 1874, Staff Sergeant MacKenzie of the Royal Madras Fusiliers “cut
bars of lead an inch and a half inch in thickness with a single blow as easily as he cuts sheets
of newspaper. He then cut an apple in slices on the head of a little boy, to the alarm of the
ladies present, who were sadly afraid the little boy would be made an inch shorter by a false
blow. . . . The whole of these sword feats were brought to a conclusion by a sheep being sev-
ered by a single blow—one of the best sword feats that we have had the pleasure of witness-
ing” (Wolf 2001).
Such cutting events remain popular, although today they are more often associated with
Asian martial arts than Celtic.
IRELAND
In Irish literature, the earliest reference to wrestling is when the hero Cú Chulainn put on his
belt to wrestle an invader from Scotland. The invader, whom he killed, turned out to be his son.
This story is a variation of a standard Indo-European myth. The games associated with Telltown’s
(Taillteann) annual harvest festival included wrestling, and these games reportedly lasted from
ca. 632 BCE until 1169 CE, meaning a longer time than the ancient Olympics.
In historic times, the martial spirit of Ireland was manifested in stick ﬁghting (bataireacht).
Rather than being a remnant of ancient culture, the stick ﬁghting done between roughly 1750
to 1880 was recreational ﬁghting between rival factions. Origins for this ﬁghting may have
included the disbanding of Irish regiments that followed the Treaty of Limerick in 1691. During
the late nineteenth century, due to both clerical and legal interference, the Irish supplanted stick
ﬁghting with other sports, such as hurling (iománaíocht), Gaelic football (Peil), and international
boxing. Today, wrestling in Ireland is done mostly in the international style, and stick ﬁghting is
essentially extinct (although researched by historians and done by people interested in martial
reconstruction).
Bagpipe music and martial dances are also popular in Ireland.
Celtic Martial Arts
223

BRITTANY AND CORNWALL
In Northwest France, the Bretons have an ancient style of jacket wrestling, ar gouren, which is
almost the same sport as that done in Cornwall in Southwest England. The only real difference
is in the type of jacket used—the Breton roched is very tight, while the Cornish jacket is loose.
Judging by fourteenth-century illustrations, the jacket originally may have been a sash rather
than a jacket. There is no ground wrestling in either style, and victory is won by throwing an
opponent onto his shoulders. In Gouren, such a throw is called a lamm. In Cornish style, it is
necessary to throw an opponent onto two shoulders and a hip or two hips and a shoulder. Here,
the move is called a back. Both are difﬁcult to achieve. Gouren is still associated with traditional
music and dancing, but Cornish wrestling has been less successful in its use of music and dancing
as cultural indicators.
Gouren is very important in the culture of Brittany and has a documented history dating to
at least the fourteenth century. For example, in 1337, the Breton man-at-arms Bertrand du
Guesclin (ca. 1320–1380) was recorded as wrestling at a fair; later in his career he became Con-
stable of France. When Pierre II, Duke of Brittany (1418–1457), went to meet the King of
France and later the King of Spain, he took named wrestlers with him in his train. “In the acts
of ceremony, it is said that these wrestlers occupied the position of dignitaries” (Jaouen and
Nichols 2007, 50). Illustrations of wrestling also appear in a Book of Hours commissioned by the
French courtier Jacques de Montbéron (1470–1525).
Many Breton men were killed during World War I, and afterwards, rural sports such as
gouren were swamped by twentieth century commercial sports such as cycling and soccer. In
the French-dominated schools and the army, there was also pressure to replace gouren, a
mainstay of the Breton cultural identity, with French wrestling (Greco-Roman). Breton cul-
tural nationalists fought back. In September 1927, physician Charles Cotonnec (1876–1935)
attended the ﬁrst postwar Gorsedd (Druidic ceremony). This was held at Riec sur Belon, in
Brittany. There, he met Cornish folklorist William Tregoning Hooper, and between them,
they agreed to organize an international (“Inter-Celtic”) meeting. This latter meeting took
place at Quimperlé, Brittany, on August 19, 1928. In 1930, Cotonnec established the Fédéra-
tion des Amis de la Luttes et des Sports Athlétiques Bretons (FALSAB, Federation of the Friends
of Wrestling and the Athletic Sports of the Bretons), for the purpose of revitalizing tradi-
tional Breton sports and culture.
The promotion of Breton wrestling proved to be a success, but the revival of the related
Cornish wrestling has taken longer. When the International Federation of Celtic Wrestling
(FILC) was founded in Cardiff, Wales, on November 16, 1985, the Cornish Wrestling
Association refused to join, and despite overtures from Brittany and the FILC, it continues to
stagnate in splendid isolation.
Despite their modern intransigence, at the Battle of Agincourt in October 1415, the men of
Cornwall marched behind a banner depicting two wrestlers in a “hitch.” They needed no other
sign, for everyone knew that as a sure sign of Cornishmen. A century later (June 1520), near
Calais, King Henry VIII of England (1491–1547) met with King Francis I of France
(1494–1547). Wrestling was part of the ceremonies, Henry having instructed Godolphin, his
champion Cornish wrestler, to bring his best wrestlers for a match against the Bretons in the
train of the French King.
224
Celtic Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

WALES
Emma Lile, music and sport curator at the National History Museum at St. Fagans (formerly the
Museum of Welsh Life) has written about the “24 feats” (Y pediar Camp ar Hugainyn) described
in the Peniarth manuscripts (compiled 1592–1667). The 24 feats included archery, three types
of fencing, and wrestling. According to Lile (2005, 94), Welsh wrestling was called cwdm braich
(arm wrestling) and cwdwm cefn (backhold wrestling). In the ﬁrst style, competitors grabbed
“each other by the arms. A fall was achieved when one wrestler succeeded in kicking his oppo-
nent and knocking him to the ﬂoor.” In the second style, “The intention was to pass one’s right
arm under the opponent’s left and to clasp him around the waist.” Although backhold wrestling
was still practiced in Wales into the 1980s, the traditional Welsh sports declined rapidly during
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The reason was partly the casualties of World
War I, partly the emigration to cities or overseas, and mostly the spread of new urban and school
sports, notably English boxing and football (both the soccer and rugby styles).
IBERIA (SPAIN AND PORTUGAL)
References to Iberian martial arts appear in Book III of Strabo of Amaseia’s (ca. 64 BCE–ca.
24 CE) Geographia (ca. 20 CE). The author relates, “They practice gymnastic exercises, both as
heavy-armed soldiers, and cavalry, also boxing, running, skirmishing, and ﬁghting in bands”
(Strabo 1892, 252). The reference was to groups known as Kallakoi, Astoures, Kantabroi,
Ouaskones, and people from the Pyrenees range; that is, the inhabitants of northern Spain. The
Lusitani were among the largest of these Iberian tribes, living in a territory that roughly equates
with modern Portugal and Extremadura; they were skillful guerrilla ﬁghters and had a strong
martial culture.
During their centuries of warfare with Celts and Celt-Iberians, both in Gaul and Iberia, the
Roman infantry adopted their famous gladius Hispaniensis, or Hispanic short sword. During the
six centuries of Roman rule, Spain provided many emperors and Spanish soldiers became a main-
stay of the Western Empire’s legions. In addition, the class of gladiators known as Samnites
fought solely with this weapon.
Following the collapse of the Western Roman Empire in the ﬁfth century CE, the Germanic
Vandals and Visigoths took over Iberia. The Vandals and Visigoths were generally Arian Chris-
tians, and this caused conﬂict with the Roman Catholic Iberians, who viewed Arian Christian-
ity as heresy. Thus, when the Muslims invaded from Africa in 711, resistance was fragmented,
and by 790, the Muslims controlled most of the Iberian Peninsula. The Roman Catholic Recon-
quista began soon after. The process took seven centuries, but in 1492, the Catholic monarchs
of Spain, Isabella of Castile (1451–1504) and Ferdinand II of Aragón (1479–1516), ﬁnally
expelled the last of the Arabic emirs from Iberia. That same year, Ferdinand and Isabella coin-
cidentally summoned Christopher Columbus (ca. 1451–1506) and gave him a mandate to
explore the western ocean, in hopes of circumventing the Ottoman lock on the transshipment
of Asian goods via Suez. The modern nations of the Americas are the result.
Carvings in Romanesque and Gothic churches and cathedrals, especially in northern Spain,
provide visual evidence of wrestling as a sport during late medieval times. Examples include San
Martín de Frómista (Palencia, eleventh century), San Isidoro de León (twelfth century), San Juan
de San Juan de Amandi (Villaviciosa, Asturias, twelfth century), Ciudad Rodrigo’s cathedral
Celtic Martial Arts
225

(Salamanca, thirteenth century), and León’s cathedral cloister (León, fourteenth century). These
carvings generally show wrestlers wearing only a cloth around the waist and grasping each other’s
arms, neck, or back.
In literary sources, Fuero Vidal Mayor (a municipal code enacted in Aragón in 1247; the name
refers to its compiler, Vidal de Canellas [?–1252]) included a section describing the regulation of
wrestling matches. This shows that by the 1240s, wrestling was important enough to require reg-
ulations (Piernavieja del Pozo 1970). In this tradition, the Spanish man-at-arms Pietro Monte
(Pero Monti, ca. 1460–1530) was a noted wrestler in his youth. Monte spent most of his adult life
in Italy, and he is remembered today mostly because he instructed the Milanese condottiere
Galeazzo di Sanseverino (ca. 1460–1525) in wrestling. This in turn is remarked because Sansev-
erino was one of the models for Baldassare Castiglione’s (1478–1529) The Courtier (1528), in
which it was posited that the ideal Renaissance gentleman needed equal education in wrestling,
the classics, and manners (Anglo 2000, 1).
Some old-rooted martial arts survive in northern Iberia. Although it is likely that there is
pre-Christian inﬂuence in these old-rooted martial arts—they were contextualized in pagan fes-
tivals, and often denounced and even forbidden by the church—nowadays it is probably more
accurate to consider wrestling and old armed styles such as stick ﬁghting (jogo do pau in Por-
tuguese) to be a shared practice between the cultures of northern Iberia, including the Celts.
In northern Spain (especially the traditionally Celtic region of Galicia) and Portugal, stick
ﬁghting was popular until the 1950s, when the move from the countryside to the city began.
Today, stick ﬁghting continues to be practiced in Portugal, but much less than previously. As for
the regional wrestling styles, only the belted style known as lucha leonesa (León wrestling, for-
merly named aluche) can be said to be thriving. This success is due to the progressive standardi-
zation, imposed beginning with the establishment of the Provincial Wrestling Commission
(Comisión Provincial de Lucha) in 1920. In León, wrestling is still viewed as an important cul-
tural artifact, and in 2005, the council of Cisternia, a town in León where León wrestling is very
popular, said in a public statement, “Our history is written in a wrestling tournament” (Nuestra
historia está escrita en un corro de lucha) (Adios a doce años de lucha 1992–2004, 2005).
Searching for identity symbols, other Iberian regions including Asturias, Bragança,
Cantabria, and Galicia are currently trying to resuscitate their local wrestling styles. In October
2008, the Galician parliament decided by a unanimous declaration to reinvigorate loita celta
(Celtic wrestling). In truth, the sport is almost moribund in Galicia, but the infusion of govern-
ment money and professional reorganization should ensure its survival. In a similar example, in
the Portuguese province of Bragança the traditional wrestling style, called galhofa, is an unde-
veloped loose-hold style that was persecuted by the Catholic Church for centuries on account of
its pagan connotations and customs, and it survived into the present only at festivals held in
three remote villages. Today, however, galhofa is no longer frowned on by the church. Instead,
it has been given government patronage and is to be taught in schools and colleges. The ﬁrst
nontraditional tournament in this style was held on June 7, 2008.
THE FILC
The Fédération International des Luttes Celtiques (International Federation of Celtic
Wrestling), most commonly known by its acronym, FILC, was founded in Cardiff, Wales, on
226
Celtic Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

November 16, 1985. Its ﬁrst representatives came from Brittany, Scotland, Cornwall, and
England. Members now come from many places: Austria, Brittany, England, Friesland
(Netherlands), Iceland, Ireland, Sardinia, Scotland, Sweden, and Spain (León, Cantabria, and
the Canary Islands). Organizational goals include validating and reinvigorating the historic
styles of its member nations; thus, all of its competitions include a cultural component as a
compulsory part of their program. The ﬁfteenth biannual European Championship in Celtic
Wrestling was held in East Kilbride, Scotland, during April 23–25, 2009. Ten teams competed,
and the event set a standard of excellence for future events. The FILC is trying to encourage
wrestlers in the United States, Canada, and Australia who compete in Scottish backhold style
competitions in these countries to form proper associations and afﬁliate so that they can
participate in FILC competitions.
—William Baxter and Joseph Svinth
See also: Canary Islands Stick Fighting and Wrestling; Canne de Combat; Fighting 
Arts of the Early Middle Ages; Fighting Arts of the Later Middle Ages; 
Fighting Arts of the Renaissance (in this volume); Belief Systems: 
Introduction; Expressive Culture; Globalization of Martial Arts; 
Political Uses of the Martial Arts; and Secret Societies and 
Fraternal Organizations (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Adam, Frank. 1908. The Clans, Septs and Regiments of the Scottish Highlands. Edinburgh: W. & A. K.
Johnston, Ltd.
Adiós a doce años de lucha 1992–2004 [Goodbye to Twelve Years of Wrestling 1992–2004]. 2005.
León, Spain.
Anglo, Sydney. 2000. The Martial Arts of Renaissance Europe. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Conley, Carolyn. 1999. “The Agreeable Recreation of Fighting,” Journal of Social History 33(1), Fall,
57–72, DOI: 10.1353/jsh.1999.0009, via http://muse.jhu.edu/login?uri=/journals/journal_of_social
_history/v033/33.1conley.html, accessed October 16, 2009.
Ellis, Peter Beresford. 1998. The Ancient World of the Celts. London: Constable.
Ferrero Ferrero, Florián, editor. 1991. Historia de Zamora [History of Zamora], Volume II. Valencia:
Prensa Ibérica.
García Bellido, Antonio. 1993. España y los españoles hace 2.000 años según la Geografía de Strabón
[Spain and Spaniards 2,000 Years Ago according to Strabo’s Geographia], edited by M. P. García-
Bellido. Madrid: Espasa Calpe.
Hill, James Michael. 1986. Celtic Warfare, 1595–1763. Edinburgh: J. Donald.
Ingle, David. 2001. “Drink, Drama, Poetry, and Song: A Conference Report,” Social History of Alcohol
Review 15, 33–41.
Jaouen, Guy, and Matthew Bennett Nichols. 2007. Celtic Wrestling: The Jacket Styles. FILA: Bretagne,
France.
Lile, Emma. 2005. “Cwdwm Braich” [Arm Wrestling], in Encyclopedia of Traditional British Rural
Sports, edited by Tony Collins, John Martin, and Wray Vamplew, 94. London: Routledge.
Lile, Emma. 2005. “Cwdwm Cefn” [Backhold Wrestling], in Encyclopedia of Traditional British Rural
Sports, edited by Tony Collins, John Martin, and Wray Vamplew, 94. London: Routledge.
O’Donnell, Patrick. 1975. The Irish Faction Fighters of the 19th Century. Dublin: Anvil Books.
Ofﬁcer of the Army (attributed to Charles Leslie and George Ridpath). 1818. Memoirs of the Lord
Viscount Dundee, the Highland Clans, &c., together with an Account of the Massacre of Glenco.
Edinburgh: D. Webster, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Celtic Martial Arts
227

Piernavieja del Pozo, Miguel. 1970. “La Lucha Leonesa en el siglo XIII” [León wrestling in the 13th
Century], Deporte 2000, 21, 70–79.
Stewart, David. 1822. Sketches of the Character, Manners and Present State of the Highlanders of Scotland,
2nd edition, Volume 1. Edinburgh: Archibald Constable and Co., via http://books.google.com,
accessed October 16, 2009.
Stewart, David. 1885. Sketches of the Character, Manners and Present State of the Highlanders of Scotland,
New Edition. Inverness: A. & W. Mackenzie, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Strabo. 1892. The Geography of Strabo, Volume I, translated by H. C. Hamilton and W. Falconer.
London: George Bell and Sons, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Webster, David, and Gordon Dinnie. 1999. Donald Dinnie, the First Sporting Superstar. Methlick,
Scotland: Ardo Publishing.
Webster, David P. 1973. Scottish Highland Games. Edinburgh: Reprographia.
Wolf, Tony. 2001. “‘A Grand Assault-at-Arms’: Tournaments and Combative Exhibitions in Victorian
England,” Journal of Manly Arts, http://ejmas.com/jmanly/articles/2001/jmanlyart_wolf2_0801.htm,
accessed April 26, 2009.
ENGLISH PUGILISM
Although English newspapers such as the Protestant Mercury mentioned pugilistic bouts as early as
the 1680s, the profession of bare-knuckle pugilism is better dated to the early part of the eighteenth
century.
Pugilism’s ﬁrst popular champion was James Figg (ca. 1695–1734). Figg, from Thame in
Oxfordshire, was considered champion of England from 1719 to his retirement in 1730. Figg
was a skillful boxer and an innovative coach, and also an accomplished stick ﬁghter and fencer.
Capitalizing on this popularity, Figg opened a boxing academy in London in 1719. Figg’s
“Amphitheatre” was initially situated on Tottenham Court Road and later switched to the
premises of the celebrated Adam and Eve pub on what is now Oxford Street (then Oxford
Road). Figg’s all-round talents made “self-defence” a popular option for the urban gentleman
(“the Fancy”). This upper-class interest in the recreation of boxing (as opposed to the profes-
sion of boxing) sustained several boxing academies in London, and it also led several of the
Fancy to become enthusiastic supporters and (more importantly) patrons and sponsors of the
prizeﬁghting game.
English pugilism at this time was only vaguely related to the modern sport: wrestling (espe-
cially cross-buttocks and trips) was accepted, as was gouging eyes and “purring”—that is, raking a
spiked boot across a fallen man. Moreover, Figg taught his pupils the use not only of the ﬁst but
also of the sword, broadsword, and cudgel. Thus, in that period, English pugilism was a reasonably
rounded martial art.
Upon Figg’s retirement in 1730, Tom Pipes (1702–?) was deemed champion of England.
Pipes remained champion for ﬁve years until George “The Barber” Taylor (1716–?) replaced him
for the next three years. In 1738, a former pupil of Figg, Jack Broughton (ca. 1703–1789),
became champion. Broughton, subsequently known as the “Father of English Boxing,” is the
central, reforming ﬁgure in prizeﬁghting.
Speciﬁcally, Broughton used his status and inﬂuence to promote pugilism’s ﬁrst set of uniform
rules. The Broughton Rules of 1743 introduced four major innovations. First, there was a 3-foot
(91-centimeter) square in the center of the ring. Second, when a ﬁghter was knocked down, his
228
English Pugilism
www.ebook3000.com

handlers had 30 seconds to get him into position on one side of the square, facing his opponent.
Because each knockdown ended ﬁghting for at least 30 seconds, this was the ﬁrst time that box-
ing bouts were divided into rounds. The third innovation was the introduction of independent
referees. Fourth, although wrestling holds were permitted, a boxer was not allowed to grab his
opponent below the waist.
The rules devised by Broughton were used throughout Britain, with only minor modiﬁca-
tions, until 1838, when they were reformulated as the London Prize Ring Rules. Before the
Broughton rules, boxing matches had been arranged on a largely improvised basis. A formal
roped-off ring was rarely arranged, and often the only preparation was a chalk mark scratched on
the ground. If a competitor could not bring himself up to the scratch, then he was defeated;
hence, the origins of the phrase “up to scratch,” meaning something meeting an expected stan-
dard. Also, under Broughton’s rules, a ﬁght could be stopped if the ﬁghter’s seconds or backers
refused to let their man continue. Financial reasons dictated that this rarely occurred, but before
Broughton, there had been no conception of rounds, and the ﬁght continued until a ﬁghter was
spent. At the same time, however, Broughton Rules were in no way an immediate success in
ridding the sport of boxing of its brutality. For instance, although the ﬁghters could avail of a 
30-second break simply by falling down, there was no limit on the duration of the ﬁght as a
whole. Neither was there any weight classiﬁcation, and ﬁghters with signiﬁcantly different
physiques were commonly pitted against each other.
Broughton’s reforms and his unusually cultured, almost classless, demeanor meant that the
social elite of the era ﬂocked to spar with and be coached by him. Broughton is credited with
inventing the ﬁrst boxing gloves (known as “mufﬂers”) to protect not only the hands but also
the faces of his privileged pupils. Broughton is also credited with being the inspiration behind
the ﬁrst book devoted to the skills of boxing: Captain John Godfrey’s The Useful Science of
Defence, published in 1747.
William, Duke of Cumberland (1721–1765), was among the rich, aristocratic benefactors
attracted to Broughton. The Duke’s patronage ended in costly and controversial circumstances.
In 1750, the unbeaten Broughton, who had been continually engaged in heavy sparring sessions
in his Amphitheatre, fought Jack Slack, the “Norfolk Butcher” (ca. 1721–ca. 1768). Broughton
failed to take the challenge seriously and was soundly beaten within a quarter of an hour, mainly
as a result of a single punch that blinded him temporarily and led him to utter the celebrated cry,
“By God! I’m done.” Slack went on to collect a £600 stake from the proceeds of the enormous
gate, and a singularly unimpressed Duke of Cumberland was said to have lost a signiﬁcant wager
on Broughton. The Duke subsequently claimed that he had been duped, and his patronage of
Broughton’s academy halted. The Duke also used his inﬂuence to ensure that the “Places of pub-
lick Entertainment” regulated by the Disorderly Houses Act of 1752 included boxing academies.
This Act can be deemed the ﬁrst anti-prizeﬁghting statute.
In 1760, the reigning champion, William Stevens (“the Nailer,” meaning a nail maker,
1736–ca. 1794) was widely believed to have thrown a ﬁght against George Meggs (1735–), a
collier from Bristol, and for the next 25 years a succession of dubious ﬁghters claimed the man-
tle of champion. Although the claims of these various champions were often tenuous, the era
itself was well documented. Pierce Egan’s (1772–1849) Boxiana, issued in ﬁve volumes between
the years 1812 and 1829, with an additional volume contributed by Jon Bee in 1824, is an
invaluable resource. The ﬁrst volume is a particularly comprehensive (if slightly breathless)
English Pugilism
229

record of the early history of prizeﬁghting from Broughton to the championship of Tom Cribb
(1781–1848; British champion 1810–1812). Thereafter, William Oxberry’s Pancratia (1812) is
helpful, as are the three volumes of Henry Downes Miles’s Pugilistica (1906), which details the
history of sport from Figg to the 1860s. Frank Dowling’s Fights for the Championship (1855) and
Fred Henning’s similarly entitled edition (1898) also contain useful histories.
The “golden age” of English pugilism was Britain’s Regency Period (strictly 1811–1820, but
more broadly 1795–1837). The ﬁrst champion of the Regency Period was Thomas Jackling
(ca. 1760–1797) of Derby. Jackling fought under the name Tom Johnson, and he was the cham-
pion of England from 1784 to 1791. Unlike his immediate predecessors, Johnson was respected
for his incorruptibility and what the writers of the day described as “bottom,” meaning, his
stamina and his ability to absorb blows and counterattack as his opponent tired. Huge crowds,
attracted by his courage and skill, returned to the sport. Johnson’s “pluck” was best evidenced in
his defeat in 1789 of Isaac Perrin, an opponent who apparently weighed in at 23 stone
(322 pounds or 146 kilograms)! Another charismatic ﬁgure of the age was Daniel Mendoza
(1764–1836). Although born in the East End of London, Mendoza was of Jewish descent. While
Mendoza’s reign as champion was short, his three bouts against Richard “The Gentleman”
Humphries (dates unknown) between 1788 and 1790 generated huge publicity, and an oil
painting by John Hoppner (1758–1810) called Richard Humphreys, the Boxer hangs in New
York’s Metropolitan Museum of Art. England’s Prince of Wales (later Regent and then King
George IV) attended at least one of the Mendoza–Humphries ﬁghts, and his brother, the Duke
of Clarence (later King William IV) was also an enthusiastic patron of the prize ring.
Following Mendoza, the title of champion passed to “Gentleman” John Jackson
(1769–1845), who along with John Gully (1783–1863) dominated the Regency prize ring.
Jackson and Gully were celebrated as much for their exploits outside the ring as within. Jackson
became a well-known coach and, for a time, was a regular correspondent with the celebrated
poet Lord Byron (1788–1824), who, like fellow poet John Keats (1795–1821), was a prizeﬁght
aﬁcionado. Gully led an equally extraordinary life. He used his prizeﬁghting gains wisely to
become a successful businessman, and he beneﬁted from the Reform Act of 1832 to become a
Member of Parliament, serving from 1832 to 1837. He was even savvy enough to invest in horse
racing’s most corrupt decade, the 1840s, emerging with four Epsom Derby winners. Gully was
equally proliﬁc in another arena, having two wives and twenty-four children.
Upon Gully’s retirement from the ring in 1807, Tom Cribb (1781–1848) was declared cham-
pion. Cribb had two of the most famous ﬁghts of the era, both of which were against Tom
Molyneux (1784–1818). Not only were Cribb and Molyneux at the peak of their athletic pow-
ers at the time, but the fact that Molyneux was black (and managed by another black, fellow
African American Bill Richmond, 1763–1829) added a certain edge to the occasion. The ﬁrst
ﬁght took place on December 18, 1810, in Sussex. An overconﬁdent and overweight Cribb felt
that the weather conditions (it was bitterly cold) and his greater experience (nine ﬁghts to the
Virginian’s two victories) would see him through. As it happened, Cribb had to depend on other
factors to achieve success. Molyneux started the ﬁght aggressively and was clearly the better
ﬁghter. The crowd became appalled that the English champion was about to be shamed by the
(black) American. A mob invaded the ring—a fairly frequent tactic of the time by supporters of
the losing ﬁghter—and the ﬁght had to be stopped on several occasions. Cribb thus gained pre-
cious time as Molyneux’s seconds desperately tried to clear a space. Molyneux fought on, and by
230
English Pugilism
www.ebook3000.com

the twenty-eighth round Cribb had great difﬁculty making the scratch. Cribb’s assistants (among
them John Gully) then complained that Molyneux had weights concealed in his ﬁsts—yet
another well known ruse. In the confusion, Cribb regained his breath and eventually wore down
the challenger. A rematch took place one year later. On this occasion, Cribb was well prepared,
but Molyneux was not, following months of high living and low morals. On September 28, 1811,
in a bout staged near Leicester, Cribb, in less than twenty minutes, broke Molyneux’s jaw and
knocked him out.
Massive crowds sometimes attended Regency prizeﬁghts. It was estimated that 20,000 saw the
second Cribb–Molyneux ﬁght. The fact that so many were willing to gather to witness a nontitle
ﬁght on an island of less than 10 million inhabitants in the prerailway era was an incredible meas-
ure of the status of boxing. The sport’s popularity appealed to all elements of society, and when
the Regency Period reached its climax with the coronation of King George IV in July 1821,
pugilism was remarkably well represented: John Jackson was called upon to muster an appropriate
body of ﬁghting men whose role was ceremonially that of pageboys (though in practice they were
charged with keeping order during the coronation at Westminster Abbey). Jackson, Cribb, as
well as younger ﬁghters such as Tom Spring (Thomas Winter, 1795–1851) and Peter Crawley
(1799–1865) fulﬁlled their role with aplomb. The only controversy arose when the King’s
estranged wife, Caroline (1768–1821), was melodramatically refused entry to the ceremony on
His Majesty’s strict orders.
Following the retirement of Cribb in 1812, prizeﬁghting’s proﬁle dimmed in the search for a
credible replacement. Eventually, a champion of true quality was discovered in the talented Jem
Ward (1800–1884, champion from 1825 to 1831), but even his career was marked by corruption
and controversy, as in 1822, he was heard to say, “Now, Bill, look sharp, hit me and I’ll go down”
(Wignall 1923, 117).
By the time that Victoria (1819–1901) became Queen in June 1837, prizeﬁghting was turning
on itself. Cheating was commonplace, and many of the sport’s leading personalities viewed boxing
as beyond redemption. A prime example (and there were many) were the three Bendigo–Caunt
ﬁghts of the 1830s. Bendigo, alias William Abednego Thompson (1811–1880), conceded about 5
inches (12.7 centimeters) in height and at least three stone (42 pounds, 19 kilograms to Ben Caunt
(1815–1861). During their ﬁrst ﬁght, Bendigo dodged, weaved, and generally frustrated his oppo-
nent. Eventually after twenty-two rounds of frustration, Caunt lost his temper, ran over to
Bendigo’s corner during a rest period, and struck his opponent. Caunt was disqualiﬁed.
There was an even darker side to all this. The lack of administration led to frequent mis-
matches, which in turn resulted in fatalities. Many of the deaths merited just passing mentions
in the papers and courts, but several were high proﬁle. Of the latter, the death of William Phelps
(“Brighton Bill,” ca. 1818–1838) in 1838, the result of a bout with the popular lightweight
champion Owen Swift (ca. 1815–1879), proved a signiﬁcant setback for the sport and entirely
overshadowed the concurrent introduction of the London Prize Ring Rules.
The twenty-nine London Prize Ring Rules (ﬁrst published in 1838 and revised in 1853
and 1866) clariﬁed and updated the (fading) applicability of the Broughton Rules. They
called for a ring 24 feet (730 centimeters) square, enclosed by ropes. The ropes represented a
token effort to keep the mob from (tactically) invading the ring. The range of fouls was spec-
iﬁed in greater detail. Infractions included butting, gouging, biting, scratching, kicking, and
holding stones in the hand. Somewhat greater public recognition of the welfare and safety of
English Pugilism
231

the participants was introduced. For example, a knockdown marked the end of a round, and
after receiving a 30-second break, the ﬁghters had just eight seconds to “come up to scratch”
unaided. The motive behind this rule was to prevent the dangerous practice of the ﬁghter’s
seconds, with their eyes ﬁrmly on the stake at hand, dragging the semiconscious and highly
vulnerable boxer to the scratch in the hope that their charge might be able to undergo an
“active” recovery.
The impact of the London Prize Ring Rules was limited. Despite the best efforts of the
Pugilistic Benevolent Society, set up in 1852, the business of prizeﬁghting was rotten to the core.
Corruption meant falling attendances, diminishing stakes, and poor quality championships.
Meanwhile, British societal norms and values had altered so fundamentally during the preceding
30 years that no amount of tampering with existing rules would, seemingly, bring open-air prize-
ﬁghting with bare ﬁsts into the range of what Victorian society perceived as “socially acceptable.”
Simply put, the maladministration of the sport and the changing social order hastened the decline
of this type of prizeﬁghting.
In 1860, prizeﬁghting, in its bare knuckle tradition, had its last great event. The
Sayers–Heenan ﬁght held at Farnborough in Hampshire was unusual for its international dimen-
sion: John C. Heenan (1833–1873) was from the United States, while Thomas Sayers
(1826–1865) was the undisputed British champion. The ﬁght captured the imagination of both
Britain and the United States and was equally well covered by both the New York Times and the
London Times. The outcome of the bout was a bit bizarre. Contemporary reports suggest that
Heenan was the superior ﬁghter, but at an opportune moment, the crowd rallied to Sayers’ assis-
tance by invading the ring, thereby resulting in a draw being declared. Both ﬁghters received com-
memorative belts, and a public subscription raised about £3,000 for Sayers, awarded on condition
that he would never again enter the ring.
The success of Heenan vs. Sayers as an international media event served to highlight the
paucity of competition and depth that existed within British prizeﬁghting. Soon Jem Mace
(1831–1910), the prizeﬁghting champion of England for most of the 1860s, would have to travel
to the United States, Australia, and New Zealand to pursue his profession. The deterioration in
championship standards and the class of challengers in Britain must, however, be seen in its
broader context. It was not just the cyclical decline of quality that all sports undergo from time
to time. Instead, prizeﬁghting was excluded from the Victorian deﬁnition of a “rational” recre-
ation and was now suffering the consequences.
These consequences manifested themselves in many forms: sermons in the press and from the
pulpit; legal prohibitions on railway companies from transporting patrons to and from ﬁghts; the
police and magistrates invoking the Riot Act against those who attended out-of-doors prize-
ﬁghts; anti-gambling initiatives; the prosecution of promoters and spectators for aiding, abetting,
and operating prizeﬁghts; and the prosecution of ﬁghters on the grounds of prizeﬁghting (as well
as the historical assault, affray, and manslaughter).
As the judgment of the English Crown Court of Reserved in the celebrated decision
R v. Coney (1882) demonstrated, British society required boxing to evolve from a sport
characterized by bare ﬁsts, secluded venues, and illegality into one characterized by gloved bouts,
regulated spaces, and police supervision. The inﬂuential elements of society had tired of the
prizeﬁghting spectacle and its association with public riot, tumult, and drunkenness; as the
foundation of the Football Association (1863), Rugby Football Union (1871), and Amateur
232
English Pugilism
www.ebook3000.com

Athletic Association (1881) illustrated, the mid-Victorian attitude toward sport demanded
regulation, administration, and codiﬁcation.
The question was whether prizeﬁghting could meet those demands. The reply was posi-
tive, and it is within that context that the Marquess of Queensberry rules of 1865 must be
located. The impact of the new rules was hardly immediate, and credible bare-knuckle cham-
pionships were still taking place 25 years later. Nevertheless, the twelve rules were funda-
mental, even constitutional, in their importance to the development of modern international
boxing. Thus, the Queensberry rules need to be seen as an acknowledgment of the changing
societal and sporting expectations of the Victorian Era. Henceforth, the ﬁst was to be inside
a glove.
—Jack Anderson
See also: Savate, Chausson, and French Boxing; Muay 
Thai (in this volume); Commodiﬁcation of Leisure; 
International Boxing (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Anderson, Jack. 2007. The Legality of Boxing: A Punch Drunk Love? London: Birkbeck Law Press.
Brailsford, Dennis. 1988. Bareknuckles: A Social History of Prizeﬁghting. Cambridge, UK: Lutterworths.
Gee, Tony. 1998. Up to Scratch: Bareknuckle Fighting and Heroes of the Prize-Ring. Harpenden, UK:
Queen Anne.
Gordon, Graham. 2007. Master of the Ring: The Extraordinary Life of Jem Mace. Wrea Gree, UK: Milo
Books.
Johnson, Dick. 1987. Bare Fist Fighters of the 18th and 19th Century, 1704–1861. Lewes, UK: Book Guild.
Lloyd, Alan. 1977. The Great Prize Fight. London: Cassells.
Mee, Bob. 2001. Bare Fists: The History of Bare-Knuckle Fighting. Woodstock, NY: Overlook Press.
Roberts, Randy. 1977. “Eighteenth Century Boxing,” Journal of Sports History 4, Fall, 246–259,
via www.la84foundation.org/SportsLibrary/JSH/JSH1977/JSH0403/jsh0403c.pdf, accessed
March 22, 2009.
Wignall, Trevor C. 1923. The Story of Boxing. London: Hutchinson & Co.
FIGHTING ARTS OF THE 
HELLENIC, HELLENISTIC, AND ROMAN ERAS
The Hellenic period is the earlier period of ancient Greek civilization, from about 1100 BCE until
the rise of Alexander III of Macedon (356–323 BCE). Alexander conquered all of the Greek
world (which had previously consisted of independent city-states), the Persian Empire (which
extended from what is now Turkey and what is now Israel to what is now Pakistan), and Egypt,
thereby earning the name Alexander the Great. Subsequently, Greek culture combined with
those of the conquered countries. Therefore, the next two centuries are known as the Hellenistic
period (“like the Greeks”).
During the second century BCE, the Romans conquered the Greeks and Hellenes. The Roman
culture described here ended in the ﬁfth century CE, with the fall of the western Roman Empire.
Collectively, these three cultures exerted enormous inﬂuence over what is today called
“Western civilization.”
Fighting Arts of the Hellenic, Hellenistic, and Roman Eras
233

WRESTLING
Ancient Greeks participated in the combative sports of wrestling (pale), boxing (pyx), and
pankration (all-around ﬁghting). When discussed jointly, the three events were known as “heavy
events” (barea athla). Probably this is because weight classiﬁcations were not used; thus, heavier
athletes were at a distinct advantage (Kyle 2007, 124; Poliakoff 1987, 8).
Heavy events were not just used for sport. Instead, they were considered a staple for physical
training and especially useful for training warriors (Swaddling 1999, 71).
With respect to other “heavy events,” wrestling was considered the least injurious. Nonethe-
less, wrestling was physically demanding, and it tested and developed martial virtues ranging
from cunning and boldness to courage and self-reliance (Poliakoff 1987, 23).
Wrestlers trained at specialized schools called palaistrai. Wrestling was an organized sport,
with contests held regularly at the crown games of Delphi (Pythian Games), Isthmia, Nemea,
Olympia, and equivalent festivals, both as part of the pentathlon and as an event unto itself.
The Greeks had both upright and ground wrestling, but only standing wrestling was used at
ofﬁcial competitions (Swaddling 1999, 73; Crowther 2007, 68). Not all scholars agree that
wrestling was divided into two types, and at least one believes that ground wrestling has been
confused with pankration (Miller 2004, 46).
Irrespective of the lack of consensus concerning ground wrestling, we can be conﬁdent that
Greek upright wrestling involved a pair of athletes trying to throw one another to the ground,
thereby recording a fall. The ﬁrst wrestler to record three falls won the match. A fall was recorded
if an athlete forced his opponent’s back, shoulders, or hip—and some even suggest his knees—to
touch the ground (Sweet 1987, 63–65). A wrestler also got a fall by stretching his opponent com-
pletely ﬂat in the prone position or by strangling his opponent, forcing him to concede, or by
throwing him beyond the boundaries of the skamma (wrestling area) (Poliakoff 1987, 24–25, 28).
The modern-day idea of a wrestler “pinning” his opponent’s back to the ground did not exist in
ancient Greece (Miller 2004, 46; Crowther 2007, 66; Poliakoff 1987, 24).
In formal competitions, wrestling took place on the running track at the stadion. A measured
area of earth was dug up and mixed with sand to form a skamma. This same area was used for
other combative sports as well, and possibly even became the jumping pit for the long jump of
the pentathlon. A few vase paintings suggest that the skamma may have been located near the
turning post (kampter) on the track, but evidence is modest at best (Miller 2004, 47). Purport-
edly, ground wrestling was conducted in a heavily watered area, making the dirt muddy and
sticky, forming what the Greeks called keroma or “beeswax” (Swaddling 1999, 73). To win at
ground wrestling, falls were not registered, so an athlete had to force his opponent to surrender.
An athlete simply pointed his index ﬁnger and raised his hand to cede the victory to his oppo-
nent, antiquity’s example of the modern-day “tap-out.”
Before wrestling matches, wrestlers oiled their bodies. After that, they covered themselves
with dust (Sweet 1987, 66). Aristophanes (ca. 446–ca. 386 BCE) tells us that unethical athletes
would wipe oil on speciﬁc parts of their bodies, thus foiling grips (Swaddling 1999, 73). Such
behavior was discouraged and could lead to disqualiﬁcation.
Wrestlers were nude, except for the occasional, tight-ﬁtting leather cap. The cap was worn
to prevent the wrestler’s hair from being pulled by the adversary, and to keep dirt and mud from
caking in the hair. Dirty hair was considered scandalous in many parts of the Hellenistic world.
234
Fighting Arts of the Hellenic, Hellenistic, and Roman Eras
www.ebook3000.com

A wrestling tournament usually had a predetermined number of participants. A common
number was sixteen. Competitors drew lots to see who would be paired to wrestle for the
round (Miller 2004, 49–50). There were two identical sets of lots, with each set having var-
ious letters of the Greek alphabet inscribed onto them. The athletes who drew the lots with
the same letters on them were paired and had to wrestle. If an odd number of wrestlers were
participating, one athlete drew a bye. An athlete who drew the bye in an earlier round could
draw a bye in the subsequent round as well. If a wrestler never suffered a fall throughout the
tournament, he was honored with the title akonitei, meaning “without touching the dust”
(Swaddling 1999, 73).
To begin a wrestling match, Hellenic wrestlers stood facing one another in a position called
the systasis. In this position, the athletes leaned forward toward one another until their foreheads
touched (Miller 2004, 47). From there, each wrestler tried a variety of different holds or maneu-
vers until a fall was recorded. We know from reliefs and vase paintings that wrestlers often grasped
wrists in order to control opponents, and that numerous head and body locks were used (Poliakoff
1987, 34–49).
BOXING
Greek boxing is best described by an inscription of an ancient writer, “A boxer’s victory is gained
in blood” (Kaibel 1878, no. 942).
The origins of Greek boxing are documented in Minoan and Mycenaean art. Probably the
most famous evidence for Minoan boxing is a fresco from the island of Thera (modern-day
Santorini), ca. 1600 BCE, aptly called the “Boxing Boys.” This fresco depicts two boys boxing,
but each, interestingly, is using only one glove on his right hand. Some scholars believe that the
boys are participating in some sort of ritual activity and not necessarily a sporting contest
(Crowther 2007, 39). In addition, a relief on the “Boxers’ Rhyton” of Hagia Triada, on Crete,
dated to about 1500 BCE, displays what appears to be men boxing in its top register (Miller
2004, 22–25). Finally, a fragmented Mycenaean amphora, ca. 1300–1200 BCE, shows a pair of
boxers facing each other and about to engage in a ﬁght (Swaddling 1999, 78).
Outside of this early graphical evidence, we know little about Hellenic boxing until the eighth
century BCE, with the writing of Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey. Although the poet is supposedly
describing events that took place some 500 years earlier during the Trojan War, probably his
descriptions of sport are from his own era (Miller 2004, 25; Sweet 1987, 12).
Tradition says that boxing was introduced to the program of the Olympic Games in 688 BCE.
Onomastos of Smyrna was the Olympic champion that year. We are further told that Onomastos
was the ﬁrst person to formulate rules for boxing (Sextus Julius Africanus, third century CE, for
the year 688 BCE).
Greek boxing rules were simple and straightforward: no clinching, scratching, or biting
(Sweet 1987, 72). Scholars still debate whether kicking was allowed (Crowther 1990, 176–181).
An overseeing ofﬁcial wielded a long, forked rod to whip athletes who violated these rules.
A boxing bout was a continuous event, with no rounds or mandatory breaks. Like wrestling,
it was fought in a softened, dirt pit (skamma), the size of which was determined by the judges.
Because most punches were thrown at the head, the technique of successful ﬁghters
involved coupling excellent footwork with rapid body movement. Thus, we are told that
Fighting Arts of the Hellenic, Hellenistic, and Roman Eras
235

Alkidamas defeated his much larger opponent, Kapaneos, by dodging punches using agility and
speedy footwork (Swaddling 1999, 81).
To win, a boxer had to either knock out his opponent or force him to submit. As in wrestling,
a boxer raised an index ﬁnger to capitulate.
Greek boxers generally competed in the nude, the exception being their hand coverings. The
earliest equivalent of boxing gloves among the Greeks were thongs (himantes, singular himas),
were tanned leather straps. These straps are estimated to have been about 4 meters (13 feet) in
length (Miller 2004, 51). The straps were wrapped around the wrists and hands in deliberate and
intricate fashions. Some boxers wrapped their wrists and hands completely, and the Byzantine
Eustathius of Thessalonica (ca. 1110–1198) (1324.18) described this wrapping as clublike.
Other boxers used the thongs as braces for the wrists. Still others left a single hand completely
unwrapped.
For boxers, purposes for thongs included supporting wrists and protecting knuckles and ﬁngers.
For the audience, purposes included the thongs increasing the chances of cuts and bleeding. This
is shown in numerous vase paintings.
Literary evidence suggests that injuries to boxers were frequent and sometimes severe, and
one ancient boxer reportedly did not receive his inheritance because of being disﬁgured to a
point where he was unrecognizable (Lucilius, Greek Anthology 11.75). Lucilius (ca. 160–ca. 103
BCE) was a satirist, so he may have exaggerated, but there is no doubt that boxers were scarred.
One need merely view the ﬁrst century BCE bronze called Boxer of Quirinal, at Rome’s Museo
delle Terme, to know that.
Hard thongs were used from the eighth to the fourth century BCE. They were then replaced
with “soft thongs” (meilichai) during the Hellenistic era (Pausanius 8.40.3). Regardless of which
thongs were worn, excessive sparring with thongs was painful, and injuries could be career-
ending. Thus, the Greeks also made padded practice gloves called sphairai or episphairai that
allowed boxers to practice at full speed with substantially less chance of injury (Plato Laws
8.830B; Plutarch Mordia 825e).
Cushioned competitive gloves called “spheres” (sphairai) were developed during the fourth
century BCE. The cushioned gloves were also known as “softer thongs” (himantes malachoteroi)
(Pausanius 623.4). Softer thongs were constructed using a ﬂeece under-layer that was secured to
the forearms, wrists, and hands by leather straps.
Softer thongs served as a precursor to an even more destructive glove, known as “sharp
thongs.” Sharp thongs placed a hardened piece of leather that was interlaced with other leather
bands across the knuckles of the ﬁngers. The result was essentially a knuckleduster. Sharp thongs
generally replaced softer thongs by the third century BCE (Scanlon 1982, 39).
Eventually, the sharp thong developed into a true glove. A true glove is much easier to put
on and to remove. The Greek glove had interwoven leather straps, and secured the leather
knuckleduster so that it would not shift on the hand while a boxer was delivering a blow.
The injurious nature of the thongs led to an interesting nickname, “ants” (myrmikes). Some
(Crowther 2007, 69; Miller 2004, 51; Poliakoff 1987, 73) believe this to be a metaphorical ref-
erence; e.g., thongs caused pock-marks and pain, much the way ants do when they burrow or
sting. However, Scanlon (1982, 39) believes that the moniker “the ants” was earned from the
thongs’ appearance. The enlarged ﬁst is similar in shape to an ant’s head, while the wrist and
forearm resemble the tapered abdomen of an ant.
236
Fighting Arts of the Hellenic, Hellenistic, and Roman Eras
www.ebook3000.com

PANKRATION
The pankration was the third of the “heavy events,” and it combined both wrestling and box-
ing. The term itself has been translated to mean “all-powerful” (Miller 2004, 57) or “complete
power or complete strength” (Crowther 2007, 70; Poliakoff 1987, 54), and the event was just
that—something that tested an athlete’s complete strength and power over his opponent.
Pankration was a no-holds-barred ﬁght, in which an athlete won by forcing his opponent to sub-
mit or to be unable to continue.
The only tactics that were prohibited in pankration were biting and gouging (Miller 2004,
57; Poliakoff 1987, 54). Writing during the second century CE, Pausanius (6.4.2) reported that
at least one athlete was victorious in the pankration by bending, if not breaking, the ﬁngers of
his opponents. Kicking was permitted, and some scholars believe that kicks and blows to the
genitals, while frowned upon, were probably legal (Miller 2004, 58–59). Pankratiasts fought in
a skamma, and, just as wrestlers and boxers, they signaled surrender by raising the index ﬁnger
on one hand. Probably the best-known story concerning a pankratiast is that of Arrichion. At
the 54th Olympiad in 564 BCE, Arrichion was being strangled by his opponent, who was using
a choke hold and body scissors. With his last bit of strength, Arrichion performed a maneuver
that dislocated his opponent’s ankle, forcing his opponent to surrender. Unfortunately, it was too
late for Arrichion, because he had just died, either from asphyxiation or heart failure. Nonethe-
less, Arrichion was declared the Olympic champion for the third and ﬁnal time, posthumously
(Poliakoff 1987, 67; Hollenback 2003; Miller 2004, 59–60).
ROMAN GAMES
The participation of Romans in combat sports is documented from at least the sixth century
BCE. Although the rules and tactics used by the Romans were essentially the same as those used
by the Greeks, the Romans were especially fond of boxing (pugilatus), which they considered
more difﬁcult and dangerous than wrestling or pankration (Köhne and Ewigleben 2000, 75).
One major difference between the boxing of the Romans and that of the Greeks is the type of
boxing glove used. Initially, the Romans incorporated the sharp thongs of the Greeks, but they soon
replaced the leather knuckleduster with a metal insert, thereby forming a glove known as a caestus
(Poliakoff 1987, 75–79; Köhne and Ewigleben 2000, 76), also caestus in the plural. Lee (2007) takes
exception to the caestus having metal inserts, and argues that the glove was made of leather.
Either way, in his ﬁctional Aeneid V. 404–484, written about 29–19 BCE, Virgil (Publius
Vergilius Maro, 70–19 BCE) references the brutal nature of the caestus. According to Virgil, a
Sicilian boxer named Entellus intended to ﬁght while wearing a pair of metal-laden gloves that
previously had been used by his brother Eryx. Their prior use was plain because they were still
“stained with blood and splattered brains” (sanguine cernis adhuc sparsoque infecta cerebro [Aeneid
V.413]). Entellus’ opponent, a Trojan named Dares, refused to ﬁght unless smaller, lighter gloves
were used. The sponsor of the match, Aeneas, complied with Dares’ request. Entellus went on
to win the ﬁght. The spoil of victory was a bull. At that point, Entellus demonstrated how
destructive even lighter caestus could be, by using his right hand to deliver one blow to the bull’s
head, killing it by fracturing the animal’s skull.
Roman boxing was harsh, but it paled in comparison to the most popular combat sport of
ancient Rome: the gladiatorial games. The origin for Roman gladiatorial games is unknown.
Fighting Arts of the Hellenic, Hellenistic, and Roman Eras
237

Etruria, in central Italy, has been suggested, and we know from wall paintings that Etruscans held
various sporting contests (Futrell 1997, 9–19). However, none of these paintings depicts gladiators
ﬁghting. Meanwhile, frescoes from Campania, in southern Italy, show men armed with helmets,
shields, and spears ﬁghting during ceremonies honoring the dead (munera). Campania was the area
where the ﬁrst stone amphitheaters were constructed, and it eventually housed the most important
gladiatorial school. Thus, there is circumstantial evidence for a Campanian origin (Köhne and
Ewigleben 2000, 11; Kyle 2007, 271). But, in the end, neither region can be conclusively shown
to be the rightful originator of gladiatorial games.
The ﬁrst known Roman gladiatorial games occurred in 264 BCE. In this bout, three pairs of
gladiators fought in honor of a deceased aristocrat. The practice proved fashionable, and soon
Roman aristocrats celebrating the lives of deceased relatives were hiring numerous pairs of gladi-
ators to face off in combat. The fad grew, and by the beginning of the Common Era, gladiatorial
games were associated less with funerary ritual than with public entertainment.
Gladiators earned their name from the gladius, a type of sword used by Roman soldiers. Thus,
the term gladiator is simply a word for swordsman. Most gladiators were slaves, but some were vol-
unteers (auctorati) who willingly took the gladiator’s oath of submission “to be burnt with ﬁre,
shackled with chains, whipped with rods, and killed with steel” (uri, uinciri, uerberari, ferroque
necari) (Grant 1967, 31). Individuals taking this oath forfeited their rights as freemen (or free-
women, as women, too, fought in the arena as gladiators) to their new owner, who could do with
them as he pleased. The reasons that Roman citizens had for doing this included debt retirement,
fame, and/or guaranteed subsistence (Coleman 1998, 70).
Gladiators lived in gladiatorial schools (ludi, singular ludus, literally “play”) that were run by
managers called lanistae. The gladiators of the school formed a troupe (familia). Instruction in the
art of ﬁghting was provided by teachers called doctores and magistri. The latter were presumably
retired gladiators (Junkelmann 2000, 32).
Gladiatorial training involved wooden weapons. Arming slaves with sharpened metal
weapons was deemed unwise, especially after the famed revolt of Spartacus (ca. 109–ca. 71 BCE)
in 73 BCE.
Different types of gladiators fought in the arena (e.g., eques, murmillo, thraex, retiarius, secutor),
and they each had specialized armor and weaponry that ultimately affected their respective ﬁghting
styles (Junkelmann 2000, 31–64). With the exception of the eques and provocator, differing types of
gladiators faced off in paired combat. The rationale was that the strengths of one gladiator would
correspond to the weaknesses of the other gladiator and vice versa. One popular pairing pitted the
retiarius against the secutor. The retiarius was a lightly armored gladiator—he had only one small
shoulder guard (galerus)—who was equipped with a net, trident, and dagger. His lack of armor made
him vulnerable, but mobile. The secutor was ﬁtted with a helmet, a large shield, and a sword. The
secutor’s armor slowed his mobility, but provided him with much protection.
Gladiators did not compete often. Instead, they fought only a few times a year, like a modern-
day boxer (Coleman 1998, 70). Contrary to the popular belief of today, gladiators rarely fought to
the death; it was the rare occurrence for a gladiator to actually die in the arena (Potter 1999, 307).
The reason for this is quite simple: Gladiators were more valuable alive, being able to be rented
for ﬁghts in the arena, than they were dead.
The night preceding the events of the amphitheater, a public banquet (coena libera) involved
the presentation of the gladiators who would ﬁght the following day. The local citizenry was
238
Fighting Arts of the Hellenic, Hellenistic, and Roman Eras
www.ebook3000.com

admitted to the feast. Prisoners sentenced to be executed next day were brought to the feast.
Thus, the banquet is probably better viewed as a form of advertising for the next day’s event
rather than as a symbolic gift from the sponsor (munerarius).
The morning of the bout began with the beasts, gladiators, prisoners, and musicians parading
through the amphitheater. Again, this was probably done to gain the attention of the spectators
and to whet their appetites for what was to come.
The activities of the day followed a standard pattern: a beast hunt (venatio) took place in the
morning; often, multiple hunts would occur. Condemned prisoners were put to death at noon,
generally by animals (the prisoners were said to be sentenced ad bestias, “to the beasts”). Gladi-
atorial ﬁghts (the main events) were offered during the afternoon hours. All these events were
usually accompanied by music. Instruments included trumpets and water organs.
The number of gladiatorial ﬁghts varied from event to event, depending upon how much the edi-
tor of the games was willing to spend. As a rule, if the gladiatorial ﬁghts were to last all afternoon,
some ten and thirteen pairs would face off in combat. A single gladiatorial ﬁght would last some 10
to 15 minutes (Potter 1999, 314), much like a modern-day mixed martial arts ﬁght night.
The ending of a bout normally occurred because a combatant would tire or become wounded,
lay down his (or her) shield, and signal capitulation by pointing only the index ﬁnger to the sky
(the ﬁght was said to continue ad digitum, “until the ﬁnger”). The umpire would stop the action
and look to the sponsor of the games (munerarius). The gladiator’s fate was deferred to the
munerarius. This person could, with inﬂuence from the crowd, grant a discharge from the arena
(missio), order the gladiator slain, or free one or both of the gladiators. The last two choices were
expensive—the munerarius rented the gladiators from the lanista, and freeing (or killing) some-
one else’s slave would cost him heavily.
The patron revealed his decision with a turn of the thumb (pollice verso). No one knows for
sure whether the true meaning was “thumbs up” or “thumbs down” (Hopkins and Beard 2005,
58). Often, the defeated gladiator was granted missio because the ﬁght was entertaining and he
(or she) fought with honor, thus he (or she) was allowed to return to the ludus to ﬁght again
another day. However, if the gladiator fought poorly or the crowd simply did not like the effort,
death was the verdict. The winning gladiator would then deliver the coup de grâce to the
defeated, kneeling gladiator, stabbing him (or her) in the throat and into the thorax, causing a
quick death.
The winning gladiator received a palm leaf as a token of his victory and then made a celebra-
tory lap of the arena’s ﬂoor, to accept the cheers of the crowd. Gladiators also won more tangible
prizes, such as gold pieces and spears.
The ultimate award for victory was the gladiator’s freedom. The process by which gladi-
ators received their freedom was elaborate. If a gladiator was deemed worthy by excellence
on the arena floor, he (or she) would be awarded a wooden sword (rudis) in a ceremonial rit-
ual. The munerarius would walk down to the arena’s floor and hand deliver the rudis to the
gladiator, signaling that the gladiator was now free (Potter 1999, 313–317.). The cost of
having a freed gladiator return to the arena was high. Emperor Tiberius (42 BCE–37 CE)
once paid 1,000 gold pieces to a freed gladiator to have him fight again in the arena (Grant
1967, 31).
Gladiatorial games continued well into the fourth century CE, but they began falling out of
favor with the spread of Christianity. Thus, Emperor Constantine I (272–337 CE) banned them
Fighting Arts of the Hellenic, Hellenistic, and Roman Eras
239

in 325 CE. The bans were ignored, however, and so gladiatorial games were banned again in
404 CE by Emperor Honorius (384–423).
—Steven Ross Murray
See also: Amazons and Gladiatrices (in this volume); Belief Systems: 
Introduction; and Commodiﬁcation of Leisure (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Coleman, Kathleen M. 1998. “The Contagion of the Throng: Absorbing Violence in the Roman World,”
Hermathena 164, 65–88, via http://ideas.repec.org/a/cup/eurrev/v5y1997i04p401-417_00.html,
accessed October 16, 2009.
Crowther, Nigel B. 1990. “The Evidence for Kicking in Greek Boxing,” The American Journal of
Philology 111, Summer, 176–181, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/294973, accessed October 16,
2009.
Crowther, Nigel B. 2007. Sport in Ancient Times. London: Praeger.
Grant, Michael. 1967. Gladiators. New York: Barnes and Noble.
Hollenback, George M. 2003. “Arrichion’s Last Fight: What Really Happened?” Journal of Combative
Sport, http://ejmas.com/jcs/jcsart_hollenback_0903.htm, accessed October 7, 2008.
Hopkins, Keith and Mary Beard. 2005. The Colosseum. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Junkelmann, Marcus. 2000. “Familia Gladiatoria: The Heroes of the Amphitheatre,” in Gladiators and
Caesars: The Power of Spectacle in Ancient Rome, edited by Eckart Köhne and Cornelia Ewigleben,
31–74. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Kaibel, Georg. 1878. Epigrammata Graeca ex lapidibus conlecta [Greek Epigrams: A Collection of
Gems] (in Latin). Berlin: Apud G. Reimer, via http://books.google.com, accessed January 17, 2010.
Köhne, Eckart and Cornelia Ewigleben. 2000. Gladiators and Caesars: The Power of Spectacle in Ancient
Rome. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Kyle, Donald G. 2007. Sport and Spectacle in the Ancient World. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Lee, Hugh M. 1997. “The Later Greek Boxing Glove and the ‘Roman’ Caestus: A Centennial
Reevaluation of Juthner’s ‘Ueber Antike Turngerathe,’” Nikephoros 10, 161–178.
Miller, Stephen G. 2004. Ancient Greek Athletics. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Poliakoff, Michael B. 1987. Combat Sports in the Ancient World: Competition, Violence, and Culture.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Potter, David Stone. 1999. “Entertainers in the Roman Empire,” in Life, Death, and Entertainment in the
Roman Empire, edited by David Stone Potter and D. J. Mattingly, 256–325. Ann Arbor: University
of Michigan Press.
Scanlon, Thomas F. 1982. “Greek Boxing Gloves: Terminology and Evolution,” Stadion 8–9, 31–45.
Swaddling, Judith. 1999. The Ancient Olympic Games. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Sweet, Waldo E. 1987. Sport and Recreation in Ancient Greece: A Sourcebook with Translations. New
York and Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
FIGHTING ARTS OF THE EARLY MIDDLE AGES
The Early Middle Ages in Western European culture are considered to extend from the collapse of
the Western Roman Empire (late ﬁfth century CE) until the start of the Crusades (circa 1100 CE).
During this period, parchment (the most common information storage medium) was expensive.
Consequently, little detailed information is known to have been written about the wrestling,
fencing, or archery methods of any Western Europeans, of any social class, until the late thirteenth
century. Archeology does not help much either. Although artifacts can show what weapons were in
use, artifacts do not show us how they were used. Nonetheless, some generalizations are possible.
240
Fighting Arts of the Early Middle Ages
www.ebook3000.com

From the ﬁfth to the ninth century, most Western European military forces were small. An
English legal code of 694 deﬁned an army (here) as any group of more than thirty-ﬁve armed
men. These “armies” fought using axes, spears, and bows. Armor generally consisted of conical
metal helmets, leather vests, and metal-banded shields. Horses were available, but they were usu-
ally used to carry supplies, rather than as cavalry mounts.
European chieftains began adding mail shirts (hauberks) to their arsenals during the late sev-
enth century. Mail shirts cost as much as a good horse or a ﬂock of sheep. Thus, a metal cap, a
leather vest, and a shield were all the armor most soldiers would ever own.
For most men, training consisted of whatever their relatives or friends taught, but wealthy
men sometimes hired sword masters to teach their sons. Thus, in the ninth century Frankish
kingdom, the Latin word schola (school) was sometimes used to describe the places where rich
men’s sons learned swordsmanship alongside reading and arithmetic.
Throughout the Early Middle Ages, wrestling and sword ﬁghts were sometimes used to settle
disputes. Although these ﬁghts were often to the death, recreational uses were also known. For
example, by the 1060s, tournaments had become popular in France, the Low Countries, and
western areas of Germany. During tournaments, men could gain reputation and wealth; they
could also lose fortunes—or die.
Mystery plays date to the eleventh century. Mystery plays taught Biblical stories to illiterate
audiences, and it was not for want of a better word that the Saxon theologian Hugh of Saint
Victor (1096–1141) described their choreographed wrestling and swordplay as “theatrics.” Trade
fairs and saints’ festivals were additional places where archery and sword-and-buckler contests
took place, and wrestling was done for the prize of a ram.
Anglo-Norman professional swordsmen were called escrimeurs, after a French word meaning
“fencers.” For Anglo-Norman swordsmen, training grounds included the courtyards of taverns
and inns, and known methods included wrestling tricks, disarms, throws, and enthusiastic sword-
and-buckler play. The authorities viewed these traveling swordsmen with suspicion, and the
movements of “vagabonds” (a term that originally included fencers, bear-baiters, and jugglers)
were closely regulated into the seventeenth century.
From the standpoint of martial historiography, the spread of paper-making technology into
Europe during the late twelfth century is signiﬁcant; as affordable paper spread, so did manuals
of swordsmanship and wrestling. Thus, Del Serpente’s manual was written in Milan about 1295,
while the German text known today as I.33 was written in Würzburg about 1300.
—Joseph Svinth
See also: Celtic Martial Arts; Fighting Arts of the Hellenic, Hellenistic, and Roman 
Eras; and Fighting Arts of the Later Middle Ages (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Barber, Richard, and Juliet Barker. 1989. Tournaments: Jousts, Chivalry, and Pageants in the Middle
Ages. New York: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
Carter, John Marshall. 1992. Medieval Games: Sports and Recreations in Feudal Society. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press.
Gies, Frances, and Joseph Gies. 1995. Cathedral, Forge, and Waterwheel: Technology and Invention in the
Middle Ages. New York: HarperPerennial.
Fighting Arts of the Early Middle Ages
241

FIGHTING ARTS OF THE LATER MIDDLE AGES
“Middle Ages” is a term used to describe European civilization from the collapse of the Western
Roman Empire during the late ﬁfth century until the collapse of the Eastern Roman Empire in
the mid-ﬁfteenth century. As a period with a 1,000-year span and hundreds of interrelated cul-
tures, it is difﬁcult to speak of the period in more than generalities: Iron Age technology, monar-
chical governments, feudal (or semi-feudal) economies, and a system of warfare based primarily
on fortiﬁcation and siege. Military command was based in a hereditary nobility and warrior class,
but by the twelfth century, a growing proportion of medieval armies were composed of profes-
sional, common, ﬁghting men.
THE LITERATURE OF COMBAT
There are no detailed records of the warrior’s training or technical skills, let alone the folk tra-
ditions of the common people, until the end of the High Middle Ages (ca. 1000–ca. 1350 CE).
Consequently, we can refer to the medieval arsenal and its battleﬁeld tactics, but not to the
actual ﬁghting methods of the individual combatants.
Around the year 1300, we can begin to speak more authoritatively of what was used, and how.
Although the martial arts of medieval Europe did not survive as living traditions, with the
increase of secular manuscript production, the nobility began to commission books on all man-
ners of topics, from falconry to medicine. Martial arts were among those topics, and fencing mas-
ters proved proliﬁc writers. By the turn of the ﬁfteenth century an entire corpus of fencing treatises
document highly developed, multidisciplinary martial arts and the presence of regulated fencing
guilds whose masters were plying their trades in cities, universities, and noble courts. Surviving
fencing manuscripts from Germany, Italy, England, Spain, Portugal, and Burgundy give a detailed
look at martial arts more than half a millennium old. These arts were practiced foremost by the
knightly class, but also by professional soldiers and townsmen who owed service in city militias.
THE CURRICULUM
Medieval masters-at-arms taught cognate martial arts: complete systems of armed and unarmed
combat, designed for both the battleﬁeld and personal defense. Their diverse curriculum com-
bined unarmed and weapons combat, both in and out of armor, on foot and on horseback. These
systems combined wrestling, dagger combat, and swordsmanship. Wrestling was particularly
aggressive and focused on techniques that would end a ﬁght quickly through either joint-breaking,
throws, or lethal force, rather than seeking submission. In contrast to many folk traditions or
modern wrestling sports, ground-ﬁghting had a minimal role in the overall corpus. Dagger combat
was split between unarmed defenses against the dagger and dagger vs. dagger dueling.
Swordsmanship formed the basis for training with all long hand weapons. The central
weapon was usually either the longsword or the sword and buckler. The longsword, often called
a “hand-and-a-half” sword by modern curators, appeared in the thirteenth century and was the
ﬁrst sword to offer a two-handed grip. It measured between 112 to 137 centimeters (44 to
54 inches) in length and weighed roughly 1.4 to 1.8 kilograms (3 to 4 pounds). The longsword’s
straight, double-edged blade was suited for both cutting and thrusting, and it could be ﬂat and
wide, narrow and hexagonal, or diamond-shaped in cross section. Its versatility with the cut and
242
Fighting Arts of the Later Middle Ages
www.ebook3000.com

thrust, and its suitability against unarmored, lightly armored, or even fully armored opponents,
made the weapon extremely popular with the knightly classes.
The one-handed “arming” sword also remained in use, and its blade evolved parallel with the
longsword. The one-handed sword could be used alone but was generally combined with the
buckler, a small hand shield measuring between 23 to 46 centimeters (9 to 18 inches). Sword
and buckler constituted the other core weapon system for the medieval fencing instructor, and
were a common sidearm for common soldiers and travelers. Fencing with them was also a popu-
lar medieval sport, especially with university students. Through the use of these weapons, the
master taught all of the basic blows, defenses, entering techniques, and disarms of his martial art.
Full plate armor, which had been developed by 1400, was virtually impervious to sword cuts. To
defeat this, the sword’s blade could be gripped in the left hand, turning it into a short spear. This
“shortened sword” or “half-sword” combat used the point to thrust into the gaps and weak points of
the armor. Combat with this weapon also included disarms, throws, and wrestling techniques based
on those taught with the dagger. This foundation in armored close-quarter combat and swords-
manship in turn formed a basis for ﬁghting with the spear, the poleaxe (a two-handed ax or war
hammer usually measuring about 150–200 centimeters, or 59–78 inches), and mounted combat.
METHODS OF TRAINING
Precise training methods of the medieval warrior remain unclear, but a rough picture can be
formed by looking across a variety of sources. As a rule, training consisted of physical condi-
tioning, teaching (and learning) prearranged sequences of techniques, and then participating in
various forms of mock combat.
Fencing masters devised guards for the different weapons based on the natural beginning and
ending points of blows. Since all possible strikes and parries were encoded in the guards, any time
the combatant assumed a guard, he knew precisely what options were available to him. Masters
also organized their repertoire into short training sequences meant to convey both technique and
tactics. This method is reminiscent of the kata of classical Japanese traditions. By learning the
guards and blows of the weapon, then the training sequences, one learned the fencing master’s
formal curriculum.
The writings of the Later Roman writer Vegetius (ﬂourished fourth century CE) were copied
and recopied throughout the medieval period. Vegetius advised the soldier to learn his blows by
striking a wooden post, called a pell. This should be done with a double-weight sword and shield,
so that the combatant would gain strength and ﬁnd his real weapons to be light. Conditioning
was also important to Dom Duarte of Portugal (1391–1438), who, in 1423, wrote a short treatise
on how his knights should keep ﬁt. Duarte recommended running on uneven terrain such as hills
and sandy beaches, vaulting, and exercising with weighted weapons. Best of all was wrestling,
which increased endurance and made the person supple in mind and body, and fencing in full
armor against another person.
Many forms of mock-combat games existed. The best known are the knightly joust (individ-
ual lance combat on horseback) and mounted or dismounted melees fought between rival teams.
Individual feats of arms also became popular during the fourteenth and ﬁfteenth centuries.
Sometimes, a single knight or squire would announce his intention to be at a particular place
and time and to hold the ﬁeld against all comers. Other times, two combatants would agree to
Fighting Arts of the Later Middle Ages
243

meet before a noble patron and a crowd of spectators. Either way, these were formal affairs, with
matched armor and weapons, and with predetermined conditions as to what ended the ﬁght.
Fencing contests and melees were not unique to knights, however. Jousting also became a pop-
ular sport with wealthy merchants, especially in the Low Countries during the fourteenth and
ﬁfteenth centuries. Similarly, from at least the late twelfth century, Italian city militias practiced
their skills by breaking into teams, donning armor, and ﬁghting mock battles (mezzascudo) in
which wooden batons substituted for swords. Usually fought with sticks and bucklers, mezzascudi
could be bloody affairs, but they continued as civic traditions and sport long after the militia had
been replaced by mercenary armies. In addition, universities began to appear, especially in Italy,
after 1088. By the thirteenth century, sword and buckler fencing had become popular with stu-
dents, leading many European universities to issue edicts banning the carrying of bucklers or fenc-
ing on school grounds. By the ﬁfteenth century, formal contests were also sponsored by the
fencing guilds. These matches featured specialized equipment, stringent safety rules, and speciﬁc
scoring systems. The purpose seems to have been much like folk wrestling: a physical challenge
and sporting competition that used some real combat skills but was not combat per se.
THE LIECHTENAUER TRADITION
The surviving record of European swordplay begins with a unique, south German manuscript,
Royal Armouries Ms. I.33, dated to ca. 1295. This manuscript, written by an anonymous priest,
shows a cleric teaching his “scholar” sword and buckler combat. The manuscript consists of cap-
tioned illustrations that teach a clear, well-developed and well-elucidated system of combat. It
also refers obliquely to a “common” method of swordplay, but it does not describe how its own
instructions might relate to, or differ from, that method.
Although Ms. I.33 is a sophisticated text, and portions appear in later manuscripts, there is no
clear historical evidence to show the priest’s art survived him in any kind of established “tradition.”
The ﬁrst evidence of a continuous, European tradition begins two generations later, with the Ger-
man grandmaster Johannes Liechtenauer. There are virtually no biographical details of Liechte-
nauer, save a few left by his students and their descendants. Liechtenauer was born sometime in the
ﬁrst half of the fourteenth century, but his birthplace, family and rank remain unknown. He trav-
eled through the Holy Roman Empire (comprising modern Germany, Austria, Switzerland, and
northern Italy) and Eastern Europe for a number of years, training with local masters and synthesiz-
ing their teachings into a new method. His primary weapon was the longsword, but his direct teach-
ings also included wrestling, dagger, and spear ﬁghting, both in and out of armor.
By the later 1300s, Liechtenauer had settled down and begun to teach. Precisely where is
unknown, although Swabia or Austria are likely. Tradition has it that he gathered a circle of stu-
dents, to whom he taught his art, simply known as Kunst des Fechtens (Art of Fencing), and from
whom derives nearly the entire record of German martial arts for the next two centuries.
Liechtenauer preserved his teachings in rhyming, mnemonic verses. These verses were
designed to obscure his art intentionally from anyone who had not been trained by the master
or his inner circle. The grandmaster swore his students to secrecy, presumably until they were
recognized as masters themselves, and then they were expected to hold their own students to
secrecy, as well.
Regardless of those oaths, within a few years of Liechtenauer’s death in the late fourteenth
century, the Liechtenauer circle seems to have determined that the art was being “corrupted by
244
Fighting Arts of the Later Middle Ages
www.ebook3000.com

lesser masters.” Whether this was true, a matter of professional rivalry, or something else, his stu-
dents, and then their students, began to write treatises interpreting the Master’s cryptic verses
and explaining both the technique and the philosophy of his school.
The ﬁrst of the surviving manuscripts was created in 1389, perhaps shortly after the grand-
master’s death, and is a compilation of fencing, medical, and astrological writings. Throughout
the ﬁfteenth and into the sixteenth centuries, a succession of German fencing masters wrote
texts based on the principles laid down by Liechtenauer, expanding his original teachings with
new techniques and new weapons, such as the sword and buckler, messer (a falchion-like
weapon, popular in Central and Eastern Europe), staff, spear, and poleaxe. Much of this writing
seems to have been intended to secure noble patronage.
The last great master of the Liechtenauer tradition known to us is Joachim Meyer (ﬂourished
mid-sixteenth century). Meyer’s manual of 1570 is a massive, incredibly detailed, and lavishly illus-
trated fechtbuch (combat manual) that covers all of the tradition’s weapons: longsword, dagger, short
and long staffs, polearms, daggers, and the dusack (a training weapon for the messer). Meyer was also
the ﬁrst German master to describe a new weapon and a new style of fencing, the Italian rapier,
which he modiﬁed to ﬁt the Liechtenauer conceptual framework. This massive work was ﬁlled with
detailed engravings and was a complete, step-by-step “how to” fencing manual. Meyer’s manual was
inﬂuential enough to be reprinted in 1600 and again in 1660, and to be plagiarized in at least two
seventeenth-century manuals, namely those of Jacob Sutor (1612) and Theodore Verolini (1679).
ITALIAN MASTERS
Late medieval Italy was a patchwork of feuding principalities, “free-republics,” and cities under
Papal rule. Condottieri, or mercenary soldiers, came from all ranks of society and traveled from
city to city, army to army, selling their services. In terms of education and literacy, Italy was far
ahead of the rest of Europe. Thus, while Germany of 1400 was still a medieval society, Italy was
already entering its Renaissance.
Fiore dei Liberi da Premariacco was born into this factitious society around the year 1340.
A member of a minor noble house in Friuli, a region of northeastern Italy, he was drawn into the
life of the itinerant swordsman. Like Liechtenauer before him, dei Liberi traveled widely and
studied under a variety of Italian and German masters, systematizing their lessons into his own,
unique art. He eventually entered the service of the powerful Marquis of Ferrara, Niccolò III
d’Este (1383–1441), and at the marquis’s request, dei Liberi composed a book in 1409. This large
manuscript, called Il Fior di Battaglia (“The Flower of Battle”), covered the use of wrestling and
the principal knightly weapons of sword, poleaxe, spear and dagger, in and out of armor, on foot
and on horseback.
In his prologue, dei Liberi provided a number of details of his own life, including the men-
tion of the ﬁve duels he fought against rival masters. He also names his principal students,
most of whom were well-known mercenary and military commanders of the day. Although dei
Liberi wrote that he had read and owned many books on the art of fencing, no record survives
of what these works or their authors might have been, and Il Fior di Battaglia stands as the ear-
liest surviving Italian martial arts text. Although he remains a shadowy ﬁgure, as the “father
of Italian martial arts,” dei Liberi’s fame was still great enough to produce two biographies over
the ensuing centuries and to be remembered in the street names of the towns of Udine and
Premariacco.
Fighting Arts of the Later Middle Ages
245

About seventy years after dei Liberi, Filippo Vadi of Pisa produced a small, painted martial arts
book, De Arte Gladiatoria Dimicandi (“Of the Art of Sword Combat”), dedicated to Guidobaldo da
Montefeltro, Duke of Urbino. Vadi was a disciple of the dei Liberi “school,” but his work has depar-
tures in nomenclature and methodology, and may either represent a subtradition of the dei Liberi
heritage or be evidence of the school’s evolution during the ﬁfteenth century.
A second great tradition of Italian swordsmanship originated in Bologna around the same
time as dei Liberi’s, and long outlived it. Lippo di Bartolomeo Dardi, an expert in mathematics,
geometry, astrology, and astronomy, was a professor at the University of Bologna; he also founded
a fencing school there sometime during the ﬁrst half of the ﬁfteenth century. Tradition names
him as the author of a now-lost work on geometry and swordsmanship. The Dardi School taught
a staggering variety of weapons and close-quarter combat to be used in both civilian and mili-
tary encounters: the one-handed sword, used alone and in conjunction with bucklers; shields; an
armored gauntlet; the two-handed sword; pole arms such as the halberd, bill, spear, winged spear,
partisan (another kind of spear), and partisan and shield; the dagger, cloak and dagger, and
unarmed defenses against the dagger. Although this school originated in the ﬁfteenth century, it
is only known today through the line of masters who began to publish printed books in the six-
teenth century. The most famous of these books was Achille Marozzo’s Opera Nova (“New
Work”), which was published in 1536. Despite the title of his work, Marozzo was neither a
founder nor a particular innovator; there is little in his book that would have seemed odd to dei
Liberi or Vadi. But Marozzo’s book is both massive and illustrated, qualities that caused it to con-
tinue to be reprinted well into the 1620s, which suggests that the Bolognese tradition continued
throughout the Renaissance.
Italian records also remain from maestri d’arme from unrelated traditions of the Later Middle
Ages and early Renaissance. Notable among these was Pietro Monte, another master in the serv-
ice of Guidobaldo, Duke of Urbino (1472–1508). Monte was the author of a variety of printed
books on philosophy, martial arts, and related practices. His Collectanea, published in 1509, not
only presents a unique system of combat, but also covers a dizzying variety of weapons, wrestling
plays, physical conditioning, jousting tactics and techniques, and arms and armor nomenclature.
From 1553, we have the only surviving treatise of a possible Neapolitan school, Le Tre Giornate
(The Three Days) by Marcantonio Pagano. Despite being written well into the Renaissance,
Pagano’s work focuses on medieval weapons: the two-handed sword, the partisan, and a slashing
spear called coltello inhastato (“pole knife”).
Although later fencing masters continued to dedicate space to lance, halberd, sword and
buckler, and two-handed sword, by the late sixteenth century all these traditional weapons and
methods were being eclipsed by a new, purely civilian style of fencing based on a new weapon,
the rapier. Thus, while Bonaventura Pistoﬁlo produced a massive work on pike, halberd, and
musket in 1621, and the rapier master Francesco Alﬁeri turned his attentions to the two-handed
sword in 1653, the world had changed, and the old methods were dying out.
ENGLAND AND FRANCE
Outside of central Europe, records of medieval European martial arts are very thin. Whereas
German, Austrian, and Italian fencing masters apparently wandered throughout central Europe,
going from city to city and court to court, reﬁning their arts and setting up shop wherever they
246
Fighting Arts of the Later Middle Ages
www.ebook3000.com

could ﬁnd patronage, it seems that the English nobility had not warmed to the discipline of arms
being an open commodity. The ﬁrst mention of “fencers” comes from the reign of Henry II
(reigned 1154–1189), in the form of a writ imprisoning a fencing instructor. Statues of Edward I
(reigned 1239–1307) speciﬁcally ban the teaching of sword and buckler fencing within London’s
walls, on pain of imprisonment.
This dim eye may have been class-related. Whereas continental fencing masters came
from mercantile and knightly families, in England they were often simple tradesmen, such as
cheese makers and ﬁshmongers. Therefore, much of the “knightly” training in England may
have continued in the old fostering tradition, in which a household knight was appointed to
train youthful charges. In either case, the lower levels of literacy associated with lower classes
may explain why the total corpus of surviving medieval English fencing literature consists of
three fragmentary poems on the use of the longsword and staff, written in a rural dialect of
Middle English.
There is even less information from France than from England. Research thus far has only
revealed a single combat manual, Le Jeu de la hache (“Axe-Play”), a ﬁfteenth-century Burgundian
treatise on the poleaxe.
IBERIA (SPAIN AND PORTUGAL)
Records from the Iberian Peninsula are almost as scant as those of France and focus entirely on
mounted combat. The earliest surviving Iberian work was written by Dom Duarte of Portugal in
1423. This short work, Regimento de las Armas (Regiment of Arms), is not a fencing manual.
Instead, it addresses how a knight should train at arms. Duarte wrote a second, longer work, Bem
Cavalgar (Art of Good Horsemanship), in 1434, which focused largely on the art of jousting,
with a small chapter of wrestling. Also, throughout the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries, a suc-
cession of Iberian noblemen, notably Ponç de Menaguerra of Valencia (1493) and Juan Quixada
de Reayo (1548), produced treatises on mounted, armored combat, with sword and lance, both
in battle and in the lists.
MODERN SURVIVALS
As the nature of both warfare and personal defense evolved, what was no longer useful was
abandoned. By the early eighteenth century, the use of medieval weapons survived in only a few
places, mostly as traditional curiosities. Today, there are a number of European styles of stick-
combat whose “histories” claim descent from the two-handed swordplay of the Late Middle
Ages; examples include French grand baton and Portuguese jogo do pau. However, there is no
indisputable documentary or technical evidence to show that any of these arts originated before
the eighteenth century.
Various European folk wrestling traditions, to include those of Iceland, Cornwall, and
Brittany, also claim great antiquity. Unfortunately, folk culture is oral culture, so there is little
way to verify these claims. Although these folk traditions certainly may have grown from (or
parallel to) traditions taught by the medieval masters-at-arms, their overall curriculum and
assumptions of the combat environment are very different. There are a number of similar
throws, holds, and takedowns found between all surviving forms of Western wrestling and the
medieval material, but the medieval tradition focused on ending the ﬁght immediately through
Fighting Arts of the Later Middle Ages
247

a use of strikes, joint-breaks, chokes, and potentially lethal throws, most of which are banned
for safety in folk, international freestyle, and Greco-Roman wrestling.
The most signiﬁcant division from the art of the medieval masters-at-arms is the role of
ground ﬁghting. Grappling on the ground is a key element of many modern wrestling arts, but
it makes only rare appearances in the medieval texts. Writing in 1409, Fiore dei Liberi
declared that there were two types of wrestling, “for play and for preserving life,” and stated
that he taught only the latter. Thus, his wrestling has no ground ﬁghting. Instead, it focuses
on joint destructions, throws, and arm-bars. Writing about seventy years later, Pietro Monte
analyzed the wrestling of many different nations and criticized those who focused on ground
wrestling, saying that wrestling on the ground was a ludic rather than martial exercise. This
suggests that it was medieval ludic wrestling, rather than combative grappling, that is the
ancestor of surviving European folk traditions.
—Gregory D. Mele
See also: Canary Islands Stick Fighting and Wrestling; Celtic Martial Arts; 
Fighting Arts of the Early Middle Ages; Fighting Arts of the Renaissance 
(in this volume); Belief Systems: European Chivalry; and Belief 
Systems: European Occult Sciences (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Anglo, Sydney. 1989. “The Man Who Taught Leonardo Darts,” Antiquaries Journal LXIX,
261–278.
Anglo, Sydney. 2000. The Martial Arts of Renaissance Europe. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Barber, Richard, and Juliet Barker. 1989. Tournaments: Jousts, Chivalry and Pageants in the Middle Ages.
Woodbridge, UK: Boydell & Brewer.
Castle, Egerton. 1885. Schools and Masters of Fence from the Middle Ages to the 18th Century. London:
G. Bell and Sons, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Forgeng, Jeffrey, editor. 2003. The Medieval Art of Swordsmanship: A Facsimile & Translation of Europe’s
Oldest Personal Combat Treatise, Royal Armouries MS I.33. Highland Village, TX: Chivalry Bookshelf.
Forgeng, Jeffrey. 2006. The Art of Combat: A German Martial Arts Treatise of 1570. Westport, CT:
Greenwood.
Hils, Hans-Peter. 1985. Meister Johann Liechtenauers Kunst des langen Schwerts [Master Johann
Liechtenauer’s Art of the Longsword]. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang GmbH.
Luders, Alexander, T. Edlyn Tomlins, and others. 1810–1828. Statutes of the Realms. London: Record
Commission.
Novati, Francesco. 1902/1409. Flos Duellatorum, in arnis, sine arnis, equester, pedester [Flower of Fighters,
with Weapons, without Weapons, on Horse, on Foot]. Bergamo: Instituto Italiano D’Arti Graﬁche
(reprint).
Porzio, Luca, and Gregory Mele. 2003. Arte Gladiatoria Dimicandi: The 15th Century Swordsmanship of
Filippo Vadi. Highland City, TX: Chivalry Bookshelf.
Tobler, Christian. 2001. Secrets of German Medieval Swordsmanship. Highland Village, TX: Chivalry
Bookshelf.
Tobler, Christian. 2007. In Service to the Duke: The 15th Century Fighting Treatise of Paulus Kal. Highland
Village, TX: Chivalry Bookshelf.
Zanutto, D. Luigi. 1906. Fiore di Premariacco ed i ludi e feste marziali e civili in Friuli nel medio evo
[Fiore of Premariacco, and the Martial and Civil Festivals in Friule in the Middle Ages].
Udine.
248
Fighting Arts of the Later Middle Ages
www.ebook3000.com

FIGHTING ARTS OF THE RENAISSANCE
The Renaissance took place during the ﬁfteenth to mid-seventeenth centuries in Europe. It was
a time of great cultural and technological upheaval, and these changes were reﬂected in Euro-
pean ﬁghting arts. Many factors drove these changes: the waning of plate and mail armor, the
rise of private dueling, a pan-European fascination with Italian culture, and the ability of printed
books to widely disseminate new ideas. The pike, cannon, and harquebus had appeared during
the 1300s and were rapidly changing the face of the battleﬁeld, but not so rapidly that the old
sword and buckler, poleaxe, two-handed longsword, and plate armor could yet be ignored. Thus,
well into the seventeenth century, the truly well-rounded martial artist had to be skilled in a vast
array of “medieval” weapons, close-quarter combat, and most notably, the new rapier and its
companion arms.
BOLOGNA: CITY OF SWORDSMEN
The University of Bologna, founded in 1088, was one of Europe’s ﬁrst international centers of
learning. Alongside the arts and sciences that ﬂourished in the city, there was a particular
interest in the martial arts, and fencing schools and fencing masters can be traced to the city
from the 1300s.
In the early decades of the ﬁfteenth century, Bartolomeo de Lippo Dardi, a professor of
mathematics and astronomy at the University, founded a fencing school. The Dardi School was
both the ﬁrst fencing tradition of the Renaissance and also the last great tradition of the Mid-
dle Ages, and its evolution gives a fair picture of how the new civilian fashion of wearing
swords, the rise of private dueling, and the rapidly evolving military battleﬁeld was reshaping
European martial arts.
Like other medieval traditions, the Dardi School was a cognate school of armed and unarmed
combat; that is, it was meant for both civilian and military use. Whereas many other traditions
focused on wrestling and the longsword, the Bolognese school’s focus was on the single-handed
“arming” sword. The arming sword went through several developments during the late ﬁfteenth
century, when it was ﬁtted with ﬁnger rings and a knuckle bow to protect the hand. Sword use
was taught both alone and in conjunction with a wide variety of defensive arms: the round buckler,
square buckler, round shield, cloak and dagger, and the armored gauntlet.
Besides the arming sword and its companion weapons, the Dardi School taught a variety of
two-handed weapons. Examples include the spadone, which was a shoulder-height sword ﬁtted
with a long, blunted ricasso and wide steel parrying hooks. Old pole weapons such as the spear
and poleaxe continued to be taught, but there were also new pole weapons such as the pike, par-
tisan, bill, and halberd, all of which had developed during the 1400s. Although it did not empha-
size close-quarter combat techniques as much as previous systems had, the Dardi tradition also
taught a variety of them, including the use of the cross-hilted dagger, cloak and dagger, and
empty-hand defenses against a knife attack.
Although tradition claims that Dardi wrote a book describing the relationship between fenc-
ing and geometry, no trace of this text has been found. Nevertheless, Dardi’s school ﬂourished and
passed on to later generations, to include a famed master, Guido Antonio de Luca (active ca.
1500). Today, both Dardi and de Luca remain shadowy ﬁgures to fencing historians, and little is
Fighting Arts of the Renaissance
249

known of the school or its speciﬁc teachings until the sixteenthcentury. The increased knowledge
is owed to de Luca’s students Antonio Manciolino and Achille Marozzo, both of whom published
works entitled Opera Nova (New Works) during the 1530s. Speciﬁc didactical methods of the
Dardi School shown in both Opera Nova included long solo drills, analogous to kata in Japanese
martial arts; assalti (sequences of techniques to be used in friendly matches); and abbattimenti
(paired techniques to be used in serious duels). In all, the Bolognese style was dynamic and ﬂam-
boyant, with many guards, varied footwork, and creative attacks.
INNOVATION AND REINVENTION
As the sixteenth century progressed, printed fencing books intended for a bourgeois audience
became increasingly popular. This coincided with the increased popularity of wearing swords in
civilian dress and a growing dueling culture.
Fencing was not immune to the Renaissance interest in Humanism. As such, masters at arms
sought to apply rational models when they explained or conceptualized their arts. They also sim-
pliﬁed and reduced the number of guards and replaced metaphorical names with mechanical or
numerical ones. This process began (or at least is ﬁrst recorded) with the works of swordsman
Angelo Viggiani and architect Camillo Agrippa.
A Venetian or Bolognese swordsman, Angelo Viggiani dal Montone (1517–ca. 1555) was a
fencing innovator whose work Lo Schermo (Fencing) was written in the 1550s but not printed
until 1575. In this work, written as a dialogue between a fencing master and his noble patron,
Viggiani introduced four innovations. First, he made his chief focus the sword alone, rather
than the sword and buckler or any other companion arm. Second, he reduced the large num-
ber of guards of the old Bolognese school to seven positions, all framed with only the right foot
forward. Third, he disposed of the metaphorical names of the Bolognese tradition in favor of a
rational nomenclature based on the guard’s form and purpose. Fourth, he insisted upon the
superiority of the point and introduced what he considered to be a “perfect attack”: an
overhand thrust made on the lunge. Viggiani did not invent a new style; instead, he simpliﬁed,
recast, and redeﬁned the underlying theory of the Dardi School into the language of a
sixteenth-century scholar.
The ﬁrst true innovator of the sixteenth century was Camillo Agrippa (ﬂourished mid–
sixteenth century). Agrippa was from Milan but lived and worked in Rome, where he was a
noted fencer, architect, engineer, and mathematician. As a mathematician, Agrippa embraced
the idea of using geometry and physics (as they were then known) to conceptualize and codify
fencing. This began a process that would radically change the face of civilian fencing. In his
Trattato di Scientia d’Arme con un Dialogo di Filosoﬁa (Treatise on the Science of Arms with a
Dialogue of Philosophy) published in 1553, Agrippa proposed dramatic changes in the way
swordsmanship was practiced at the time. Focusing on unarmored combat, Agrippa proposed
that, since the thrust was a straight-line attack, it traveled the shortest distance. The thrust was
also generally lethal. Thus, this combination of speed and lethality made the thrust the opti-
mal attack. Cuts, Agrippa believed, should be reserved for those instances when the point was
off-line, and used with the objective of bringing the point back on-target for a ﬁnishing thrust.
With a new emphasis on the thrust, only those guards that kept the point directed straight at
the target had merit. Therefore, the ten or more guards used in the Dardi School could be
250
Fighting Arts of the Renaissance
www.ebook3000.com

reduced to four: prima, seconda, terza and quarta, which roughly correspond to the guards used
in Italian fencing today.
Following Agrippa and Viggiani’s lead, masters of the late sixteenth century continued to
emphasize the thrust and adopted either Agrippa’s four guards or subtle variations of them.
The emphasis on civilian combat continued. Although masters such as Marco Docciolini
taught sword-and-buckler into the seventeenth century, by the 1570s, it was being supplanted,
ﬁrst by the civilian sidearms of dagger and cloak, and then by the sword alone. Staff weapons
and large shields also continued to be taught throughout the sixteenth century, but instruc-
tion became increasingly vestigial as the century wore on, and was virtually absent by the end
of the century.
This absence did not necessarily reﬂect contempt for these ancient weapons. Nicoletto
Giganti posed for his frontispiece with a longsword. Salvatore Fabris informed the reader of
his (unfulﬁlled) intention to write an entire volume on the spadone. Francesco Alﬁeri
thought the two-handed sword important enough to write a treatise on its use in the mid-
seventeenth century. Instead, the days of judicial combats were gone, and the importance of
the sword and shield on the battleﬁeld was minimal. Italian masters now were concerned
with preparing their students with civilian defense, in the street and in formal duels, using a
new weapon, the rapier.
THE RAPIER
The rapier was a natural outgrowth of the theories of masters such as Agrippa and Viggiani. An
emphasis on the thrust meant that the sword should be longer and stiffer, thereby extending
reach and penetration. Less emphasis on the cut meant that the mass of the weapon could be
kept manageable by counteracting the additional blade length with a generally thinner blade.
Without the buckler or armored gauntlets to protect the hands, the use of ﬁnger rings and
knuckle bows were needed to protect the sword hand, which was now always carried forward of
the body, and was thus more exposed to attack.
Sometime during the second half of the seventeenth century, there emerged a distinct,
instantly recognizable, one-handed weapon having a long, straight-blade, optimized for the
thrust, and speciﬁcally designed to be used without any other companion weapon. At that point,
the rapier was born.
The rapier used at the close of the 1500s featured two cutting edges and a point, counter-
balanced to provide greater point control and ﬁtted with a swept hilt of loops and rings that
guarded the entire sword hand. By the 1620s, this hilt would begin to be replaced by the more
protective cup-hilt. These weapons were neither light nor ﬂimsy; a typical rapier of circa 1600 had
a blade about 107 centimeters (42 inches) in length, weighed 1 to 1.5 kilograms (2 to 3 pounds),
and was capable of parrying the blows of broad-bladed military swords, including the old-
fashioned, but still potent, longsword. It was not until the following century, as the rules of dueling
formalized (and there was less likelihood of encountering two-handed swords and polearms) that
thinner, more specialized rapiers appeared.
By the time there was a full-developed rapier, there was also a fully developed method for
using it. This new style of fencing was based on Agrippa’s four guards and emphasis on the
thrust, but it replaced Agrippa’s circular footwork with a narrower, more linear stance that kept
Fighting Arts of the Renaissance
251

the weapon advanced towards the opponent, and the swordsman’s body hidden behind the
sword’s hilt. In this linear style, the lunge became the ideal attack. Thus, fencing masters taught
how to use a lunge from any of the four guard positions to parry and strike the opponent in a
single action. The counterattack was made in mezzo tempo, that is, in the midst of the opponent’s
own action.
The masters of rapier fencing published proliﬁcally and were read widely, with three of the
greatest exponents of the art all publishing just after the turn of the seventeenth century. Ridolfo
Capoferro of Cagli was a fencing master in the city of Siena. In 1610, he published a lavishly illus-
trated treatise in Italian that was entitled Gran Simulacro dell’Arte e dell’Uso della Scherma (Great
Representation of the Art and Use of the Sword). A complex text, Gran Simulacro covered top-
ics ranging from general theory, to the correct form of the lunge, to using the rapier alone, to using
it with dagger, cloak, and even the old rotella (a round shield worn strapped to the arm; known as
“target” in English). Technically, Capoferro seems to have been trained in the old Bolognese
school, because he periodically used Bolognese terminology and techniques in his book.
In 1606, Nicoletto Giganti, a Venetian fencing master, published a shorter, more concise
work called Scola overo Teatro (School or Theater [of Arms]). Giganti wrote in a clear, crisp style.
He described four basic guards and footwork and then progressively led the student through a
series of exercises that illustrated the different attacks, defenses and counterattacks. This man-
ual was reprinted in 1608, and three separate German and French translations appeared between
1608 and 1619.
Also in 1606, another work appeared, this time by the Paduan master Salvatore Fabris
(1544–1618). Fabris would become arguably the most internationally celebrated teacher of the
new style. It is not known whom Fabris studied with, and he does not show an obvious Bolognese
origin like his contemporaries. However, he earned both a living and a reputation as a fencing
master, ﬁrst in Italy, then in Northern Europe. The roster of his princely pupils included John
Adolf (1575–1616, Lutheran Archbishop of Bremen, 1589–1596, and Duke of Holstein-
Gottorp, 1590–1616) and Christian IV, King of Denmark (1577–1648), and it was through the
patronage of the latter that Fabris published his exceptional rapier-fencing manual De lo Schermo
ovvero Scienza d’Armi (Of Fencing, or the Science of Arms). This dense work provided a thor-
ough discussion of fencing theory and tactics, followed by a massive and detailed curriculum for
the sword, sword and dagger, and sword and cloak. Fabris ended his work with notes on how to
use the rapier against polearms, plus a short chapter on unarmed defenses against the dagger.
These latter techniques could have been taken from medieval masters writing two centuries
prior, showing that these skills were still considered the provenance of the trained master-
at-arms. Fabris’s manual became famous in European fencing circles; it was reprinted continually
from 1606 to 1713, translated into several languages, imitated, and even plagiarized, as the
“Salvatoran Art” spread throughout the continent, taking particular root in the German states
of the Holy Roman Empire.
Although each of these masters emphasized slightly different elements, all three were
teaching the same general style of fencing. The next century saw a constant stream of new
works in this same tradition. Authors included Francesco Alﬁeri, La Scherma di Francesco
Alﬁeri (The Fencing of Francesco Alﬁeri, 1640), Giuseppe Morsicato Pallavicini, La Scherma
Illustrata (Fencing Illustrated, 1670), Francesco Antonio Marcelli, Regole della Scherma (Rules
of the Sword, 1686) and Bondi’ di Mazo, La Spada Maestra (The Sword Master, 1696), while
252
Fighting Arts of the Renaissance
www.ebook3000.com

the writing of Capoferro, Giganti, and Fabris continued to be both reprinted and plagiarized
in new editions.
TWILIGHT OF THE GERMAN TRADITION
North of the Alps, the medieval tradition of Hans Liechtenauer (ﬂourished late fourteenth cen-
tury) continued to thrive, and a host of new masters added their own manuscripts on wrestling
and longsword, Messer (falchion), dagger, halberd, and spear fencing. German fencing masters
had apparently long employed some method of testing and creating other masters, but this began
to be codiﬁed with the formation of an ofﬁcial fencing guild, the Marxbrüder (Brotherhood of
St. Mark), which received an imperial charter from the emperor Frederick III in 1487. The guild
held an annual meeting in Frankfurt, where they elected their captain (Hauptmann) and gave
tests for candidates seeking the title of “master of the longsword.” A rival fencing brotherhood,
the Federfechter (Fencers of the Feather) was founded in Prague in 1570, and the Holy Roman
Emperor Rudolf II (1552–1612) awarded it a charter in 1607.
As in Italy, the advent of printed books led to a boom in fencing literature. The earliest
known printed fencing text was made by a German named Pauerenfeindt in 1516. There was
also a subtle, but continuous, change in the curriculum during this period, again reﬂecting the
change in martial culture and intended audience. Sportive elements were increasingly
introduced into the longsword and wrestling curriculum. The “bourgeois” halberd and staff
replaced the “knightly” poleaxe and lance. Mounted combat and armored ground combat nearly
disappeared altogether.
By the mid-sixteenth century, there began to be attempts at preservation of the older
teachings, notably by Paulus Hector Mair (1517–1579). Mair was an Augsburg town bureaucrat
who spent lavish sums of money to create huge, full-color compendia of fencing manuscripts, at
least three of which survive to this day. Mair’s obsession for book production drove him to
embezzlement, and ultimately to a hangman’s noose. Amidst the pages of Mair’s compendia are
the familiar weapons of the Liechtenauer tradition, as well more exotic ones such as the sickle,
two-handed ﬂail, and scythe. Of particular interest, however, is the inclusion of short passages
on a complex-hilted sword, used alone and with the dagger, cloak, or buckler in a series of tech-
niques that seemed straight out of Marozzo’s repertoire: the innovations of the Italian masters
were beginning to cross into German lands.
By the time Joachim Meyer, the last of the Liechtenauer masters, published his massive
Thorough Descriptions of the Knightly Art of Fencing in 1570, it was clearly stated that the
longsword was maintained as a pedagogical and traditional style, and that it was used only in
fencing contests. However, Meyer’s treatment of a new weapon, the Rappir, is very different.
Meyer tells us that he learned the use of this weapon in foreign lands and had adapted it to his
native tradition. He dedicates nearly a third of the book to this weapon, in a fascinating fusion
of late Bolognese and German guards, the overhand lunge of Angelo Viggiani, and the special
cuts, or Meisterhau, of the old Liechtenauer School. How widespread this hybrid style became is
unclear, but it clearly had enough impact for Meyer’s book to be reprinted in 1600, plagiarized
by Jacob Sutor in 1612, and plagiarized again by Theodore Verolinus in 1679. Nevertheless, it
was the mainline of Italian rapier fencing, particularly the school of Salvatore Fabris, that would
dominate German fencing in the seventeenth century.
Fighting Arts of the Renaissance
253

SPAIN
By the late sixteenth century, Spanish gentry were studying a system of swordsmanship that was
based on geometry such as only the Renaissance could produce. When Jerónimo Sánchez de
Carranza (sixteenth century) published his La Philosophia de las Armas (The Philosophy of Arms)
in 1582, he based it on the sacred geometry so popular in European alchemical and mathematical
circles of the ﬁfteenth to seventeenth centuries.
Carranza’s system of combat, called La Verdadera Destreza (The True Skill) applied sixteenth-
century logic, didactics, and Euclidean geometry to fencing. The result, he said, was a system of
fencing based entirely on mathematic principles. The ﬁghting method, ﬁrst documented by
Carranza in 1569 but not published until 1582, describes a conservative system of swordplay
using both thrusts and cuts. Like the Italian school, the Spanish system recognized the superior-
ity of the point over the cut, but made greater use of cuts. The Spanish system used a single
guard, formed with the arm held straight forward toward the opponent; it also had a unique style
of circular footwork.
La Destreza appealed to the Spanish aristocracy. Carranza was a gentleman, and his student Don
Luis Pacheco Narvaez (1570–1640) was a nobleman, personal arms instructor to the Spanish king
Philip IV (1605–1665), and admiral-general in the Spanish navy. He was also one of the most pro-
liﬁc writers in the history of fencing, producing a vast body of work, including a 750+-page opus
entitled Nueva Ciencia, y Filosofía de la Destreza de las Armas, su Teorica y Practica (New Science
and Philosophy of the Art of Weapons, Its Theory and Practice). Narvaez’s early writings were
compendia celebrating his master Carranza, but he later attempted to discredit Carranza in order
to further his own renown, thus splitting the Spanish fencing community into “Carrancistas” and
“Pachequistas.”
Despite scorn by late nineteenth-century fencing historians such as Egerton Castle
(1858–1920), the Spanish system must have been more than a hollow exercise of hermetic
mathematics, as Spanish swordsmen were noted with respect throughout Europe, and Carranza’s
system survived for two centuries.
ENGLAND
Although Henry VIII of England (1491–1547) legitimized the London Masters of Defence by
issuing them a letter of corporation in 1540, the role of “fencing master” remained a decidedly
lower-class profession in England throughout the Renaissance; as in the Later Middle Ages, it
was associated with cheese makers, ﬁshmongers, and tanners rather than aristocrats. Even
George Silver (ca. 1560s–ca. 1620s), whose works provide the only detailed study of Elizabethan
martial arts, was quick to point out that he was a gentleman, not a professional fencing master.
Like German fencing guilds, English masters taught the traditional weapons of sword and
buckler, sword and dagger, two-handed sword, quarterstaff, and bill, only adding the Italian
rapier and rapier and dagger after the arrival of the Italian masters Rocco Bonetti about 1571 and
Vincentio Saviolo about 1590. These Italians were well-born and quick to distance themselves
from comparisons with the native competition, offering lessons for vast tuitions: Rocco Bonetti
was charging £20–£100 to learn rapier and dagger, at least ten times the fee of an English mas-
ter. These fees were beyond the reach of most of the populace, including the London Masters
themselves.
254
Fighting Arts of the Renaissance
www.ebook3000.com

English interest in Italian fencing grew with the publication of an English translation of di
Grassi in 1594, and Saviolo’s own Vincentio Saviolo, his practise, in two bookes, the ﬁrst intreat-
ing of the use of the Rapier and Dagger, the second of honor and honorable quarrels, in 1595.
Although it is unknown precisely what Bonetti taught, the technical portion of Saviolo’s book
suggests it was another offshoot of the old Bolognese system, utilizing a low, point-forward
guard, circular footwork, hand parries, and a fair number of cuts. Also, while Saviolo boasted
of teaching “how to thrust two foote farther than annie Englishman,” his book does not
include any form of lunge.
In 1599, George Silver published Paradoxes of Defense. Silver was a member of the English
gentry, the eldest of four brothers, and reportedly eleventh in descent from Bartholomew
Silver. The latter was a fourteenth-century man who was reputedly knighted by
King Edward II. This genealogical relationship has been alleged since at least the seventeenth
century, but genealogies of martial arts teachers, both then and now, are sometimes exagger-
ated for commercial or egotistical reasons. In any case, several years before writing Paradoxes,
Silver and his brother Toby had challenged Saviolo to a public exhibition on a raised scaffold
that was to be fought with everything from the sword to the battleaxe, including the rapier
and dagger. Although the stage was rented and advertisements published, nothing came of the
challenge. In his book, Silver refuted the Italian system and called for Englishmen to recog-
nize the greater virtues of the old sword and buckler, staff, and bill, all of which could serve in
both war and personal defense.
George Silver also penned a practical training manual called Bref Instructions Vpõ My
Pradoxes of Defence. This work was probably written in 1605, but remained an unpublished
manuscript until its publication in 1898 by the fencing historian Captain (later Colonel) Cyril
G. R. Matthey (1864–?). This was a lucid distillation of fencing principles and a concise cur-
riculum for use of the sword, sword and dagger, sword and buckler, staff, two-handed sword, bill,
pike, and knife. The reason it was never published in its own time is that Silver and the Lon-
don Masters were vestiges of a dying age; when the next native English fencing treatise
appeared, it was written by no less a ﬁgure than a royal fencing instructor, the choleric and
misogynistic Joseph Swetnam (died 1621). While Swetnam’s The Schoole of the Noble and Wor-
thy Science of Defense (1617) contains a detailed series of lessons for the quarterstaff, the cen-
terpiece of his book is the use of the rapier and the rapier and dagger. Swetnam dismisses the
English backsword with a few cursory tricks and techniques, most of which show how to use the
backsword like a rapier. In addition, he casually dismisses “George Giller” (i.e., George Silver)
and his old-fashioned ways.
While the basket-hilted sword and quarterstaff remained a part of the English sword master’s
repertoire well into the nineteenth century, the rapier had successfully staked its claim as the
“weapon of honor,” a place it in turn relinquished to the smallsword and dueling pistol during
the 1700s.
—Gregory D. Mele
See also: Canary Islands Stick Fighting and Wrestling; Celtic Martial Arts; 
Fighting Arts of the Later Middle Ages (in this volume); Belief Systems: European 
Chivalry; Belief Systems: European Occult Sciences; and Stage 
Combat in the Elizabethan Tradition (in Volume II).
Fighting Arts of the Renaissance
255

REFERENCES
Alﬁeri, Francesco. 1653. Lo Spadone [The Great Sword]. Padua, via http://members.lycos.co.uk/rapier/
alﬁeri2.htm, accessed September 30, 2008.
Anglo, Sydney. 2000. The Martial Arts of Renaissance Europe. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Berry, Herbert. 1991. The Noble Science: A Study and Transcription of Sloane Ms. 2530, Papers of the Masters
of Defence of London, Temp Henry VIII to 1590. London and Toronto: Associated University Presses.
Capoferro, Rudolfo. 1610. Gran Simulacro [Great Representation]. Working translation by William
Wilson and Jherek Swanger, http://www.drizzle.com/~celyn/jherek/RnglishCF.pdf, accessed
September 30, 2008.
Castle, Egerton. 1885. Schools and Masters of Fence from the Middle Ages to the 18th Century, London:
G. Bell and Sons via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Conroy, Tom. 1980. “Errors and Oversights in Castle’s Schools and Masters of Defense,” HOPLOS, 2(3) June.
Curtis, Mary Dill, and R. E. Puck Curtis. 2005. Destreza Translation and Research Project from Ghost
Sparrow Publications, via http://plumes.org/destreza/index.html, accessed September 30, 2008.
Fabris, Salvator. 1606. De lo Schermo ovvero Scienza d’Armi [Of Fencing, or the Science of Arms]. In
The Art of Dueling: Salvator Fabris’ Fencing Treatise of 1606, by Tom Leoni. Highland Village, TX:
Chivalry Bookshelf, 2005.
Forgeng, Jeffrey. 2006. The Art of Combat: A German Martial Arts Treatise of 1570. Westport, CT:
Greenwood.
Gaugler, William. 1998. The History of Fencing: Foundations of Modern European Swordplay. Bangor,
ME: Laureate Press.
Grassi, Giacomo di. 1594. Giacomo di Grassi, His True Arte of Defense. London, via http://www.cs.unc.
edu/~hudson/digrassi, accessed September 30, 2008.
Hutton, Alfred. 1901. The Sword and the Centuries. London: Grant Richards. New York, Barnes &
Noble reprint: 1997.
Manciolino, Antonio. 1531. Opera Nova, dove li sono tutti li documenti & vantaggi che si ponno havere
nel mestier de l’armi d’ogni sorte novamente corretta & stampata [New Work, Where Is Documented
the Advantages to be Had in the Mastery of Every Manner of Arms, in a New and Corrected
Publication.]. Venice, via http://www.umass.edu/renaissance/lord/pdfs/Manciolino_1531.pdf,
accessed September 30, 2008.
Marozzo, Achille. 1536. Opera Nova. Chiamata duello, o vero ﬁore dell’armi de singulari abattimenti offensivi
et diffensivi [New Work, Speaking of the Duel, or the True Flower of Arms Wielded in Single Combat
for Offense and Defense]. Modena, via http://www.aemma.org/onlineResources/marozzo/
marozzoArte.htm, accessed September 30, 2008.
Matthey, Cyril G.R., editor. 1898. The Works of George Silver, Comprising “Paradoxes of Defence” and
“Bref Instructions vpõ My Pradoxes of Defence.” Covent Garden, UK: George Bell and Sons, via
http://books.google.com, accessed January 17, 2010.
Viggiani, Angelo. 1570. Lo Schermo [Fencing]. Venice, via http://www.drizzle.com/~celyn/jherek/
Schermo.pdf, accessed September 30, 2008.
SAVATE, CHAUSSON, AND FRENCH BOXING
French Boxing is a combat sport that ﬁrst appeared in the nineteenth century under the names
of savate and chausson but soon became known as French Boxing (la boxe française). It has no sig-
niﬁcant links with similar Eastern or English disciplines (Loudcher 2000).
Today, the French Boxing Federation has 37,000 license holders, which is of average size for
a French sport. As a pugilistic sport, French Boxing occupies a singular position. It is not only a
well-known European kick-boxing discipline, but it also constantly strives to promote educa-
tional values. Since World War II (1939–1945), it has diversiﬁed, and it is increasingly practiced
256
Savate, Chausson, and French Boxing
www.ebook3000.com

by children and women. However, lacking government sponsorship, it is not well publicized by
the French media or well-known outside of France.
HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT
It is not known exactly who invented this discipline. Returning to the origins of the words,
savates were old shoes used by workers, and chaussons, which today are slippers, were special
shoes worn by French fencers during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
The earliest known reference to savate is found in Mémoires de Vidocq (1828); here, the word
referred to a combat sport, and also to bare-ﬁsted duels. The savate and chausson were ways to
solve the problem of settling disputes of honor between rough, tough men at a time when duel-
ing with weapons was forbidden.
French writers such as Honoré de Balzac (1799–1850), Alexandre Dumas (1802–1870), and
Théophile Gautier (1811–1872) made savate duels famous. During the ﬁrst half of the nine-
teenth century, savate and chausson were taught in the street, the cellars, or the back rooms of
cafés. Gautier thought savate should be taught at school: he suggested replacing the word savate,
which had vulgar connotations, with the phrase “French Boxing,” which would be a synthesis of
savate and chausson.
By the mid-1800s, the discipline was well established and had several styles. One style
appeared in music halls, where acrobats such as Rambaud (alias la Résistance) and Louis
Vigneron (1827–1871) gave spectacular shows, kicking while doing cartwheels, and punching
in midair while jumping. Such extraordinary moves astonished spectators. Another was the self-
defense model, stemming directly from the original practice, which was used by Michel Casseux
(alias Pisseux) and others. Finally, the gymnastic style developed by the Lecour brothers, Charles
(1808–1894) and Hubert (1820–1871), became common during the 1860s.
During the mid-nineteenth century, French Boxing was advertised as a serious discipline.
The rigorous physical training resulted in good health, and the programs were advertised in
a way that had appeal to a bourgeois and comparatively wealthy public. Although the tech-
nical guidelines were already fairly strict and detailed, they became more and more speciﬁc.
Fights became progressively codiﬁed and were somewhat comparable to those of the modern
sport.
French Boxing competitions of the second half of the nineteenth century used the ﬁrst touch
as the basis for scoring, which was very similar to fencing regulations; they did not use cumula-
tive hits and knockouts. In addition, after one of the two boxers was hit, no matter how hard or
softly, it had to be declared “Touché!” by one of them. Then, the bout was stopped and started
again after a reciprocal “Salut.”
During 1870–1871, the French lost a war to the Prussians, and the “Defeat of Sedan” in
September 1870 weighed heavily on French national pride. Toward rectifying this dishonor, new
methods of mass instruction were taken directly from army practices, and new gymnastic practices
emerged. For example, the “four faces method” of French Boxing was an original set of codiﬁed
movements used to train dozens of people in gridlike formations. It was borrowed from German
gymnastics, and it met with a huge success both in the army and in schools. French military
instructors introduced these methods to Japan in the 1870s and 1880s; subsequently, in elementary
schools in Japan, a similar model was implemented using martial arts kata.
Savate, Chausson, and French Boxing
257

Over the next few decades, the political situation in France changed, and the need to reno-
vate gymnastics was recognized by the different branches of the government (Military, Educa-
tion, and Health). Initiatives increased during the 1880s and 1890s. Among these were the ideas
developed by Pierre de Coubertin (1863–1937) that led to the development of the International
Olympics.
During the 1880s and 1890s, Joseph Charlemont and Louis Albert synthesized the Lecour
brothers’ methods and moves. They created a style that was more in accordance with the health
standards and scientiﬁc studies of the Belle Époque. The assaut (soft combat), with the scoring
based on the “ﬁrst touch” and its conﬁrmation by the ﬁghters, was increasingly debated—should
it be more like English boxing?
During this period, the popularity of French Boxing had never been so high, and no doubt it
would have needed little to become a “national” sport. Unfortunately, the Charlemont clan was
opposed to changing the academic style into a modern sport (which was the reason why no
regular championship matches were currently taking place). In addition, there was a lack of
disciplined technical training. Finally, English boxing was proving very popular, with the rise of
home-grown French champions such as Georges Carpentier (1894–1975). Thus, French Boxing
declined during the 1910s, and during the period between the two World Wars (1919–1939), it
almost disappeared; only a few isolated gyms promulgated Charlemont’s practice. The sole
teachers were Henri Seydoux (Charlemont’s son-in-law), Paul Boucher, Count Pierre Baruzy,
Gaston Prévot, Lucien Alliot, Jean Berceau, and Haquin.
By 1944, there were only three French Boxing gyms in the Paris region and two in Provence.
From these, two separate philosophies emerged. One camp, composed mainly of white-collar
workers (businessmen, engineers, and physical therapists), was in favor of full-contact ﬁghting in
the ring. The other camp, more academically oriented, was supported by people who were either
physical educators or teachers of French Boxing. This second group was headed by Count Pierre
Baruzy (1897–1994).
Following World War II, the two forms of French Boxing, academic and combat, gradually
expanded, and each was supported by relatively homogeneous groups. In general, competition
regulations remained at the center of the debates.
In 1965, French Boxing teachers decided to establish the “Comité National de Boxe Française”
(the National Committee of French Boxing, CNBF). CNBF was under the authority of the Judo
Federation rather than the English Boxing Federation, as was previously the case. With this, the
expansion of the discipline accelerated.
Although the academic camp of French Boxing soon gained control of CNBF, the two camps
continued competing with each other throughout the 1960s and 1970s. By this time, the differ-
ences between the two camps were not only technical: they were much more complex. It was
the educational camp versus the combat camp, institutionalization versus freedom, and from a
political point of view, conservatives versus liberals. Over time, the combat-style camp, led by
Jacques Cayron, Guy Proust, and Sylvain Salvini, began gaining ground within the developing
arena of competitive sports (and especially that of Muay Thai).
In 1973 the CNBF became the Fédération Nationale de Boxe Française (FNBF), but it was
still controlled by the academic camp. The competitors staged a rebellion, and in May 1974 a
schism split the FNBF. A new federation was created, called the Fédération Nationale de Savate
Boxe Française, and it took with it many of the best ﬁghters of the period.
258
Savate, Chausson, and French Boxing
www.ebook3000.com

In 1975 government authorities delegated the right to deliver ofﬁcial teaching diplomas and
award championship titles to the FNBF (the academic camp), which in 1976 was renamed the
Fédération Française de Boxe Française, Savate et Disciplines Assimilées (FFBFS&DA). Mean-
while, the dissident Fédération Nationale de Savate Boxe Française continued to challenge the
FFBFS&DA. Instead of unifying and pursuing the development of French Boxing, both federa-
tions engaged in a merciless war that limited the sport’s expansion. French Boxing thus missed
its opportunity for recognition as a combat sport in France and abroad.
Meanwhile, the Bruce Lee craze (1972) and American-style full-contact competitions
(1976) spread over Europe. By 1978, the social and cultural evolution, the necessity for uniﬁca-
tion, and ministerial urges combined to force both movements to unite under the ﬂag of the
FFBFS&DA. This agreement required technical compromises on both sides.
In 1985, the International Federation of French Boxing was created with a dozen countries
as members.
SAVATE/FRENCH BOXING AND ITS EFFICIENCY IN THE RING
Savate/French Boxing versus Nineteenth-Century English Boxing
During the mid-nineteenth century, several famous ﬁghts took place between English prize
ﬁghters and French savate boxers. One of the most publicized was the match between Rambaud,
alias la Résistance, against Dickson in 1852. A long poem was written describing the ﬁght. Accord-
ing to the poet, the Frenchman won, precisely because of his kicks. However, that was an excep-
tion, because four other similar matches resulted in defeat for savateurs (Loudcher 2000).
The last famous match took place in 1899 in Paris. In this match, Charles Charlemont fought
Jerry Driscoll. In the fourth round, Charlemont kicked Driscoll in the stomach and knocked him
out. The kick was disputed by the English supporters, who called it too “low.” Also, Driscoll was
not a top level ﬁghter.
Savate/French Boxing versus Jujitsu
Professional wrestlers introduced jiujitsu (as jujutsu was then known) into French music halls
during the early 1900s. One of the famous ﬁghts in this category was the match between Georges
Dubois, savate/French Boxing teacher, and Ré-nier (Guy de Montgrilhard), a jujutsu practi-
tioner. This event took place in October 1905 at Courbevoie in the Védrines Company facility.
Five hundred people witnessed the match. After a few seconds, Dubois attempted a coup de pied
bas. Ré-nier avoided it and immediately grabbed Dubois, threw him down, and got him in an
armlock. As a result, many articles were written up in the papers debating the levels of the two
ﬁghters (Loudcher 2000). The popularity of jujitsu spread across the country even though, soon
after, Ré-nier was defeated by the Ukrainian professional wrestler Ivan Poddubny (1871–1949).
Savate/French Boxing versus Karate
In 1957, karate and aikido practitioner Mochizuki Hiroo (1936–) came to Paris. He was the
ﬁrst Japanese karateka to come to France, and he was welcomed by Henri Plée (1923–). As soon
as Mochizuki arrived, he was driven to the Banville garage for an “exchange of information.”
Karate was not very well-known in France at that time as a martial art, and even less for combat.
Savate, Chausson, and French Boxing
259

The French wanted to see how it worked, so Mochizuki soon found himself in the ring with
Jacques Cayron, one of the best French ﬁghters in savate, and a semi-professional boxer as well.
The movie of the bout, ﬁlmed by Quilerier, shows the problems Mochizuki had in ﬁghting
Cayron. According to Henri Plée (1923–), “The Japanese ﬁghter attempted a jump kick, the
Frenchman sidestepped, delivered a hook and it was all over” (Ehrenberg 1978). It should be
noted, however, that Mochizuki was just 19 years old, and an inexperienced ﬁghter.
Savate/French Boxing versus Kickboxing
The ﬁrst matches took place in 1969, when Christian Guillaume went to Japan to ﬁght
kickboxers. Guillaume won all his bouts during his two trips to Japan, and he stated that all the
matches he fought seemed to be very easy for him. (A ﬁlm was made of all the matches.) This
shows the superiority of the French ﬁghting art in the ring at that time (Guillaume and George
1991). In 1997, French savate ﬁghters fought Thai boxers in Los Angeles in North American
Thai boxing competitions.
SAVATE/FRENCH BOXING NOWADAYS
Rules of Engagement
The current rules of ﬁghting come more or less from 1978 agreements. The two savate ﬁght-
ers, called tireurs (a term taken from fencing), wear special sport shoes, a special one-piece
stretch uniform, gloves (from 8 to 12 ounces), and a mouthguard. Depending on the level of
ﬁghting, head and leg protection also may be worn. The length of the match ranges from four
rounds of 1 minute 30 seconds each, with a 1-minute rest between each round, to ﬁve rounds of
2 minutes each, with a 1-minute rest between each round.
Techniques
Punching, according to international boxing regulations, is permitted. Straight blows, hooks,
and uppercuts are the main techniques in savate/French Boxing. Kicks are allowed, but shin and
knee strikes are not.
There are four main types of kicks: chassé frontal (front kick, only pushing outward), fou-
etté (round kick), chassé (side kick), and coup de pied bas (kicking the opponent’s leg with the
inside part of the shoe to throw him/her off balance). Most of the kicks can be delivered using
two modalities: slingshot or spring. For ﬁsts, the targets are the front and sides of the face and
body, and for kicks, the front, sides, and back of the body; the back of the head is strictly pro-
hibited.
Modalities of Technical Evolution and Combat
During the mid-1960s, the French Federation began to award degrees. A scale of ﬁve gants de
couleurs (colored gloves) was set up like the colored belts in judo. Silver, gold, and vermeil gloves
each have different levels and are more or less equal to the black belt. They are awarded to com-
petitors or technical practitioners. Teaching degrees (moniteur and professeur) are also awarded
by the Federation. The Federation also provides regular training and workshops.
260
Savate, Chausson, and French Boxing
www.ebook3000.com

There are several levels and two kinds of competition: soft combat (assaut) and full contact.
In soft combat, there is no full contact, only touching, and victory depends on marks for both
technicality and efﬁciency. In full-contact competitions, only efﬁciency counts.
An initiative was started in 1985 with the duo, which was a kind of combat choreography
between two people who fake a combat and try to produce the best show for technicality and
tactics. The couple, sometimes a man and a woman, receives an overall mark. However, the duo
did not appeal to spectators, and it has been abandoned.
Changes in the French Federation of Savate/French Boxing
Currently, about 20 percent of savate/French Boxing ﬁghters are women and 30 percent are
children. Since the beginning of 2000, an average of 2,500 spectators per year have attended the
France Final Championship competitions at Pierre de Coubertin Hall. Twenty countries belong
to the International Federation.
Nowadays, the trend does not favor combat competition: it is becoming more difﬁcult to
train high-level full-contact competitors. On the other hand, light boxing (soft contact, assaut)
is experiencing considerable success, in part due to the organization of a European Cup. In 2008,
this led the French Federation to launch a new style of combat called Chaussﬁght, for which the
original rules of kicking have been modiﬁed. Shin strikes are permitted. The savate ﬁghter can
thus meet ﬁghters from other disciplines such as full-contact, kickboxing, and Thai boxing. Boxing
ﬁtness (savate forme) and self-defense are also proving very popular.
—Jean-François Loudcher
See also: Canne de Combat; English Pugilism (in this volume); International 
Karate; and Professional Wrestling (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Bridgeman, Terance. 2008. “Bridgeman Savate,” http://www.bridgemansavate.com/index.html accessed
October 3, 2009.
Ehrenberg, Alain. 1978. Archanges, guerriers, militaires et sportifs, essai sur l’éducation de l’homme fort
[Archangels, Warriors, Soldiers, and Sportsmen: Essays on the Education of the Strong Man]. Thesis.
Université de Paris X.
FFSBF&DA. 2008. “Fédération Française de SAVATE, Boxe Française, et DA,” http://www
.ffsavate.com, accessed October 3, 2009.
Guillaume, Christian, and Dominique Georges. 1991. Boxe française Savate [French Boxing Savate].
Boulogne-Billancourt: Sedirep.
Loudcher, Jean-François. 2000. Histoire de la savate, du chausson et de la boxe française: d’une pratique
populaire à un sport de combat [History of Savate, Chausson, and French Boxing: From Popular Prac-
tice to Combat Sport]. Paris: L’Harmattan.
Savate, Chausson, and French Boxing
261

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

Oceania
Oceania is the portion of the world dominated by the Paciﬁc Ocean. Oceania has some of the
world’s most geographically isolated communities, and its climate and topography are equally
varied. There are deserts in Australia, tropical rain forests in New Guinea, and glacier-covered
mountains in New Zealand.
Date of human inhabitation varies by region. Humans settled Australia 40,000 years ago, and
today at least 150 separate languages and dialects remain in use there. At the other extreme, the
Maori did not settle the Chatham Islands, southeast of New Zealand, until around 1500 CE.
Culturally, Oceania has four distinct zones: Australia, Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia.
All four terms date to the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
Australia (“Southern” [Continent]) comprises the continent of Australia and nearby islands
such as Tasmania. After 1788, Australia was extensively colonized by the British.
Melanesia means “islands of black” [-skinned people]. Fiji, the Solomon Islands, and New
Guinea are all in this region. During the early twentieth century, the Dutch, Germans, and
Australians all had colonies in Melanesia.
Micronesia means “little islands.” Islands in this grouping include Kiribati (Gilbert Islands),
the Marshall Islands, Guam, and Palau. During the twentieth century, the United States,
Britain, and Japan all had colonies in Micronesia. Thus, some of the biggest battles in the Paciﬁc
War of 1941–1945 were fought in Micronesia.
Polynesia means “many islands.” Islands in this grouping include Tahiti, New Zealand, Samoa,
and Hawai‘i. There has been extensive European and American settlement in the Polynesian
cultural zone—the French in Tahiti, the British in New Zealand, the Chileans in Easter Island,
the United States in Hawai‘i, and so on.
In parts of New Guinea, traditional martial arts are still taught as preparation for warfare, but
elsewhere in Oceania, combative sports predominate. Examples include international boxing in
Australia and judo in Hawai‘i. In the Polynesian communities of New Zealand and Hawai‘i,
there is some movement toward revival of historic cultural arts, but overall, syncretism is prob-
ably more common. For example, haka (traditional Melanesian and Polynesian martial dancing)
has a long association with Oceanic rugby teams.
AUSTRALIA
Australia, which is bounded by the Indian and Paciﬁc Oceans, is either the largest island in
the Paciﬁc or the smallest of the inhabited continents. It has been settled for at least 40,000
years.

264
Australia
Aboriginal Australian economies were based on hunting, ﬁshing, and gathering. Some groups
relied heavily on gathering plant foods. Others claimed territory that provided greater opportu-
nities for hunting or ﬁshing.
Most Aboriginal Australian communities were small nomadic bands that followed food
resources. Thus, seasonal subsistence cycles deﬁned their year.
In Aboriginal Australian societies, there was no military class, as such. All initiated males
were expected to participate in their band’s conﬂicts.
Spears were the most common weapon. Long spears measuring up to 3.5 meters (12 feet)
were made from slender hardwood trees and given a sharpened, ﬁre-hardened tip. Long spears
were usually thrown, and they were sometimes made as composites to lighten their weight and
make for easier throwing. For example, they might have a reed shaft, a wooden head, and a wood,
bone, or shell point. Shorter spears (usually around a meter, about 36 to 39 inches) were used as
stabbing weapons. Serrated or barbed points, ﬁsh teeth, and, after European contact, glass were
sometimes used to tip hunting and war spears.
Long spears were usually thrown with the assistance of spear throwers (wommera). These
were ﬂat wooden devices similar to the Central American atlatl that made a spear go farther,
with more force, through lever action. Wommera were about 60 centimeters (24 inches) in
length and had a hooked protrusion at one end and a handle at the other. Sometimes a piece of
stone, bone, or glass was fastened to the butt of the wommera to allow it to be used as a weapon
or cutting tool.
Clubs and sticks were used at close ranges. Australian clubs and sticks come in a variety of
sizes and shapes. Heads may be a natural protrusion in the stick, or a separate knob or head may
be attached. Materials such as broken shells may be attached to the head to increase the dam-
age the weapon is capable of inﬂicting. There were also throwing sticks. The returning
boomerang, a variety of throwing stick popularly associated with Aboriginal Australian culture,
was not a particularly effective martial tool.
Ambush was the preferred method of warfare, but wooden shields were sometimes carried
during prearranged battles. Shields came in two general types: large shields made of light wood
that were used for deﬂecting thrown spears, and smaller shields made of dense hardwoods that
were used to defend against clubs.
Martial training was extremely informal—boys learned to ﬁght with toy spears and clubs.
Weapons were thrown at circular bark targets rolled on ground. Additional practice was
obtained later in life through the hunt.
Warfare, in the sense of a desire for political dominance or to extend state boundaries, was
essentially unknown. On the other hand, personal grudges were often settled violently.
Violence was initiated by small, autonomous groups. Ambushes were common. These were
then followed by ritualized battles. The latter fell into four basic categories: “formal battles, raids
for women, revenge attacks, and ritual trials” (Connor 2002, 3).
Formal battles were waged to settle disputes between rival groups. They began in the late
afternoon and ended around dusk. They lasted only a few hours and resulted in no more than a
handful of casualties. The battleﬁeld tactic usually involved men throwing spears at one another
from long range, then, just before dark, closing to have close combat with clubs. Formal battles
were preceded by religious ceremonies and accompanied by crowds of women cheering for their
faction and taunting the opposition.
www.ebook3000.com

Raids for women ranged from serious, violent forays, in which the men were killed and the
women and children taken as slaves, to prearranged outcomes in which the abducted woman and
her group gave only token resistance.
Revenge attacks were motivated by the death of a member of one’s group. The death may
have had either a physical or supernatural origin.
Ritual trials served as judicial apparatus. During revenge trials, the offended party or parties
threw spears or clubs at the accused. The accused was expected to receive injuries without ﬁght-
ing back or attempting to avoid injury. When the attackers felt that the accused had been suit-
ably punished, the attack ceased.
Lawbreakers wishing to escape this punishment could seek refuge in neighboring bands. The
Tiwi, who live in the Bathurst and Melville Islands off Australia’s northern coast, did not gen-
erally exercise this option because their boats were too ﬂimsy. Thus, they were forced to resolve
disputes rather than ﬂee them. In this culture, where young wives were almost entirely the prop-
erty of old men and therefore young men were forced to remain single, the most common griev-
ances were accusations of adultery by older men against younger men. These accusations were
characteristically shouted from campﬁre to campﬁre at night.
The classic solution among the Tiwi took the form of a one-sided duel during a public
occasion. The ceremonially painted accuser stood at one end of a rough circle of band mem-
bers, and after working everyone up by more shouted accusations, he threw spears at the
defendant.
A submissive defendant let himself be wounded by a spear, and everyone was satisﬁed. A deﬁ-
ant defendant appeared armed and either blocked the thrown spears or threw some back in
return. In that case, the accuser could expect to be joined by his peers, and that usually meant
death for the younger man.
Tiwi elders sometimes fought their peers over the right to bride bestowal. These battles were
essentially duels escalated into faction ﬁghts. While individual duels had predictable outcomes
(someone would back down, or someone would die), ﬁghts between elder men were generally
inconclusive. Typically, they began with verbal abuse shouted between pairs of elders. Then they
moved to spear throwing from long range. The battle ended when someone, even a bystander,
was injured.
After dark, the central ﬁgures in the conﬂict (for example, the father who delayed handing
over his daughter and the man to whom she was promised) might come together to settle their
differences. More commonly, everyone went home to sulk or gloat, as appropriate, and fantasize
about what would happen the next time things came to a head.
MELANESIA
There is dispute regarding the precise boundaries of Melanesia, but it includes New Guinea, the
Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, New Caledonia, and the Torres Straits Islands. Fiji is classiﬁed as
Melanesian, but the Fijian culture shares many common traits with Polynesian Tonga and
Samoa.
Although the area is typiﬁed by linguistic and cultural diversity, some generalizations can be
made about traditional culture. Economies were based on horticulture, pig husbandry, and
Melanesia
265

trading networks. Socially, elaborate exchange systems, secret societies, and male initiation rit-
uals were common. Violent feuding was endemic, and in the words of Knauft (1999, 102),
warfare “appeared in a bewildering variety of contexts and cultural guises.”
NEW GUINEA
New Guinea is the world’s second largest island—only Greenland is larger (counting Australia
as a continent). Human settlement dates back at least 40,000 years. Today, there are at least
1,000 separate languages and cultures on the island, making it perhaps the most ethnically
diverse place left on the planet.
Spanish and Portuguese explorers sighted the island in the 1520s, but Europeans did not
establish permanent settlements there until the late nineteenth century. The Dutch claimed
western New Guinea; the Australians claimed southeastern New Guinea, and the Germans
claimed northeastern New Guinea. Following Germany’s defeat in World War I (1914–1918),
the German claims went to Australia.
During the 1920s, the Dutch and Australians began extending their control into the interior
of the island. At that time, warfare was widespread throughout New Guinea, and headhunting
was common. In fact, war was the major preoccupation for the adult male population. More time
and effort was devoted to this activity than any other. For example, in the interior of the East-
ern Highlands, arrows were “more elaborately decorated and carefully made than a sacred ﬂute”
(Berndt 1964, 185).
For males, strength, agility, and similar attributes associated with ﬁghting were highly valued
personal traits. A man’s standing was based on his prowess rather than his material goods. How-
ever, in this area, the material culture of weapon manufacture, the physical culture of personal
adornment (tattooing and scariﬁcation), and the oral culture of song, verse, and narrative ritual
were at least as important as actual technical or physical skills.
Feuds and wars were fought for the usual reasons: disputes over women or pigs, personal
insults, accusations of sorcery, territorial disputes, disputes over access to food resources, and
revenge. The general idea of a life for a life prevailed, but honor demanded some equivalence.
For example, among some tribes the death of an adult man needed to be avenged by taking the
life of an adult man from the offending group (Berndt 1964, 200).
Warfare included stealthy raids, attacks from ambush, and ritualized battles. Casualties
could range from village slaughters to huge set-piece battles that resulted in much shouting and
no injuries. The reason for the difference was that in village raids, the attackers would attack
unsuspecting houses with ﬁre, then club or spear the ﬂeeing villagers as they tried to escape the
ﬂames. On the other hand, during the formal battles, there was no real coordination of effort.
Instead, hundreds of men on each side, each acting alone, threw spears or shot arrows from long
range.
The spear and club were important weapons. Spear throwers similar to Australian wommera
were sometimes used. There are regional variations. In the Highlands, the bow and arrow are
highly developed weapons, but the bow was of minimal importance in the coastal tribes.
Among the Dani of the central highlands of western New Guinea (the eastern portion of
Papua), the stabbing spear measured about 180 to 300 centimeters (72 to 120 inches in length.
It had a ﬂattened, diamond-shaped head. The butt was sharpened to a point so that the spear
could be stuck upright in the ground when not in use, but ready to be grabbed in case of a surprise
attack. Dani throwing spears were thin, sharpened sticks about 180 centimeters (72 inches) in
266
Melanesia
www.ebook3000.com

length, but other groups made spears as long as about 230 centimeters (90 inches) in length.
Hunting spears tended to be utilitarian, but the spears used in warfare or ritual were often deco-
rated by painting stripes along the shafts; adding string, hair, or feathers; or even incorporating
carved clan symbols. The preferred wood for making weapons was black palm (Borassus ﬂabel-
lifer). Heartwood was used because it was strong and ﬂexible, and not likely to splinter. Spear
throwers were made from bamboo. The spear ﬁtted into the hollow bamboo shaft and was held
in place by a protruding thumb guide. In some cases, thumb guides were elaborately carved.
Archery dominated warfare in the New Guinea interior highlands. Arrow shafts were bamboo.
Generally, arrows were about 150 centimeters (60 inches) long, although arrows as long as 230 cen-
timeters (90 inches) have been reported. Bamboo, wood, or bone tips were attached to the bam-
boo shafts using string made from plant ﬁber. Tips were sometimes heated, thereby creating a brittle
arrowhead, which would fragment on contact and create an infected wound. Hunting arrows were
utilitarian, but ceremonial and dueling arrows were sometimes elaborately decorated.
War bows are made from wood taken from the heart of the black palm tree. The usual length
is about 175 centimeters (69 inches), meaning somewhat taller than the average archer. Some
of these bows generate enough power to shoot an arrow through a man.
Hand-to-hand methods were mentioned in descriptions of combat on Rossel Island, off the
east coast of Papua New Guinea (Murray 1912, 134). One involved smothering the victim by
covering his nose and mouth. The other involved breaking the victim’s ribs, arms, and legs and
then leaving him to die.
Warriors defended themselves using wooden shields and armor. Some armor was simply a
bark girdle intended to protect against arrows, but some was elaborate cane armor. Cane armor
was seen into the twentieth century in western portions of the island.
Supernatural weapons were common. Ceremonies were held before raids, and raiders carried
medicines said to assure success and confer protection. Thus, a shaman gave J. H. P. Murray
(1912, 219) a small wooden “alligator” as “proof against arrows.” According to the Dani of the
highlands of Papua New Guinea, ghosts aided war parties in battle by warning of ambushes and
even attacking the other group. In return, ghost warriors expected gifts such as weapons, cloth-
ing, and food.
During childhood, boys were assigned to a cohort. The assignment was determined partly by
age and mostly by ability. Thus, younger boys sometimes ended up going through initiation with
older boys and vice versa. Sometime after puberty (when depends on the traditions of the group),
cohorts took up residence in the communal men’s house. Communal men’s houses contained rit-
ual apparatus, supernatural weapons, and power-laden objects such as enemies’ (or ancestors’)
skulls. The supernatural knowledge was held as a secret among men of the group.
After being admitted into the men’s house, boys learned the practical skills and ritual knowl-
edge they needed to attain adult status. Changes in hair style, attire, and adornment marked this
passage. Frequently, ritual battles took place between cohorts, thereby establishing rites of pas-
sage. In ritual battles, sticks were used rather than spears, clubs, and bows, as the idea was to
avoid death and maiming.
ISLAND MELANESIA
Island Melanesia refers to the Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, New Caledonia, the Torres Straits
Islands, Fiji, and so on. From 1864 to 1901, this region was subject to “blackbirding,” meaning
Melanesia
267

coercive labor recruitment akin to indentured servitude. This in turn led to much damage to tra-
ditional culture.
In traditional society, Melanesian warfare was often linked to revenge. Ritual headhunting
was sometimes practiced. Vengeance was not the only motive for taking heads. In the Solomon
Islands, the taking of heads was a means both to accumulate supernatural power in the present
and to enslave the head’s previous owner in the afterlife.
Melanesian tactics were informal. Men were typically divided into two cadres: bowmen
and spearmen. Both groups carried wooden shields. Spearmen maneuvered their shields with
their left hands and fought using a thrusting spear in their right hands. Spare throwing spears
were carried in the left hand, too. Bowmen propped up their shields, and shot arrows from
behind this shelter. Arrows were loosed at will, rather than in volleys, and archers advanced
or retreated after shooting their arrows. When range closed, then men fought with spear and
club.
Bows were from 110 to 150 centimeters (43 to 60 inches) in length. Arrows were plain
wooden shafts with hardwood heads. Since they were neither notched nor ﬂetched, they were
not especially accurate. However, even minor wounds were serious because of infection in the
tropical climate. In addition, arrows and throwing spears were sometimes tipped with substances
intended to cause infection or inﬂammation. Grease, dirt, and strips of orchid are among the irri-
tants used throughout Melanesia.
Training was equally informal. At least in the Solomon Islands, youths expressed a preference
for one weapon or the other and were then trained according to this preference (Randell 2004,
81). Youths participated in mock battles using blunted spears and arrows whose points were cush-
ioned by bark. This minimized serious injury. They practiced their skills by hunting rats, iguanas,
and similar animals. In imitation of adult raiders, youths took the heads of their prey and hung
them from the rafters of their youth huts. Neophytes also learned haka—leaping, stamping,
body-slapping dances and chants that invoked ancestral spirits, taunted the enemy, and extolled
prowess. Haka were common throughout the Paciﬁc Islands and persist in contemporary con-
texts as cultural performances, preludes to athletic events, and physical culture.
MICRONESIA
Micronesia consists of hundreds of small islands spread over a large region of the western
Pacific. These islands were claimed by Spain during the 1870s and were fought over during
both World Wars. Today, these islands are politically consolidated into various countries
and territories. The largest include Federated States of Micronesia (Chuuk and Ulithi),
Guam, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Northern Mariana Islands, Palau, and Wake
Island.
GUAM
Guam is the largest of the Mariana Islands. At the time of Spanish contact in the sixteenth cen-
tury, it was populated by the Chamorros, a hierarchical culture divided into three castes: upper
(matua), middle (achaot), and lower (mana’chang). The lowest caste owned no land and was not
permitted to participate in ﬁghting during warfare. They served simply as beasts of burden.
268
Micronesia
www.ebook3000.com

Slings and spears were the primary weapons. Spears were up to 240 centimeters (96 inches)
in length and about 5 centimeters (2 inches) in diameter. Handles were wood. Tips could be 
ﬁre-hardened, but an attached tip of ﬁsh or human bone was preferred. For war, the tibia was the
bone of preference. The reason was that this brittle bone broke on contact and infected the
wound. This led to the Spanish belief that the Chamorros used poison. This was not the case;
wounded soldiers simply died from bacterial infection. As a point of honor, Chamorros did not
use barbed harpoons in battle. However, when attacking an enemy settlement, raiders would
throw ﬁre-tipped spears at huts to set ﬁre to their thatched roofs.
Secondary weapons included sticks and stones. A stick about 160 centimeters (63 inches) in
length and 7.5 centimeters (3 inches) in diameter was used to parry spear thrusts. This stick
often had palm leaves attached as decoration. Stones thrown from slings served as long-range
weapons. The account of a Spanish expedition of 1565 contends that the Chamorros used
shields, but this is not mentioned in later accounts (Cox et al. 1917, 47).
There is no documentation of formal warrior training, but there were competitions in
wrestling, throwing spears, and slinging. During festivals, there were competitions between
champions. During spear throwing competitions, men tried to catch spears thrown at them. A
man who successfully caught a spear would both ridicule the thrower and boast about his own
abilities. In preparations for these games (and for adult raids), youths fought mock battles using
blunted spears and hardened mud balls.
Villages sometimes fought pitched battles. The usual reasons included land or ﬁshing dis-
putes, insults, and revenge. Warfare among the Chamorros was ritualized and incurred fairly low
casualties. The preferred strategies coupled ambush and surprise, but when opposing forces did
meet, battles did not involve massed attacks. Instead, battles were fought by means of single
combats between members of the opposing forces.
Throughout Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia, objects such as skulls, certain plant and
animal species, and human beings were believed to be invested with an impersonal supernatural
force called mana. Thus, on Guam as elsewhere in Oceania, ritual specialists carried the ances-
tors’ skulls into battle.
Chamorro battles started with boasting and insults. Then men began throwing spears and
slinging rocks. After two or three men were killed, the losing army appealed for peace. This usu-
ally meant a payment of tortoise-shell money to the victors. The winning village boosted its sta-
tus and gloated by singing songs that ridiculed the defeated village. The losers meanwhile
dreamed of revenge.
THE CAROLINES
The Carolines is a large archipelago (chain of islands) that lies south and southeast of Guam. It
was settled from Asia, and its ethnic groups include Malays, Melanesians, and Polynesians.
There was extensive ﬁghting in this area during World War II (1941–1945).
On the island of Ulithi (east of Yap), there is a comparatively well-documented martial sys-
tem called Bwang. Remnants of the system have been found on Chuuk (formerly Truk), Yap,
Palau, Namoluk, Faraulep, and Lamotrek, and on the basis of linguistic evidence, anthropologist
Ward Goodenough (2002) claims that the combat system originated on Chuuk. If true, then the
following description of the Chuuk martial art called Pwáán can be viewed as representative of
the entire region.
Micronesia
269

On Chuuk there were five distinct schools of Pwáán, each perpetuated along family
lines. Knowledge of Pwáán was regarded as proprietary information. Young men between the
ages of eighteen and nineteen underwent training for one month at the men’s house of their
lineage, where they learned armed and unarmed tactics, the manufacture of weapons, and
magical spells for warfare. While undergoing training, the novices were required to eat
sparingly and were forbidden sexual contact. They could not go fishing because the
Chuukese believed that being on the water at this time made the students weak. Wrestling
was used as a means of building strength. Upon completion of training, initiates received a
special cape.
Although there was no warrior caste on Chuuk, there were martial specialists. These
included the teachers of Pwáán, diviners (itang) who performed rituals for success, specialists
who strengthened warriors’ arms by treating them with ritual medicines, and specialists who
used sympathetic magic to make their side’s weapons effective and the other side’s weapons
ineffective.
There was also arms control. Only the ritual weapons specialists were allowed to bring
military clubs and spears out of the men’s house, and during battles, warriors were under the lead-
ership of a senior priest.
Armor was made of thick layers of textiles. Tactics called for an initial hail of stones projected
by slings, followed by a wave of javelins. Then men would close to hand-to-hand range. Spears
had palm wood handles and points made from the spines and stingers of stingrays (Dasyatidae
spp). Bludgeons, slings, and shark-tooth knuckledusters were also carried.
Following European contact, traditional weapons were mostly replaced by knives and riﬂes.
However, knowledge of the unarmed methods of Bwang was preserved into the twentieth cen-
tury. Unarmed methods involved striking, kicking, gouging, choking, tripping, throwing, twist-
ing, turning and locking joints, and disarming opponents armed with spears. Weapons retained
in the twentieth-century repertoire included a short spear that had points on each end, knives,
and shoulder-high staffs (Lessa and Velez-Ibanez 1978).
Today, indigenous martial arts survive on Guam and in the Caroline Islands as performance
arts. Typical locations include cultural festivals, political events, and nationalist displays.
POLYNESIA: TAHITI, HAWAI‘I, 
AND AOTEAROA (NEW ZEALAND)
Polynesian culture is the one that most Americans and Europeans associate with the South
Paciﬁc. Included here are the traditional cultures of Hawai‘i, Tahiti, Samoa, and Tonga, and the
Maori culture of Aotearoa (New Zealand). Linguistic evidence suggests that the Polynesian cul-
ture originated in Taiwan about 5,000 years ago, and that it began moving east into the Paciﬁc
about 2,000 years ago.
Traditional Polynesian economies were based on agriculture (taro, yams, and other crops),
pig husbandry, hunting, and the exploitation of maritime resources. Political power was central-
ized in kings and priests, who had hereditary authority over a stratiﬁed populace. This central-
ization of power allowed Polynesian leaders to ﬁeld larger forces than was possible in the less
centralized societies of Australia and New Guinea. Thus, during the late 1790s, the Hawaiian
270
Polynesia: Tahiti, Hawai‘i, and Aotearoa (New Zealand)
www.ebook3000.com

King Kamehameha I (died 1819) boasted a ﬂeet of 1,200 canoes that could transport 10,000
soldiers (D’Arcy 2006, 110).
TAHITI
Tahiti is the largest island in French Polynesia, which is the portion of Polynesia closest to East
Asia. Polynesian people began settling Tahiti and neighboring islands about 1,700 years ago.
Although European contact began in 1521, Europeans did not begin visiting regularly until
the eighteenth century, and they did not begin formally annexing islands until the 1840s. The
region was not occupied by the Japanese during World War II.
At the time of European contact, Tahitian society was divided into three social classes: aris-
tocrats, middle classes, and commoners. Ego was a powerful motivation in this stratiﬁed society,
and men fought to gain or preserve prestige. Material gain (as distinct from territorial or egotis-
tical gain) was a consideration when deciding to wage war.
Tahitian chiefs led large armies into battle. These were armies in the true sense of the word.
The tactical maneuvers employed by these troops had poetic names such as The Backbone, The
Ant-Fight, and the Coral Rock, and amok, meaning warriors who vowed to conquer or die. Out-
right ambush was rarely used, because there was no glory in that. Nonetheless, surprise was
employed to take an enemy force unaware.
At the onset of a battle, celebrated warriors from the rival forces advanced, shouting boasts
and insults. If a challenge was accepted, then the duelists advanced toward each other. At a rea-
sonable distance, the duelists stopped, announced their names and lineage, described the great
deeds of their ancestors, limned their own accomplishments, and mixed in a few taunts for good
measure. Initially, a single pair fought between the battle lines of the two forces, but soon oth-
ers followed them, and shortly, there was general engagement.
At sea, battles started with slingers hurling stones. As the canoes closed, men threw javelins.
Finally, when the canoes crashed together, there was boarding action. War canoes were made
with reinforced prows and sterns speciﬁcally for use during boarding and ramming actions
(D’Arcy 2006, 109).
There was speciﬁc naval training. Ellis (1833, 170) described a nineteenth-century Tahitian
naval exercise. After “a short harangue to the warriors, and an . . . invocation, to the gods, . . .
a signal [was] given, [and] the whole ﬂeet was in a moment launched upon the ocean, and pulled
with rapidity and dexterity to a considerable distance from the shore, where the several varieties
of their naval tactics were exhibited; after which, they returned in regular order, with precision,
to the shore.”
Although Tahitian ﬂeets were never as big as Kamehameha’s Hawaiian ﬂeet, they were still
signiﬁcant forces. During an eighteenth-century battle between the forces of Huahine and
Raiatea (two islands west of Tahiti, near Bora Bora), the Huahine naval forces reportedly con-
sisted of “ninety ships, each twenty fathoms [about 37 meters, or 120 feet] long” (Ellis 1833,
241), plus smaller escort vessels.
When a naval engagement took place within the reefs, as frequently happened, the canoes
were often lashed together in a line, the prow of one being fastened to the stern of the next. This
tactic was designed partly to prevent the breaking of their line and partly to prevent any ship’s
unauthorized withdrawal.
Polynesia: Tahiti, Hawai‘i, and Aotearoa (New Zealand)
271

When Tahitian forces were in danger of becoming overwhelmed, they usually ﬂed. In cases
of failed naval engagements or landings in hostile territory, the Tahitians abandoned their canoes
and sought refuge in mountain fortiﬁcations.
Tahitian forts were sited on natural features such as narrow valleys or mountain passes, and
they often had the only good source of water available. Ellis (1833, 242–243) observed that,
“[A]t Maeva, in Huahine, bordering on a lake of the same name, is probably the best artiﬁcial
fortiﬁcation in the islands. Being a square of about half a mile [800 meters] on each side, it
encloses many acres of ground well stocked with bread-fruit, containing several springs, and hav-
ing within its precincts the principal temple of their tutelar deity. The walls are of solid stone-
work, in height twelve feet [about 3.7 meters].” Without cannon, such fortiﬁcations were
essentially impossible to storm.
Spears used on land were up to 5.5 meters (18 feet) in length. Shafts were made of hardwood
and were about 2.5 to 4 centimeters (1 to 1.5 inches) in diameter at the thickest point. Spears
used at sea were much shorter and are better considered javelins or darts.
War clubs (omore) were made of ironwood (Casuarinas spp.). There were two types of war
clubs. One was a short, heavy form used for close combat, and the other was a long-handled club
having a broad, lozenge-shaped blade. Some clubs had sharks’ teeth embedded on their striking
edges, making them essentially axes or tridents. The serrated spine of the stingray was used as a
dagger.
Headgear was used to cushion blows and make the wearers look taller. Some warriors deco-
rated these helmets with human hair, shells, or feathers. Body armor was made of cords and wood
and covered with thick cloth. Slingers, whose weapon required agility and mobility, wore only
loose mantles.
Training was regarded as a military necessity. Youths were expected to practice with javelin
and sling and to wrestle or box.
The supernatural was of great importance during Tahitian combat. Before a war, a human sac-
riﬁce was made to summon the powerful deity known as Oro. Next, divination from the sacriﬁ-
cial victim was conducted in order to know the will of the gods, to assist in military decisions,
and to predict the outcome of engagements. The outcome of a campaign was predicted by means
of the contortions of the dying victim and the postdeath appearance of the body.
After the battle, enemy bodies were collected and offered to Oro, as testimony to his power,
acknowledgment of the warriors’ dependence on him, and as an appeal for his continued assis-
tance.
Festival provided a venue for demonstrating martial skills. Martial exhibitions were usually
connected with a religious ceremony or a social celebration. Wrestling (maona) was the favorite
demonstration event. A standard form of competition pitted champions from different clans or
villages against one another. In the case of a reception for a visiting dignitary, the visitor’s retain-
ers were pitted against the host’s.
Prayer and propitiation preceded the wrestling. The wrestling took place on a grassy turf or
a sandy beach. The ring measured about 9 meters (30 feet) in diameter. There was usually musi-
cal accompaniment.
The supporters of one wrestler were on one side of the ring and the supporters of the other
wrestler were on the other. During matches, six to ten competitors from each side entered the
ring, each wearing a belt or girdle (maro). Wrestlers had the option of oiling their limbs.
272
Polynesia: Tahiti, Hawai‘i, and Aotearoa (New Zealand)
www.ebook3000.com

Good wrestlers were famous throughout the islands, and a noted wrestler in a chief’s
entourage could count on being challenged by his counterparts when visiting another district or
island. Sometimes, challenges were issued prior to arrival. If this was the case, then champions
entered the ring and engaged immediately. Otherwise, said Ellis (1833, 165), “[T]he wrestlers of
one party, or perhaps their champion, walked around and across the ring, having the left arm
bent, with the hand on the breast; and gave the challenge by striking the right hand violently
against the left, and the left against the side, which produced a loud hollow sound. The strokes
on the arm were sometimes so violent, as not only to bruise the ﬂesh, but to cause the blood to
gush out.”
Usually, the wrestlers seized each other by the shoulders, but this was not required. Ellis
(1833, 166) reports an instance when a wrestler, “instead of stretching out his arms as was
expected . . . ran the crown of his head with all his might against the temple of his antagonist,
and laid him ﬂat on the earth.”
After a wrestler was thrown, the winner’s side erupted with drumming, dancing, and taunts.
This was met by a similar response from the loser’s faction. This was repeated with each contest.
After the men’s matches were over, women wrestled, both with each other and occasionally
with men.
At major festivals, there was boxing (motoraa). There were fewer participants in boxing than
in wrestling, and in general, boxers were servants of the Areoi, meaning a secret society
dedicated to Oro, god of war. Members of this group were noted for practicing sexual abstinence.
Boxers issued challenges in the same way as wrestlers, and their contests were short, bloody
affairs. Blows were aimed at the head, and there was little effort to dodge the opponent’s blows.
No referees intervened, and the battle continued until one boxer fell to the ground or quit. The
boxing matches were followed by the same celebrations as described for wrestling contests (Ellis
1833, 167).
Some Tahitian boxers and wrestlers were nobles and priests. Metia, a priest of Oro, was a cel-
ebrated champion who killed two opponents (a father and son) during a festival at Taiarapu
(Ellis 1833, 168).
HAWAI‘I
The Hawaiian Islands are located in the central Paciﬁc Ocean, southwest of North America and
southeast of Japan. There are eight main islands in the archipelago, and hundreds of lesser ones.
Polynesians settled the Hawaiian Islands between 300 and 800 CE, and the United States
annexed the Kingdom of Hawai‘i in 1898.
Until Kamehameha I succeeded in conquering all the major islands in 1810, each of the pri-
mary islands had been ruled by an independent king or chief. The conﬂicts of interest and ambi-
tion that inevitably arose frequently led to warfare.
Although Hawaiian societies were stratiﬁed, there was no separate military class. Further,
although an individual farmer or ﬁsherman might distinguish himself in military actions, he
returned to his normal peacetime occupation afterward.
Before a decision to wage war was made, rulers called on the services of diviners and priests.
Animals (usually pigs or chickens) were sacriﬁced. This was both as an offering to the deities and
as a vehicle for divination. The manner in which the sacriﬁce died and the appearance of the
Polynesia: Tahiti, Hawai‘i, and Aotearoa (New Zealand)
273

sacriﬁce’s entrails (especially the spleen) were considered to contain portents for the impended
conﬂict. For particularly important campaigns, human sacriﬁces were offered.
Hawaiian prophets slept in the temples that housed the images of their deities. The war god
Ku was expected to communicate his will by means of divination, a vision, or a dream. A mili-
tary campaign did not start until a conclusive message was received.
When positive omens prevailed and war was declared, runners were dispatched to tell men
to bring their weapons and provisions. Tradition attributes these runners with the ability to run
around the island of Hawai‘i (a distance of over 480 kilometers, or 300 miles) in just nine days.
At times a quota system prevailed, but in extreme cases, all men were required to serve. To
prevent draft dodging, soldiers slit the ears of malingerers, bound them with ropes, and then took
them back to the main body in disgrace.
To prevent surprise attack, camps were made in open spaces surrounded by broken terrain,
ravines, or rivers. To protect supplies, forts were built. Camp followers stayed near these forts dur-
ing battle. The characteristics described for Tahitian fortresses apply.
Because the Hawaiian Islands are volcanic peaks, they are not surrounded by coral reefs.
Therefore, the sea is often choppy and rough. Consequently, there was less naval warfare here than
in Tahiti. Instead, Hawaiian ﬂeets were used primarily for transporting troops to land battles.
Hawaiian land warfare was sophisticated, and formations varied depending on terrain. Imme-
diately before battle, diviners were consulted and prayers were made. The commander exhorted
his troops, and the battle commenced. The whole army might engage at once, break up into skir-
mishes, or enter in a series of individual duels.
Occasionally, the battle ceased by mutual consent. If a peace treaty was proposed and
accepted, the treaty was ratiﬁed by ritual, feasting, and games. Otherwise, ﬁghting continued
until one army was victorious. The losing army usually retreated to a defensive position or sacred
ground. If neither of these options was available, then the defeated forces retreated to the moun-
tains. The victors pursued, and some of these running battles lasted for months. The reason was
that in case of defeat, both the lands and the lives of the defeated were already forfeit.
Weapons were made of hardwood such as ironwood and mahogany. Standard weapons
included the spear (pololu), javelin (iike), dagger (pahoa), sling (ma‘a), and war clubs (leiomano).
Some war clubs were embedded with sharks’ teeth, thereby making ripping weapons out of
bludgeons. There were also unusual weapons, to include knuckledusters, strangulation cords, and
tripping cords (pikoi). However, after Europeans arrived, the traditional weapons were generally
replaced by Chinese-made spears and European or American trade muskets.
Shields were not employed for defense. Instead, the spare javelins carried in the left hand
were used for parrying. Capes were also draped over the left arm. Armor consisted of coconut-
ﬁber clothing reinforced with pig’s tusks or the teeth of sharks or dogs. Helmets were made of
wicker wrapped in cloth. The high chiefs’ towering headgear offered no more protection than
the less impressive helmets, but it added to the height and consequently the imposing appear-
ance of the war leaders.
Festivals provided an arena for warlike games. From this standpoint, the most important fes-
tival was Makahiki. The Makahiki festival was dedicated to the agricultural deity Lono, and it
stretched over the 4 winter months. During this period a general truce prevailed, but what that
actually meant was that rival retainers turned to competing in ﬁst-ﬁghting (mokumoku),
wrestling (hakoko), and foot racing (kukini). Fatalities were common.
274
Polynesia: Tahiti, Hawai‘i, and Aotearoa (New Zealand)
www.ebook3000.com

The wrestling competitions that took place during Makahiki were considered to be training
for the hand-to-hand combat. Finger and arm wrestling contests also contributed to the devel-
opment of upper body strength.
Other martial games included slinging stones at a target consisting of a single stalk and
throwing the javelin. Men also practiced dodging, parrying, and catching javelins thrown at
them. Kamehameha I, who ultimately uniﬁed the islands, was reputed to be able to catch a dozen
spears simultaneously.
Tradition attributes this feat (and in fact his overall success at the arts of war) to a martial
art called lua. Historically, knowledge of lua was said to have been restricted to Hawaiian
nobility and to their elite guards. Victims of an assailant skilled in lua were said to wind up
mangled, but alive and with their bodies folded into a helpless bundle. It may be noteworthy
that this is precisely the condition in which human sacriﬁces were delivered to Ku, god of war.
Given the relationship of Tahitian boxers to their warrior deity, Oro, via the Aeori Society,
the concept of lua adepts constituting a similar warrior society dedicated to Ku does not seem
far-fetched.
It is not known how much of traditional lua survived the end of the Kingdom of Hawai‘i.
There is no doubt, however, that the Native Hawaiian movement of the late twentieth and
early twenty-first centuries has led to increased interest in the art. Charles Kenn
(1907–1988), ethnographer, translator, and student of traditional Hawaiian religion, is
generally credited with helping revitalize the practice of lua. Kenn reportedly shared his
knowledge of the art with Danzan Ryu (Hawaiian-style) jujutsu teacher Seishiro Henry
Okazaki (1890–1951). During the 1960s, Jerry Walker and a group of his friends sought out
Kenn, and they ultimately persuaded Kenn to teach them. Later, they established a curricu-
lum for teaching lua to others of Hawaiian descent, and today, lua is being taught as a Native
Hawaiian heritage art encompassing not only combat, but also dance, healing, material cul-
ture, and related arts (Sodetani 2003).
AOTEAROA (NEW ZEALAND)
Although southeast of Australia, Aotearoa was settled from north, by Polynesians sailing south
from Tahiti and Tonga. This settlement happened within the past 700 years. About 500 years
ago, a group of Polynesians from Aotearoa also settled the Chatham Islands, about 800
kilometers (500 miles) east of Aotearoa.
Dutch sailors sighted the main islands of Aotearoa during the 1640s and gave them the name
“New Zealand,” after the island where Copenhagen, Denmark, is located. British settlement
began during the 1770s. There was signiﬁcant ﬁghting between British settlers and the Polyne-
sians during the nineteenth century.
The indigenous Polynesian culture is called Maori. The name translates as “The People.”
The Maori pursued the standard Polynesian lifestyle of horticulture, ﬁshing, hunting, and
war. During the late eighteenth to mid-nineteenth centuries, conﬂicts over land caused the
Maori to devote enormous energy to developing martial skills.
Traditionally, Maori champions called out insults, as on Tahiti, and then the rest of the army
closed for battle. The advent of ﬁrearms in the 1770s compelled a change in tactics—duelists
were simply shot down. During the musket era, the preferred method came to involve a small
Polynesia: Tahiti, Hawai‘i, and Aotearoa (New Zealand)
275

force attacking a village or fort. The hope was that the defenders would be lured out and then
led into ambush. Another method was for lone warriors to pick off individuals who strayed too
far from camp. Traditions also tell of one or two armed men running through a village, killing all
easily available targets, and then retreating into the bush.
Before engaging in battle, Maoris sought supernatural assistance. Divination methods
included astrology, observing the behavior of animals, listening to the prophecies of mediums,
and casting fern stalks. Careful attention was paid to omens that included, among other things,
bodily sensations, the behavior of members of the war party, and even the physical condition of
certain weapons. According to Best (1902b, 47), a “famous taiaha, Matua-kore by name, was
such [a talismanic weapon]. It was very sacred (tapu) and was consulted as an oracle in war time.
The omen was drawn from the appearance of the red feathers which ornamented the weapon, if
bright and vivid in colour the omen was a good one, if it appeared pale, disaster was imminent.”
Other weapons were capable of being strengthened by the correct incantation. A slight wound
inﬂicted by magically assisted weapons was believed to be fatal.
The longest thrusting weapons were huata. These were 6 to 8 meters (18 to 25 feet) in length.
When used defensively, the weapon was balanced on a rail mounted on a wall, and thrust down-
ward at attackers. When used offensively, the weapon required two men, one at the front to aim
the thrusts, and another at the back to do the pushing. This was generally done when attacking
houses or palisades, to get at the people within.
The standard personal spear (koikoi) was a more conventional 210 to 250 centimeters
(approximately 84 to 96 inches) in length. This weapon was used for stabbing rather than throw-
ing and was pointed at both ends.
A nearly universal weapon was the broad-bladed club, or mere. The Maori mere was short
(about a foot in length). Handles were made of wood or baleen (whalebone). Blades could be
single- or double-edged and tipped with sharks’ teeth or nephrite jade (pounamu in Maori, green-
stone in New Zealand English). The weapon was usually carried tucked into the belt at the back.
The taiaha was a two-handed club with a sharpened edge. Length of the hardwood handle
varied, but standard lengths were 120 to 210 centimeters (48 to 84 inches). Striking surfaces
were sharpened, and there was also a sharpened point at the butt. The distinctive part of this
weapon was that the striking end (rau) was carved in the form of a human face with extended
tongue (arero). To complete the look, dog hair and red feathers surrounded the face.
Elsdon Best (1902c, 240) notes the following guards and strikes associated with the taiaha:
“1. Popotahi—guard. The weapon held vertically before the body, the tongue end down.
2. Whakarehu—the point from the popotahi guard. The lower end of the weapon (i.e., the arero)
raised and thrust at adversary. (Either as a feint, or if the point struck the person so much the
better, as it would give operator time to recover arms and possibly deliver a blow.) 3. Whitiapu—
the stroke (not thrust) from the popotahi guard. The blade (rau) of weapon used as a club.
4. Huanui—a guard. The taiaha held horizontally before the body, the arero end to left. The point
whakarehu and the blow whitiapu were also delivered from the huanui guard.” During the World
Wars (1914–1918 and 1939–1945), Maori soldiers in British service sometimes used the
riﬂe–bayonet combination in exactly this fashion.
Projectile weapons included darts (kopere) thrown by whiplike spear throwers (kotaha). Being
disposable, darts were crudely made, and had simple ﬁre-hardened points. Length varied enor-
mously, but a standard length was around 120 centimeters (48 inches). There were two kinds of
spear throwers, one about 60 centimeters (24 inches) in length and the other about twice that.
276
Polynesia: Tahiti, Hawai‘i, and Aotearoa (New Zealand)
www.ebook3000.com

The different lengths are explained by differing functions in siege warfare (Palmer 1957,
177–184). To throw the projectile, the butt of the dart was stuck into the ground. The point was
raised at the desired angle, facing the direction of the enemy. The free end of the whip cord was
wrapped around the body of the dart. The whip was cracked, and the dart ﬂew in the direction
it was pointed.
During battle, the general rule was that each warrior was armed with one long and one short
weapon. The long weapon was carried in the right hand, while the short weapon was tucked in
the belt.
Battleﬁeld attire consisted of kilts or aprons. Armor consisted of cloaks made of dog skin
leather or woven ﬂax. Soaking in water caused the ﬁbers of the ﬂax cloaks to swell into a thick
mass that was said to repel spears.
By the 1760s, Maori lived inside fortiﬁed villages. Natural defenses such as hills, bodies of
water, or cliffs were enhanced with earth-and-timber palisades. After the introduction of
ﬁrearms, these palisades were padded with spall liners made of green ﬂax. During the mid–
nineteenth century, these Maori fortiﬁcations proved capable of withstanding direct ﬁre from
British artillery.
Maori youths started training for war almost from birth. At the age of ﬁve days, Maori male
infants were taken to the body of water that each village had dedicated to performance of ritual
observances. There a ceremony was performed that was intended to endow the child with
strength, health, and to remove ritual pollution (tapu, taboo). The same ritual dedicated the boy
to the principal Maori war deity, Tu. Part of the ritual involved having the boys swallow small
stones. This was said to make them strong as rocks, and impervious to injury.
Older youths gathered in open areas to practice both armed and unarmed combat. The term
was para-whakawai. These practice sessions were supervised by elders, and weapons were blunted.
The curriculum included both individual sham duels and group combats.
Maori wrestling (whatoto) included named locks, holds, and throws. This suggests a level of
formal development beyond spontaneous grappling. Further evidence for this appears in
Frederick Maning’s account of his wrestling match with a Maori that took place in the 1830s
(1876, 25–26). Two of the terms Maning used—twist (ta) and lock (whiri)—were still in use sev-
enty years later when Elsdon Best (1901, 66) published his list of Maori wrestling grips.
Maori martial culture has had a renaissance during the late twentieth century. For example,
in 1983, Maori academic and politician Pita Sharples (1941–) helped establish Te Whare Tu
Taua o Aoteaora (National School of Ancient Weaponry of New Zealand), which is a vehicle
for teaching Maori history and physical culture through the use of the taiaha. At present, the
organization claims 2,000 members throughout New Zealand (Nahu-Roberts).
—Thomas A. Green
See also: Belief Systems: Introduction; Expressive Culture;
Invented Traditions; Performing Arts; Political Uses of the Martial Arts;
and Secret Societies and Fraternal Organizations (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Berndt, Ronald M. 1964. “Warfare in the New Guinea Highlands,” American Anthropologist 66(2),
183–203, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/668437, accessed October 15, 2009.
Best, Elsdon. 1901. “The Diversions of the Whare Tapere: Some Account of the Various Games,
Amusements, and Trials of Skill Practised by the Maori in Former Times,” Transactions and
Polynesia: Tahiti, Hawai‘i, and Aotearoa (New Zealand)
277

Proceedings of the New Zealand Institute 17, 34–66, via http://rsnz.natlib.govt.nz/volume/rsnz_34/
rsnz_34_00_000540.html, accessed August 9, 2009.
Best, Elsdon. 1902a. “Notes on the Art of War, as Conducted by the Maori of New Zealand, with
Accounts of Various Customs, Rites, Superstitions, &c., pertaining to War, as Practised and
Believed in by the Ancient Maori,” Part I, Journal of the Polynesian Society 11(1), 11–41, via
http://www.jps.auckland.ac.nz/document/Volume_11_1902/Volume_11,_No. 1, accessed August
9, 2009.
Best, Elsdon. 1902b. “Notes on the Art of War, as Conducted by the Maori of New Zealand, with
Accounts of Various Customs, Rites, Superstitions, &c., pertaining to War, as Practised and
Believed in by the Ancient Maori,” Part II, Journal of the Polynesian Society 11(2), 47–75, via
http://www.jps.auckland.ac.nz/document/Volume_11_1902/Volume_11,_No._2, accessed August
9, 2009.
Best, Elsdon. 1902c. “Notes on the Art of War, as Conducted by the Maori of New Zealand, with
Accounts of Various Customs, Rites, Superstitions, &c., pertaining to War, as Practised and
Believed in by the Ancient Maori,” Part IV, Journal of the Polynesian Society 11(2), 219–246, via
http://www.jps.auckland.ac.nz/document/Volume_11_1902/Volume_11,_No. 4, accessed August 9,
2009.
Best, Elsdon. 1903a. “Notes on the Art of War, as Conducted by the Maori of New Zealand, with
Accounts of Various Customs, Rites, Superstitions, &c., pertaining to War, as Practised and
Believed in by the Ancient Maori,” Part V, Journal of the Polynesian Society 12(1), 32–50, via
http://www.jps.auckland.ac.nz/document/Volume_11_1902/Volume_11,_No. 5, accessed August 9,
2009.
Best, Elsdon. 1903b. “Notes on the Art of War, as Conducted by the Maori of New Zealand, with
Accounts of Various Customs, Rites, Superstitions, &c., pertaining to War, as Practised and
Believed in by the Ancient Maori,” Part VI, Journal of the Polynesian Society 12(2), 65–84, via
http://www.jps.auckland.ac.nz/document/Volume_11_1902/Volume_11,_No. 6. , accessed August
9, 2009.
Bolton, H. Carrington. 1891. “Some Hawaiian Pastimes,” Journal of American Folklore 4, 21–26, via
http://www.jstor.org/stable/532928, accessed October 15, 2009.
Campbell, Sid. 2006. Warrior Arts and Weapons of Ancient Hawaii. Berkeley, CA: Blue Snake
Books/Frog.
Connor, John. 2002. The Australian Frontier Wars, 1788–1838. Sydney: University of New South
Wales.
Cox, Leonard M., Edward J. Dorn, K. C. McIntosh, and M. G. Cook. 1917. The Island of Guam.
Washington DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce, via http://books.google.com, accessed Octo-
ber 16, 2009.
Cunningham, Lawrence J. 1992. Ancient Chamorro Society. Honolulu: Bess Press.
D’Arcy, Paul. 2006. The People of the Sea: Environment, Identity, and History in Oceania. Honolulu:
University of Hawai‘i Press.
Ellis, William. 1827. Tour through Hawaii, Owhyhee; with Observations on the Natural History of the
Sandwich Islands and Remarks on the Manners, Customs, Traditions, History, and Language of Their
Inhabitants, 2nd edition. London: H. Fisher, Son, and P. Jackson, via http://books.google.com,
accessed October 16, 2009.
Ellis, William. 1833. Polynesian Researches, during a Residence of Nearly Eight Years in the Society and
Sandwich Islands, Volume 1. New York: J. & J. Harper, via http://books.google.com, accessed
October 16, 2009.
Fitzpatrick, James T. 1966. “Lua: The Ancient Art of the Bodyguards of Hawaiian Kings.” Black Belt,
via http://www.blackbeltmag.com/archives/347?print=1, accessed August 9, 2009.
Flanagan, Roderick. 1888. The Aborigines of Australia. Sydney: Edward F. Flanagan and George
Robertson and Co., via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Goodenough, Ward Hunt. 2002. Under Heaven’s Brow: Pre-Christian Religious Tradition in Chuuk.
Philadelphia, PA: Memoirs of the American Philosophical Society.
278
Polynesia: Tahiti, Hawai‘i, and Aotearoa (New Zealand)
www.ebook3000.com

Grey, Jeffrey. 1999. A Military History of Australia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hart, C. W. M., Arnold R. Pilling, and Jane C. Goodale. 1988. The Tiwi of North Australia, third
edition. Chicago: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Hiroa, Te Rangi (Sir Peter Buck). 1971. The Coming of the Maori. New York: Kraus Reprint Co., via
http://www.nzetc.org/tm/scholarly/tei-BucTheC-t1-g1-t2-body1-d4.html, accessed August 9, 2009.
Horwitz, Tony. 2003. Blue Latitudes: Boldly Going Where Captain Cook Has Gone Before. New York:
Picador.
Knauft, Bruce M. 1999. From Primitive to Postcolonial in Melanesia and Anthropology. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
Lessa, William A., and Charles G. Velez-Ibanez. 1978. “Bwang, a Martial Art of the Caroline Islands,”
Micronesica 14, 139–176.
Lockwood, Victoria S. 1993. Tahitian Transformation: Gender and Capitalist Development in a Rural
Society. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers.
Maning, Frederick E. 1876. Old New Zealand, and a History of the War in the North . . . London:
Richard Bentley and Son, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Marshall, Mac. 2004. Namoluk beyond the Reef: The Transformation of a Micronesian Community.
Boulder, CO: Westview Case Studies in Anthropology.
Murray, J. H. P. 1912. Papua or British New Guinea. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Nahu-Roberts, P. 2005. “Te Ao Maarama Mauraakau Roopu,” http://www.webspawner.com/users/
mauraakau, accessed August 9, 2009.
Palmer, J. B. 1957. “The Maori Kotaha,” Journal of the Polynesian Society 66(2), 175–191.
Randell, Nigel. 2004. The White Headhunter: The Story of a 19th-Century Sailor Who Survived a South
Seas Heart of Darkness. New York: Carroll & Graf Publishers.
Skinner, H. D. 1916. “Origin and Relationship of Hani, Tewha-Tewha, and Pou-Whenua,” Man 16,
November, 161–164, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/2788763, accessed October 15, 2009.
Skinner, H. D. 1918. “The Two-Handed Clubs of the Maoris,” Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 48 (July-December), 198–213, via http://www.jstor.org/
stable/2843420, accessed October 15, 2009.
Sodetani, Naomi. 2003. “Way of the Warrior,” Hana Hou: The Magazine of Hawaiian Airlines 6(2)
http://www.hanahou.com/pages/magazine.asp?Action=DrawArticle&ArticleID=271&
MagazineID=15, accessed August 9, 2009.
Stewart, C. S., with introduction by William Ellis. 1839. A Residence in the Sandwich Islands, 5th
edition. Boston: Weeks, Jordan & Company, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16,
2009.
Thomas, Martin, editor. 2007. Culture in Translation: The Anthropological Legacy of R. H. Mathews.
Canberra: Australian National University, via http://epress.anu.edu.au/aborig_history/cit/
mobile_devices/ch03s13.html, accessed August 9, 2009.
Polynesia: Tahiti, Hawai‘i, and Aotearoa (New Zealand)
279

This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook3000.com

South Asia
South Asia includes the modern countries of Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan,
and Sri Lanka, plus parts of Tibet and Myanmar.
South Asia was one of the ﬁrst areas in the world to have settled agriculture and cities, and
today, it is home to about a ﬁfth of the world’s human population. World religions that originated
in South Asia include Buddhism, Hinduism, Sikhism, and Jainism, but other world religions are
equally well represented. For example, half of the world’s Muslims live in South Asia, and India
has as many Christians as do many European countries.
Teachers of South Asian arts generally perceive a clear distinction between martial arts
taught or practiced for sport or business, martial arts practiced for reasons of self-discipline or cul-
tural nationalism, and martial arts practiced for dueling or physical defense. These distinctions
are not always easy to explain to people from other cultures.
SOUTH ASIAN MARTIAL ARTS
South Asia’s martial arts have as much variation and diversity as one would expect from such an
enormous region, and from the standpoint of researching martial art history, this causes problems.
The country of India alone has 22 ofﬁcial languages, and few people with the linguistic skills
needed to master 22 separate languages, in both their medieval and modern forms, are interested
in writing about martial arts. Therefore, the following is simply an introduction to the topic.
LITERARY SOURCES
South Asia’s oldest literary sources are Hindu religious texts. The Rig Veda (Hymnic Lore, before
the tenth century BCE) and the Upanishads (Revealed Teachings, probably the ninth century
BCE) both mention wrestling and archery.
For Hindu martial culture, Ramayana (Rama’s Journey, eighth century BCE) is fundamental.
The hero Rama, whom Hindus consider an incarnation of the deity Vishnu, became the ideal
Hindu warrior king (kshatriya). Rama’s earthly friends included Hanuman. A strong, loyal, and
cunning individual, Hanuman was part human and part ape, and according to the story, as long
as he remained both celibate and loyal, he would be blessed with strength, speed, and protection
from weapons. Hanuman was an enormously popular character, and over time he became a
patron saint for South Asian strongmen and wrestlers.
In another ancient tale (probably ﬁfth century BCE), the king Krishna, also believed to be
an incarnation of Vishnu, discusses the meaning of the warrior’s way with the peerless archer
Arjuna in the Bhagavad-Gita (Divine Song), part of the much larger national epic Mahabharata,

in which Arjuna and his brothers, the legitimate kings, ﬁght with many weapons against their
usurping cousins.
In 326 BCE, Alexander the Great (356 BCE–323 BCE) marched his army into areas that are
today part of Pakistan and Afghanistan. Soon after, a Sanskrit text called Arthashastra (Treatise
on Material Gain) appeared, which advised regional princes that they had the moral and legal
right to wage wars against other kingdoms as a means of achieving political objectives. This sen-
timent was in direct contrast to earlier Jain and Buddhist doctrine, which asserted that wars
fought for gain were demonic in nature.
Another important Sanskrit text, Ayur Veda (Life Science), was codiﬁed by the second cen-
tury BCE. This was a medicinal and metaphysical text that described the ﬁve elements (earth,
water, ﬁre, air, and spirit), listed the vital points of the body, and so on. The exact number of
vital points was debated, but was often said to be 108, probably because this numeral had cos-
mological signiﬁcance in both Buddhist and Hindu doctrine. Attacks on these 108 vital points
were subsequently hidden traditions within many Asian martial arts.
Somewhat later Sanskrit texts include Natya Shastra (Manual of Dramatics) and Abhinaya
Darpana (Mirror of Gesture). Dates for these two dramaturgy texts range from as early as the
third century CE to as late as the eighth. Gestures (mudra) described in these manuals continue
to be seen in Asian dances, exorcism rituals, and martial arts practice forms, presumably
because, when accompanied by ritual chants (mantra), the gestures are said to invoke the
deities and their powers.
Agni Purana (Old Stories of the Deity Agni) was written during the eighth century CE.
Although the text emphasizes statecraft and astrology, it mentions archery and wrestling.
A royal encyclopedia called Manasollasa (Refreshments for the Mind) dates to the twelfth
century CE. An entry in this text describes how court wrestlers of the era trained and ate, but
did not provide much discussion of actual technique.
During the thirteenth or fourteenth century CE, Malla Purana (Old Stories of Wrestlers)
appeared in Gujarat. This text described how the wrestlers of one Vaishnavite (Hindu and ded-
icated to the deity Vishnu rather than to Shiva or Brahma) caste trained and practiced.
From the early eighth century CE to the present, Muslims have been prominent in South
Asia. Because Muslim merchants and armies generally entered the region via Iran, Afghanistan,
or Central Asia, they tended to read and write their secular texts in Persian. A fundamental
Persian-language text is Shah-nama (Book of Kings, ca. 1010 CE). This epic poem described Per-
sian heroes from antiquity to the tenth century, and its heroes included Rostam, a man who wres-
tled, shot arrows, and fought with swords in superhuman fashion. Hindus obviously had different
heroes. Some of these heroes were once real people: modern Hindu heroes include Shivaji
Maharaja (1627–1680), a historical Maratha leader who killed a Biajpuri general named Afzhal
Khand during hand-to-hand combat in 1658.
During the Mughal era (early sixteenth to mid-nineteenth centuries), relevant martial texts
were often published in several languages. Thus, a Persian-language text called Hidayat al-rami
(Archery Guide) was compiled in Bengal ca. 1500; a comparable Dhanurveda (Science of the
Horn Bow) was published in Sanskrit around the same time. Mughal-era royal chronicles often
provide additional detail. For example, in Tarikhi-i Farishta (Farishta’s Chronicle), historian
Muhammad Qasim Farishta noted that the practice of singlestick, and singlestick with shield,
was popular in Ahmednagar, a city established in 1494 by the eponymous Malik Ahmed Nizam
282
South Asian Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

Shah Bahri (ca. 1460–1508) (Briggs 1829, 207). Contemporary European accounts can be use-
ful, too. In 1827, Godfrey Mundy (1804–1860), watched some Bengali soldiers engage in sin-
glestick exhibitions. Later, he wrote (1832, v.2, 280–281): “The ﬁrst two combatants, who
jumped simultaneously into the arena, were armed with a species of single-stick, shorter and
heavier than those used in England, and covered with leather to qualify the effect of the blow;
bearing in their left hands a small leathern buckler about the circumference of a dinner plate.
. . . The extreme dexterity which they displayed in warding with the little shield, their crafty
feints, and the immense springs they occasionally made to avoid or surprise their adversary, drew
loud plaudits from the circle.”
IMAGES AND ARTIFACTS
Around 480 BCE, the Hellenic historian Herodotus described Indian archers as carrying long-
bows made of cane or bamboo (vii. 65). Four centuries later, the Roman author Lucius Flavius
Arrianus (Arrian, ca. 86–ca. 146 CE) also described Indian soldiers carrying longbows made of
cane or bamboo (Indica XVI). The Indian arrows were ﬂetched with feathers and tipped with
steel. Because bamboo longbows are comparatively inexpensive and do well in humid climates,
they remained in wide use until the advent of ﬁrearms. Bamboo longbows continue to be used
in archery games in Bhutan into the present.
Horn bows made in the Persian and Central Asian styles appeared in South Asia before the
second century BCE (Emeneau 1953), and British soldiers reported being attacked by opponents
using horn bows as late as 1904 CE (Crosby 1905, 210). Horn bows do not do well in high
humidity, so steel bows made in the fashion of horn bows became popular during the Mughal era.
Steel bows were not as powerful as horn bows, but they could be kept strung, did not need much
maintenance, and could be engraved and bejeweled (Koppedrayer 1997). Since steel bows are
durable, they are frequently seen in museum collections. Egerton (1880, entry 457, 114)
described two eighteenth-century steel bows as follows: “They are of the shape usually carried by
the Sikhs, and are covered on both sides with richly damascened gold ornamentation in which
are traced inscriptions in Hindustani verse showing them to have belonged to the Emperor
Bahadur Shah (A.D. 1707 to 1712).”
Swords, spear tips, arrowheads, and armor are frequently found in museum collections. Iron
was forged in South Asia before the fourth century BCE, and by the Muslim era, Indian smiths
were famous for their pattern-welded, high-carbon steels, which the English called wootz.The sub-
sequent Arab method of hot-forging steel known in English as Damascus steel is based on these
Indian methods. Although the general method of making wootz steel is known (Burton 1884,
110–112), its traditional rituals and methods have been lost. Legends about wootz steel swords
abound, but their properties may involve nothing more esoteric than iron ores found near
Hyderabad having unusually high concentrations of vanadium (Verhoeven et al. 1998). Archers’
thumb rings, especially rings made of precious stones rather than everyday leather, are also found
in museum collections.
The most durable images of South Asian wrestling are artistic. During the sixth to eighth cen-
turies CE, living stones were carved in southern India to show all kinds of scenes, to include
wrestling scenes. The best-known sculptures, known as the Five Vehicles (Ratha), were carved
during the reign of Narasimhavaraman I (reigned 630–688 CE), and the city of Mahabalipuram
South Asian Martial Arts
283

was named after this king’s praise name, “The Great Wrestler.” The legendary Shaolin prelate
Bodhidharma is sometimes said to have been born in Mahabalipuram during the Great Wrestler’s
reign. Subsequent South Asian courts also patronized wrestling, and there are thousands of
Mughal-era paintings of wrestling scenes (Biswas and Chopra 1987). During the nineteenth cen-
tury, Calcutta’s newspapers began publishing engravings and photos of famous wrestlers, and
India’s ﬁrst indigenous ﬁlm was H. S. (Harishchandra Sakharam) Bhatavdekar’s (1868–1958) The
Wrestlers (1899).
ROLE OF MARTIAL ARTS IN SOCIETY
It is risky to apply generalizations across an area as vast as South Asia. On the other hand, there
do seem to be patterns.
Foremost, in the words of M. N. Pearson (1984, 335) there was an absence of “pure play or
fun . . . In premodern India recreation had intimate, indeed inextricable links with wider
social, economic and religious activities.” Thus, weddings, trade fairs, royal audiences, and
religious festivals were typical venues for wrestling, stick ﬁghting, archery, and cognate activ-
ities (O’Hanlon 2007, 517–518). During religious festivals, holy characters were depicted as
powerful wrestlers or superhuman swordsmen—hence, the stories of Rama and Hanuman.
State theatre ﬁgured, too. Kasim Khan (died 1635), a cousin of the Mughal emperor, was a
noted patron of wrestlers, and his tomb in Lahore was originally called Wrestler’s Dome
(Kushtiwala Gumbaz).
Villages, neighborhoods, guilds, and fraternal organizations sometimes organized self-
defense forces. In Rajput communities, self-defense forces were ﬁnanced by local landowners
or businessmen, who arranged for a soldier or strongman to train young men in stick ﬁghting
or wrestling in return for room and board (Hitchcock 1958). Dirk Kolff (2002, 28) adds that
the weavers’ guild was associated with a stick game called pata (wooden sword), while
working-class Muslims in Lucknow were associated with a singlestick game called rustam khani.
In other communities, comparable singlestick and stick-and-shield games included chub-bazi,
fari gadka, and hanumanti lakadi (O’Hanlon 2007, 497, 503). Between 1857 and 1947, the
British discouraged village defense forces, but during the 1920s, union organizers and
nationalist groups revived the concept. Training in the early twentieth-century socialist and
nationalist volunteer corps included practice in wrestling and stick ﬁghting (Gooptu 2001,
112). After British India’s partition in 1947, riﬂe-armed “Village Defence Committees” were
created in disputed areas of India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and Kashmir. The present-day organi-
zations have nationalist overtones.
Until independence and partition in 1947, large landowners and aristocrats maintained
armed retainers. In small princely states, the armed retainers were essentially liveried bodyguards
(O’Hanlon 2007, 498), but in the big princely states of Hyderabad and Mysore, the armed retain-
ers included cavalry, infantry, and artillery battalions. Wealthy landowners also kept
groundskeepers. Groundskeepers were only nominally armed—their weapons were usually noth-
ing more than a sword or stick. Their role was to collect taxes, prevent poaching, and generally
impose the authority of the landowner in the community (Hitchcock 1958).
Merchants hired guards to protect their shops, storehouses, and caravans. Retired soldiers or for-
mer wrestlers sufﬁced to protect shops and storehouses, but guarding caravans was problematical.
284
South Asian Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

The issue was how well to arm and equip the caravan guards. If guards were heavily armed, then
the governments of the regions through which the guards passed might accuse the guards of being
bandits and have them arrested. Indeed, in 1819, a group of about 200 travelers were arrested on
suspicion that they had been involved in a recent robbery (Sinha 2008, 23). On the other hand,
if the guards were poorly armed, then brigands might attack (Roy 1998). A compromise, then, was
to arm convoy guards with wooden staffs. It was said that a good man with a staff could hold off
several swordsmen (Kolff 2002, 28).
In disputed areas, temples sometimes organized private security forces. The temple security
forces (dob-dob) serving the Yellow Hat Buddhist monasteries established in Tibet, Siberia, and
Mongolia are examples of this concept that survived into the twentieth century. In the Tibetan
monasteries, the men serving in the temple security forces were usually lay brothers rather than
tonsured monks (Harris and Wardle 1996, 86–88). South of the Himalayas, militarized religious
ascetic orders were more common. Members of these militarized ascetic orders frequently served
as armed mercenaries in regional conﬂicts. Examples of Hindu militant ascetic orders included
the Nath yogis, Dasnami sannyasa, and Vishnaivite vairagya. In these names, the adjectival
proper nouns describe religious orders or sects, while the descriptive names translate roughly into
people who have renounced the material world. Equivalent Islamic ascetics were known as
fakirs. The Fakir of Ipi (Mirza Ali Khan, 1897–1960), who led a rebellion against the British
from 1936 until 1947, is an example of an Islamic martial ascetic.
The Sikh religion was established in the Punjab at the end of the ﬁfteenth century, and in
1699, the tenth Sikh guru, Gobind Singh (1666–1708), decided to form his own warrior asce-
tics, known as khalsa (“The Pure”). Khalsa members underwent initiation rituals and took the
surname Singh, meaning “Lion.” Although members of the Khalsa did not cut their hair or
beards, they were expected to hold jobs, keep their beards clean and combed, and wear modest
clothes, thereby distinguishing themselves from Hindu yogis and Muslim fakirs. Khalsa members
wore steel bracelets to show their devotion to God and daggers or swords to show their willing-
ness to ﬁght for their faith and communities. They trained in wrestling, chakra (quoits), archery
(mostly with steel bows), musketry, and fencing with sticks. The Sikh method of fencing with
sticks was called gatka, meaning “liberation through group effort.” In this context, liberation
referred both to personal salvation and community autonomy.
Armed robbers (dacoit) sometimes displayed signiﬁcant skill in martial arts. Martially tal-
ented robbers were often demobilized soldiers, unemployed caravan guards, or members of
organized crime syndicates. The Thugee are a famous example of a Mughal-era crime syndi-
cate (Roy 1998). Folk histories posthumously converted a handful of South Asian armed rob-
bers into social bandits, meaning robbers who allegedly stole from the rich to give to the poor.
Sarva Papadu, a Telugu bandit chieftain executed by the Mughals in 1710, is an example of
a historic armed robber who was later transformed into a social bandit (Richards and Rao
1980).
And, of course, men fought for all the usual reasons. “The tendency to overweening ambi-
tion, extreme pride, and rashness, plus the code of revenge and the tendency to rely on force as
an instrument of policy, has led to turbulence in village affairs,” John Hitchcock wrote in 1958
(219). “During the past three decades in one subdivision of the village for which I have accu-
rate data, there have been three deaths as a result of stick ﬁghts in a Rajput population of about
six hundred.”
South Asian Martial Arts
285

NATIONALISTS
Even in modern times, South Asian martial arts and combative sports are often geared toward
what Rosalind O’Hanlon (2007, 520) calls “‘national’ regeneration.” In other words, South
Asian nationalists frequently use their regional martial arts and associated bodybuilding exer-
cises to further political agendas.
In 1866, the Bengali nationalist educator Rajnarayan Basu (1826–1899) organized a National-
ity Promotion Society, which called for the revival of “national gymnastic exercises” (Rosselli 1980,
127). In British India, gymnasiums set up on European lines but called akhara were established.
Methods of “Indian” physical culture that became widespread during this period included dipping
pushups (dand), deep knee bends (utthak baithak), and Indian clubs (mugdal). Dipping pushups and
squats remain popular with bodybuilders to this day, but Indian clubs went out of favor during the
1910s, as physical educators began giving preference to iron barbells (New York Times 1912). This
movement reached its peak shortly before World War I (1914–1918) (O’Hanlon 2007, 519), and
in 1910, a wealthy Bengali named Sarat Kumar Mitra arranged to send a group of talented profes-
sional wrestlers from the Maharaja of Patiala’s (Bhupinder Singh, 1891–1938) stable to Britain to
participate in British wrestling tournaments, speciﬁcally to show the world that Indian strongmen
could defeat the British on their own terms, using nothing but Indian methods (Noble 2003).
Patrons of these nationalist akharas often included members of British India’s urban (but
nonaristocratic) elite. For example, Swami Vivekananda (1863–1902), one of the pioneers of
yoga in Europe and the United States, had a personal wrestling trainer named Ambikacharan
Guha (“Ambu-babu”). By the early 1900s, middle-class nationalists were also hiring personal
trainers, and by the 1930s, it had become comparatively common for nationalists to hire low-caste
strongmen to teach wrestling to the young men of the community (Rosselli 1980, 143–144).
The National Volunteer Corps (Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, RSS) is a modern-day
organization that is committed to supporting Hindu nationalism via “physical and martial exer-
cises, ideological training and patriotic prayers” (McDonald 1999, 343). RSS was organized in
1925. In its akhara, stories of Rama, Hanuman, and Shivaji are told and retold, and its mem-
bers are encouraged to participate in Indian sports such as kabbadi (a kind of football) and kushti
(traditional Indian wrestling) rather than international sports such as soccer and cricket
(McDonald 1999; Veer 2001, 103–104). In comparable Muslim groups, heroes come from an
Islamic rather than a Hindu legendarium. Thus, Rostam wrestles with the martyred Imam Ali,
or Yakub (Jacob) wrestles with the Angel. For their part, Sikhs train with sticks, wrestle, and
tell stories of the gurus and the Khalsa. The second Sikh guru, Angad Dev (1504–1552), is
often described as a great patron of wrestling. Rivalries between these various nationalist organ-
izations sometimes results in real rather than sublimated violence. In November 1966, there
was a riot in Udaipur, in Rajasthan, following a ﬁght between a Hindu wrestler and a Muslim
wrestler; in the aftermath; one person was shot to death, and scores of shops were looted (Engi-
neer 1991, footnote 1, 232).
EXTANT SYSTEMS WITH HISTORICAL ROOTS
Between 1946 and 1949, the countries of South Asia achieved independence from Britain.
Since then, the region’s governments have encouraged international-style athletics rather than
traditional sports and games. Nonetheless, some traditional martial arts have survived (or, at
286
South Asian Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

least, been revived). Stick ﬁghting (danda) and wrestling (kushti) are widespread, and surviv-
ing (or revived) martial arts include angam pora in southern India and Sri Lanka, dha in
Bhutan, gatka in Sikh communities, silambam in Tamil Nadu communites, thang-ta in
Manpuri communities, and vajramushti in Gujarati communities.
—Joseph Svinth
See also: Indian Wrestling; Iranian Martial Arts; Ottoman Martial Arts; Thang-ta (in this volume);
Belief Systems: India; Belief Systems: Iran; Expressive Culture; Performing Arts; Political Uses of
the Martial Arts; and Secret Societies and Fraternal Organizations (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Alter, Joseph S. 1992. The Wrestler’s Body: Identity and Ideology in North India. Berkeley: University of
California Press, via http://ark.cdlib.org/ark:/13030/ft6n39p104/, accessed May 25, 2009.
Biswas, T. K., and Sarla Chopra. 1987. “Sport and Indian Miniatures: A Presentation of the Bharat
Kala Bhavan Collection,” Olympic Review 241, November, 586–588, via www.la84foundation.org,
accessed May 25, 2009.
Briggs, John. 1829. History of the Rise of the Mahomedan Power in India till the Year A.D. 1612, translated
from the Original Persian of Mahomed Kasim Ferishta, Volume 3. London: Longman, Rees, Orme,
Brown, and Green, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Burton, Richard Francis. 1884. The Book of the Sword. London: Chato and Windus, via http://books.
google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Chehabi, H.E. and Allen Guttmann. 2002. “From Iran to All of Asia: The Origin and Diffusion of
Polo,” Journal of the History of Sport 19(2), 384–400, via http://www.ingentaconnect.com/, accessed
May 25, 2009.
Crooke, William. 1906. Things Indian: Being Discursive Notes on Various Subjects connected with India.
London: J. Murray, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Crosby, Oscar Terry. 1905. Tibet and Turkestan: A Journey through Old Lands and a Study of New
Conditions. New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Dadswell, Sarah. 2007. “Jugglers, Fakirs, and Jaduwallahs: Indian Magicians and the British State,”
New Theatre Quarterly 23(1) 3–24, DOI 10.1017/S0266464X06000595, via Cambridge University
Press January 16, 2007.
Egerton, Wilbraham. 1880. An Illustrated Handbook of Indian Arms, Being a Classiﬁed and Descriptive
Catalogue of the Arms Exhibited at the India Museum: With an Introductory Sketch of the Military
History of India. London: W. H. Allen, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Emeneau, Murray B. 1953. “The Composite Bow in India,” Proceedings of the American Philosophical
Society 97(1), February 14, 77–87, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/3143734, October 15, 2009.
Engineer, Asgharali. 1991. Communal Riots in Post-Independence India. London: Sangam.
Gooptu, Nandini. 2001. The Politics of the Urban Poor in Early Twentieth-Century India. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Grayson, Charles E., Mary French, and Michael J. O’Brien. 2007. Traditional Archery from Six
Continents. Columbia: University of Missouri Press.
Hannam, Kevin. 2007. “Shooting Tigers as Leisure in Colonial India,” in Tourism and the Consumption
of Wildlife, edited by Brent Lovelock, 99–110. London: Routledge.
Harris, Brian, and Heather Wardle. 1996. Tibetan Voices: A Traditional Memoir. San Francisco:
Pomegranate Artbooks.
Hitchcock, John T. 1958. “The Idea of the Martial Rajput,” Journal of American Folklore 71(281),
Traditional India: Structure and Change, July to September, 216–223, via http://www.jstor.org/
stable/538557, accessed October 15, 2009.
Kolff, Dirk H.A. 2002. Naukar, Rajput, and Sepoy: The Ethnohistory of the Military Labour Market of
Hindustan, 1450–1850. Cambridge, UK: University of Cambridge Oriental Publications.
South Asian Martial Arts
287

Koppedrayer, Kaye. 1997. “The End of an Archery Tradition in South India,” Instinctive Archer,
Spring, 26–29, via http://www.atarn.org/india/maharaja.htm, accessed June 29, 2009.
Lorenzen, David N. 1978. “Warrior Ascetics in Indian History,” Journal of the American Oriental Society
98(1), January to March, 61–75, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/600151, accessed October 15, 2009.
Mayaram, Shail. 2003. “Kings versus Bandits: Anti-Colonialism in a Bandit Narrative,” Journal of the
Royal Asiatic Society 13, 315–338, DOI 10.1017/S1356186303003122, via Cambridge University
Press, June 17, 2009.
McDonald, Ian. 1999. “‘Physiological Patriots’? The Politics of Physical Culture and Hindu
Nationalism in India,” International Review for the Sociology of Sport 34:4, 343–358, DOI:
10.1177/101269099034004003, via http://online.sagepub.com/, accessed October 16, 2009.
Mujumdar, D. C. 1950. Encyclopedia of Indian Physical Culture. Baroda: Good Companions.
Mundy, Godfrey C. 1832. Pen and Pencil Sketches, Being the Journal of a Tour in India . . . . London:
John Murray, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
New York Times. 1912. “560,000,000 Minutes Saved Yearly in School Exercise; New System Applied
to Children’s Gymnasium Work Eliminates That Huge Amount of Waste,” May 18, Sunday
Magazine, SM12, via http://news.google.com/archivesearch, accessed October 16, 2009.
Noble, Graham. 2003. “‘The Lion of the Punjab’: Gama in England, 1910,” in Martial Arts in the
Modern World, edited by Thomas A. Green and Joseph R. Svinth, 93–109. Westport, CT: Praeger.
O’Hanlon, Rosalind. 2007. “Military Sports and the History of the Martial Body in India,” Journal of
the Economic and Social History of the Orient 50(4), 490–523, via http://www.ingentaconnect.com/,
accessed May 25, 2009.
Pearson, M. N. 1984. “Recreation in Mughal India,” International Journal of the History of Sport 1(3),
335–350, via http://www.informaworld.com,accessed May 25, 2009.
Phillips, Neil. No date. “Silambam Fighting Art,” International Hoplology Society, http://www
.hoplology.com/weapons_detail.asp?id=8, accessed August 3, 2009.
Pinch, William R. 1997. “Subaltern Sadhus? Political Ascetics in Indian Myth, Memory, and
History,” unpublished paper, http://www.virginia.edu/soasia/symsem/kisan/papers/sadhus.html,
accessed May 25, 2009.
Richards, J. F., and V. N. Rao. 1980. “Banditry in Mughal India: Historical and Folk Perceptions,” Indian
Economic and Social History Review 17, 95–120, via http://online.sagepub.com/, accessed May 25, 2009.
Rosselli, John. 1980. “The Self-Image of Effeteness: Physical Education and Nationalism in
Nineteenth-Century Bengal,” Past and Present 86, February, 121–148, DOI:10.1093/past/86.1.121,
via http://past.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/citation/86/1/121, accessed May 25, 2009.
Roy, Parama.1998. Indian Trafﬁc: Identities in Question in Colonial and Postcolonial India. Berkeley:
University of California Press, via http://ark.cdlib.org/ark:/13030/ft8s20097j/, accessed May 25, 2009.
Sachchidananda, and R. R. Prasad. 1996. Encyclopaedic Proﬁle of Indian Tribes. New Delhi: Discovery
Publishing House.
Singh, Rajendra, 2007. Annual Review of South Asian Languages and Linguistics. Berlin and New York:
Mouton De Gruyter.
Singh, Khalsa, Nanak Dev, and Sat Katar Kaur Ocasio-Khalsa. 1991. Gatka: Dance of the Sword.
Phoenix, AZ: GT International.
Sinha, Nitin. 2008. “Mobility, Control and Criminality in Early Colonial India, 1760s–1850s,” Indian
Economic and Social History Review 45(1), 1–33, DOI: 10.1177/001946460704500101, via http://
online.sagepub.com/, accessed May 25, 2009.
Stone, George Cameron. 1961. A Glossary of the Construction, Decoration, and Use of Arms and Armor
in All Countries and in All Times. New York: Jack Brussel.
Thurston, Edgar. 1906. Ethnographic Notes in Southern India. Madras: Government Press, via http://books
.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Veer, Peter Van der. 2001. Imperial Encounters: Religion and Modernity in India and Britain. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Verhoeven, J. D., A. H. Pendray, and W. E. Dauksch. 1998. “The Key Role of Impurities in Ancient
Damascus Steel Blades,” Journal of the Minerals, Metals, and Materials Society 50(9), 58–64, via
http://www.tms.org/pubs/journals/JOM/9809/Verhoeven-9809.html, accessed May 24, 2009.
288
South Asian Martial Arts
www.ebook3000.com

Victoria and Albert Museum Collections. “Ceremonial Staff or Fencing Stick (IS.10-1980),
http://collections.vam.ac.uk/objectid/O16043, accessed August 4, 2009.
Weerasinghe, Mahendra. 2007. “Angam Martial Art: Rekindling Traditions,” Sri Lanka Guardian,
November 15, http://www.srilankaguardian.org/2007/11/angam-martial-art-rekindling-traditions.
html, accessed August 4, 2009.
Zarrilli, Phillip B. 1994. “Actualizing Power(s) and Crafting a Self in Kalarippayattu, A South
Indian Martial Art and the Yoga and Ayurvedic Paradigms,” Journal of Asian Martial Arts 3(3),
10–51, via http://www.phillipzarrilli.com/downloads/actualizing_power.pdf, accessed January 18,
2010.
Zarrilli, Phillip B. 2002. “Martial Art Traditions,” in South Asian Folklore: An Encyclopedia, edited by
Peter J. Claus, Sarah Diamond, and Margaret Ann Mills, 386–387. London: Routledge.
INDIAN WRESTLING
There can be no consideration of Indian wrestling as a sociocultural phenomenon without a
complete examination of the history out of which the modern sport emerges. This history is not
shaped only by the form of the sport as such, nor is it linear in any developmental, progressive
sense. Wrestling as a martial art is as closely linked to colonialism and nationalism as it is to the
ancient traditions of South Asian civilization; its form emerges out of a more pervasive and com-
plex concern with the place of the body in society and the meaning of embodied practice in
terms of religious, moral, and political principles.
However, on a purely superﬁcial level, Indian wrestling is directly comparable to other mar-
tial arts, most notably and explicitly freestyle wrestling. Since the basic rules, moves, and tech-
niques are almost identical, one may almost speak of “wrestling in India” rather than Indian
wrestling as such. Thus, the term kushti, which means “wrestling,” denotes both a very local form
of the art as well as a more global phenomenon.
Kushti is composed of three primary dimensions: daw (moves), pech (countermoves), and
pantra (stance). There is almost direct congruence between the daws known as multani, dhobi pat,
and kalajangh, for example, and the corresponding freestyle moves known as arm drag, front hip
throw, and ﬁreman’s carry. What is signiﬁcantly different about wrestling in India is that wrestlers
sometimes wrestle in earth pits, sometimes engage in bouts that last for half an hour or more,
sometimes wear distinctive briefs, and under some circumstances can employ moves that amount
to hitting or kicking an opponent and/or throwing him by holding and pulling on his briefs.
Sometimes a bout is decided when one contestant’s shoulders touch the earth, and sometimes
the rules of a tournament are set by those who organize it, but at other times and under other
circumstances wrestlers in India wrestle according to strict and clearly deﬁned international
guidelines, rules, and regulations.
The radical contingency of this is fundamentally important, since wrestlers in India often
consider themselves to be simply wrestlers—capable of competing equally on the earth of a
freshly plowed village ﬁeld or on expensive rubber mats at the National Institute of Sports in
Patiala. In other words, there is an important sense in which the transnational form of freestyle
wrestling makes Indian wrestling into wrestling in India. The history of this process is directly
linked to the formalization of rules and the structured organization of tournaments throughout
India during the twentieth century.
This history is not one in which freestyle wrestling in India has emerged from—and then has
diverged away from, and become something different from—traditional Indian wrestling. The
Indian Wrestling
289

point is that wrestling in India, at any given time (but particularly in the twentieth century),
undermines the pretense of Indian wrestling understood as a distinctive, culture-speciﬁc martial
art. Consider, for instance, what might appear to be uniquely Indian about Indian wrestling—
the intense and comprehensive regimen of jor (Hindi; training), khurak (diet), and vyayam (exer-
cise); the principle of brahmacharya (celibacy) as a prerequisite to training; the rich symbolic
meaning of the akhara (gymnasium); the competitive dynamics of dangals (tournaments); the
signiﬁcance of royal patronage; the idealized structure of the guru–chela (master–disciple)
relationship; and, in more general terms, the kind of embodied person known as a pahalwan, who
is completely devoted to his guru, spends all his time wrestling, and who, among other things,
idealizes the practice of celibacy; the consumption of huge amounts of milk, butter, and
almonds; and the daily performance of thousands upon thousands of dands (a kind of jackkniﬁng
push-up) and bethaks (rapid deep-knee bends). Each of these “traditional” features is thoroughly
modern and contextualized by changing, rather than stable, priorities.
Although wrestling is said to date back to antiquity in South Asia, references to the art in
the Vedas, Upanishads, as well as in the Mahabharata (eighth to fourth centuries BCE) and
Ramayana (eighth century BCE) epics, are cryptic and ambiguous. Two medieval texts, the Man-
asollasa (a treatise on royal art and culture in the Vijayanagar kingdom) and the Mallapurana (a
caste purana of the Jyesthimalla Brahmans of western India) provide more detailed accounts.
What is interesting about these two texts is that they do not provide a useful framework—no
better or worse than accounts of the history of freestyle wrestling, that is—for understanding
wrestling in contemporary India. Whereas most contemporary Hindu wrestlers emphasize the
fundamental importance of a vegetarian diet, both medieval texts prescribe a diet that includes
meat, even for high-caste Brahmans. Contemporary wrestlers de-emphasize the caste identity of
wrestlers, saying that the sport breaks down hierarchy by producing a physiology “of one color”
based on a principle of embodied power. Both medieval texts use caste as an important (if prob-
lematic) criterion for ranked classiﬁcation. The medieval texts carefully delineate and differen-
tiate the kind of dietary regimen for different kinds of wrestlers and recognize the value of
moderation and balanced consumption, whereas contemporary wrestlers tend to advocate the
hyper-consumption of milk, ghee (clariﬁed butter), and almonds. Whereas the medieval texts
make a careful distinction between wrestlers on the basis of age, skill, caste background, physi-
cal development, size, and competitive preparedness, contemporary wrestlers make a fetish of
mass and musculature as developed through exercise and diet. Whereas contemporary wrestlers
tend to exclusively do hundreds if not thousands of fairly straightforward exercises—dands and
bethaks to build up strength—the medieval texts catalog complex training regimens based on
an array of many more different kinds of exercise.
It is difﬁcult, if not impossible, to know whether there have been various alternatives to, or
distinct stages between, the medieval and the modern traditions of wrestling. There is no doubt,
however, that the emphasis on celibacy is a fairly modern phenomenon, a phenomenon that
articulates the high anxiety of masculinity in late colonial and postcolonial India. Wrestlers
claim that celibacy is an imperative part of the training regimen because sex in general and the
loss of semen in particular are thought to be debilitating. Brahmacharya, as abstinence and asen-
suality, has a long genealogy in South Asia, which can be most clearly traced in the practices of
asceticism and yogic self-discipline on the one hand and the disciplinary practices of Brahman
ritual pedagogy on the other. Wrestlers explain their advocacy for absolute asexuality using these
290
Indian Wrestling
www.ebook3000.com

idioms, pointing out that abstinence promotes focused concentration and the development of
skill, as well as the embodiment of shakti (superhuman, subtle strength) manifest in the aura of
pervasive ojas (divine energy).
Celibacy became a problematic concept in twentieth-century India, invoking, on the one
hand—in the context of Victorian colonialism—a kind of effete masculinity and, on the other,
a kind of power that was displaced, disarticulated, and ambiguously marked on the male physique
by virtue of its structural androgyny. In this light it is possible to understand how wrestlers in
colonial India sought to articulate, with nervous bravado, an ideology of hypercelibacy—
absolute detachment from sensual arousal—that was located, bombastically through hyper-self-
discipline, in a massively masculine physique. The point of reference was not so much an
idealized, intrinsically athletic physique as the threat of colonial masculinity deﬁned by aggres-
sive sexuality and the attendant feminization of the colonial subject.
The akhara (wrestling gymnasium)—replete with the symbolic signiﬁcance of the earthen
pit, its microcosmic relationship to the elemental structure of the cosmos, and the ritualized
structure of religious meanings associated with Hanuman (a patron deity of wrestling), as well as
its spatial and architectural form as an integrated whole—might be considered the quintessen-
tially Indian feature of Indian wrestling. The earth of the pit is said to symbolize elemental purity,
fertility, and the power of nature. Hanuman’s embodiment of shakti through absolute celibacy
substantiates this symbolism and links the gymnasium to the sacred realm, deﬁning it as a locus
of physically expressed spiritual devotion. The integrated balance of earth, water, trees, and air
is regarded as a kind of elemental matrix, both marking the gymnasium as a world apart and yet
redeﬁning the world as whole by way of microcosmic instantiation. In most respects, the gym-
nasium is conceptualized as a natural environment minimally transformed to evoke the ideal of
a rural, agrarian landscape. In the rhetoric associated with wrestling, the gymnasium is said to
reproduce the natural and authentic qualities of village life. Yet, akharas are the product of a his-
tory that is rooted not so much in the world of peasants as in the palaces of princes and in the
urban imagination of middle-class nationalists.
In the medieval period, wrestlers were, in some instances, peasants. But to the extent they came
to embody the identity of a pahalwan, they were wards of the royal state. Champions were kept in
stables by rajahs and maharajahs, who paid their expenses and built gymnasiums for practice and are-
nas for tournament competition. These gymnasiums and arenas were designed to represent the aes-
thetics of aristocratic taste and thus manifest pomp and pageantry rather than peasant parochialism.
Among other things, rose water, buttermilk, ghee, and in some instances crushed pearls, gold, and
silver were mixed into the earth of the royal pit. The ritual features of the gymnasium as a sacred
space were not as signiﬁcant as its secular conﬁguration in relation to the authority of the king and
the degree of his prestige, political power, and attendant status in the domain of changing imperial
hierarchies. By most accounts, the place of the gymnasium in the broader political culture of the
princely states took on heightened signiﬁcance in the late nineteenth and ﬁrst half of the twenti-
eth centuries, when, as scholars have recently pointed out, the status of rajahs and maharajahs was
being deﬁned in terms of British imperial authority and the pageantry of colonial rule.
During this era, gymnasiums were redeﬁned and developed in the context of Indian nation-
alism. Both militant Hindu nationalists as well as the more secular nationalists of the Indian
National Congress were concerned with the problem of Indian masculinity and sought to reform
Indian men—in particular middle-class men, who were regarded as corrupt, weak, and
Indian Wrestling
291

effeminate—by instituting various forms of physical culture. Thus, after the revolt of 1857, and
increasingly around the turn of the century, wrestling gymnasiums were built in the newly urban-
ized areas of north and central India to try to reproduce the “natural” masculinity of peasants by
transplanting the “natural” environment of rural India into the modern space of rapidly expand-
ing cities. The Birla Mill Vyayamshala in the heart of Old Delhi, where, until recently, Guru
Hanuman (born Vijay Pal, 1901–1999) trained almost all of India’s international freestyle
wrestlers, is the best example of this manufactured tradition of modern Indian wrestling that is
also, signiﬁcantly, wrestling in India.
Until his death in 1999, Guru Hanuman epitomized the ideal of an enlightened master
teacher and the role of a master teacher in defining the structure of training in the gymna-
sium. A guru, or ustad, is, in essence, a senior wrestler who imparts to his disciples the
knowledge of wrestling. He gives his chelas (disciples) instructions on training, self-
discipline, technique, and overall development. Traditionally, a guru is more than a teacher;
he is the object of his disciples’ absolute devotion and service, and this devotion and serv-
ice are understood as an integral feature of training. In many respects, the guru is revered as
“greater than God” by his disciples, and thus the regimen of training in the gymnasium takes
on the aura of ritual practice. Young wrestlers prostrate themselves at their guru’s feet, and
on Gurupuja (devotion to the guru [master teacher]), formalize their obeisance by trans-
forming the guru into God. In this sense, the guru’s persona is much closer to that of an asce-
tic adept intent on the embodiment of truth than to that of a coach. Yet Guru Hanuman
cast himself, and was cast by the central government of India, in the role of an Olympic
coach, and many if not most other ustads in contemporary gymnasiums struggle with the
conflicting demands of athletics and asceticism, of self-discipline as an end in itself, and
training for competition.
Although there were senior wrestlers in the stables of many rajahs and maharajahs who
functioned, undoubtedly, as teachers, and there were men who built and deﬁned urban gym-
nasiums around themselves and their sense of national purpose, the status of a guru, as such,
has an ambiguous history. Little or no mention is made in the medieval literature and in the
history of competitive wrestling of who won against whom. Much more is made of individual
prowess than of a tradition of training deﬁned by a speciﬁc master of the art. In short, the
ideal of the guru–chela relationship seems to be much more important than the practice as
such. More signiﬁcantly, the ideal is a function of the way in which the priorities of modern
wrestling and modern coaching require that for Indian wrestling to be anything other than
just wrestling in India, it requires the form of difference. Wrestlers in contemporary India are
quite clear on this point. While categorically deﬁning themselves as disciples of a master,
they say it would be foolish not to access a broad range of expertise. As the range of expert-
ise expands to include training camps run by coaches from Russia and Canada, the need for
gurus may increase or decrease, depending on the degree to which wrestlers deﬁne themselves
as pahalwans or Olympic hopefuls.
The designation “pahalwan” refers to a man who embodies the ideals and practices of
wrestling. A pahalwan is a wrestler, but a wrestler who is oriented in two directions at once. As
a wrestler in India competing with other wrestlers for the chance to participate in the Asian
Games or the Olympics, he is drawn, through the structure of sports hostels and recruiting
camps, toward the mats of the National Institute of Sports. As an Indian wrestler, he is grounded
292
Indian Wrestling
www.ebook3000.com

in the akhara, as the akhara deﬁnes a cultural space that is modern by way of its location in the
colonial and postcolonial history of India.
In some sense, the characteristic features of a dangal (tournament) deﬁne a wrestler in India as a
pahalwan, but only to the extent that it highlights the tension between two alternative moderni-
ties. Dangals are wrestling tournaments that are organized by various local, regional, state, and
national groups, any of which may be political, economic, or cultural in orientation. Thus, a village
leader, a trade union, or an organization such as the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (a militant, pro-
Hindu nationalist organization) may sponsor a dangal. In colonial and precolonial times, rajahs and
maharajahs organized dangals, and the success or failure of a wrestler reﬂected directly on his patron.
Dangals are deﬁned by the wrestlers who compete, and sponsors often seek to attract well-known
champions in order to enhance the prestige of the event. The rationale for organizing a dangal is
nam kamana (making a name for oneself), thus making the events inherently competitive rather
than just formal contexts within which athletes compete.
What is signiﬁcant about dangals is the pomp and circumstance of the event as a whole, as
it revolves around a series of progressively important bouts. Dangals are characterized by a degree
of structured improvisation and ad hoc negotiation, in the sense that the questions of who will
compete with whom and what the length of a contest will be are often worked out in public with
a high degree of panache and affected style. The dangal is very much a stage where wrestlers per-
form, and not simply an arena where moves are executed with athletic precision. There is no
standardization with regard to how to structure dangal competition—no stipulated panel of
judges, no weight-class criteria, no time limit as such, no sharply delineated boundary. All of this
means that dangals can be very volatile and contentious. Although there are clearly delineated
rules, and skill, strength, and stamina deﬁne, in some sense, the aesthetics of competitive per-
formance, a dangal always seems to verge on the edge of chaos, and there is usually some degree
of unstructured confrontation between competing groups. In an important way, dangal competi-
tion strains against the rule-bound protocol of competitive freestyle wrestling in India. The
pahalwan who is on stage at a dangal is called on to embody an ideal of physical development
(tremendous mass, density, and radiance) that is somewhat at odds with the pared-down, lean,
ﬂexible musculature of the international wrestler.
All this is a very recent development, as is clearly illustrated by the case of Gama (Ghulam
Muhammad, ca. 1882–1953), who, embodying the ideals of a pahalwan, beat Stanley Zbyszko
(Stanislaw Cyganiewicz, 1879–1967) in what was, in effect, a World Championship “dangal” staged
in London by the John Bull Society in 1908. Subsequently, in 1928, Gama defended his title as
world champion in a dangal staged in India by the Maharaja of Patiala (Bhupinder Singh,
1891–1938). When Gama was world champion from 1908 until 1950, it was still possible to be a
world champion and an Indian wrestler. Now, at best, one can be a heavyweight freestyle gold medal
winner in the Olympics or the Asian Games, and only then as a wrestler from India, Pakistan,
Bangladesh, or Sri Lanka.
—Joseph S. Alter
See also: Iranian Martial Arts; Ottoman Martial Arts; South Asian Martial Arts 
(in this volume); Belief Systems: India; Belief Systems: Iran; International 
Freestyle and Greco-Roman Wrestling; Professional Wrestling; and 
Secret Societies and Fraternal Organizations (in Volume II).
Indian Wrestling
293

REFERENCES
Alter, Joseph S. 1992. The Wrestler’s Body: Identity and Ideology in North India. Berkeley: University of
California Press, via http://ark.cdlib.org/ark:/13030/ft6n39p104/, accessed May 25, 2009.
Alter, Joseph S. 1993a. “The Body of One Color: Indian Wrestling, the Indian State and Utopian
Somatics,” Cultural Anthropology 8(1) 49–72, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/656421, accessed
October 15, 2009.
Alter, Joseph S. 1993b. “The sannyasi and the Indian Wrestler: The Anatomy of a Relationship,” American
Ethnologist 19(2), 317–336, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/645039, accessed October 15, 2009.
Alter, Joseph S. 1994a. “The Celibate Wrestler: Sexual Chaos, Embodied Balance and Competitive
Politics in North India,” Contributions to Indian Sociology 29(1–2), 109–131.
Alter, Joseph S. 1994b. “Somatic Nationalism: Indian Wrestling and Militant Hinduism,” Modern
Asian Studies 28(3), 557–588, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/313044, accessed October 15, 2009.
Alter, Joseph S. 2000. Gandhi’s Body: Sex, Diet and the Politics of Nationalism. Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press.
THANG-TA
Thang-ta (sword-spear) is the popular Manipuri name for a set of armed and unarmed ﬁghting
techniques developed by the Meitei people of the state of Manipur, India. The formal name for
this martial system is Huyen Lallong (art of warfare).
Bordered on the east by Myanmar (Burma), the state of Manipur (total area: 2,190,000
hectares, or 8,456 square miles) in northeastern India consists geographically of an oval valley of
about 181,300 hectares (700 square miles) surrounded by densely forested mountain ranges. Each
of the various communities residing in the valley possesses its own distinct religious practices. The
Meiteis have long been the principal inhabitants of this valley. Their history is characterized not
only by interclan and intertribal warfare and conﬂicts with Myanmar, Assam, and other neigh-
boring kingdoms, but also by long periods of stable government. Thang-ta, with its long and ener-
getic practice sessions, allowed Meitei warriors to hone their combat skills in times of peace as
well as war.
The story of the origins of thang-ta is embedded in the religious mythology of the Meitei
community. In the mythology of the Meitei, the limbs and bones of the community’s progenitor,
Tin sidaba (also called Pakhangba), are said to have turned into various swords and tools, some
of which are used in thang-ta; others are used in certain rites. Tin sidaba’s ribs turned into the
broad sword (thangjao), for instance, while one of his ﬁngers became the kitchen knife (heijrang).
Even today, each of the seven clans of the Meitei owns a distinctively shaped traditional sword
that must be laid out during any event of ancestor worship. Leishemlon, the story of creation in
Meitei mythology, records Pakhangba as the originator of thang-ta.
Thang-ta reached its zenith during the reign of King Khagemba (1597–1652). Chainarol (An
Account of Combats), a manuscript written during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries that
contains glimpses of the prevailing war customs, suggests that warriors were expected to adhere
to a strict code of conduct. For instance, when an unarmed man was challenged, he had the right
to fetch weapons and to ﬁx the date for the ﬁght. During the ﬁght, when blood oozed from a
scratch or wound on any part of a combatant’s body, that combatant was declared the loser.
Afterward, the combatants shared food and wine supplied by their wives. Then, the victor cut
off the loser’s head and, if the loser had requested this service, cremated the loser’s body. Heads
usually were preserved by victors as trophies of prowess.
294
Thang-Ta
www.ebook3000.com

After losing the Anglo-Manipuri War of 1891, Manipur was annexed to the British Empire.
In recognition of the heroism and skill of the Manipuri army, which was ably led by Major Gen-
eral Paona Brajabasi, the British immediately made it illegal for a citizen of Manipur to possess
a weapon and outlawed the martial arts of Manipur, including thang-ta. Thang-ta went under-
ground and was kept alive by only a few expert practitioners. India gained independence in 1947;
Manipur became a territory of the Indian Union in 1949 and a constituent state in 1972, and
thang-ta slowly reemerged.
Today, considerable controversy surrounds differences in thang-ta techniques taught by the
various gurus (teachers). These differences may be attributable to the long suppression of this
martial art by the British colonial power.
Thang-ta is popular in Manipur both as a martial art form and as a technique used in the-
ater and dance. Therefore, it receives support from the state and has gained widespread pop-
ularity. Across Manipur, various martial arts academies train men and women in thang-ta,
and many dance and theater schools include thang-ta among their course offerings. The per-
formance of thang-ta techniques, as in the solo decorative sword dance or a choreographed
thang-ta duel on the stage, has become common in Manipur. In fact, the professional
Manipuri dancer is quite likely to have taken a few thang-ta workshops. In addition, well-
known Indian choreographers such as Astaad Deboo (1947–) have collaborated extensively
with thang-ta artists.
The traditional repertoire of thang-ta is divided into four broad categories. These categories
are art of spear dance (Ta-khousarol), art of swordplay (Thanghairol), unarmed combat (Sarit-
sarat), and art of touch and call (Thengkourol).
Ta-khousarol consists of nine extremely demanding and sophisticated movement sequences:
Maram Nungshetpa, Maram Achouba, Maram Macha, Tangkhul, Athou Achouba, Thel,
Maram Nungjrongba, Kabui, Athou Chumthang. Each involves a series of moves executed in a
speciﬁc order—salutation, removing stakes, watching the foe, battle, and so forth. The martial
artist holds the spear (ta) in the right hand and a round shield (chungoi) in the left. The spear is
made of bamboo, about 150 centimeters (60 inches) in length, with a blade attached on both
sides. The spears used in present times are decorated with colored thread. The shield measures
about 90 centimeters (36 inches) in length and 45 centimeters (18 inches) in diameter. It is usu-
ally black in color, with a motif painted on top.
Today, the spear dance is a popular solo performance piece for the expert martial artist, and
Ta-khousarol techniques are used widely by drama directors and dance choreographers in
Manipur.
Thanghairol encompasses two kinds of swordplay: decorative swordplay (Leiteng-thang)
and combat swordplay (Yanna-thang). The expert swordsman carries a shield (chungoi) and
three swords, namely, a right-hand sword (yet-thang), a left-hand sword (oi-thang), and an
additional sword (tendon-thang); this last is kept at the back and used like an arrow in an
emergency. In decorative swordplay (Leiteng-thang), the swordsman moves either two swords
or one sword and the shield gracefully in a show of valor and virtuosity. A typical technique
involves twirling two swords around the swordsman’s body so that they trace the path of a ﬁg-
ure eight without ever touching one other. In combat swordplay (Yanna-thang), the swords-
man learns to master the various units of Thanglon (language of the sword), which include
bladework and the accompanying footwork, so that the swordsman can defend against all
Thang-Ta
295

modes of attack and counterattack. The swords are about 60 centimeters (24 inches) long.
They can be either straight or slightly curved, with handles made of brass and wood. In con-
temporary Manipur, Thanghairol is taught in martial arts academies and is also seen fre-
quently in theatrical productions.
Unarmed combat (Sarit-sarat) consists of a series of techniques that must be mastered by
every student. The training begins with different types of somersaults and various methods for
rolling on the ﬂoor and later advances to include strategies of offense and defense without the
use of weapons. This tradition focuses on using movements such as punching and kicking in
strategic ways in order to deal with sudden attacks of any kind. It also includes techniques for
ﬁghting unarmed against an armed opponent. In stage performances of thang-ta, a popular the-
atrical piece is one showing a woman who defends herself against a male attacker using the self-
defense techniques of Sarit-sarat.
Thengkourol involves ritualistic movements that must be executed in sequence, following
the symbolic diagram of the coiled snake (paphal). The martial artist’s movements form
patterns by connecting the points of the diagram with the feet. Rather than being a system of
techniques used for direct combat with another human being or an animal, Thengkourol
functions as a magical practice in which the prayer along with the mode of action performed
brings about the desired effect on the enemy or the kingdom. The knowledge of Thengkourol
is highly valued by the community, and those warriors who possess this knowledge are believed
to possess the ultimate knowledge of the art of warfare. Very little information is publicly
available about Thengkourol. It is a sacred art, the knowledge of which is preserved in secrecy.
It is never performed in public, and currently, only a handful of martial artists claim to know
Thengkourol. Although gurus sometimes disagree about the details of a Thengkou (one of the
forms of the art), they concur on the overall idea. There are nine Thengkou: Akao, Leiphal,
Leichai, Nongphan, Leikak, Leinet, Lankak, Akham, Leishit. The records of Manipur docu-
ment occasions on which a series of Thengkou were performed to bring victory. For example,
during the reign of King Garibniwaz (1709–1748), a noble named Sarot haiba Toglen
Wangkheirakpa performed Akham Thengkou. Similarly, during the reign of Rajarshi
Bhagyachandra (1748–1799), Pandit Gopiram performed the Akham Thengkou. The revered
stories of these occasions have lived for generations in people’s memories. A student must be
both the trusted disciple of a guru and over the age of forty before learning Thengkourol
because it can bring destruction to others or even kill the performer. These strictures are
meant to ensure that the martial artist has enough maturity and discretion to avoid misusing
this mystical and dangerous sacred art.
The system of training in thang-ta is strict and bound by tradition. Training begins with
the initiation ceremony, Ojha Boriba (teacher acceptance). On the auspicious day selected for
the ceremony, the training ground is cleaned and candles are lit in front of the picture of the
Pakhangba. The student is asked to meditate in front of Pakhangba and then to bow down and
offer the teacher a gift of fruit, cloth (usually a khudoi, a locally woven garment worn by men at
home), betel leaves, betel nuts, candles, and a token remuneration (usually one Indian rupee,
about two cents in U.S. currency). The teacher accepts the gift and the student as a disciple, and
that day the student ofﬁcially starts training with the teacher. There are strict codes of conduct
in the institutions. The following represent the disciplinary regulations of Hula Sindamsang, a
school of thang-ta located in Imphal, Manipur.
296
Thang-Ta
www.ebook3000.com

•
The student must enter barefoot into the school (sindamsang) or the home of the teacher.
•
The student must bow in greeting to the teacher and elders who are already present.
•
The training ﬂoor must be well groomed and sprinkled with water before and after each
training session.
•
Pregnant or menstruating women are not allowed on the training ﬂoor.
•
Before each training session, the student must bow to Pakhangba with reverence.
•
Before each training session, the student must bow to the partner and salute the partner
with the weapon wielded by the student.
•
Before picking up a weapon (whether a sword, spear, shield, or stick), the student must
touch it with the ﬁngers and then touch the ﬁngers to the forehead, thus acknowledging
the sanctity of the weapon.
•
The student’s feet must never touch the student’s weapon or the partner’s weapon.
•
If any person comes between practicing partners, all practice must be stopped for the day.
•
All students must stand still when receiving the instructions from the teacher.
•
No student shall come to the school intoxicated.
•
Chewing of betel and smoking are not allowed in the sindamsang or in the presence of
the teacher.
•
At the end of a training session, the student must bow again to the teacher.
Such regulations ensure that students learn in a disciplined and controlled environment, an
important factor given that the slightest lapse in concentration may result in injury or even death.
Students learn and execute a rigorous practice routine of different sets of exercises, after having
mastered basic exercises that develop balance, ﬂexibility, agility, endurance, and coordination.
Beginning students practice with sticks of different sizes. Training in the use of various swords, the
shield, and the spear follows once the student is proﬁcient enough to use actual weapons.
Thang-ta provided the basis for two other movement traditions of Manipur: the classical
Manipuri dance and the performance techniques of the ensembles of drum dancers and cymbal
dancers and singers known as Nata Sankirtana. The decorative, non-narrative hand gestures and
the footwork of Manipuri dance are said to derive from thang-ta. Also, the basic stances of the
drum dance and the cymbal dance have been inﬂuenced by this martial art.
The ever-present threat of invasion by the warriors of Myanmar and other kingdoms fostered
in Manipur a strong martial tradition, which gave impetus to a vibrant physical culture as well.
Among the ancient indigenous sports of Manipur are Sagol Kangjei (polo, which the British
learned in Manipur), Khong Kangjei (a type of ﬁeld hockey), Yubi Lakpi (coconut snatching,
similar to rugby), Mukna (a style of wrestling), and Kang (a team sport played indoors only
between mid-April and June).
—Sohini Ray
See also: South Asian Martial Arts (in this volume); Expressive 
Culture; and Performing Arts (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Brara, N. Vijaylakshmi. 1998. Politics, Society and Cosmology in India’s North East. New Delhi: Oxford
Publishing House.
Doshi, Saryu, editor. 1989. Dances of Manipur: The Classical Tradition. Bombay: Marg Publications.
Hodson, T. C. 1908. The Meitheis. London: David Nutt.
Thang-Ta
297

Kabui, Gangumen. 1991. History of Manipur: Pre-Colonial Period, Volume 1. New Delhi: National
Publishing House.
Katyal, Anjum, editor. 1997. “Theater in Manipur Today,” Seagull Theater Quarterly 14/15. Calcutta:
Seagull Foundations for the Arts.
Lightfoot, Louise. 1958. Dance-Rituals of Manipur, India. Hong Kong: The Standard Press.
Naorem, Sanajaoba, editor. 1988–1995. Manipur: Past and Present. New Delhi: Mittal Publications.
Singh, Ch. Manihar. 1996. A History of Manipuri Literature. New Delhi: Sahitya Academy.
Singh, E. Nilakantha. 1982. Aspects of Indian Culture. Imphal, Manipur, India: Manipur State Kala
Academy.
Singh, E. Nilakantha. 1993. Fragments of Manipuri Culture. New Delhi: Omsons Publications.
Singh, E. Nilakantha. 1997. Manipuri Dances. New Delhi: Omsons Publications.
Singh, L. Bhagyachadra. 1987. A Critical Study of the Religious Philosophy of the Meeteis before the
Advent of Vaishnavism in Manipur. Imphal, Manipur, India: L. Momon Devi.
Singh, L. Joychandra. 1995. The Lost Kingdom (Royal Chronicle of Manipur). Imphal, Manipur, India:
Prajatantra Publishing House.
Singh, M. Kirti. 1980. Religious Development in the 18th and 19th Centuries. Imphal, Manipur, India:
Manipur State Kala Akademi.
Singh, M. Kirti. 1988. Religion and Culture of Manipur. New Delhi: Manas Publications.
Singh, M. Kirti. 1993. Folk Culture of Manipur. New Delhi: Manas Publications.
Singh, M. Kirti. 1998. Recent Researches in Oriental and Indological Studies. New Delhi: Parimal Publi-
cations.
Singh, N. Khelchandra. 1995. “The Origin of Thang-ta and Its Present Trend,” in Diamond Jubilee
Volume, Manipuri Sahitya Parishad (Manipuri Literary Academy).
Singh, P. Phonendrajit Singh. 1987. Paona Brajabasi. Imphal, Manipur, India: P. Phonendrajit Singh.
Singh, R. K. Jhalajit. 1987. A History of Manipuri Literature. Imphal, Manipur, India: Public Book Store.
Singh, R. K. Jhalajit. 1992. A Short History of Manipur. Imphal, Manipur, India: R. K. Jhalajit Singh.
Singh, S. Devabrata. 1995. “Contemporary Position of Manipuri Martial Arts and towards Its
Understanding,” in Souvenir. Irilbung, Manipur, India: Huyen Lalong Manipur Thang-ta Cultural
Association.
298
Thang-Ta
www.ebook3000.com

Southeast Asia
Mainland Southeast Asia consists of Cambodia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Thailand, Vietnam,
and Singapore (an island city created by the British during the nineteenth century). Maritime
Southeast Asia consists of Borneo, Indonesia, the Philippines, and parts of Polynesia. Major
world religions found in Southeast Asia include Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism, and Christianity.
The peoples of Southeast Asia included many famous seafarers. For example, the Polynesians
spread across the Paciﬁc from an ancestral home in Taiwan, while other Austronesians sailed to
Madagascar from homes near Borneo. Spices and other commodities native to Southeast Asia
have been distributed throughout the world since antiquity. This trade is worthy of note because
European maritime exploration of the ﬁfteenth century was aimed speciﬁcally at obtaining eas-
ier access to Southeast Asian spices and commodities.
From the sixteenth to the twentieth centuries, indigenous Southeast Asian culture was
disrupted by European, American, and East Asian mercantile and colonial activities. Southeast
Asian culture was disrupted again by World War II (1941–1945 in the Paciﬁc) and its
aftershocks, to include the Indonesian National Revolution of 1945–1950, the Philippines’
Hukbahlap Rebellion of 1946–1954, the Indochina Wars of 1947–1975, and the Malay
Emergency of 1948–1960.
Southeast Asian martial arts such as arnis, kuntao, and Muay Thai developed along cultural
lines. Today, however, there is signiﬁcant cross-cultural interest in gambling sports such as inter-
national boxing and Muay Thai.
ARNIS
The Filipino martial arts (FMA) are local cultural traditions of combat that encompass a wide
range of activities such as self-defense, community security, personal protection, military train-
ing, sports, and healing. A commonly held image of the FMA is that they are primarily weapon-
based arts focusing on the use of the stick, sword, and knife. Empty-hand techniques are taught
at a later stage of training. The most popular names for this version of the FMA are arnis, kali
(also kalis), and eskrima. This is in contrast to other FMA systems such as Silat and kuntao,
which are found mostly in Mindanao, in which methods for empty-hand combat are the foun-
dation of skill while weapons techniques are taught at a later stage. In addition, there are other
local systems that are adaptations of foreign styles such as kickboxing, wrestling, Brazilian jiu-
jitsu, mixed martial arts (MMA), and Okinawan karate (especially Shorin-ryu). This article will
focus on arnis, kali, and eskrima, the weapon-based martial arts of the Philippines. Throughout
this article, the word arnis will be used to refer to all three. This is not meant to lessen in any

300
Arnis
way styles or systems that use the two other words in their names, only that it is purely a matter
of convenience.
The word arnis is derived from the Spanish term arnes, meaning harness, a probable reference
to the attire of the inhabitants that the Spanish ﬁrst encountered in the Philippines during the
start of the colonial period. Kalis, on the other hand is derived from an old term for sword found
in several languages in throughout the archipelago. The word may also be a possible derivative of
kris (keris), the Malay word for bladed weapon, or the Spanish caliz, the latter meaning saber.
Eskrima is a direct adaptation of the Spanish word escrima or esgrima meaning fencing or skir-
mishing. There are also references to armas, which means arms or weapons; hence the phrase
armas de mano refers to handheld weaponry. Of these three terms, arnis and eskrima are the most
widely used in the Philippines, while kali and eskrima are more widely used outside. Nevertheless,
the movement of master teachers from the Philippines to other countries has contributed to the
wider use of the word arnis in these countries.
MATERIAL CULTURE: THE OBJECTS OF POWER
The term material culture refers to the material objects that are signiﬁcant to a group or community.
These objects are given meanings; their possession and use bestows identity and status for their
users in the community. In this case, the material culture under consideration consists of both the
weapon and nonweapon material objects that are part of the practice of arnis. These items are a
concrete manifestation of the symbols and the world view that guide the practice of arnis.
In the various systems and styles of arnis, weapons form the primary modality of practice.
There are a wide range of weapons practiced, with sticks, swords, and knives forming the core,
but most styles include other weapons, such as staffs of varying lengths, spears, chains, and ropes.
In addition, for purpose of self-defense, techniques for all these weapons are adapted to everyday
objects such as slippers, pens, umbrellas, and even rolled-up magazines and newspapers.
Categories of practice may include: singlestick, double stick, stick and dagger; single sword,
double sword, sword and dagger; single dagger, double dagger; staff; spear; chain, rope and scarf
or handkerchief; improvised weapons. Empty-hand techniques may follow the movements of the
weapons depending on the style; or they may include techniques borrowed from foreign martial
arts such as boxing, karate, judo, or Brazilian jiu-jitsu.
Some systems may encompass all of the above categories of practice. Others may focus on
only a few—typically singlestick, stick and dagger, or sword work alone. Blade and stick work are
considered interchangeable in some systems, hence the popular image of the rattan stick as a
training substitute for the sword. In these systems, the movements of the sword are directly trans-
lated into stick movements, with little or no adjustment needed. The obvious advantage of such
a method is that no matter what weapon the practitioner uses, the movements and methods of
use are the same.
There are variations in what is considered to be the ideal length of the weapon. Many sys-
tems employ sticks and swords of roughly 70 to 74 centimeters (27 to 29 inches) in length. These
lengths are commonly used and widely available from suppliers. However, there are systems that
employ sticks that are about 76 to 80 centimeters (30 to 32 inches) long. Practice sticks are usu-
ally made of varnished rattan, with the skin kept on. Rattan is preferred for its durability and
ability to withstand hard blows in training. Sticks made from other kinds of woods are used but
www.ebook3000.com

not as frequently. The reason is that local hardwoods such as kamagong (velvet-apple, Diospyros
blancoi) shatter upon frequent contact with other hardwood sticks. Knife and dagger lengths also
vary, with blade lengths ranging from 15 to 30 centimeters (6 to 12 inches). The differences in
lengths affects the ranges at which these weapons can be employed and the methods of using
them.
Objects other than weapons form part of the material culture of arnis. For instance, uni-
forms play a role in deﬁning the practitioner. There is no standard uniform for arnis. Instead,
there are many different styles of uniform clothing, probably as many as there are styles, asso-
ciations, and teachers. A common uniform is a pair of bright red pants and a white shirt. Sup-
posedly, this combination was the everyday attire of the peasant members of the Katipunan, a
revolutionary group that fought against the Spaniards at the end of the Spanish colonial era
(1892–1898). The red color symbolizes bravery and the willingness to die for one’s country;
the white is for purity of heart and purpose. A cloth belt may be worn around the waist.
Depending on the system, the cloth belt may be of different colors according to the rank of
the practitioner. Common color schemes include red or red and gold for the masters and
grandmasters of the styles, black for the teachers, and different colors according to the grade
of the students. Although this color scheme is presumably borrowed from judo, the arnis belt
is often tied at the side of the wearer, instead of in front. The shirt bears the emblem of the
club or association and sometimes the name of the wearer as well. Another common uniform
is black pants and black shirts without the use of colored belts. A third common uniform has
sleeveless jackets over white shirts for the teacher or master and white shirts for students. A
fourth style of uniform is closely patterned after the Japanese keikogi or karate practice
uniform. In this case, however, the uniform jacket is shorter than its Japanese counterpart,
coming to slightly below the waist, and it has shorter sleeves as well. All of these uniforms rep-
resent recent innovations, having been popularized after World War II. This coincides with
the concurrent trend toward offering mass instruction at commercial clubs and in the public
schools as part of the physical education program.
The club logos worn on uniform shirts and jackets are a visible manifestation of identity,
clearly stating to which group a practitioner belongs. The various elements of the logos, usually
incorporating a depiction of a sword or a stick, symbolize the value system to which the club sub-
scribes. One common variation incorporates some of the elements of the national ﬂag of the
Philippines, such as the sun and stars. Geometrical ﬁgures such as triangles and circles also
appear in the logos. The signiﬁcance of each and every element deserves closer examination, but
at this point it is sufﬁcient to say that there are multiple layers of meanings associated with each
element, and members are in essence supposed to embody these meanings in their personal
conduct.
A word must be said about the role of anting-anting (Tagalog, “talismans”). As a source of
power, the talisman is believed to confer various supernatural abilities on the wearer, such as
invulnerability to attacks, invisibility, hypnotism, bilocation (the ability to be in two places at
the same time), and so on. The process of creating and imbuing an anting-anting is closely
guarded, to be passed down as secrets from master to disciple (not necessarily an arnisador, as
arnis practitioners are known). Thus, whatever their popularity in previous times, the making
and use of such talismans is not very widespread today. The spread of public education and the
popularization of sport and self-defense applications has also meant that fewer and fewer people
Arnis
301

are interested in such esoteric knowledge, particularly as participation in a market economy
drives most people to regard this as unlikely to bring in any substantial income.
MOVEMENT AND MYSTERY
In pedagogical terms, the ﬁrst priority in teaching arnis is to teach the angles of striking. Most
systems use twelve strikes in their repertoire; however, some have ﬁve, others seven, and still
others thirteen. Arnis movements are classiﬁable into two broad categories: striking/cutting and
thrusting. In striking/cutting movements, the body of the stick is the main striking area. Expo-
nents cut or strike using different combinations along any of the angles of attack prescribed by
the system. Thrusts are delivered at different targets to the body and to the face. The most com-
monly seen thrusts are to the abdomen, both sides of the chest, and the eyes.
The ratio of strikes/cuts to thrusts varies with each system. Some styles have a 50–50 ratio of
strikes to thrusts. That is, if they have twelve prescribed movements and targets, then six of those
will be strikes/cuts and the other six will be thrusts. Other styles have more strikes than thrusts.
The presence of the thrust in the repertoire is a reminder that not too long ago, the major
weapon of the Filipino martial arts was the sword.
In most systems of arnis, the basic movements and the associated targets on the body are
taught through a numbering system, while speciﬁc techniques have their own names. This
appears to be primarily a pedagogical tool; the numbering system enables beginners to absorb the
basic movements of the art, serving as the foundation for the speciﬁc techniques.
This knowledge of striking and thrusting movements is subsequently combined into series of
techniques. Students drill in these techniques in pairs. The skills taught in these drills range from
simple parrying and countering to controlled sparring in various modes, from what some call
“target practice” or hitting only a part of the body such as the hand, to all-out free sparring.
There are varying degrees of protection, depending on the skill and inclinations of the partners.
Striking/cutting techniques can be described as geometrical shapes, such as lines, crosses, tri-
angles, circles, and the ﬁgure-8 (what many call otso, adapted from the Spanish ocho). The most
common strike is executed on a diagonal line from outside the opponent and going down across
his body. A cross describes two strikes or cuts executed as two intersecting diagonal lines or as a
vertical line crossing a horizontal line. A strike describes a circle going forward and down in front
of the practitioner. Continuous strikes can resemble the number 8 turned on its side (∞), or a
vertical circle continually going forward, any number of varying movements executed nonstop.
Techniques include the usage of all the weapons in the system, disarming with weapon
against weapon and empty hands against weapon and bare-handed combat ranging from punch-
ing and kicking to grappling and throwing. It is during these two-person practices that the ﬂow
of both body and mind for which the Filipino martial arts are famous is imbibed. In addition, the
strategies and tactics of the style are revealed in these paired practices.
While strategy is a guide for doing things, tactics are the speciﬁc tools needed to achieve
those goals. Strategies are derived from a core set of beliefs as to the best way to proceed in com-
bat and attain victory. The central belief for the exponents of some styles is that the practitioner
has to generate overwhelming force so as to sweep aside the opponent, regardless of what he or
she may do. In other styles, the preference is to go with an opponent’s force and then retaliate
using a devastating counter from an unexpected angle. Speciﬁc techniques therefore reﬂect the
approach of each style.
302
Arnis
www.ebook3000.com

Footwork patterns are literally the stepping stones of techniques. These patterns are incul-
cated into the practitioner’s memory (both in the mind and muscle) through hours of constant
drill. The footwork patterns are also derived from the style’s core strategies and are used to
deliver the techniques to the target.
Many of these footwork patterns can be described in geometrical terms.
•
One pattern is a simple linear stepping pattern on the ground. The practitioner steps
forward or backward continuously while executing techniques.
•
A second pattern is also linear. One foot steps forward while the other foot slides in
synchrony. This pattern can be reversed: the rear foot steps backward while the front foot
slides back at the same time. This can also be executed sideways to the left or right and
even at 45-degree angles.
•
A third pattern is triangle-shaped. This so-called triangle footwork is varied in its execu-
tion as well. One version has one foot stepping out at an angle. Both the lead and rear
foot form the side of a triangle. To switch sides and evade an attack, the rear foot must
step out at an angle and the lead foot goes backward to the rear foot’s position. If the
practitioner pivots while stepping, then he or she can end up at the opponent’s blind side,
ensuring his or her safety while countering.
•
A variation of triangle footwork involves the lead foot stepping back ﬁrst and then the
rear foot stepping out at an angle. This is used for techniques executed at a closer range.
There are other versions of the triangle footwork, but these two illustrate the range of
possibilities involved in moving this way.
Postures come in two forms. One is called sirada (sometimes spelled serrada, from the Spanish
cerrada), a word meaning “closed.” In this posture, the weapon is held across the practitioner’s
body thus closing off the centerline of the body and protecting the vital organs from attack. This
is generally defensive in nature, although it can also be used to launch an attack. The opposite
posture is called abierta (“open”). In this posture, the weapon is held to one side of the body,
leaving the center open. This posture allows for a quicker offense. All styles of arnis have both
postures in their repertoire, and practitioners are expected to be able to alternate quickly
between both.
Apart from assuming these postures for defense and attack, there are other applications for
the concepts involved. For instance, sirada can be applied as a counter to an opponent in that
one’s defense can literally close the attacker’s own posture, preventing a follow-up to the initial
attack. Abierta can be applied in a similar manner—one’s defense opens up the opponent’s body
and posture, rendering the opponent vulnerable to one’s own counters and follow-up attacks.
Thus, defenses can be methods for forcing opponents to assume disadvantageous positions. Both
applications exist in various arnis systems, with precise details varying according to the systems’
strategies and tactics.
These postures (sirada and abierta) are used with different stances.
•
One common stance is a frontal stance. In this stance, one foot (usually the right if the
practitioner is right-handed, left if the opposite) steps out in front of the other. The front
leg is bent, while the rear leg may be either straight or bent. The length of the stance may
vary, with some styles advocating a long front stance and others assuming a shorter
stance, almost like a boxer.
Arnis
303

•
A second stance is the straddle or horse stance. In this case, both feet are in line with
each other, but one foot may be in front at an angle. Both legs are bent, feet and thighs
parallel to each other. In appearance, it looks like the practitioner is sitting down on an
imaginary chair or riding a horse. Many practitioners assume this stance at a 45-degree
angle since it offers a useful neutral position from which to execute techniques.
•
A third stance is the x-stance or ekis (in Tagalog, Bisaya, and other Philippine languages).
One leg crosses behind the other such that from the front, the crossed legs resemble the
letter x. This stance is used to fade back from an attack before snapping into a counter,
or to twist into an opponent’s attack and countering at the same time.
•
Other stances exist, such as the back stance and cat stance, which are derived from
Okinawan and Japanese karate, and which have been modiﬁed to suit the particular arnis
style.
•
Kneeling stances are found in some styles of arnis and were used originally on muddy
ground to ensure the practitioner’s balance, as well as to attack the opponent’s lower body
and legs.
It is worth considering at this point that in many styles, the head is the major target for obvi-
ous reasons—most people cover their heads when attacked and, for this reason, defensive strate-
gies and tactics emphasize protecting the head. However, a feint to the head can be delivered
and the real attack can be aimed at the vital organs of the lower body or the vulnerable areas of
the legs. In this instance, it can be seen that with the right timing and techniques, kneeling
stances can be very effective, especially when delivered from the side.
Unarmed methods, and methods involving disarming armed opponents, are taught. These
are sometimes called mano-mano (from the Spanish mano-a-mano, “hand-to-hand”). The extent
to which unarmed combat is taught within arnis systems varies greatly. Some systems and teach-
ers emphasize unarmed ﬁghting as much as they do weapons training, incorporating empty-hand
versus empty-hand combat into their syllabi. For other systems and teachers, the empty-hand
portion concentrates mostly on empty-hand defense against weapons. Here, the term mano-mano
refers more to range than technique.
The execution of empty-hand techniques varies according to the style. On one end of the
spectrum, there are systems whose empty-hand techniques follow the same pattern as the
weapon movements. Thus, diagonal striking with weapons is translated into diagonal striking
with the hands as well as joint locks. Similarly, thrusts become punches or ﬁnger strikes. On the
other end of the spectrum, some styles borrow liberally from other martial arts systems. Thus,
there are arnis styles whose unarmed methods are based on boxing, karate, judo, Silat, or
Chinese martial arts.
KNOWLEDGE AND POWER
Techniques embody aspects other than combative superiority. For example, technical knowledge
can be considered a form of capital—its possession confers status and authority upon the
practitioner.
Within any hierarchical system, one’s position within that hierarchy is determined by the
extent of one’s knowledge of the techniques and strategies of the system. Among arnis practi-
tioners, the more extensive one’s knowledge of the system, the greater is his or her status rela-
tive to other practitioners, and the more authority he or she gains. This is signiﬁed in part by the
304
Arnis
www.ebook3000.com

belts worn by the students (if the club uses belts). Testing periods play a signiﬁcant role in the
advancement of the student, both as determination of knowledge and as validation of one’s cur-
rent place in the system. Testing periods also become scenarios of contesting status, as disagree-
ments may arise as to whether a particular student deserves the rank awarded as a result of the
test.
Among schools and styles that have adapted a grading system similar to the modern Japanese
martial arts (karate and judo especially), the scope of material learned at a particular level is
clearly delimited. New knowledge is added in a progressive fashion, building upon material pre-
viously learned. This includes material leading to black belt and beyond that, to master ranks.
In this grading system, Grandmaster ranks are rarely conferred. In theory, the most senior stu-
dent (or at least the one closest to the Grandmaster) is designated as the heir to the system, to
be recognized by the other members of the system. When a Grandmaster rank is conferred, it is
often in recognition of the recipient’s years of practice, teaching, and promotion of the art. The
person conferring the award is usually known as a Supreme Grandmaster, literally the head of
the Grandmasters of the system. In practice, however, senior (and in some cases not very senior)
teachers break away from their parent systems and start their own styles or schools.
Not all schools use this ranking system. Instead, in some, students are taught in a cyclic man-
ner, with new material being taught and previous material constantly reviewed. While there is a
progression of technical knowledge being taught, the linearity characteristic of a belt-oriented
system of teaching is absent. Instead, the teacher may give a token of esteem, issue a testament
as to the student’s ability, or simply tell the student to begin teaching on his or her own.
Beyond the technical aspect, knowledge of the style’s techniques and traditions leads to issues
of status and supremacy. The more knowledge one accumulates within a system, the greater the
degree of perceived (or claimed) authority. This accumulation is not without its own risks,
because people who claim to be advanced practitioners can be tested by others. Questions of
knowledge can be referred to books or other documentary sources, and skill in technique can be
tested via the medium of a challenge match. Claims to supremacy within a system are open to
challenge by fellow practitioners within a system as well as from other systems. Claims of supe-
riority of systems are framed in terms of who has a better technique, such as unstoppable move-
ment, superior power, unbeatable footwork, and so on.
It is not uncommon for practitioners to go around, looking at other systems, and then trying
to incorporate what they learned into their own systems. This can be harder than it sounds.
Although cross-training between related teachers is not uncommon, introductions may be
required to train in other styles. Sometimes, this is because there are suspicions that the visiting
student was sent to spy on behalf of his former master, or that he was forced to leave his previ-
ous school on account of his lack of manners and humility. Often, it is simply that knowledge is
capital. If everyone knows the teacher’s technique, then he can no longer sell it dearly.
ASSOCIATED PRACTICES
As mentioned, arnis practices include the use of magical talismans. In the Tagalog and Bisaya
languages, these talismans are known as anting-anting. These talismans are often inscribed with
the ﬁgures of the saints, of Christ, of a cross, of a triangle with an eye in it, or with any of the
many ﬁgures and designs associated with the mystic traditions. Many also contain inscriptions in
Arnis
305

corrupted Latin. The ﬁgures and written inscriptions are material symbols of the indigenous
Catholicism unique to the Philippines.
The use of talismans is accompanied by prayers (orasyon, derived from the Spanish word
oración, meaning prayer). The prayers are akin to mantras in that their constant recitation is
believed to confer a tremendous power upon the practitioner. The anting-anting are like batter-
ies in that they have to be charged every now and then, usually on selected days during the week.
Without this recharging, they eventually lose power and become nothing more than ordinary
medallions.
While associated material objects such as the anting-anting attract attention of outsiders
because of their exotic ﬂavor, these objects and the related prayers are concrete manifestations
of the world view that is still part of daily life in many areas in the Philippines. From one per-
spective, an element of this world view is the belief that the environment can be a source of
power for many uses (including protection in combat) and an amulet or talisman is a way to con-
centrate this power for use by the wearer. From a more materialist perspective, the belief in the
power of the talisman or amulet reinforces the wearer’s conﬁdence and determination and so
serves a useful purpose.
Not all arnis practitioners believe in the anting-anting and its associated practices. The more
openly skeptical of the claims narrate stories of how they defeated other practitioners who relied
on their anting-anting. Such claims and counterclaims can be seen as part of the process of the
way in which claims to rank and status continue to be contested (see previous sections).
Apart from the anting-anting, other associated practices include knowledge of traditional
healing (hilot), herbs (albularyo), and witchcraft (kulam). While many arnis practitioners
(arnisadors) are healers, not all healers are arnisadors. Also, not all arnisadors know (or care)
about the various traditional practices. Thus, many arnisadors, especially in urban areas, seek out
training in ﬁrst aid or paramedical training instead.
There are a number of specialties in Filipino traditional healing. Herbalists (albularyo) are in
a sense general practitioners, although their forte is the use of medicinal plants. Masseurs
(manghihilot) specialize in fractured or broken bones, sprains, and other muscular and bone-
related injuries and discomforts. Midwives (magpapaanak) assist in the delivery of children; most
midwives are female. Diviners (magluluop) specialize in divining illnesses, especially those caused
by supernatural beings. Sorcerers (manggagaway) use their supernatural powers to harm or, con-
versely, to reverse the effects of such injury. Many sorcerers are also healers and may be asked to
heal as often as they are asked to harm. Medico are healers who combine both traditional and
modern medicine in their practice. It should be noted that all these terms come from Tagalog;
similar terms exist in the other Philippine languages such as Cebuano and Ilokano, hinting at a
continuity of practice across various areas in the archipelago.
WRITING AND REWRITING HISTORY
In the ofﬁcial histories of various schools and organizations, it is common to ﬁnd references to
the following eras of Philippine history.
1.
Pre-Hispanic history and culture
2.
Lapulapu and his encounter with the Spaniards on the beach of Mactan
3.
The Revolution of 1896
306
Arnis
www.ebook3000.com

4.
World War II and acts of heroism and resistance against the Japanese
5.
Post-colonial era (1946–present)
These narratives are connected to the history of the style in question such that they serve to
locate it in wider narrative of the life of the nation. In such a manner, its indigenous roots are
presented as beyond question or doubt.
Histories of various schools and organizations often their style’s roots back to the pre-His-
panic era. One such origin story traces the beginnings of arnis to the thirteenth century, when
ten legendary datu (chieftains) ﬂed Borneo to escape the tyranny of the sultan. They eventu-
ally landed in what is now known as Panay Island, which is one of the larger Visayan Islands.
According to the story, the datu brought many innovations, including schools for community
members (bothoan). Apart from reading, writing, mathematics, and religious studies, the both-
oan curriculum also included the practice of martial arts. Thus, some contemporary schools
and styles originating from the Visayas claim an unbroken lineage descending from the ten
datu of Borneo.
Contemporary scholars such as William Henry Scott (1921–1993) and Felipe Landa
Jocano (1930–) have pointed out that the story remains just that—a story. Presently, there
is a serious lack of archaeological and other material evidence to support the claim (Jocano
1975a; Scott 1974). Nevertheless, the story serves a purpose, for it crystallizes a sense of
regional pride. By claiming that their style is descended from those practiced by regional roy-
alty, practitioners are able to elevate the status of their style through its connection with
heroes of the past.
The heroism of Lapulapu, a chieftain on Mactan (another island in the Visayas) is celebrated
in Philippine history texts, and today Lapulapu is an icon of Filipino resistance against foreign
invasion. At least one school of arnis (Lapulapu Viñas Arnis) has claimed him as its symbol,
naming their style after his name, and other schools have claimed that their style is descended
from the ﬁghting style that he used during the Battle of Mactan in April 1521.
A note should be made about Lapulapu and his importance as an icon of Filipino bravery and
love of community. There are several versions of his encounter with the Spanish forces under
the Portuguese expedition commander, Ferdinand Magellan (Fernão de Magalhães, 1480–1521).
The version accepted by most historians comes from the chronicle of Antonio Pigafetta (ca.
1491– ca. 1534), an Italian who was part of Magellan’s expedition. In brief, Pigafetta recorded
how Lapulapu rejected Magellan’s demand that he recognize the King of Spain as his overlord
and that he pay tribute. During the ensuing battle, Magellan was struck by a thrown spear or
lance that penetrated his thigh. Upon seeing this, the other native warriors swarmed over him,
killing him.
A local version of the story of Lapulapu and his ﬁght with Magellan appears in Damiana
Eugenio’s Philippine Folk Literature Series (2002, 22–23). In this version, Lapulapu was about to
engage in a duel with a certain Bitadlok for the hand of the lovely Princess Bulakna when word
came of the arrival of Magellan and his demand for tribute and obeisance. Furious, Lapulapu
challenged the intruders to single combat. Bitadlok sided with Lapulapu and, in the ensuing
combat, was killed by Magellan using the same lance that had pierced him. Lapulapu promptly
grabbed a massive rice pestle and ﬁnished off the wounded Magellan. This version is interesting
because it adds a romantic aspect to the heroic narrative of Lapulapu.
Arnis
307

A third, even more dramatic, narrative is seen in comic books. In this version, Lapulapu and
Magellan faced each other on the beach, and during a sword duel that took place in the midst
of the raging battle, Lapulapu overcame Magellan and killed him.
It is the folk narrative that is the source of the claims that Lapulapu knew and practiced a
particular sword system, subsequently handed down over the centuries through his descendants
and now publicly known through the systems that bear his name. The contrast between the two
is clear, for the historical narrative comes down to us through the chronicles of Pigafetta, while
the folk narrative is passed on as an oral tradition.
In any case, Lapulapu’s battle with the Spaniards (and indeed Lapulapu himself) stands as a
symbol for the unwillingness of the Filipino people to bow to the demands of a foreign invader.
As symbols, both the battle and the hero of that battle (for that is how Lapulapu is viewed) are
articulations of an ideology of heroic resistance against an encroaching outsider. Thus, both nar-
ratives continue to be replayed and retold in classroom history texts and in the histories of arnis
systems.
Articulation of heroic resistance resurfaces in the narrations of the revolution of 1896
against Spain, led by a revolutionary secret society known as Katipunan (Katastaasang
Kagalanggalangang Katipunan Ng Mga Anak ng Bayan, Supreme and Venerable Society of the
Children of the Nation). The earliest known document to link Katipunan with arnis was
Placido Yambao’s Mga Karunungan sa Larong Arnis (Knowledge in the Sport of Arnis), which
was published in 1957. In this book, now long out of print, the author of the history chapter
(Buenaventura Mirafuente) mentions (1) the martial arts encountered and displayed by the
natives upon contact with Spanish expeditions during the late sixteenth century; (2) how Fil-
ipino martial arts fared under Spanish occupation; (3) the connection between the Katipunan
and the heroes of the Revolution; (4) the ﬁrst school of arnis in Manila; (5) places where arnis
in described in Philippine literature.
Mirafuente claims that Miguel López de Legazpi (1502–1572) was the earliest recorded
witness to the martial displays put on by indigenous people and to acknowledge that the
Philippine systems represented an effective ﬁghting art. It was held by many authors that dur-
ing the Spanish colonial period, the Spanish administrators banned the practice of arnis in
order to forestall revolutionary inclinations on the part of the natives. However, Mirafuente
gives another side of the story. According to Mirafuente, the public venues for the displays of
arnis skills included the plays known as moro-moro and duplo, which featured battles between
Christians and Moros, as Muslim groups were known in those days. Such was the passion for
skills involved that the natives spent most of their time learning and practicing the skills, to
the detriment of farming and other economic activities. In addition, there was the law and
order situation. As Mirafuente records, duels were frequent during ﬁestas, especially when one
or the other participant was drunk and was embarrassed in front of the audience. Hence, the
colonial administration banned the practice of arnis. Thus, in contrast to the popular notion
that arnis was a dangerous tool in the hands of revolutionaries, Mirafuente argues that the sup-
pression was due to the law and order situation on the one hand and, on the other, the desire
to maintain economic productivity.
Judging from this chapter, it appears that Mirafuente was the source of the idea that many of
the heroes of the revolution of 1896 were arnisadors. For example, Mirafuente mentions Andrés
Bonifacio (1863–1897, founder and leader of the Katipunan), Dr. José Rizal (1861–1896),
308
Arnis
www.ebook3000.com

General Antonio Luna (1866–1899), and Reverend Father Gregorio Aglipay (1860–1940)—
but beyond mention of their names, no further information is given about them. Mirafuente also
mentions what is said to be Manila’s ﬁrst public school of martial arts, known as the Tanghalan
ng Sandata (School of Arms). This was supposedly founded and run by a certain Don Jose de
Azas and to have included both European fencing and arnis in its curriculum. However, no men-
tion is made of what styles of fencing and arnis were taught there, how long the school operated,
who the graduates were, or other details. Finally, Mirafuente notes that the word arnis makes a
brief appearance in Filipino literature written in Tagalog. Speciﬁcally, in Francisco Balagtas’
(1788–1862) epic poem called Florante at Laura (1853), the protagonists are described as being
skilled in arnis and buno (wrestling), while a separate stanza describes the skill of the narrator in
overcoming his enemy using his sword.
It is frustrating for readers of Yambao’s book that Mirafuente did not include bibliographical
and other references in his chapter. This would have answered several interesting questions, such
as what were the source documents for Legazpi’s musings as well as possible sources for the so-
called decree banning the practice of arnis. Mirafuente’s chapter is interesting for another rea-
son, and this is the fact that this chapter contains the ﬁrst-known reference to kali, held to be
the earlier name of arnis. Kali was supposedly brought over by the earliest Malay immigrants to
the archipelago. Again, it is unfortunate that Mirafuente did not cite any source documents for
this claim.
Yambao’s book has had signiﬁcant impact on the Filipino martial arts community in that
Mirafuente’s chapter has inﬂuenced the subsequent narration of Filipino martial arts history.
Most of the history chapters of the various books on arnis have followed a similar pattern. Thus,
in Presas (1983) there is an attempt to connect kali with tjakalele, a war dance found in
Indonesia, as well as with the Sri-Vijayan and Madjapahit empires. However, archaeological and
other evidence to buttress this contention are sadly lacking. In this light, there have been
alternative approaches to the history of arnis. A case in point is Macachor’s (2002a–c) series of
articles in RAPID Journal (a Philippine-based martial arts publication) on Cebuano eskrima (the
preferred term in the Visayas), which contend that much of what is known today as eskrima is
an offshoot of efforts by Spanish priests and fencers in the seventeenth century onward to teach
what they knew to the local populations in order to prepare them for seasonal raids by Muslim
pirates and slave traders.
The writing and rewriting of martial arts history is a contentious ﬁeld of endeavor, and
arnis history is no exception. One can argue that most of what we know as arnis today is
derived from external sources such as the martial arts of Java and Sumatra (e.g., the Srivijaya
and Majapahit empires) and later, the Spanish imperialists. The problem with this explana-
tion is that the necessary archaeological and other evidence needed to establish the link with
Srivijaya and Majapahit has not yet been established. Although a stronger case can be made
for the fencing done during the Spanish colonial era, it should be remembered that European
fencing changed a lot between the sixteenth and nineteenth centuries. Thus, the extent to
which European fencing inﬂuenced the growth of arnis needs to be examined more closely by
experts in both martial styles. One also can argue that arnis has indigenous origin, albeit with
inﬂuences from other cultures and martial art styles. While a logical position that ﬁts well with
Philippine nationalism, there is a need for more ﬁeld research in order to more clearly deﬁne
this model.
Arnis
309

THE ROLE OF BIOGRAPHY
The biographies of the masters play an important role in the life of arnis styles and schools.
Often, the pattern is similar to that of an epic narrative. Biographies begin with the birth and
immediate life situation of the master. Usually, the master is born to a poor family. After experi-
encing various difﬁculties, he begins training with a teacher of a particular style of arnis. After
enduring rigorous training, the future master receives permission to teach. At some point in his
teaching career, the master begins to introduce new elements into his art, whether as new tech-
niques or as innovations in teaching methods. Eventually, a new organization is proclaimed and
registered (sometimes) with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Thereafter, the master
begins to certify his most advanced students as teachers, ensuring that the art is propagated both
in the Philippines and throughout the world.
Although this is a common pattern, there are variations. A growing number of arnis masters
come from the ranks of professionals—lawyers, engineers, doctors, and so on. Also, many con-
temporary masters have studied more than one style of arnis before starting their own. It is
noticeable that new styles began proliferating from the late 1970s onward. Before the 1960s, it
would have been considered unthinkable for a student to consider studying with more than one
master unless there were circumstances beyond the student’s control, such as having to move to
another area. Finally, many of the contemporary masters have experience in other martial arts,
especially karate and judo.
There are some martial arts families that are closely knit together by a common heritage of
arnis traditions. Examples include the Cañetes (Doce Pares), the Tortals (Dekiti-Tirsia Siradas),
and the Caburnays (Lapunti Arnis De Abaniko). Such families are described in the collective:
The patriarch of the family ensures that the children (sons, daughters, nephews, and nieces) are
trained in the family arts. The children in turn begin to set up schools and train students of their
own as instructors. Even children-in-law also beneﬁt from the setting, as they too begin training
and eventually receive teaching ranks as well. For the larger, more organized families, the family
structure provides the framework for creating a business enterprise that involves selling equip-
ment as well as receiving fees for instruction and certiﬁcation. Thus, in addition to propagating
the traditions, the family’s ﬁnancial future is also ensured.
CONCLUSION
This essay does not claim to provide a comprehensive overview of the Filipino martial arts. It
focuses only on arnis, the best known of them. It has not yet taken into account the styles of Silat
and kuntao from the southern Philippines or the various indigenous forms of empty-hand combat
descended from boxing, karate, and kickboxing. Current writing on the Filipino martial arts
focuses mostly on the histories of styles, distinct features of movements and techniques, reports of
martial arts–related events, and the role of Filipino martial arts in popular media such as movies
and television series. However, there are far more areas to explore, such as the role of arnis as a
form of personal, social, and cultural capital, the impact of globalization on the practice and prop-
agation of arnis, and so on. As scholars begin expand the focus of inquiry to include areas previ-
ously ignored, the martial arts in general, and the Filipino martial arts in particular, will prove to
be a rich ﬁeld of study in culture, politics, economics, and the dynamics of crafting an identity.
—Felipe P. Jocano Jr.
See also: Canary Islands Stick Fighting and Wrestling; Zulu Stick Fighting; Caribbean Martial Arts;
310
Arnis
www.ebook3000.com

Canne de Combat; Japan: Jodo; Kuntao; Silat (in this volume); Commodiﬁcation of Leisure;
Globalization of Martial Arts; and Political Uses of the Martial Arts (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Boouraca, A. K., and Thomas J. Nardi. 1994. Dynamic Kali Knife Defense. Canoga Park, CA: Total
Approach Institute.
Cañete, Ciriaco. 1989. Doce Pares: Basic Eskrima, Arnis, Kali, Pangolisi. Cebu City: Doce Pares
Publishing House.
Davis, Anthony, and Leo T. Fong. 1999. The Legacy of Grandmaster Angel Cabales: Serrada Escrima
Explosive Empty Hand Fighting. Woodland Hills, CA: Koinonia Productions.
Diego, Antonio, and Christopher Ricketts. 1999. The Secrets of Kalis Illustrisimo. Boston: Tuttle
Publishing.
Dowd, Steven K. No date. Arnis Balite: The Filipino Art of Hand, Foot & Stick Fighting. Fallon, NV:
Maharlika Publications.
Draeger, Donn. 1992. The Weapons and Fighting Arts of Indonesia. Rutland, VT: Charles E. Tuttle Company.
Eugenio, Damiana. 2002. Philippine Folk Literature Series Vol. III: The Legends. Quezon City:
University of the Philippines Press.
Galang, Reynaldo S. 2004. Classic Arnis: The Legacy of Placido Yambao. Roseland, NJ: Arjee Enterprises.
Galang, Reynaldo S. 2005a. Masters of the Blade. Roseland, NJ: Arjee Enterprises.
Galang, Reynaldo S. 2005b. Warrior Arts of the Philippines. Roseland, NJ: Arjee Enterprises.
Inosanto, Dan, Gilbert Johnson, and George Foon. 1980. The Filipino Martial Arts. Los Angeles: Know
Now Publishing.
Jocano, Felipe Landa. 1975a. Questions and Challenges in Philippine Prehistory. Quezon City: University
of the Philippines Press. Professorial Chair Lecture.
Jocano, Felipe Landa. 1975b. Philippine Prehistory. Quezon City: PCAS.
Jocano, Felipe Landa. 1975c. The Philippines at the Spanish Contact: Some Major Accounts of Early
Filipino Society and Culture. Manila: MCS Enterprises.
Jocano, Felipe P. Jr. 1997. “Arnis: A Question of Origins,” RAPID Journal 2(4), 15–17, www
.rapidjournal.com/Articles/pdf/Arnis-Question_of_Origins.pdf, accessed May 8, 2009.
Jocano, Felipe P. Jr. 2004. “Arnis and the Work of History: A Short Critical Overview,” RAPID
Journal 9(2), 23–26.
Macachor, Celestino. 2002a. “New Theories on the Origins of Eskrima, Part 1,” RAPID Journal 6(2),
16–18.
Macachor, Celestino. 2002b. “New Theories on the Origins of Eskrima, Part 2,” RAPID Journal 6(3),
12–13.
Macachor, Celestino. 2002c. “New Theories on the Origins of Eskrima, Part 3,” RAPID Journal 6(4),
14–17.
Mariñas, Amante P. 1987. Pananandata Arnis: Dalawang Yantok [Pananandata Arnis: Double Sticks
Fighting]. Metro Manila: Socorro Publications.
Mariñas, Amante P. 1989. Pananandata Rope Fighting: Filipino Choking and Binding Techniques. Boulder,
CO: Paladin Press.
Presas, Ernesto. 1988. Arnis: Presas Style and Balisong. Manila: Ernesto A. Presas.
Presas, Ernesto. 1996. Filipino Modern Mano-Mano: Presas Style. Manila: Ernesto A. Presas.
Presas, Remy. 1993. Modern Arnis. Manila: Modern Arnis Publishing.
Scott, William Henry. 1974. Prehispanic Source Materials for the Study of Philippine History. Quezon
City: New Day Publishers.
Scott, William Henry. 1994. Barangay: Sixteenth-Century Philippine Culture and Society. Quezon City:
Ateneo de Manila University Press.
Sulite, Edgar. 1993. Masters of Arnis, Kali and Eskrima. San Juan, Philippines: Socorro Publications.
Sy, James U. 2007. “Digging and Scraping for the Truth; Kali Origins and Mirafuente,” RAPID Journal
12(1), 24–28.
Wiley, Mark V. 1994. Filipino Martial Arts: Cabales Serrada Escrima. Rutland, VT: Charles E. Tuttle
Company.
Arnis
311

Wiley, Mark V. 2000. Filipino Fighting Arts: Theory and Practice. Hollywood, CA: Unique Publications.
Wiley, Mark V, editor. 2001. Arnis: Reﬂections on the History and Development of the Filipino Martial
Arts. Boston: Tuttle Publishing.
Yambao, Placido. 1957. Mga Karunungan sa Larong Arnis [Knowledge in the Sport of Arnis]. Quezon
City: University of the Philippines Press.
KUNTAO
In Southeast Asia, Chinese and Chinese-descended martial arts are known generically as
kuntao.
The term kuntao appears in many different forms with many alternative Romanized spellings.
The term itself comes from the Fujianhua dialect spoken in Southern China’s Fujian Province. In
Fujianhua, kuntao is a generic term referring to martial arts, much as quanfa is used in Mandarin
or ken fat is used in Cantonese. The ideograms used to write the name translate as “ﬁst way”: kun
means ﬁst, and tao means way, as in Taoism. The equivalent in Mandarin would be quandao.
Therefore, the common claim that kuntao is an alternative, Fujian dialect, pronunciation of
quanfa is inaccurate; that phrase would be kun huat in Fujianhua.
There is not uniform agreement among overseas Chinese and indigenous Southeast Asians
about the foregoing explanation. Native speakers of Fujianhua typically favor the “ﬁst way”
interpretation, but one can also ﬁnd suggestions that the tao part should be read as tou, meaning
“head.” In that case, the meaning becomes the intelligent or wise use of the ﬁsts. In at least one
case among nonimmigrant Indonesian communities in Bali, the term kun is written using the
character meaning “stick” or “staff,” which is also pronounced as kun in Fujianhua.
Within the languages and cultures of Southeast Asia, the term kuntao appears as a loanword,
and is employed in a range of contexts. As such, it is liable to a range of alternative interpreta-
tions and applications. Broadly speaking, however, the term can be said to have four main alter-
native denotations:
1.
A generic term for martial art of any origin—Chinese, Southeast Asian, or other
2.
Orthodox, traditional Chinese martial arts
3.
Culturally marginal or hybrid arts that combine Chinese martial arts with local Southeast Asian
methods, techniques, and traditions
4.
Completely integrated Southeast Asian styles of martial arts; e.g., arts that may have Chinese roots
but in which any formal Chinese heritage has been completely subordinated to the institutions and
conventions of the dominant indigenous culture
Romanization of the name sometimes gives a clue as to how a system should be classiﬁed. For
example, under the revised Romanization scheme adopted by the Indonesian and Malaysian
governments for their Malay-derived national languages in the mid-1970s, the term ordinarily
would be transliterated as kuntau. Nonetheless, the older Romanization survives and continues
to be used throughout the region. In particular, in Malaysia and Singapore one tends to see koon-
tow used almost exclusively to refer to orthodox Chinese systems, whereas kuntao or kuntau is
generally applied to hybrid arts. Indeed, in 1990, Malaysian anthropologist Razha Rashid for-
mally employed this distinction to distinguish between orthodox and hybrid systems.
312
Kuntao
www.ebook3000.com

Some years ago, I proposed that kuntao systems could be divided between orthodox and
hybrid systems (Davies 2000). In this, I borrowed the Indonesian notions of totok (Chinese-
speaking traditional ethnic communities) and peranakan (Indonesian-speaking communities of
ethnic Chinese). However, given the large number of schools that have opted over the last two
decades to integrate more fully into the organizations, practices, and identities associated with
the indigenous martial arts of Southeast Asia, it seems more useful for the purposes of this essay
to examine the concept in terms of the four divisions described above.
GENERIC USAGE
As governmentally sanctioned national organizations for martial arts have risen in Indonesia
and Malaysia, regional variations in martial arts nomenclature have decreased. This includes
the use of kuntao as a generic term for martial arts. Nonetheless, as recently as the 1970s, the
Balinese Silat system called Bakhti Negara was often described as “kuntao Bali,” although
there a few (if any) evident Chinese inﬂuences on the art. Likewise, practitioners of Kuntau
Tekpi in Malaysia are adamant that despite the name, the system is purely Malay, originating
in the northern state of Kedah in the nineteenth century. In some parts of the Western
Philippines one also encounters a variation in which kuntao refers to indigenous empty-hand
ﬁghting skills, whereas Silat describes indigenous blade techniques. In most regional languages,
however, this use of the term kuntao has increasingly fallen into disuse. Instead, there is
growing emphasis on using indigenous terms for the martial arts and the role of those arts in
a politically managed national identity.
ORTHODOX SYSTEMS
The sizable Chinese communities in Semarang, on the north coast of Java, and Malacca, on the
southwestern coast of the Malay Peninsula, both publicly date their presence to the naval expe-
ditions of the Ming Dynasty admiral Zheng He (1371–1433). However, it seems likely that there
has been overseas Chinese presence in the region for as long as the maritime trade route (the
Southern Silk Road) from Southern China to the Red Sea has operated (certainly since the Tang
Dynasty [618–907], and probably earlier). Consequently, the conditions for practice of Chinese
martial arts in Southeast Asia, and for mutual exposure between those arts and their indigenous
counterparts, have pertained for centuries. From the standpoint of Europeans and Americans,
Chinese martial arts practiced in Southeast Asia acquired particular signiﬁcance between 1949
and the mid-1980s. The reason is that during this period, Communist-controlled Mainland
China was relatively closed to outsiders. Consequently, scholars, observers, and would-be stu-
dents of Chinese martial arts found teachers, information, and training chieﬂy in Hong Kong,
Taiwan, and the major urban centers of Southeast Asia.
Today, taijiquan is probably the most widespread form of Chinese martial arts practiced
throughout the region. It is practiced both by Chinese and local populations, chieﬂy as a health
exercise.
In terms of combat-oriented training, most of Southeast Asia’s Chinese arts would be classi-
ﬁed as southern Shaolin, with origins in the coastal regions of Fujian Province. This is because
Fujianese people are historically the prevalent Chinese ethnic group in Southeast Asia.
Kuntao
313

In the region overall, Southern White Crane is particularly common (Draeger 1993; Draeger
and Smith 1987), and Manila, Jakarta, and Penang are generally recognized as three of the
strongest centers outside the People’s Republic of China in the practice of Five Ancestors (Ngo
Cho in Fujianhua) (Co 1997). In Penang, one also ﬁnds the Chukka school of Fujian southern
Praying Mantis (Draeger and Leong 1977; Wiley and Leong 2000). Other centers with sizable
Chinese populations (e.g., Malacca and Semarang) display similar assortments of orthodox
Chinese systems.
Guangdong styles are less common but widespread. The reason is that many overseas Chinese
originally hailed from that province or from Hong Kong. Singapore is similar; it has a majority
ethnic Chinese population and a wide range of traditional systems, but again, there is a strong
presence of Fujian styles. Examples include the Fujian Tiger and Crane taught by the Nam Yang
Pugilistic Association.
There are also some northern Shaolin systems in Southeast Asia. For instance, Donn Draeger
(1922–1982) documented luohanquan (Arhat boxing) in Penang (Draeger and P’ng 1979) and
a Shandong-originated Black Tiger in Jakarta (Draeger, Tjoa, and Chambers 1983).
HYBRID SYSTEMS
There have been several centuries of mutual exposure between Chinese martial arts practition-
ers and the practitioners of other communities. Regionally, this includes methods developed and
practiced by indigenous Malays (Bumiputra), Indonesians, Filipino ethnic groups, and mercan-
tile and colonial powers such as the Indians, Europeans, Americans, and Japanese.
Consequently, one encounters hybrids throughout Southeast Asia. Examples of hybrids include
Java’s Kuntau Jawa (literally Javanese kuntao), Sulawesi’s Silat Kuntao (which is entirely different
from the kuntao silat taught by Dutch-Indonesian Willem de Thouars, 1936–), and Singapore’s
Kuntau Melaka (Malacca kuntao).
In the late 1970s, Theo Verschuur documented a Balinese hybrid kuntao system in Denpasar;
in this system, Chinese hand techniques and stances were combined with Indonesian kicking and
weapons techniques. In Mindanao, in the Philippines, Frank Ayochoko’s kuntaw is attributed to
a Chinese called Ling Ping Wan. Ling traveled ﬁrst to Indonesia (where he converted to Islam),
and then to the Philippines. Ayochoko’s teaching consciously maintains both Chinese and
indigenous inﬂuences. In this system, Chinese empty-hand methods and theory are combined
with Filipino weapons techniques involving knife and sword or espada y daga (Graceffo 2008).
Between 1949 and the mid-1980s, the governments of the region were generally anti-
Communist. Concurrently, large and pervasive national Silat organizations have formed. The
result is that regional hybrid systems increasingly tend to position themselves as products of
regional rather than Chinese culture. This has resulted in many schools re-branding their
systems as forms of Silat, and then increasingly integrating themselves and their practice into the
Bumiputra mainstream (see Integrated Systems below).
At the same time, there is a strong correlation between kuntao in the hybrid sense and the
arts taught by members of the post-revolutionary Dutch-Indonesians (“Indo”). Indonesia declared
independence at the end of World War II, and in 1949, the Dutch reluctantly agreed to recognize
that independence. Many Dutch-Indonesians then left Indonesia. First generation émigré masters
such as Carel Faulhaber (1923–1974), Willem Reeders (1917–1990), Willy Wetzel (1921–1975),
314
Kuntao
www.ebook3000.com

and Willem de Thouars all brought with them systems that combined Chinese and Indonesian
martial arts components and inﬂuences. As a culturally marginal community, Dutch-Indonesians
tended to identify with the Dutch colonial authorities and, consequently, were not deeply
invested in the orthodoxies of either the Bumiputra or Chinese communities. Consequently,
there was greater willingness to mix and match. Indeed, one could make the case that due to the
Indo community’s mixed heritage, that community collectively possessed an institutionalized
experience at navigating marginal and syncretic identities, which in turn may have facilitated
developing a similarly marginal and syncretic form of martial arts practice. An example here is
Faulhaber’s Kuntao Matjan (tiger-style kuntao). This system combines a core of Fujian Tiger-style
with footwork and ground ﬁghting skills typical of Silat, and uses traditional Indonesian weapons
such as the golok (bush knife) and pedang (sword) rather than Chinese weapons.
INTEGRATED SYSTEMS
At the far extreme from the purely orthodox traditional Chinese martial arts are systems that have
effectively abandoned any outward Chinese reference and instead have sought to integrate them-
selves into the majority martial arts cultures of Indonesia and Malaysia. Although taxonomically
classiﬁable as kuntao in terms of technique repertoire, training methods, tactical doctrine, medic-
inal practice, and so forth, today they typically identify themselves as Silat despite being, for all
intents and purposes, hybrid forms of kuntao.
In Indonesia, systems that typify the integrated end of the scale include the Jakarta-origi-
nated art of Mustika Kwitang and the Sundanese (West Java) school of Bangau Putih. Mustika
Kwitang’s origins have been lost to all but the most uncertain and conﬂicting oral traditions.
According to an oft-cited version, Mustika Kwitang arose from a challenge between a Chinese
trader called Kwee Tang Kiam and an Indonesian Silat practitioner. After a tough duel, the
Silat practitioner prevailed. Kiam converted to Islam and then taught his martial art system
to local Bumiputra, who termed it “Kwee Tang’s Silat.” According to an alternative account,
the style arose after an Indonesian Silat practitioner married Kiam’s daughter and then learned
the Chinese skills as a member of Kiam’s family. In any event, the greater part of the Mustika
Kwitang repertoire is recognizably medium- and short-ﬁst southern Chinese boxing, with wide
horse and long bow stances that suggest roots in Guangdong Province. By comparison, Ban-
gau Putih was created after 1945 and was explicitly based on Fujian White Crane. Indeed, the
name Bangau Putih is a direct translation into Indonesian of White Crane. Its founder, Subu
Rahardja, originally studied an orthodox White Crane kuntao from his uncle Liem Kim Bouw.
He then amalgamated Liem’s Crane with four other arts, primarily forms of Silat. Rahardja
subsequently reconstituted the combined art (effectively a form of hybrid kuntao) into a nom-
inal form of pencak silat. Unsurprisingly, it took some years for the resulting synthesis to be
accepted by the Indonesian Pencak Silat Federation (IPSI, for the Ikatan Pencak Silat Indone-
sia, established 1948).
In Malaysia, a path of development very close to Mustika Kwitang can be found in what are
commonly called the Lian or Buah Pukul systems. The Lian arts are a family of schools (now
numbering roughly twenty-two) that have a common range of basic training techniques and
forms. These techniques and forms derive from a single system founded in Johor (on Malaysia’s
southern tip) during the 1920s. That original system was called Lian Yunan. As its name suggests,
Kuntao
315

the founder was from Southern China’s Yunan Province. While there is little agreement
on the trader’s name or his religion (some schools claim that he was a Chinese Muslim, others
reject the idea), there is a common consensus that he made a name for himself in the rough and
tumble environment of the Johor docklands. He took a number of local students, eventually
including palace guards from the Johor sultanate (Murad 2008). All of the buah pukul systems
display a common reliance on Chinese-style short-ﬁst techniques, the standing ﬁst, as well as
sticking, trapping, and bridging techniques typical of southern Chinese styles. At the same time,
the buah pukul systems generally position themselves as schools of Silat rather than Chinese box-
ing or kuntao. Nonetheless, they are often less exclusive about the ethnicity or religion of those
admitted to training than many other orthodox Malay Silat schools.
INDONESIA’S “KUNTAO BAN”
Something of an urban myth in the kuntao sphere is the conviction that the Indonesian gov-
ernment prohibited the practice of kuntao because it was so dangerous. In fact, there is no
evidence that kuntao, as such, was banned under any Indonesian legislation. Rather, during
the dictatorship of President Suharto (1921–2008, ruled 1967–1998), Chinese martial arts
fell prey to a more general ban on any expression of Chinese culture. That blanket ban,
which included variously Chinese-language publications and public ceremonies such as the
Ghost Festival, was a consequence of the perceived role of the ethnic Chinese and the Main-
land Chinese government in fomenting and supporting an abortive 1965 coup. This event
prompted an anti-Communist purge. The restrictions on Chinese martial arts were therefore
part of a more general attempt at suppressing what was perceived to be dissenting and desta-
bilizing ethnic minority. Under these measures, ethnic Chinese were forced to adopt
Indonesian names rather than Chinese, and by the same token, Chinese martial arts schools
were required to redesignate themselves as Silat, and join the Indonesian Pencak Silat
Federation.
Efforts to absorb the Chinese martial arts into the Silat community were not generally
regarded as a success. For one thing, taijiquan was very popular in Indonesia, even among
Bumiputra, and during the 1980s, the Suharto government was forced to declare it a “national
health exercise.” IPSI ofﬁcials complained that instead of being submerged within the majority
Indonesian Silat community, the Chinese schools instead had a disproportionate impact on the
practice of Silat (Maryono 2002). Some Chinese systems have retained their Indonesian nomen-
clature. An example is Lie Tjie Tjan’s Kubudaian Ilmu Silat Indonesia in Makassar. Despite its
Indonesian name, Lie’s art is actually a form of southern Shaolin Crane style, and it is currently
taught and promoted as such.
In 1997, the Asian ﬁnancial crisis or “meltdown” led to the collapse of Suharto’s New Order.
The subsequent administrations of Bacharuddin Jusuf Habibie (1936–, president from 1998 to
1999) and Abdurahman Wahid (1940–, president from 1999 to 2001) pursued more liberal
policies towards ethnic Chinese in order to encourage investment from China, Hong Kong, and
Singapore and to facilitate the return of Indonesian Chinese who had ﬂed Indonesia during
recent riots. This liberalization had a palpable impact on the orthodox Chinese martial arts in
Indonesia. Some systems, such as the Golden Eagle school in Semarang, promptly re-branded
themselves wushu (the preferred term for martial arts in the People’s Republic of China), and
316
Kuntao
www.ebook3000.com

then joined Beijing’s international wushu organization. Teams were even sent to participate in
Chinese-sponsored international wushu competitions. That said, international wushu standards
effectively admit only systems that remain unaltered by exposure to regional arts. Thus, hybrid
systems have increasingly found themselves more welcome within the Silat community than
within the wushu world, and this has added to the already strong incentives for such systems to
become more fully integrated and Indonesianized.
—Philip H. J. Davies
See also: China: Boxing Styles; China: Martial Arts; China: Martial Arts in Hong Kong; China:
Martial Theories; China: Shaolin Temple Legends; China: Weapons; China: Wrestling; Silat (in this
volume); Belief Systems: China; Belief Systems:Silat; Chinese Martial Arts and Money;
Globalization of Martial Arts; Invented Traditions; Political Uses of the Martial Arts; and Secret
Societies and Fraternal Organizations (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Co, Alexander. 1997. Five Ancestor Fist Kung Fu: The Way of Ngo Cho Kun. Rutland, VT: Charles
Tuttle.
Davies, Philip H. J. 2000. “What is Kuntao? Cultural Marginality in the Indo-Malay Martial Arts
Tradition,” Journal of Asian Martial Arts 9(2), 28–47.
Draeger, Donn F. 1993. Weapons and Fighting Arts of Indonesia. Rutland VT: Charles Tuttle.
Draeger, Donn F., and Leong Cheong Cheng. 1977. Phoenix-Eye Fist: A Shaolin Fighting Art of South
China. New York: Weatherhill.
Draeger, Donn F., and P’ng Chye Kim. 1979. Shaolin, An Introduction to Lohan Fighting Techniques.
Rutland, VT: Charles Tuttle.
Draeger, Donn F., and Robert W. Smith. 1987. Comprehensive Asian Fighting Arts. New York:
Kodansha.
Draeger, Donn F., Tjoa Khek Kiong, and Quintin Chambers. 1983. Shantung Black Tiger: A Shaolin
Fighting Art of North China. New York: John Weatherhill.
Graceffo, Antonio. 2008. “The Kung Fu of the Muslim Kings,” Kung Fu Tai Chi March/April.
Maryono, O’ong. 2002. Pencak Silat in the Indonesian Archipelago. Singapore: Select Books.
Murad, Na’a. 2008. “The Chinese Roots of Silat,” Kung Fu Tai Chi November/December.
Rashid, Razha. 1990. “Martial Arts and Superman,” in Emotions of Culture: A Malay Perspective,
edited by Wazir Jahan Karim, 64–95. Singapore: Oxford University Press.
Wiley, Mark, and Leong Cheong Cheng. 2000. The Secrets of Phoenix-Eye Fist Kung-Fu: The Art of
Chuka Shaolin. Rutland, VT: Charles Tuttle.
MUAY THAI
Muay Thai, or Thai boxing, is the national sport of the Kingdom of Thailand, and an increas-
ingly popular style worldwide. A full-contact martial sport allowing the use of punches, kicks,
knee strikes, and elbow strikes, it is known for its signature roundhouse kicks and knee strikes
and for its rules proscribing very few targets. Matches are typically fought in ﬁve rounds of 3 min-
utes with 2-minute breaks. Victories are decided by knockouts or points in a system adapted from
Queensbury Rules. Each bout is preceded by a ritualized dance called ram muay (boxing dance)
or wai khruu (paying homage to teachers) performed in honor of instructors, parents, and elders.
All bouts have musical accompaniment.
Muay Thai
317

HISTORY
Although the history of Muay Thai is long, an absence of reliable historical evidence makes
it difﬁcult to specify with precision the repertoire of ancient Muay practice. Modern advo-
cates of Muay Thai claim a battleﬁeld pedigree (e.g., Khet 2007). This seems plausible but is
poorly documented. At the same time, ancient law codes, such as the Laws of King Mengrai
(1259–1317) and those of the Ayutthaya period (1351–1767), plus short descriptions in
Siamese chronicle and premodern foreign travel journals, document that hundreds of years
ago, Muay Thai was conducted as prizeﬁghting for entertainment and accompanied by gam-
bling, much as it is today.
Accounts of ancient Muay Thai history found in popular media are both integral to the nar-
rative of the Thai nation and largely apocryphal. These accounts are repeated and embellished
in both Thai and international media and have become something of a standard, if mythical,
historical-cultural packaging (Vail 1998a). Even the seminal legend of Nai Khanom Tom (a
common soldier captured by Burmese forces in the eighteenth century who allegedly defeated
ten Burmese boxers) is unveriﬁable. That said, this particular episode is atypical of Siamese
chronicle history, because it discusses a commoner rather than royalty. Thus, the episode, which
addresses Ayutthaya’s defeat by the Burmese, serves as a way to commend Siamese commoners
while condemning the weakness of Siam’s leadership. As such, it serves more as a commentary
on politics than an account or endorsement of boxing. But because it represents one of the few
times boxing is explicitly mentioned in historical sources, Nai Khanom Tom has been lionized
as the father of Muay Thai and made a key ﬁgure in Thai history. Indeed, March 17 is celebrated
as “Boxing Day” and commemorates Nai Khanom Tom’s victory. As one would expect, consid-
erable poetic license has been used in the story’s subsequent retellings and its depictions in pop-
ular media. Other episodes depicting boxing’s ancient history are based on similarly meager data
and have also been embellished by those wanting to provide Muay Thai with a more substantial
historical narrative.
Muay Thai serves Thai nationalism and history by evoking essentialist masculine
characteristics assumed to be inherent to a purported “Thai race.” Ancient Thai expansion into
Southeast Asia features prominently in the national myths. In the frame of nationalism, the suc-
cess of Thai military conquests is attributed to an innate warrior spirit, heroism, and toughness
presumably still represented by, and transmitted through, Muay Thai practice (Vail 1998b).
Nationalistic renderings of Muay Thai assert that it is exclusively a Thai form, but this claim is
conceptually problematic and is discernible as an artifact of nascent Thai nationalism in the 1930s
and 1940s. Thailand’s exclusive claim to Muay Thai cultural ownership is contested by neighboring
countries that question the veracity of Thailand’s monopoly on Muay’s heritage. Cambodian critics,
for example, cite depictions of Khmer pradal techniques similar to those of Muay Thai on ancient
Khmer bas-reliefs and lintels that predate any Thai claims over Muay as evidence of Muay’s
Cambodian heritage. Unfortunately, Cambodian critics tend to simply replace the Thai nationalized
version of Muay history with their own equally reiﬁed autochthonous national history, rather than
offering a history of local martial arts unclouded by nationalistic rhetoric.
Muay Thai was modernized into its current form in the early twentieth century, with the
introduction of gloves, timed rounds, weight classes, rationalized rules and a scoring system.
Appending the national term “Thai” to “Muay” was a way to distinguish local forms of boxing
from Muay Sakon (international-style gloved boxing), which was being introduced about this
318
Muay Thai
www.ebook3000.com

time. Because this modernization coincided with the rapid and thorough propagation of Thai
nationalism and the rise of mass media, it is easy to see how appending ‘Thai’ to “Muay” served
the emerging “invented tradition” of national origins. The rationalization of boxing also created
a further distinction between Muay Thai and Muay Boran (“ancient boxing”), where the latter
refers to premodern boxing with rope-bound ﬁsts (khaat chuak) rather than gloves (Khet 2007).
Because Siam was never colonized by European powers, the practice and exhibition of Muay
was not repressed or controlled by any colonial regime. Royal support for Muay at the beginning
of the twentieth century, and the continued support by Thailand’s military governments after the
fall of the absolute monarchy in 1932, helped legitimize and standardize the sport. Religious
reforms instituted after 1900 forced Muay praxis out of temples and into a secular realm. Muay
prospered as the Siamese state (called Thailand after 1939) modernized. Large boxing venues
(especially Ratchadamnoen and Lumpini Stadiums) were opened after World War II. The Thai
military owned many of these large venues, and nationwide networks of camps, promoters, and
boxers quickly developed. In 1999, a boxing act was passed by the Thai parliament. This law fur-
ther standardized and regulated many aspects of Muay praxis and criminalized the ﬁxing of ﬁghts.
Diluted versions of Muay Thai began to be exported internationally in the 1970s (especially in
Japanese variants of kickboxing and K-1); only beginning in the 1990s has Muay Thai been
propagated overseas as a speciﬁcally Thai cultural practice and with Muay Thai’s modern reper-
toire largely intact.
SOCIAL DIMENSIONS
Muay Thai is the sport of the rural, agricultural underclass. Although practiced across the
nation, most boxers originate from Thailand’s poorest region, the Northeast (called “Isan”).
Muay Thai is conducted as prizefighting, and—nationalism and cultural heritage
notwithstanding—if there were no ﬁnancial rewards, there would be little boxing. The middle
and upper classes in Thailand rarely compete in Muay Thai; indeed the explosive popularity of
taekwondo in Thailand over the last ten years can be attributed to a middle-class desire for a
combative sport that is both international in ﬂavor and distinguished from the working-class sta-
tus of Muay Thai (Vail 2005). The middle and upper classes view Muay as an integral part of
Thai identity, but they do not box.
Spectatorship in Thailand consists of rural and working-class fans, people involved in the
boxing world, and urban gamblers. Gamblers are often of Chinese descent. Television has cre-
ated an enormous audience for Muay Thai over the last forty years, and like boxers themselves,
most of this audience comes from the countryside. The viewership, however, is aging: as
Thailand becomes increasingly cosmopolitan in outlook, soccer is supplanting Muay Thai as the
sport most consumed via mass media among younger audiences, even in rural areas (National
Statistical Ofﬁce 2002).
BOXERS
Practitioners range from the casual, occasional ﬁghters found at rural festivals to professional
ﬁghters associated with a boxing camp. The former engage boxing as a source of extra income
and as a way to learn social values; the latter see boxing as an avenue of social mobility with
potentially high ﬁnancial rewards.
Muay Thai
319

“Casual boxers” are those who ﬁght occasionally, typically during dry season temple festivals.
This group includes boys and teenagers who have a passing interest in Muay and want to try their
luck in the ring; children urged to ﬁght at the behest of family, friends, and relatives (often more
for the experience than the money); and retired professional ﬁghters who rely on boxing as a means
of earning extra income. It is common, but not universal, for rural boys to try boxing.
All ﬁghts in the countryside are prizeﬁghts, with purses ranging from as low as 100 baht (about
U.S. $3) up to tens of thousands of baht, depending on the reputation of the boxer and on the
expected size of the audience. Prize money is utterly integral to Muay Thai praxis; there is no
extended amateur circuit for unpaid ﬁghts before one turns professional. Even novice ﬁghters earn
money (albeit very little) for their ﬁrst ﬁght. Casual boxing at temple festivals is closely tied to
rural values and the seasonal agricultural cycle, and as such it is regarded as an important way to
inculcate local masculine values of fortitude, courage, composure, and self-reliance.
Boys showing an aptitude for boxing may commit to training more intensively, and then join
boxing camps. Most full-time boxers live at the camps where they train and rarely return home.
Training is strenuous, and social freedoms are restricted. Workouts are held twice a day, morning
and afternoon, with emphases on conditioning, shadowboxing, bag work, and one-on-one spar-
ring with a trainer using Thai pads. School-aged boys attend school between workouts; older
boys stay at the camp to rest between workouts. The costs of food, lodging, and training are
borne by the camp. The camp’s income, in turn, depends on the boxers’ earnings. Any given
camp will always have signiﬁcant expenses, since many of the young boxers who live there are
not yet earning substantial sums. The camp relies on the income of its more seasoned boxers,
with bigger purses, for support. The fortunes of camps wax and wane depending on the skills and
age range of ﬁghters in residence, and if several older boxers retire (usually around age 25) simul-
taneously, the camp may go through a near-dormant period of restructuring. Muay Thai boxers
ﬁght on average once a month, and mandatory rest periods between ﬁghts are stipulated in law.
Festival ﬁghts are often not counted, however, so some boxers may ﬁght weekly or more.
Standard practice is to split purses 50–50 between boxer and camp. Boxers are frequently
cheated of portions of their winnings because unscrupulous camp owners can collude with pro-
moters to underreport the overall amount of the purse. The boxer is paid half of the underre-
ported amount, and the difference is pocketed by the promoter and owner. Although the 50–50
split was codiﬁed in the Boxing Act of 1999, it is not clear whether the law successfully pro-
tects a boxer’s interests. Another result of the camp structure is that, until recently, boxers
signed a contract prohibiting them from switching camps. This was important for the survival
of smaller, especially rural camps, which faced a crippling loss of income if their advancing
ﬁghters moved to bigger urban camps, but it made virtual prisoners of boxers who had no
recourse short of quitting altogether if they were mistreated by their camp owner. The Boxing
Act removes the restriction, but in practice few boxers can exercise this right, since they would
face a backlash from owners and promoters, who would refuse to promote them in future ﬁghts.
VENUES
Fights take place in all regions of the country, but most are held in the northeast. Rural festivals,
especially Buddhist temple fundraising fairs held during the hot season, offer opportunities to
ﬁght for casual boxers of all skill levels. Professional boxers afﬁliated with camps also ﬁght in
320
Muay Thai
www.ebook3000.com

rural festivals; such venues offer an important training ground for camp ﬁghters too young or
inexperienced to compete in larger stadium ﬁghts. Matchmaking is done in the morning and
includes a weigh-in and an informal assessment of skills and experience. Camp boxers, whose
experience can be discerned from their ﬁght records, are matched more carefully and usually
constitute the main event. Local ﬁghters are assessed by visually sizing ﬁghters up and gleaning
any information they can about experience from local boxing aﬁcionados. Local boys strive to
look timid and inexperienced during matchmaking to get the easiest possible draw. Fighters must
post a deposit after they are matched to ensure they appear for their ﬁght. Casual ﬁghters—
mostly village boys and teenagers—may train little if at all before a festival ﬁght. Camp boxers
train regardless, and as such usually receive top billing in the festivals at which they ﬁght.
Stadium ﬁghts, both regional and in Bangkok, are more closely regulated and more thor-
oughly promoted. Stadiums are found throughout the country, many (including Lumpini Sta-
dium) still run or owned by the military. The most prestigious venues are in Bangkok, and these
stadiums allot a small number of promoters a limited quota for their ﬁght programs. Competition
for quotas is ﬁerce, and promoters must consistently offer competitive ﬁghts that please the gam-
bling community to maintain their allotments. Promoters maintain extensive networks among
camp owners to ﬁnd suitable boxers; some promoters also own their own camps or maintain a
stable of boxers residing at other camps.
GAMBLING
The economy of Muay Thai is powered by gambling, and Muay Thai venues are among the few
places in the country where gambling is legal. In a given ﬁght, there is normally a two-tiered bet-
ting structure called the “inside” bet (doem phan) and the “outside” bet. The inside bet is placed
by members of each corner and their supporters; the odds on this bet are 1:1. The outside bet is
conducted between any interested gamblers (to include members of a ﬁghter’s entourage). Here,
odds are not ﬁxed, and vary even between rounds.
Gambling’s prominence in the economy of Muay Thai is contentious. Detractors point out
that many of boxing’s ills—exploitation, crime, violence, ﬁxed ﬁghts, loss of tradition—stem
from gambling and its pervasive inﬂuence on the Muay community (Hishida 2008). However,
without gambling, Muay Thai would lose most of its paying spectatorship and would probably
become unsustainable as an organized sport.
SOCIAL ROLE
Despite social ills associated with gambling, organized crime, and exploitation, Muay is gen-
erally depicted as positive. This is achieved in part by positing Muay Thai as a living bastion
of Thai history, masculinity, and traditional rural values, partly through its capacity as an
avenue of social mobility for the rural poor, partly through its regimented discipline and its
inculcation of sportsmanship, and partly through a public stance against the use of illicit drugs.
The Muay Thai community has been vocal in publicly condemning methamphetamine abuse
and depicting Muay Thai training as an effective method to prevent exposure and addiction
to methamphetamines and narcotics. Antidrug messages are a salient aspect of Muay Thai’s
public image in Thailand, even as economic and bodily exploitation in Muay Thai are masked
from public view.
Muay Thai
321

CULTURAL DIMENSIONS
Participation in Muay Thai is regarded by boxers as something of a two-edged sword. On the one
hand, boxers have the potential to earn more money than they would in any other profession;
even mediocre boxers make a better income than they would in agriculture or the lower strata
of the urban labor market. Boxers also have the opportunity for fame—however ﬂeeting—via
televised ﬁghts and boxing magazines. Boxers regard their purse size (kha tua, literally “body
value”) and their pictures in magazines as cultural capital, amassing prestige among their fellow
boxers and peers. They are cognizant of their role as a national symbol, and many of the photo-
graphs in magazines are deliberately posed in front of national monuments, temples, or equally
evocative settings. At the same time, boxers know that they are exploited and that they expend
a vast amount of what Wacquant (1995) describes as “bodily capital” for the beneﬁt of others.
They describe this as being maa lai neua (literally “dogs who chase meat”), an acute dysphemism
according to Thai sensibilities (Pattana 2005). Even framed in such a pejorative manner, boxers
still assert a sense of masculine dignity by pointing out their role as breadwinners, in spite of their
exploitation.
GENDER
Muay Thai has long been associated with extreme masculinity and remains so today.
Women’s boxing has gained cultural acceptance to a certain extent, although female Muay
Thai is far more popular overseas, where it is less stigmatized and incongruent with dominant
cultural attitudes. In Thailand, women’s boxing is a site where common cultural and civil
attitudes conﬂict. Boxers suggest that women should have the right to box if they choose to
do so, but nevertheless feel it is inappropriate and would not allow their own sisters or girl-
friends to ﬁght.
According to prevailing cultural sensibilities in Thailand, feminine bodily essence is widely
believed to undermine, subvert, or contaminate masculinity. Thus women are barred from enter-
ing the rings in Lumpini and Ratchadamnoen stadiums, and a special ring is set aside for female
bouts at Rangsit stadium north of Bangkok.
Proscriptions on women’s boxing are more lax in countryside ﬁghts, but this stems in part
from the fact that the makeshift rings used in countryside ﬁghts are ritually recharged with a
small ceremony every time they are set up. Women are believed to distract boxers from their
training and enfeeble them; a common jibe directed to a weak boxer is that he has “a woman’s
bones.” Women are also believed to destroy the efﬁcacy of sacred objects they come in contact
with, such as the headpiece (mongkhon) worn during the ram muay and any sacred artifacts worn
in armbands. Attitudes about women’s participation are changing, but overall the Muay Thai
community in Thailand remains conservative.
Muay Thai has had several prominent transgender and transsexual ﬁghters, notably Nong
Tum (Parinya Kiatbusaba, 1981–) and more recently “Nong Tim.” Transgender boxers challenge
the models of hyper-masculinity represented in Muay Thai. Conservative sectors of the Muay
community dismiss such transgender ﬁghters as carnivalesque aberrations designed to pique pub-
lic interest and generate money. Scholars of Muay Thai and of Thai sexuality tend to view them
as part of a broader phenomenon in which traditional constructions of masculinity and femi-
ninity are contested and refashioned (Rennesson 2005).
322
Muay Thai
www.ebook3000.com

EXPORT COMMODITY
Muay Thai is one of Thailand’s leading cultural exports, experiencing rapid growth worldwide
partly because of its efﬁcacy as a combative ring sport, and partly because it satiates global
appetites to consume “authentic” (i.e., exotic) martial arts. A renewed popularity of eclecticism
in martial arts worldwide, evident in the success of Mixed Martial Arts (MMA) and similar com-
petitions, has given Muay Thai a high international proﬁle, and forms one of the staples of mixed
martial arts training regimens. This presents a dilemma for conservative proponents of Muay
Thai. They are eager to see Muay Thai embraced internationally, but at the same time they are
loath to see its rules modiﬁed or for it to lose its cultural trappings. This is reﬂected in the rules
of international Muay Thai endorsed by both amateur and professional sanctioning bodies,
which stipulate that a mongkhon must be worn and a ram muay must be performed by every
ﬁghter before every bout. The cultural packaging of Muay Thai is stressed in Thailand, often at
the expense of gamblers’ preferences. Growing foreign participation—both as boxers and as
spectators—has prompted Lumpini Stadium to change its scoring rules to favor technique over
brute strength, boxing over ﬁghting, and to break up the lengthy, stalled clinches that the gam-
bling community enjoyed.
Seeking international legitimacy and a broader paying audience, but hampered by
internecine disputes, Muay Thai has developed several competing governing bodies, both pro-
fessional and amateur, to sanction ﬁghts and championships. These include the World Muaythai
Council (WMC), WBC Muay Thai (afﬁliated with the World Boxing Council, or WBC), the
International Amateur Muay Thai Federation (IAMTF), and the International Federation of
Muaythai Amateur (IFMA). Although politically mutually inimical, all the sanctioning bodies
share the goal of bolstering Muay Thai participation internationally while maintaining its cul-
tural identity and reafﬁrming Thailand as its cultural progenitor.
Muay Thai is also increasingly represented in other mediums, such as ﬁlm, reality television,
video games, and documentaries. Noteworthy examples include Ong-Bak (Baa-Ram-Ewe, 2003),
a ﬁlm depicting Muay Boran that has strong nationalistic overtones; Beautiful Boxer (GMM
Pictures, 2003), which recounts the life of the transgender boxer Nong Tum; and The Contender
Asia (AXN Asia/ITV4/Versus, 2008; known as The Contender: Muay Thai in the United States),
a spin-off of the Contender reality television series. Muay Thai’s overseas image, both in practice
and in its cinematic or televised representations, is deemed critical to Thailand’s carefully culti-
vated international reputation.
—Peter Vail
See also: Commodiﬁcation of Leisure; Invented Tradition; 
Globalization of Martial Arts; International Boxing; Mixed Martial Arts;
and Film and the Martial Arts (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Boxing Act. 1999. “Text of the 2542 [1999] Muay Thai Boxing Act in Thailand,” via http://www.e-
library.ago.go.th/multim/B/b00779.pdf (in Thai), accessed October 4, 2008.
Hishida Yoshifumi. 2008. “How Gambling Transformed Muay Thai.” Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation.
Tokyo: Waseda University (in Japanese).
Khet, Sriapai. 2007 (2550). Introducing Muay Thai. Bangkok: Matichon Publishing House (in Thai).
Muay Thai
323

National Statistical Ofﬁce, Thailand. 2002 (2545). “Report of the Sport Played and Sport Watching
Behavior Survey.” Bangkok.
Pattana, Kitiarsa. 2005. “‘Lives of Hunting Dogs’: Muai Thai and the Politics of Thai Masculinities,”
South East Asia Research 13(1), March, 57–90, via http://www.ingentaconnect.com/, accessed
October 16, 2009.
Rennesson, Stéphane. 2005. “Transgender Culture and Thai Boxing.” Paper presented at 1st Inter-
national Conference of Asian Queer Studies, Bangkok, Thailand, July 7-9, via Permanent Archive
of Sexualities, Genders, and Rights in Asia, http://bangkok2005.anu.edu.au/papers.php, accessed
October 4, 2008.
Vail, Peter. 1998a. “Modern Muai Thai Mythology,” Crossroads 12(2), 75–95.
Vail, Peter. 1998b. “Violence and Control: Social and Cultural Dimensions of ‘Muai Thai’ Boxing,”
Ph.D. dissertation. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University.
Vail, Peter 2005. “Class, Culture, and Martial Arts in Thailand.” Berkeley: University of California
Martial Arts Department (UCMAP) Monograph No. 6. Ken Min, editor.
Wacquant, Loïc J. D. 1995. “Pugs at Work: Bodily Capital and Bodily Labour among Professional
Boxers,”
Body and Society
1(1), 65–93, DOI: 10.1177/1357034X95001001005, via
http://online.sagepub.com/, accessed October 16, 2009.
SILAT
Silat comprises the principal martial arts practices of the Malay world. Modern countries
involved include Brunei Darussalam, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, and portions of the Philip-
pines. The term silat is generic to Malaysia and linked to the Minangkabau (West Sumatra) word
silek. Due to the probable Sumatran origin of the Malay language, Sumatran origin of the term
is likely. Regional appellations are used in the island of Java, for example, penca by the
Sundanese (West Java), and pencak by the Javanese (Central and Eastern Java). Nevertheless,
the word pencak was also used on the Malay Peninsula for the activities described by Walter
Skeat in Malay Magic (1900). Conversely, the word silat (or sélat) is present in Wilfridus
Poerwadarminta’s 1939 Javanese dictionary. This terminological exchange means that various
terms, traditions, and techniques are widely known, even though they may be separated by
thousands of miles. It also suggests that numerous historic exchanges of knowledge and tech-
niques have occurred between the inhabitants of the different islands and regions of the Malay
Archipelago, a region known locally as the Nusantara. Other terminological traditions for Silat
include encak in Bali, mancak in Bawean, bemancek in Eastern Borneo, mamencak and akmencak
(Maryono 1998, 3) and sila’ (Christian Pelras, personal communication, 2009), in South
Celebes, and gayong in Malaysia. (Gayong refers to a “bucket” used to dip into the well of the
unseen, and is a Malay term of Sumatran origin.) Kanuragan is used in Java and Bali to designate
all techniques used for self-defense and, in a broader sense for self protection.
The double terminological tradition of silat and pencak encouraged the founders of the
Indonesian federation, IPSI (Ikatan Pencak Silat Indonesia), established in 1949, to employ the
composite term pencak silat. This appellation was retained from 1980 by the international feder-
ation, PERSILAT. In this book, Silat is capitalized to refer to the martial art as a whole, whereas
local terms are left lowercase.
It is difﬁcult to locate a satisfactory etymological explanation for Silat. Pencak refers to the
rhythm of the movements, and pencak can also be performed as a dance known as tari pencak, the
dance of pencak. More recent Indonesian deﬁnitions of Silat assign to pencak different martial
324
Silat
www.ebook3000.com

techniques and basic practices (including ritual dance) and assign to Silat the mastering of the
art and the best way to use it in ﬁghting or confrontation. In Malaysia, pencak is shorthand for
ﬁghting skills, and seni silat (“the art of Silat”) refers to the mastery of the whole of Silat, to
include dance, ritual, and practical ﬁghting skill.
Silat deﬁnitions elaborated from the 1970s have been inﬂuenced by the popular success of
cerita silat, martial arts stories that spread throughout Indonesia during the 1960s, notably
through the work of the Sino-Indonesian novelist Asmaraman Kho Ping Hoo (1926–1994).
These were followed by the spread of Silat comics and even a television series. The inﬂuence
of popular media encouraged the generalization of the term Silat in everyday language, even in
Java, in parallel with local appellations. In addition, an ofﬁcial Indonesian deﬁnition of pen-
cak silat was promulgated after the 1980s. The expansion of all these different terminological
traditions abroad has followed the local transplantation of martial arts masters and schools
globally.
The practitioner of Silat is called a pesilat. The term is not gendered. In Malay, the verb “to
play Silat” is bersilat. The generic term for master is guru silat. The “champion” ﬁghter is a jago
(“ﬁghting cock,” as in cockﬁghting), and if paid, a jago may become a tukang pukul (“hench-
man”). The practitioner who achieves a profound level of ﬁghting skills and who demonstrates
clear religious and ethical purpose may be referred to as pendekar (warrior); and if aged and full
of wisdom, he or she may (at least on Java) be known as sesepuh (elder). Historically, there were
also hulubalang, meaning champion ﬁghters serving the sultan or members of the Malay royal
family. Hulubalang performed a wide range of tasks, ranging from prize ﬁghting and protection
to kidnap and assassination.
DIFFUSION
Most Indonesian and Malaysian specialists assert a Sumatran origin for Malay martial arts.
Although this remains to be proven from an historic perspective, from a ritual and social point
of view the hypothesis seems plausible. The roots of Silat were affected by the expansion of Bud-
dhism in Southeast Asia, notably with the formation of the Buddhist Empire of Srivijaya (sev-
enth to thirteenth centuries). Srivijaya’s center stood in South Sumatra, and it became an
important stopover on the maritime trade route between China and India.
Until recently, the transmission of the martial art was secret, and the tradition of oral and
embodied dissemination means that there are insufﬁcient written sources to conﬁrm the
Sumatran origin hypothesis. However, as mentioned above, studies of the social anchorage of the
art, including its ties to ritual activity, theater, performance, and regional linguistic media, all
point toward Sumatran origin.
Indonesian researchers and practitioners posit the southern part of Sumatra as the region of
origin of Silat. Through known historical facts and Malaysian scholarship, Jambi is accepted as
the location from which silat Melayu (Malay Silat) emerged. Close ties between the martial art
and local ritual activities such as weddings, circumcisions, and the welcoming of important per-
sonages are found in West Sumatran silek and in Malay silat, and also in Aceh, Brunei
Darussalam, Sumatra, Malaysia, and the Muslim areas of the southern Philippines. The ritual
dimension is also strong in the Sundanese penca of West Java. The martial art is sometimes pre-
sented as a ritual dance in Malaysia (silat pengantin) and West Java (tari or ibing). This dance is
Silat
325

usually accompanied by percussion (gendang), wind instruments (serunai), and gongs. Another
point supporting diffusion is that the technical Silat vocabulary is much richer in Minang and
in Sundanese than it is in Javanese. Additional clues are provided by the toponyms attached to
the schools, which sometimes name the school in relation to the place where the teaching
started. For example, in Sunda, place names help trace systems such as Cimande to the eigh-
teenth century.
There exist several major regional styles, with all the variations one would expect from sys-
tems taught at hundreds of locations. Major regional styles include Malay silat or silat Melayu
(Malaysia, South and East Sumatra), Minangkabau silek or silek Minang (West Sumatra), Sun-
danese penca or penca Sunda (West Java), Betawi penca (Jakarta), and Javanese pencak or pencak
Jawa (Central and East Java). Because of its large Indonesian community, the Netherlands is the
main region where Silat schools are found in Europe, but there are also Silat schools in Australia
and the Americas.
SOCIAL DIMENSIONS
The social dimensions of Silat involve both ritual and religious activities. A good illustration of
this is the transmission of silek Minang, which used to be imbricated into West Sumatran social
structure. Traditionally, the datuk (the custom and religious leader of the village or district) was
responsible for the silek group and its meeting place (tapian). There was no centralized organiza-
tion; each tapian was autonomous. This corresponds to the political structure of the Minangkabau
country in Nagari, which was a federation of small autonomous states. In Minang society, the
mamak (“maternal uncle”) was responsible for the children’s education in custom, religion, the art
of speech, and silek. The teaching took place in Islamic religious schools called surau, and silek
itself is often considered as a “second religion” because of its close binds to ancestor worship. At
the highest rank, the mamak is also a datuk. Thus, in West Sumatra, kinship, custom, religion,
political structure, and silek are intertwined.
The Sundanese area in West Java is another region where Silat practice is anchored in the
social structure. Penca is allied to ritual activity and is performed ceremonially for circumcisions,
weddings, and for welcoming guests. Penca was traditionally practiced in Muslim schools, but it
has developed differently in Sunda than in the Minangkabau context, probably because for 300
years the area around Jakarta was a capital city, ﬁrst for the Sunda Kingdom, then the Dutch East
Indies, and today, the Republic of Indonesia.
In West Java, Silat practice often developed in the family context; there are sometimes entire
families of penca experts, from the grandparents to the children, living in villages ﬁlled with
penca experts and students. In West Java, women commonly practice penca, probably to a
greater degree than in any other Malay region. This may be due to the rapid and broad intro-
duction of Silat in the modern school system promoted after Indonesia achieved independence
from the Netherlands in 1949.
Long-established schools have grown into modern pencak currents. For example, Cimande
was established (or popularized, depending on one’s perspective) by Abah Kahir around 1760. A
more recent example is Cikalong, which was popularized by Raden Haji Ibrahim during the mid-
nineteenthcentury. Cimande originates from a peasant family (semah), whereas Cikalong derives
from a noble family (menak). Both Cimande and Cikalong became broad currents that inﬂuenced
326
Silat
www.ebook3000.com

many masters and spread throughout Central and East Java, Singapore, and Malaysia. Other large,
well-organized schools (perguruan or paguron) such as Panglipur have grown in the Sunda region
and are widely known today.
In Central Java, the inﬂuence of the historic royal courts can be felt on some pencak schools.
Rightly or wrongly, many schools claim a noble ancestral founder in their genealogy. This may
signify that the techniques were highly developed in the noble court. Consider, for example, the
inﬂuence of Raden Mas Harimurti (1907–1962), the grandson of Sultan Hamengku Buwono VII
(1839–1921). Harimurti mastered pencak along with Javanese classical dance and Javanese mys-
ticism, and he won challenge matches against some of the best ﬁghters of Java (de Grave 2000).
These ﬁghts were organized through a clandestine association called sambuk, ﬁnanced by wealthy
businessmen. Today, many schools founded by Harimurti’s students can be found in the old royal
city of Yogyakarta, where he lived.
People from Central Java played an important role in the development of the modern sport
of pencak silat. The originators of this standardized style of Silat and of the IPSI (Indonesian
Pencak Silat Association in English, Ikatan Pencak Silat Indonesia in Indonesian) in 1948 were
Javanese. One of the originators, Mohamad Djoemali, was the ﬁrst technical counselor of the
IPSI. He worked under the aegis of Taman Siswa (“Garden of Students”), a progressive educa-
tional movement which was created by Ki Hadjar Dewantara (1889-1959), a nationalist of the
ﬁrst hour, himself of aristocratic descent and tied to Harimurti’s family, and Minister of Educa-
tion and Culture in Indonesia after independence. Having adapted their techniques to the mod-
ern context, Javanese schools such as Setia Hati Teratai, Tapak Suci, and Merpati Putih have
grown widely within the Archipelago and abroad.
In East Java, pencak was traditionally cultivated in Islamic boarding schools called
pesantren. From 1986, a federal organization called Pagar Nusa came from this tradition.
Pagar Nusa regrouped all the pencak masters of the Nahdatul Ulama, Indonesia’s biggest
Sunni Muslim organization. Pagar Nusa was founded by the deceased Kyai Haji Maksum
Jauhari (currently called Gus Maksum) (1944–2003), who fought against the 1960s Com-
munist movement.
Madurese pencak exerts another strong influence on Silat in East Java. Pamur is a well
known Madurese pencak school. Madurese pencak is frequently exhibited for communal
occasions and festivals. These activities often feature tontine investment schemes, known
locally as arisan (Bouvier 1990). The principle of tontine is that a group of people each gives
the same amount of money. First one member of the group uses this sum, then another mem-
ber, and so on. This allows participants to engage in microeconomic activities, which in
turn enables them to build local projects and to help one another in the neighborhood
context.
The important thing to remember from all this is that the nobility, the merchants, the peas-
antry, and the religious groups alike promulgated Malay martial traditions.
LEGENDARY ORIGINS
During the 1950s, the demographics of Silat expanded massively, as it was introduced in an
educational context ranging from elementary schools to university. Modern Silat also main-
tains close ties to nationalism, the army, the police, private and political militia, and to other
Silat
327

security agencies. Thus, the social and historical aspects of Silat are steeped in both invented
tradition and folk legend.
A legend recounted in Sumatra and West Java tells of a young man who observed the move-
ment of a ﬂower turning in a whirlpool created by a waterfall. The ﬂower appeared sure to be
destroyed by the strong current of the whirlpool, but somehow it always managed to escape
destruction. This observation inspired the man to create a self-defense system, which would
become Silat. Another popular legend tells of a woman who observed a snake and a crane ﬁght-
ing each other and afterwards used their techniques to defend herself against her violent hus-
band. Depending on the version, the background to these legends can be religiously neutral, or
it can be animist, Buddhist, or Muslim.
Among the legendary or semilegendary personages include Hang Tuah, a Malay admi-
ral (laksamana) from the Sultanate of Melaka (1402–1511) who apparently killed his best
friend Hang Jebat on orders of the evil Sultan; Jaka Tingkir, the warrior who is at the ori-
gin of the Javanese Muslim kingdom of Pajang (1549–1582); Nyi Ageng Serang
(1752–1828), supposed to have been a member of the Javanese royal court female warriors
(langenkusumo), and later associated with Prince Diponegoro (1785–1855), who fought
against the Dutch; and the Batavian social bandit Si Pitung (also known as Salihoen, died
1893). Other martial leaders, champions, and defenders of social justice anchored in recent
history include the warok of the East Javanese town of Ponorogo, the jawara of the West
Javanese town of Banten, and Mat Kilau (born ca. 1857), who apparently died in the Malay
Peninsula’s Pahang Rebellion of 1891–1895, only to re-emerge in 1969 under the name
Mat Siam.
TECHNICAL ASPECTS
Silat’s most salient characteristic is its aesthetic of movement. This aesthetic varies according to
the school. Sumatran styles of Silat, especially of the Minangkabau schools, tend to adopt the
lowest stances. However, Sundanese styles also use low stances, as do Malaysian and Javanese
styles (although not so low, in the latter case). The aesthetic aspects of Silat reveal its ritual and
artistic nature. Learning stylized series of movements appropriate to each school forms the basis
of the student’s apprenticeship. Prearranged patterns of aesthetic moves (what would be called
kata in Japanese martial arts) are called bunga in Sumatra and Malaysia; kembang in Java, langkah
in West Java and Malaysia, balabek in West Sumatra, or, generically in the modern international
systems, jurus.
Malay dance and theatrical traditions often share gestures with regional martial movements.
For example, Minangkabau theatre (randai) uses speech, music, dance, and training methods all
derived from silek, where theater and martial arts are one.
Ritual gestures and activities are often linked to evoking the powers of animal spirits,
notably the tiger, the monkey, the crocodile, the snake, and the wild boar. According to the
school or current, such gestures may be perpetrated through possession techniques (menurun),
which enable a spirit animal to enter the practitioner’s body. Modern international systems use
standardized and speciﬁc series of movements to reproduce the animal’s style.
Upper-body strikes for the purposes of self-defense use the palm, ﬁngers, back of the hand,
ﬁst, forearm, elbow, and shoulder. Kicks employ the foot, calf, shinbone, knee, and thigh.
328
Silat
www.ebook3000.com

Grappling techniques are taught together with punching and kicking, and grappling stances
include squatting, kneeling, and sitting positions (duduk sempok).
Within this general set of techniques, regional characteristics are exhibited. For instance,
Sumatran and Malaysian styles emphasize foot strikes, whereas West Javanese styles emphasize
hand tactics. Consequently, Cimande practitioners toughen and harden their wrists through
intensive and extensive partner training, applying medicinal oil after each striking session.
Historically, Silat duels were fought to the death. Thus, Silat features blade work to a high
degree. Some styles in Malaysia introduce weapons training early in the syllabus, but in Java it
comes only after several years of practice. Dozens of different weapons are used, often with local
variations The most distinctive is the keris (wavy-blade dagger), but other common weapons
include machetes (parang and golok), swords (pedang), knives (pisau), bill hooks (celurit), curving
knives (karambit), pruning knives (sabit), spears (tombak), tridents (tjabang or trisula), staffs
(tongkat or toya), and cindai (a tightly rolled sarung, or male skirt).
Traditionally, a guru who was unable to heal the injuries of his or her students was consid-
ered a bad master. Consequently, every Silat style has its own arsenal of therapeutic techniques.
Examples include energetic massages, herbal medicine, magnetism, and healing prayers. Recent
schools of “inner power” (tenaga dalam) have been developed within the perspective of health or
healing practices; they emphasize therapeutic breathing exercises and meditation.
Ritual techniques are also prevalent, including magical incantations, methods to summon
spirits, and religious amulets. Collectively, these are known as tenaga dalam or ilmu batin, terms
that roughly translate as “inner knowledge.” Again, practices vary regionally and from one style
to another. Broadly, however, the term tenaga dalam describes all kinds of special techniques that
develop “inner power” that are not directly physical. Examples include breathing exercises, med-
itation, mantras, fasting, prolonged retreats in isolation, and the use of religious talismans and
magical amulets. Exotic examples of practices associated with tenaga dalam include dramatic rit-
ual ordeals (patigeni) such as lying in an open grave for seven nights in succession.
Many tenaga dalam schools have developed in the 1980s and in the 1990s, especially on Java.
The older schools seem to originate from West Java, but similar techniques also exist in the
region of Padang (West Sumatra). Thus, further investigations are necessary. In Banten (West
Java), there are invulnerability techniques (dabus) where adherents pierce their own ﬂesh using
the keris. These practices were formerly tied to Suﬁorders, and similar practices can be found in
a Hindu context at Bali. Methods to attain invulnerability (ilmu kebal in Malaysia) include plac-
ing the hands into boiling oil without being burned (mandi minyak). Again, such practices are
tied to Suﬁtechniques.
ORGANIZATIONS
The ﬁrst national-level organization, Indonesia’s IPSI, appeared during the late 1940s. Since the
1970s, international Silat competitions have emerged under the inﬂuence of the various
national federations, to include Malaysia’s PESAKA, Singapore’s PERSISI, and Brunei
Darussalam’s PERSIB. The ﬁrst international competition took place in 1982. During sportive
bouts, known as tanding, categories of weight are distinguished and the opponents wear plastrons
to protect their chests. As in amateur boxing, matches have three rounds lasting 2 minutes
each. International competition has resulted in relatively higher stances in Silat practice, and
Silat
329

formalized steps of approach preﬁguring the actual contest have been developed. In addition, the
method for counting points in international contests—a reaching punch scores one point, a
reaching kick scores two points, a combined dodge scores one point, and a fall caused by a dodge
or blow scores three points—has encouraged the participant schools to adapt their techniques
to sport ﬁghting.
Standardized jurus have also been developed for competition. The international federation,
PERSILAT, introduced three standardized jurus: the tunggal, which consists of 100 steps, ﬁrst
performed without weapons and then with the machete and staff; the ganda, in which two oppo-
nents ﬁght each other in a prearranged choreography using a machete (golok) against a staff
(tongkat); and a third weapon of the practitioner’s choice, usually a keris, a pisau, a celurit, or a
pair of trisula (iron weapons similar to Japanese sai).
—Jean-Marc de Grave and Douglas S. Farrer
See also: Oceania; South Asian Martial Arts; Arnis; 
Kuntao (in this volume); Belief Systems: Silat;
and Political Uses of the Martial Arts (in Volume II).
REFERENCES
Bouvier, Hélène. 1990. “Ojung and Pencak Silat: Village and National Sport in Madura,” Archipel 40,
23-39, via http://www.persee.fr/web/revues/home/prescript/article/arch_0044-8613_1990_num_
40_1_2659, accessed October 16, 2009.
de Grave, Jean-Marc. 2000. “Un ‘champion’ issu du kraton: l’histoire de Ndara Harimurti” [A “Cham-
pion” from the Kraton: Ndara Harimurti’s Story]. Archipel 160, 141-166, via http://www
.persee.fr/web/revues/home/prescript/article/arch_0044-8613_2000_num_60_4_3585, accessed
October 16, 2009.
de Grave, Jean-Marc. 2001. Initiation rituelle et arts martiaux: trois écoles de kanuragan Javanais [Ritual
Initiation and Martial Arts: Three Schools of Javanese Kanuragan]. Paris: L’Harmattan/Archipel.
Draeger, Donn F. 1972. Weapons and Fighting Arts of Indonesia. Boston, MA: Tuttle.
Farrer, Douglas S. 2009. Shadows of the Prophet: Martial Arts and SuﬁMysticism, Volume 2, Muslims in
Global Societies Series. Berlin: Springer Science+Business Media B.V.
Maryono, O’Ong. 1998. Pencak silat—Merentang Waktu [Pencak Silat: Across Time].Yogyakarta: Pustaka
Pelajar.
Maryono, O’Ong. 2002. Pencak Silat in the Indonesian Archipelago, translated by Ruth Mackenzie.
Yogyakarta: Yayasan Galang.
Pauka, Kirstin. 1998. Theatre and Martial Arts in West Sumatra: Randai and Silek of the Minangkabau.
Athens, OH: Ohio University Center for International Studies.
Shamsuddin, Sheikh. 2005. The Malay Art of Self-Defense: Silat Seni Gayong. Berkeley, CA: North
Atlantic Books.
330
Silat
www.ebook3000.com

Index
AAUC. See Amateur Athletic Union of Canada
(AAUC)
ABADÁ Capoeira, 458
Abrahams, Roger, 45
L’Academie d’Espee (Academy of the Sword)
(Thibault), 355
Achaemenian bow, 67
Acordeon, Mestre (Almeida, Ubirajara “Bira”),
41
Adab al-Harb va al-Shoja-e (The Customs of War
and Bravery) (Mobarak Shah), 68
Adams v. Baker (1996), 522
Afghanistan, 62–63
Africa, 1–24
belief systems, 332–337
See also individual nations
African martial arts in contemporary settings, 337
African American prison ﬁghting styles. See
Jailhouse Rock
Afrikan, term deﬁned, 626
Agrippa, Camillo, 250
Aikido, 422
Japanese, 132–138
non-violent martial art, 445
and political conﬂict, 638–642
schools, 431
See also Black Dragon Society; Ueshiba Morihei
AIM. See American Indian Movement (AIM)
Air Force Judo Association, 449
Aizawa Yasushi, 370
Akharas (gymnasiums), 359, 360
and Indian nationalism, 286
Indian wrestling, 291
Akiyama Shirobi, 122
Albert, Louis, 258
Alchemical practices, embryonic breathing and
spells, 375–376
Alexander the Great, King (Macedonia), 282
Alexios I Komnenos, Emperor (Byzantium),
348–349
Alﬁeri, Francesco, 251
Ali, Muhammad
and the draft, 468
poetry, 421
Alkidamas, 236. See also Greece, boxing
All-in Fighting (Fairbairn), 566
All Japan Judo Federation, 577
All Japan Jukendo Federation, 582
All-Japan Kendo Federation, 602
All Japan Men’s Naginata Championships, 162
All Men Are Brothers. See Outlaws of the Marsh
(Shuihuzhuan)
All-Russia Sambo Federation, 513
All-USSR Committee of Physical Culture and
Sports, election of All-USSR judo
committee, 509
Allah, 400
names of, 398
Amakhanda, 630
Amateur Athletic Union of Canada (AAUC),
462, 463
Amateur boxing
as international sport, 467
and World War I, 467
Amazons, 213–214, 643
American Freestyle Karate, 479
American Gladiators (television program,
2008–2009), 546. See also Carano, Gina
American Indian Movement (AIM), and the
negative image of the “Dog Soldiers,” 656
American Legion, sponsoring boxing smokers,
649
American Shaolin (Polly), 412, 413
American Wrestling Association (AWA), 494
Americas, 25–53. See also individual nations
Amulets, 355
Anapale, 605
The Anatomy of Self (Omote to Ura) (Doi), 659
Ancestral Spirits, 372–373
André, Emil, 219

Andre the Giant (Roussinoff, André), 495
Anglo-Norman professional swordsmen
(escrimeurs), 241
Angola, Capoeira and, 455, 458
Angry White Pyjamas (Twigger), 414
Animal sacriﬁce, Hawai‘i, 273–274
Animal symbolism in medieval literature,
353–354
Animal-modeling, 425
Animals
as allegorical ﬁgures, 354
cattle, 336
crocodile, 334
gorilla, 335
leopard, 335
and power, 334–336
and symbolism, 353–354
totem, 335
Anime, Japanese animation and kids’television,
543
ANKF. See Zen Nippon Kyudo Renmei (All
Nippon Kyudo Federation, or ANKF)
Aotearoa (New Zealand), 275–277
Arab Archery, 64
Arash the Archer, 366
Archery
Central Asian, 55–65
Chinese, 94, 115
composite bows, 57–58
continued use for hunting, 84
Iranian, 67–72
Japanese, 152–158
Mongolian, 79–80
New Guinean, 267
Ottoman, 82–84
self-bows, 57
South Asian, 283
Archery (kyujutsu), schools of, 599
Archery Traditions of China (Selby), 63
Aristophanes, 234
Armed Forces Judo Association, 449
Armor
close-quarter combat and, 243
full plate, 243
scale, 58–60
Arnis, 299
categories of practice, 300
club logos, 301
deﬁned, 299, 300
derived from Okinawan and Japanese karate,
304
I-2
Index
footwork, 303
history, 309
inﬂuence of European fencing on, 309
knowledge, 305
magical talismans and, 305–306
masters, 310
origins, 308
postures, 303–304
ranking system, 305
strategy, 302
talismans (Tagalog, “anting-anting”), 301,
305–306
teaching of, 302
techniques, 302, 304–305
unarmed methods, 304
uniform, 301
weapons, 300
Arrichion, 237. See also Greece, pankration
Art, and archery, 63. See also Expressive culture
The Art of French Boxing and Canne Fencing
(Charlemont), 219
The Art of Worldly Wisdom (Gracián), 478
Arthouse wuxia ﬁlms, 533
Arthur, King (mythical, England), 350
Asaf, Muhammad Hashim, 365
Asanas, 361. See also Yoga
Ascetic order and akharas, 360
A-Shan Shi, itinerant teacher, 409
Asia, Central and Southwest, 55–58. See also
individual nations
Asia, East, 89–211. See also individual nations
Asia Minor, Amazons, 231–214. See also individual
nations
Asia, South, 281–297. See also individual nations
Asia, Southeast, 299–330. See also individual
nations
Asian martial arts in the United States and
Canada, 442–450
Asians and immigration to North America,
442–443
Assassins, 648
Astrology
astrological charts, 355
magical amulets, 355
and Talhoffer, Hans, 355
and talismanic magic, 355–356
Atatürk, President Mustafa Kemal (Turkey)
preference for Western style sport organizations,
84
view on Ottoman practices, 86
See also Turkey, Republic of
www.ebook3000.com

Australia, 263–265
Aboriginal martial training, 264
boxing and Sydney Stadium rules, 468
boxing exhibitions, 466
ﬁrst demonstrations of judo, 575
martial arts tourism, 412
and Okinawan karate, 438
reality-based defense, 496
Tiwi ceremonial spears, 422
Authenticity
discarded as yardstick of legitimacy, 439
in ﬁlms, 530
The Avengers (television series), 531
Avesta, 67
AWA. See American Wrestling Association
(AWA)
Awa Kenzo, 156–157
Ayyaran
initiation ceremonies of, 365
principles of, 363–368
Ba To, 340
Babur, 61
Bachelor subculture
and Asian immigrants, 445–446
decline of, 447
and mail-order wives, 447
Badisches Landesmuseum Karlsruhe, 83
Baganda people, 334
Baguazhang
and Central Martial Arts Institute, 97
Kuomintang government, under, 102
Bali and traditional dance, 414
Balkan Wars (1912–1913) and success of bayonet
charges, 570
Bangladesh and cancellation of ﬁrst women’s
wrestling meet, 521
Banten (West Java), 399–400
Banyoro, 334
Barbados, stick-dancing (stick-licking), 47–48
Bare-knuckle pugilism
opposition to, in England, 465–466
Regina v. Young and others (1866), 465
Regulation of Railways Act of 1868, 465
Bartitsu
Barton-Wright, 451–454
and Conan Doyle, Sir Arthur, 452
and the Internet, 451, 452, 453
neo-Bartitsu, 454
revival of, 451
The Bartitsu Compendium (Wolf), 453
Index
I-3
Bartitsu School of Arms and Physical Culture,
452
Bartitsu Society
and historical martial arts reconstruction,
453–454
researching the life of Barton-Wright, 453–454
Barton-Wright, Edward William, and Bartitsu,
451–454
Baruzy, Count Pierre, 258
Bayonet, Imperial Japanese Army’s admiration of,
580
Bayonet techniques (jukenjutsu), 579
in China, 571
instruction in Japanese schools, 575
in Japan, 571
national competitions, 581
during World War II, 571
Bayonet training in the United States, 568–572
adoption of aggressive British and Canadian
methods, 571
and the American Civil War, 569
Army stopped training, 572
bayonets deﬁned, 568
decline after World War I, 571
effect of magazine-fed riﬂes in European battles,
570
during Korean War, 572
and purpose of U.S. military boxing, 589
training manuals, 569
Becker, Gavin de
intuitive radar, 500
thesis that fear is a gift, 500
Bee, Jon, 229
Behind the Rising Sun (RKO), 532
Beijing Opera, 607
Belgium
Fédération Internationale de Boxe Amateur,
467
ﬁrst female world wrestling gold medalist, 524
Belief systems
Africa, 332–337
China, 338–345
deﬁnition, 331
European chivalry, 345–351
European occult sciences, 352–356
India, 357–362
Iran, 363–368
Japanese budo, bujutsu, and bugei, 369–370
sacred themes, 332
Silat, 394–395
Belt color system, 431–432, 438

Benin, Republic of, 333, 336
Ewuare the Great, King (Benin) 336
Bhutan, modern archery, 64
Biaoju/Biaohang, (Protection Agencies), 96
“Big Broadsword Wang Number Five” (dadao
wangwu), 96
Bilbao World Capoeira Capu 2006, 458
Billy Jack (Warner Brothers), 532
Billy the Kid (Bonney, William), 535
Bimba, Mestre (Machado, Manuel dos Reis), 37,
38–40
Bissell, Stanley “Sonny,” 131
Black belt, 422
invention of, 431
Black Belt Jones (Warner Brothers), 532
Black Dragon Society (Kokuryukai),640
and traditional samurai ideologies, 647
and Ueshiba Morihei, 640
Black Karate Federation, 627
patches and uniforms, 628
Blanks, Billy, 436
Blaxploitation ﬁlms, and Kelly, Jim, 532
Bloodsport (Cannon Group), 532
Bodhidharma (patriarch of Chinese Chan [Zen]
Buddhism), 342
mythical story of, 344
Bollea, Terry (Hulk Hogan), 494
Bonetti, Rocco, 254
Bonney, William (Billy the Kid), 535
Book of Changes (ChineseYijing), 377
Book of Han (Han Shu), 93
Book of History (second century, BCE), 107
Book of Rites (Li Ji), 92
Book of the Courtier (Castiglione), 351
Boxer Uprising (1899–1901), 96, 108
martial artists as warriors, 407
secret societies and martial arts, 647
and use of esoteric martial arts, 622
Wang Zhengyi, 96
Boxers United in Righteousness, 96
Boxiana (Egan), 229
additional volume by Bee, Jon, 229
Boxing
and bare-knuckle pugilism, 465
Chinese, 92–93, 97, 107, 115
Chinese American boxers, 446
and Chinese American youth, 448
Chinese styles, 89–91
English, 228–233
ﬁght footage banned by U.S. government, 469
and Filipino American men, 448
I-4
Index
ﬁrst televised match, 469
French, 256–261
Greek, 235–236
Hong Kong, 100–101
international, 465–470
Kung Fu (television series), 444
and medicine, 336–337
movies, 469
popularity of, and television, 545
Queensberry’s rules, 466
Roman, 237
shaolin, in, 444
Tahitian, 273
Thai, 317–323
U.S. military rules, 589
Boxing, amateur, 466–467
and Christian youth organizations, 467
deﬁned, 466
Boxing, professional, 467–468
and cable television, 469
in popular culture, 468–470
and Prohibition, 467
Boxing, women’s, 514–520
British fairground boxing, 514
in Thailand, 322
and 2012 Olympics, 519
Boxing booths, 515
Boxing Classic: Essential Boxing Methods (also
under title Boxing Classic: Essentials of Boxing,
1784), 91, 96, 107
Boyd, John, and the OODA (Observation,
Orientation, Decision, and Action) Loop,
500
Brahmacharya
and celibacy, 358–359
and cosmology, 358
practice of, 358
rejuvenation, 359
Vedic model, 359
Brahmanic Hinduism, 357
Brazil, 32–34
beneﬁts of martial arts tourism, 415
European pilgrimages to, 457
globalization of capoeira, 437
Gracie family of, 486
invulnerability and political conﬂict, 622
kendo and Japanese immigrants, 602
martial arts tourism, 412
and MMA, 489
role of culture in capoeira marketing, 455
Vale Tudo (“anything goes”) matches in, 486
www.ebook3000.com

Brazil, jiu-jitsu
Asians and, 32–34
and cultural assimilation, 34
development, 32–35
Gracie family, 545
as inﬂuence in North America, 34–35
inﬂuences, 32–33
versus Japanese, 31, 33–34
and Japanese inﬂuence, 33–34
techniques, 35–36
and Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC),
545
World War II and, 33
Bref Instructions Vpõ My Pradoxes of Defence
(Silver), 255
Britain
and Bartitsu, 451–452
combat plays, 421
decline of bayonet training, 571
fairground boxing, 514
military unarmed ﬁghting systems, 588
mummers, 420
reality-based defense, 496
and sportsmanship, 384
and women’s boxing matches in music halls, 515
World War II and commando units, 589–590
British Academy of Dramatic Combat, 612
British Commonwealth, war with Japan, 641
Brittany, martial arts in, 224
Broken rhythm, Way of the Dragon, 484
Broughton, Jack, 228–229
Broughton Rules of 1743, 228–229
Buddha’s bliss, 374
Buddhism, 89, 120, 133, 156, 163, 164, 167, 168,
177, 183, 184, 325
dissociation from, 383
forms of, 373
Four Noble Truths, 167
and initiation documents, 558
Mahayana, 431
martial arts, 339–342
meditation, 378
mental training, 378
monasteries, 339
monks laicized, 383
New Buddhism, 383–384
scheme of ﬁve elements, 559
secret martial techniques, 374
temples dismantled, 383
and tengu (heavenly dogs), 647
vegetarianism, 339
Index
I-5
Buddhist temples
as clan shrines, 372–373
dismantling of, 383
Budo (the warrior’s way, martial ways), 369, 370
banned use of term, 390
deﬁned, 575
skills taught by Imperial Japanese Army, 581
Buffy the Vampire Slayer (television series),
543–544
Bugei (warrior arts), 369
Bujutsu (warrior skills), 369, 370
Bulgaria
bayonet charges in Balkan Wars, 570
Sambo teams from, 512
women’s Wrestling World Championship, 521
Bunseki, Fu Kiau, 44
Burckhardt, Jakob, 349
Bushido
and Christianity, 386–387
introduction to the Western world, 574
and Zen, 389
Bushido: The Soul of Japan (Nitobe), 387, 574
Butokukai, 157, 387–388, 576–577, 638
disbanded, 577
dissolved when Japan lost World War II, 601
formation of, 600
and jujutsu, 574
subjugation of aikido to, 639
Buttrick, Barbara, 515
Byzantine Empire, 348
Canada
allows women in the military without
restrictions, 643
and Asian martial arts, 442–450
boxing exhibitions, 466
decline of bayonet training, 571
and Finnish-Canadian wrestlers, 460–464
introduction of female wrestling, 522
and martial arts, 443
and MMA, 489
wrestling and ethnic Finns, 460–464
Canary Islands
Guanches and, 1, 3
martial arts in, 1, 3
origin of name, 1
Spanish conquest of, 3
stick ﬁghting (Juego del Palo) in, 3–5
wrestling (Lucha Canaria), 5–6
Canary Islands wrestling. See Lucha Canaria
(Canary Island wrestling)

Canboulay, 46–47
Canne de combat
change in attitude toward,
competition, 220
deﬁnition, 217
diplomas speciﬁc to, 218
ﬁrst European text about, 218
ﬁrst French Championship, 220
ﬁrst World Championship, 220
French Boxing clubs, 219
origins, 217–218
revival, 218–219
training, 219
Cannon Pounder (Pao Chui), 95
Capellanus, Andreas, 350
Capoeira
advertisements using, 456–457
Afro-Brazilian inﬂuence, 37, 39, 40, 41
Afro-Brazilian martial art, 411
appearance in Europe, 456
basics, 37
and Brazilianization process, 457
characteristics, 37–38
and claims of invulnerability, 623
closed body, 427
countercultural cachet, 440
developments, 39–42
differences in styles, 37–38
diffusion via the Internet, 458
essential aspects, 455
in Europe, 455–459
European adaptations, 459
European demand for, 457
globalization of, 437, 458–459
growth of, 41–42
marketing of, 456–457
in martial arts tourists, 413
music and, 37
and musical accompaniment, 455
networking of, 457–458
origins, 38
and professional success, 457
spectacular styles, 439
teaching in Europe, 456
types, 36–38
in video game Tekken 3, 457
Capoeira Angola, 455
revival of the tradition, 459
values of, 459
Capoferro, Ridolfo, 252
Carano, Gina, 546. See also American Gladiators
(television program, 2008–2009)
I-6
Index
Carolingian Empire, 346
Carambe Jarimi (Yahuza, Ibrahim), 9, 10
Caribbean martial arts
and African culture, 42–43, 47–48
African descended, 48
Barbados, 47–48 (see also Barbados, stick-
dancing)
Cuba, 44–45 (see also Cuba, stick ﬁghting, 44)
Haiti, 45 (see also Haiti, stick ﬁghting)
Trinidad, 46–47 (see also Trinidad, stick
ﬁghting)
Caroline Islands, 269–270
Carpentier, Georges, 258
Carradine, David, 540
Carranza, Jerónimo de, 254. See also La
Philosophia de las Armas (The Philosophy of
Arms) (Carranza), 254
Casillas, Graciela, 516–519
Casinos
Native American, 470
and professional boxing, 470
Casquelord, Malonga, 334, 336
Castiglione, Baldassare, 351
Castle, Egerton, 254
Catholic Youth Organization (CYO), and
amateur boxing, 467
CDKA (Central House of the Red Army), 504
Oshchepkov organized male and female groups,
505
Celibacy
akharas, 360
and Hanuman, 291
and Indian wrestling, 290–291
and martial arts in India, 360
relevance of control of desire, 358
as religious practice, 358–359
and wrestling in India, 290–291
Celtic martial arts
Brittany and Cornwall, 224
cutting events, 223
Iberian, 225–226
Irish, 223
Scottish, 221–223
Welsh, 225
Celtic myths, presentational forms, 418
Central and Southwest Asia, 55–58. See also
individual nations
Central Asia, archery, 55
Afghanistan and, 62–63
arrow points, 60
asymmetric bows, 59
Bronze Age, 57
www.ebook3000.com

China and, 62–63
composite bow, 57–58
“crab bow,” 61
depictions of, 63–64
Hunnic bow, 58–59
Hunza bow, 62
Indian archery, 61
literature about, 63–64
Mesolithic, 56
Neolithic, 56–57
obsolescence of, 64
quivers, 60
Scythians and, 58
Sind horn bows, 61
sources on, 56–57
Timurid bows, 61
Timurid period, 60–61
today, 64–65
trained women archers, 61
Turkestan and, 62–62
Turkic tribes and, 60
Central House of the Red Army. See CDKA
(Central House of the Red Army)
Central Java, role in development of pencak silat, 327
Chan, Jackie (Chan Kong Sang)
and actors from Hong Kong, 541
comedic star, 530
Rush Hour, 542
Chanbara, 528, 529
Chang Naizhou, 95, 106
Chang Shi Wuji Shu, 95
Chang’s Book of Martial Skills (Chang Shi Wuji
Shu), 95
Changquan, 97
Chardin, Sir John, 68, 73
Charlemagne, King/Emperor (Frankish and Holy
Roman Empire), 346
Charlemont, Joseph, 219, 258
Chaussﬁght, 261
Che style xingyiquan, 410
Cheatham, James
and Chito Ryu karate, 627
and Tolo-Naa, 628–629
Chen Pan Ling, 104
Cheng Man-Ching, 104
Cheng Zongyou, 95, 342
Cherry Blossoms
and aikido, 640
and Ueshiba Morihei, 640
Cheyenne Dog-Men. See Dog-Men Society
Chiang Kai-shek, 102
travel restrictions after his death, 104
Index
I-7
Chidaoba, martial arts style of Soviet Georgia, 507
Chin Genpin, 123
China, 62–63, 89–119, 357
archery, 62–63
Beijing Opera, 607
belief systems and martial arts, 338–345
cheap martial arts training manuals widely
available, 408
Cultural Revolution, 100
cultures, 89
development of stage combat, 607
ﬁve sacred mountains, 340
Han dynasty, 59
Heaven and Earth societies, 648
immigration to North America, 442–443, 445
Japan’s attempts to end the war with, 642
martial arts usage, 89
military expanded bayonet training, 571
and MMA, 489
population, 89
Qing era, 62–63
war with Japan, 641
China, boxing styles
blending, 89–90
Boxing Classics: Essentials of Boxing (1784), 91,
96, 107
documentation of, 90
proliferation of, 89
Sword Classic (Yu Dayou), 90–91
typology, 91
China, martial arts, 338–344
boxing, 92–93
Central Martial Arts Institute (Zhongyang
Guoshu Guan), 97, 343
Complete Book of Ten Thousand Treasures
(Wanbao Quanshu), 95
Elucidation of Shaolin Staff Methods (Cheng
Zongyou), 95
Encyclopedia of Military Preparedness (Wubei
Zhi), 95
Essentials from the Military Classics (Wujing
Zongyao), 94
“ﬁve weapons,” 93
Former Han period, 93
kung fu, 98
and Mao Zedong, 97
Martial Compendium (Tang Shunzhi), 94
military use, 93–94
Ming Dynasty, 94
Mongol (Yuan) rule, 94
New Book of Effective Discipline (Jixiao Xinshu),
94

China, martial arts (continued)
New Book of Military Preparedness, 95
Physical Culture and Sports Commission, 97
Qing Dynasty, 95
Revolution of 1911 and, 96–97
Rites of Zhou, 92
Shaolin Temple as example of commodiﬁcation,
436
Skills Beyond Farming (Cheng Zongyou), 95
Song period, 93–94, 341
Sword Classic (Yu Dayou), 90–91, 94
Taipings (Kingdom of Heavenly Peace), 96
China, martial theories
in Chinese military writings, 105
in Confucian society, 105
Maiden of Yue principles, 106
Martial Compendium (Tang Shunzhi), 107
negating oneself and accommodating others,
106
Qing Unofﬁcial Categorized Extract (Xu Ke), 106
stability, 106
Sword Classic (Yu Dayou), 106
True Narratives of the Meaning of Boxing (Sun
Lutang), 107
yinyang theory, 105–106
China, martial women of
Fu Hao, 108
Hua Mulan, 109
Maiden of Yue, 108
“On Watching a Sword Dance by Madam
Gongsun’s Disciple,” 108
Qing period, 109
Qing Unofﬁcial History Categorized Extracts, 109
Qiu Jin, 108
Song period, 109
Stone Studio Illustrated News, 109
Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio, 109
Widow Qi Number Two, 109
Woman Ding Number Seven, 109
Woman Number Four, 109
Wu Zetian (Empress), 108
Yongchun County Gazetteer, 109
China, Republic of, 407
China, Shaolin Temple legends
anti-Manchu sentiment, 112–113
Father-Mother Society, 111
Outlaws of the Marsh (Shuihuzhuan), 111
Qing period, 111
Romance of Three Kingdoms (Sanguo Yanyi), 111
Secrets of Shaolin Boxing, 112
Taiping wars, 112
I-8
Index
Three Principles of the People (Sun Yat-sen), 112
Tiandihui legends, 113
Tiandihui society, 111
Triads, 112
Xi Lu legend, 113
Yongzheng era, 111
China, weapons, 92–95, 115
China, wrestling
communism and, 118
Former Han period, 117
international following, 119
Manchus, 118
Mongols, 117–118
objective, 118
origins, 116
popularization of, 118
ranking system, 119
Record of Wrestling, 117
Song Dynasty, 117
Spring and Autumn Annals period, 116
tournaments, 117
training, 118–119
Chinatowns of North America, 408
Chinese Archery (Selby), 63
Chinese Civil War, 102
The Chinese Connection, 426
Chinese Cosmology, 375–378
Chinese Freemasons of Canada, 113
Chinese Martial Arts Boxing and Weapons List, 89
Chinese New Martial Arts, 96
Chivalry
as a code of conduct, 348
and the Crusades, 349
deﬁned, 347
European, 345–351
and knighthood, 346–347
and love, 349–350
and narratives, 350
and poetry, 350
precursor of, 346–347
way of life, 351
and western gunﬁghters, 537
Choi Hong-Hi, 184, 201
Choi Yong-Sul, 185
Chou Chan (Shaolin monk), 339–340
Chow, William Kwai Sun, 49
Chozan, Issai, 378
Christian karate teachers, 431
Christian pedagogical theory, 386
Christianity, 89
Taipings (quasi-Christian cult), 96
www.ebook3000.com

Chuuk martial art, Carolines, 269–270
Cimande
elders’ authority, 399
inﬂuence on schools of Southeast Asia,
326–327
rituals, 399–400
and Suﬁsm, 398
training techniques, 329
Cixi, Empress Dowager (Qing Dynasty, China),
109
Classic of the Planet of War (Taibai Yin Jing), 93
Clovis I, King (Frankish), 346
Club logos, arnis, 301
Club patches, 422
Code of conduct, 363–364
Chivalry as, 348
Iranian warriors’, 363–364
Laith’s code, 364
Cold War, 390
martial arts instruction during, 591
Collectanea (Monte), 246
Color symbolism, in Japanese martial arts, 432
Color-coded explanation, 431–432
Comanche Codetalkers, 650
Combat, literature of, 242
Combat Conditioning Manual: Jiu Jitsu Defense
(Hanley), 566
Combat Division, ﬁghting techniques, 508
Combat medley, 220
Combat plays, British, 421
Combat Sambo, 502
development of, 513
Combat Sambo Federation of Russia, 513
Comité National de Boxe Française (the
National Committee of French Boxing,
CNBF), 258
Commando training
American high school courses in, 566
and the Israeli Defense Force, 584–585
Commentary of Zuo (Zuo Zhuan), 92–93
Commodiﬁcation of martial arts, 435–436
Shaolin Temple and, 436
Commonwealth Games, women’s wrestling,
525
Communism, anti-communism and silat in
Southeast Asia, 314
Complete Book of Ten Thousand Treasures
(Wanbao Quanshu), 95
Composite bows, 57–58
Comprehensive Study of Documents, 96
Conan Doyle, Sir Arthur, 452
Index
I-9
Confucianism, 89, 93, 105, 120, 127, 130, 153,
163, 167, 183, 184, 185
ideals of, 377–378
inﬂuence on Japanese martial arts, 376
and mental cultivation, 378
serious-mindedness, 378
See also neo-Confucianism
Confucius, 92, 93, 153, 167, 406
Constantine I, Emperor (Rome), 239
Constantinople, 83. See also Istanbul; Ottoman
Empire
Cornish Wrestling Association, 224
Cornwall, martial arts in, 224
Cosmology
Chinese, 375
medieval, 355
Coubertin, Pierre de, 258
and the modern Olympiad, 385
Couch v. British Boxing Board of Control Ltd.
(1998), 516
Council of Forty-Four
and Dog-Men, 654
supreme tribal authority, 653
Courlander, Harold, 46
The Course of Self-Defense without Weapons—
“Sambo” (Volkov), 510
The Courtier (Castiglione), 226
Cousteau, Jacques, 546
Crane Boxing, 103
and martial arts tour stops, 409
Cribb, Tom, 230–231
Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (Columbia Tri-
Star), 533
Cruel jidaigeki, 528–529
and graphic violence, 529
nihilism of, 530
Crusade, First, 349
Cuba, stick ﬁghting, 44
Afro-Cuban dance forms and, 44
and Afro-Cuban religions, 45
dance (palo), 44
weapons, 45
Cuban martial culture, and rumba Columbia, 44
Cultural Revolution, 100
and lull in martial arts magazines, 408
Culture
expressed in presentational forms, 417
martial arts and, 417–432
Cumberland and Westmorland folk-style
wrestling, 471
CYO. See Catholic Youth Organization (CYO)

Dai Nippon Butokukai (Greater Japan Martial
Virtues Society). See Butokukai
Dai-Soke, 430
Dambe
contemporary, 8–9
future directions, 10
music and, 8
origins and history, 7–8
preparation, 9–10
Dance
Celtic martial arts and, 221, 223, 224
combative form of festive dancing, 419
and competitive play, 419
Cuban stick ﬁghting (palo), 44
and festivals, 418
haka Polynesian martial, 263
“Head Dance,” 418
Kenyan stick dance, 419
martial activities and, 334
and Mongolian wrestling, 78
Omani, 418–419
as representational genres, 418
sword and stick, 419, 420
symbiotic relationship with martial training and
performance, 605
Walking Stick Dance
in Yemen today, 418
Dao Xuan, 340
Dardi, Lippo di Bartolomeo, 246, 249
Dardi School, 249–250
Darius I, King (Persia), 67
De Arte Gladiatoria Dimicandi (Vadi), 246
De Arte Honeste Amandi (Capellanus), 350
De lo Schermo ovvero Scienza d’Armi (Of Fencing,
or the Science of Arms) (Fabris), 252
De Mente, Boyé Lafayette, 658
Death-dealing sword, 332
dei Liberi, Fiore, 218, 245, 248, 352, 354
Deities, Buddhist
Acalanatha (Fudo), 374, 375
Marici (Marishiten), 374, 375
Deities, Hindu
Hanuman, 359
Indra, 359
Sri Rama, 359
Vayu, 359
Dempsey, William H. (Jack), 468, 566, 590
Deng Zhan of Wei, General, 93
Denmark, allows women in the military without
restrictions, 643
Deracination, deﬁned, 436
I-10
Index
Dhanurveda, 64
Di Arte Gladiatoria Dimicandi (Book on the Art of
Fighting with Swords) (Vadi), 354
Dinnie, Donald, 221
Dio Cassius, 214
Direct lineage, discarded as yardstick of
legitimacy, 439
Disorderly Houses Act of 1752, 229
Divine king (Oba), 336
Divine Life Society, 358
Döbringer, Hanko, 218
DOD. See United States Department of Defense
(DOD)
Dog-Men Society
annual Sun Dance, 655
and anti-Indian activities, 655
Battle of the Little Big Horn, 655
golden age of, 654–655
leadership, 653
origins, 653
Plains Indian warrior societies, 653–656
reservation life, 656
restricted, 655
weapons, 653
Domitian, 214
Doyle, Sir Arthur Conan, 452
Draeger, Donn, 390–391, 402, 439, 450
Drama, and dance, 420
Drug abuse, Muay Thai community opposition to,
321
Du Bois, W. E. B., 43
Du Fu, 108
Duanda, 107
Duarte, King (Portugal), 243, 247
Dubois, Georges, 219
Dürer, Albrecht, 422
Dynamo, 504, 506
cultivated system known as Sambo, 506
Earp, Wyatt, 535
East Africa, 333. See also individual nations
East Asia, 89–211. See also individual nations
Easter Island, 394
Eastwood, Clint, 536
Eﬁk, 335
Egypt, tahtib (“wooden stick”), 419
Ekaku, Hakuin, 376–377
Eleanor of Aquitaine, Queen (Anglo-Norman),
350
Electronic Journals of Martial Arts and Sciences
(http://ejmas.com), 452
www.ebook3000.com

Elucidation of Shaolin Staff Methods (Cheng
Zongyou), 95, 342. See also Shaolin
monastery, Shaolin Staff
Embah Buyut, 398–399
Embah Kahir, 398–399
Embryonic breathing, 376, 380
Emperor Qian Long Visits the South, 342
Empty-hand techniques
arnis, 300, 304
and kuntao, 313
Encyclopedia of Indian Physical Culture, 357
Encyclopedia of Military Preparedness (Wubei Zhi),
95
England. See also Britain; United Kingdom
and bare-knuckle pugilism, 465
fencing, 254–255
origins of women’s boxing, 515
England, boxing
deaths and, 231–232
history, 229–232
origins, 228
prizeﬁghting, 231–232
prizeﬁghting, opposition to, 232–233
versus pugilism, 228
R v. Coney (English Crown Court of Reserved,
1882), 232
rules, Broughton, 228–229
rules, London Prize Ring, 231–232
rules, Marquess of Queensberry, 233
Enlightenment, the, 415
Enter the Dragon (Golden Harvest Productions),
441, 444
Enter the Ninja (Cannon Productions), 532
Epic of Manas, 64
Epitaph for Wang Zhengnan (Wang Zhengnan Muzhi
Ming) (Huang Zongxi), 90, 97–98, 342
Esfandiar the Invincible, 366
Eskrima
deﬁned, 300
globalization of, 437
Esoteric powers, beliefs in, 427
ESPN cable network, 518
Essentials from the Military Classics (Wujing
Zongyao), 94
Ethiopia, 336, 337
Ethnicity, in professional wrestling, 492
Etruscans, 238
Europe, 213–261
belief systems, chivalry, 345–351
belief systems, occult sciences, 352–356
heroic literatures, 606
Index
I-11
self-bows, 57
See also individual nations
Europe, Middle Ages (early), ﬁghting arts during,
240–241
Anglo-Norman professional swordsmen
(escrimeurs), 241
manuals of swordsmanship and wrestling, 241
mystery plays, 241
spread of paper-making technology, 241
teaching of swordsmanship, 241
Europe, Middle Ages (later), ﬁghting arts during
cognate martial arts, 242
English, 247
Iberian, 247
Italian, 245–246
joust, 243, 244
Liechtenauer tradition, 244–245
mock battles, 244
swordsmanship, 242
training, 243
wrestling, 242
Europe, occult sciences, 352–356
Europe, Renaissance, ﬁghting arts during
Bolognese, 249–250
fencing, 249, 250, 251, 254
German tradition, 253
rapier, 251
Spanish, 254
weapons, 249, 251
European Championship in Celtic Wrestling, 227
European Judo Union, 129, 577
Eustathius of Thessalonica, 236. See also Greece,
boxing
Ewuare the Great, King (Benin), 336
Explaining Taijiquan (Taijiquan Shiyi) (Yang
Chengfu), 100
Expressive culture
material forms, 422
presentational forms, 417–418
representational forms, 418–422
Extrahuman powers, 331
Fabris, Salvatore, 251, 252, 253
Fanon, Frantz, 626
FBI Academy and visiting jujitsu instructors, 595
FBR. See Forum Betawi Rempug (FBR)
FCWS. See Finnish-Canadian Workers Sports
Federation (FCWSF)
Fechtbuch (fencing manual, Kal), 354
Federación de Lucha del Garrote Canario
(FLGC), 4

Federación del Juego del Palo Canario (FJPC), 4
Fédération Française de Boxe Française, Savate et
Disciplines Assimilées (FFBFS&DA), 259
Fédération Internationale de Boxe Amateur,
administering Olympic boxing, 467
Fédération Internationale de Lutte Amateur
(FILA), See International Federation of
Amateur Wrestling (FILA)
Fédération Internationale de Luttes Celtiques
(International Federation of Celtic
Wrestling) (FILC), 226–227
Fédération Nationale de Boxe Française (FNBF),
258
Fédération Nationale de Savate Boxe Française,
258
Female college students, self-defense training,
499. See also Women
Feminist movement, and changes in women’s
boxing, 516
Fencing
Bolognese, 249–250
contests and melees, 244
English, 254–255
English versus continental masters, 247
European, inﬂuence on arnis, 309
German masters, 245
innovations, 250
Italian, 246
and Liechtenauer, Johannes, 244
literature, 253
rapier, 245, 246, 251–253
Renaissance, 249, 250, 251
Spanish, 254
Spanish system, 254
training, 243
See also Sword ﬁghting
Ferdinand II, King (Aragón [Spain]), 225
Festivals, martial arts and, 418–419
Feudalism, European, 347
FFBFS&DA. See Fédération Française de Boxe
Française, Savate et Disciplines Assimilées
(FFBFS&DA)
FIAS. See International Amateur Sambo
Federation (FIAS)
Fifteen Years War of 1931–1945 (Patterson), 620
52 hand blocks. See Jailhouse Rock (JHR)
Figg, James, 228
Fight Girls (television series, 2006–2007), 545
Fight Quest (television series, 2007–2009),
545–546
A Fighter’s Heart (Sheridan), 413, 414
I-12
Index
Fighting, Jailhouse Rock (JHR), 25–31
FILA. See Fédération Internationale de Lutte
Amateur (FILA); International Federation of
Amateur Wrestling (FILA)
FILC. See Fédération Internationale de Luttes
Celtiques (FILC); International Federation of
Celtic Wrestling (FILC)
Filipino-American War of 1898–1902, 446
Filipino martial arts (FMA). See Philippines
Films, martial arts
authenticity, 530
chanbara, 528–529
Chan, Jackie (Chan Kong Sang), 530, 541,
542
countercultural hero, 532
cruel jidaigiki, 528–529, 530
“Encounters with Asia,” ﬁlms about, 531
“Golden Age” of the chanbara, 528
and Hollywood, 531
Hong Kong, 532–533
Jet Li (Li Lianjie), 541
jidaigeki period, 527
ken-geki, 528
kung fu ﬁlms, 530
with Lee, Bruce, 530
Muay Thai action ﬁlms, 533
samurai ﬁlms 527
and Shaw Brothers Studio, 530
and Sino-Japanese connection, 531
wuda pian (ﬁghting ﬁlm), 528
wuxia movies, 530
wuxia pian (chivalry ﬁlm), 528
Finland
folk wrestling in, 461
immigration of Finns to Canada, 460–461
restricted immigration of Finns to the United
States, 463
Finnish Labour Temple (Finlandia Club), 461
Finnish-Canadian Workers Sports Federation
(FCWSF), 463–464
Fiore dei Liberi, 218, 245, 248, 352, 354
Fists of Fury (ﬁlm, Golden Harvest), 426
FITA. See International Archery Federation
(FITA, Federation Internationale de Tir a
L’Arc)
FJPC. See Federación del Juego del Palo Canario
(FJPC)
FLGC. See Federación de Lucha del Garrote
Canario (FLGC)
Flight shooting, 83
Flos Duellatorum (Flower of Battle) (Liberi), 218
www.ebook3000.com

Fludd, Robert, 356
FMA (Filipino martial arts). See Philippines
FNBF. See Fédération Nationale de Boxe
Française (FNBF)
Folk belief, 426–427
Folklore, 423–424
Folk-style wrestling, 471, 472
The Forbidden Kingdom (ﬁlm, Silver), 533
Forever Spring Boxing system, 103
Former Han period (206–208 BCE), 117
Forum Betawi Rempug (FBR)
invulnerability and pencak silat, 624
and pencak silat, 623
France
military advisors to Japan, 580
military doctrine, 580
military unarmed ﬁghting systems, 588
and successful bayonet charges, 569
See also Brittany, martial arts in
France staff fencing. See Canne de combat
France, boxing, 256–259
Chaussﬁght, 261
history, 257–259
versus jujitsu, 259
versus karate, 259–260
versus kickboxing, 260
versus nineteenth century English boxing,
259
origins, 257
participation, 261
popularity, 257
ranking, 260–261
rules of engagement, 260
styles, 257
techniques, 260
women and, 261
Francis I, King (France), 224
Franco-Prussian War (1870–1871), French boxing
and, 257
Franks, 346, 349
Franks, Gordon, 405–406
Fraternal societies, 649–650
Fraternities (college), and “ﬁght nights,” 649
Frazier, E. Franklin, 43
Free sparring, 477
Freestyle wrestling, women’s, 473, 520–525
changing perspectives, 532
funding inadequate, 524
impact on male participation, 521
roadblock, 524
and Title IX, 521
Index
I-13
tournaments, 523
and women’s liberation movement, 521
See also Adams v. Baker
French Boxing Federation, 256
Fu Hao, imperial consort (Shang Dynasty,
China), 108
Fudoshi shinmyoroku (Marvelous Power of
Immovable Wisdom) (Takuan), 377
Fuero Vidal Mayor (municipal code), 226
Fujian Buddha’s Disciples Boxing, 103
Fujian Sketches (Min Xiaoji) (Zhou Lianggong),
100
Funakoshi Gichin, 438, 441, 430–431
Further Biographies of Eminent Monks (Dao Xuan),
340
Gabon, 335
Gambling, and Muay Thai, 321
Game of Death (ﬁlm, Golden Harvest/Columbia),
484
Garrud, Edith
and contemporary codes of etiquette, 636
involvement with the suffragette movement,
635
as suffragette jujitsu teacher, 633, 635
Garshap-nama (Book of Garshap) (Asadi), 66
Gaumata, 67
GCAP. See Grupo de Capoeira Angola
Pelourihno (GCAP; Pelourinho Capoeira
Angola Group)
GCOLIFK, 506
judo program designed by Oshchepkov, 507
Oshchepkov, 505–506
See also State Central Institute of Physical
Culture
Ge Hong, 342
view on martial arts techniques, 105
Genghis Khan (Mongol great khan), 60. See also
Timur, Amir (“Tamerlane”)
Gengyu Shengji (Cheng Zongyou), 95
Geographia (Strabo of Amaseia), 225
Georgia, martial arts style, chidaoba, 507
Germania (Tacitus), 346
Germanic tribes, 346
Germany
and capoeira, 456
gymnastic societies, 384
reality-based defense, 496
Ghana, 333
Ghazan Khan (Mongol great khan, Iran), 66
Ghazi, Sifu, 28

Gidigbo
future directions, 14
as ritual theater, 12–13
rules, 11–12
training, tools, and related arts, 13
and worldview, 13–14
Giganti, Nicoletto, 251, 252
Gladiatrices
evidence for, 215–216
Great Dover Street Woman, 216
presence of, 214–215
social standing and, 215
Gladius Hispaniensis (Hispanic short sword), 225
Global War on Terrorism, and female military
personnel, 644
Globalization
deﬁnition, 435, 440
and demand for cultural authenticity, 458–459
ﬁlm successes of Lee, Bruce, 436 (see also Lee,
Bruce)
and homogenization, 458–459
and martial arts tourism, 411
and “globalkanization,” 440
Okinawan karate, 438
Globalization of martial arts, 435–525
Goju Ryu karate
and Miyagi Chojun, 476
and prewar and postwar versions of Sanchin,
476
Goju-Kai karate, 478
Goju-Shinto, 478
Golden Age of Wrestling, 494
Golden Gloves, 467, 518
Goldﬁnger (ﬁlm, Eon Productions), 450
Gongfu, 98
Gongfu pian, 98
Gongyang and Guliang Commentaries (Gongyang
Zhuan and Guliang Zhuang), 92–93
Gotch, Frank, 492
Gorin-no-sho (Five Elemental Spheres) (Musashi),
598
Gou Jian, King (China, Yue), 105, 108
Goushu, 97
Goushuguan, 97
Gracie, Carlos, 33, 39, 486
Gracie, Rorion, 34, 405, 486
Gracie family, 545
Gracie Jiu-Jitsu, 33–35
Brazilian origins, 486
Gracie’s Brazilian jiu-jitsu, 33, 39. See also Gracie
family; Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC)
I-14
Index
Gran Simulacro dell’Arte e dell’Uso della Scherma
(Great Representation of the Art and Use of
the Sword) (Capoferro), 252
Grand Emperor Boxing, 103
Grappling (jujutsu), schools of, 599
and numerology, 353
Great Achievement Boxing, 103
Great Avatar Shining over the East, 371
Greco-Roman wrestling, revival in North
America, 463
Greece
bayonet charges in Balkan Wars, 570
cultural performance and ﬁghting techniques,
605
heroic ethos, 606
Greece, boxing, 235–236
glove development, 236
Greece, pankration
deﬁnition, 237
story of Arrichion, 237
Greece, wrestling
aknoitei (“without touching the dust”), 235
martial virtues developed, 234
skamma (wrestling area), 234
training and, 234
Greek mythology, presentational form, 417
The Green Hornet (television series), 444
and a martial arts mini-craze, 539, 540
Grupo de Capoeira Angola Pelourihno (GCAP;
Pelourinho Capoeira Angola Group), 41
GTO (Gotov k Trudu i Oborone; “Ready for Labor
and Defense”), designed to prepare Soviet
citizens for military service, 505–506
Guam
talismans, 269
at time of Spanish conquest, 268
warrior training in, 269
weapons used, 268
Guanches people, 1, 3
Guinevere, Queen (legendary, England), 350
Gully, John, 230
The Gunﬁghter (ﬁlm, Twentieth Century Fox),
534–535
Gunﬁghters, Western, 534–539
versus Asian martial artists, 538
Bonney, William (Billy the Kid), 535
and chivalry, 537
Earp, Wyatt, 535
fast draw, 536
Hickok, James Butler (Wild Bill), 535
Hollywood version, 536
www.ebook3000.com

knight errant image, 537
mechanics of the gunﬁghter’s skill, 536
milieu, 535
mythic isolation, 535–536
mythology, 537
and nonwhites, 537
numbers of victims, importance of, 537
romanticized, 535
and spaghetti Westerns, 536
Guo Yunshen, 107
Gwaltney, John, 27
Gymnasium, akharas, 360
Gymnastic societies, 384
Hackenschmidt, George, 492
Hagana
Jewish community defense forces, 583
training in hand-to-hand combat, 584
Haiti, stick ﬁghting
and African spirituality, 46
basics, 45
and dance, 46
and supernatural, 45
Hakka, 102–103
Hakka boxing, 103
Han, Bong-soo, 51
Hand-to-hand combat, value of training in, 589
Han Dynasty (China), 108
Hanuman, Guru, 292
and absolute celibacy, 291
narrative of, 281
patron of gymnasiums, 359–360
popular Hindu deity, 359
See also Deities, Hindu
Hapkido, 444
Harris, Paul, 27
Hausa people, dambe combat sport among. See
Dambe
Hawai‘i, 273–275
martial arts classes, 448
martial law, 449
Heenan, John C., 232
Heiho Kadensho (Our Family’s Tradition of
Swordsmanship) (Yagyu), 598
Heiho michi shirube (Guide to the Way of Fencing)
(Shirai Toru Yoshinori), 376
Henry II, King (England), 350
Henry VIII, King (England), 224, 254
Herodotus, 283
Hero-genre
and ﬁlms of Lee, Bruce, 426
Index
I-15
King Zumbi, 426
yongchun, 425
Herrigel, Eugen, 156, 389–390
Herskovits, Melville J., 44
Hickok, James Butler (“Wild Bill”), 535
The Hidden Blade (ﬁlm, Shochiku), 529
Hinatsu Shigetaka, accounts of martial valor, 556
“Hindoo” wrestling, 493
Hinduism
and Indian wrestling, 290
martial culture, 281
Hisardut, 585. See also krav maga
HKCMAAL. See Hong Kong Chinese Martial
Arts Association Limited (HKCMAAL)
Hobsbawm, Eric, 428–429
Hogan, Hulk (Terry Bollea), 494
Hoklo, 102–103
Hollywood, role in globalization of martial arts,
438
Honcho bugei shoden (Hinatsu Shigetaka), 556
Hong ﬁst style, 342
Hong Kong, 99–101
cheap martial arts training manuals widely
available, 408
home of wuxia pian, 530
and martial arts movies, 441
second Shaolin temple, 436
source of 8-millimeter ﬁlms, 409
stunt work and choreography, 533
Hong Kong, martial arts, 408
boxing, 100–101
Lee’s Modiﬁed Tai Chi for Health (Lee Ying-
Arng), 100
Hong Kong Chinese Martial Arts Association
Limited (HKCMAAL), 100
Hong Kong kung fu, countercultural message,
541
Honne, 660, 662
Honorius, Emperor (Rome), 240
Horn bows, 283
Horse racing, Mongolian, 80–81
Horse Riding Stance, 107
Hospitallers, monasticism and chivalry, 349
How to Fight Tough (Dempsey), 566
Huang Zongxi, 90, 95, 97–98, 342
Huang-di, Emperor (legendary, China), 376
Hugh of Saint Victor, 241
Hui, the Chinese Islamic minority and their
martial arts practices, 343
Hulk Hogan (Bollea, Terry), 494
Hulkamania, 494

Human Weapon (television series, 2007–2008),
545–546
Hung I-Hsiang, 104
Hung, Sammo (Hung Kam Po), ﬁrst Chinese
male lead, 542
Hunnic bows, 58–59
Huns (Xiongnu), 58–59
Hwang Kee, 201–202
IAWF. See International Amateur Wrestling
Federation (IAWF)
Iberia
galhofa, 226
old-rooted martial arts, 226
stick ﬁghting, 226
wrestling styles, 226
Ifa (Orunmila), teachings of, 332–333
Ifa Chapters (Ifa), 332
Igbo people, 335
IKC. See International Karate Championship
(IKC)
Il Fior di Battaglia (Flower of Battle, Liberi), 245,
352–353
Imamura Yoshio, 122
Immigration, Asian, 442–443
British Indians to North America 1897–1915,
445
Chinese to North America 1848–1849, 445
Filipinos to North America 1902–1934, 446
Japanese to North America 1885–1907, 445
Immigration Act of 1924, 447
Imperial Way faction
failed coup attempt, 642
and Sakurakai, 641
India, 360
archery, 61
belief systems, 357–362
and British imperialism, 622
connection between martial and performing
arts, 607
overtly martial dance, 420
and Thuggees, 648
wrestling traditions of, 621–622
India, wrestling
celibacy, 290–291
freestyle, 289
and gurus, 292
history, 290
origins, 289
participants, 291
pomp and circumstance of, 293
I-16
Index
tournaments, 293
traditions of, 621–622
wrestling gymnasium, 291
Indochina (Vietnam), bamboo spear training, 581
Indonesia
bamboo spear training, 581
Japanese occupation of, 621
martial arts and common cultural heritage,
621
Indonesian Pencak Silat Federation (IPSI), 621
Initiation
Ayyaran, 365
boys, New Guinea, 267
boys and Maori war deity, 277
Caroline Islands, 270
ceremonies of, 365
documents, 374–375
Pusaka Medal, 399–400
silek, 397
stick ﬁghting, 337
and thang-ta, India, 296 
wrestling, 337
Zoroastrianism, 365
Initiation documents
and Buddhism, 558
key characteristic of, 558
secrecy of, 557
styles of, 557–558
Indonesia, 394, 401–402
cheap martial arts training manuals widely
available, 408
martial arts, civil and security role of, 623
pencak silat schools, 623
Indra, chariot of, 359
Inky Toy San Soy, 425
Inosanto, Dan, 480, 481
Inoue Nissho, Temple of Righteous National
Defense, 641
Inside Kung-Fu (magazine), 50
Instituto de Patrimônio Histórico Artístico
Nacional (IPHAN), 41
Instructions for Training for Hand-to-Hand Fighting
(Sagatelyan), 511
Internal School Boxing Methods (Huang Baijia),
95
International Amateur Sambo Federation (FIAS),
512
International Amateur Wrestling Federation
(IAWF), 472
International Archery Federation (FITA,
Federation Internationale de Tir a L’Arc), 84
www.ebook3000.com

International Boxing Club of New York (IBC), 469
inﬂuence on American television, 469
and organized crime, 469
International Federation of Amateur Wrestling
(FILA), 472, 520
recognition of Sambo, 512
women’s weight classes, 520
International Federation of Celtic Wrestling
(FILC), 224
International Federation of French Boxing, 259
International Judo Federation, 131
International Karate Championship (IKC), 51
International Krav Maga Federation, 586
International Olympics, 258. See also Olympic
Games
International Shuai-chiao Association, 119
International Taekwon-do Federation (ITF), 203
International Women’s Boxing Association
(IWBA), 517
Internet, and the martial arts, 549–554
for advertising, 551
archive of historical records, 552
blogs, 551
contentious issues online, 553
digital video, 551
discussion groups, 552
email, 550
ﬁrst martial art group on the Web, 550–551
increased access to information and source
material, 552–553
listservers, 550
online discussion groups, 553
for recruiting purposes, 551
social networking systems, 551
usenet newsgroups, 550
Web sites and, 550–551
World Wide Web, 550
Internment camps, and judo, 449
Invented traditions
belt color system, 431–432
black belt, 431–432
Dai-Soke, 430
deﬁned, 428–429
exclaiming “osu,” 430
karate “empty hand,” 430
lineage and authenticity, 429–430
linguistic, 430–431
title of “Soke,” 429–430
Invention of Tradition (Hobsbawm), 428
Invulnerability and political conﬂict, 619,
622–624
Index
I-17
IPHAN. See Instituto de Patrimônio Histórico
Artístico Nacional (IPHAN)
Iran
and the Assassins, 648
belief systems, 363–368
cultural inﬂuence on Abbasids, 68
epics, 66
history, 66–67
pre-Islamic, 367
language, 66
Muslim conquest of, 367
religion, 66
warrior tradition, 66
See also Persia
Iran, archery
Abbasids, 68
Achaemenian era, 67–68
ancient, 67
A Complete Guide in the Science of Shooting,
70–71
exercises, 68
Mongol horse archers, 68
moral code (jananmardi), 69–70
Parthian era, 67
principles of, 69
Safavid dynasty, 68
Sassanids, 67–68
swordsmanship, 71–72
technique, 69–71
Umayyad Caliphate, 68
Iran, martial arts, 66–75
archery, 67–72 (see also Iran, archery)
swordsmanship, 72–73 (see also Iran,
swordsmanship)
wrestling, 73–76. (see also Iran, wrestling)
Iran, swordsmanship
literary accounts, 72
techniques, 71
test-cutting exercises, 72
training, 71–72
types of attacks, 72–73
Iran, warriors, code of conduct for, 363–364
Iran, wrestling
equipment, 74–75
forms, 75–76
koshti, etymology of, 73–74
as pastime, 72
Qajar era, 73
Safavid-era wrestling, 73
techniques, 74
tradition, 72

Iran, wrestling (continued)
training places (zoorkhane), 74
Zand dynasty, 73
Ireland, martial arts, 223
Isabella, Queen (Castile [Spain]), 225
Iskandar, Qabus ibn, 364
Islam, 89, 364, 395
introduction in Iran, 365
in Malaysia, 396
and Silat, 395, 401
and silek, 397
Island Melanesia, 267–268
Ismail I, Shah (Safavid, Iran), 68
Israel, establishment of the state of, 583
Israeli Defense Force (IDF), 584
Istanbul, 83–84
Italy
and capoeira, 456
fencing, 245–246
women in the military, 643
ITF. See International Taekwon-do Federation
(ITF)
Ivanhoe (Scott), 351
IWBA. See International Women’s Boxing
Association (IWBA)
Iyi, Kilindi, 629–630
and the Afrikan consciousness movement, 629
Jackson, “Gentleman” John, 230
Jahn, Friedrich Ludwig, 384
Jailhouse Rock (JHR)
characteristics of, 28–29
ﬁghting styles, 27–28
history, 25–26
learning of, 29–30
as martial art, 30
Mother Dear method, 27–28
and Newsome, Dennis, 630
origins, controversy about, 26–28
revitalization and commoditization, 30–31
slaves and, 27
James, William, 388
Japan, 119–182, 357, 383, 474
and anime, 543
annexation of Manchuria, 580
army revised bayonet programs, 571
before 1868, 371–381
belief systems and martial arts in, overview,
369–370
boxing vs. judo matches in, 486
budo and mobilization of young men, 581
I-18
Index
Bushido and pre-World War II nationalism, 619
Christians, 386–387
decline of traditional martial arts, 600
divine mission to enlighten the world, 638
after 1868, 382–391
enthusiastic exporter of karate, 478
environment of militarism, 576
exercise as recreation, 560
hierarchical social structure, 658
immigration to North America, 442–443
Imperial Navy and judo, 575
invention of free sparring, 477
judo, 573–577
Kabuki theater and portrayal of samurai, 607
karate, judo and U.S. soldiers, 438
kendo in schools, 601, 603
martial arts dojo (school), 657
martial arts literature, 554
military occupation of, 438
and MMA, 489
and the Occupation, 576–577
omote and ura, 659
origins of MMA, 487
physical education curriculum for schools, 600
premodern, 374
Pure Land Buddhism, 372–373
Sambo teams from, 512
social cohesion, 657
social practices in, 661–662
submission wrestling, 487
Taiwan, arrival in, 101
and tengu (heavenly dogs), 647
university martial arts clubs, 661
warriors, 372
warriors who commit ritual suicide, 421
world’s largest kendo population, 602
Japan, aikido
expansion overseas, 136
as general martial art, 136–137
and military establishment, 134–134
and Omoto believers, 133
origins, 132
“peaceful” form, 135
training, 132–133
and Ueshiba Morihei, 133–134
variants of, 137–138
weapons, 133
Japan, iaido (technique of drawing the sword)
competitions, 146
origins, 144
governing bodies, 145–146
www.ebook3000.com

practice, 145
purpose, 145
weapons, 145
Japan, jo
history, 148–150
origins, 147
technique, 150–151
Japan, judo
expansion of, 128–130
foreign involvement in, 129–130
philosophy, 127
techniques and practice, 127–128
after World War II, 130–131
Japan, jujutsu
early systems, 121–122
after 1868, 123–124
instruction at public schools, 560
Kodokan judo, 123
modern jujutsu, 124–125
origins, 120–121
overseas transmission, 124
principles, 120
rank and grading, 125
Japan, kendo (sword ﬁghting)
contests, 141
early history, 139–140
equipment, 140
purposes, 143
samurai culture, 143
scoring, 142t
spirituality, 143
training, 141
way of the warrior, 141, 143
Japan, kyudo
bow, 152–153
contests, 155
modern, 156
preservation of, 155–156
as sport, 155
teaching of, 154–155
way of Bow and Horse, 153–154
Japan, martial arts
and religion before 1868, 371–380
religious inﬂuences on, 379
and Shintoism, 388
as spiritual education, 384
Japan, naginata
competition, modern, 161
as “concealed” activity, 159
deﬁnition, 158
examinations, 162
Index
I-19
as military weapon, 159
versus new naginata, 160
origins, 158
“Rhythm Naginata,” 162
in school curriculum, 159–160
teacher training for, 160
weapon, modern, 161
Japan, ninpo
deﬁnition, 162–163
forms, 165t
history, 163, 168–170
as military tradition, 163
in modern era, 170–171
techniques, ﬁghting, 164, 166
techniques, meditative and mind control, 164
traditions, 164
worldview, 166–168
Japan, Shorinji Kempo
deﬁnition, 172
movies and, 173
origins, 172
philosophy, 173–174
in school curriculum, 174
symbolic identity, 173
technique, 174
Japan, sumo wrestling
amateur, 181
commercial demands, 179
decorum, 176
development, 176–177
gambling on, 178–179
media image, 180–181
modernization of, 178
and nationalism, 177
origins, 175
product endorsements, 179
proﬁts from, 178
promotion of, 177–178
regulation of, 176
rules, 175
tournaments, 176
training, 180
and women, 181
Japan Sumo Association, 178
Japanese Budo Association, 391
Java, 398, 400–401
invulnerability and political conﬂict, 622
Javanmardi, principles of, 363–368
Jeet, 483
Jeet Kune Do, 478, 479–485
Bruce Lee stance, 481

Jeet Kune Do (continued)
concept rather than style, 481
controversial aspects of, 482–484
in ﬁlm, 484
“non-style” of, 483
popularized by Bruce Lee, 479
and postmodernism, 482
success and celebrity, 483
term coined, 480
two major factions of, 480
Jeet Kune Do Principles, 480
Jerusalem, 349
Ji Han-Jae, 184
Jiang Rong Chiao, 408
Jiangwu, 92
Jidaigeki (period ﬁlm), 527–528. See also Cruel
jidaigeki
Jie Xuan, 105
Jiji, 93
Jing Wu Tiyuhui
ﬁrst Chinese martial arts as recreation, 407
ﬁrst women’s program, 407
martial arts magazines, 408
Jiu-jitsu
Brazilian, 32–36
and Gracie, Rorion, 405
Japanese, 120–125
versus French boxing, 259–260
See also Japan, jujutsu; Jujitsu
Johnson, Jack, and knockout of Great White
Hope, 468
Johnson, Tom (Jackling, Thomas), 230
Jordan, Jackson, Jr., 27
Jousting, 348
Judo
experienced by American servicemen, 438
ﬁrst international tournaments, 503
hegemonic and ubiquitous, 440
high-performance, 131
Japan, 127–131
in Japan, 1931–1950, 573–577
Kodokan, 123, 508
modern, 385
and Olympics, 127, 130–131
and relocation centers and internment camps,
449
in Taiwan, practiced by Japanese ofﬁcials, 103
in Taiwan, under the Japanese, 101
Taiwanese, 101, 103
taught in U.S. Army camps, 447
in United States, after 1943, 591
I-20
Index
Judo, American
and American football, 566–567
and commando courses, 566
differences with Kano’s judo, 566
and U.S. military, 565–567
and U.S. military women, 567
women’s self-defense books, 567
Judo freestyle wrestling
combat division, 508
combination of wrestling styles within Soviet
Union, 507
differences from Kodokan judo, 508
Juego del Palo (Canary Islands stick ﬁghting)
history and development, 3–4
technique, 4–5
Jujitsu (unarmed combat), 385
and British suffragette campaigners, 632
in circus and vaudeville acts, 446
and Garrud, Edith, 635–636
instruction at Japanese public schools, 560
and Mao Zedong, 97
and Pankhurst, Christabel, 635
and the Russo-Japanese War, 633–634
taught in U.S. Army camps, 447
and U.S. military training, 589
and vaudeville circuits, 492
See also Japan, jujutsu; Jiu-jitsu
Jujutsuffragettes, 632–637
and Garrud, Edith, 635–636
and Pankhurst, Christabel, 634–635
and suffragette literature, 636
Jukendo, 578–582
Jukendo Promotion Association, 581
Jun Fan Gung Fu
method of nucleus, 480
sources for, 480
Juvenal, 215
Kabuki theater, portrayal of samurai in, 607
Kaidu, Khan (Mongol), 118
Kal, Paulus, 354
Kali, globalization of, 437
Kalinda, 630
Kalis, 300
Kangzi, Emperor (Qing Dynasty, China), 118
Kano Jigoro, 128, 385, 431, 620
and American judo, 566
and “black belt” system, 573
founder of Kodokan judo, 560–561
and Judo magazine, 574
and Kodokan judo, 574
www.ebook3000.com

and modern martial art textbooks, 561
and Olympics in Japan, 573
physical education curriculum for schools, 600
and Tokyo Summer Olympics (1940), 575
Kapaneos, 236. See also Greece, boxing
Kapap, 583–587
Karate
effect of Japanese militarism and, 476
elimination of Chinese inﬂuences, 476
empty-hand, 475, 430
experienced by American servicemen, 438
franchise clubs, 405
versus French boxing, 259–260
hegemonic and ubiquitous, 440
in Japan after World War II, 477–478
Kenpo, 49–52
no special uniform for, 475
origin of, 249
as paramilitary martial art, 478
psychological perspectives of, 477–478
schools, 431, 436
as a spiritual path, 478
U.S. military sponsored training, 478
and wa, 475
as a Way of Life, 478
Karate, international, 474–479
Karate, Okinawan
Chinese inﬂuences, 207–208
cultural perspectives, 474–475
di (hand), 206
as example of globalization, 438
instruction in, 208
versus Japanese, 474–475
Japanese inﬂuences, 207, 475–476
origins, 205–206
styles, 209
transformation of, 438
Karate clubs, community-based, 448–449
and Chinese martial art instruction, 448–449
The Karate Kid (ﬁlm, Columbia Pictures), 532
Karate teachers
Christian, 431
Funakoshi Gichin, 430–431
Kashima-Shinryu, 657
Kata
deﬁned, 375
and hierarchical social structure, 658
Japanese social behavior and, 658
Sanchin of Goju Ryu, 476
Kawaishi Mikonosuke, 129
Kelly, Jim, 532
Index
I-21
Kelly v. SEG Sports Corp. (1997), 488
Kendo
in circus and vaudeville acts, 446
social and cultural evolution of, 598–603
in Taiwan, practiced by Japanese ofﬁcials, 103
in Taiwan under the Japanese, 101
Taiwanese, 101, 103
world’s largest kendo population, 602
Kenjutsu
instruction at Japanese public schools, 560
Sakakibara Kenkichi, 600
schools of, 599
Kenpo karate
current systems, 52
origins, 49
popularization of, 52
techniques, 49–50
and Tracy brothers, 52
in United States, 49–53
Kenya, 336
combative form of festive dancing, 419
Kharlampiev, Anatoly, 511–512
Khayyam Neishaburi, 68
Kibuka (deiﬁed ancestor), 333–334. See also
Orisha (deiﬁed ancestor)
Kickboxing
development of, 477
versus French boxing, 260
and television, 546
women’s, 516
Kill Bill (ﬁlm, Miramax), 532
“Killer Kowalski” (Wladek “Walter” Kowaski),
494, 495
Kim Un Yong, 203
Kipp, Bill, 498
KMF. See Krav Maga Federation (KMF)
Knighthood
candidate for, 347
ceremony of, 347–349
and chivalry, 346–347
and Christianity, 348
precursor of, 346–347
Knights of Columbus, organizing ﬁght cards for
troops, 467
Knights Templar, 349
Kobukan Dojo, 638–639, 641
golden age of, 638
and Japan’s political and military establishment,
638
Kodokan judo, 123, 385
attack to vital points, 574–575

Kodokan judo (continued)
in England, 125
founder of, 431
introduction into the United States, 429
and the Los Angeles Police Department, 595
Oshchepkov as student of, 503
school of jujutsu, 385, 574
Kohai, 661
Kokuryukai
Black Dragon Society, 640
and traditional samurai ideologies, 647
Korea
as exporter of karate, 478
invention of free sparring, 477
kendo and Japanese colonialists, 602
sizable kendo population, 602
taekwondo and modern South Korean
nationalism, 619
taekwondo and national imperatives,
620–621
taekwondo and U.S. soldiers, 438
Korea, Hapkido
versus aikido, 185–185
versus Daito-ryu aiki-jujutsu, 185–186
deﬁned, 183
inﬂuences, 183–184
schools, 185
Korea, Kumdo
changes, 189–190
forms, 189
Haedong, 188
inﬂuences, 187–188
training, 188–189
Korea, ssireum
deﬁned, 190
etymology, 191
history, 190, 192
rules, 191
status, current, 194
Korea, taekkyon
associations, 198
competition, 198
deﬁnition, 195
development of, 197
footwork, 198
forms, 196
inﬂuence, conceptual, 197
learning, 196
origins, 195
and taekwondo, 197
training system, 197
Korea, taekwondo
international, 199
I-22
Index
and Japanese colonial rule, 199–200
versus karate, 203–204
as martial art, 202
military applications, 202
origins, 199–200
protective sparring gear, 201
systems, 200–201
Korean War (1950–1953), 390
Krav maga, 583–587
becomes international martial art, 585
civilian, 585
guiding principles, 586
and the Israeli Defense Force, 584
other principles of, 587
public perception of, 585
in public schools, 585
spread outside Israel, 585
technical description of, 586–587
three core ideas, 587
as a trademark, 586
use of the name, 584
Krav Maga Federation (KMF), 585–586
Kubota, Seion, 379
Kung fu
countercultural hero and paciﬁsm, 532
deﬁned, 98
ﬁlms, 530
hegemonic and ubiquitous, 440
schools, 436
Kung Fu: History, Philosophy, Traditions
(Spangler), 541
Kung Fu (television program), 444, 540–541
Lee, Bruce, failed audition for, 542
philosophical paciﬁsm, 540–541
popularization of the term “kung fu,” 98
Shibuya, Robert Kinji, in villain roles, 450
and Western frontier hero, 540
Kunst des Fechtens (Art of Fencing), 244. See also
Liechtenauer, Johannes
Kuntao, 299
deﬁnition, 312
divisions, 312–313
Indonesia and, 316–317
systems, hybrid, 314–314
systems, integrated, 315–316
systems, orthodox, 313–314
usage, generic, 313
Kuomintang government, 102, 103
Kupigana Ngumi, 629, 631
Kurosawa Akira, 528–529, 538
Lafond, Roger, 220
Laith’s code, 364
www.ebook3000.com

Lapulapu
ﬁght with Magellan, 307–308
as Filipino resistance hero, 307
The Last Samurai (ﬁlm, Radar Pictures/Warner
Brothers), 529
Latvia
ﬁrst international Sambo competition, 512
and women in the military, 643
The Leaf People (play; Viera and Machado), 41
LeBell, Gene, 426
Lecour, Hubert, 218
Lee, Ang, 533
Lee, Bruce (Lee Jun Fan), 408, 480, 414
authenticity to martial arts, in ﬁlms, 530
brand names, 410
effect on movie action choreography, 441
Enter the Dragon, 441, 444
Fists of Fury, 426
impact on Japan, 531
impact overstated, 483
and Jeet Kune Do, 479–484
and Parker, Ed, 51
popularity of “kung fu” (quanfa), 440
procedure, 481
stance, 481
teacher, 100
wisdom, packaging of, 482
Lee’s Modiﬁed Tai Chi for Health (Lee Ying-Arng),
100
Legitimacy
online contentious issues, 553
yardsticks of, 439
Lehto, Karl, 461–462
Leisure, martial arts and, 405–406
Leone, Sergio, 536
Leopard (Egbe) Society, 335
Leopard Societies
in Benin, 336
common duty, 335
Leopard (Egbe) Society, 335
OKonko, 335
of Sierra Leone, 335
in West Africa, 649–650
Les Compagnons (guilds of craftsmen), 218
Lethal Weapon (ﬁlm, Warner Brothers), 486
Lewis, Joe, 51
Li, Jet (Li Lianjie), 541
Li Gong, 95
Li Xiaolong. See Lee, Bruce
Libanda, 44–45
Liberi, Fiore dei, 245, 352, 354
Lichtenberg, Georg Christoph, 390
Lichtenfeld, Imrich “Imi,”and krav maga, 584–586
Index
I-23
Liechtenauer, Johannes, 244, 352
Life-dealing sword, 332
Lile, Emma, 225
Lin Shuang-wen, 112
Lineage and authenticity in martial arts, 429–430
Linguistic inventions, 430–431
Linton, Ralph, 625
The Lion King (ﬁlm, Disney), 441
Lioness programs
in open contradiction of Department of
Defense policy, 645
U.S. military in Iraq, 644–645
Lo Schermo (Fencing) (Montone), 250
Lochaber axe, 222
London Masters of Defense, 254
Longsword, 242–243
López de Legazpi, Miguel, 308
Louis VII, King (France), 350
Louis, Joe, rematch with Max Schmeling, 468
Louis William, Margrave (Baden), 82
Lu Xun, 97
Luca, Guido Antonio de, 249
Lucha Canaria (Canary Islands wrestling)
history and development, 5–6
technique, 6
Ludwig Wilhelm, Margrave (Baden), 82
Luo Zhenchang, 96
Lusitani, 225
Luther, Martin, 351
Ma Fengtu, 343
Ma Liang, General, 96, 343
Maasi, Mfundishi, 628–629
MacCannell, Dean, 412
Mace, Jem, 232
Madagascar, 15, 394
Maeda Mitsuyo (Mitsuyo Maeda), 32
Magellan, Ferdinand, and Lapulapu, 307–308
Magic
arnis and talismans, 305–306
martial, 337
spells written in Sanskrit, 374
talismans that give invulnerability, 622
The Magniﬁcent Seven (ﬁlm, United Artists), 538
Mahabharata, 357, 418, 420
Mahayana scriptures, Tantric rituals and, 374
Mahmud II, Sultan, 84
“Maiden of Yue” (story), 107
Mair, Paulus Hector, 253
Malay cultures, belief systems and martial arts,
394–395
Malaysia, 324–330, 394, 396
Mali, 334

Manchuria
annexed by Japan, 580
horn bows, 62
invention of free sparring, 477
jukendo taught in, 581
kendo and Japanese colonialists, 602
Manchus, 118
Mandala diagrams, 374
Mandarin Duck Feet, 96
Manipur, India, 294–297
Manorialism, 347
The Manual for Eclectic Gymnastics for All Ages (de
Bouffémont), 219
Manual of Training for Hand-to-Hand Fighting
(Galkovsky), 511
Manuscrit d’Ambras (Talhoffer), 218
Mao Zedong, 343, 482
advocated practice of jujutsu, 97
death of, 102
government of, and wuxia pian, 529
travel restrictions after his death, 104
Marine Corps, United States, martial arts
programs, 592
Marine Corps Martial Arts Program (MCMAP),
mixed-gender training in, 644
Martial arts
and African Americans, 626
and Afrikan identity, 626
animal models, 425
Banten, Cimande style, 399
books, 408
branding of, 440
Chinese, 338–344
and claims of vulnerability, 622
color-coded explanation, 431–432
commodiﬁcation of, 414, 435–436
in contemporary theater performance, 608
creation legends, 425
dan-kyu (“rank-step”) grades, 431
deﬁned, 331–333
dojo (school), 657
education in Japan, 384
empty-hand techniques, 300
and ethnic or national identity, 619
Filipino, 427
and folk beliefs, 426
and folklore studies, 424
franchise schools, 409
globalization of, 439–441
and the Hui (Islamic) minority, 343–344
impetus for development, 437
I-24
Index
in India, 357
intellectualization of, 598
institutionalization of, 438
and the Internet (see Internet, and the martial
arts)
and invented traditions, 428–429
Japanese, 369–370
lineage and authenticity, 429–430
and Malaysia, 396
and narrative, 424–426
and nationalism, 620–622
overt spiritualization of, 599
paciﬁcation of kenjutsu, 599
performers trained in, 532
and performing arts, 613
political uses of, 619–624
and popular religious Taoism, 342–343
postmodern development, 437
postmodern dissemination, 436–437
postmodern proliferation of, 437
and presentational forms, 417–418
preservation of, 418
and reality-based defense, 497
and representational genres, 418–421
ryuha (system), 598
secrecy and transmission of, 325
and secret societies and fraternal organizations,
647
in South Asia, 357
as sport, 384
in Taiwan, under the Japanese, 101
teaching of, 499
training in family, 379
and visual arts, 422
Martial arts, Afrikan (African), 625–631
African-based systems, 628–630
Amakhanda, 630
and the Black Power movement, 625
and eclectic innovators, 627–628
eclectic systems, 626
Kupigana Ngumi, 629
and Nation of Islam, 628
purists, 630–631
and Sanuces Ryu, 628
and traditionalists, 627
Martial arts business
and criminal justice problems, 410
franchise schools, 409
magazines, 408
selling of brand names, 409
selling of trade secrets, 409
www.ebook3000.com

seminars, 409
“teach yourself” books, 408
teachers, 408
teaching of martial arts, 407
tourism, 409
training ﬁlms, 408
training manuals, 408
videos, 409
Martial arts business, Chinese
con games, 410
exercise value of, 340
legitimacy of, 410
martial arts tourism, 409
myth about martial arts and money, 406
Martial arts, China
absorption of silat community, 315–316
boxing schools, 342
known as kuntao in Southeast Asia, 312
and Mao, 342
as a manual trade, 407
and money, 406–409
myth about martial arts and money, 406
as physical exercise, 407
as recreation, 407
and religion, 344
signiﬁcance in Southeast Asia, 313
in South Asia, 357
Taoism, 342
Yin-Yang school, 342
Martial arts, Filipino
amulets to protect from blade and bullet, 622
boxing vs. judo matches in, 486
bravery and Lapulapu, 307
globalization of kali and eskrima, 437
history, 306–309
immigrants and bachelor subculture, 446
immigration to North America and, 442–443
invulnerability and political conﬂict, 622
Lapulapu, hero of resistance, 307–308
sword usage, 302
“Thrilla in Manila,” 470
traditional folk dramas, 421
traditional healing and, 306
Martial arts ﬁlms, and Hollywood, 531–533
Martial arts initiation documents. See Initiation
documents
Martial arts, India, thang-ta, 294–297
Martial arts, Japan
budo (martial ways), 387
bujutsu (martial techniques), 387–388
Bushido (warrior ways), 386
Index
I-25
correct mental attitude, 388
“correct” way, 659
and democratic ideals, 390, 658
ideological content, 388
kendo, 390
national championship tournament, 388
as performance, 388
and prescribed way of behaving, 659
priests and, 374–375
public understanding of, 556
and religious symbols, 388
and spiritual development, 386
sufﬁx -do nomenclature, 388, 391
teaching of, 373
“training of the martial spirit,” 386
Martial arts, Java, 400–401
Martial arts literature of Japan
educational works, 560–561
Hinatsu Shigetaka, 556
initiation documents, 557–558
martial arts treatises, 558–560
military manuals, 556–557
Tokugawa period, 554–555
war tales, 555–556
warrior exploits, 556
Martial arts magazines, ﬁrst Chinese-language,
408
Martial arts movies, 444
Enter the Dragon, 441
Hong Kong, 441
See also Chan, Jackie; Jet Li (Li Lianje); Lee,
Bruce; Norris, Chuck (Carlos); Seagal,
Steven; Van Damme, Jean Claude; Yuen Wo-
ping (Yuan Heping)
Martial arts, Southeast Asia, and kuntao, 312
Martial arts, Sulawesi, 401–402
and Hindu inﬂuence, 402
and Islam, 402
and Muslims, 402
Martial arts systems, Chinese
brand names, 410
secrecy of, 410
Martial arts teachers
A-Shan Shi, 409
in Taiwan, 408
income of, 409
Sun Lu Tang, 409
Martial arts television series
Green Hornet, 444
Kung Fu, 444
Martial arts tour packages, 413

Martial arts tourism, 409
beneﬁts for the local community, 415
concerns about legitimacy and authenticity,
411–412
desire to tour, 411–412
globalization, 411
impulse to tour, 411
and ofﬁcial tourism Web sites, 414
reasons for, 412
Martial arts tourists
effects on, 413
intensiﬁed training regimen, 412
Martial arts training facilities
in China, 413
in Thailand, 413
Martial arts training ﬁlms, Jing Wu Association, 408
Martial arts videos, 409
Martial arts, West Java, spiritual mediation, 399
Martial arts, West Sumatra, and silek, 397
Martial belief systems, universal assumptions of, 331
Martial choreography, 547. See also Yuen Wo-ping
(Yuan Heping)
Martial Compendium (Tang Shunzhi), 94, 106, 107
Martial deities, 332–334
Eshu, 333
Ochosi, 333
Ogun, 333
Shango, 333
weapons of, 333
Martial Law (television program, 1998–2000)
borrowed from Rush Hour, 542
and Hu, Kelly, 544
Hung, Sammo, 542
Martial media, 527–563
and children’s television programming, 542–543
and ﬁlms with female ﬁghters, 544–545
ﬁrst Chinese male lead, 542
martial arts as a “Way,” 541
mystique of the ninja, 541
philosophical paciﬁsm, 540–541
place of women in, 543–545
and proliferation of cable television, 545
storytelling, East-West differences, 543
and super-powered mysticism, 542–543
and television, with female ﬁghters, 544
and westerns, 540, 542
See also Internet, the, and the martial arts
Martial temple parades, 615
as living history and ethics lessons, 616
Taiwan, 616
Martial traditions, and cultural performances, 606
I-26
Index
Martial way, 601, 620
Masonic Knights Templar, and historical Knights
Templar, 648
Masters-at-arms, medieval and renaissance, 352
Masterson, Bat (William Barclay), 538
Mathematics, fencing and, 254
The Matrix (ﬁlm, Miramax), 532, 541. See also
Yuen Wo-ping (Yuan Heping)
Matthey, Cyril G. R., 255
Mauldin, Bill, 405
MCMAP. See Marine Corps Martial Arts Program
(MCMAP)
Medicine
to invoke divine protection, 333
martial, 335, 336–337
war medicine, 336
Mehmet II, Sultan (Ottoman), 83
Meiji period, 370, 383–384
dismantling of the traditional class system, 620
fall and rise of kenjutsu, 599–600
hierarchical structure loosened, 658
radical secret societies, 639–640
restoration, 641
Shinto institutions, 383
Melanesia, 265–268
Mémoires de Vidocq (1828), 257
Menaguerra, Ponc de, 247
Mendoza, Daniel, 230
Merovingian dynasty, 346
Mexico, and mixed martial arts (MMA), 489
Meyer, Joachim, 245, 253
Michuan Duanda Fa, 90
Micronesia, 268–270, 394
Middle Ages, 350
The Mighty Morphin Power Rangers (television
program, 1993–1996), 543
Military calisthenics, 386
Military unarmed ﬁghting
amateur boxing in British military training
programs, 588–589
Cold War period (1945–1991), 591
deﬁned, 588
goals, 588
and physical ﬁtness programs, 591
and U.S. military, 590
U.S. military adoption of British commando
training model, 590
U.S. Navy military system, impact of, 591
and World War II British commandos, 589–590
See also Jukendo; Krav maga; Sambo;
Taekwondo
www.ebook3000.com

Miller, Rory, 497
Million Dollar Baby (ﬁlm, Warner Brothers), 516
Milne, William, 114
Min Xiaoji (Fujian Sketches) (Zhou Lianggong), 100
Minamoto no Yorimasa, 421
Minangkabau (West Sumatra), 397
Mirafuente, Buenaventura, 308–309
Mr. T, 494
Mixed Martial Arts (MMA), 35, 479, 485–489
and cable television, 489
and casinos, 488
competitions, 439
deﬁned, 485–486
homoerotic elements of, 490
and the Internet, 488
opposition to, 488
promotions, corporate, 489
resistance to female participation, 490
and U.S. military, 489–490
See also Combat medley
Miyagi Chojun, 476
Miyamoto Musashi (Yoshikawa), 556, 558–559
MMA. See Mixed Martial Arts (MMA)
Mochizuki Hiroo, 259
Model Mugging, 499–500
Modern Kapap, 586
Mokuju (“wooden riﬂe”), 579
Molyneux, Tom, 230
Monasteries, Buddhist
martial arts and, 339
Shaolin Monastery, 339
Mongolia, archery
bow construction, 79
bow usage, 79–80
design, 80
modern bows, 80
styles, 80
Mongolia, martial arts
archery, 80–81 (see also Mongolia, archery)
horse racing, 80–81
Sambo teams, 512
wrestling, 78–80 (see also Mongolia, wrestling)
Mongolia, wrestling
attire, 79–80
dance and, 78
rank, 78
rules, 78
Mongols, 60, 118, 341
bows, 60
Genghis Khan, 60
horse archers, 68
Index
I-27
Monkey Boxing, 341
Monkey Dance, the, 497
Monte, Pietro, 226, 246, 248
Montone, Angelo Viggiani dal, 250
Moore, Archie, 26
Moraingy
evolution of, 17–18
functions in society, 18–19
origins, 15–16
practice, 16
techniques, 16–17
Mount Song, 340
Mount Wudang, 342
Zixiao Gong (Purple Mist Palace), 343
Mozambique, combative form of festive dancing,
419
Muay Thai (Thai boxing), 299, 533–534
boxers, 319–320
boxers, perceptions of, 322
as cultural export, 323
deﬁnition, 317
depictions of, 321
female ﬁghters, 546
gambling and, 321
governing bodies, 323
history, 318
modernization, 318–319
Ong-Bak: The Thai Warrior (ﬁlm, Baa-Ram-
Ewe, 2003), 533
prizeﬁghts, 320
royal support for, 319
social dimensions, 319
and Thai nationalism, 318
training, 320
venues, 320–321
winnings, 320
women and, 322, 546
Muay Thai action ﬁlms, Ong-Bak, 533
Mughal Empire, 61, 282–283
Muhammad, Prophet, 82, 367, 400
Muhammadiyah, 401
Mummers, 420
Music
African inﬂuences in Carolinas, 43
Breton martial arts and, 224
capoeira and, 37
Caribbean martial arts and, 43–44, 45
Chinese martial arts and, 92
Chinese Six Arts and, 115
combat language and, 44
dambe and, 7, 8

Music (continued)
danced martial art, 44
Japanese naginata and, 162
kenpo karate and, 49
moraingy and, 17
Muay Thai and, 317
Roman gladiatorial games and, 239
Scottish martial arts and, 221
silat and, 328
ssireum and, 194
Muso Gonnosuke Katsuyoshi, 148
Muzumdar, D. C., 357
My Darling Clementine (Twentieth Century Fox),
535
Mysticism, Pythagorean, 355
Mythology, presentational form, 417
Naito Katsutoshi, 34
Nakabayashi Shinji, 598
Nango Jiro
resignation from the Kodokan, 577
successor to Kano, 575
Nanquan, 97
Napoleonic Wars, 384
Narratives, 424–426
chivalry and, 350–351
creation legends, 425
folk, 421
Hanuman, 281
hero-genre, 425
Hindu, 420
of Lapulapu, 307–308
martial folk, 424
origin, in martial arts systems, 424
origins of thang-ta, 294
Nation of Islam, 631
military arm trained by Powell, Moses, 628
National Collegiate Athletic Association
(NCAA)
boxing regulations and U.S. military rules, 589
boxing rules, 467
university wrestling rules, 472
National Wrestling Alliance (NWA), 494
National Wrestling Association, 492
National Wrestling Coaches Assoc. v. U.S.
Department of Educ. (2003), 522
Nationalism, in professional wrestling, 492
Nationalist China. See Taiwan
Nativistic movements, 625
Navajo Windtalkers, 650
Nero, 514
I-28
Index
Netherlands
and mixed martial arts (MMA), 489
oiled wrestling tournaments, 87
and Silat schools in Europe, 326
National Sporting Club (British), establishment
of weight classes in professional boxing, 468
NCAA. See National Collegiate Athletic
Association (NCAA)
neo-Confucianism, 376
and martial arts training, 558
and modern kendo, 559
Nettesheim, Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa von, 355
New Book of Effective Discipline (Jixiao Xinshu),
94
New Book of Military Preparedness, 95
New Buddhism, 383–384
New Guinea, 266–267
martial arts and preparation for warfare, 263
and supernatural weapons, 267
New Judo, 577
New Martial Arts (Xin Wushu), 343
A New Theory of the Art of Canne Fencing
(Larribeau), 219
New York Police Department
development of training program, 594
and training Tokyo police, 595
New York State Athletic Commission, and
Walker Law of 1920, 468
New Zealand
boxing exhibitions, 466
Maoris, 276
See also Aotearoa (New Zealand)
Newsome, Dennis, 25, 630
Nguni, 336
Niger
dambe combat sport. See Dambe
“Head Dance,” 418
Nigeria, 332–333, 334, 335, 337
dambe combat sport. See Dambe
Yoruba, 332–333
Nigeria Afromartial Club (Kano City, Nigeria), 9
Ninety-nine names of Allah, chanting of, 396
Nine-Word Spell, 375
Ninja, Hands of Death (Ashida Kim), 445
Ninjutsu, and Western action cinema, 532
Nitobe Inazo, 387
Noble Science, 218
Norris, Carlos (Chuck)
against Lee, Bruce, 542
and martial arts sub-genre, 541
and Parker, Ed, 51
www.ebook3000.com

Norway
allows women in the military without
restrictions, 643
ﬁrst FILA-sanctioned international tournament
for women, 524
Nowruz-nama (Book of Nowruz) (Khayyam
Neishaburi), 68
Nueva Ciencia y Filosofía de la Destreza de las
Armas, su Teoría y Práctica (New Science and
Philosophy of the Art of Weapons, Its Theory
and Practice) (Narváez), 254
Numerology
medieval, 352–353
quaternities, 352
triplicities, 352
NWA. See National Wrestling Alliance (NWA)
Observation, Orientation, Decision, and Action
(OODA) Loop. See OODA (Observation,
Orientation, Decision, and Action) Loop
Oceania, 263–278. See also individual nations
Oceania, martial arts
Australian, 263–265
Melanesian, 265–268
Micronesian, 268–270
Polynesian, 270–277
Occult sciences, European, 352–356
Odu Ifa. See Ifa Chapters (Odu Ifa)
Ogawa Ryuzo, 34
Ögodei, great Khan (Mongol), 118
Ogun (primary deity of war), 333
Oiu Jin, 108
Okinawa, 474
enthusiastic exporter of karate, 478
origin of karate, 429
original concept of karate, 477
as replica of seventh-century Japan, 438
Okinawa, karate
Chinese inﬂuences, 207–208
cultural perspectives, 474–475
di (hand), 206
as example of globalization, 438
instruction in, 208
versus Japanese, 474–475
Japanese inﬂuences, 207, 475–476
origins, 205–206
styles, 209
transformation of, 438
Okochi Tatsuo, 34
Okonko, 335
Oludamare, 333
Index
I-29
Olympic Games
54th, in 564 BCE, 237
1936, 109
1940, 575
1986, 385
1988, 203
2000, 199
2004, 104, 524
2008, 90, 97
boxing and, 235
as an exercise for war, 605
institution of women’s wrestling, 473
modern, 258
movement, 385
Indian wrestling and, 292, 293
judo, 127, 130–131
taekwondo, 104, 199, 202–203
universal rules for wrestling, 472
Oman, combative form of festive dancing,
418–419
Omori, Geo, 33
Omote, 659
Omote to Ura (Doi), 659
Omoto religion, 638
golden age of, 640
in Japan, 134
Ong-Bak: The Thai Warrior (Baa-Ram-Ewe, 2003)
533
On the Correct Handling of Contradictions among
the People (Mao), 482
Only the Strong (ﬁlm, Twentieth Century Fox),
456
OODA (Observation, Orientation, Decision, and
Action) Loop, 500
Opera Nova (New Work) (Manciolino), 250
Opera Nova (New Work) (Marozzo), 246, 250
Origin narratives, 424
creation legends, 425
Praying Mantis quanfa, 425
Original Jeet Kune Do, 480
Orisha (deiﬁed ancestor), 333. See also Kibuka
(deiﬁed ancestor)
Orunmila (Ifa), 333
Oshchepkov, Vasily Sergeevich
combat division and, 508
founder of Sambo, 502
GCOLIFK, 506
judo freestyle wrestling, 508
and Kodokan judo, 503
teaching judo at CDKA, 505
untimely death of, 509

Osman Bey, 81
Ottoman archery
competitions, 83
decline of, 84
early history, 82
ﬂight shooting, 83
guilds, 83
Karlsruhe collection, 82
military history, 82–83
mounted archery, 83
Ok Meydani (ﬁeld of the arrow), 83
rebirth of traditional, 84
training, 83
women and, 82
Ottoman Empire, 81–82
bayonet charges in Balkan Wars, 570
conquest of Istanbul (former Constantinople), 83
founder, 81
and Palestine, 583
Sultan Mahmud II, 84
Sultan Mehmet II, 83
wealth of, 81 (see also Silk Road)
Ottoman martial arts
archery, 82–84 (see also Ottoman archery)
history, 81–82
wrestling, 85–87 (see also Ottoman oiled wrestling)
Ottoman oiled wrestling
champions, 85
changes after 1923, 86–87
globalization, 87
Kirkpinar tournament, 86
at the local level, 86
purpose of oil, 85
rules, 85
secularization of, 86
and soccer, 87
tournaments, 86
urbanization and, 86–87
Ouro, Besouro Cordão de (Pereira, Manoel
Henrique), 39
Outlaws of the Marsh (Shuihuzhuan), 109, 111,
339, 409
Pacheco Narváez, Luis, 254
Palestine
Jewish population of, 583
use of walking stick for defense, 220
Palmach, 583
Pan-Am Games, women’s wrestling weight
classes, 525
Panembahan Senopati, 400
I-30
Index
Pankhurst, Christabel, 634–635
Pao Chui (Cannon Pounder), 95
Paradoxes of Defense (Silver), 255
Paris, and capoeira, 456
Parker, Edmund Kealoha, 49–52
awards, 52
books by, 51–52
celebrity students, 50
“The Father of American Karate,” 50
movie roles, 50
and Presley, Elvis, 51, 444
television experience, 540
“Parthian shot,” 67
Parthians, 67
Passive resistance, and African Americans, 626
Pastinha, Mestre (Vincente Ferreira), 37, 40
Passion plays (ta’ziyeh), 367–368
Paton, James, 221
Pauerenfeindt, 253
Pax Dei (Peace of God), 348
Penca Cimande, 399
Pencak, 400–401
Pencak silat, 623
origin of term, 324
as product of Indonesian culture, 621
role of central Java in development of, 327
schools, and practice of invulnerability, 624
Perdiguier, Agricol, 218
Performing arts
heroic display of ethos of a culture, 606
and living martial traditions, 606
and martial arts, 613
relationship between martial training, dance,
and performance, 605
and stage combat, 613
Persatuan Persilatan Pendekar dan Seni Budaya
Banten Indonesia (PPPSBBI), 624
Persia
culture, 365–366
reverence of warrior culture, 365–366
traditional literature, 363
See also Iran
Pestalozzi, Johann Heinrich, 385
Philip IV, King (Spain), 254
Philippe II Auguste, King (France), 217
Philippines, 306–310, 394
amulets to protect from blade and bullet, 622
boxing vs. judo matches in, 486
bravery and Lapulapu, 307
globalization of kali and eskrima, 437
history, 306–309
www.ebook3000.com

immigrants and bachelor subculture, 446
immigration to North America, 442–443
invulnerability and political conﬂict, 622
Lapulapu, hero of resistance, 307–308
sword usage, 302
“Thrilla in Manila,” 470
traditional folk dramas, 421
traditional healing, 306
La Philosophia de las Armas (The Philosophy of
Arms) (Carranza), 254
Philosophical systems, East Asian, 89. See also
speciﬁc systems
Pipes, Tom, 228
Pistoleers. See Gunﬁghters
Plains Indian warrior societies, 651–653
Big-Dogs (Crow), 652
Cheyenne Bowstring Warriors Society, 654
Crazy-Dogs-Wishing-to-Die (Crow), 652
Dog-Men (Cheyenne), 652
Dog-Men Society, 653
introduction of horses, 652
military leadership, 652
and paciﬁcation of the Plains peoples, 655
The Plainsman (ﬁlm, Paramount), 535
Platonic elements, 354
Plée, Henri, 259
Poem of Aqhat (West Semetic), 63
Poetry, 333
and chivalry, 350
of hunters, 335
Karlsruhe collection, 82
Khayyam Neishaburi, 68
and ritual suicide, 421
Skallagrimsson, Egill, 421
with physical displays, 421
Police defensive tactics, U.S.
deﬁnition, 593–594
historical programs, 594–596
Japanese martial arts instructors, 595–596
modern programs, 596–597
police jujitsu, 593
seminars on, 597
training, 596
weapons, 596
Police jujitsu, 593
Berkeley Police Department, 594
manuals speciﬁcally for police, 595
New York Police Department, 594–595
Political conﬂict and aikido, 638–642
omote versus ura, 639–640
Ueshiba Morihei, 638
Index
I-31
Political uses of the martial arts, 619–624
Polly, Matthew, 412, 414
Polynesia, 270–277, 394
Portugal
capoeira as a tool against colonialism, 458
introduction of muskets into Japan, 579
stick ﬁghting, 226
See also Iberia
Postmodern martial arts, 436–437
Powell, Moses
and Nation of Islam, 628
and Sanuces Ryu, 628
Powers, extrahuman, 331–332
PPPSBBI. See Persatuan Persilatan Pendekar dan
Seni Budaya Banten Indonesia (PPPSBBI)
Practical Taijiquan (Taijiquan Shiyongfa) (Tung Hu-
ling), 100
A Practical Theory on the Art of Savate Fighting,
called Chausson, and French Dexterity in the
Use of the Canne, 219
Prana (vital breath), 361
Pranayama (breathing exercises)
importance of, 361
yoga, 360–361
Praying Mantis quanfa technique, 425
Presentational forms, 417–418
Celtic myths, 418
Greek mythology, 417
mythology, 417
Presley, Elvis, 51
and karate, 444
and Parker, Ed, 51, 544
Principles of Psychology (Spencer), 380
Prishtabhanga, 418
Professional wrestling
Andre the Giant, 495
and gimmicks, 493
Gorgeous George, 494, 609
the Great Togo and Mr. Moto, 494
hand-to-hand combat instructors, 493
Hulk Hogan (Terry Bollea), 494
Killer Kowalski, 495
made for television, 494
similarities to the Golden Age of Television,
495
sumo, 178–179
and vaudeville, Wild West shows, and circuses,
493
Protection Agencies (Biaoju/Biaohang), 96
Provincial Wrestling Commission (Comisión
Provincial de Lucha), 226

Pugil stick ﬁghting, 572, 581, 592
Pugilism. See Boxing
Pure Land Buddhism, 371, 372
Pure Martial Athletic Association (Jing Wu
Tiyuhui), 407
Pwáán, 269–270
Pyrrhic, 605
Qabus-nama (Book of Qabus) (Qabus ibn
Iskandar), 364
Qajar period, 367
Qi, 93
Qianlong, Emperor (Qing Dynasty, China), 343
Qi Jiguang, General, 94
and “short hitting” techniques, 100
Qin Zong, Emperor (Song Dynasty, China), 341
Qing dynasty, 407
itinerant teachers, 409
martial arts emphasized as combat, 101–102
Qing period, 343
use of the term quanbang, 96
Qing Unofﬁcial Categorized Extracts (Xu Ke), 106,
109
Quan Jing Quanfa Beiyao (Boxing Classic: Essentials
of Boxing), 91, 96
Quanbang, 96
Queensberry’s rules, 466
Quran, 398
protective formulas from, 401
Raiders of the Lost Ark (ﬁlm, Lucasﬁlm), 441
Rama, 359
Ramayana, 357, 359
Randori, 129
Ranger, Terence, 428
Rara, 45–46
Rath, Richard Cullen, 44
Ratu Kidul, 400
Reality-based defense
and digital technologies, 501
ﬁrst commercial courses, 497
and intuitive radar, 500
phases of training, 498–499
techniques, 496–497
Recitations (naqqali), 366–367
Record of History (Shi Ji), 92
Record of the Arm (Shoubi Lu) (Wu Shu), 96
Record of Wrestling, 117
Red Army
and CDKA (Central House of the Red Army),
504
hand-to-hand combat system, 511
I-32
Index
implementation of Oshchepkov’s system, 505
and Japanese jujutsu, 504
judo combat techniques, 509
Red Sun (ﬁlm, Corona Films), 532
Red Turban uprising, 341
Regimento de las Armas (Regiment of Arms)
(Duarte), 247
Regole della Scherma (Rules of the Sword)
(Marcelli), 252
Religion
African, overview of, 332–336
and aikido, 133
in ancient China, 92
and the Assassins of Syria, 648
assumptions regarding belief systems, 331–332
Candomblé, 623
Daishadokyo, 156
deﬁnition, 382
East Asia, 89
folk beliefs, 426–427
in Iran, 66
in Japan, 372, 382
and jujutsu, 126
and Maní, 44
and martial arts, 372
Omoto, 133, 135, 638, 640, 641
and silek, 326, 394–395, 397
and temple security forces, 285
traditional Hawaiian, 275
traditional Yoruba, 12
Zen, 389
Zoroastrianism, 66
Relocation centers, judo, 449
Renaissance, European, 249–255
Renaud, Jean-Joseph, 219
Representational genres, 418–421
Republican Period, China (around 1911), 407
Return of the Dragon (ﬁlm, Golden Harvest), 51
Rhee, Jhoon, 405
Richard Humphreys, the Boxer (painting,
Hoppner), 230
Richard I, King (the Lion-Heart [Coeur de Lion];
Anglo-Norman), 60, 349
Richmond, Bill, 230
Riesy (Eritrean style stick ﬁghting with head-
butting), 630
Riﬂe and Light Infantry Tactics (Hardee), 569
Risk Rule, 643–644
Rites of Zhou (Zhouli), 92
Rituals
accession bathing, 402
combat, 419
www.ebook3000.com

communal ceremony, 400
meals, 399
purpose of, in Java, 400
RKKA (Workers and Peasants Red Army),
Oshchepkov and, 503
Roda, 455, 456
Roman Empire, 346
Romance of Three Kingdoms (Sanguo Yanyi), 111,
112
Rome, boxing, 237
Rome, gladiatorial games
awards, 239
end of, 239–240
ﬁghts to death rare, 238
history, 238
origins, 238
rules, 239
schools, 238
training, 238
women, 238
Ronin (masterless wanderers), 527
Roosevelt, President Theodore (United States)
and amateur boxing, 466
and Kodokan judo, 446, 429
Rostam, 366, 368
Rostam al-Tavarikh (Asaf), 365
Roussinoff, André (André the Giant), 495
Royal Armouries Ms. I.33 (German manuscript),
244
Rush Hour, 542. See also Chan, Jackie; Martial
Law (television program, 1998–2000)
Russo-Japanese War (1904–1905)
bayonet assaults, 580
exposure of Japanese martial arts, 446
Japanese bayonet charges, 570
SAC Judo Society, 449
Sacred geometry
and the art of memory, 355–356
and Thibault, Gerard, 355–356
Safavid period, 367
Sakakibara Kenkichi, 600
Sakan culture, 58
Sakata, Harold, 449–450. See also Wrestling,
Japanese American wrestlers
Sakurakai
Cherry Blossom Society, 641
disbanded, 641
and Ueshiba Morihei’s Kobukan Dojo, 641
Saladin, Sultan (Ayyubid), 349
Sambo, 502–513
Combat Sambo, 502
Index
I-33
ﬁrst international competition, 512
founder of, 502
and the international arena, 512
and Judo Freestyle Wrestling, 508
Russia’s national sport, 513
Soviet ofﬁcial recognition, 510
Sport Sambo, 502
and the Tokyo Olympics, 512
Sambo Wrestling (Kharlampiev), 511–512
Samnites, 225
Samurai, 371, 377, 599
as portrayed in Kabuki theater, 607
Samurai ﬁlms, 527
San da, 102
and Mixed Martial Arts competitions, 104
San shou. See San da
Sánchez de Carranza, Jerónimo, 254
Sannyas, 360
Sannyasi, 360
austerity, 360
Sanseverino, Galeazzo di, 226
Sanuces Ryu, 628
Saracen Archery, 64
Sarry, Maurice, 220
Sassanids, 67, 364
Savate duels, 257
Savate/French Boxing Federation, 220
Saviolo, Vincentio, 254–255
Sayers, Thomas, 232
La Scherma di Francesco Alﬁeri (The Fencng of
Francesco Alﬁeri) (Alﬁeri), 252
La Scherma Illustrata (Fencing Illlustrated)
(Pallavicini), 252
Scholasticism, 352
The Schoole of the Noble and Worthy Science of
Defense (Swetnam), 255
Scola overo Teatro (School or Theater [of Arms])
(Giganti), 252
Scotland,
broadsword training method, 222
Celtic martial arts in, 221–223
dancing, 221
Highland games, 222
martial arts, 221–223
pipers, 221
Stewart, David, of Garth, 222
training, 222
Scottish Highland Games (Webster), 222
Scriptures, Hindu, 359
Scythians
and composite bows, 58
term indicates culture and confederacy, 55

Seagal, Steven, 541
Secrecy, and transmission of martial arts, 325
The Secret Manual of Chinese and Foreign Magic
Tricks, 410
Secret societies
and female membership, 649
and fraternal organizations, 647–662
Secrets of Shaolin Temple Boxing (anonymous), 112,
441. See also Shaolin Temple, myths about
Secrets of Shaolin Temple Boxing (Smith), 441
Segno della Spada (Sign of the Sword; illustration),
354
Self-defense
and martial arts, 439
passive forms in British etiquette manuals for
women, 633
Seljuk Turks, 348
Sempai, 661
Seutonius, 214
Seven Samurai (Koho), 538
Shah-nama (Book of Kings) (Ferdowsi), 66,
365–366
heroes of, 366
recitations (naqqali), 366–367
subject matter in, 366
Shakti, concept of, 357
Shamanism, 89
Shango’s club, 333
Shaolin boxing, 95. See also Wudang boxing
Shaolin Gunfa Chanzong (Cheng Zongyou), 95
Shaolin Monastery, 339, 340–342
documentary evidence, lack of, 90
Elucidation of the Original Shaolin Staff Method,
342
established in 495, 340
exaggerated association with martial arts, 98
as example of commodiﬁcation, 436
ﬁghting monks of, 340, 341
and Hong Kong martial arts movies, 441
and martial art schools, 410
and misperception about origin of martial arts, 90
monkey boxing, 341
Red Turban uprising, 341
reopening of, 436
role of, 344
staff ﬁghting, 342
Tanzong, 340
Thirteen Staff Fighting Monks, 340, 341
as tourist destination, 441
See also Shaolin monks, Shaolin Staff; Shaolin
Temple
I-34
Index
Shaolin Monastery Short Hitting Body Technique
Combined Boxing Manual, 107
Shaolin monks
Bian Tun, 341
Tanzong, 340
Shaolin Staff, 341
Cheng Zongyou, 342
See also Elucidation of the Original Shaolin Staff
Method (Cheng Zongyou); Sword Classic (Yu
Dayou)
Shaolin Temple, 414, 530
and Kung Fu, 541
and marketing authenticity, 547
martial arts tour stops, 409
myths about, 441
tour packages, 413
The Shaolin Temple (ﬁlm, Chung Yuen Film
Production Co.), 530
Shaw Brothers Studio, 530
Shi Dakai, 96
Shibuya, Robert “Kinji,” 449–450. See also
Wrestling, Japanese American wrestlers
Shiite Muslims, 367
Shinto, 383–384
Shintoism, 89
Shirai Toru Yoshinori, 376
Shogun (television program, NBC), 532, 541
Shogun, teacher to the, 598
The Shootist (ﬁlm, Paramont), 538
Shootists. See Gunﬁghters, Western
Shorinji Kempo, 172
Shotokan karate, 440
Shoubi Lu (Record of the Arm) (Wu Shu), 96
Shoubo, 93
Shu, 97
Shuaijiao, 103, 119
Siddha (perfection), 362
Silat
aesthetics, 328
close ties with Islam, 395
and dance, 421
esoteric powers, 427
etymology, 324–325
and family, 326
globalization of, 437
indigenous blade techniques in Philippines, 313
indigenous to Malay cultures, 394
and Islam, 327, 401
organizations, 329–330
origins, 324, 325
origins, legendary, 327–328
www.ebook3000.com

practitioners and Indonesian independence,
427
practitioners of, 325
re-branding systems in Southeast Asia, 314
and religion, 326
and ritual, 325–326, 396
and royal courts, 327
and schools, 326
and social structure, 326
styles, regional, 326
styles associated with Sudanese culture, 398
in Sulawesi (eastern Indonesia), 402–403
techniques, 329
techniques, ritual, 329
techniques, therapeutic, 329
transmission of, 325
and West Java, 398
Silek, 397, 421
Silk Road, 55, 59, 61, 62, 81–82
Silver, George, 254, 255
Sin Han-sung, 197
Singapore, cheap martial arts training manuals
widely available, 408
Sinhozinho, Mestre (Ferreira, Agenor Moreira),
38, 40
Sino-Japanese War (1894–1895), 97
Sivananda, Swami, 358
Skallagrimsson, Egill, 421
Skills Beyond Farming (Cheng Zongyou), 95
“Slam Bang Western Style Wrestling,” 493
Smith, Robert W., 439, 441, 450
popularized Taiwanese martial arts, 104
Secrets of Shaolin Temple Boxing, 441
Snake in the Eagle’s Shadow (Seasonal Film),
441
Social aspects of kata and waza, 657–662
Soke, 429
Sombo. See Sambo
Song period (China), 93–94, 109
Song Tok-ki, 196–197
Soto, 660, 661
South Africa, 19
and hand-to-hand combat in Anglo-Boer Wars,
570
South Asia, 281–297. See also individual nations
history of medieval period, 361
immigration to North America, 442–443
South Asia, martial arts
and Hindu religious texts, 281
history, 281–283
kuntao and, 312
Index
I-35
and nationalists, 286
and robbers, 285
and Sikh religion, 285
in society, 284–285
South Celebes, 401–402
South Korea
and mixed martial arts (MMA), 489
modern archery, 64
propagation of taekwondo, 414
Southeast Asia, 299–330, 357
effect of anti-communism, 314
See also individual nations
Soviet Freestyle Wrestling, 510
Soviet Union
ﬁrst judo classes for elementary school children,
507
and Sambo, 502
Sambo teams from, 512
war with Japan, 641
wartime exclusion of judo, 509
La Spada Maestra (The Master Sword) (di Mazo),
252
“Spaghetti westerns,” 536
Spain
allows women in the military without
restrictions, 643
and Society of Jesus, 648
See also Iberia
Sparta, 605
Spartacus, 238
Speakman, Jeff, 51
Spearmanship (sojutsu), schools of, 599
Spiridonov, Viktor
conﬂict with Oshchepkov, 506–507
and Sambo, 506
Sport karate, and Japanese high schools and
colleges, 405
Sport Sambo, 502, 512
Sporting clubs, Finnish-Canadian, 461
Sportsmanship, 384–385
Spring and Autumn Annals (Chun Qiu), 92–93
Spring and Autumn Annals of Wu and Yue, 105
Stage combat
Elizabethan tradition, 611–614
as a performing art, 613
and safety, 613
taught in drama schools, 614
theatrical illusion of violence, 611
State Central Institute of Physical Culture. See
GCOLIFK
The Steps of Yu, 376

Stick-ﬁghting
in ancient Egypt, 422
Barbados (stick dancing, stick-licking), 47–48
Canary Islands (Juego del Palo), 3–5
Caribbean, 43–48
Caribbean system called kalinda, 630
Cuban, 44
Filipino, 300–301, 421
French, 217–220
Haitian, 45–46
Iberia, 226
Irish, 223
Japanese, 147–151
kalinda, 630
and krav maga, 586
Palestine, 583
taught by Hagana Kapap, 584
Trinidadian, 46–47
Zulu, 19–24 (see also Zulu stick ﬁghting)
Zulu festivals, 337
Zulu war preparation, 336
Stick-ﬁghting, Filipino, 421
Stone Studio Illustrated News, 109
Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio, 109
Stray dogs, 528
Street performances, Taiwan, 615–618
and Chinese metaphysics, 616
and lion and dragon dances, 617
and local militias, 616
and martial temple parades, 615–616
and mega-puppets, 617
Sung Jiang battle arrays, 617
Striking art, moraingy, 15–19
Sudan, wrestling tournaments, 422
Suﬁ, 396
knowledge, 396
practices, 396
SuﬁIslam, 333
Suﬁsm, abilities, 396
Sui dynasty, 340. See also Shaolin Monastery,
ﬁghting monks of
Sulawesi (South Celebes), 401–402
and Silat, 402–403
Sumo
in circus and vaudeville acts, 446
in Japan, 175–181
Sun Lu Tang
ﬁrst commercial successful author of manuals, 408
martial arts teacher, 107
Sunda (Java), and Silat, 398
Supernatural powers
and human sacriﬁce, Tahiti, 272
I-36
Index
and Indonesian independence, 427
Suzuki, D. T., 389
Swahili, combative form of festive dancing, 419
Sweden, allows women in the military without
restrictions, 643
Swetnam, Joseph, 255
Switzerland
and capoeira, 456
reality-based defense, 496
Sword Classic (Yu Dayou), 90–91, 94, 106, 107
Sword ﬁghting
Iberian, 225
Japanese, 139–144
Scottish, 222–223
Swordsmanship
European, middle ages, later, 242–244
Iranian, 72–73
Italian, 246
Japanese, 144–146, 370, 556
Korean Kumdo, 187–190
longsword, 242–243
no-sword style, 380
Tengu, 424–425
Symbiosis between martial training, dance, and
performance, 605
Syria, and the Assassins, 648
Tabarestan, 366
Tachibana Kozaburo, 641–642
Tacitus, 215
Tadashi Yamashita, 51
Tae Bo, Blank, Billy, 436
Taekwondo
adoption of the name, 620
experienced by American servicemen, 438
franchise clubs, 405
hegemonic and ubiquitous, 440
international propagation of, 414
Jhoon Rhee system, 405
and national imperatives of Korea, 620–621
spectacular styles, 439
Taiwan, increased focus in, 102
See also Korea
Tahiti, 271–273
boxing, 273
wrestling, 272–273
Tahtib, 419
Tai chi chuan. See Taijiquan
Taijiquan, 107
and Central Martial Arts Institute, 97
compared to changquan and nanquan, 97
and Kuomintang government, 102
www.ebook3000.com

mixture of systems, 89
non-violent martial art, 445
popularity in Indonesia, 316
in Southeast Asia, 313
“Yang style,” 410
and yoga and Pilates, 440
Zhang Sanfeng, inventor of, 343
Taijiquan Shiyi (Explaining Taijiquan) (Yang
Chengfu), 100
Taijiquan Shiyongfa (Practical Taijiquan) (Tung
Hu-ling), 100
Taijiquan Theory (Wang Zongyue), 95
Taipings (Kingdom of Heavenly Peace), 96
Taiwan, 101–104, 394
cheap martial arts training manuals widely
available, 408
Chinese martial arts as national art, 619
kendo and Japanese colonialists, 602
street performances, 615
See also China
Taiwan, martial arts
background, 101–102
Japanese inﬂuence, 101, 102–103
Japanese Period, 103
judo, 103, 104
kendo, 103, 104
Kuomintang Period, 103–104
modern developments, 104
Qing Dynasty, 102–103
taekwondo, 104
Takuan Soho, 558
inﬂuential treatise of, 559–560
Talhoffer, Hans, 355
Talismanic magic, amulets, 355
Talismans
ancestors’ skulls as, Guam, 269
and animal sacriﬁces, Hawai‘i, 273–274
arnis, 301, 305–306
human sacriﬁce and, Tahiti, 272
and Maoris of New Zealand, 276
supernatural weapons, New Guinea, 267
Tang, 340
Tang Dynasty, 108
Tang Hao, 97
Tang Shunzhi, 106, 107
Tantric rituals, 374
Tantrism, teachings of, 361
Tanzania, combative form of festive dancing, 419
Tanzong, 340
Taoism (Daoism), 89, 339, 360
alchemical practices, 375–376
breathing techniques, 376
Index
I-37
concentrating the mind (i.e., breath), 378
deity, Tenshin, 376
Ge Hong, 342
ideas used by Bruce Lee, 483
and martial arts, 342, 343
Zhang Sanfeng, 343
Tatemae, 660, 662
Teacher’s Manual for Gymnastics and Fencing, 219
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (children’s television
series, 1984 onward), 445
and arsenal of cartoon crime-ﬁghters, 543
Tekken 3 (video game), 457
Television, the martial arts and
in animation, 542–543
authenticity versus accessibility, 546–547
in fantasy, 541–542
Fight Quest, 545–546
Fight Science: Mixed Martial Arts (NGC), 546
Fight Science: Special Ops (NGC), 546
frontier hero, 540
heroines, cult status, 544
Human Weapon, 545–546
kickboxing, 546
tournaments, 545
and westerns, 539–540
women in, 543–544
Tengu, talent for swordsmanship, 424
Tenshin, 376
deﬁned by Shirai, 376
Teruga Dei (Truce of God), 348
Thailand, 537
invulnerability and political conﬂict, 622
martial arts tourism, 412, 414
Muay Thai action ﬁlms, 533
nationalism and Muay Thai, 318
and women’s boxing, 322
Thailand, boxing. See Muay Thai
Thang-ta (sword-spear)
combat, unarmed, 296
disciplinary regulations, 297
origins, 294
popularity, 295
spear dance, 295
swordplay, 295–296
training, 296
war customs, 294
Thibault, Gérard, 355–356
Thirteen Broadsword Methods (Shisan Daofa)
(Wang Yuyou), 95
Thirteen Staff Fighting Monks, 340, 341
Thomas, Matt, 499
Thompson, Robert Farris, 44

Thorough Descriptions of the Knightly Art of Fencing
(Meyer), 253
Three Principles of the People (Sun Yat-sen), 112
Three-Part Stance, 107
Tibet, modern archery, 64
Timur, Emir (Tamerlane)(Timurid dynasty;
Mongol), 60
Title IX, Educational Amendments of 1972, 516,
521–522
Tiwi ceremonial spears, 422
Togo, 333
Tokugawa period (Japan), 369, 370, 377–378
distinct trends in the martial arts, 598
hierarchical social structure, 658
Japan governed by military autocracies, 639
martial arts treatises, 378
martial arts warrior treatises, 554–555
publishing of martial arts treatises, 559
and the samurai, 620
specialization of ryuha, 599
Tokyo Kendo Club, 601
Tokyo Police Academy, guidelines for cadets, 600
Tolo-Naa, Nganga
and James Cheatham, 628–629
and Nation of Islam, 629
Totem animals, crocodile, 335
Tourism, and martial arts, 414
Toxophilus (Ascham), 64
Tracy brothers, 52
Traditionalists, Yamaoka Tesshu, 379–380
Traditions, Austronesia, 395
Training manuals, do-it-yourself, 408
Trattato di Scientia d’Arme con un Dialogo di
Filosoﬁa (Treatise on the Science of Arms
with a Dialogue of Philosophy) (Agrippa),
250
Travels of Lao Can, 441. See also Shaolin Temple,
myths about
Travels of Lao-ts’an (Liu E), 342
Le Tre Giornate (Pagano), 246
Treatise and Theory of Royal Canne (Humé and
Renkin), 219
Treuga Dei (Truce of God), 348
“Triad,” 114
Trinidad, stick-ﬁghting
basics, 46–47
masquerade, 47
origins, 46–47
rules, 47
weapons, 47
Tong (“meeting hall”), 114
I-38
Index
True Narratives of the Meaning of Boxing (Sun
Lutang), 107
Tsuboi Gendo, 560
Tung Hu-ling, 100
Tung Moli, 100
Tung Ying-chieh, 100
Turkestan, 61–62
archers of, 59
Turkey, Republic of
establishment of, 86
Istanbul, 83, 84
modern archery, 64
modernization of, 84
and Suﬁpractices, 84
Turkic culture, 60
Turkish Archery and the Composite Bow, 64
Tutelary Deities, 372–373
“24 feats” (Y pediar Camp ar Hugainyn), 225
The Twilight Samurai (Eisei Gekijo), 529
2004 Olympics in Athens, women’s freestyle
wrestling and, 520–521
Tyson, Mike, 26
Uchi, 660, 661
Uemura Masahisa, and Christianity, 386–387
Ueshiba Morihei, 642, 660
and Black Dragon Society (Kokuryukai), 640
founder of aikido, 638
Kobukan Dojo, 638
and omote versus ura, 639
and Omoto religion, 640
UFC. See Ultimate Fighting Championship
(UFC)
Uganda, 333, 336
Ukraine, and mixed martial arts (MMA), 489
Ultimate ﬁghter, and martial arts practices, 439
The Ultimate Fighter, 489, 545
Ultimate Fighting, 479
Ultimate Fighting Champions, rise of, 545–546
Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC), 34–35,
445, 486–487
and Gracie family, 545
opposition to, 488
Ultimate Fighting Competitions, and martial arts
practices, 439
Unforgiven (ﬁlm, Malpaso), 536
United Kingdom, and Okinawan karate, 438. See
also England; England, boxing
United States
Army Rangers and Brazilian jiu-jitsu, 592
and Asian martial arts, 442–450
www.ebook3000.com

bayonet training, 568–572
boxing exhibitions, 466
FBI Academy and visiting jujitsu instructors, 595
franchise karate and taekwondo clubs, 405
gunﬁghters, 534
judo, 565–567
Kenpo karate in 49–53
and martial arts, 443
Marine Corps, martial arts programs, 592
military unarmed ﬁghting systems, 588
and Okinawan karate, 438
police defensive tactics training, 593–597
and post-Civil War American West, 534
restricted Finnish immigration to, 463
resumption of bayonet training, 571
self-defense training for coeds, 499
servicemen and martial arts, 438
war with Japan, 641
United States Department of Defense (DOD)
and Lioness programs, 644–645
military as major patron of judo, karate, and
taekwondo, 449
and Risk Rule, 643
United States Judo Association (USJA), 449
United States Judo Federation (USJF), 449
University martial arts clubs, examples of
Japanese fraternities and sororities, 661
Unleashed (Rogue Pictures), 441
Ura, 659
Urban II, Pope, 349
Urquidez, Benny “The Jet,” 51
USA Amateur Boxing Federation, 518
USA Boxing, 518
USA Judo, 449
The Useful Science of Defence (Godfrey), 229
USJA. See United States Judo Association
(USJA)
USSR. See Soviet Union
Vadi, Filippo, 354
Vajrayana scriptures, Tantric rituals, 374
Van Damme, Jean Claude, 541
Vandals and Visigoths, 225
Vargas, President Getúlio (Brazil), 40
and cultural assimilation, 34
Vayu, 359
Vegetius, 243
La Verdadera Destreza (The True Skill)
(Carranza), 254
Veterans of Foreign Wars, and sponsoring boxing
smokers, 649
Index
I-39
Vietnam (formerly Indochina), bamboo spear
training, 581
Vigny, Pierre, 219
The Virginian (book and ﬁlm), 537, 538
Visual arts, 422
Wa (peace and harmony), 657
Wagner, Jim
ﬁrst commercial courses in reality-based
defense, 497
and reality-based defense, 496
Walking stick dance, 419
The Walking Stick Method of Self Defence (Lang),
220, 454
Wanbao Quanshu (Complete Book of Ten
Thousand Treasures), 95
Wang Shu Jin, 104
Wang Yuyou, 95
Wang Zhengnan Muzhi Ming (Epitaph for Wang
Zhengnan) (Huang Zongxi), 90, 342
Wang Zhengyi, 96
Wang Zongyue, 95
Wanted (ﬁlm, Universal), 544
War medicine, 336
War tales (gunki mono), 555–556
War trophies, 82
Ward, Jem, 231
Warrior families, 371
Wat Tyler Rebellion, 351
Water Margin. See Outlaws of the Marsh
(Shuihuzhuan)
Way of the Dragon, demonstration of broken
rhythm, 484
WBAN. See Women Boxing Archive Network
(WBAN, http//:www.womenboxing.com/)
WCW. See World Championship Wrestling (WCW)
Weapons
Chinese, 115
of martial (warrior) deities, 333–334
supernaturally charged, 333–334
See also speciﬁc weapons
Weapon skills, 92–95
WEC. See World Extreme Cage Fighting (WEC)
Weichi Jingde, General, 93
Wenxian Tongkao, 96
West Africa, 333, 334
Leopard Societies, 649–650
ritual murder, 650
West Indies, mummies, 420
West Java, 398
practice of silat in, 326

Western gunﬁghter
compared to Asian martial artist, 538
knight errant image, 537
When the Last Sword Is Drawn (Sochiku), 529
White Lotus sect, 339
Wilhelm, George, 354
William, Duke of Cumberland, 229
Wing chun, 483
martial arts tour stops, 409
nucleus for Jun Fan Gung Fu, 480
style, 483
Women
Amazons, 213–214
and boxing in Thailand, 322
Carano, Gina, 546
in Chinese martial arts, 108–110
Empress Wu Zetian, 108
female kickboxing show, 545
ﬁrst female match on network television, 546
French boxing and, 261
Fu Hao, 108
gladiatrices, 214–216
Hua Mulan, 109
Maiden of Yue, 108
military service during Global War on
Terrorism, 644
and MMA, 490
Model Mugging, 499
Ottoman archery and, 82
Qing period, 109
Qing Unofﬁcial History Categorized Extracts, 109
Qiu Jin, 108
secret society membership, 649
self-defense training for, in college, 499
Song period, 109
Stone Studio Illustrated News, 109
Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio, 109
television’s female ﬁghters, 544
“On Watching a Sword Dance by Madam
Gongsun’s Disciple,” 108
Widow Qi Number Two, 109
Woman Ding Number Seven, 109
Woman Number Four, 109
Yongchun County Gazetteer, 109
Young, Kaitlin, 546
Women Boxing Archive Network (WBAN,
http://www.womenboxing.com/), 519
Women in combat, and the U.S. military,
2001–present, 643–645
Lioness Programs, 644
Marine Corps Martial Arts Program, 644
I-40
Index
mixed-gender training, 644
Risk Rule rescinded, 643–644
Women’s Armed Services Integration Act of
1984, 643
Women’s boxing
in British music halls, 515
Casillas-Tortorelli, Graciela, 516
exhibition at the 1904 Summer Olympics, 515
ﬁrst all-women’s professional boxing
championship, 516
ﬁrst amateur women’s division, 518
promotion of, 517
and Sex Discrimination Acts, 516
in Thailand, 322
Women’s freestyle wrestling, 473, 520–525
changing perspectives, 532
funding inadequate, 524
impact on male participation, 521
roadblock, 524
and Title IX, 521
tournaments, 523
and women’s liberation movement, 521
See also Adams v. Baker
Women’s Social and Political Union (WSPU),
634
Women’s wrestling, 494
Won Hop Loong Chuan system, 425
Wong Ark-Yuey, 449
World Championship Wrestling (WCW), 495
World Extreme Cage Fighting (WEC), 489
World War II, and people of Japanese ancestry in
North America, 449
World Wide Wrestling Federation (WWWF),
494, 545
World Wrestling Entertainment. See World Wide
Wrestling Federation (WWWF)
Wrestling
in ancient Egypt, 422
Breton, 224
Celtic, 226–227
ceremonial, 337
Chinese, 116–119
in contemporary settings, 337
Cornish, 224
crocodile, 335
European folk traditions, 247
European middle ages, later, 242
and Finnish-Canadians, 460–464
four basic stances of, 352
gidigbo, 11–14
Greco-Roman, 472
www.ebook3000.com

Greek, 234–235
Hawaiian, 275
“Hindoo,” in the United States, 447
Iberian, 226
Indian, 289–293
international freestyle, 472–473
Irish, 223
Japanese, 175–181
Japanese American wrestlers, 446, 447, 449
Korean, 190–195
like a gorilla, 335
Lucha Canaria (Canary Islands wrestling), 5–6
male initiations, 337
Maori, 277
mat surface standardized, 473
medieval tradition, 247–248
modern, 247–248
Mongolian, 78–80
Nuba tournaments, 422
Ottoman, 85–87
South Asian, 283–284
Soviet freestyle, 509
sumo, as popular U.S. spectator sport, 448
sumo, in Japan, 176–181
Tahitian, 272–273
Welsh, 225
Wrestling, backhold, 471–472
Wrestling, Finnish-Canadian
during the Depression, 464
and ideological divisions, 462
and World War I, 462
Wrestling, folk, 471, 472
Finland, 461
Wrestling, Greco-Roman, 471–474
described, 472–473
history of name, 472
Wrestling, Indian, 290–293
Wrestling, International and Greco-Roman
differences, 473
length, 473
mat, 473
rules, 473
Wrestling, international freestyle, 471–474
Wrestling, professional, 491–495
and gender roles, 609
Golden Age of, 494
during the Great Depression, 493
and importance of novelty, 610
as live muscular theater, 491
prematch preparation, 610
scandals in North America, 492
Index
I-41
“Slam Bang Western Style Wrestling,” 493
and stereotyping, 609
storyline of the Caped Crusader, 609
training, 610
Wrestling, women’s freestyle. See Freestyle
wrestling, women’s
Wright, Archibald, 26
WSPU. See Women’s Social and Political Union
(WSPU)
Wu Gongyi, 100
Wu Gongzao, 100
Wu Jianquan, 100
Wu Mei legend, 425
Wu Quanyou, 100
Wu Shu, 96
Wu Yuxiang, 95, 106, 107
Wu Zetian, Empress (Tang Dynasty, China),
108
Wubei Xinshu (New Book of Military
Preparedness), 90
Wubei Zhi (Encyclopedia of Military
Preparedness), 95
Wuda pian (martial arts ﬁghting ﬁlm), 528
Wudang boxing, 95. See also Shaolin boxing
Wudang Mountains, martial arts tour stops, 409
Wujing Zongyao, 94
Wushu, 92, 97
Wuxia movies, from mainland China, 530
Wuxia pian (martial arts chivalry ﬁlm), 528, 529
WWWF. See World Wide Wrestling Federation
(WWWF)
Xiaowu, Emperor (Northern Wei, China), 340
Xingyiquan
and Central Martial Arts Institute, 97
Kuomintang government, under, 102
Xiongnu (Huns), 58–59
Xu Dong, 95
Xu Ke, 107
xuanji (profound opportunity), 107
Yagyu Munenori, 558–559
The Yakuza (Warner Brothers), 532
Yamaga Soko, and justiﬁcation for hereditary
warrior class, 557
Yamaoka, no-sword style, 379–380
Yambao, Placido, 308–309
Yan Yongchun, 425
Yan Yuan, 95
Yang Chengfu, 100
“Yang style” taijiquan, 410

Yasen kanna (Evening Chat on a Boat) (Hakuin),
375
Yasumaru Yoshio, 377
Yellow Emperor (Huang-di), 376
Yemen, dance, 418
Yi, 97
Yi He Tuan (Chinese secret society), 622
Yihetuan, 96
Yin and Yang, 432
parallelism in the uchi/soto distinction, 660
Yin-Yang School, 342
Yinyang theory, 105–106
Yip Man, 100
YMCA. See Young Men’s Christian Association
(YMCA)
YMHA. See Young Men’s Hebrew Association
(YMHA)
Yoga, 360
akharas, 360
asanas, 361
chakra, 361
deﬁned, 360
ida, 361
method for achieving siddha, 362
nadi physiology, 361
pingla, 361
pranayama (breathing exercises), 360–361
sushumna, 361
Yoga Sutra (Patanjali), 361
Yongchun boxing, 109, 426
categorized as Southern Boxing, 100
Yongchun County Gazetteer, 109
Yongzheng era, 111
Yoruba people, traditions of, 335–336
Young, Kaitlin, 546
Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA),
organizing ﬁght cards for troops, 467
Young Men’s Hebrew Association (YMHA), and
amateur boxing, 467
Yu Dayou, General, 107, 341
Yu Kwon Sool, 184
I-42
Index
Yuan period, 343
Yue Fei Boxing, 103
Yuen Wo-ping (Yuan Heping), 532, 541. See also
Martial arts ﬁlms, and Hollywood
Yugoslavia, Sambo teams from, 512
Yung Chen City, martial arts tour stops, 409
Zafar-nama (Book of Victories) (Mostawﬁ), 66
Zbyszko, Stanley, 492
Zen, 389
Zen and Japanese Culture (Suzuki), 389
Zen and the Art of Street Fighting (Sabat), 414
Zen Buddhism, 338–339, 372–373
Japanese, deﬁned, 389
nature of, 340
romanticized notions of, 383
and Shaolin Monastery, 340
Zen in the Art of Archery (Herrigel), 156, 390, 413
Zen Nippon Kyudo Renmei (All Nippon Kyudo
Federation, or ANKF), 157
Zhang Sanfeng, 342, 343. See also Taijiquan
Zhonghua xin wushu, 96
Zhongyang Guoshu Guan (Central Martial Arts
Institute), 97, 343
Zhou, 92–93
Zhou Lianggong, 100
Zoroastrianism, 365, 366
Avesta (holy book), 67
Zulu people, 19, 336
Zulu stick ﬁghting
historical background, 19–20
as preparation for warfare, 336
rules and protocol, 23
social practices, 20–21
structure of, 22–23
today, 23–24
war magic, 21–22
weapons, 21
Zumbi, King (semi-legendary, Brazil)
as capoeira master, 622
role in African Brazilian martial arts, 426
www.ebook3000.com

About the Editors
THOMAS A. GREEN is associate professor in anthropology at Texas A&M University. His
books include Folklore: An Encyclopedia of Beliefs, Customs, Tales, Music, and Art (1997), Martial
Arts of the World: An Encyclopedia (2001), and Martial Arts in the Modern World (2003). He has
practiced martial arts since 1972.
JOSEPH R. SVINTH is an editor for the Electronic Journals of Martial Arts and Sciences
(http://ejmas.com). His books include Getting a Grip: Judo in the Nikkei Communities of the Paciﬁc
Northwest, 1900–1950 (2003) and Martial Arts in the Modern World (2003). He has practiced
martial arts since 1980.

Martial Arts of the World
www.ebook3000.com

A t l a n t i c
I n d i a n
O c e a n
O c e a n
A r c t i c  O c e a n
A r c t i c  O c e a n
P a c i f i c
O c e a n
Zimbabwe
Zambia
Yemen
Vietnam
Somoa
Venezuela
Vanuatu
Uzbekistan
Uruguay
United States
United Kingdom
U.A.E.
Ukraine
Uganda
Turkmenistan
Turkey
Tunisia
Trinidad & Tobago
Tonga
Togo
Thailand
Tanzania
Tajikistan
Syria
Switz.
Sweden
Swaziland
Suriname
Sudan
Sri Lanka
Spain
South Africa
Somalia
Solomon Islands
Slovenia
Slovakia
Sierra Leone
Senegal
Saudi Arabia
Sao Tome & Principe
Rwanda
R
u
s
s
i
a
R
u
s
s
i
a
Romania
Qatar
Portugal
Poland
Philippines
Peru
Paraguay
Papua
New Guinea
Panama
Palau
Pakistan
Oman
Norway
Nigeria
Niger
Nicaragua
New Zealand
Neth.
Nepal
Namibia
Mozambique
Morocco
Mongolia
Mold.
Mexico
Mauritius
Mauritania
Malta
Mali
Malaysia
Malawi
Madagascar
Mace.
Lux.
Lithuania
Libya
Liberia
Lesotho
Lebanon
Latvia
Laos
Kyrgyzstan
Kuwait
S. Korea
N. Korea
Kenya
Kazakhstan
Jordan
Japan
Jamaica
Italy
Israel
Ireland
Iraq
Iran
I
n
d
o
n
e
s
i
a
India
Iceland
Hungary
Honduras
Haiti
Guyana
Guinea-Bissau
Guinea
Guatemala
Greenland
Greece
Ghana
Germany
Georgia
Gambia
Gabon
French Guiana
France
Finland
Fiji
Ethiopia
Estonia
Eritrea
Equatorial Guinea
El Salvador
Egypt
Ecuador
East Timor
Dom. Rep.
Dijbouti
Denmark
Czech Rep.
Cyprus
Cuba
Croatia
Cote
d'Ivoire
Costa Rica
Congo
Dem. Rep.
of Congo
Colombia
C h i n a
China
Chile
Chad
Central African Republic
Cape Verde
C a n a d a
Cameroon
Cambodia
Burundi
Burma
Burkina Faso
Bulgaria
Brunei
B r a z i l
Botswana
Bolivia
Benin
Belize
Bel.
Belarus
Bahamas
Azerb.
Austria
A u s t r a l i a
Armenia
Argentina
Angola
Algeria
Albania
Afghanistan
Western Sahara
(Occupied by Morocco)
Bos. & Herz. Serb.
Mont.

Martial Arts of the World
An Encyclopedia of 
History and Innovation
VOLUME II
Themes
Thomas A. Green and Joseph R. Svinth, Editors
www.ebook3000.com

Copyright 2010 by ABC-CLIO, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording,
or otherwise, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior permission
in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Martial arts of the world : an encyclopedia of history and innovation / Thomas A. Green and
Joseph R. Svinth, editors.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-59884-243-2 (hard copy : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-1-59884-244-9 (e-book)
1.  Martial arts—Encyclopedias.  I. Green, Thomas A., 1944– II. Svinth, Joseph R. 
GV1101.M29 2010
796.8—dc22
2010004149
ISBN: 978-1-59884-243-2
EISBN: 978-1-59884-244-9
14 13 12 11 10
1 2 3 4 5
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper 
Manufactured in the United States of America

Contents
Volume I: Regions and Individual Arts
List of Contributors
xi
Introduction
xvii
A Note on Romanization
xxi
Africa
1
Canary Islands Stick Fighting and Wrestling
1
Dambe
6
Gidigbo
10
Moraingy
14
Zulu Stick Fighting
18
Americas
25
52 Hand Blocks/Jailhouse Rock
25
Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu
31
Capoeira
37
Caribbean Martial Arts
42
Kenpo Karate
49
Central and Southwest Asia
55
Central Asian Archery
55
Iranian Martial Arts
66
Mongolian Martial Arts
77
Ottoman Martial Arts
81
Ottoman Oiled Wrestling
85
East Asia
89
China: Boxing Styles
89
China: Martial Arts
92
China: Martial Arts in Hong Kong
99
www.ebook3000.com

China: Martial Arts in Taiwan
101
China: Martial Theories
105
China: Martial Women
108
China: Shaolin Temple Legends
110
China: Weapons
114
China: Wrestling
116
Japan: Jujutsu
120
Japan: Judo
127
Japan: Aikido
132
Japan: Kendo
139
Japan: Iaido
144
Japan: Jo
147
Japan: Kyudo
152
Japan: Naginata
158
Japan: Ninpo
162
Japan: Shorinji Kempo
172
Japan: Sumo
175
Korea: Hapkido
183
Korea: Kumdo
187
Korea: Ssireum
190
Korea: Taekkyon
195
Korea: Taekwondo
199
Okinawa: Karate
205
Europe
213
Amazons and Gladiatrices
213
Canne de Combat
217
Celtic Martial Arts
221
English Pugilism
228
Fighting Arts of the Hellenic, Hellenistic, and Roman Eras
233
Fighting Arts of the Early Middle Ages
240
Fighting Arts of the Later Middle Ages
242
Fighting Arts of the Renaissance
249
Savate, Chausson, and French Boxing
256
Oceania
263
Australia
263
Melanesia
265
vi
Contents

Contents
vii
Micronesia
268
Polynesia: Tahiti, Hawai‘i, and Aotearoa (New Zealand)
270
South Asia
281
South Asian Martial Arts
281
Indian Wrestling
289
Thang-Ta
294
Southeast Asia
299
Arnis
299
Kuntao
312
Muay Thai
317
Silat
324
Index
I-1
About the Editors
Volume II: Themes
List of Contributors
xi
A Note on Romanization
xvii
Social Uses of the Martial Arts
xix
Belief Systems
331
Belief Systems: Africa
332
Belief Systems: China
338
Belief Systems: European Chivalry
345
Belief Systems: European Occult Sciences
352
Belief Systems: India
357
Belief Systems: Iran
363
Belief Systems: Japanese Budo, Bujutsu, and Bugei
369
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868
371
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868
382
Belief Systems: Silat
394
Commodiﬁcation of Leisure
405
Chinese Martial Arts and Money
406
Martial Arts Tourism
411
www.ebook3000.com

Expressive Culture
417
Folklore
423
Invented Traditions
428
Globalization of Martial Arts
435
Asian Martial Arts in the United States and Canada
442
Bartitsu
451
Capoeira in Europe
455
Finnish-Canadian Wrestlers
460
International Boxing
465
International Freestyle and Greco-Roman Wrestling
471
International Karate
474
Jeet Kune Do
479
Mixed Martial Arts
485
Professional Wrestling
491
Reality-Based Defense
496
Sambo
502
Women’s Boxing, 1972–Present
514
Women’s Freestyle Wrestling
520
Martial Media
527
Film and the Martial Arts
527
Gunﬁghters
534
Television and the Martial Arts
539
The Internet and the Martial Arts
549
Written Texts: Japan
554
Military, Paramilitary, and 
Law Enforcement Methods
565
American Judo, 1942–1945
565
Bayonet Training in the United States
568
Judo in Japan, 1931–1950
573
Jukendo
578
Kapap and Krav Maga
583
Military Unarmed Fighting Systems in the United States
588
Police Defensive Tactics Training in the United States
593
Social and Cultural Evolution of Kendo
598
viii
Contents

Performing Arts
605
Action Design for Professional Wrestling
608
Stage Combat in the Elizabethan Tradition
611
Taiwanese Street Performances
615
Political Uses of the Martial Arts
619
Afrikan Martial Arts
625
Jujutsuffragettes
632
Political Conﬂict and Aikido, 1931–1942
638
Women in Combat: The U.S. Military, 2001–Present
643
Secret Societies and Fraternal Organizations
647
Plains Indian Warrior Societies
651
Social Aspects of Kata and Waza
657
Index
I-1
About the Editors
Contents
ix
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank 

List of Contributors
Contributing Editors
Jason Couch
Douglas S. Farrer
Carlos Gutiérrez García
Stanley E. Henning
Brian Kennedy
Gregory D. Mele
Tony Wolf
Editorial Assistant
Margie Serrato
Contributors
Monica Aceti
University of Franche-Comté
Besançon, France
Joseph Alter
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Jack Anderson
Queen’s University
Belfast, Ireland
Jeff Archer
Independent Scholar
La Mesa, California
Martin Bastide
Leeds Metropolitan University
London, England
www.ebook3000.com

William Baxter
President, International Federation of Celtic Wrestling
Glasgow, Scotland
Alexander Bennett
Kansai University; Editor, Kendo World
Osaka, Japan
William M. Bodiford
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, California
Paul Bowman
University of Cardiff
Cardiff, Wales
Jeff Broderick
Independent Scholar
Kanagawa, Japan
Graciela Casillas-Tortorelli
Oxnard College
Oxnard, California
Luc Cerruti
Independent Scholar
Montpellier, France
Vera Chan
Senior Editor, Yahoo!
San Francisco, California
Marié-Heleen Coetzee
University of Pretoria
Pretoria, South Africa
Jason Couch
Independent Scholar
Severn, Maryland
Rupert Cox
University of Manchester
Manchester, England
Philip Davies
Brunel University
London, England
Jean-Marc de Grave
University of Provence
Aix-en-Provence, France
xii
List of Contributors

Gabriel Facal
University of Provence
Aix-en-Provence, France
Jack Farrell
Independent Scholar
Houston, Texas
Douglas S. Farrer
University of Guam
Mangilao, Guam
Aaron Fields
Independent Scholar
Seattle, Washington
Karl Friday
University of Georgia
Athens, Georgia
Lance Gatling
Independent Scholar
Tokyo, Japan
Emelyne Godfrey
Independent Scholar
London, England
Peter A. Goldsbury
Hiroshima University
Hiroshima, Japan
Alexey Gorbylev
Independent Scholar
Moscow, Russia
Noah Gross
Independent Scholar
Zichron Yaakov, Israel
Elizabeth Nai-Jia Guo
Independent Scholar
Taipei, Taiwan
Carlos Gutiérrez García
University of León
León, Spain
Earl Hartman
Independent Scholar
Palo Alto, California
List of Contributors
xiii
www.ebook3000.com

C. Nathan Hatton
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Ontario
Stanley E. Henning
Independent Scholar
Honolulu, Hawai‘i
Leon Hunt
Brunel University
London, England
Felipe P. Jocano Jr.
University of the Philippines
Quezon City, Philippines
Brian Kennedy
Independent Scholar
San Diego, California
Kay Koppedrayer
Wilfrid Laurier University
Waterloo, Ontario
Glynn Leyshon
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario
Jean-François Loudcher
University of Franche-Comté
Besançon, France
WR Mann
Realﬁghting.com
New York, New York
Juan Carlos Martín
University of León
León, Spain
Trevor W. McKeown
Historian, Grand Lodge of British Columbia and Yukon
Vancouver, British Columbia
Gregory D. Mele
Chicago Swordplay Guild
Chicago, Illinois
Lauren Miller
Indiana University
Bloomington, Indiana
xiv
List of Contributors

Manouchehr Moshtagh Khorasani
Independent Scholar
Frankfurt-am-Main, Germany
Ron Mottern
University of Tennessee
Knoxville, Tennessee
Steven Murray
Mesa State College
Grand Junction, Colorado
Michael Pederson
St. John’s College
Santa Fe, New Mexico
Mikel Pérez Gutiérrez
University of León
León, Spain
Ernest Ratsimbazafy
University of Antananarivo
Antananarivo, Madagascar
Sohini Ray
Manipuri Dance Visions
Pasadena, California
Roy Ron
Historiographical Institute, University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
Margie Serrato
Texas A&M University
College Station, Texas
Bruce Sims
Midwest Hapkido
Lindenhurst, Illinois
Christopher Sparks
Texas A&M University
College Station, Texas
Kim Taylor
Publisher, Electronic Journals of Martial Arts and Sciences (EJMAS)
Guelph, Ontario
T.V. Tuleja
Saint Peter’s College
Jersey City, New Jersey
List of Contributors
xv
www.ebook3000.com

Tad Tuleja
Princeton University
Princeton, New Jersey
Peter Vail
National University of Singapore
Singapore
Lee Wedlake
Independent Scholar
Fort Myers, Florida
Chi-hsiu Weng
United States Shuai Chiao Association
Cupertino, California
Earl White
Ijo Ija Academy
Los Angeles, California
Lee Wilson
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, England
Tony Wolf
Fight Director
Chicago, Illinois
Phillip Zarrilli
University of Exeter
Exeter, England
xvi
List of Contributors

A Note on Romanization
In this book, we generally follow standard academic usage, with the caveat that macrons have
been omitted because of typographical considerations.
We admit that we were not always consistent. Consider the following. In 1979, the People’s
Republic of China (PRC) decided to employ the pinyin system of transliteration for foreign pub-
lications, and the pinyin system is the preferred method in the present volume. Before this deci-
sion by the PRC, the Wade-Giles system had gained wide international acceptance, and it
remains the government standard in Taiwan. In 2000, the Republic of Korea introduced a new
transliteration system for Korean. Before that, the McCune-Reischauer system was standard.
Achieving consistency in Japanese is no easier—is it jujutsu, jujitsu, or jiu-jitsu? Today, the pre-
ferred transliteration is jujutsu, using macrons, but the latter two spellings are how practitioners
of some of these systems actually wrote the word, and in the latter case, that spelling sometimes
represents a legal business name. Finally, there are political issues. To take a geographical exam-
ple, is the body of water called the Arabian Gulf or the Persian Gulf? The answer to that ques-
tion literally depends on which shore you are standing.
To get around this, we have tried to take the middle ground. When there was a political
or business issue, we used the method preferred by the subject of the entry, and when the per-
son spoke English, we used his or her preferred spelling. Otherwise, we tried to follow current
academic guidelines.
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank 

Social Uses of the Martial Arts
In Volume I of this book we arranged the martial arts of the world by geographical region. Here,
in Volume II, we arrange them topically.
Both individuals and societies use martial arts for many reasons. Thus, it helps to think of
these motivations as Venn diagrams—those overlapping circles they use in algebra classes to
show relationships between groups of things, with the best ﬁt being the place where all the cir-
cles overlap. To avoid giving undue priority to any single motivation, the following list, which
is not all-encompassing, is arranged alphabetically.
Agonistics. Agonistics is a Greek word used by sociologists to describe aggressive social interaction
between people. This aggressive interaction can be mental, physical, or both, and participants
can be actors, spectators, or both. Although both observation and participation can provide
intrinsic pleasure, agonistic behavior also teaches methods of trickery, deception, and divination
not otherwise taught in school.
Character development. In the Chinese Book of Rites (Li Ji, parts of which are probably dated to the
tenth century BCE), in the chapter entitled “The Meaning of the Ceremony of Archery,” it is writ-
ten that one can know the virtue and conduct of the archer by the way he draws his bow. Unfor-
tunately, the deﬁnition of what constitutes good character depends largely upon the society and
subgroup, and even within a society or subgroup, deﬁnitions may change over time.
Exorcising demons. Sometimes, this exorcism is literal. For example, on Taiwan, Taoist priests some-
times use martial art drills during exorcisms. Moving in precise patterns, the priests ﬁrst point their
magical weapons toward heaven, to show that they have divine favor. Then, they point the
weapons at the ghosts. If the priests’ ritual is correct, then the ghosts are forced to leave (Lagerwey
1987). Usually, though, exorcising demons refers to people training themselves to physical exhaus-
tion as a way of dealing with nightmarish emotional situations.
Funerary rituals. Homer described boxing and wrestling as part of the funerary games in The Iliad
(eighth century BCE), and George MacDonald Fraser (1995, 88–89) described a division of dead
soldiers’ property during World War II (1939–1945): “It was not callousness or indifference or lack
of feeling for two comrades who had been alive that morning and were now names for the war
memorial; it was just that there was nothing to be said.”
Group solidarity. Immigrant groups often encourage their children to participate in national games as
a way of keeping them in touch with Old Country traditions. Examples include Japanese Ameri-
can judo and kendo clubs of the 1920s and 1930s. At another level, as early as the fourteenth cen-
tury, the North African philosopher Ibn Khaldun (1332–1406) had already identiﬁed the role that
group solidarity plays in warfare—people, he said, do not die for camels.
Honor and reputation. According to the story, the Fates offered Achilles the choice between a short
life crowned by everlasting fame and a long life that no one would remember. Achilles chose glory,
and as a result became the short-lived (but famous) hero of Homer’s Iliad. Since then, ﬁghts, duels,
and homicide about matters of honor or masculinity are so common as almost to need no mention.
www.ebook3000.com

Invented tradition. Invented traditions (a term introduced by Hobsbawm and Ranger in 1983) estab-
lish social cohesion, legitimize political institutions, and sell commercial products. Examples of
invented traditions include George Washington (1732–1799) admitting in childhood to chopping
down a cherry tree, white-bearded Santas wearing red suits, and the Korean art of taekwondo,
which owes more to the warriors of ancient Silla than to the karate classes of Imperial Japan. Much
(perhaps most) martial arts history consists of invented tradition; as one of the editors has written
elsewhere (Green 2003), a system’s ofﬁcial past is more frequently the product of dialogue and
imagination than chronology.
Keeping together in time. Drums, ﬁrecrackers, speed bag drills, and boot heels striking in unison are all
forms of percussion. Percussion is sometimes used to help practitioners enter trance states, and
other times to frighten enemies or inspire observers.
Lords of disorder. Across the world, people stage festivals in which the normal order of the world is
turned upside down. In such festivals, feasting follows fasting. Energetic dancing follows heavy
drinking. Women dressed as men abuse men dressed as women. Trickster becomes Warrior-King,
and The Fool becomes the Sage. During these festivals, the authority of the state is always at risk;
something happens when people move out of normal space and into the street. There is often sub-
text to the term street-ﬁghter.
Military training. Preparation for military service often involves participation in wrestling, archery,
hunting, stick games, energetic dances (Indian tandava, Brazilian capoeira, Spartan pyrrhiche), and
foot, horse, and canoe races. Not everyone agrees that these activities are worth the army’s time,
expense, and injuries. But, at a minimum, the skills developed by recruiting athletes and organiz-
ing tournaments are valuable. After all, during an extended campaign, the prowess of the individ-
ual warrior is rarely as important as is the prowess of the people involved in command,
communication, logistics, and tax collection.
Monetary gain. Monetary motivation applies not only to individuals selling belt rankings or requiring
students to purchase long-term contracts, but also to martial art teachers seeking to earn a living,
athletic and professional associations, equipment manufacturers, and tourist bureaus.
Muscular development. Although individuals often participate in martial arts and combative sports for rea-
sons such as fun or narcissism, the purpose of school physical education programs is not so much to build
beautiful bodies or help anyone have fun as it is to ensure that children grow up healthy. Through vig-
orous exercise, participants grow stronger and therefore become more productive workers or soldiers.
Nationalism. Governments (and groups that hope to become governments) often patronize martial arts
and combative sports. The idea is to show the world that our cultural method produces better ﬁght-
ers than their cultural method does. Nationalism sometimes leads to invented traditions, in part
because governments can afford to pay people to create invented traditions.
Paramilitary training. When used by police, paramilitary training typically emphasizes control methods
that do not routinely kill or maim healthy adults and teenagers. (Obviously, such methods can kill or
injure if they are misused or if the recipient is unlucky.) When taught by political factions and anti-gov-
ernment activists, paramilitary training also includes teaching ways to kill using everyday implements.
Political theater. Stories featuring deeds of derring-do are often used to teach history and morals to
semiliterate masses. Martial examples include the Greek Iliad, the Chinese Water Margin stories,
the English Robin Hood stories, and the American ballads about Jesse James (1847–1882).
Potlatch. In a potlatch, one group sets out to embarrass a rival group by putting on fancier meals or games
than the other group can afford. Thus, Romans staged gladiatorial contests in which expensive slaves
were killed, and modern university alumni groups buy new uniforms and team equipment.
Preposterous violence. We all enjoy fantasizing about a universe in which bad things happen to bad peo-
ple, and James Twitchell (1989) has deﬁned theatrical efforts in this direction as “preposterous
violence.” Examples include religious iconography featuring tortured saints, Punch-and-Judy shows,
xx
Social Uses of the Martial Arts

Social Uses of the Martial Arts
xxi
comic books, kung fu movies, and professional wrestling. Because preposterous violence is voyeuris-
tic rather than participatory, the good guys (meaning people in our group, our leaders, and/or our
media support) triumph in the end. Preposterous violence tends to support the status quo.
Rites of passage. During rites of passage, the emphasis is less on combat effectiveness than on learning to
take one’s lumps like a man. Gangs have beatings-in, schoolboys have hazings, and assorted cultures
have games involving mutual ﬂagellation. Military organizations and martial arts classes typically
invoke such activities as rites of passage. “I once studied a martial art that offered ‘special training’
twice a year,” recalled a martial arts practitioner during personal correspondence with the author of
this entry. “I don’t believe I ever really learned anything at these events, but the bonding and the
testosterone boost, even among the women in the group, were palpable for the next few weeks.”
Seeking (or showing) divine favor. At one time or another, most major cultures have conceived mar-
tial art as a religious duty. Examples include Zealots, Crusaders, and jihadists. Religious motivation
generally includes the belief that the Deity will grant victory to the person or side that is divinely
guided. This can lead to serious theological issues during civil wars, when the same deity is pre-
sumably supporting the good people on both sides.
Status. A belt is just a piece of cloth or leather, and as any decent philosopher or religious leader will
afﬁrm, it is pointless to claim to be a master unless one has ﬁrst mastered one’s carnal self. Nonethe-
less, the human desire for individual status explains why teachers frequently take enormous pride
in grandiloquent titles. Meanwhile, their students pay hundreds, sometimes thousands, of dollars
for what are, after all, nothing more than fashion accessories.
Vice. In most societies, vice is a crime only if one gets caught. The more commercial the society, the
more likely vice is to ﬂourish, and in the postmodern world, casino owner Donald Trump found “a
direct relation between a high roller in the gaming sense and a boxing fan.” Speciﬁcally, a boxing
championship meant an extra U.S. $15 million a week in business, and almost $2 million a week
in proﬁts (Berger 1993, 193).
In Volume II, our authors explore these generalizations in greater detail.
—Joseph Svinth
See also: Introduction (in Volume I).
REFERENCES
Berger, Phil. 1993. Punch Lines. New York: Four Walls Eight Windows.
Fraser, George MacDonald. 1995. Quartered Safe Out Here. New York: HarperCollins.
Green, Thomas A. 2003. “Sense in Nonsense: The Role of Folk History in the Martial Arts,” in Mar-
tial Arts in the Modern World, edited by Thomas A. Green and Joseph R. Svinth, 1–11. Westport,
CT: Praeger.
Hobsbawm, E. J., and Terence Ranger, editors. 1983. The Invention of Tradition. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Ibn Khaldun. 1967. The Muqaddimah, translated by Franz Rosenthal, edited by N. J. Dawood. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Lagerwey, John. 1987. Taoist Ritual in Chinese Society and History. New York: Macmillan.
Macleod, David I. 1983. Building Character in the American Boy: The Boy Scouts, YMCA, and Their
Forerunners, 1870–1920. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
McNeill, William H. 1995. Keeping Together in Time: Dance and Drill in Human History. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Twitchell, James B. 1989. Preposterous Violence: Fables of Aggression in Modern Culture. New York:
Oxford University Press.
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank 

Dehua ware porcelain statuette of Bodhidharma,
ﬁrst half of the seventeenth century. (Metropolitan
Museum of Art/Art Resource, NY)
Dan “The Beast” Severn (left) and Ruben “Warpath” Villarreal compete in a cage ﬁght held
in Colusa, California, June 2004. (Jeff Hutchens/Getty Images)
xxiii
www.ebook3000.com

Pakistani women belonging to
the Sind Muslim Women’s
National Guard perform with
bamboo sticks, November 1947.
(Margaret Bourke-White/Time
& Life Pictures/Getty Images)
“Myack, Jiu-Jitsu Champion of the World,”
photograph of professional wrestler and judo
pioneer Miyake Taruji taken in France in 1914.
(Bibliothèque Nationale de France)
xxiv

During the mid-1970s, a boy in Belfast,
Northern Ireland, pretends to be an old-fash-
ioned soldier, with a sword and shield made
from a stick and garbage can lid. (Hulton-
Deutsch Collection/Corbis)
Men audition for a role in a movie, about 1975. (UCLA Charles E. Young
Research Library Department of Special Collections)
xxv
www.ebook3000.com

U.S. Army recruiting poster features recent
enlistee and reigning world heavyweight
boxing champion Joe Louis, early 1942.
(National Archives and Records Adminis-
tration)
Indonesian danced battle, mid-twentieth century. (New York Public
Library)
xxvi

Brazil’s Natália Falavigna da Silva celebrates winning a bronze medal in taek-
wondo at the Beijing Olympic Games, August 23, 2008. (Ezra Shaw/Getty
Images)
New Guinea man wearing a heart-shaped mask of curved boars’ tusks, brush-
like headdress, necklace, and stick, early 1920s. (National Library of Aus-
tralia/Frank Hurley)
xxvii
www.ebook3000.com

Caricature of English antiquarian author Egerton Castle, dressed in fencing
clothes and holding a rapier, by Sir Leslie Ward, published in Vanity Fair,
March 9, 1905. (National Library of Australia)
xxviii

Belief Systems
Belief systems comprise a complex whole. Included are speech, cuisine, holidays, recreational
and economic activities, gender relationships, and relationship to the divine.
Belief systems are group phenomena that are transmitted over time. The method of trans-
mission ranges from informal observation through formal initiation.
This does not mean that belief systems are mechanistic. Cultures are a matter of consensus.
Nonetheless, members of a given culture are predisposed to a certain worldview. That predispo-
sition is what makes them members of this culture rather than that culture.
With these thoughts in mind, martial arts can be deﬁned as systematic bodies of knowledge,
belief, and practice that are associated with methods of attack and defense against human adversaries and
their extrahuman allies.
Given this deﬁnition, the following are some reasonably universal assumptions regarding
martial belief systems.
1.
Extrahuman powers are available. Cultural deities and ancestral spirits are common sources of
extrahuman power. The invocation of these extrahuman powers involves sacriﬁces and often
includes chanting, drumming, dancing, and the correct performance of ritual.
2.
Extrahuman powers can both protect and attack. Protective powers include amulets, charms,
icons, and prayers. Malevolent powers include poisons and the like.
3.
Certain weapons have extraordinary power. In Indonesia and Malaysia, there is a belief that
certain wave-bladed daggers (keris) carry the spirit (hantu) of the smiths (pande) who forged
them. In the Islamic world, this impersonal divine power is called baraka. In Oceania, it is called
mana. In ﬁn-de-siècle Europe, the belief was, “Whatever happens, we have got the Maxim gun
and they have not.”
4.
Extrahuman powers are ﬁckle. Daggers break. Maxim guns jam. Odin the One-Eyed takes his
ravens elsewhere. Extrahuman powers often fail at exactly the wrong moment.
5.
Training reduces chaos. Some martial training is esoteric. Examples of esoteric practices include
practicing astrologically signiﬁcant patterns, taking guidance from dreams, and reciting the correct
incantations. However, in most cases, martial training is simply endless hours of rote repetition
under the watchful eye of a teacher.
6.
Rehearsal reduces chaos. Youths wrestle their brothers and neighbors before representing their
villages or schools in district meets. Mughal maharajahs and British imperial administrators
organized tiger hunts. Modern armies hold war games. The idea is to survive mistakes and learn
from them.
7.
Awareness reduces chaos. This awareness is both literal and metaphysical. Sudden silences,
inexplicable ﬂights of birds, the patterns of the clouds in the sky, the steaming livers of the
freshly killed; these are omens. Divination (from the Latin “to foresee”) describes systematic
methods said to help trained ritual specialists discern meaningful information from apparently
www.ebook3000.com

unrelated patterns. Yoruba Ifa, Chinese I Ching (Yi Jing), and systems analysis are examples of
divination systems that have been used in martial contexts.
8.
The life-dealing sword, the death-dealing sword. The surgeon’s scalpel is simply a tiny sword, and
a society’s attitudes toward death are revealed in its attitude toward medicine. In some cultures, the
ideal warrior is also a bone-setter and herbalist, whereas in others, the wounded soldier or defeated
general is expected to fall on his sword or blow out his brains.
In short, belief systems help deﬁne martial arts and their associated behavioral codes.
—Thomas A. Green and Joseph Svinth
See also: Social Uses of the Martial Arts; Expressive Culture; Folklore; 
Military, Paramilitary, and Law Enforcement Methods; Political 
Uses of the Martial Arts; and Secret Societies and Fraternal 
Organizations (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Geertz, Clifford. 1973. The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays. New York: Basic Books.
Klass, Morton. 1995. Ordered Universes: Approaches to the Anthropology of Religion. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
BELIEF SYSTEMS: AFRICA
The lifestyles that arose on the African continent manifest the diversity that would be expected
from populations adapting to physical environments ranging from desert to rain forest. Coptic
Christianity, Islam, Bantu, Nilotic, and West African belief systems all predated modern colo-
nialism, and all impacted perceptions of relations between humanity and the supernatural
(Schneider 1981, 183–186). Ironically, although the word for religion (as a distinct category of
experience as separated from politics, medicine, art, and martial endeavors) is absent from many
African languages, the concept of the spiritual is integral to daily life (Opoku 2006, 537).
Sacred themes that are cross-culturally integral to martial practice relate to deities, the animal
world, traditional medicine, and cultural performances (festival and ritual). The following exam-
ples address martial practices of representative cultures from the areas of Africa south of the Sahara.
MARTIAL DEITIES
Sometimes the ties between the spiritual and the martial arts are explicit. Sacred narratives,
prayers, praise poetry, the names of supernatural concepts, festivals, and rituals often resonate
with martial practice. Put another way, martial images appear in the verbal expressions such as
sacred narratives, praise poems, and prayers through which belief systems are transmitted.
The teachings of Ifa among the Yoruba of Nigeria provide many examples of the intertwining
of martial metaphor and sacred literature. For example, Ifa divination involves casting down six-
teen palm nuts or, alternatively, casting eight medallions strung together on a chain (opuele). The
conﬁguration into which the palm nuts or medallions fall alludes to speciﬁc verses in a sacred text
332
Belief Systems: Africa

known as the Ifa Chapters (Odu Ifa). Martial images permeate these texts. The phrase for casting
the divination objects is da[i]fa (“throw down Ifa”). The allusion is to wrestling as well as casting
divinatory objects. In his human incarnation, the orisha (deiﬁed ancestor) Orunmila (an alternate
name for Ifa) was a wrestling champion, and he conspired with the orisha Eshu (the trickster) to
allow himself to be thrown in return for payment from challengers. Thus, divination refers to
trying to arrange a future outcome, just as a gambler might attempt to ﬁx a wrestling match.
Elsewhere in the Odu Ifa, the supreme deity Oludamare decreed that the orishas must wres-
tle each other in order to earn the spiritual power (ashe) that determined their places in the
supernatural hierarchy. Ori (the “head” in the sense of inborn destiny, which would be termed
barakah in SuﬁIslam and divine grace in Christianity) prevailed. Thus, during prayer, the fol-
lower of Ifa starts by saluting his or her personal Ori (that is, the believer’s “spiritual head”), just
as a wrestler salutes his teacher.
Similarly, the praise poetry (oriki) honoring Orunmila, the prophet of Ifa, alludes to
Orunmila’s ﬁght with Death. When the word rendered as “fought” is strictly translated, the sense
of the passage is not that Orunmila resisted dying, but instead that he “gave Death a headbutt.”
That distinction is signiﬁcant in that it refers to a distinctive technique of gidigbo (traditional
Yoruba wrestling). Yoruba culture (and its relationships in neighboring cultures such as the Ewe
and the Fon) is found in Nigeria, Togo, Ghana, and the Republic of Benin, and the divination
system and the deity Ifa is a common bond among all.
In these same West African cultures, the primary deity of war is Ogun, “the King who ﬁghts with
the sword” (Dennet 1910, 98). Ogun is associated with warfare, hunting, and the iron implements
used in these callings. Ogun’s “hunters’ poetry” (ijala; a more literal translation would be “salutes to
birds and animals”) contain repeated references to ﬁghting and hunting (Babalola 1997). Ogun also
has medicine that makes his body (and the bodies of anyone who can gain access to this medicine)
impervious to different types of weapons, to include arrows, guns, swords, and knives.
The medicine used to invoke the divine protection of Ogun is called okigbe. The information
that describes the preparation and use of these medicines is contained in the Ifa scriptures (the
Odus and Orikis).
Although the Yoruba regard Ogun as the primary martial deity, the orishas Shango, Eshu, and
Ochosi are also warriors. Like Ogun, Shango has connections to war medicine. Shango is known
as a lover of magic, but his magic focuses primarily on its military uses. Shango priests conceal
stones on certain parts of their bodies for protection against attacks.
Each orisha has a speciﬁc weapon. For example, Ogun, who is associated with iron, is a sword
ﬁghter, while Eshu, who is a stick ﬁghter, has 1,600 different clubs. Ochosi is a hunter orisha of
the forest; therefore, he uses a bow and arrow. Shango, the orisha of lightning and magic, wields
a double-headed ax-wand in one hand; in his other hand he bears a club.
When taken to the Americas by slaves, Shango’s club became the musical shakers called
maracas. The ax, with its speed, symbolizes lightning, while the maraca, with its shaker, sym-
bolizes both the sound of hard rain hitting and a club. Thus, when evoking Shango through
dance, the dancer moves these implements as if ﬁghting: one hand is punching, and the other
hand is chopping. When people ﬁght with one hand closed and the other hand open, they also
illustrate that symbolism—they are showing Shango’s ﬁghting style.
Supernaturally charged weapons also ﬁgure prominently in East Africa. Kibuka is the war
deity of the Bantu Baganda people of Uganda. Like the West African orishas, Kibuka is a deiﬁed
Belief Systems: Africa
333
www.ebook3000.com

ancestor. According to the story, during life he ascended to a cloud, from which he rained arrows
and spears on the heads of the Baganda people’s traditional adversaries, the Banyoro. Mortally
wounded by a volley of arrows from the enemy, he dropped his shield. The Banyoros took the
shield home as a trophy, but the shield possessed enough power in its own right to cause epidemic
illness among the Banyoros. To get rid of the curse, the Banyoros returned the shield to the
Baganda, who enshrined it with other holy objects in the temple devoted to Kibuka after his
death on the battleﬁeld (Roscoe 2005, 301–303).
ANIMALS AND POWER
Throughout the world there is an association between martial activities and the animal world.
In Africa, as elsewhere, these associations are manifested in dance, religious texts, material cul-
ture, and indigenous medical practice. This was summed up well by Kongolese dancer Malonga
Casquelord (1947–2003) during a demonstration of the ﬁghting techniques embedded in tradi-
tional dance. According to Casquelord (interview, White, 1998), “There’s a lot of ﬁghting move-
ments in the dance, but it’s all about your intention. If you want to be nice, you’re nice, you’re
showing beauty, but if you’re showing ﬁght, you’re showing ﬁght.”
After demonstrating a series of physical actions that could serve as either dance movements
or martial attacks, Casquelord explained the way to attain true expertise in ﬁghting. He said
(ibid.): “If you want to have the agility of monkey, you must take medicine of the monkey. If you
want the speed of a snake, you have to take the medicine of the snake. The snake is for speed
and accuracy.”
Casquelord cited other animals associated with his traditional martial arts. Examples were
the gorilla and even a ﬁsh that could generate energy (probably the electric catﬁsh, Malapteru-
rus electricus, native to the Congo regions). He said that wrestlers take the medicine of the ﬁsh
to make the body slippery and charged with energy.
As these comments by Casquelord suggest, the list of animal associations is long. The follow-
ing examples indicate the continental distribution of the concept of animal power in different
African martial traditions.
The crocodile (Crocodylus Niloticus) appears in various contexts in Western Africa. In the
Yoruba salutes to animals (ijala), there are verses associated with the martially signiﬁcant deity
Ogun. For instance, one ijala contains the phrase, “One who ﬁghts by slinging his legs about just
as a crocodile uses his tail” (Isha lo iko). According to Yoruba author and religious authority Bayo
Ogundijo, who demonstrated the technique for Earl White during a 2001 interview in
Ogundijo’s ofﬁce at Obafemi Awolowo University in Ile Ife, Nigeria, this phrase refers to snap
kicks: kicks that combine features of a roundhouse kick with the pivoting action of a spinning
hook kick using the heel as a point of contact.
Farther north, in Mali, there is an oral tradition of ﬁshermen wrestling crocodiles. This is asso-
ciated with of the Songhay-speaking people of Djenné, which is one of the oldest cities in sub-
Saharan Africa. The wrestlers maneuver the crocodile into deep water, because on land or in
shallow water the crocodile is able to defend itself using its tail as a formidable weapon. Success-
ful wrestlers, it is said, kill the crocodile by holding its head under water. Since tradition main-
tains that crocodiles can only survive for ﬁve minutes without taking a breath, crocodile wrestlers
train to hold their breaths for up to twice as long (Mamady Sibide, interview, Green, 2008).
334
Belief Systems: Africa

Although ethnographic descriptions of Djenné crocodile wrestling are unavailable, a Djenné
terracotta statue shows the crocodile wrestler squeezing the animal’s body between his legs and
using a grip formed by the man’s head and arm to keep the reptile’s powerful jaws closed (Thomas
Green collection). In the alligator wrestling done for tourists in Florida, a comparable technique
is known as bulldogging.
The crocodile is a totem animal for the Binou cult of the Dogon village of Amani, Mali, where
a large crocodile-ﬁlled pool occupies a place of honor in the village. At Kirango, Mali, on the bank
of the Niger River, a masquerade controlled by the youth association (ton) is held is conjunction
with circumcision rites. The masquerades, most of them animals (sogow), are constructed of bam-
boo and cloth casings, and cover the body of a man crawling on all fours. The ﬁnal episode of the
days-long ritual drama takes place at the Niger River, where the masqueraders representing the
African tigerﬁsh (Hydrocynus spp.) and the crocodile appear swimming down the river, as these
represent totem animals that “can only be captured by the strongest men” (Otter 2005).
In Yoruba tradition, there are hunters’ poems (ijala) that relate to the gorilla. The poems that
use gorilla imagery describe using one’s ﬁngers to strike like a whip. In 1995, dance teacher
Bamidele “Dele” Adefemi (interview, White) demonstrated a series of three similar ﬁnger strik-
ing techniques learned from his father, although he did not relate this to an ijala. Another praise
poem describes, “He who ﬁghts like a gorilla, snatching the arms of an opponent.” This refers to
a technique in Yoruba wrestling where a grappler snatches the opponent’s arms and tries to jerk
the shoulder or elbow out of socket. The wrestling technique is like a quick grab. Gorillas in the
jungle exhibit similar behavior when they grab trees and yank on them in an effort to intimidate
rivals. Wrestlers who use that are called ja-di ilafa, meaning “he who ﬁghts like a gorilla.”
The Igbo, who are neighbors of the Yoruba, have a wrestling system they call igba mgba.
Igbo priests who are the equivalent of the Yoruba babalawo (“father of secrets”) are called dibia.
The term is a compound of di (expert, father, or husband) and abia (knowledge or wisdom).
The dibia are healers (dibia is used as a generic word for doctor), but there are other special-
ties within this classiﬁcation. For example, the dibia mgba is an expert wrestler in the human
world. Igbo tradition regards the gorilla as the expert wrestler in the animal kingdom. The
Igbo maintain that in ancient times the ultimate initiation into the ranks of dibia mgba was
to wrestle a gorilla.
In Gabon, the Kwele consider the gorilla to be particularly charged with supernatural power.
Therefore, they use various parts of the gorilla for martial medicine. For instance, powdered
gorilla paw is administered via incisions to the knees, ﬁst, and feet for striking power and to the
head for protection against punches. “From the naked skin of silverbacks’ [male gorillas aged
twelve years or older] breast a fetish against punches is produced by the Kwele in Gabon. A dried
gorilla hand is a fetish which improves the punch during ﬁghts and the resistance against
punches” (Meder).
The association of leopard energy with martial activity (authority, enforcement, and warfare)
is strong all over Africa. In the early twentieth century, the Leopard Society of Sierra Leone
became notorious as a result of the publication of a sensationalist account of the trials of some
members of that society (Beatty 1915). The Leopard (Egbe) Society is also prominent among the
Eﬁk, who live in the modern Cross River State of Nigeria, in the Calabar region. The Igbo also
have a Leopard Society (Okonko). A common thread that runs through the duties of all the leop-
ard societies in the area is the duty to punish violations of custom.
Belief Systems: Africa
335
www.ebook3000.com

In Benin the leopard traditionally serves as the insignia of the Oba (the divine king). Wear-
ing images of the animal or parts of the body (pelt or teeth) conferred the leopard’s deadly attrib-
utes on the wearer. Oral history maintains that “[b]efore he was crowned, Ewuare [the Great, a
famous king of Benin, ruled ca. 1440–1473 CE] lived in exile, wandering in the wilderness. One
day he awoke to feel blood dripping on his face. He looked up and saw a leopard resting on an
overhanging branch, an antelope in its jaws. Interpreting his survival as a sign of luck and an
omen of future kingship, he demonstrated his mastery by killing the animal. Ewuare subsequently
decreed that all future obas [kings of Benin] should sacriﬁce a leopard at least once during their
reign” (Oberlin College, no date).
In the Nguni culture of southern Africa, the Zulu adopted the leopard skin as indicative of
the status of the wearer. Only members of the Royal House were allowed to wear leopard skin,
and any leopard killed automatically became the property of the chief (Knight 1989, 7).
In Kenya and Uganda the leopard assumes a more directly martial association. For example,
among the Nilotic Luo, the consumption of leopard meat was a traditional means of generating
ﬁerceness and martial prowess (Hobley 1902, 34). In central West Africa, the Fang classiﬁed
leopard teeth as “war medicine” (biang) that had the power to impart to the bearer the power of
the leopard (Bennett 1899, 87–89). The power of the leopard’s tooth was so highly regarded that
imitations of them were carved in ivory when the genuine power-laden items were not available
(Bennett 1899, 80).
Herders throughout Africa turn to the cattle that sustain their lives for inspiration for their
methods of war, martial medicine, martial sports, and the structure of their traditional festivals.
This pattern is well-developed among the Nguni of southern Africa. Tradition holds that, under
the leadership of Shaka (ca. 1787–1828), the Zulu polity of the Nguni people transformed their
battle tactics from traditional skirmish lines into a formation based on the body of their beloved
cattle. The battle formation was labeled the “beasts’ horns” (i’mpondo zankhomo). The formation
used to launch a frontal assault by a phalanx was the chest (isifuba), while the crescent-shaped
enveloping attacks were called the horns (izimpondo). The “loins” represented the reserves
(Knight 1989, 11).
Zulu preparation for warfare historically included stick ﬁghting. In present-day Zulu ludic
stick ﬁghting, intelezi (a powdered magical medicine) is applied to both the combatants and to
the weapons they use. The area of preparation and application is often the cattle corral
(Coetzee 2002). At the other end of the continent, the Mursi of Ethiopia, who are also
cattlemen and stick-ﬁghters, prepare for their annual day of ritual combat (Donga) with a diet
of blood and milk taken from their herd (Ulm 2001). Therefore, not only the animals of the
bush, but also domestic animals ﬁgure prominently in African martial belief systems.
MEDICINE
As the earlier testimony of Malonga Casquelord attests, martial magic survives in contempo-
rary Africa. Regardless of the combat sport or its cultural context, (magical) medicines are
essential to the combatants’ preparation. For example, the Nguni of southern Africa have a
tradition of burning herbs that are utilized by inhaling the smoke. Historically, this was used
as medicine for warfare. The burned remains also were used for smudging. Alternatively, med-
icines were administered by “cut inoculation,” meaning the introduction of substances into
336
Belief Systems: Africa

the bloodstream via incisions in the skin. The Zulu called this ukuchaza (“piercing”). The
method is used by the Zulu on speciﬁc areas of the body such as the striking arm at the wrist
and elbow for speed, and at the upper arm for power. However administered, the medicines
are prepared by specialists called inyanga (herbalists), often working in cooperation with
other specialists called sangoma (diviners).
In the northwest, Nigerian Dambe boxers still put faith in various medicines that reportedly
have magical powers useful for increasing strength and reducing risk of injury (Powe 1994).
Whether amulets, herbal mixtures, or prayers are used depends on the belief system of the
individual ﬁghter. That is, boxers’ martial magic is drawn from a variety of indigenous African,
Christian, and Islamic sources. Consequently, amulets attached to the boxers’ bodies or held in
their hands may contain plant or animal parts, Muslim or Christian religious verses, or a combi-
nation of these things. Similarly, rituals designed to enhance performance are tied to no single
tradition.
CONTEMPORARY OCCASIONS
Historically, African martial culture was part of the African art of war. In contemporary settings,
however, African martial arts are primarily ceremonial and sporting. Wrestling, especially among
horticulturalists such as the Yoruba, is an integral element of ceremonial life, and martial com-
petitions mark important points of the agricultural year. For instance, Eje is the New Yam Festi-
val that marks the beginning of the yam harvest. This is generally around July. After the harvest
ends (around October), the Êdi Festival takes place. Wrestling matches are part of the ritual.
These matches commemorate historical conﬂict between the Yoruba and the Igbo, reenact
events from Yoruba cosmology, and mark rites of passage. The Igbo of southern Nigeria also asso-
ciate wrestling with the rites of male maturity. Thus, Igbo wrestle at male initiations. Among the
Nuba of the Sudan, the season when wrestling matches take place is similarly tied to the agri-
cultural cycle of planting, cultivation, and harvesting. Wrestling season extends from the ﬁrst
harvest in late fall to spring. Because the number of wrestling matches increases in direct pro-
portion to the yield during a growing season, “wrestling may be regarded as a ceremony to cele-
brate a good harvest” (Rahhal 2001).
Among Africa’s pastoralists, stick ﬁghts are intertwined with the spiritual work of festival and
ritual. In the northeast, the Mursi of Ethiopia engage in the Donga, a festival stick ﬁght having
initiatory overtones, and in the southeast, a vast range of contemporary Zulu festivals provide
the context for stick ﬁghts.
In the twenty-ﬁrst century, there continues to be associations between sacred metaphor,
supernaturally based medicine, cultural performance, and combat sport. These continued asso-
ciations attest the ﬂexibility of indigenous belief systems in accommodating and ultimately
absorbing competing systems and to the enduring ties between belief systems and martial prowess
in the cultures of continental Africa.
—Thomas A. Green and Earl White
See also: Canary Islands Stick Fighting and Wrestling; Dambe; Gidigbo; Moraingy; Zulu Stick-
Fighting; Capoeira; Caribbean Martial Arts (in Volume I); Afrikan Martial Arts; and Secret
Societies and Fraternal Organizations (in this volume).
Belief Systems: Africa
337
www.ebook3000.com

REFERENCES
Babalola, Adeboye. 1997. “A Portrait of Ogun as Reﬂected in Ijala Chants,” in Africa’s Ogun: Old World
and New, 2nd edition, edited by Sandra T. Barnes, 147–172. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Beatty, Kenneth J. 1915. Human Leopards: An Account of the Trials of Human Leopards before the Special
Commission Court. London: Hugh Rees Ltd, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Bennett, Albert L. 1899. “Ethnographical Notes on the Fang,” The Journal of the Anthropological Insti-
tute of Great Britain and Ireland 29, 66–98, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/2842579, accessed
October 16, 2009.
Brotherhood of the Blessed Gérard. 2009. “Traditional Healers in Zululand,” http://bbg.org.za/tradheal
.htm, accessed April 24, 2009.
Butt-Thompson, F. W. 2003/1929. West African Secret Societies. Whiteﬁsh, MT: Kessinger Publishing.
Coetzee, Marié-Heleen. 2002. “Zulu Stick-Fighting: A Socio-Historical Overview,” InYo: The Journal of
Alternative Perspectives on the Martial Arts and Sciences, http://ejmas.com/jalt/jalt_Coetzee_0902.htm,
accessed April 12, 2009.
Dennett, Richard Edward. 1910. Nigerian Studies. New York: Macmillan, via http://books.google.com,
accessed October 16, 2009.
Hobley, Charles William. 1902. Eastern Uganda, an Ethnological Survey. London: Anthropological
Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Hodgkin, Thomas. 1975. Nigerian Perspectives. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Knight, Ian. 1989. The Zulus. Oxford, UK: Osprey.
Meder, Angela. 1999. “Gorillas in African Culture and Medicine,” Gorilla Journal 18, http://www
.berggorilla.de/english/gjournal/texte/18culture.html, accessed April 26, 2009.
Oberlin College, Allen Memorial Art Museum. No date. “African Art: Nigeria,” http://www.oberlin
.edu/amam/Nigeria.htm, accessed April 26, 2009.
Opoku, KoﬁAsare. 2006. “Traditional African Religious Society,” in Oxford Handbook of Global Reli-
gions, edited by Mark Juergensmeyer, 537–544. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Otter, Elisabeth den. 2005. “Masquerades of the Bozo, Kirango (Mali)” http://web.mac.com/
edotter/bozo_circumcision_and_masquerades/Article_and_photos_of_the_Bozo_circumcision_
and_masquerades.html, accessed April 22, 2009.
Powe, Edward L. 1994. Combat Games of Northern Nigeria. Madison, WI: Dan Aiki Press.
Rahhal, Suleiman. 2001. “Wrestling in the Nuba Mountains: Past and Present,” Nuba Survival 1, 8–9,
http://www.nubasurvival.com/Nuba%20Vision/Vol%201%20Issue%202/8%20Wrestling.htm,
accessed April 22, 2009.
Roscoe, John. 2005/1911. The Baganda: An Account of Their Native Customs and Beliefs. Whiteﬁsh,
MT: Kessinger Publishing.
Schneider, Harold K. 1981. The Africans. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Ulm, Ben. 2001. The Mursi Tribe: Day of the Donga. Princeton, NJ: Films of the Humanities and Sciences.
DVD Video.
BELIEF SYSTEMS: CHINA
Chinese historical records and other writings over the centuries reveal that all elements of society,
including members of religious groups, practiced martial arts. However, there is little evidence to
show that religion exerted signiﬁcant inﬂuence over the martial arts or that the Chinese martial
arts were themselves a product of religious experience. On the contrary, the Chinese martial arts
were the product of a clan society protecting group interests.
Nevertheless, there is a strong trend in modern martial arts circles, especially outside China,
to associate the Chinese martial arts with religion, especially Zen (in Japanese; Chan in
338
Belief Systems: China

Chinese) Buddhism. Attention is also given to philosophical Taoism (Daoism) and various het-
erodox groups such as the White Lotus and Eight Trigrams sects. That individuals belonging to
all these groups practiced martial arts is undeniable. That individuals in all these groups tried to
integrate these arts into their belief systems is almost certain. However, that the arts themselves
are inseparable from a religious or spiritual context is simply unfounded.
Chinese martial arts concepts are based on a belief system. Speciﬁcally, it is the Taoist philo-
sophical worldview, and this includes psychological as well as physical aspects. This Taoist philo-
sophical worldview predated the establishment of popular religious Taoism, and it strongly
inﬂuenced later Confucian and Buddhist, especially Chan (Zen), thought. Because of the omnipres-
ence of this Taoist philosophical worldview in Chinese culture and society, the psychophysiological
nature of martial arts practices, the disproportionate amount of media attention paid to the role of
the Shaolin monastery, and the dearth of serious, factual writing on the subject, it is understandable
that such misunderstandings have arisen.
As individuals, the residents of Buddhist monasteries and Taoist temples and the followers of
heterodox religious groups practiced martial arts to protect themselves and their groups. Along
with forms of qigong (cultivation of vital energy), the martial arts also served as a form of men-
tal and physical cultivation for those so inclined. Nonetheless, martial arts probably more often
entered monasteries and temples from outside rather than vice versa. The reason was that the
population in Buddhist monasteries and Taoist temples comprised a mix of regular residents and
transients, some of whom were individuals seeking to escape guilty consciences or the law. For
instance, one Ming period (1368–1644) ofﬁcial described the Shaolin monastery as a hideout
for rebels, including White Lotus sect members seeking to escape the authorities. Two of the
main characters in the early Ming period popular novel Outlaws of the Marsh (also known as
Water Margin or All Men Are Brothers), known for their martial prowess, are in this category.
One, Lu Zhisheng, a carousing “monk,” enters a monastery to escape punishment for killing an
ofﬁcial; another, Wu Song, disguises himself as a wandering monk to avoid detection.
THE MARTIAL ARTS AND BUDDHISM
Buddhism’s earliest adherents in China were rich and aristocratic (including some high-level
military patrons) and, under the Northern Wei dynasty (386–534 CE), Buddhism was adopted
as the state religion. As an organized entity with bureaucratic structure, Buddhism was beholden
to the state. Monasteries had large landholdings, and, like secular owners of landed estates,
monks needed to protect this wealth with available manpower. Although leaders might include
monks, manpower came from the local citizenry, some of whom may have been in the military
or learned the martial arts in some other way.
Young acolytes also let off steam using wrestling and acrobatics. For instance, an apocryphal
story tells of a Shaolin monk, Chou Chan, who lived during the Northern Qi period (550–577
CE). Chou’s compatriots bullied him because of his frail appearance. According to the story, he
ran into one of the halls, bolted the doors shut, threw himself at the feet of a guardian image, and
prayed for six days that he be given the ability to defend himself. On the sixth day, the guardian
image appeared with a large bowl full of tendons and told Chou Chan to eat them if he desired
strength. He reluctantly ate them. (Good Buddhists are supposed to be vegetarians.) He then
returned to his compatriots, who began as before to harass him. They were surprised, however,
Belief Systems: China
339
www.ebook3000.com

when they felt the incredible strength of his arms. He then ran several hundred paces along the
wall of the large hall, jumped so high his head reached the ceiling beams, lifted unbelievably
heavy loads, and put on a display of strength and agility that frightened even inanimate objects
into moving.
The exercise value of martial arts practice as part of daily routine was recognized and
described by the monk Dao Xuan (596–667), in his Further Biographies of Eminent Monks. How-
ever, his description is not of monks but of a devout Buddhist Indian prince, of the warrior caste,
who practiced martial arts after dinner.
The monasteries were powerful institutions—sometimes dangerously so. In a persecution in
446, Emperor Taiwu is reported to have personally led a raid on monasteries in and around
Changan (now Xi’an), which uncovered various activities such as moonshine production,
weapons caches, and prostitution. Emperor Xiaowu (532–534) is recorded as having a contingent
of Buddhist monks ﬁght for him during his retreat as the dynasty collapsed.
The Shaolin Monastery, established in 495 by the Indian monk known in Chinese as Ba To,
was just one of many monasteries at the time. However, its location, historical circumstances,
and possibly the disciplined yet individualistic nature of the Zen (Chan) Buddhism that was
introduced there, resulted in its subsequent fame as a center for martial arts. Built at the foot of
Mount Song in today’s Henan province, it was close to China’s social, political, and geomantic
center. As early as 140–87 BCE, Mount Song was known as the central among China’s ﬁve
sacred mountains, and as such, it has been a popular destination for pilgrims for centuries.
The monastery’s singularly strong association with ﬁghting arts can be readily understood in
terms of its exposed location. Speciﬁcally, it is between the ancient capitals of Loyang and
Kaifeng, which made it extremely vulnerable to the ebb and ﬂow of war and social upheaval.
Thus, monks needed to maintain a self-defense capability.
As a group, the ﬁghting monks of the Shaolin Monastery are mentioned during the confu-
sion surrounding the collapse of the Sui dynasty and the rise of the Tang (605–618). Two inci-
dents (both recorded on a stela dated 728) laid the foundation for the ﬁghting fame of the
Shaolin monks. In the ﬁrst incident, the monks tried to repulse an attack by marauding bandits,
but the monastery buildings still suffered considerable damage. In the second (and more famous)
incident, the ﬁrst Tang emperor’s son, Prince Qin (Li Shimin or Emperor Taizong, ruled
627–649), requested that the monastery provide manpower to serve alongside other local forces
during Qin’s ﬁght with Wang Shichong (died 621), who had established himself in the area in
opposition to Tang rule. With Wang based near the monastery and probably considering taking
it for its strategic location, the monks readily joined forces against him, helped capture his
nephew, and assisted in his defeat. As a result, the monastery was issued an imperial letter of
commendation and a large millstone, and ceded land comprising the Baigu Estate. Thirteen
monks were commended by name, and one of them, Tanzong, was designated general-in-chief.
Research has revealed that the primary motive for erecting the stela that records this informa-
tion was to protect monastery property gains resulting from this incident. And, indeed, with
imperial favor, the Shaolin Monastery retained its properties while other monasteries in the area
were divested of theirs. As for the actual martial arts skills of the thirteen monks, the record fails
to provide any speciﬁcs. Later writers have assumed such skills, some even venturing so far as to
refer to them as the Thirteen Staff Fighting Monks of the Shaolin Monastery. The monks’ main
contribution was more likely in providing the leadership necessary to direct local forces. Martial
340
Belief Systems: China

arts skills were actually fairly widespread in the villages and throughout the countryside, from
whence they entered the monasteries.
For nearly 900 years following the deeds of the thirteen monks, there is not a single known
contemporary reference to martial arts practice at the Shaolin Monastery. It is not that martial
arts were not practiced there. Instead, they were simply nothing out of the ordinary; at most, a
security force from the monastic ranks.
During the same 900-year period, there are sparsely scattered references to individual monks,
not necessarily from the Shaolin Monastery, who were involved in military activities. Two of
these appear during the Song period, when China was invaded by Jurched tribes, who founded
the Jin dynasty (1122–1234). One, Zhen Bao, on orders from Emperor Qin Zong (ruled 1126),
formed an army and fought to the death defending the monasteries on Mount Wutai in Shanxi.
Another, Wan An, is recorded as having said, “In time of peril I perform as a general, when peace
is restored I become a monk again.” In both these cases, one can see that the leadership role, as
with the incident involving the Thirteen Monks, was of primary importance. Monks could pro-
vide disciplined leadership when needed in perilous times. In addition, larger monasteries such
as Shaolin and those on Mount Wutai were objects of imperial patronage. Their roles included
praying for national peace and prosperity, and supporting political authority.
In 1368, in the wake of the Red Turban uprising against Mongol rule, the Shaolin Monastery
suffered a major catastrophe. Over half of its buildings were burnt to the ground, and its residents
were temporarily scattered to neighboring provinces. This traumatic experience apparently
inspired the returning monks to take their security duties and martial arts practice more seriously
from then on. One hundred and ﬁfty years later, in 1517, a stone tablet was erected at the
Shaolin Monastery that gave a different version of events. According to the tablet, it was said
that the monastery, which had been repaired years before, had been spared because a monk with
kitchen duties had miraculously transformed himself into a fearful giant, and then, using an iron
ﬁre poker for a staff, fought off the Red Turbans. Regardless of the mythical aspects of this story,
which may have been designed to remind the monks of their responsibilities as well as warn away
transgressors, the monks actually had become known for their staff-ﬁghting prowess, and a form
of staff ﬁghting was named after the monastery.
The high point of the Shaolin Monastery’s martial arts fame came during the mid–sixteenth
century. During the mid-Ming period, the monks had built up a reputation as martial artists, and
as such, they responded to a call for volunteers to ﬁght Japanese pirates then raiding the Chinese
coast. Their everlasting fame as Shaolin Monk Soldiers resulted from their participation during
these campaigns. During one battle in the vicinity of Shanghai in 1553, a company of 120 monks
killed over a hundred pirates, while suffering only four casualties themselves.
Observations by visitors to the monastery during this time reveal that Shaolin monks prac-
ticed popular forms of boxing, such as Monkey Boxing, but that none of these forms were directly
associated with the monastery. In addition, a monk named Bian Tun is said to have studied staff
ﬁghting under a Tibetan monk residing at the monastery. Nonetheless, when a Ming general and
martial art practitioner, Yu Dayou (1503–1579), visited the monastery, he was disappointed with
what he saw. Therefore, he selected a couple of young monks to accompany him on campaign,
and to take back what they learned. Thus, it seems likely that the term Shaolin Staff did not sig-
nify a speciﬁc form of staff ﬁghting originated and passed down by monks. Instead, it is more
likely that several styles were practiced and taught by individual monks at any given time.
Belief Systems: China
341
www.ebook3000.com

Nonetheless, Cheng Zongyou (1561–?), who claimed to have spent a decade studying staff ﬁght-
ing at the monastery under a monk named Hong Zhuan, wrote in Elucidation of the Original
Shaolin Staff Method (1621) that Shaolin Staff originated at the Shaolin Monastery. Cheng also
wrote that Shaolin monks were working on their boxing, to bring it up to the standards of the
famed Shaolin Staff.
Ironically, most of the monastic association (or lack of association) with martial arts has been
obscured by early nineteenth-century secret society activity and subsequent embellishments in
popular novels such as Emperor Qian Long Visits the South (by an unknown author) and Liu E’s
Travels of Lao-ts’an. The Heaven and Earth Society (also known as the Triads or Hong League)
associated themselves with the monastery’s patriotic fame as a recruiting gimmick. Concocting
a story to suit their needs, the society members traced their origins to a ﬁctitious southern
Shaolin monastery said to have been located in Fujian province, where the society had its begin-
nings in the 1760s. Around 1907, Liu E, in his short but powerful critique of social conditions
in late Qing Dynasty China (1644–1911), refers to Chinese boxing originating with Bodhid-
harma, the legendary patriarch of Chinese Chan (Zen) Buddhism, who is said to have spent
nine years meditating facing a rock in the hills above the Shaolin Monastery. Similarly, on the
eve of the Revolution of 1911, the contents of a secret society Hong ﬁst style (hongquan) man-
ual were published in Shanghai under the title Secrets of Shaolin Boxing Methods. This publica-
tion, more than any other, soon became a major source for misinformation concerning the
association of Chinese boxing with the Shaolin Monastery and Buddhism.
THE MARTIAL ARTS AND POPULAR RELIGIOUS TAOISM
The Chinese martial arts are based on the Yin–Yang School cosmological worldview, not
Taoism. There is little evidence to show a serious connection to religious Taoism, except that
some individual martial artists decided to incorporate Taoist internal cultivation or qigong-type
physical regimens into their martial arts practices. Of course, such regimens are not the unique
preserve of Taoists, or any particular religious group for that matter. The Taoist intellectual and
one-time military ofﬁcer Ge Hong (284–363) practiced martial arts during his younger days. In
his later years, he studied Taoist hygiene methods and physical immortality through alchemy. He
did not treat his martial arts as Taoist activities.
The earliest and single most important document to hint at a martial arts association with
popular Taoism is Ming patriot Huang Zongxi’s Epitaph for Wang Zhengnan (1669). Huang
claimed that Shaolin was famous for its boxing and that the Shaolin style emphasized attack-
ing an opponent. At the same time, however, Huang wrote that there was also an Internal
School that stressed restraint to countermovement. According to Huang, this school’s patri-
arch was a Taoist hygiene practitioner from Mount Wudang named Zhang Sanfeng. In the
political context of the times, the opposing boxing schools in the epitaph can be viewed as
symbolizing Han Chinese opposition to Manchu rule. Here, indigenous Taoism is represented
by Zhang Sanfeng and Mount Wudang. (Ming rulers had expended much money erecting
monasteries on Mount Wudang.) Meanwhile, opposition to Manchu is represented by Shaolin
monks, as their Buddhism was patronized by foreign rulers. In other words, Epitaph for Wang
Zhengnan was a political statement rather than a serious discourse on the religious basis of rival
boxing schools.
342
Belief Systems: China

At the beginning of the twentieth century, some boxing teachers attempted to categorize tai-
jiquan, xingyiquan, and baguazhang as Internal School styles and to identify taijiquan speciﬁcally
with Zhang Sanfeng and Taoism. Leaders in this movement included Xu Longhou (1875–1949).
Around the same time, and persisting to the present day, a number of newer martial arts forms
have identiﬁed themselves with Mount Wudang and Taoism. And, ﬁnally, there were important
changes of government. Under Mao, both religion and martial arts were viewed with suspicion.
However, after Mao died, new leaders who were not averse to getting rich emerged. Thus, by
2001, a brass plaque could be seen at the entrance to the impressive Zixiao Gong (Purple Mist
Palace, built in 1413) on Mount Wudang that told readers that the right side of the hall was ded-
icated to Taoist hermit Zhang Sanfeng who invented taijiquan, and in recent years the Mount
Wudang area has been populated by a growing number of martial arts schools.
THE MARTIAL ARTS AND THE HUI (ISLAMIC) MINORITY
The Hui, or Islamic minority, are unique in China. Unlike the Uighurs and other Turkic ethnic
minorities, the Hui have been granted minority status based on religion rather than ethnicity.
Their involvement in martial arts may have been based to some degree on a perceived or real
need for self defense, and it constitutes an important element in Hui identity; their martial arts
practices are essentially the same as those of the Han majority.
The association of Hui with martial arts dates to the Yuan period (1279–1368), when Mus-
lims were in the Mongol forces that conquered China. As soldiers in a Mongol army, they would
have been familiar with a broad range of martial arts practices, including hand combat,
wrestling, archery, and strength training, and they took this orientation with them when they
left the military. The Hui resided in locations scattered throughout China, and thus their local
community characteristics varied. Like their neighbors, they also practiced martial arts, but their
adherence to Islam could not help but cause them to stand out among their neighbors in tradi-
tional Chinese society. This likely further encouraged group cohesion and the camaraderie asso-
ciated with martial arts practices.
The Hui produced a number of high-ranking generals during the Qing period, and Emperor
Qianlong favorably commented that “The Hui in China are martially oriented [have a procliv-
ity toward strength and bravery/martial arts].” Although Hui martial arts practices are similar to
those of the majority Han, there have been a few styles popularly attributed to them, to include
shajiaquan, chaquan, bajiquan, jiaomen tantui (“religious Style Spring Legs,” with “religious”
referring to Islam), and liuhe (Six Combinations) spear. Muslims also have been active in shuai-
jiao (Chinese wrestling), a famous twentieth-century proponent being Wang Ziping
(1881–1973).
During the Republican years (1911–1949), Hui individuals played important roles in
national-level martial arts programs. For example, General Ma Liang (1864?–1947), a Beiyang
warlord general assigned to a posting in Jinan, oversaw the publication of standardized martial
arts manuals designed for use by military and police organizations and public schools under the
title New Martial Arts (Xin Wushu) (1917). This effort was followed by the founding of the Cen-
tral Martial Arts Institute (Zhongyang Guoshu Guan) in Nanjing in 1927, in which Hui martial
artists made important contributions. Examples include Ma Fengtu (1888–1973), who began
advocating Tongbei Martial Studies (Tongbei Wu Xue, “Tongbei” emphasizing both intellectual
Belief Systems: China
343
www.ebook3000.com

and martial concerns), early in the twentieth century. His younger brother, Ma Yingtu, also
joined the Central Martial Arts Institute in Nanjing. Today, three of Ma Fengtu’s sons are con-
tinuing in their father’s footsteps, Ma Xianda in Xi’an, Ma Lingda in Lanzhou, and Ma Mingda
in Guangzhou. Both Ma Xianda and Ma Mingda have made signiﬁcant contributions to ofﬁcial
and other publications on martial arts topics. Ma Mingda, a historian by profession, has added
valuable breadth and depth to many heretofore ignored facets of Chinese martial arts history.
CONCLUSION
The connection between the Chinese martial arts and religion is an artiﬁcial construction. Peo-
ple from all walks of life and religions practiced martial arts for their own reasons. Some were
religious; some were not. The martial arts themselves were essentially secular activities. Attri-
bution of a religious mystique to the Chinese martial arts is, for the most part, a comparatively
recent phenomenon based on misunderstandings of the past. This is often reﬂected in writings
purporting to discuss, but actually to distort, Chinese martial art history by beginning with the
mythical story of Bodhidharma and then overemphasizing the role of the Shaolin Monastery.
This distortion in turn derives from the fact that few individuals interested in this topic have a
grasp of literary Chinese or access to the historical record, and few of the scholars who do are
willing to pursue the subject.
—Stanley E. Henning
See also: China: Boxing Styles; China: Martial Arts; China: Martial Theories; China; Shaolin
Temple Legends; China: Wrestling (in Volume I); Belief Systems: Iran; Belief Systems: 
Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts 
and Religion since 1868; Invented Traditions; Written Texts: Japan; Taiwanese Street 
Performances; and Secret Societies and Fraternal Organizations (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Chan Wing-tsit, translator. 1963. The Way of Lao Tzu. New York: Bobbs-Merrill Company.
Cheng Dali. 1995. Zhongguo Wushu: Lishi yu Wenhua [Chinese Martial Arts: History and Culture].
Chengdu: Sichuan Daxue Chuban She.
Duan Yuming. 1994. Zhongguo Simiao Wenhua [Chinese Monastery and Temple Culture]. Shanghai:
Renmin Chuban She.
Gu Yanwu. 1928. Rizhi Lu [Record of Daily Knowledge]. Shanghai: Zhonghua Shuju.
Guojia Tiwei Wushu Yanjiu Yuan, bianzuan (National Physical Culture Commission Martial Arts
Research Institute, editors). 1997. Zhongguo Wushu Shi [Chinese Martial Arts History]. Beijing:
Renmin Tiyu Chuban She.
Hallenberg, Helena. 2002. “Muslim Martial Arts in China: Tangping (Washing Cans) and Self-
defence,” Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs 22(1), 149–175.
Henning, Stanley E. 1997. “Chinese Boxing: The Internal versus External Schools in the Light of
History and Theory,” Journal of Asian Martial Arts 6(3), 10–19.
Henning, Stanley E. 1998. “Observations on a Visit to Shaolin Monastery,” Journal of Asian Martial
Arts, 7(1), 90–101.
Henning, Stanley E. 1999. “Martial Arts Myths of the Shaolin Monastery, Part I: The Giant with the
Flaming Staff,” Journal of the Chenstyle Taijiquan Research Association of Hawaii 5(1), via http://
seinenkai.com/articles/henning/mythsofshaolin.pdf, accessed October 3, 2009.
344
Belief Systems: China

Henning, Stanley E. 2006. “Chen (sic) Zongyou, Explanation of the Original Shaolin Staff Method,”
Journal of Asian Martial Arts 15(1), 92–93.
Henning, Stanley E. 2006. “China’s New Wave of Martial Studies Scholars,” Journal of Asian Martial
Arts 15(2), 8–21.
Henning, Stanley E. 2007. “The Imaginary World of Buddhism and East Asian Martial Arts,” Classi-
cal Fighting Arts 2(12) 37–40.
Jones, Lindsay, editor. 2005. Encyclopedia of Religion. New York: Macmillan Reference, 5730–5736.
Kuang Wennan and others. 1990. Zhongguo Wushu Wenhua Gailun [An Outline of Chinese Martial
Arts Culture]. Chengdu: Sichuan Jiaoyu Chuban She.
Li Chi, translator. 1974. The Travel Diaries of Hsu Hsia-k’o. Hong Kong: Chinese University of Hong
Kong.
Li Liwang. 1995. Shaoshu Minzu Tiyu Wenhua Lun [On the Sports Culture of Minority Nationalities].
Kunming: Yunnan Minzu Chubanshe.
Liu Junxiang. 1991. Zhongguo Wushu Wenhua yu Yishu [Chinese Martial Arts Culture and Artistry].
Taiyuan: Xinhua Chuban She.
Ma Mingda. 2000. Shuo Jian Conggao [Discourses on the Sword: Collected Manuscripts]. Lanzhou:
Lanzhou University Press.
Ma Mingda. 2003. “Shi Lun ‘Huizu Wushu’” [An Attempt to Discuss ‘Hui Minority Martial Arts’].
Whxue Tanzhen, Volume 2. Taibei: Yiwen, 311–324.
Matsuda Ryuji. 1984/1979. Zhongguo Wushu Shilue [A Short History of the Chinese Martial Arts],
translated by Lu Yan and Yan Hai. Chengdu: Sichuan Kexue Jishu Chuban She.
Shahar, Meir. 2001. “Ming Period Evidence of Shaolin Martial Practice,” Harvard Journal of Asiatic
Studies, 61(2), 359–413, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/3558572, accessed October 16, 2009.
Shahar, Meir. 2005. “Cheng Zongyou, Explanation of the Original Shaolin Staff Method,” in
Hawai‘i Reader in Traditional Chinese Culture, edited by Victor H. Mair, Nancy S. Steinhardt, and
Paul R. Goldin, 514–516. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Shahar, Meir, 2008. The Shaolin Monastery: History, Religion, and the Chinese Martial Arts. Honolulu:
University of Hawai‘i Press.
Spiessbach, Michael F. 1992. “Bodhidharma: Meditating Monk, Martial Arts Master or Make-
Believe?” Journal of Asian Martial Arts 1(4), 10–27.
Tang Hao. 1968/1930. Shaolin-Wudang Kao [Shaolin-Wudang Research]. Hong Kong: Unicorn Press.
Tang Hao. 1969/1935. Neijia Quan de Yanjiu [Internal School Boxing Research]. Hong Kong: Unicorn
Press.
Tonami Mamoru. 1990. The Shaolin Monastery Stele on Mount Song, translated by P. A. Herbert.
Kyoto: Italian School of East Asian Studies.
Wang Zuyuan. 1936/1881. Neigong Tushuo [Illustrated Explanation of Inner Cultivation]. Shanghai:
Shangwu Yinshu Guan.
Wu Gu, and Liu Zhixue, editors. 1982. Shaolinsi Ziliao Ji [Collection of Shaolin Monastery Materials].
Beijing: Shumu Wenxian Chubanshe.
Xu Longshou (Yusheng). 1961/1921. Taijiquan Shi Tujie [Illustrated Taijiquan Forms]. Taipei:
Zhonghua Wushu Chubanshe.
Young, Robert W. 1994a. “Bodhidharma and Shaolin Temple,” Karate/Kung Fu Illustrated, October, 30.
Young, Robert W. 1994b. “Bodhidharma and Shaolin Temple,” Karate/Kung Fu Illustrated, December, 48.
BELIEF SYSTEMS: EUROPEAN CHIVALRY
The age of chivalry ﬂourished between the end of the eleventh century and the opening of the
sixteenth century. It was a time when the mounted nobility of Western Europe lived out their
lives in obedience to the code of chivalry, which charged each knight with the defense of the
Church, his sovereign king, the weak, and the poor. A knight was to be just, brave, and skilled
Belief Systems: European Chivalry
345
www.ebook3000.com

in warfare, and, as a soldier of God, he was to be pious and charitable. In time, a knight’s duties
came to include the safeguarding of women, which brought an aura of romance to chivalry. Dur-
ing the Crusades, knighthood and chivalry were inseparably bonded.
Chivalry sprang up almost simultaneously throughout Western Europe. There was no single
inspirational founder. It spread as a contagious dedication of the armed nobility, and carried with
it the concepts of the Christian faith, of audacity on the ﬁeld of battle, and of gallantry in the
presence of noble ladies. The source of this phenomenon, with all of its pageantry and heroism,
must be traced to evolving events of an earlier time.
When the western part of the Roman Empire collapsed during the late ﬁfth century CE, Ger-
manic tribes that had menaced the empire’s northern borders for centuries moved south to settle
among the more numerous Romanized inhabitants. In those chaotic times, the new invaders were
often quartered on state lands and the holdings of private landowners. Of the several Germanic
tribes that tramped across the tumbled bastions of Rome’s old provinces, the Salian Franks were
most closely related to the later development of medieval chivalry and knighthood.
Clovis I (ca. 466–511), one of the earliest Frankish leaders, established in 481 a Germanic
kingdom on the discarded civilization of Roman Gaul, where an evangelizing church had already
impressed its inﬂuence. Clovis became a Christian without learning to turn the other cheek. Before
his death in 511 he had, through treachery, murder, and brutal conquest, enforced his rule on sur-
rounding Teutonic peoples—Alemanni, Burgundians, and Visigoths. His military campaigns,
because they won converts for Christianity, went forward with the blessings of the Church.
Clovis’s Frankish state was an unstable predecessor of the resplendent realm of Charlemagne
(742–814), which ﬂourished three centuries later as the Carolingian Empire. Between the times
of these two Frankish rulers, the embryo of medieval knighthood and chivalry began slowly to
evolve. But there would have been neither knighthood nor chivalry had not the system of feu-
dalism emerged from the Frankish historical experience.
A typical early German institution was the Gefolgschaft (Latin comitatus), in which a distin-
guished war leader gathered about him a select group of young men from his tribe to engage in
warfare. We learn from the Germania (ca. 98 CE) of the Roman historian Tacitus (ca. 56–117
CE) that young German warriors, already invested with the shield and spear according to cus-
tom, swore a sacred oath that they would protect their chief in battle and try to emulate his
bravest deeds but never exceed them, for it would have been a violation of their oath to outshine
their leader. This was as much a practical matter as one of loyalty: it was from the leader that the
warriors received a share of the war booty, which might include a horse, weapons, and other gifts
taken from the enemy as plunder. If their leader should die in battle and they returned home
unscathed, or if they ﬂed the ﬁeld, they became scorned outcasts. Some ended their shame by
their own hand.
The bond that existed between a war chief and his loyal followers became a ﬁxed element in
the military structure of the Merovingian dynasty that began with Clovis and ended in the mid-
eighth century. During this time, the military leaders and their young warriors became the lords
and vassals of a feudal system in which the war booty of old became grants of conquered lands
divided into ﬁefs, for which the endowed warrior pledged his loyalty and his military service.
To visualize this precursor of knighthood and chivalry, one should know that a medieval vas-
sal was not a menial or serf, as modern usage sometimes implies, but a loyal soldier or knight who
could himself be the lord of his own vassals. Nor did the nobility, including lords and vassals, make
346
Belief Systems: European Chivalry

up a very large proportion of the medieval population. The privileged class comprised no more
than 10 percent of the population, often much less. Within this small assemblage of landed gen-
try rested the wealth, the political power, and the military strength of the domain, thus enabling
the noble class to become a hereditary aristocracy. The rest of society was made up mostly of toil-
ing peasants, who tilled the soil they did not own and performed other servile duties. Their rela-
tionship to the lord whose lands they worked was called manorialism; it had little to do with the
feudal hierarchy.
During the decentralization of political power that followed the fall of Rome, many displaced
warriors sought domestic security in an inconstant age. Their hope was to ﬁnd a propertied mag-
nate willing to accept them as vassals in return for land. The process created a feudal hierarchy
of lords and vassals that rested like a small pyramid upon the vast populace of peasants. At the
apex of this martial consortium was the king, who held his realm from God. Below him were
royal vassals such as viscounts and barons, whose ﬁefs were expansive. The ﬁefs were further
parceled out among high-ranking nobles, who thereby became vassals. They, in turn, were able
to continue the practice of subinfeudation, going down the broadening levels of the pyramid to
the bottom, where one ﬁnally found a few humble knights holding modest ﬁefs whose income
was barely enough to support them and their families. When a lord sponsored every knight and
every tract of feudal land became hereditary, European feudalism became complete, with the ﬁef
serving as the basic bond of lord/vassal dependency.
Most ﬁefs had been created essentially for military purposes, and the men who received them,
trained for warfare, became the soldiers who controlled the military strength of the kingdom. If
war threatened, the king called upon his royal vassals to provide arms for the coming encounter.
They, in turn, called upon their own vassals. Because there was so much intermittent ﬁghting in
the Middle Ages, warfare became an oppressive burden for the knightly class, and an agreement
was reached that limited a knight’s obligated military duties to forty days a year.
At the heart of the feudal fabric was the armored knight, whose ideal role in life was to
uphold the code of chivalry. The term chivalry, deﬁning the code of western knights, appears in
Middle English as chivalrie and is related to the French chevalier (knight). In Late Latin, we ﬁnd
the word caballarius, meaning horseman or cavalier. The medieval knight, therefore, was an
armored horseman, bearing shield, sword, and lance, the weaponry of his day. Soon chivalry and
cavalry become synonymous.
A candidate for knighthood, after serving as a page, often began his apprenticeship as a squire
at the age of twelve. He served under a veteran knight, who instructed him in both military and
worldly matters. When his term as squire was over, he followed his sponsor into battle as his
bearer of arms; and when he was judged to be ready for knighthood his sponsor “dubbed” him by
tapping him on the shoulders with the ﬂat of his sword. The initiation ceremony for knighthood
varied in its formalities from place to place, but the code of chivalry was ﬁrmly ﬁxed in its ethos,
if not always in its fulﬁllment.
The earlier pagan practice, in which elder warriors bestowed arms upon younger initiates,
without beneﬁt of prayer and benedictions, was sanctiﬁed when the Church took part in the cer-
emony, adding religious symbolism and solemnity. Eventually, the secular nobility and the clergy
shared the investiture ceremony of knighthood.
At an earlier time, the knightly ceremony, performed on the battleﬁeld, was sudden and brief.
A young arms-bearer, having distinguished himself in combat, might be recognized by an older
Belief Systems: European Chivalry
347
www.ebook3000.com

knight, who would simply strike him with his ﬁst or the ﬂat of his sword and call out: “Sir
knight!” It is not likely that many of the noble demands of chivalry were transmitted in such a
nimble encounter, but they would be learned later.
The ceremony of knighthood was greatly changed by the end of the eleventh century. Now, the
knight-to-be took a ritual bath to cleanse him of his sins. He then spent a night alone at the altar
of his local church in quiet prayer, with his arms beside him. At dawn he went to Mass, received
Communion, and listened to the celebrant afﬁrming his obligations to knighthood and chivalry.
We learn of a more elaborate knightly ceremony from the writings of a thirteenth-century
bishop, Guillaume Durand (ca. 1230–1296). He tells us in his Pontiﬁcal that the sword of the
knightly candidate was placed on the altar by the ofﬁciating bishop, who called upon God to
bless the weapon so that the wielder might defend churches, widows, and orphans against the
cruelty of heretics and inﬁdels. The initiate was admonished that he must be a good soldier,
faithful and courageous; and with words from the Old Testament, he was reminded that God had
formed his hands for battle and his ﬁngers for war. The bishop then girded the sword on the new
knight, who unsheathed it, brandished it three times, and returned it to its scabbard. Finally, the
bishop gave the knight a slight blow on the cheek and exhorted him to “awake from evil dreams
and keep watch, faithful in Christ and praiseworthy of fame” (Barber 1995, 27).
The consecration of a warrior and his arms gave moral strength to chivalry and knighthood,
as well as support for the feudal system in which they ﬂourished. Chivalric behavior became an
ideal of civilized fellowship among the privileged class, and although much easier to achieve in
ballads than in real life, became a code of conduct that served as a model of knightly aspiration.
During periods of peace, knights engaged their energies in the tournament, an armed sport
that allowed them to ﬂaunt their military skills and courage before an assembly of their peers.
Contenders came from far and wide to the domain of some renowned prince, where pavilions
and platforms were raised around a mock battleﬁeld. Here the knights would rest their heraldic
shields, afﬁrming that they were of noble birth and pure character. The encounter of two knights,
called jousting or tilting, took place on horseback, with each knight trying to unhorse the other
with lance and sword. Although the weapons were blunted, the martial passion of the combat-
ants led to some brutish duels.
When warfare came to feudal Europe, whether from land disputes, breaches of contract, or
other causes, it was often a brief local affair. The ones who suffered most from these internecine
clashes were the defenseless peasants and the Church, whose lands were often bound up in the
network of feudal dependencies. It was the Church that tried to subdue the violence of an unruly
society when it proclaimed the Pax Dei (Latin; Peace of God) in 989, and a half century later,
the Treuga Dei (Truce of God). The ﬁrst, in banning warfare against the weak, sought to save
women, children, and priests from the brutalities of the age. The second, more ambitious, decree
attempted to mark out whole religious seasons of the year when ﬁghting would be prohibited.
Neither decree was entirely successful, but each lessened to some degree the incessant warfare of
the armed nobility.
Toward the end of the eleventh century, European knighthood was to receive a challenge
from the Near East that would extend knighthood’s conventions and its belligerency as far as
the Holy Land and even beyond. The Seljuk Turks, a menacing military force arising out of
Asia made up of warriors who embraced Islam fervently, overran the exposed eastern borders
of the Byzantine Empire. The Greek emperor Alexios I Komnenos (1048–1118) asked the
348
Belief Systems: European Chivalry

Roman Catholic Pope Urban II (b. Otho de Lagery, ca. 1035–1099) to send military aid for
the Christian cause; the events that followed revealed the quixotic essence of medieval
knighthood.
The pope, himself a man of France, gathered about him an assembly of Frankish leaders at
Clermont in 1095. He reminded them that they were of the Frankish race “chosen and loved by
God” and that the deeds of their ancestors should inspire them to take the road to the Holy Land
and wrest it from the accursed Turks, who had mutilated their Christian brethren and desecrated
the holy places. Urban, mindful of the warfare that was despoiling Europe, severely reproached the
gathering of French nobility: “You, girt about with the badge of knighthood, are arrogant . . . you
rage against your brothers. You, the oppressors of children, plunderers of widows . . . vultures who
sense battles from afar and rush to them eagerly. If you wish to be mindful of your souls, either lay
down the girdle of such knighthood or advance boldly as a knight of Christ” (Krey 1921, 30).
The papal speech created a mild hysteria, and it aroused Western chivalry to advance upon
Jerusalem as a great crusading army, shouting the battle cry: “God wills it!” Urban had set into
motion a prolonged war between the cross and the crescent that would continue well into the
thirteenth century. That war encompassed eight crusades between 1096 and 1270. None was
characterized chieﬂy by the crusaders’ pious behavior.
The First Crusade began in high spirits, with a righteous purpose and banners ﬂying, but
ended with the crusaders’ slaughter of Jerusalem’s non-Christian population. The second effort
achieved little against a revival of Muslim military aggression. When the famed Muslim leader
Saladin (Salah ad-Din, 1138–1193) recaptured Jerusalem in 1187, a new papal call led to the
Third (or King’s) Crusade; this attracted the support of the Holy Roman Emperor, the king of
France, and England’s famous Richard the Lion-Heart (1157–1199), who, contrary to his
romanticized popular image, massacred 2,700 of his own prisoners of war. The Fourth Crusade of
1204 debased the chivalric ideal by overrunning the Christian world of Byzantium and parti-
tioning its territory, and the high purpose of the original crusading ideal was not regained until
the late thirteenth century, in two crusades led by the sainted Louis IX of France (1214–1270).
The spirit of the crusades endured, however, through a unique blending of monasticism and
chivalry, in two military orders. The ﬁrst of these, the Knights Templar, took monastic vows of
poverty, chastity, and obedience while also pledging themselves to the code of chivalry and ded-
icating themselves to ﬁghting in the defense of pilgrims. The second order, known as the Hos-
pitallers, also took monastic vows, and carried out their chivalric duties in caring for sick pilgrims
and crusaders.
The chivalric age left many enduring monuments. During the crusading movement, the east-
ern Mediterranean coast became studded with stone castles that French knights had built to safe-
guard the Holy Land against Islam. The massive walls and towers left on the Levant a lasting
imprint of medieval France.
The age of chivalry was one of contrasts and contradictions. Jakob Burckhardt (1818–1897),
the renowned scholar of the Italian Renaissance, visualized medieval consciousness as something
that “lay half dreaming or half awake beneath a common veil . . . woven of faith, illusion, and
childish prepossession, through which the world and history were seen clad in strange hues”
(Burckhardt 1944, 81). His perception somewhat clariﬁes how the carnage of knightly battle
could be so oddly tempered by an equally signiﬁcant medieval phenomenon, the noble class’s
infatuation with courtly love.
Belief Systems: European Chivalry
349
www.ebook3000.com

During the Middle Ages, most aristocratic marriages were made chieﬂy for the dowry of feudal
lands the wife would bring to the union. Often a knight simply married a ﬁef, and his wife came as
an encumbrance. She entered into his life as a household helper and child-bearer, rarely as a lover.
Medieval poets wrote that the true love of a knight must not be his wife, even if he had married
her for love. Under the conventions of chivalric love, once a knight had chosen a lover-to-be from
among the ladies of the noble class, he was to write her amorous letters and prove his devotion by
performing valorous deeds. Once they had given their hearts to each other, they pledged that their
love would forever remain secret, and he swore that he would serve her for all his days.
Chivalry’s demand that the suitor remain gallant in all things sometimes unfairly chal-
lenged a knight when his frivolous lady commanded him to perform extravagant feats to prove
his love. According to the poets, Queen Guinevere, faithless wife of King Arthur, ordered
Lancelot to undergo a round of ordeals before she surrendered to him in their adulterous love
affair. Yet, the central theme of such unchaste love remained ﬁrm—a knight must perform
heroic deeds for his lady.
The theme of chivalric love emerged in the poetry of the troubadours of southern France,
who sang their verses in the Provençal tongue. Next were the trouvères (the romantic minstrels
of northern France) and the minnesingers of Germany, whose balladry carried on the same har-
monious motif. The love theme that wanders through the tales of medieval knighthood was
enriched by the grande dame, Eleanor of Aquitaine (1122–1204). Married ﬁrst to Louis VII of
France (1120–1180), then to Henry II of England (1133–1189), she brought the songs of the
troubadours into the royal court. Later, at Poitiers, she organized the ﬁrst love court, a largely
frivolous proceeding where the code of courtly romance was woven into the military discipline
of knightly chivalry and an assembly of noblewomen settled lovers’ quarrels and judged which
gallant knight had loved the best. Ideally, the knightly lover was expected to keep some distance
from his lady, knowing that his love must remain hopeless. In truth, the lover’s muted yearnings
were not always unheard or unrewarded, and adultery often became an emotional release for
noblewomen hopelessly caught in a marriage of convenience.
The rules for lovemaking among the nobility were set down in an irreverent manual by
Andreas Capellanus called De Arte Honeste Amandi (twelfth century; On the Art of Loving Vir-
tuously). It became a guide for knightly romance and elevated courtly love to a form of religion.
Although that religion came into conﬂict with the Church’s teaching against adultery, it provided
a clear mirror reﬂecting the romantic idealism of the medieval nobility.
From the abundance of melodic poetry and heroic literature that served the cause of chivalry,
there emerged several enduring narratives, such as Lancelot, by Chrétien de Troyes (written
between 1177 and 1181); Gottfried von Strassburg’s Tristan and Isolde (written before 1210); The
Romance of the Rose of Guillaume de Lorris (written before 1230, but signiﬁcantly modiﬁed by
Jean de Meun in the 1270s); Jean Froissart’s Chronicle of the Hundred Years’ War between
England and France (written between 1369 and 1400); and the twelfth-century legends of the
Holy Grail (the cup reportedly used by Jesus at the Last Supper and searched for devotedly by
King Arthur’s knights).
The diverse documents of the Later Middle Ages give us an ambivalent image of a chivalrous
knight. One side shows us a young hero in bright armor, astride a magniﬁcent white charger,
lance poised, ready to defend his monarch, his lady love, the Church, the poor and oppressed,
and all good Christians who sought shelter behind his shield. The other side reveals a savage
350
Belief Systems: European Chivalry

warrior, heavily protected ﬁrst with chain mail, later with plate armor, and carrying a battle-ax
or double-edged sword ever at the ready. Among such men the code of chivalry was not infre-
quently ignored. Knightly comportment, moreover, was reserved for the gentry. A knight
extended his courtesies only to members of his class; and his ethereal devotion to his lady did
not bridle his predatory advances toward women of the lower class.
The vast number of peasants who tilled the soil on the feudal estates belonged to another
world that was dominated by the small but powerful aristocracy. Revolts of the peasantry were
inevitable. In 1358, French peasants mounted a revolt (the Jacquerie) demanding relief from
their economic and judicial oppression; and in 1381, the Wat Tyler Rebellion, just across the
English Channel, convulsed England’s gentry. In Martin Luther’s time (1483–1546), German
peasants vented their rage against their noble masters. These risings were put down with vin-
dictive slaughter, showing that the gentle knight of legend was also a ruthless killing machine.
Yet chivalry as an exemplary way of life left rules of gentlemanly conduct for Europe’s future
society. After gunpowder made castles and armored knights obsolete, the ideals of chivalry were
preserved in Baldassare Castiglione’s Book of the Courtier (1528), which set standards of courtesy
in the urban courts of Renaissance Italy. The faded image of medieval knighthood emerged again
in modern times, ﬁrst in organizations such as the Most Noble Order of the Garter (established
between 1344 and 1347), Ordre de l’Étoile (Order of the Star, established 1351), and Order of
the Golden Fleece (established 1430), later in historical romances such as Walter Scott’s novel
Ivanhoe (1819).
The ghost of the armored knight as a bloodied savage ﬁghter lies with his bones beneath the
sod of countless battleﬁelds. But to this day, European monarchs continue to confer the title of
chevalier or knight on distinguished public ﬁgures, and as a virtuous warrior of ballad and song,
he lives on in popular legend.
—T. V. Tuleja
See also: Celtic Martial Arts; Fighting Arts of the Early Middle Ages; Fighting Arts of the Later
Middle Ages; Fighting Arts of the Renaissance (in Volume I); Belief Systems: European 
Occult Sciences; Belief Systems: Iran; Folklore; Invented Traditions; and Secret 
Societies and Fraternal Organizations (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Atiya, Aziz S. 1938. The Crusade in the Later Middle Ages. London: Methuen.
Barber, Richard. 1995. The Knight and Chivalry. London: Boydell Press.
Bornstein, Diane. 1975. Mirrors of Courtesy. Hamden, CT: Archon Books.
Bridge, Antony. 1982. The Crusades. New York: Franklin Watts.
Burckhardt, Jacob. 1944. The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy. London: Oxford University Press.
Evans, Joan. 1969. Life in Medieval France. London: Phaedon Press.
Gautier, Léon. 1965. Chivalry. London: Phoenix House.
Grousset, René. 1936. Histoire des Croisades et du Royaume Franc de Jerusalem [History of the Crusades
and the Frankish Kingdom of Jerusalem]. Paris: Plon.
Krey, August C. 1921. The First Crusade. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
La Monte, John L. 1932. Feudal Monarchy in the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem, 1106–1291. Cambridge,
MA: Medieval Academy of America.
Oman, Charles W. C. 1953. The Art of War in the Middle Ages, 375–1515, revised and edited by John
H. Beeler. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Belief Systems: European Chivalry
351
www.ebook3000.com

Runciman, Steven. 1978. A History of the Crusades. New York: Penguin Books.
Wood, Charles T. 1970. The Age of Chivalry: Manners and Morals, 1000–1450. New York: Universe
Books.
Wright, Sylvia. 1988. The Age of Chivalry: English Society, 1200–1400. New York: Warwick Press.
BELIEF SYSTEMS: EUROPEAN OCCULT SCIENCES
Medieval and Renaissance literature was steeped in generations of tradition. These traditions
were based in part on the surviving work of ancient Greek and Roman authors, as preserved in
the academic tradition of scholasticism, but over time a separate literary tradition grew from the
marriage of these sources with the oral tradition of heroic legends, Christian folklore, and Chris-
tianized pagan mythology. By the ﬁfteenth century, even instructional literature was couched in
metaphorical language and ﬁlled with symbolic ﬁgures, mnemonic devices, and allegorical
meaning. Since martial arts are products of their cultural milieu, these same devices became a
key component of the teaching methodology of medieval and Renaissance masters-at-arms.
NUMBERS AND NUMEROLOGY
Medieval numerology drew from both Judaic and Classical sources. It ascribed a speciﬁc quality
to a number, and then slowly built up a series of correspondences around that number. Central
to this thinking were the numbers three and four. Triplicities (usually representing the inner of
spiritual world) and quaternities (representing the physical world and the foundation of all phys-
ical things) were common organizational devices. Many of these associations still exist. The
number four was the number of the physical world, and years are thus divided into four seasons.
maps are marked with four cardinal directions, and so forth.
Medieval masters-at-arms organized their art around numbers whose correspondences related
to the larger ideas they were trying to convey. This allowed the student to make an immediate men-
tal association and encode that knowledge into his memory. This use of basic numerology occurs
in both German and Italian sources. Hans Liechtenauer, the fourteenth-century founder of the
most extensively documented school of medieval martial arts, built his art of swordsmanship
around four principal guards or stances from which the swordsman could launch any attack or
defense. A careful reading of the Liechtenauer tradition’s literature shows that some of these guards
have left and right variations and other masters introduced additional guards. Nonetheless, until
the late sixteenth century, these are always noted as separate and distinct from the four “perfect”
guards. While this may seem misleading to the modern reader, to the contemporary audience the
meaning was clear: whatever other variations to the guards there might be, these “four” were the
foundation of them all. By understanding them, the swordsman should understand any other.
In the same way, Fiore dei Liberi (ﬂ.1380–1410), the earliest Italian master to leave a writ-
ten record of his art, described four basic stances of wrestling that he claimed were the founda-
tion of all other martial disciplines. Indeed, perhaps the most detailed use of number by a
medieval fencing master appears in the four surviving copies of Liberi’s treatise Il Fior di Battaglia
(The Flower of Battle, 1409), where he carefully used numbers as mnemonic devices. The num-
bers three and four are repeatedly used to order this book: four types of footwork, four rules gov-
erning dagger combat, three parts of the sword, three turns of the body and the weapon, etc.
352
Belief Systems: European Occult Sciences

But he moves beyond the use of three and four to incorporate many of the other principal digits
of medieval numerology when displaying the guards used with each of the different weapons he
teaches. Charting them produces a pattern as shown in Table 1.
Although the scheme may seem occult to twenty-ﬁrst-century readers, it was designed to
convey a number of basic “truths” that would have been obvious to a ﬁfteenth-century European.
Grappling is the foundation of the art, through which Man uses his natural weapons—the same
weapons that God gave to animals. Through reason, which elevates Man above the beasts, Man
can fashion weapons. The knife is the ﬁrst weapon, and the simplest, so the knife has ﬁve guards,
the number of Man. The weapons of armored combat (that is, warfare) are symbols of the imper-
fection and evil of a fallen world, so the weapons of war have six guards apiece. The longsword
can be used in all forms of combat and is the “noblest” of all weapons, so the centerpiece of the
art, the sword, sits at the manuscript’s center.
Liberi’s number of guards for a given weapon seems driven mostly by the number of guards
needed to organize his material mnemonically. It does not matter that, when he introduces his
twelve guards for the two-handed sword, he sometimes illustrates left and right, forward and
backward variations of one guard, while only obliquely refers to similar variations of another. As
the closest thing to perfection that can be achieved in a ﬂawed Creation, the guards of the sword
must equal the number of Earthly perfection: twelve.
ANIMAL SYMBOLISM
The use of animal symbolism was a common theme in medieval literature, and was part of a
learning method wholly unlike our present-day system of literal categorization of information.
Medieval bestiaries contained mythological descriptions of the different animals and their
supposed properties and powers. These were irrespective of the animals’ real traits. Dragons
Belief Systems: European Occult Sciences
353
Numbers of Guards and Their Correspondences
Number of Guards
Discipline
Correspondences
Four
Grappling 
The physical world: the four elements,
four corners of the earth, four seasons,
four bodily humors, etc.
Five
Dagger
“Quintessence”: the union of the four
elements and the spirit, Man and
things of Man: the ﬁve bodily senses,
the Old Law of the Pentateuch, the
Fifth (Mosaic) Age of the World
Six
Armored combat: 
Earthly imperfection: evil, the 
sword, axe, and spear
number of iron, the planet Mars (the
count started with the Sun), the Sixth
(and ﬁnal) Age of the World before the
End of Days
Twelve
Longsword 
The cosmic order: the twelve tribes of
Israel, the twelve Apostles, the twelve
signs of the zodiac, the union of
Heaven and Earth (3 x 4) in the New
Jerusalem
Table 1
www.ebook3000.com

and unicorns readily populated the same bestiary as wolves and lions. Despite the author never
having seen a unicorn, he did not need to see one to “know” what it was, or how it lived. It
was thematic, rather than literal, qualities that a number of masters-at-arms used to devise
allegorical illustrations.
Liberi listed the physical and mental qualities required of a swordsman as strength, fortitude,
speed, prudence, and courage, and in two of his manuscripts, he used both bestiary and Chris-
tian iconography to illustrate his point. One illustration, the Segno della Spada (Sign of the
Sword), is a full-page depiction of a man intersected by seven swords and surrounded at the car-
dinal points by four creatures wearing four golden collars. Beneath the man’s feet is an elephant
standing on a slab of earth and carrying a tower on its back; this symbolizes strength. At the
man’s right, a tiger clutches an arrow; this represents speed. Above the man’s head is a lynx
holding dividers; this shows prudence. To the man’s left is a lion holding a heart; this indicates
courage. The animals are arranged along speciﬁc compass points to correspond with the hier-
archy of the Platonic elements. The physical power of earth—the elephant—lies in the south,
while the semi-divine ﬁre—the lion—lies in the east, toward the direction of Jerusalem and
the lost Garden of Eden. The seven swords piercing the man’s body represent the different
angles of attack possible with the sword.
Liberi was not alone in using allegorical signs. Filippo Vadi, a later master of the same
lineage, included similar images in his own treatise, Di Arte Gladiatoria Dimicandi (Book on
the Art of Fighting with Swords, ca. 1482–1487). Here, a man is depicted standing upon a
wheel and a rock, his body surrounded by (and physically incorporating) a variety of differ-
ent animals. In this case, the animals and objects represent the specific qualities of that part
of the warrior’s body. His sword hand should be as vicious and deadly as the lashing tail of
a dragon, while his left hand, which is used to grapple and disarm, should be as swift as a
greyhound.
Allegorical ﬁgures also appear in the Liechtenauer tradition. In his Fechtbuch (Fencing
Manual, ca. 1460), master Paulus Kal included an image that speaks to the requirements of a
good swordsman. This is a composite ﬁgure, taking the form of a man’s body, but with a stag’s
legs (speed and agility), a falcon’s head (clarity of vision), and a lion over the heart (courage).
The use of allegorical ﬁgures in the Liechtenauer tradition continued in the sixteenth century
with the master George Wilhelm, who used several symbolic ﬁgures, some of which are currently
unclear to modern researchers.
Mnemonic diagrams showing the body of an archetypal Man embodying various physical,
spiritual, and magical qualities were a mainstay of late medieval and Renaissance astrological
and Kabbalistic texts. Although these symbolic diagrams could be (and were) used for display-
ing occult information, they are not of themselves inherently occult. The style of the speciﬁc
fencing segni was not unique to the masters-at-arms; instead, it was a commonplace of medieval
and Renaissance education. Liberi’s segno, in particular, is organized as a common memory device
known in that period as “the Heavens.” Both place a human ﬁgure at their center, surrounded
by four ﬁgures at the cardinal compass points that represent one of the four classical elements of
Earth, Air, Fire, and Water, plus a related ideal. The diagrams also incorporate the numbers
seven (for divinity) and twelve (the cosmos). Although distinct from the mnemonic device of
the Heavens, even the idea of a human ﬁgure pierced by seven swords is a common medieval
theme, drawn from Christian martyrology.
354
Belief Systems: European Occult Sciences

ASTROLOGY AND TALISMANIC MAGIC
There was sometimes actual occultism in early European martial arts texts. The ﬁrst text in the
Liechtenauer tradition, the so-called Döebringer Hausbuch (Döbringer System Book, ca. 1389)
includes a chapter on how to make magical amulets. These amulets were worn for a variety of
occasions, including the ﬁghting of duels and trials by combat. The amulets fall into the realm
of Christian theurgy, and also make use of astrological lore.
Astrology was particularly important to Hans Talhoffer (ca.1420–ca. 1470s). Talhoffer was
an itinerant master-at-arms and proliﬁc author of fencing books. Of the six surviving treatises
believed to have been authored by Talhoffer, two dedicate signiﬁcant attention to astrology and
numerology. The ﬁrst of these texts provides a way to divide combatants into several “orders,”
depending on their patron saints. These are then corresponded against a series of astrological
charts to determine the most auspicious time to ﬁght a judicial duel. The second text contains a
short section on numerology and the Hebrew alphabet, followed by a treatise on cosmology and
physiology attributed to “the Jew Ebreesch.” The section on cosmology is, in reality, an astro-
logical summary of the classical planets, the twelve houses of the zodiac, and their effects on the
personality of those born under a given planet’s inﬂuence, while the section on physiology is a
standard look at the body or the organs through the lens of the four classical humors.
SACRED GEOMETRY AND THE ART OF MEMORY
Gérard Thibault (died 1627) was a mathematician, philosopher, architect, and physician who
taught fencing in Holland during the early seventeenth century, and his posthumous L’Academie
d’Espee (Academy of the Sword, 1628–1630) provides a unique look into the social, philosoph-
ical, and esoteric culture of sixteenth century Europe.
The occult pedigree of L’Academie d’Espee is clear from the outset; the ﬁrst chapter exten-
sively quotes the German philosopher and occultist Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa von
Nettesheim (1486–1535), and throughout the text, Thibault both overtly and subtly acknowl-
edges Agrippa. Sacred geometry (the proportions of man as they relate to the circle) and
Pythagorean mysticism are equally prominent in the book. For instance, Thibault follows the
medieval tradition of using symbolic numbers (in this case three, ﬁve, nine, ten, and twelve).
Although this may appear to be simple mathematics, the numbers ﬁve and ten were, to
Pythagoreans, symbols of the microcosm and macrocosm. Meanwhile, Thibault’s footwork dia-
gram, proportioned and superimposed to the individual, conceals a squared circle—a
Pythagorean symbol of the universe.
Echoing the medieval mnemonic of “the Heavens,” Thibault used the number twelve. In this
case, the author was not describing guards, as was Liberi, but rather divisions of the sword. This
“heavenly” use of numbers is deliberate, as throughout the text, Thibault refers to both the
zodiac and astrology. Indeed, he even put small clocks in his text. These apparently refer to hours
of astrological signiﬁcance. Since these references were intentionally veiled, their precise mean-
ing remains unclear.
Thibault’s cosmology envisioned a series of concentric rings based on the numbers four,
seven, twelve, and the “perfect” one. The lowest realm was the physical world, composed of the
four common elements, which were the ﬁrst four “rings” or “spheres.” Then there were the seven
Belief Systems: European Occult Sciences
355
www.ebook3000.com

planets (in order, the Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, the Sun, Jupiter, and Saturn). The highest
realm, the primum mobile, was of course the realm of the Divine.
Although this model followed that of earlier times, it was not ancient. Instead, it was inﬂu-
enced by the writings of the Elizabethan physician, philosopher, and occultist Robert Fludd
(1574–1637). Fludd’s theory was that the cosmos was linked by a single chord of music that
incorporated all tones from highest to lowest; speciﬁcally, there was a “Great Chain of Being” in
which the hand of God tuned the divine harmony of the universe. During the 1620s, Fludd’s the-
ory was being seriously discussed in intellectual circles throughout Europe, and especially in the
Low Countries, where Thibault was a university professor. It may have informed Thibault’s deci-
sion to have an engraver depict a hand holding the sword with its descending numbers, almost
a perfect illustration of the divine monochord.
In short, L’Academie d’Espee combined occult and fencing to an unprecedented degree. Such
an integrated connection would not be seen in European fencing again. Instead, as mainstream
interest in alchemy, astrology, hermeticism, and mystical symbolism declined during the late sev-
enteenth and early eighteenth centuries, European fencing masters became more interested in
determining the “rational” principles behind fencing. Numeration became straightforward lists
of ﬁrst, second, and third and manuals steered away from discussion of anything but the theory
and technique of fencing itself.
—Gregory D. Mele
See also: Fighting Arts of the Early Middle Ages; Fighting Arts of the Later Middle Ages; Fighting
Arts of the Renaissance (in Volume I); Belief Systems: European Chivalry; Expressive 
Culture; and Secret Societies and Fraternal Organizations (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Anglo, Sydney. 2000. The Martial Arts of Renaissance Europe. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Barber, Richard. 2006. Bestiary: Being an English Version of the Bodleian Library, Oxford M.S. Bodley
764. Suffolk, UK and New York: Boydell & Brewer.
Hils, Hans-Peter. 1985. Meister Johann Liechtenauers kunst des langen Schwertes [Master Johann
Liechtenauer’s Art of the Longsword]. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang GmbH.
Kal, Paulus. 2006. In Service to the Duke: The 15th Century Fighting Treatise of Paulus Kal, translated by
Christian Tobler. Highland Village, TX: Chivalry Bookshelf.
Lewis, C. S. 1964. The Discarded Image: An Introduction to Medieval and Renaissance Literature. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Liberi, Fiore dei. 1902. Flos Duellatorum, in arnis, sine arnis, equester, pedester [Flower of Battle], edited
by Francesco Novati. (Reprint) Bergamo: Instituto Italiano D’Arti Graﬁch.
Lindholm, David and friends, translators. Cod. HS.3227a or Hanko Döbringer fechtbuch from 1389, via
http://www.thearma.org/Manuals/Dobringer_A5_sidebyside.pdf, accessed May 21, 2009,
Marozzo, Achille. 1536. Opera Nova. Chiamata duello, o vero ﬁore dell’armi de singulari abattimenti
offensivi et diffensivi [New Work]. Modena, via http://www.aemma.org/onlineResources/marozzo/
marozzoArte.htm, accessed September 30, 2008.
Thibault, Gérard. 2006. Academy of the Sword, translated by John Michael Greer. Highland City, TX:
Chivalry Bookshelf.
Vadi, Filippo. 2002. Arte Gladiatoria Dimicandi: 15th Century Swordsmanship of Filippo Vadi, translated
by Luca Porzio and Gregory Mele. Union City, CA: Chivalry Bookshelf.
Yates, Frances A. 1964. Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
356
Belief Systems: European Occult Sciences

BELIEF SYSTEMS: INDIA
In comparison to China and Japan, or even to Thailand and other regions of Southeast Asia,
India does not often come to mind as a country with a strong martial arts tradition. Indeed,
Indian civilization is most often associated with elaborate ritual codes, abstract metaphysical
speculation, and, at least in modern times, the principle of nonviolence. Even though the so-
called classical scheme of social classiﬁcation known as varna (rendered in English as “caste”)
clearly deﬁned the role of warrior princes in relation to other occupational groups and the two
preeminent epics, the Mahabharata and the Ramayana, are replete with military exploits and
martial heroes, Indian civilization has come to be associated with the values of Brahmanic Hinduism
and colored by the values of orthodox ritual religiosity on the one hand and contemplative, oth-
erworldly speculation on the other. In both public conception and much of the academic litera-
ture, these attributes are conceived of as decidedly noncombative and, very often, abstracted
from the body rather than linked to it.
Nevertheless there is a strong tradition of martial arts in South Asia, as D. C. Muzumdar
brought out in his Encyclopedia of Indian Physical Culture (1950), and this tradition is not nearly as
dissociated from the so-called mainstream of spiritualism and philosophical thought as popular per-
ception would have it. In practice, the martial arts in India are clearly marginalized, and their pop-
ularity is sharply limited, but in theory various forms of martial arts are closely linked to important
medical, ritual, and forms of meditation practice. Moreover, it is somewhat problematic to think of
the martial arts in India as a discrete entity upon which an equally discrete entity—spirituality and
religion—has a direct effect. When, as in South Asia, the distinction between mind and body is
not applicable, other categorical binary distinctions also tend to lose their meaning. As a result,
what might be classiﬁed as religion shades into metaphysics, which, in turn, shades into physical
ﬁtness. Thus, in a sense, devotionalism, meditation, and the martial arts are, perhaps, best seen as
part of the same basic complex rather than as interdependent variables.
The concept of shakti (Hindi; power/energy) or its various analogs, such as prana (vital breath),
is of central importance to the Indian complex of variables. Most broadly, shakti as a metaphysical
concept denotes the active, or animating, feminine aspect of creation. It also means cosmic energy
or, simply, the supernatural power associated with divine beings and spiritual forces. Shakti is
regarded as a kind of power that pervades the universe but that does not always manifest itself as
such. To the extent that human beings are microcosmic, they are thought to embody shakti, and
this shakti can be made manifest in various ways under various circumstances.
Most often, one is said to manifest shakti when one so closely identiﬁes with a deity that one
embodies that deity’s power. Moreover, the performance of austerities, such as fasts and other
forms of renunciation, as well as various forms of ritualized sacriﬁce, produces shakti. Thus,
shakti is thought of as something that can be developed through practice, and this, in particu-
lar, is what links it to the performance of various martial arts. Most signiﬁcantly, shakti is at once
supernatural and therefore metaphysical and physical and physiological. The brightness of one’s
eyes as well as the tone of one’s skin is said to be a manifestation of shakti, as is the ability to lev-
itate, on the one hand, or lift an opponent into the air, on the other. In other words, shakti
means many different things, which makes it possible to translate across various domains of
experience, and the martial arts can be thought of as a critical, if often overlooked, point at
which this translation is most clearly worked out.
Belief Systems: India
357
www.ebook3000.com

Whereas shakti can be derived from devotional and ascetic practices, it is perhaps most
closely linked, and clearly embodied, through the practice of brahmacharya (celibacy; the com-
plete control of one’s senses). In this way, shakti is directly linked to sexual activity, and the
physiology of masculine sexuality in particular. Essentially, shakti becomes manifest when a per-
son is able to renounce sexual desire and embody the energy manifest in semen. As Swami
Sivananda (1887–1963) of the Divine Life Society explained, “The more a person conserves his
semen, the greater will be his stature and vitality. His energy, ardor, intellect, competence, capac-
ity for work, wisdom, success, and godliness will begin to manifest themselves, and he will be able
to proﬁt from long life. . . . To tell the truth, semen is elixir” (1984, 10–11). Semen itself is
thought of as the distilled, condensed essence of the body, as the body, nourished by food, goes
through a series of biochemical metabolic transformations whereby waste products are purged
and each successive metamorphosis is a more pure, reﬁned form of the previous one. In fact,
semen is thought of as the purest and most powerful of body ﬂuids, derived from the juice of food,
blood, ﬂesh, fat, bone, and marrow; it imparts an aura of ojas (bright, radiant energy) to the body,
and ojas is, in essence, the elemental, particulate form of cosmic shakti.
Although the physiology of this transformation is what matters in the context of martial arts
training and self-development, the embodied process of metamorphosis is congruent with cos-
mological mythology and astrology. The underlying model within this cosmology is the ﬂow of
liquids and the dynamic interplay of dry solar heat and cool, moist, lunar ﬂuids. The waxing and
waning of the moon are conceived of as the drying up and death of the lunar king, but then his
subsequent cyclical rejuvenation.
Rejuvenation is regarded as a process by which cool, moist, lunar “semen” is replenished.
Signiﬁcantly, this cosmology deﬁnes the potential energy of contained semen, and the
embodiment of semen, in terms of the negative consequences of its outward ﬂow. In an
important way the high value placed on semen/shakti in the Indian martial arts is deﬁned in
terms of the danger associated with indiscriminate sensual arousal, and one can note, in the
anxious rhetoric of contemporary religious teachers, the underlying mythic symbolism of heat,
waning energy, and the violent destructiveness of sex.
Sivananda characterized this condition in the following way: “Because the youth of today are
destroying their semen, they are courting the worst disaster and are daily being condemned to
hell. . . . How many of these unfortunate people lie shaking on their cots like the grievously ill?
Some are suffering from heat. . . . There is no trust of God in their hearts, only lust. . . . [W]hat
future do such people have? They only glow with the light of ﬁreﬂies, and neither humility nor
glory are found in their ﬂickering hypocrisy” (1984, 41).
In terms of formalized religious practice, celibacy is institutionalized in the life stage of brah-
macharya, in the sense of chaste discipleship. In this sense a brahmachari is not simply celibate,
although certainly and primarily that, but also a novice scholar who submits himself to the
absolute authority of a guru (adept master). As the ﬁrst stage of the ideal life course, brah-
macharya is roughly congruent with the age through which most children attend school, with
marriage when a young man is in his early to mid- twenties. In the idealized scheme, a brah-
machari is a high-caste Brahman boy who must learn by rote the Vedic scriptures and all of the
formal ritual protocol associated with those scriptures. The concept of chastity is relevant here
insofar as a boy who is able to control his desire is not distracted, better able to learn—in the
sense that he has a greater capacity for memory—and also in appropriately good physical health,
358
Belief Systems: India

both strong and pure. Although brahmacharya as a life stage is associated with ritual and Vedic
learning, it also has much wider pedagogical salience as a model for all forms of instruction, both
explicitly spiritual, as when a person submits to the devotional teaching of a holy man, as well
as more secular, as when a person learns a craft, a musical instrument, or a martial art from an
accomplished teacher. It is signiﬁcant that these “secular” forms of the master–disciple relation-
ship are secular only in terms of content. The mode of instruction and the attitude of complete
submission to authority and total identiﬁcation with the guru that are incumbent on the disci-
ple stem directly from the idealized Vedic model. Celibacy factors into this attitude because of
the extent to which a disciple must be able to focus his whole being on the act of learning and
literally embody the knowledge his guru imparts.
Hindu scriptures are replete with references to the link between sex, fertility, and mastery of
power, both supernatural and natural—and the link is complex. In many instances, it is also
inherently ambiguous, insofar as sex—understood as an analog for divine creation—is the
source of great power, but also—understood as an instinctual, bestial, subhuman drive—is
regarded as an act through which all power can be lost if it is not carefully controlled. In any
case, the deity who is celibacy incarnate, most clearly manifests shakti, iconographically embod-
ies the physiology of ojas, and translates all of this explicitly into the domain of martial arts is
Hanuman, hero of the epic Ramayana. Although he is most closely associated with wrestling and
is known for having performed feats of incredible strength, the nature of Hanuman’s power is
more complex. To begin with, Hanuman is a monkey, or the son of a nymph and a monkey, and
is thought to possess the nascent attributes of his simian lineage. This is made clear in many of
the myths and folktales associated with him that, in essence, depict him “monkeying around.”
In one notable instance, as an infant, he ﬂew off intent on eating the sun, manifest as the char-
iot of the god Indra, thinking the golden orb was a succulent orange. Indira threw his spear and
knocked Hanuman unconscious to the ground. At this, Vayu, god of the Wind and surrogate
father of the young monkey, withheld his power and threatened to suffocate the world unless his
son’s life was saved. The whole pantheon of gods rallied to Hanuman’s side and bestowed on him
their respective supreme powers. As a result of this, Hanuman is immortal and invincible. He
also has the ability to change form and change size. He—again betraying the subhuman attrib-
utes of his lineage—is not conscious of these powers until he is made so by a suprahuman deity,
in particular his lord and master, Sri Rama.
Hanuman is one of the most popular deities in the Hindu pantheon, in part because he is a
deity whose primary spiritual attribute is his own devotion to his lord Rama. In other words,
Hanuman provides human supplicants with a clear divine model for their own devotional prac-
tices, and, signiﬁcantly, it is from these devotional practices that Hanuman is wise beyond the
wisest and an expert in the use of all weapons, among many other things. From the act of sen-
sory withdrawal and complete emotional transference, Hanuman derives his phenomenal
strength, skill, and wisdom. For the vast majority of supplicants, devotionalism is an end in itself.
And, given the metaphorical link between celibacy and fertility, newly married women often
pray to Hanuman to bless them with the birth of a son. However, Hanuman is most clearly rec-
ognized as the patron deity of akharas (gymnasiums), and in this context he is an explicit link
between the domain of spiritual, cosmic shakti, celibacy and the embodiment of shakti, and the
performance of martial arts. A shrine dedicated to Hanuman is found in almost all gymnasiums,
and in addition to performing rituals of propitiation and offering prayers to him, men who
Belief Systems: India
359
www.ebook3000.com

engage in martial arts training attribute their skill and strength to the extent of their ability to
embody celibacy and thereby become in their relationship to Hanuman as Hanuman is to Rama.
Celibacy is an integral feature of the martial arts in India, and in addition to being closely
linked to Hanuman, it is an important aspect of two other forms of practice that together con-
stitute one of the central coordinates around which Hindu doctrine has been constructed: san-
nyas (world renunciation) and yoga (the union of the individual self with the cosmic soul).
Technically, a sannyasi is a person who has moved through each of the ﬁrst three stages of the
ideal life course—celibate discipleship, ritual-performing family man, and forest-dwelling
monk—and has gone in search of moksha (ﬁnal liberation from the cycle of rebirth). As a san-
nyasi, a person must have no possessions, no family, no home, and no desire for worldly things.
After performing the rites to his own funeral—thereby symbolically dying—he secludes himself
to perform tapas (austerities), and from these austerities is thought to develop phenomenal pow-
ers before achieving ﬁnal liberation. Signiﬁcantly, the powers that a sannyasi comes to possess
through the performance of austerities are embodied, even though the ﬁnal realization of liber-
ation entails a complete dissolution of the body. In popular imagination, sannyasis can tell the
future, read minds, and perform other miracles. Often the act of performing intense austerities is
said to generate tremendous heat, referred to commonly as tapas. The heat of tapas is closely
linked both conceptually as well as in a theory of physiology associated with the retention of
semen. In many respects, therefore, the sannyasi is an ascetic analog of the divine ape,
Hanuman, and practitioners of the martial arts in India draw on both models to deﬁne the nature
and extent of their own strength and skill.
Interestingly, recent scholarship has shown that sannyasis were, in all likelihood, themselves
practitioners of various martial arts. Although past scholarship has tended to emphasize the aso-
cial, ascetic, and purely cognitive features of sannyas, it is clear that at various times in the his-
tory of South Asia, groups of sannyasis (known tellingly as akharas, a term that can mean either
“gymnasium” or “ascetic order, celibacy, and yoga”) have used their power to develop speciﬁc
ﬁghting skills. These so-called ﬁghting ascetics were retained by merchants, landlords, and
regional potentates to defend or extend their various interests. In some instances sannyasis of
this kind amassed signiﬁcant amounts of wealth and exercised considerable political power. A
recent permutation of this practice is manifest in present-day Ayodhya, a prominent religious
city in north India, where the heads of various akharas have tremendous political clout, as well
as in the articulation of aggressive, chauvinistic, communal Hinduism, wherein the powerful
sannyasi is seen as the heroic embodiment of idealized Hindu masculinity.
In contrast to East Asia, where the ascetic practices associated with Taoism produced the
archetypal martial arts, there is very little known about how the ﬁghting ascetics of India reﬁned
their skill. It is clear that yoga as a form of rigorous self-discipline is an integral part of ascetic
practice and that yoga makes reference to a theory of subtle physiology that translates very well
into the language and practice of martial arts, even though in recent history yoga has come to
be regarded, by most practitioners, as the antithesis of these arts. Although yoga is often thought
of as being cerebral, supremely metaphysical, and concerned with such ephemeral concepts as
the transmigration of the soul and the dissolution of consciousness, many of the basic or prelim-
inary steps in yoga entail clearly deﬁned codes of conduct, comprehensive ethical standards, and
detailed prescriptions for personal “moral hygiene,” as well as the more commonly known meth-
ods of asanas (physical postures) and pranayama (breathing exercises). These preliminary steps
360
Belief Systems: India

of yoga are designed to build up a practitioner’s overall strength such that he or she is able to
withstand the force of transcendental consciousness.
Pranayama is of particular importance. In yogic physiology, a person is said to be composed
of a series of body-sheaths, which range across the spectrum from the gross anatomy of elemen-
tal metamorphosis at one extreme to the subtle, astral aura of the soul at the other. Prana (vital
breath) is said to pervade all of these sheaths, and there is a close relationship, both metaphori-
cally and metonymically, between air as breath and the vital, subtle breath of prana. Not only
are they alike ﬁguratively, but one has come to stand for the other. Prana, as related to shakti, is
thought to be the very energy of life, and yogic breathing exercises are conceived of as the means
by which one can purify, concentrate, and channel this energy. In this regard, a theory of pranic
ﬂow through the nadis (subtle channels or meridians of the body) explains how cosmic energy is
microcosmically embodied within the individual body.
Most closely associated with the esoteric, self-consciously mystical teachings of Tantrism,
nadi physiology is integral to yoga in general. Although subtle and thereby imperceptible to the
gross senses, nadis pervade the body in much the same way as do veins, arteries, and capillaries,
on the one hand, and nerves on the other. Of the hundreds of thousands of nadis, three are of
primary importance in yoga, the axial sushumna, which runs up the center of the trunk from anus
to crown, and the ida and pingla, which both start from the anus and intersect the sushumna at
key points as they crisscross from left to right and right to left respectively. These key points are
referred to as chakra centers, which, among many other things, reﬂect the energy of prana as the
disarticulated prana ﬂowing through all three conduits comes together. The ultimate goal of
pranayama is to cleanse the channels, purify prana, and then channel it exclusively through the
sushumna nadi such that it penetrates consciousness and yokes or harnesses, as yogic imagery
would have it (yoke and yoga have a common etymology) the individual soul to the cosmic spirit
of the universe.
In this regard, the asanas of yoga are, technically, “seats” rather than postures and are
designed to anchor, or root, the body in space, thus explicitly facilitating the practice of “yok-
ing.” The classical padmasana (lotus seat) as well as similar cross-legged seated positions such as
sukhasana and siddhasana are particularly important, insofar as they enable a person to sit motion-
less for many hours and also stabilize the subtle body. Thus, before a person engages in the four
“higher” stages of yogic meditation, he or she must master these “empowering” ways of sitting.
Apart from these “seats-in-fact,” the relative importance to yoga as a whole of the more “vigor-
ous” stretching, bending, and ﬂexing asanas is unclear, since many of the classical, authoritative
works on the subject, such as the Yoga Sutra of Patanjali (second century BCE), give scant men-
tion to the subject of this kind of yoga. However, there is no doubt that asanas have become a
highly developed form of physical self development, and this development can be traced back to
the medieval period of South Asian history and the structured asceticism of the Kanpatha sect
of sannyasis. Although these ascetics were concerned with the embodiment of power, it is difﬁ-
cult to imagine that asanas were, in and of themselves, a form of martial art, given that they do
not entail movement as such. There is nonetheless the intriguing possibility that yogic asanas,
linked together through a series of connective movements, might have constituted a more active
style of martial self-development along the lines of taijiquan (cf. Sjoman 1996). Regardless, it is
clear that in contemporary practice, asanas are conceived of as a form of physical ﬁtness train-
ing for both the subtle and gross bodies, with primary attention given to the locus points at
Belief Systems: India
361
www.ebook3000.com

362
Belief Systems: India
which these bodies tend to affect one another most directly: the internal organ/chakra nexus,
the spine/sushumna axes, and, to a lesser extent, the joint/nerve/nadi/tendon complex.
In essence, yoga is a method for achieving siddha (perfection) in the whole body–mind com-
plex. Although perfection is meant to lead to a state of complete nothingness, a person who
comes close to perfection is able to perform supernatural feats. In the canonical literature of
Hinduism, as well as in more popular folk genres, yogis often ﬁgure as characters that use their
power to perform miracles or, as is often the case when they are disturbed from deep meditation,
to curse and otherwise punish those who are less than perfect. Thus, in a very concrete sense, the
power associated with yoga is regarded as having an outward orientation and is not only directed
inward toward the self and away from others or society at large. Although the power of a yogi can
be destructive, in either a defensive or offensive mode, an adept yogi can embody near-perfection,
such that the aura of his personality has a positive effect on those with whom he comes in con-
tact. Although this “personality” is not exactly physiological, neither is it “martial” in any mean-
ingful sense. The way in which a yogi’s embodied consciousness—his spirituality or the subtle
aura of his religious persona—can factor into problematic social relationships should be under-
stood as an extension of the logic behind more explicitly martial arts.
—Joseph S. Alter
See also: South Asian Martial Arts; Indian Wrestling; Thang-ta; Silat (in Volume I); Expressive
Culture; Performing Arts; and Secret Societies and Fraternal Organizations (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Alter, Joseph S. 1993a. “Hanuman and the Moral Physique of the Banarsi Wrestler,” in Living
Banaras: Hindu Religion in Cultural Context, edited by Bradley Hertel and Cynthia Ann Humes,
127–144. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Alter, Joseph S. 1993b. “The Sannyasi and the Indian Wrestler: The Anatomy of a Relationship,”
American Ethnologist 19(2), 317–336, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/645039, accessed October
15, 2009.
Alter, Joseph S. 1994. “Celibacy, Sexuality, and the Transformation of Gender into Nationalism in
North India,” Journal of Asian Studies 53(1), 45–66, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/2059526,
accessed October 16, 2009.
Alter, Joseph S. 1997a. “Seminal Truth: A Modern Science of Male Celibacy in North India,” Med-
ical Anthropology Quarterly 11(3), 275–298, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/649567, accessed Octo-
ber 16, 2009.
Alter, Joseph S. 1997b. “A Therapy to Live By: Public Health, the Self and Nationalism in the Prac-
tice of a North India Yoga Society,” Medical Anthropology 17, 309–335, via PMID: 9241991
[PubMed—indexed for MEDLINE], accessed October 17, 2009.
Alter, Joseph S. 1999. “Heaps of Health, Metaphysical Fitness: Ayurveda and the Ontology of Good
Health in Medical Anthropology,” Current Anthropology 40, 43–66, DOI: 10.1086/200060, via
http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/200060, accessed October 16, 2009.
Briggs, George W. 1973. Gorakhnath and the Kanpatha Yogis. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Deshpande, S. H. 1992. Physical Education in Ancient India. Delhi: Bharatiya Vidya Prakashan.
Eliade, Mircea. 1969. Yoga: Immortality and Freedom. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lorenzen, David N. 1978. “Warrior Ascetics in Indian History,” Journal of the American Oriental Society
98(1), January to March, 61–75, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/600151, accessed October 15, 2009.
Muzumdar, D. C. 1950. Encyclopedia of Indian Physical Culture. Baroda, India: Good Companions.

O’Flaherty, Wendy Doniger. 1973. Asceticism and Eroticism in the Mythology of Siva. London: Oxford
University Press.
Parry, Jonathan. 1989. “The End of the Body,” in Fragments for a History of the Human Body, Part 2,
edited by Michel Feher. New York: Zone.
Pinch, William R. 1996. Peasants and Monks in British India. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Rosu, Arion. 1981. “Les Marman et les Arts Martiaux Indiens [Vital Spots in Indian Martial Arts],”
Journal Asiatique 269, 417–451.
Sivananda, Swami. 1984. Brahmacharya Hi Jiwan Hai [Celibacy Is Life Itself]. Allahabad: Adhunik
Prakashan Graha.
Sjoman, N. E. 1996. The Yoga Tradition of the Mysore Palace. Delhi: Abhinava Prakashan.
Staal, Frits. 1993. “Indian Bodies,” in Self as Body in Asian Theory and Practice, edited by Thomas 
P. Kasulis, with Roger T. Ames and Wimal Dissanayake. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Veer, Peter van der. 1988. Gods on Earth: The Management of Religious Experience and Identity in a North
Indian Pilgrimage Center. London: Athlone.
Veer, Peter van der. 1989. “The Power of Detachment: Disciplines of Body and Mind in the Ramanandi
Order,” American Ethnologist 16(3), August, 458–470, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/645268,
accessed October 17, 2009.
Wadley, Susan S. 1975. Shakti: Power in the Conceptual Structure of Karimpur Religion. University of Chicago
Studies in Anthropology, no. 2. Chicago: Department of Anthropology, University of Chicago.
Wolcott, Leonard. 1978. “Hanuman, the Power-Dispensing Monkey in Indian Folk Religion,” Jour-
nal of Asian Studies 37(4) August, 653–661, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/2054368, accessed
October 17, 2009.
Zarrilli, Phillip B. 1989. “Three Bodies of Practice in a Traditional South Indian Martial Art,” Social
Science and Medicine 28(12), 1289–1309, via PMID: 2660283 [PubMed – indexed for MEDLINE],
accessed October 17, 2009.
BELIEF SYSTEMS: IRAN
Traditional Persian literature is ﬁlled with tales of heroic deeds of champions who are powerful and
skilled on the battleﬁeld and virtuous and good off of it. These stories represent an Iranian ideal.
This reverence is especially notable in Shah-nama (Book of Kings) written by Ferdowsi about
1010 CE. Ferdowsi’s epic had a tremendous impact on the revival of Persian language during the
Middle Ages, and maintaining Persian culture afterwards. Shah-nama is generally considered the
most important book in Persian literature.
The rules and codes that were extolled by Persian epics and romances were called javanmardi
(principles of young men). These principles were based on concepts codiﬁed and practiced in
Iran under the Sassanids (ca. 241–651 CE), and perhaps earlier.
Devices used to propagate these ideals have included recitation (naqqali) of stories, epics, and
romances. Passion plays (ta’ziyeh) also represent ideal types of the Persian warrior codex, as seen
through the ﬁlters of Shi’a Islam.
THE PRINCIPLES OF JAVANMARDI AND AYYARAN
For centuries, Iranian warriors have been encouraged to follow a code of conduct. In Persian, this
code is called javanmardi (principles of young men). Javanmardi has many similarities to the
Arabic concept of futuwwa (from fata, pl. ﬁtyan: young men), which is in turn part of the spiri-
tual culture of Islam. As such, javanmardi encompassed the moral ideal and rule of conduct for
Belief Systems: Iran
363
www.ebook3000.com

many Persian groups: artisan and craft guilds, Suﬁbrotherhoods, militant ascetics, urban militia,
warriors for the faith (ghazi), pleasure-seeking aristocratic youth, working-class physical cultur-
ists, and even brigands (Zakeri 1995, 1). The origins of this concept can be traced back to pre-
Islamic Iran, when this concept was supported by the Sassanid aristocracy.
Around 1082 CE, the Ziyarid prince Qabus ibn Iskandar (ca. 1021–ca. 1099 CE) wrote
the Qabus-nama (Book of Qabus). Qabus wanted educate his son in proper behavior, and so
his text’s longest chapter deals with the principles of javanmardi. This text was probably
based on a now-lost Sassanid text called Ayinnamak (Book of Customs and Usages); in those
days, the Ziyarid Dynasty was attempting to attach itself to the pre-Islamic Iranian past (Zakeri
1995, 3).
Members of Iranian confraternal organizations that followed the principles of javanmardi
were called ayyaran. The Arabic root word ayyar means “scoundrels,” which tells us exactly
how Umayyad and Abbasid ofﬁcials viewed these groups. However, Persian-language authors
such as the Suﬁphilosopher Abu’l Hasan al-Hujwiri (died ca. 1072 CE) took care to distin-
guish between ayyaran who were rightly guided and those who were not, and today,
Dehkhoda’s Persian-language dictionary deﬁnes ayyaran as “people who follow the principles
of javanmardi.”
Leaders of ayyaran groups descended from (or claimed lines of descent from) the Sassanid
asbaran (horsemen). Under the Sassanids, asbaran had provided elite cavalry during wartime;
hence the name. During peacetime, asbaran were independent men of some means. Many had
been landlords, artisans, or warriors who stemmed from lower nobility, and they served the func-
tion of tax collectors and lords in villages. Thus, asbaran were what young men of no ﬁnancial
means aspired to become.
Due to the extensive reforms initiated by the Sassanid king Anushirvan (died 579 CE), the
social standards of the asbaran were gradually shaped into a set of ethical and moral standards
called azadegi (greatness; nobility) (Zakeri 1995, 8–11). After the introduction of Islam into
Iran in the seventh century CE, azadegi formed the core of the virtues and social practices that
came to be known in Arabic warrior culture as futuwwa, corresponding to chivalry in the
Anglo-Norman warrior culture.
During the ninth century CE, Laith, a Persian-speaking coppersmith from Zaranj (a city in
southwestern Afghanistan), wrote a moral guide for his sons. Laith said that men (ayyaran)
should lead their lives according to seven principles:
1.
Follow the way of manliness (javanmardi), and volunteer to perform good deeds.
2.
Be honest (rasti), and tell the truth at all times.
3.
Keep secrets (sattari).
4.
Show magnanimity (moravvat) toward friends and enemies.
5.
Safeguard (emanatdari) material goods that are entrusted to one’s care.
6.
Keep promises (vafa be ahd).
7.
Honor the salt (haghe namak). That is, if you share food with someone, then you are bound to that
person (Ashtari Tafreshi 2000/1379, 36).
Laith’s code is known to us today because he was the father of Ya’qub bin Laith as-Saffar
(840–879 CE), founder of the Iranian Saffarid dynasty. The Saffarid dynasty (867–ca. 1495 CE)
was always closely associated with middle-class ayyaran values.
364
Belief Systems: Iran

Many ayyaran followed the principles of javanmardi and safeguarded the security of their
communities and roads. A few of them became what we now call social bandits, meaning that
they robbed the rich and the powerful and distributed the money to the poor. (Afshari and
Madayeni 2002/1381, 15–16) And, no doubt, some were simply armed robbers.
According to Muhammad Hashim Asaf (2002/1382, 267), author of Rostam al-Tavarikh, an
ayyar needed to master the following techniques to be considered a good ﬁghter:
1.
Speed (chasti va chalaki)
2.
Horsemanship (funun savari)
3.
Swordsmanship (shamshir-zani)
4.
Dagger ﬁghting (khanjar-gozari)
5.
Throwing the lasso (kamand-andazi)
6.
Strength (govvat-e bazu)
7.
Polo (chogan bazi)
8.
Throwing javelins and spears (jarid-andazi)
9.
Wrestling (koshti-giri)
Ayyaran groups had initiation ceremonies for their new members. The purpose of the
ceremony was to prove that the prospective members had reached a certain level of maturity and
could be considered javanmard. Typically, the new members were asked to wear a special type of
belt named a shod and a certain type of pants called saravil. There is astonishing correlation
between this ceremony and certain Zoroastrian ceremonies of initiation, in which the belt is
called kustik and the pants are called shadr.
After the introduction of Islam in Iran, ghazi (holy warriors) and Suﬁs spread the principles of
javanmardi into neighboring countries (Afshari and Madayeni 2002/1381, 11–12). The aristocratic
futuwwa established in Baghdad by the Abbasid Caliph Nasir al-Din Allah (ruled 1180–1225 CE)
is an example of an elite group organized along the same lines as an ayyaran brotherhood.
During the Safavid, Afsharid, Zand, and Qajar eras (sixteenth to nineteenth centuries CE), the
champions (pahlavanan) who trained in houses of strength (zoorkhane) followed the principles of
javanmardi. Originally, champions were not just wrestlers, as they would become in the late nine-
teenth century CE. Instead, they were proﬁcient in the full spectrum of traditional Iranian martial
arts: wrestling, spear and sword ﬁghting, and shooting with the bow and arrow. Some pahlavanan
were active in the political and social development of Iran. For example, some were involved in
Iran’s wars against the Central Asians and Ottomans, while others served Iranian kings as court
champions. According to the Qajar-period manuscript Rostam al-Tavarikh (completed 1831 CE),
145 pahlavanan served Shah Soltan Hossein Safavid (1693–1723 CE). Unfortunately, some of
Shah Soltan Hossein’s pahlavanan were corrupt, committing murder and robbery, and so con-
tributed to his eventual downfall. Nevertheless, most pahlavanan strictly followed the ethical
principles of javanmardi (Afshari and Madayeni 2002/1381, 11, 23, 28, 30–31).
SHAH-NAMA
In Persian culture, the reverence of warrior culture is not just respect for strength; it is also respect
for virtues, good deeds, and strict adherence to the principles of javanmardi. The most important lit-
erary work dealing with this subject is Shah-nama (Book of Kings), completed about 1010 CE. The
Belief Systems: Iran
365
www.ebook3000.com

author was Hakim Abolqasem Ferdowsi (935–1020 CE). This epic poem consists of some 60,000
couplets. Structurally, its rhymes describe the heroic deeds of Iranian champions from antiquity to
the seventh century CE, but more importantly, they revived the Persian language and culture after
two centuries of Arab domination. Shah-nama represents a Persian national renaissance.
Shah-nama deals with Iranian legends and the history of ancient Iran. The story had a huge
inﬂuence on Iranian historiography, and the way that Iranians subsequently dealt with their
ancient kings and heroes. From its writing to the present, the text has been used as an instru-
ment for the legitimization of a Persian-speaking ruler’s power. Thus, Shah-nama is not only a
mythical epic about heroes but also a theoretical guide for real kings.
The subject matter in Shah-nama represents a vast body of information that dates to the pre-
Islamic Sassanid era. Indeed, there is a similar Persian prose history that slightly precedes the poetic
version by Ferdowsi. This prose version was translated by Zoroastrian scholars from an original
Pahlavi text (Davidson 1985, 61–62). Nonetheless, it is Ferdowsi’s version that lives in the imagi-
nation and heart of Iranians (Jacob 1985, 16); it is the couplets of Ferdowsi’s Shah-nama that are sung
in the training halls of zoorkhane, where Iranian pahlavanan exercise to the lyrics and songs of this
great epic and pledge to defend the national identity and integrity of Iran, and its warrior culture.
Rostam is one of the heroes of Shah-nama. Rostam has superhuman skill in wrestling, swords-
manship, ﬁghting with the mace and dagger, cavalry games, and archery. At the same time, he
takes care of the weak and downtrodden, and is a doer of good deeds. But what makes him so
popular is that he also has many very human failings, for which he is usually punished. For exam-
ple, in one story, Rostam resorts to deceit to defeat a powerful opponent named Sohrab. Then,
while Sohrab lies dying, Rostam discovers that Sohrab is his son.
Another popular story describes Rostam’s battle with Esfandiar the Invincible. Like the
Greek hero Achilles, Esfandiar had bathed in a special substance that made him impervious to
cuts and blows. When Esfandiar bathed in this substance, he kept his eyes closed. Rostam learns
this, and then kills Esfandiar by shooting arrows into his eyes.
A separate hero is known as Arash the Archer. According to one version of this story (Pur
Davud 1969/1347, 63–64), a Turanian (i.e., Turkic) king named Afrasiab attacked Iran. After
being surrounded in Tabarestan, the Iranian King Manouchehr asked for terms. Afrasiab replied
that Manouchehr could keep as much land as could be covered in a bow shot. Manouchehr
accepted the terms. He then brought out a bow that had been made exactly as described in the
Zoroastrian holy book Avesta, and had his best archer, Arash, shoot it. Arash put all his strength
into the bow, and he died right after releasing the arrow. God assigned an angel to keep the arrow
in ﬂight, and so the arrow ﬂew over the mountains to land in remote Khorasan, still with enough
power to pierce a tree. The distance of this shot was said to be a thousand farsang (forty days walk;
the farsang is a unit of measurement based on how far a man could walk in an hour) (Houtum-
Schindler 1888). Such a distance is clearly legendary, but the story reminds us of the importance
of archery in Iranian mythology and culture.
RECITATIONS (NAQQALI)
Historically, Shah-nama was presented to audiences via recitations (naqqali). To this day, recita-
tions of the Shah-nama can be seen in some villages and towns in Iran. In addition, comparable
Turkic epics are still presented this way in rural sections of Central Asia (Harrison 2005). In
366
Belief Systems: Iran

Persian, the person who recited the epic was called a naqqal, and the recitation was called naqqali.
During feasts and in teahouses, naqqals told the stories from the Shah-nama and other famous
epics in return for food or payment.
The techniques of recitation were passed down from a master in naqqali to his student. To
maintain variety, stories included tales of heroic deeds of assorted champions and heroes;
examples include Eskandar-nama (Romance of Alexander the Great, twelfth century CE),
Darab-nama (Romance of Darab, twelfth century CE), and Romuz-e Hamze (Secrets of Hamze,
thirteenth century CE). All these tales propagated the values of javanmardi (Modaresi
Chahrdahi 1979/1358, 67).
During recitation of these stories, naqqals sometimes wielded swords and other types of arms
and armor and imitated the ﬁghting scenes. Thus, the storyteller appealed to the public’s emo-
tions. Before the introduction of Islam, naqqali was accompanied by a person playing lyre/harp
in the background. After the introduction of Islam, public recitation was generally done with-
out music, thereby making naqqals rely more on mimics and gestures.
Naqqali told stories about heroes of ancient, pre-Islamic, Iran. These stories encouraged audi-
ences to resist foreign ideas and preserve their own cultural heritage. At the same time, kings and
warlords used the same stories to establish links to ancient kings, thereby legitimizing their rule
(Beizai 2004/1383, 64–66).
During the ﬁrst 200 years following the Muslim conquest of Iran, the Iranians were not suc-
cessful in recapturing the past glory of Iran. Therefore, they took refuge in faith instead, usually
choosing non-Sunni religious perspectives such as Suﬁsm and Shi’a Islam. Naqqali was one of
the ways that these beliefs were spread (Beizai 2004/1383, 67).
PASSION PLAYS (TA’ZIYEH)
As Shiite Muslims, Iranians consider the Twelve Imams to be the true heirs of the Prophet
Muhammad (ca. 570–632 CE). Thus, each year, the martyrdom of the third Imam, Husayn ibn
‘Ali (626–680 CE), is mourned in a special ceremony called ta’ziyeh (literally, mourning).
Ta’ziyeh takes place on the tenth day (Ashura) of the ﬁrst month of the Islamic lunar cal-
endar (Muharram), which is the date that Imam Husayn, grandson of the Prophet and son of
Imam ‘Ali, the ﬁnal undisputed caliph, was killed. On October 10, 680 CE, an Umayyad cav-
alry unit commanded by the clergyman Umar ibn Sa’ad (ca. 620–ca. 680 CE) surrounded a
small group of people led by Imam Husayn in open country near what is today Karbala, Iraq.
When the Imam and his followers refused to swear allegiance to the recently installed
Umayyad caliph, they were beheaded and left in the sun, unburied. A shrine was built at the
site in 684 CE. More elaborate structures followed, and the present-day mosque dates to the
eleventh century.
Institutionalized mourning for the martyred Imam has taken place on Ashura for a long time,
and by the Safavid period (1501–1722 CE), group mourning, consisting of sinezani (chest hit-
ting), qamezani (hitting oneself on the forehead with a short sword), and zanjirzani (hitting one-
self with a chain) were common throughout Iran (Homayuni 2001/1377, 12). However, ta’ziyeh,
in its current form as drama or passion play, only dates to the Qajar period (1794–1925). This
Qajar tradition represents perhaps the most dramatic development and ﬂowering of popular arts
in Iranian history (Chelkowski 1998–1999, 90).
Belief Systems: Iran
367
www.ebook3000.com

The weapons seen in Qajar ta’ziyeh are those of the late medieval era and include the long
sword (shamshir), dagger (khanjar), shield (separ), mace (gorz), torch (gorz-e atashin), wooden
club (mantasha’), saddle axe (tabarzin), bow and arrow (tir va kaman), spear (neyze), helmet
(kolahkhud) festooned with feathers (ablagh), mail armor (zereh), and unit standard (alam)
(Shahidi 2001/1380, 395, 398–403). Originally, ta’ziyeh was restricted to the portrayal of the
tragic events at Karbala, but eventually it expanded to include comedies (ta’ziyeh mozhek). A
sample comedy was called Rostam Converts to Islam. During this play, the sainted Imam ‘Ali
defeats Rostam in a wrestling match, and afterwards, Rostam converts to Shi’a Islam. This par-
ticular episode combines elements of ancient Iranian martial culture, Suﬁstories about miracu-
lous conversion, and Shi’ite passion plays. Since the 1930s, ta’ziyeh mozhek has gone into
decline (Beizai 2004/1383, 152), but orthodox ta’ziyeh continues to be popular in Iran, and the
plays are sometimes even presented overseas (Weber 2002).
—Manouchehr Moshtagh Khorasani
See also: Iranian Martial Arts (in Volume I); Belief Systems: European Chivalry; Belief Systems:
India; Expressive Culture; Folklore; Invented Traditions; Performing Arts; Political Uses of the
Martial Arts; and Secret Societies and Fraternal Organizations (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Afshar, Iraj, and Mehran Afshari, editors and annotators. 2006 [AP 1385]. Qese-ye Hossein Kord-e
Sabestari [The Story of Hossein Kord Shabestari: Based on an Anonymous Tale Known as Hossein-
nama]. Tehran: Nashr-e Cheshme.
Afshari, Mehran, and Mehdi Madayeni, editors. 2002 [AP 1381]. Futuwwat va Asnaf: Chardah Resale
dar Bab-e Futuwwat va Asnaf [Futuwwat and Guilds; Fourteen Manuscripts about Futuwwat and
Guilds]. Tehran: Nashr-e Cheshme.
Asaf, Muhammad Hashim. 2003 [AP 1382]. Rostam al-Tavarikh: Salatin-e Selseleye Safaviye, Afshariye,
Zandiye va Qajariye [Rostam al Tavarikh: The Sultans of Safavid, Afsharid, Zand and Qajar]. Anno-
tated by Azizollah Alizadeh. Tehran: Entesharat-e Ferdos.
Ashtari Tafreshi, Ezatollah. 2000. [AP 1379]. Nehzat Ayyaran az Aghaz Ta Doreye Pahlavi [The
Ayyaran from the Beginning to the Pahlavi Era]. Tehran: Sharat Avaye Nur.
Beiqami, Molana Muhammad. 2002. [AP 1381]. Darab-nama [Romance of Darab], two volumes, cor-
rected and annotated by Zabiollah Safa. Tehran: Sherkat-e Entesharat-e Elmi va Farhangi.
Beizai, Bahram. 2004. [AP 1383]. Yek Motale’eye Namayesh dar Iran: Ba Shast Tasvir va Tarh va Yek
Vajename [A Survey of Theatre in Iran: With Sixty Illustrations and a Glossary]. Tehran:
Entesharat-e Roshangaran va Motaleat-e Zanan.
Chelkowski, Peter. 1998–1999. “Popular Arts: Patronage and Piety,” in Royal Persian Paintings: The
Qajar Epoch, 1785–1925, edited by Layla S. Diba and Maryam Ekhtiar, 90–99. London: I. B. Tauris
Publishers.
Davidson, Olga M. 1985. “The Crown-Bestower in the Iranian Book of Kings,” in Papers in Honour
of Professor Mary Boyce, edited by Mary Boyce. Acta Iranica, 24–25, Volume X, Deuxième série,
Hommages et minora, 61–148. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Hakim, Manouchehr Xan. No date. Koliyat-e Haft Jeldi Eskandarname: Sahebgharan Zowalgharenein Eskan-
dar ben Darab ben Bahman ben Esfandiar Ruintan [The Complete Seven Volumes of Eskandar-nama:
Sahebgharan Zowalgharenein Alexander, the Son of Darab, the Son of Bahman, the Son of the Invul-
nerable Esfandiar]. From the Series of Legends of Oriental Pahlavan. Tehran: Entesharat-e Muham-
mad Hasan Sar Elmi.
Harrison, K. David. 2005. “A Tuvan Hero Tale, with Commentary, Morphemic Analysis, and Transla-
tion,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 125(1), January to March, 1–30, via http://www
.jstor.org/stable/20064281, accessed October 17, 2009.
368
Belief Systems: Iran

Homayuni, Sadeg. 1999 [AP 1377]. Shiraz Khastgah Taziyeh [Shiraz: the Origin of Ta’ziyeh]. Shiraz:
Bonyad Fars Shenasi.
Homayuni, Sadeg. 2001 [AP 1380]. Taziyeh dar Iran [Ta’ziyeh in Iran]. Shiraz: Navid-e Shiraz.
Houtum-Schindler, Albert. 1888. “On the Length of the Persian Farsang,” Proceedings of the Royal
Geographical Society and Monthly Record of Geography 10(9) (September), 584–588.
Jacob, Alain. 1985. Les Armes Blanches du Monde Islamique: Armes de Poing: Épées, Sabres, Poignards
[The Swords of the Islamic Era: Hand Arms: Swords, Sabers, and Daggers]. Paris: Jacques Grancher.
Kaykavus ibn Iskandar Ibn Qabus, ‘Unsur al-Ma’ali. 1951. A Mirror for Princes: The Qabus Nama,
translated by Reuben Levy. New York: E. P. Dutton.
Modaresi Chahrdahi, Nuroldin. 1979 [AP 1358]. Khaksar va Ahle Hag [Khaksar and the Followers of
Hag]. Tehran: Chapkhaneye Khushe.
Moshtagh Khorasani, Manouchehr. 2006. Arms and Armor from Iran: The Bronze Age to the End of the
Qajar Period. Tübingen: Legat Verlag.
Pur Davud, Ebrahim. 1969 [AP 1347]. Zin Abzar [Armament]. Tehran: Chapkhane-ye Arteshe
Shahanshahi.
Romuz-e Hamze. 1940 [AH 1359]. Handwritten by Muhammad Ali Name. Tehran: Sherkat-e Chap-
e Ketab. Note: An English-language translation of an Urdu version of this story is Ghalib Laknavi,
Abdullah Husain Bilgrami, and Musharraf Farooki. 2008. The Adventures of Amir Hamza: Lord of
the Auspicious Planetary Conjunction. New York: Modern Library.
Shahidi, Enayatollah. 2001 [AP 1380]. Taziyeh va Tazeyehkhani: Az Aghaz Ta Payan Doreye Qajar Dar
Tehran [Ta’ziyeh and Tazeyehkhani in Tehran: Research on the Shi’ite Indigenous Drama of
Ta’ziyeh from the Beginning to the End of Qajar Era]. Tehran: Khojaste.
Weber, Bruce. 2002. “Festival Review; Musical Drama on a Story Sacred to Shiite Muslims,” New
York Times, July 15, via http://news.google.com/archivesearch, accessed October 17, 2009.
Zakeri, Mohsen. 1995. Sasanid Soldiers in Early Muslim Society: The Origins of Ayyaran and Futuvva.
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
BELIEF SYSTEMS: JAPANESE BUDO, 
BUJUTSU, AND BUGEI
The meaning and usage of the terms budo, bujutsu, and bugei as appellations for the martial arts
of Japan are subjects of considerable confusion and misinformation among practitioners and aﬁ-
cionados of these arts—Japanese as well as Western. Among modern authorities in Japan, the
terms have acquired a more or less conventional usage adopted mainly to facilitate discussion of
the multiple goals and purposes of combative training. Bujutsu (warrior skills) describes the var-
ious Japanese martial disciplines in their original function as arts of war; budo (the warrior’s way)
denotes the process by which the study of bujutsu becomes a means to self-development and self-
realization; and bugei (warrior arts) is a catch-all term for the traditional Japanese military sci-
ences, embracing both bujutsu and budo.
It must be stressed, however, that such precise usage is modern—adopted for analytical pur-
poses—not traditional. Projecting it backward into earlier times, as much literature on Japanese
martial art does, is anachronistic.
Western texts on Japanese ﬁghting arts often assert that during the Tokugawa period
(1603–1868) martial art masters began replacing the sufﬁx -jutsu, meaning “art” or “skill,” with -do,
meaning “way” or “path,” in the names of their disciplines, to distinguish the sublime from the
purely technical applications and purposes of martial art. Thus kenjutsu, “the art of swordsmanship,”
became kendo, “the way of the sword”; bujutsu, “the martial skills,” became budo, “the martial way”;
and so on. The historical record, however, does not support this conclusion. Some Meiji-period
Belief Systems: Japanese Budo, Bujutsu, and Bugei
369
www.ebook3000.com

(1868–1912) educators did differentiate -jutsu and -do in precisely this fashion, but their forebears
did not.
Historically, the samurai employed a cornucopia of terms for their ﬁghting arts, some still in
common use today, others not. Swordsmanship, for example, was called kenjutsu, kendo, kenpo,
hyoho, tojutsu, gekken, shigeki no jutsu, and various other appellations, without distinction of form or
content. The meaning and popularity of each term varied from age to age. Two of the oldest words
for martial art are bugei and hyoho (the latter is more commonly pronounced heiho in modern
usage). Both are Chinese borrowings, and both appear in Japanese texts as far back as the turn of
the eighth century CE. The early meanings of the two words overlapped to a substantial extent,
but by the Tokugawa period hyoho had narrowed considerably, from a general term to one of sev-
eral alternative names for swordsmanship. Bugei, in the meantime, had become a generic appella-
tion for the ﬁghting arts. Today, heiho simply means “strategy” in general usage, while scholars and
practitioners of swordsmanship and related arts often apply it in more restricted fashion to desig-
nate the principles around which a particular school’s approach to combat is constructed.
Budo and bujutsu came into fashion during the medieval and early modern periods. Budo,
which appeared in print at least as early as the thirteenth century, seems to have been rather
ambiguous in meaning until the Tokugawa period, when it sometimes carried special connota-
tions. Scholar and philosopher Aizawa Yasushi (1781–1863) differentiated budo from bugei in
the following manner: “The arts of the sword, spear, bow and saddle are the bugei; to know eti-
quette and honor, to preserve the way of the gentleman, to strive for frugality, and thus become
a bulwark of the state, is budo” (Tominaga 1971, 1). In other words, for at least some Tokugawa-
period writers, budo had far broader implications than it does today, designating what modern
authors often anachronistically call Bushido—that is, the code of conduct, rather than the mil-
itary arts, of the warrior class. Nevertheless, pre-Meiji nomenclature for the martial disciplines
betrayed no discernible systematization. The sources use bujutsu interchangeably with bugei, and
use both in ways that clearly imply a construct with moral, spiritual, or social components, as
well as technical ones.
—Karl Friday
See also: China: Martial Theories; Japan: Jujutsu-based Systems; Japan: Kendo, Iaido, and Jodo;
Japan; Kyudo; Japan: Naginata; Japan: Ninpo; Japan; Shorinji Kempo (in Volume I); Belief
Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868; Belief Systems: Japanese 
Martial Arts and Religion since 1868; Folklore; Invented Traditions; 
Written Texts: Japan; Judo in Japan, 1931-1950; Social and 
Cultural Evolution of Kendo; Political Uses of Martial Arts; 
Political Conﬂict and Aikido, 1931-1942; and Social 
Aspects of Kata and Waza (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Friday, Karl. 1997. Legacies of the Sword: the Kashima-Shinryu and Samurai Martial Culture. Honolulu:
University of Hawai‘i Press.
Hurst, G. Cameron, III. 1998. The Armed Martial Arts of Japan: Swordsmanship and Archery. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
370
Belief Systems: Japanese Budo, Bujutsu, and Bugei

Rogers, John M. 1990a. “Arts of War in Times of Peace: Swordsmanship in the Honcho Bugei
Shoden, Chapter 6,” Monumenta Nipponica 46(2), 173–202.
Rogers, John M. 1990b. “Arts of War in Times of Peace: Archery in the Honcho Bugei Shoden,” Monu-
menta Nipponica 45(3), 253–260, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/2384902, accessed October 17, 2009.
Rogers, John M. 1990c. “Arts of War in Times of Peace: Swordsmanship in the Honcho Bugei Shoden,
Chapter 5,” Monumenta Nipponica 45(4), 413–447, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/2385378,
accessed October 17, 2009.
Tominaga Kengo. 1971. Kendo Gohyakunen-shi [Five Hundred Year History of Kendo]. Tokyo:
Hyakusen Shobo.
BELIEF SYSTEMS: JAPANESE MARTIAL ARTS AND
RELIGION BEFORE 1868
One cannot say with certainty when organized schools of martial arts instruction began. Some
recent scholars suggest that codiﬁed systems of martial arts were not developed until the seven-
teenth century, when Tokugawa peace and social regulation prompted the appearance of a class
of professional instructors. It is more widely assumed, however, that systematic martial training
developed throughout the thirteenth to seventeenth centuries, as warrior families (buke) fought
one another for governmental authority, and attained maturity during the following two cen-
turies of Tokugawa peace.
Over these centuries, warrior families changed so much that they cannot be identiﬁed by any
consistent criteria. Moreover, warrior families (however deﬁned) never monopolized military
arts. The centuries of unrest saw organized ﬁghting units among other social strata, such as shrine
militia (jinin), monastic legions (i.e., warrior monks, sohei), criminal gangs (akuto), naval raiders
(i.e., pirates, wako), and peasant rebels (ikki).
Even when clergy and peasants were disarmed, regulations were unable to conﬁne martial arts
to ofﬁcially designated samurai (i.e., senior members of each domain’s military government).
Martial arts proliferated among warriors who lacked samurai status (e.g., ashigara, kachi), towns-
men (chonin), rural warriors (goshi), and even peasants. Naturally, between different populations
the goals, techniques, and training methods were not the same.
Japan’s religious scene was no less varied. A few developments selected almost at random illus-
trate this point. Exclusive (Ikko) Pure Land Buddhism grew from an outlawed heretical sect in the
thirteenth century into Japan’s largest denomination in the sixteenth century, with armed forces
capable of ruling several provinces. In 1571, Mt. Hiei, the nation’s most powerful Buddhist center,
lost its domination over religious discourse when Oda Nobunaga (1534–1582) set its buildings
ablaze and killed tens of thousands of priests, soldiers, craftsmen, women, and children. During the
1590s, Roman Catholicism boasted of 300,000 converts, including major warlords (e.g., Otomo
Sorin, 1530–1587, Omura Sumitada, 1533–1587, and Arima Harunobo, 1567–1612) whose
armies fought under the sign of the cross. Rigorous persecution eliminated these Christians within
a century. In the early 1600s, the ﬁrst Tokugawa ruler (shogun), Ieyasu (1542–1616), was deiﬁed
as the Great Avatar Shining over the East (Tosho Dai Gongen). The title signiﬁed that he had
become the divine Buddhist protector of Japan, and his subsequent regulation of religious activi-
ties prompted the most rapid proliferation of Buddhist temples in Japan’s history. This expansion
prompted anti-Buddhist sentiments among Confucian and Nativist (kokugaku) scholars. New pub-
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868
371
www.ebook3000.com

lications of Buddhist scriptures, for example, fostered the development of textual criticism, which
enabled the Confucian Tominaga Nakamoto (1715–1746) to deny their veracity.
Given such wide diversity of combatants and religious developments over such a long span of
time, it is impossible to explain interactions between religion and martial arts in terms of any sin-
gle simplistic formula. Neither the familiar trope of “Zen and/in the martial arts” nor the teleolog-
ical determinism of “progressing from techniques to ways” can possibly do justice to the variety of
practices employed before 1868 to associate martial training with cosmic forces and principles. The
complexity of the data is compounded by the fact that few scholars have researched either Japanese
religious practices or the vast literature describing premodern martial arts.
At this preliminary stage, tentative order can be imposed on this vast topic by surveying it in
terms of the three dominant religious patterns of premodern Japan: (1) familial religion of tute-
lary ancestors, alliances, and control over land; (2) exoteric–esoteric Buddhist systems of resem-
blances and ritual mastery; and (3) Chinese notions of cosmological and social order.
These three systems of meaning usually reinforced one another, but in some circumstances
they could just as easily stand in conﬂict. Even their conﬂicts, however, never approached the
degree of mutually exclusive intolerance historically associated with monotheistic religions.
Instead of monotheism, Japanese in those days recognized a hierarchical cosmology populated by
deities of local, regional, national, international, and universal signiﬁcance, each type of which
concerned only those spiritual matters appropriate to their station.
ANCESTRAL SPIRITS AND TUTELARY DEITIES
Japanese warriors relied on ancestral spirits and local tutelary deities to reinforce their familial
bonds, to intensify their military alliances, and to cement their control over lands and over the
peasants who worked those lands.
Individual warrior families publicly proclaimed their control over estate lands by establish-
ing shrines for the worship of either a clan ancestor (ujigami) or a local tutelary deity who
assumed the same functions. Males established permanent links to the family’s tutelary spirits
using special coming-of-age ceremonies. Obligations to contribute resources for and to partici-
pate in the annual cycle of shrine rites forced otherwise estranged branches of the family to
cooperate with one another. Lower-ranked warriors who became vassals also were obligated to
participate in these ceremonies as a public conﬁrmation of their alliance. The relative positions
and assigned roles among participants in these ceremonies clearly revealed each family’s status,
and thereby constituted a mutual recognition of each one’s respective hierarchical rank. Before
battles the entire warrior band invoked the protection of their leader’s tutelary spirits. During
peacetime, warriors invoked these tutelary spirits to threaten local peasants with divine pun-
ishment if they failed to deliver the labor and taxes demanded of them. Thus, local gods symbol-
ized the authority that rulers exercised over people and land.
By the late thirteenth century, it was becoming common for rural warriors to augment their clan
shrines by establishing clan-centered Buddhist temples (ujidera). Most of these were associated with
Pure Land or Zen. Pure Land teachings were popular among warriors because they promised that even
killers could escape the torments of hell and attain deliverance to the Buddha’s Pure Land. The appeal
of Zen priests lay in their ability to perform Chinese-style funeral rites and elaborate memorial serv-
ices that enhanced the earthly prestige of deceased warrior rulers and their descendants.
372
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868

These different forms of Buddhism did not necessarily preclude one another. A single family
could, for example, sponsor many types of religious institutions simultaneously: an esoteric tem-
ple to pray for military success, a Pure Land temple for the salvation of soldiers killed in battle,
a Confucian hall to teach duty and loyalty to their living vassals, and a Zen temple for the
aggrandizement of their clan ancestors.
Regardless of their denominational afﬁliation, Buddhist temples functioned like clan shrines
in that they provided religious reinforcements for social and political status. In many cases, the
abbot of the main temple would be a blood relation of the leader of the local warrior band that
sponsored the temple. The abbot’s disciples consisted primarily of kinsmen of the vassals who
made up the warrior band, and these disciples served as head priests at afﬁliated branch temples
sponsored by those vassal families. The deiﬁcation of Tokugawa Ieyasu served this same purpose
for Japan as a whole. In this way familial, military, and ecclesiastical hierarchies merged or mir-
rored one another. Peasants found themselves subjected to social domination justiﬁed by uniﬁed
religious and military authority.
Within this culture, martial arts were taught by one generation to the next within real or ﬁc-
tional familial lineages (ryuha). These martial art lineages, like warrior families in general, had
their own ancestral spirits and tutelary deities. Anyone who wished to learn martial curricula was
required to sign a pledge (kishomon) requesting membership in one of these lineages. Such
pledges usually concluded by stating that any violations of the lineage’s rules would invite divine
punishment by the lineage’s tutelary deities.
Members of the lineage observed ancestor rites and participated in religious ceremonies at
clan temples and shrines just as if they were related by blood. Group devotion was symbolized
by the donation of votive plaques (hono kaku) to local shrines or temples. These plaques typi-
cally proclaimed the historical ties of that particular martial lineage to a religious institution,
listed the names of all the lineage members, and requested divine assistance. Donation of a
plaque was accompanied by monetary gifts and performance of religious ceremonies, including
ritual performance of martial arts. Participation in public ceremonies not only reinforced hier-
archical distinctions within the lineage but also constituted public notice of a martial lineage’s
assertion of authority within that locality. Anyone who attempted to introduce a rival martial
art lineage in that same area would risk retaliation by the established lineage as well as religious
sanctions. Acceptance of a martial art plaque by a temple or shrine, therefore, sanctiﬁed that
lineage’s local hegemony.
THAT WHICH IS REVEALED, AND THAT WHICH IS HIDDEN
Tutelary deities and their institutions functioned as local agents for the Japanese form of East
Asian Buddhism. These systems are today usually known, using the designation popularized by
Kuroda Toshio (1926–1993), as exoteric–esoteric (kenmitsu) systems. Exoteric refers to that
which can be revealed to anyone, while esoteric designates that which is hidden from all except
select initiates.
In premodern Japan most Buddhist lineages (e.g., Hosso, Nichiren, Sanron, Shingon,
Shugendo, Tendai, and Zen, as well as priestly lineages now considered non-Buddhist, e.g.,
Shinto) practiced, in greater or lesser degrees, variations of these exoteric–esoteric systems. These
forms of Buddhism integrated exoteric doctrines to produce all-encompassing systems of meta-
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868
373
www.ebook3000.com

physics. Examples include impermanence (mujo) and no-self (muga) as taught in the Agama scrip-
tures, emptiness (ku) and consciousness-only (yuishiki) as taught in the Mahayana scriptures, and
the Tantric rituals as taught in Vajrayana scriptures.
These resemblances were illustrated by means of cosmogonic diagrams (mandala) that
depicted how the single undifferentiated realm of the Buddha’s bliss, knowledge, and power
unfolds to appear as inﬁnitely diverse yet illusory realms within which ignorant beings suffer. All
the objects, sounds, and movements depicted in these mandala diagrams could be manipulated
ritually to transform one level of reality into the other. Thus, mandala diagrams were projected
outward to represent the physical landscape of Japan, especially the mountains and precincts of
temple-shrine (jisha) organizations, and inwardly to become the individual bodies of practition-
ers. In this way, local gods became temporal manifestations (gongen) of universal Buddhas, and
all the places and practices of daily life became ciphers of cosmic meaning.
Knowledge of the secret signiﬁcance of these ciphers allowed priests to deﬁne, literally, the
terms of public discourse. This in turn helped them deﬁne all aspects of cultural production, from
religious rituals to government ceremonies, from poetry to military strategies. Enterprises gained
respectability through their associations with prominent religious institutions that inscribed
them with the secret signs of Buddhas and gods (butsujin). The basis of all social positions,
employment, and products was traced back to divine origins.
The complexity of these systems, with their inﬁnite accumulation of hidden resemblances,
was mastered through ritual performances. The Buddhist doctrines of emptiness and con-
sciousness-only provided these rituals with an internal logic that admitted no distinction
between mind and body, nor any differences between the ritual enactment of correspondences
and actual relationships among objects of the real world. Therefore, it was commonly asserted
that mastery of any one system of ritual resemblances revealed the core principles of every
other system. After all, each consisted of the same process of merging the individual’s mind
with the universal Buddha realm.
INITIATION DOCUMENTS
Exoteric–esoteric associations are ubiquitous in the oldest surviving martial art initiation docu-
ments (densho). Some old initiation documents assert divine origins for martial arts by linking them
to the bodhisattva of India, to the sage kings of China, and to the founding gods of Japan (e.g.,
Omori 1991, 15). Others describe how secret martial techniques were ﬁrst revealed by the Buddhas
and gods in dreams at famous temples and shrines (Tominaga 1972, 62; Ishioka 1981, 25–29).
Many old initiation documents contain simpliﬁed instructions for esoteric Buddhist rituals,
such as magical spells written in Sanskrit script that supposedly offer protection from enemies,
or diagrams that show how swords and other weapons correspond to mandalas populated by
Buddhas, gods, and sacred animals (Omori 1991, 260–267; Kuroki 1967). Tantric rituals meant
to invoke the protection of the Buddhist deities Acalanatha (Fudo) and Marici (Marishiten)
were especially popular among medieval ﬁghting men.
Because few warriors were literate until the seventeenth century, many of the earliest initia-
tion documents were written by Buddhist priests, who were the most literate members of society.
Priests not only listed the Buddhist names of warrior religious rites, but also used Buddhist vocab-
ulary to describe ﬁghting techniques that lacked any relationship to Buddhist doctrines or prac-
374
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868

tices. In this way, initiation into advanced techniques became associated with mastery of Bud-
dhist secrets (Bodiford 2005).
The martial techniques themselves consisted primarily of prearranged patterns (kata). Stu-
dents stood, attacked, and parried using choreographed exercises. As with Buddhist tantric rit-
ual performances, the internalization of these patterns through constant repetition gave
coherence to the curriculum’s apparent complexity.
Assertions of divine origins and use of religious terminology imbued the Japanese martial arts
with a mystical authority that helped to ensure their survival, even after many of their ﬁghting
techniques became anachronistic. Even today, students of these traditions may begin their training
by signing written pledges (kishomon) to keep secret the esoteric lore they would learn. Also, stu-
dents who completed their instruction might receive their martial art diplomas at pseudo-religious
rituals modeled after tantric initiations. For example, the student might perform ascetic practices
(shojin) for a set number of days, after which a chapel (dojo) would be decorated, a special altar
erected, and Buddhist deities such as Acalanatha or Marici invited. At the ceremony, the student
would present ritual offerings of weapons to the deities and give a speciﬁed number of gold coins
to his teacher as a token of thanks.
Sanctiﬁed in this manner, martial art lore became closely guarded secrets, knowledge of
which conferred social status. Many martial art documents equated this lore with knowledge of
the “one mind” (isshin) underlying the inﬁnite Buddha realms. Thus, it was widely proclaimed
that success in battle depended as much on religious devotions and ritual performances as on
ﬁghting skills.
CHINESE COSMOLOGY
During the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, Chinese notions of cosmological and
social order became widely incorporated into the Japanese martial arts. Establishment of the
Tokugawa military government (bakufu) in 1603 ushered in an age of peace and stability that
witnessed the spread of literacy and the development of a new class of professional martial arts
instructors. These professional martial artists, for the ﬁrst time in Japanese history, composed sys-
tematic martial treatises (of which more than 15,000 separate titles still survive) and published
many of them for an audience of avid readers. The authors of these treatises drew on systems of
Chinese learning concerning cosmology, military theory, Taoist (Daoist) alchemy, and Confu-
cianism to endow traditional kata with a veneer of literary and metaphysical sophistication.
Taoist alchemical practices were widespread because many of them already had been
absorbed by established Buddhist systems. Among these was the Nine-Word Spell (kuji) for
warding off evil spirits and enemy soldiers. The earliest Chinese version, as described in the
Baopu zi (in Japanese Hobokushi; a fourth-century alchemy manual), involves drawing a cross
four times in the air in front of one’s chest while chanting nine words, each one of which corre-
sponds to a Taoist deity. Japanese versions taught in Buddhist, Shinto, and martial arts lineages
accompany each word with a tantric hand sign (mudra) corresponding to one of nine Buddhas.
Another was The Steps of Yu (uho). This was another Taoist ritual from the Baopu zi, and it
invoked the protection of Pole Star (hokushin), Master of Destinies, by means of dance steps that
aligned the body with the Ursa Minor constellation (e.g., Sasamori 1965, 329–331; Omori 1991,
267–269). Taoist rituals such as the Nine-Word Spell and Steps of Yu supposedly concealed the
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868
375
www.ebook3000.com

practitioner from his enemies and rendered him safe from their weapons, and their steps have
been incorporated into many of the sword dances (kenbu) still performed at Shinto shrines.
Another alchemical practice widely found in Japanese martial arts is embryonic breathing
(taisoku). Taoist texts associate breath with a cosmogonic material life force known as ki
(Chinese: qi). Special breathing methods are taught as a means of cultivating the youthful vigor
and longevity said to be derived from this life force. Many martial art treatises teach that mas-
tery of this material life force enables one to control and defeat opponents without relying on
physical strength. Hakuin Ekaku (1685–1768), an inﬂuential Zen monk, helped popularize
embryonic breathing by publishing a description of it in his Yasen kanna (Evening Chat on a
Boat, 1757; translated by Waddell 2002). In this work, Hakuin described how he used Taoist
inner contemplation (naikan) to congeal the ocean of ki within his lower ﬁeld of cinnabar
(tanden; i.e., lower abdomen). This in turn restored his health, which had become poor as a result
of excessive periods of Buddhist sitting Zen (zazen) meditation.
Hakuin said that he learned these techniques in 1710 from a perfected Taoist (shinjin) named
Hakuyu, who was then between 180 and 240 years old. The fact that Hakuin and his disciples
gave ﬁrsthand instruction in these breathing methods to many swordsmen is often cited by his-
torians as a link between Zen and martial arts (Ishioka 1981, 180–181). One must not overlook,
however, the clear distinction in Hakuin’s writings between Buddhist forms of Zen meditation
and Taoist techniques of breath control.
In any case, Hakuin’s methods of breath control came to form a core curriculum within the
Nakanishi lineage of the Itto-ryu style of fencing. Swordsmen in this lineage labeled instruction
in embryonic breathing the Tenshin (Heavenly True) transmission. Tenshin (in Chinese,
Tianzhen) is the name of a Taoist deity who, according to the Baopu zi, ﬁrst discovered the tech-
nique for prolonging life by circulating breath among the three ﬁelds of cinnabar and who then
revealed these secrets to the Yellow Emperor (Huang-di, legendary reign ca. 2697 BCE).
A fencer in the Itto-ryu lineage, Shirai Toru Yoshinori (1783–1843), wrote perhaps the most
detailed account of how embryonic breathing is applied to martial arts. In his Heiho michi shirube
(Guide to the Way of Fencing; see Watanabe 1979, 162–167), Shirai deﬁned Tenshin as the
original material force (ki) of the Great Ultimate and as the source of divine cinnabar (shintan;
i.e., the elixir of immortality). Shirai asserted that his mastery of Tenshin enabled him to proj-
ect ki out the tip of his sword blade like a ﬂaming aura. His instructions for duplicating this feat,
however, are so cryptic and laden with Taoist alchemical vocabulary that they are impossible to
understand without direct guidance by a teacher.
Although Taoist breathing techniques remain popular to this day, the single greatest Chinese
inﬂuence on Japanese martial arts was exerted by Confucianism. This was because, during the
Tokugawa period, the study of Confucian texts spread beyond the conﬁnes of the court nobility and
the Buddhist monasteries into hundreds of newly established domain schools and private academies.
Confucian scholars adhered to a wide variety of academic approaches: ancient learning that
emphasized the original Confucian classics, neo-Confucianism that emphasized later Chinese
and Korean commentaries, and approaches that linked Confucian teachings to Japanese shrine
rituals (i.e., Shinto) or to the study of Japanese history, to name only a few. Despite academic
variations, all these approaches shared a reliance on Confucian texts as authoritative guides to
ideal social norms.
These sagely norms were said to reﬂect the order, regularity, and harmonious integration of
the universe itself. As revealed by the Book of Changes (ﬁrst century BCE; Chinese Yijing,
376
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868

Japanese Ekikyo), human society, like nature, should attain a stable continuity of harmonious
integration. This integration was based on a hierarchy of high and low, strong and weak, and
within which everyone interacts according to proper etiquette and ritual.
Achievement of this ideal society was said to begin with benevolent rulers (jinsei). Rulers
were to show the people how to rectify their own heart-minds (Chinese shin, Japanese kokoro)
by properly fulﬁlling the individual social roles appropriate to their position within the
hierarchy. In turn, individuals must investigate (kyu) the principles (ri) of their roles (i.e., kyuri)
and perform them with serious-minded (kei, “reverent”) diligence.
Many Confucian scholars during the Tokugawa period were men of samurai status who also
wrote about military affairs and about the proper role of military rulers (shido; i.e., Bushido) dur-
ing an age of peace. Yamaga Soko (1632–1685), for example, combined lectures on military sci-
ence with moral exhortations, arguing that samurai should practice self-discipline so that their
rule would serve all members of society.
Thus, Confucian teachings not only justiﬁed military rule but also helped to transform the
hardened warriors of medieval Japan into the military bureaucrats required by the Tokugawa peace.
Meanwhile, without wars to ﬁght, people born into warrior families found that their assigned
social roles lacked any meaningful purpose. Contemporary accounts commonly chastise them for
being lazy, corrupt, and bereft of any higher ideals. Government leaders repeatedly sought to
improve morale among warrior households by encouraging them to pursue Confucian learning
and martial arts. As a result, many types of martial arts training, which normally consisted of
paired student–teacher workouts before other students, gradually became reinterpreted as prac-
tical exercises in the investigation of Confucian principles and serious-minded performance.
Within larger urban centers, especially, martial arts academies functioned more like ﬁnishing
schools, where instructors lectured on proper moral values and ceremonial decorum.
Over time, the Confucian ideals proclaimed by and for military rulers found an audience
among powerful merchants, wealthy landowners (chonin), village administrators, prosperous
peasants, and other commoners who aspired to higher status. Yasumaru Yoshio (1934–) has ana-
lyzed how moral virtues (such as serious-mindedness, diligence, thrift, humility, submission to
authority, and uprightness) emerged during the Tokugawa period as a new form of public dis-
course and gradually hardened into a “conventional morality” (tsuzoku dotoku). This morality
was extremely idealistic, insofar as it posited limitless possibilities for human development, but
like all conventional moralities, it exerted rigid control over all aspects of everyday life. Here,
mind, or rather the moral qualities of mind, were seen as the source of all forms of success,
whether measured in terms of social status, material wealth, or martial art prowess. This same
moral discourse simultaneously justiﬁed and rendered invisible to criticism the most atrocious
social inequities and contradictions. It reassured the wealthy and powerful of their moral superi-
ority, while teaching the poor and oppressed that their misery resulted from their own moral
shortcomings. Since it placed mind above the external world, malcontents were told that they
should ﬁnd happiness not by rebelling against that world but by reforming their own minds.
Seen within this background of conventional morality, it is not surprising that Tokugawa-
period martial arts treatises devoted many pages to mind and proper mental attitudes. The exam-
ple most familiar to modern readers (both in Japan and abroad) is the treatise usually titled
Fudochi shinmyoroku (Marvelous Power of Immovable Wisdom; reprint in Hayakawa et al. 1915).
The text is attributed to the Zen monk Takuan Soho (1573–1643), and was nominally written
in the form of a personal letter to Yagyu Munenori (1571–1646). Yagyu served as fencing
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868
377
www.ebook3000.com

instructor to the Tokugawa family, and Takuan’s essay uses examples from fencing to illustrate
basic Buddhist teachings and Zen sayings. The author does not discuss the techniques or vocab-
ulary of fencing, but rather asserted that a Buddhist approach to mental training would improve
not just one’s fencing but especially one’s ability to serve a lord. Signiﬁcantly, the author rejected
both the Taoist practice of concentrating the mind (i.e., breath) in the lower abdomen (lower
ﬁeld of cinnabar) and the Confucian practice of serious-mindedness (kei, “reverence”), practices
he likened to keeping a cat on a leash. Instead of constraining the mind through these practices,
the author advocated cultivating a strong sense of imperturbability, which he described as a type
of immovable wisdom that allows the mind to move freely without calculation. The author
termed this mental freedom “not minding” (mushin) and compared it to a well-trained cat that
behaves even when released from its leash.
Although “not minding” is sometimes misunderstood as a type of amoral automatic response,
imperturbability actually implied a ﬁrm moral sense that cannot be swayed by fear, intimidation,
or temptation.
Despite the enduring popularity of Takuan’s essay, his advocacy of a Zen approach to mental
training represented a minority opinion amidst the predominantly Confucian inclinations of
Tokugawa-period martial treatises. Confucian critics commonly asserted that martial artists
could learn nothing useful from Zen monks. Issai Chozan (1659–1741) argued in his Tengu gei-
jutsuron (Performance Theory of the Mountain Demons, 1727; reprinted in Hayakawa et al.
1915) that Zen teachings are impractical because Zen monks are unconcerned with society:
Monks “abandon the proper relations between lords and ministers, ignore the rites, music, pun-
ishments, and politics taught by the sages, and wish to discard life and seek death” (Hayakawa
et al. 1915, 320). Moreover, monks lack military training. Buddhist awakening alone, Issai main-
tained, was no substitute for correct technique and suitable drill.
For Issai and other Confucian instructors, mental training in martial arts consisted of devotion to
proper social relations, elimination of selﬁsh private inclinations, the acquisition of a clear sense of
right and wrong, and discipleship under a Confucian military instructor. Without this, the freedom
of not minding (mushin) was nothing more than a kind of arrogant vacuity (ganku, “foolishness”).
For mental cultivation, many Confucian instructors advocated quiet sitting (seiza) rather
than Buddhist forms of sitting Zen (zazen). Quiet sitting differed from Zen meditation insofar as
it eliminated distinctive aspects of Buddhist ritual such as sitting in the lotus posture, burning
incense, observing ﬁxed periods of time, and so forth (e.g., Tengu geijutsuron in Hayakawa et al.
1915, 337). The lack of these features allowed its advocates to portray quiet sitting as more com-
patible with secular life and less removed from worldly affairs.
Noting that both Confucian instructors and Zen monks advocated forms of meditation and dis-
cussed the same conventional morality using similar terms, some scholars have referred to Tokugawa-
period Confucian teachings as a kind of “popular Zen” for laypeople (e.g., Sawada). However, the
ultimate result of these Confucian teachings was not the popularization of Zen practice. Instead, it
was a decline in Buddhist piety as Buddhists came to rely less on the worship of Buddhist divinities.
COMPETITION AND THE FOREIGN MENACE
In the Japanese martial arts, adherence both to religious practices and to abstract metaphysics
declined throughout the late eighteenth and, especially, nineteenth centuries. This was due ﬁrst
to widespread adoption of competitive forms of martial training and then to foreign inﬂuence.
378
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868

Competition developed ﬁrst in rural areas outside of the urban mainstream. The spread of
martial arts training among peasants and other commoners has not been well studied, partially
from lack of scholarly interest but mainly because peasants did not write scholastic martial art
treatises. Nonetheless, it is clear that many rural households maintained or developed family
traditions of martial arts training, and that as rural society became more stratiﬁed, people began
to practice them openly as a means of acquiring status.
Lacking scholarly pretensions, rural martial artists emphasized mastery of technique and
physical prowess, which they tested in competitive matches. During the early 1800s, when rural-
trained fencers ﬁnally appeared in Edo (modern Tokyo), they easily defeated men of samurai sta-
tus who had been trained in Confucian theory (or Zen), ceremonial decorum, and prearranged
pattern exercises (kata). Established martial art lineages that emphasized theory or mental train-
ing quickly became subjects of ridicule, while new lineages that taught competition (uchikomi
keiko) ﬂourished.
The abandonment of theory accelerated with the ever more frequent arrival of foreign ships.
Suddenly, practical application (jitsuyo) became more important than mental training or moral
development. The Tokugawa government gave its stamp of approval to this change when it
decreed that competition alone would be taught at Kobusho, the military training school it
established in 1856.
Kubota Seion (or Sugane; 1791–1866), one of the directors of the Kobusho, amply illus-
trates late Tokugawa attitudes toward religious influences on martial arts. Kubota authored
more than 100 treatises on all aspects of military strategy and martial arts. He edited and
wrote the preface for Bukyo zensho (Complete Works on Military Education, five volumes)
published by the Kobusho in 1860. He is credited with having personally trained more than
3,000 samurai soldiers. Thus, he can be seen as representing the prevailing military views of
government officials. According to Kubota, any martial art instructor who said that the
founder of his lineage was initiated into religious secrets, or had learned his skills through
an inspirational dream, or had been taught by mountain demons (tengu), or had mastered
his art through Zen training was simply a liar preying on the religious sentiments of gullible
students.
Of course, conventional morality and its religious framework was too much a part of martial
arts (and of everyday life) to be so easily abandoned. Many martial artists persisted in religious
practices and mental training. Of these traditionalists, none became better known than Yamaoka
Tesshu (1836–1888).
Yamaoka gained fame for his heroism during the brief civil war of 1868 that overthrew the
Tokugawa regime and for his political role in the new Meiji government, ﬁrst as a councilor
and later as one of the emperor’s chamberlains. A natural athlete, in 1856 Yamaoka became
an assistant fencing instructor at the Kobusho. His approach to martial training changed com-
pletely in 1863, after he lost a match to Asari Yoshiaki, the head of the same Nakanishi line-
age of fencing mentioned above. Yamaoka became Asari’s student, and at Asari’s urging, he
undertook an intense regimen of meditation practice under the guidance of several prominent
Zen teachers. Yamaoka continued this training for the next seventeen years until, in 1880, he
attained certiﬁcation both in Zen and in the Nakanishi lineage. By 1880, most educated
Japanese had abandoned traditional martial arts as old-fashioned. Four years earlier, in 1876,
wearing swords in public had been made illegal. Except for policemen and soldiers, fencing
had lost its practical purpose. Yamaoka, however, was not deterred. He renamed his lineage
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868
379
www.ebook3000.com

the No-Sword Style (Muto-ryu) and announced that he would teach fencing not for the pur-
pose of dueling but for the purpose of training the mind.
Yamaoka died within a few years of announcing his new approach, before it could become
fully established. Although many posthumously published texts purport to convey his teachings,
they are ﬁlled with contradictions and incongruities. We know more speculation than fact about
his methods or the extent to which they were based on Nakanishi traditions of embryonic
breathing. Nonetheless, it is clear that Yamaoka’s own Zen training occurred with monks at Bud-
dhist temples. Zen practice was an external supplement to his fencing, not something intrinsic
within it. Nonetheless, Yamaoka’s political prominence, the novelty of his methods, and his
anachronistic effort to turn back the tide of history and revive the mental training of earlier
Tokugawa times, ensured that upon his death he immediately became known as the quintessen-
tial Zen swordsman. Thus, in 1897, when the chancellor of the Japanese consulate in London,
England, gave a lecture on “The Inﬂuence of Shinto and Buddhism in Japan,” he concluded by
discussing Yamaoka’s No-Sword Style. Notwithstanding the fact that Takuan had argued against
the breath-control techniques practiced by Yamaoka, the chancellor argued that Yamaoka’s
swordsmanship was a real-life example of Takuan’s Zen teachings, which in turn perfectly illus-
trated the latest scientiﬁc ﬁndings advanced by Herbert Spencer (1820–1903) in his Principles of
Psychology (1855).
In this way, Yamaoka was more than just a traditionalist who sought to cling to older styles of
swordsmanship during a new age in which people no longer wore swords. He also served as a fore-
runner for the introduction of the now familiar motif of the psychological unity of Zen and the
martial arts to the English-speaking world. As explained elsewhere in this book, the motif of Zen
psychology assumed disproportionate prominence in twentieth century accounts of this topic.
—William M. Bodiford
See also: China: Martial Theories; Japan: Jujutsu-based Systems; Japan: Kendo, Iaido, 
and Jodo; Japan; Kyudo; Japan: Naginata; Japan: Ninpo; Japan; Shorinji Kempo (in Volume I);
Belief Systems: China; Belief Systems: Japanese Budo, Bujutsu, and Bugei; Belief Systems: Japanese
Martial Arts and Religion since 1868; Folklore; Invented Traditions; Written Texts: Japan; Judo in
Japan, 1931–1950; Social and Cultural Evolution of Kendo; Political Uses of the Martial Arts;
Political Conﬂict and Aikido, 1931–1942; and Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Adolphson, Mikael S. 2007. The Teeth and Claws of the Buddha: Monastic Warriors and Sohei in Japanese
History. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Akabane Tasuo, and Akabane Daisuke, editors. 2008. Kamiizumi Nobutsuna den Shinkageryu gungaku
‘Kin’etsushu’ (Kin’etsushu: A Manual of Shinkage-ryu Military Science Attributed to Kamiizumi
Nobutsuna). Tokyo: Ski Journal.
Bodiford, William M. 1994. Soto Zen in Medieval Japan. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Bodiford, William M. 2005. “Zen and Japanese Swordsmanship Reconsidered,” in Budo Perspectives,
edited by Alexander Bennett, 69–103. Auckland, New Zealand: Kendo World Publications.
Bolitho, Harold. 1984. “The Myth of the Samurai,” in Japan’s Impact on the World, edited by Alan Rix
and Ross Mouer, 2–9. Nathan, Australia: Japanese Studies Association of Australia.
Bolitho, Harold. 1998. “Sumo and Popular Culture: The Tokugawa Period,” in Modernization and
Beyond: The Japanese Trajectory, edited by Gavan McCormack and Yoshio Sugimoto, 17–32.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
380
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868

Dobbins, James C., editor. 1996. “The Legacy of Kuroda Toshio,” Special Issue of Japanese Journal of Reli-
gious Studies 23(3–4), via http://www.nanzan-u.ac.jp/SHUBUNKEN/publications/jjrs/jjrsMain.htm,
accessed October 20, 2009.
Enomoto Shoji. 1988. “Bakumatsu kendo ni okeru nijuteki seikaku no keisei katei” [The Formation
of a Split Personality in Fencing at the End of the Tokugawa Period], in Nihon budogaku kenkyu:
Watanabe Ichiro kyoju henkan kinen ronshu [Studies in Japanese Martial Arts: Research Commemo-
rating the Retirement of Professor Watanabe Ichiro], edited by Irie Kohei and Sugie Masatoshi.
Tokyo: Shimazu Shobo.
Hayakawa Junzoro et al., editors. 1915. Bujutsu sosho [Martial Arts Treatises]. Tokyo: Kokusho
Kankokai.
Imamura Yoshio. 1982. Nihon budo taikei [Systems of Japanese Martial Arts]. Kyoto: Dohosha.
Imamura Yoshio. 1989/1967. Jukyu seiki ni okeru Nihon taiiku no kenkyu [Studies in Nineteenth-
Century Japanese Physical Education], revised edition. Tokyo: Fumaido Shoten.
Ishioka Hisao. 1981. Heihosha no seikatsu [Lifestyles of Swordsmen]. Tokyo: Yusankaku.
Kawai Masaharu. 1963/1958. “Chusei bushidan no ujigami ujidera” [Clan Gods and Clan Temples of
Medieval Warrior Bands], in Chiiki shakai to shukyo no shiteki kenkyu [Historic Research of Regional
Culture and Religion], edited by Ogura Toyofumi. Tokyo: Yanagihara Shoten.
Kuroki Toshihiro. 1967. “Budo ryuha no seiritsu to shugendo” [Development of Martial Art Lineages
and Mountain Asceticism], Saga daigaku kyoiku gakubu kenkyu ronbunshu [Memoirs of the Saga
University School of Education] 15, 159–193.
Miyazaki Fumiko. 1992. “Religious Life of the Kamakura Bushi: Kumagai Naozane and His Descen-
dants,” Monumenta Nipponica 47(4), 435–467, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/2385330, accessed
October 17, 2009.
Nakabayashi Shinji. 1994/1982. “Kendo no ayumi” [The Development of Japanese Swordsmanship],
in Budo no Susume [Introduction to Martial Arts], edited by Nakabayashi Shinji. Tokyo: Shimazu
Shobo, 1998.
Nakamura Tamio. 1994. Kendo jiten: gijutsu to bunka no rekishi [Kendo Gazetteer: A Technical and
Cultural History]. Tokyo: Shimatsu Shobo.
Nishiyama Matsunosuke. 1997. Edo Culture: Daily Life and Diversions in Urban Japan, 1600–1868,
translated and edited by Gerald Groemer. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Omori Nobumasa. 1991. Bujutsu densho no kenkyu: kinsei budoshi he no apurochi [The Study of Martial Arts
Initiation Documents: A New Approach to Tokugawa-Period Martial Arts History]. Tokyo: Seiunsha.
Osano Jun. 1994. Zusetsu Nihon bugei bunka gairon [Illustrated Overview of Japanese Martial Arts Cul-
ture]. Tokyo: Fuyosha.
Otsuka Tadayoshi. 1995. Nihon kendo no rekishi [History of Japanese Kendo]. Tokyo: Ittoryu Gokui
Kankokai.
Sasamori Junzo. 1965. Ittoryu gokui [Ultimate Secrets of Itto-ryu Swordsmanship]. Tokyo: Ittoryu
Gokui Kankokai.
Sato Hiroo. 1998. Shin, butsu, oken no chusei [Gods, Buddhas, and Kingly Authority in Medieval
Japan]. Kyoto: Hozokan.
Sawada, Jaine A. 1993. Confucian Values and Popular Zen: Sekimon Shingaku in Eighteenth-Century
Japan. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Thompson, Lee Austin. 1998. “The Invention of the Yokozuna and the Championship System, or
Futahaguro’s Revenge,” in Mirror of Modernity: Invented Traditions of Modern Japan, edited by
Stephen Vlastos, 174–187. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Tominaga Kengo. 1972. Kendo gohyakunenshi [Five Hundred Years of Japanese Swordsmanship].
Tokyo: Hyakusen Shobo.
Waddell, Norman, translator. 2002. “Hakuin’s ‘Yasenkanna,’” The Eastern Buddhist (New Series)
34(1), 79–119.
Watanabe Ichiro, editor. 1979. Budo no meicho [Martial Arts Classics]. Tokyo: Tokyo Kopii Shuppanbu.
Yasumaru Yoshio. 1974. Nihon no kindaika to minshu shiso [Folk Religion in the Modernization of
Japan]. Tokyo: Aoki Shoten.
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 1868
381
www.ebook3000.com

Yuasa Akira. 2001. Budo densho o yomu [Reading Martial Arts Initiation Texts]. Tokyo, Nihon
Budokan.
BELIEF SYSTEMS: JAPANESE MARTIAL ARTS AND
RELIGION SINCE 1868
Jonathan Z. Smith provocatively notes that religion “is a category imposed from the outside on
some aspect of native culture” (1998, 269). Nowhere is this fact as well documented as in Japan,
where a traditional Japanese word for religion did not exist. The concept of religion was forced
on Japan during the 1860s by diplomats who employed the theretofore rare Chinese Buddhist
technical term shukyo (roughly, “seminal doctrines”) in treaties written to guarantee freedom of
religion (shukyo wo jiyu) for newly arrived foreign Christians. Signiﬁcantly, this occurred just as
the term religion was beginning to lose its exclusively Christian connotations in the West.
During the latter half of the nineteenth century, European universities inaugurated the aca-
demic study of religions (in German, Religionswissenschaft). This created a new framework inde-
pendent from Christian theology for the analysis of common elements of evolution in myths, in
propitiation of gods and ghosts, in social rituals, in taboos and norms of behavior, in sect organ-
izations, and in psychological aspects of those elements. The founding generation of European
scholars approached this new ﬁeld of research from a wide range of academic perspectives. But,
on the whole, they shared several common beliefs: in scientiﬁc progress, in the universality of
religion, in the common origin of religion, and in the evolution of religion through various stages
beginning with the primitive and concluding, depending on the orientation of the scholar, either
with Christianity or with secular science.
Belief in the universality of religion forced secular scholars to attempt to draw a distinction
between the speciﬁc historical features of any particular religion and the general essence shared
by all religions, which they then attempted to deﬁne. By the beginning of the twentieth century,
scholars had postulated more than ﬁfty competing deﬁnitions of religion, each one more or less
useful in accordance with a given focus of study, theory of origin, or evolutionary scheme. As sec-
ular academic approaches asserted ever greater authority over explanations of the objective
aspects of religion (e.g., historical accounts of scriptures, anthropological explanations of rituals,
sociological theories of sectarianism), theologians and religious thinkers increasingly began to
deﬁne the essential essence of religion in psychological terms as belief or experience—subjective
realms lying beyond the reach of secular empirical critique. This conceptual separation of inner
psychological essence from the external forms of religious life (e.g., ritual, dogma, institutions,
history) laid the foundation for the popularization in the West of romanticized notions of Zen.
Japan also redeﬁned itself during the latter half of the nineteenth century. In 1868 a new
regime, known as the Meiji, overthrew the nearly 300-year old Tokugawa military government
(called the bakufu), opened Japan to the West, and began the rapid modernization and transfor-
mation of all aspects of Japanese society, to include religion and martial arts. Meiji leaders initi-
ated a cultural revolution in which they attempted to destroy Japan’s religious traditions and to
create a new state cult known (eventually) as Shinto.
Shinto commanded obedience by identifying the Japanese government with a divine
emperor who claimed descent from ancient gods who supposedly had created Japan. To more
382
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868

closely link those gods to Japan, Meiji leaders ordered the deities’ dissociation from Buddhism.
Thus, worship halls were stripped of their Buddhist names, art, and symbols and given new
native identities. This policy caused the destruction of tens, if not hundreds, of thousands of
Buddhist temples and the loss of immeasurable quantities of Buddhist artifacts. In 1872, Buddhist
monks were forced to register on the census as ordinary subjects with secular names and encour-
aged to eat meat and raise families. No one knows how many Buddhist monks and nuns were lai-
cized immediately following 1868, but their numbers fell from a nationwide total of 82,000 in
1872 (the year of Japan’s ﬁrst modern census) to 21,000 in 1876.
Next, the Meiji government began stripping the newly independent Shinto institutions of
their ties to popular (i.e., nongovernmental) religious practices. Beginning in 1873, many folk
religious traditions were ofﬁcially banned. Shinto shrines came to be deﬁned as civic centers at
which all citizens were required to participate in state-sanctioned rituals. When Western nations
demanded freedom of religion, Meiji leaders exploited that concept’s lack of deﬁnition. They
maintained the ﬁction that State Shinto was not a religion (i.e., not individual faith), but merely
a social expression of patriotism. Thus, in 1882 they forbade celebrants at government-supported
shrines to discuss doctrine or ofﬁciate at private religious functions such as funerals. To more eas-
ily control Shinto activities, in 1906 the government initiated a nationwide program of shrine
“mergers,” a euphemism for the destruction of shrines that were too small for direct government
supervision. In Mie Prefecture, for example, the total number of smaller shrines was reduced
from 8,763 to 519. Nationwide, more than 52 percent of Shinto shrines were destroyed, thereby
depriving rural villagers of local worship halls.
The vast dismantling of Buddhist temples, laicization of Buddhist monks and nuns, and
destruction of Shinto shrines had immediate and far-reaching consequences. First, they rapidly
accelerated the forces of secularization that accompanied Japan’s industrialization. Common
people, led by the government, began to reject previous religious practices as corrupt, feudal,
and superstitious. Second, because the dismantling left ordinary people alienated from ﬁrsthand
knowledge of their own religious traditions, it encouraged their acceptance of new abstract
interpretations of Japanese religiosity.
Meiji leaders ﬁlled this spiritual vacuum with the vaguely mystical State Shinto ideology of
emperor worship and ultra-nationalism. Buddhist intellectuals, many of whom were educated
in European thought, sought to create a New Buddhism (shin bukkyo) free from previous insti-
tutional ties, which would be scientiﬁc, cosmopolitan, socially useful, and loyal to the throne.
They actively appropriated contemporary European intellectual trends and presented them to
Western and to Japanese audiences alike as the pure essence of Japanese spirituality. Many
intellectuals found this pure spirituality expressed best, not in the traditional religious rituals,
which seemed too superstitious for modern sensibilities, but instead in the worldly skills of
poetry, painting, tea ceremony, and martial arts.
During the late 1800s, martial arts became identiﬁed, not just with new interpretations of
Japanese spirituality, but speciﬁcally with the mystical aspects of militarism and emperor wor-
ship. In 1886 a martial training hall (the Seineikan) was founded for use by members of the
imperial family and nobility. Martial arts events at political rallies were banned, while the impe-
rial family assumed a public role in sponsoring public exhibitions of martial arts (Yuasa 2001,
307–314). Eventually, the government promoted the transformation of martial arts into a par-
ticular type of “spiritual education” (seishin kyoiku) that could be incorporated into the national
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868
383
www.ebook3000.com

school curriculum and then used to inculcate in schoolchildren (i.e., future soldiers) a religious
willingness to sacriﬁce themselves for the state and to die for the emperor.
Before martial arts could be transformed into so-called spiritual education, Japanese had to
develop new forms of martial arts education. These new forms were based on recently developed
European notions of sport.
Modern sports emerged during the nineteenth century, when Europeans united physical
training with nationalism and games with imperialism. The Napoleonic Wars (1792–1815) and
their large conscript armies had vividly demonstrated the importance of a physically ﬁt citizenry
in the exercise of national power. In response to this need, there developed two competing (and,
in the minds of many, mutually incompatible) methods of providing general citizens with phys-
ical vitality: continental gymnastics and English sports.
The ardent German nationalist Friedrich Ludwig Jahn (1778–1852) advocated gymnastics
(Turnen) to unify the Germanic races (Volk) and to develop soldiers stronger than those of
France. Adolf Spiess (1810–1858) and other German educators developed Jahn’s Turnen into
a system of group exercises closely resembling military drill. The emphasis was on physical dis-
cipline, strict obedience, and precision teamwork. In these systems, competitive games (i.e.,
sports) were denounced for harming moral development (deﬁned as sacriﬁce for the nation)
and for encouraging pride and egoism. This German model was emulated elsewhere on the con-
tinent, especially in Denmark, Sweden, Switzerland, and Czechoslovakia. Militaristic gymnas-
tic societies and their nationalistic ideology were vindicated by the Prussian victory over France
in the war of 1870–1871, and they became an integral part of the German empire produced by
that victory.
In contrast to the intense nationalism and militarism featured in continental gymnastics, the
British emphasized acquisition of an individualistic games ethic that they called “sportsman-
ship.” Where Germans rejected competition as morally corrupting, the British said that efforts
to surpass previous performances possessed morally uplifting qualities, at least when tempered by
adherence to ideals of fair play and mutual respect. In Britain, games (especially cricket) were
elevated to the status of moral discipline, and successful competition according to the rules of
the game was identiﬁed with certain Victorian conceptions of manliness: seriousness, rectitude,
courage, honesty, leadership, individual initiative, and self-reliance, tempered by altruism and a
sense of duty. Although the Duke of Wellington (Arthur Wellesley, 1769–1852) probably never
said that the Battle of Waterloo was won on the playing ﬁelds of Eton, most Britons nonetheless
believed that their empire had been won through the superior spiritual qualities and moral char-
acter inculcated by public school sports. Colonial administrators promoted English games to
instill British values and loyalty to the crown. So great was the British transformation of games
that historians generally credit England with the invention of the modern concept of sport and
its diffusion throughout the world.
In 1892, a French educator named Pierre de Coubertin (1863–1937) advocated the creation of
a modern Olympiad. The idea was to combine the team discipline and nationalistic sentiments of
continental gymnastics with the individual ethical qualities of English sports. Coubertin believed
that the moral discipline of English sports gave England a hidden source of military power.
Coubertin was especially inﬂuenced by the doctrines of “Muscular Christianity” (i.e., teaching
Christian ethics through physical contests), as epitomized in the novel Tom Brown’s Schooldays
(1857) by Thomas Hughes (1822–1896). Coubertin argued that sports and the ethical values of
384
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868

sports constituted a modern, secular religion that should supplant the old-fashioned theistic creeds
of Europe. He carefully selected religious symbolism to imbue Olympic ceremonies with a sense of
spirituality: ﬂags, processions, eternal ﬂames, oaths, hymns, and so forth. Coubertin wrote: “For me
sport is a religion with church, dogma, ritual” (Guttmann 1992, 3).
Coubertin’s explicit emphasis on the spiritual and religious qualities of competition helped
him overcome the skepticism of continental leaders, who saw games as incompatible with the
altruistic ideals of their own gymnastic drills. Nonetheless, Coubertin’s ﬁrst Olympiad, in 1896,
was a small affair, with teams from only eleven European countries plus a few contestants from
the United States and Chile.
Notwithstanding its shaky start, the Olympic movement quickly spread throughout the
world. It reached Japan in 1909, when Kano Jigoro (1860–1938) was selected to become the ﬁrst
Asian member of the International Olympic Committee. Kano was the ideal conduit for intro-
ducing to Japan the Olympic creed of athletics mixed with ethics and spiritualism. In 1899, Kano
had initiated the academic study of physical education in Japan when he established a depart-
ment of physical education at Tokyo Teachers College (koto shihan gakko), an institution he
headed for twenty-seven years, from 1893 to 1920. He also founded the Japanese Amateur Ath-
letic Association and served as its president from 1911 to 1920.
Kano’s most famous achievement, though, is his Kodokan school of jujutsu (unarmed combat),
from which modern judo developed. From his student days, Kano had studied the German-style
gymnastics drills introduced to Japan in 1878 by the American George A. Leland (1850–1924) as
well as the new educational theories advocated by the Swiss reformer Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi
(1746–1827), and he used ideas from both to adapt jujutsu training to the needs of youth educa-
tion. He presented jujutsu in the rational terms of Western thought while emphasizing its ties to
Japanese tradition and culture. Kodokan judo grew in popularity in large part because it incorpo-
rated the new European sports ethic: innovation and rigorous empiricism, systematic training
methods, repetitive drills to develop fundamental skills, high standards of safety and hygiene, pub-
lic lectures and published textbooks, competitive contests with clear rules and fair judging,
tournaments with spectators, all presented as means of ethical and spiritual development.
As early as 1889, Kano had addressed the Japanese Education Association on the educa-
tional value of teaching jujutsu as part of the public school curriculum. He argued that his
methods presented pupils with a balanced approach to physical education, competitive
matches, and mental cultivation. This initial attempt to introduce martial arts to the public
schools failed. After examining many different styles of jujutsu and swordsmanship (gekken or
gekiken), the Japanese Ministry of Education ruled in 1890 that martial arts were physically,
spiritually, and pedagogically inappropriate for schools. This sweeping denunciation is impor-
tant because it documents how methods of martial arts instruction at that time differed dra-
matically from Kano’s ideals and from modern educational standards. Instead of martial arts, the
Ministry of Education devised a physical education curriculum based on military calisthenics
(heishiki taiso). The Ministry stated that these gymnastic exercises would promote physical
health, obedience, and spiritual fortitude. As many Japanese scholars have noted, the idea that
this kind of physical training could promote spiritual values reﬂected Christian pedagogical
theory (see Endo 1994, 51).
The next generation of Japanese martial arts instructors was schooled in this approach. Even-
tually, this next generation would adopt textbooks and training methods developed by educators
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868
385
www.ebook3000.com

at Tokyo Teachers College in the department of physical education. And the director there was
Kano Jigoro.
By the time that the Ministry of Education adopted jujutsu and gekken as part of the standard
school curriculum in 1911, Japan’s political situation had changed dramatically. Military victo-
ries against China in 1894–1895 and against Russia in 1905 not only gave Japan control over
neighboring territories but also demonstrated Japan’s ability to challenge European nations.
Nonetheless, Japan’s industrial capacity could not supply armaments in the quantities required
by its military ambitions. Faced with this economic inferiority, Japanese army leaders decided to
rely on ﬁghting spirit (kogeki seishin) to defeat the material superiority of Western forces.
After 1905, the development of a program of spiritual education (seishin kyoiku) became a top
priority. In 1907, the army identiﬁed martial arts as a basic method for training the spirit. There-
after, it became increasingly common for Japanese intellectuals to contrast Japanese spirituality
with Western materialism and to link Japanese martial arts to spiritual development.
In this context, the term “spirit” (seishin) denoted “willpower,” as in the well-known phrase
“indomitable spirit” coined by the Chinese Confucian scholar Zhu Xi (1130–1200) and trans-
lated into Japanese as seishin itto. Malcolm Kennedy (1895–1984), a British military language
ofﬁcer assigned to Japan from 1917 to 1920, correctly captured the true sense of spiritual educa-
tion when he explained it as “training of the martial spirit.” Kennedy noted that this education
was designed to foster aggression on battleﬁelds abroad and to dispel “dangerous thoughts” (e.g.,
Bolshevism or anti-dynastic sentiments) at home (Kennedy 1924, 54–55, 311, 337).
Public school education played an indispensable role in preparing students for military train-
ing. In 1907, the same year that the Japanese army linked martial arts to spiritual education,
Japan’s legislative Diet passed a law requiring the Ministry of Education to develop jujutsu and
gekken curricula. This law explicitly identiﬁed martial art instruction with Bushido (warrior
ways). The law’s sponsors argued that Bushido was more important than ever because everyone
in the country must become a soldier (zenkoku kaihei).
Japanese Christians were the ﬁrst to popularize the concept of Bushido. These Christians justiﬁed
their conversion by describing Christianity as the modern way to uphold traditional Tokugawa-
period Confucian values. The word they used to describe these values was bushido. For example, the
ﬁrst book ever published with the word bushido in its title was Kirisutokyo to bushido (Christianity and
Bushido) by Uemura Masahisa (1858–1925). Uemura was a professor of theology at Meiji Gakuin
Academy. In this book, published in 1894, Uemura argued that modern Japanese should rely on
Christianity just as warriors (bushi) of earlier times had relied on Confucianism. Uemura also
lamented what he saw as the decline of public morality, and he cited the Bible and European his-
tory to show how Christianity not only endorsed heroic deeds but even ennobled them.
Uemura’s theme of Christian and Confucian compatibility reappeared in Bushido: The Soul
of Japan (1900) by Nitobe Inazo (1862–1933). Nitobe was a practicing Quaker, and his book was
originally written and published in English. Nitobe’s goals differed from those of Uemura. Nitobe
sought to introduce the newly victorious Japan to the court of world opinion as a civilized nation
with a sound system of moral education compatible with (but not dependent on) Christianity.
Nitobe asserted that “fair play” was the basis upon which England’s greatness was built, and then
wrote that “Bushido does not stand on a lesser pedestal” (Hanai 1994, 8–9). Although Nitobe
concluded his book by asserting that Bushido was dying and needed to be revived by Christian-
ity, it was his inspirational and idealized account of traditional virtues that impressed readers. His
386
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868

work was an instant bestseller in New York and London. Soon it was translated into German,
French, Polish, Norwegian, Hungarian, Russian, Rumanian, Chinese, and ﬁnally (in 1909) into
Japanese.
Uemura and Nitobe had conceived of Bushido as a bridge linking Japan to Christianity and
to the British games ethic of fair play. Yet, ironically, after the term Bushido entered the popular
vocabulary, both in Japan and in other countries, it tended to be deﬁned in ethnocentric terms
as a unique and unchanging ethos that opposed Christian teachings and distinguished Japanese
martial arts from European sports.
Nowhere was this ethnocentric vision of Bushido emphasized more strongly than at the Dai
Nippon Butokukai (Greater Japan Martial Virtue Society). The Butokukai was a quasi-
governmental institution founded in 1895 to unify various martial arts under the control of a
single national organization. During the same period, Europeans and Americans also were
establishing nationalistic athletic associations, and Dai Nippon Butokukai shared many
characteristics with those counterparts.
From its inception, Butokukai’s publications touted martial arts as the best method of incul-
cating traditional national values (i.e., Bushido) into a modern Japanese citizenry. In 1906, the
Butokukai deﬁned Bushido as the Japanese spirit (wakon or yamato-damashii), which was in turn
deﬁned as service to the emperor, strict obedience to authority, and a willingness to regard the
sacriﬁce of one’s own life as lightly as a feather. The Butokukai asserted that modern citizens
(kokumin) must follow a “citizen way” (kokumindo) based on the Bushido of old (Hayashi 1982).
As seen in the above example, the sufﬁx -do (from the Chinese dao/Tao; “the way”) soon
acquired speciﬁc connotations. Among these was duty to the emperor (i.e., imperial way, kodo).
The ideal of duty grew stronger as Japanese society became ever more militaristic. Because martial
arts constituted the prime method for instilling this ideology, they too became ever more frequently
called “something-do.”
In 1914, the superintendent-general of police, Nishikubo Hiromichi (1863–1930), published
a series of articles in which he argued that Japanese martial arts must be called budo (martial ways)
instead of the more common term bujutsu (martial techniques), thereby clearly showing that mar-
tial arts taught service to the emperor, not technical skill. In 1919, Nishikubo became head of the
martial art academy (senmon gakko) afﬁliated with the Dai Nippon Butokukai and changed its
name from “Bujutsu Academy” to “Budo Academy.” Subsequently, Butokukai publications
replaced the terms bujutsu (martial arts), gekken or kenjutsu (swordsmanship), jujutsu (unarmed
combat), and kyujutsu (archery) with budo, kendo, judo, and kyudo respectively. Although the
Butokukai immediately recommended that the Ministry of Education do likewise, it was not until
1926 that the names kendo and judo replaced gekken and jujutsu in school curricula. This deliber-
ate change in names signaled that ideological indoctrination was subsequently the central focus
of Japanese education.
Similar -do nomenclature eventually was applied to all athletic activities regardless of
national origin. Thus, Western-style horsemanship became kido or bado, bayonet techniques
became jukendo, and gunnery became shagekido. Even recreational sports became supootsu-do, the
highest expression of which was said to be the athletes’ willingness to sacriﬁce (sutemi) and “die
crazy” (shikyo) for the emperor.
Ofﬁcial attitudes toward sports (i.e., the games ethic) were strongly inﬂuenced by German
physical education theory. The German theory valued gymnastic drills for their ability to mold
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868
387
www.ebook3000.com

group identity and rejected competition as a morally corrupt form of individualism. The goal of
this molding process lay in creating new men. Therefore, the ideological content and psycho-
logical import of the training were more important than mastering physical skills (Irie 1986,
122–128; Abe et al. 1990). To reinforce this point, the Dai Nippon Butokukai referred to com-
petitive matches as “martial art performances” (enbu) and adopted rules that recognized con-
testants more for displaying proper warrior-like aggression and self-abandon than for winning
techniques.
Among students, however, the popularity of martial arts derived primarily from the thrill of
winning. These contradictory orientations were highlighted in 1922, when the College Kendo
League organized a national championship tournament. The Butokukai argued against recog-
nizing a champion on the grounds that kendo must not be regarded as a technical skill (jutsu),
i.e., a means of competition. In response, the students composed a petition in which they
argued that spiritual training in kendo is similar to the sportsmanship ideal taught in competi-
tive games. Eventually, the Butokukai relented, and, a few years later, it even staged its own
national championship.
To counter the inﬂuence of the Anglo-American games ethic, Japanese ofﬁcials continually
devised new ways to identify martial arts more closely with symbols of imperial ideology. This
included applying the religious symbols of State Shinto. In the 1920s, police began inspecting
martial arts training halls to ensure that they were equipped with Shinto altars (kamidana) that
celebrated ofﬁcially recognized deities. In 1931, the roof over the ring for professional sumo
(wrestling) matches was redesigned to resemble Shinto architecture. In 1936, the Ministry of
Education issued an order requiring Shinto altars in all public school martial arts training halls.
New rules of martial arts etiquette appeared that required students to begin and to end each
workout by paying obeisance to these altars. By the 1930s, martial arts training halls had com-
monly become known as dojo, a word that previously had denoted religious chapels.
In addition, many Tokugawa-period martial arts treatises (including formerly secret texts
such as Gorin no sho, 1643; Ittosai sensei kenpo sho, 1664; and Kenpo Seikun sensei sodden, 1686)
were published in popular editions (e.g., Hayakawa et al. 1915). Esoteric vocabulary that origi-
nally referred to speciﬁc physical techniques was borrowed from these texts and given new
generic psychological interpretations to explain the correct mental attitude during practice.
These religious symbols and psychological vocabulary helped to disguise the newness of the new
elements and gave the entire ideological enterprise an aura of antiquity in a manner similar to
what Eric Hobsbawm called “the reinvention of tradition” (Hobsbawm and Ranger 1983).
While martial arts were acquiring these new religious connotations, Japanese Zen Buddhism
was introduced to the West as a secularized “pure experience” that, while not itself dependent
on religious rituals or dogmas, nonetheless lay underneath all religious feeling and all aspects of
Japanese culture. Most of all, Zen was identiﬁed with Bushido and with Japanese intrepidity in
the face of death.
D. T. Suzuki (Suzuki Daisetsu, 1870–1966) is the person most responsible for promoting this
psychological interpretation of Zen. Suzuki was not a Zen priest but a university-trained intel-
lectual. He spent eleven years (from 1897 to 1908) in the United States studying the “Science
of Religion” advocated by a German émigré named Paul Carus (1852–1919). Writing in English
for a Western audience, Suzuki developed a new interpretation of Zen that combined the notion
of pure experience ﬁrst discussed by William James (1842–1910) with the irrational intuition
388
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868

and feeling that the German theologian Friedrich Schleiermacher (1768–1834) had identiﬁed
as the essence of religion. Suzuki’s numerous writings illustrate these Western ideas by recount-
ing episodes in the hagiographies of Chinese and Japanese Zen monks. By doing so, Suzuki pre-
sented Zen simultaneously as a universal human experience and, paradoxically, as Japan’s unique
cultural heritage (see James 1912; Schleiermacher 1988, 102; Sharf 1995).
Although Suzuki frequently quoted from Zen hagiographies, he argued that Zen is not the
exclusive property of the Zen school, Zen temples, or Zen monks. Rather, Zen is to be found in
the Japanese spirit as expressed in secular arts and in Bushido. Suzuki’s very ﬁrst essay on Zen in
1906 asserted: “The Lebensanschauung [outlook on life] of Bushido is no more nor less than that
of Zen” (quoted in Sharf 1995, 121). In 1938, Suzuki wrote an entire book on Zen, Bushido, and
Japanese culture based on lectures he had given while in the United States and England during
1936. During the intervening year, 1937, the Japanese military had invaded China in a war of
naked aggression, and reﬂecting the Zeitgeist of the times, Suzuki portrayed Zen in antinomian
terms, as “a religion of will power” that advocated action unencumbered by ethics (Suzuki 1938,
37, 64; see also: Suzuki 1959, 63, 84; Victoria 1997, 106–112).
Suzuki’s 1938 book, revised as Zen and Japanese Culture in 1959 and in print ever since, has
become the classic argument for the identity of Zen and martial arts. Although Suzuki had no
ﬁrsthand knowledge of martial arts, he freely interpreted passages from Tokugawa-period martial
arts treatises as expressions of Zen mysticism. His translations are full of fanciful embellishments.
For example, he explains shuriken, a term that simply means “to perceive the enemy’s technique”
(tenouchi wo miru), as “the secret sword” that appears when “the Unconscious dormant at the
root of all existence is awakened” (Suzuki 1959, 163). This kind of mistranslation, in which a
physical skill becomes a psychological experience, rendered the notion of Zen and the martial
arts at once exotic and tantalizingly familiar to Western audiences.
Suzuki’s interpretations were repeated by Eugen Herrigel (1884–1955). Herrigel was a
German professor who taught philosophy in Japan from 1923 to 1929. While living in Japan,
Herrigel studied Japanese archery (kyudo) under the guidance of an eccentric mystic named
Awa Kenzo (1880–1939). After returning to Germany, Herrigel continued to practice archery,
and in 1936 he wrote an essay to explain its principles. In his essay, Herrigel acknowledged that
he took up archery because of his interest in Zen and mysticism. Signiﬁcantly, though,
Herrigel’s ﬁrst account did not equate archery with Zen. And there is no reason it would—Awa,
his instructor, was not a Buddhist. However, Herrigel’s views changed once he read Suzuki’s
1938 account of Zen and Bushido. In 1948, Herrigel wrote a new book (translated into English
as Zen in the Art of Archery, 1953) in which, in addition to extensive quotations from Suzuki,
Herrigel described Awa’s teachings as a Zen practice that had remained the same for centuries.
Nothing could be further from the truth. In 1920, Awa had founded a new religion called
Daishakyodo (literally, “way of the great doctrine of shooting”). In Zen in the Art of Archery,
Herrigel refers to Awa’s religion as the “Great Doctrine” and identiﬁes it with Zen. Awa did not.
Awa had no training in Zen and did not approve of Zen practice. In addition, neither Awa nor
Herrigel spoke each other’s language. They always communicated using translators. However,
writing from memory almost twenty years after he left Japan, Herrigel placed subtle metaphys-
ical arguments ﬁrst voiced by the mystic Georg Christoph Lichtenberg (1742–1799) into Awa’s
mouth. Moreover, testimony from Herrigel’s interpreter shows that the mystical episodes
related in the book either occurred when there was no interpreter present or were misunder-
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868
389
www.ebook3000.com

standings based on faulty translations. Regardless of these problems, Herrigel’s account has been
uncritically accepted not only in Europe and the United States but also in Japan (where it was
translated in 1956) as an accurate description of traditional Zen teaching methods.
During the 1950s, Japanese teachers of martial art readily embraced this Zen label, because
it served to rehabilitate their public image, which had been thoroughly discredited by Japan’s
defeat and subsequent occupation by the Allied Powers. In November 1945, the Allies banned
the use of the term budo (martial ways) and decreed that martial arts could not be taught in
schools, police stations, or other public spaces. Thus, the word budo (martial ways), with its
imperialistic connotations, became taboo for almost ten years.
In 1947, school curricula in “physical training” (tairen) were ofﬁcially renamed “physical edu-
cation” (taiiku). This signaled that henceforth they would emphasize democratic ideals, individ-
ualism, and sports instead of militaristic discipline.
After the Korean War began in June 1950, Allied occupation policy reversed course. Leftists
were purged from ofﬁcial positions, and Japan became a silent partner in the Cold War. This pol-
icy shift permitted the revival of martial arts, provided that they assumed the characteristics of
Western sports. In 1953, when the Ministry of Education allowed high schools to teach kendo
(ofﬁcially renamed “bamboo-stick competition,” shinai kyogi) the Ministry of Education stipu-
lated that “it must not be taught as a martial way [budo], but as a physical education sport [kyoiku
supootsu] in exactly the same way as any other physical education sport” (quoted in Nakabayashi
1994, 128). In this environment, some martial arts instructors defended their authoritarian
teaching methods by identifying them as Zen instead of as a legacy of fascism. This Zen aura
enhanced their charismatic power and permitted them to evaluate students on the basis of arbi-
trary criteria not tied directly to physical performance.
After the 1950s, it became commonplace to deﬁne the -do sufﬁx of martial art names (e.g., aikido,
judo, kendo) as denoting Zen-like “ways” of spiritual development. This trend found its most rigid
expression in the publications of the American martial arts practitioner Donn Draeger (1922–1982).
Draeger’s numerous books and essays comprise the ﬁrst comprehensive survey in English of
the entire range of Japanese martial arts. In these works, Draeger classiﬁed this subject into four
distinct categories of classical (ko) or modern (shin) forms of arts (-jutsu) or ways (-do). Reﬂect-
ing the post–World War II sensibilities of his teachers in Japan, Draeger declared that these
activities cannot be correctly understood in terms of the ultra-nationalistic militaristic training
of the 1930s and 1940s. He asserted that martial arts whose names end with the sufﬁx -jutsu (e.g.,
jujutsu, kenjutsu) are combative systems for self-protection, whereas those whose names end
with the sufﬁx -do (e.g., judo, kendo) are spiritual systems for self-perfection (Draeger
1973–1974, vol. 2, 19). According to Draeger, the -jutsu systems primarily emphasize combat,
followed by discipline and, lastly, morals, whereas the -do systems are chieﬂy concerned with
morals, followed by discipline and aesthetic form (Draeger 1973–1974, vol. 1, 36).
Regardless of how widely disseminated this kind of lexicographical distinction between -jutsu
and -do has become, it must be emphasized that there simply is no historical evidence for it. Mar-
tial art names ending in the -do sufﬁx have a long linguistic history. For example, the ﬁrst docu-
mented appearance of the words budo, kendo, and judo occurred about 1200, 1630, and 1760
respectively (see Nakamura 1994, 13; Tominaga 1972, 19; Oimatsu 1982, 209). Until the 1910s,
these terms were used interchangeably with a wide variety of other names, some ending in the 
-jutsu sufﬁx and some not, with no agreed-upon difference in denotation or religious connotations.
390
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868

It was not until the 1920s and 1930s that martial art names became standardized in public dis-
course as “something-do,” and they did so precisely because of their association with the mili-
taristic ideology that Draeger excludes from consideration. Draeger’s deﬁnitions ignore the fact
that one of the goals of this ideological discourse was to disguise its coercive agenda by present-
ing budo primarily as a spiritual endeavor, distinct from either pure combat techniques or recre-
ational sports. In this respect, such distinctions not only depart from linguistic evidence but also
obfuscate crucial developments in Japanese martial arts history.
Despite (or perhaps because of) the rigid reductionism, these deﬁnitions have been widely
adopted by martial arts enthusiasts outside of Japan and even by some Japanese. Indeed, in 1987
the Japanese Budo Association (Nihon Budo Kyogikai) promulgated a Budo Charter (kensho)
that deﬁnes martial arts in a teleological manner reminiscent of Draeger. That is, they were a
unique cultural tradition that had “progressed from techniques to ways” (jutsu kara do ni hatten
shita). Thus the Budo Charter gives a modern Japanese voice to ideals rooted in nineteenth-
century efforts to promote group physical training as a means of instilling national (and, now,
international) moral virtues.
—William M. Bodiford
See also: Japan: Jujutsu-based Systems; Japan: Kendo, Iaido, and Jodo; Japan; Kyudo; Japan:
Naginata; Japan: Ninpo; Japan; Shorinji Kempo (in Volume I); Belief System: China; Belief
Systems: China: Martial Theories; Japanese Budo, Bujutsu, and Bugei; Belief Systems: Japanese
Martial Arts and Religion before 1868; Folklore; Invented Traditions; Written Texts: Japan; 
Judo in Japan, 1931–1950; Social and Cultural Evolution of Kendo; Political Uses of 
Martial Arts; Political Conﬂict and Aikido, 1931–1942; 
and Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Abe Ikuo, Kiyohara Yasuharu, and Nakajima Ken. 1990. “Sport and Physical Education under Fascis-
tization in Japan,” Tsukuba daigaku taiiku kagaku-kei kiyo [Bulletin of Health and Sport Sciences],
University of Tsukuba] 13, 25–46; via http://ejmas.com/jalt/jaltart_abe_0600.htm, accessed
October 4, 2009.
Bodiford, William M. 2005. “Zen and Japanese Swordsmanship Reconsidered,” in Budo Perspectives,
edited by Alexander Bennett, 69–103. Auckland, New Zealand: Kendo World Publications.
Bolitho, Harold. 1984. “The Myth of the Samurai,” in Japan’s Impact on the World, edited by Alan Rix
and Ross Mouer, 2–9. Nathan, Australia: Japanese Studies Association of Australia.
Collcutt, Martin. 1986. “Buddhism: The Threat of Eradication,” in Japan in Transition: From
Tokugawa to Meiji, edited by Marius Jansen and Gilbert Rozman, 143–167. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Draeger, Donn F. 1973–1974. The Martial Arts and Ways of Japan, three volumes. New York: Weatherhill.
Draeger, Donn F. 1977. “Martial Arts: Deﬁnitions and Approaches, an Introduction to the Concept
of Combative Culture,” edited by Michael A. Salter, Play: Anthropological Perspectives, Proceedings
of the Association for the Anthropological Study of Play, 69–82. West Point, NY: Leisure Press.
Endo Yoshinobu. 1994. Kindai Nihon guntai kyoiku shi kenkyu [History of Military Education in Early
Modern Japan]. Tokyo: Aoki Shoten.
Enomoto Shoji. 1988. “Bakumatsu kendo ni okeru nijuteki seikaku no keisei katei” [The formation
of a split personality in fencing at the end of the Tokugawa period], in Nihon budogaku kenkyu:
Watanabe Ichiro kyoju henkan kinen ronshu [Studies in Japanese Martial Arts: Research Commemo-
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868
391
www.ebook3000.com

rating the Retirement of Professor Watanabe Ichiro], edited by Irie Kohei and Sugie Masatoshi.
Tokyo: Shimazu Shobo.
Fridell, Wilbur M. 1973. Japanese Shrine Mergers, 1902–12: State Shinto Moves to the Grassroots.
Tokyo: Sophia University Press.
Goodger, John. 1982. “Judo Players as a Gnostic Sect.” Religion 12, 333–344; via http://ejmas.com/jalt/
jaltart_goodger_1201.htm, accessed October 4, 2009.
Grapard, Allan G. 1984. “Japan’s Ignored Cultural Revolution: The Separation of Shinto and Bud-
dhist Divinities in Meiji (Shimbutsu Bunri) and a Case Study (Tonomine).” History of Religions
23(3), 240–265, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/1062445, accessed October 17, 2009.
Guttmann, Allen. 1978. From Ritual to Record: The Nature of Modern Sports. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Guttmann, Allen. 1992. The Olympics: A History of the Modern Games. Urbana: University of Illinois
Press.
Guttmann, Allen. 1994. Games and Empires: Modern Sports and Cultural Imperialism. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Guttmann, Allen, and Lee Thompson. 2001. Japanese Sports: A History. Honolulu: University of
Hawai‘i Press.
Hanai Hitoshi. 1994. Kokusaijin Nitobe Inazo: bushido to kirisutokyo [Nitobe Inazo as an International-
ist: Bushido and Christianity]. Chiba Prefecture: Hiroike Gakuen.
Hayakawa Junzoro, et al., editors. 1915. Bujutsu sosho [Martial Art Treatises]. Tokyo: Kokusho Kankokai.
Hayashi Takatoshi. 1982. “Dai Nippon Butokukai no seikaku to tokucho ni tsuite” [Characteristics
and Features of the Greater Japan Martial Virtue Society], in Taiiku supotsu shakaigaku kenkyu [The-
ory of Sports in Modern Society], Volume 1. Tokyo: Dowa Shoin.
Herrigel, Eugen. 1936. “Die ritterliche Kunst des Bogenschiessens” [The Chivalrous Art of Archery].
Nippon, Zeitschrift für Japanologie [Nippon: Journal for Japanese Studies] 2(4), 193–212.
Herrigel, Eugen. 1948. Zen in der Kunst des Bogenschiessens [Zen in the Art of Archery]. Buenchen-
Planegg, Germany: Otto Wilhelm Barth-Verlag.
Herrigel, Eugen. 1953. Zen in the Art of Archery, translated by Richard F. C. Hull. New York: Pantheon
Books.
Herrigel, Eugen. 1956. Yumi to Zen [Bow and Zen; originally Zen in der Kunst des Bogenschiessens,
1948], translated by Inatomi Eijiro and Ueda Takeshi. Tokyo: Kyodo Shuppan.
Hobsbawm, Eric, and Terence Ranger, editors. 1983. The Invention of Tradition. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Humphreys, Leonard A. 1995. The Way of the Heavenly Sword: The Japanese Army in the 1920s. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press.
Hurst, G. Cameron, III. 1998. Armed Martial Arts of Japan: Swordsmanship and Archery. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.
Imamura Yoshio, editor. 1982. Nihon budo taikei [Systems of Japanese Martial Art]. Kyoto: Dohosha.
Imamura Yoshio. 1989/1967. Jukyu seiki ni okeru Nihon taiiku no kenkyu [Studies in Nineteenth-
Century Japanese Physical Education], revised edition. Tokyo: Fumaido Shoten.
Inoue, Shun. 1998a. “Budo: Invented Tradition in the Martial Arts,” in The Culture of Japan as Seen
through Its Leisure, edited by Sepp Linhart and Sabine Frühstück, 83–93. Albany: State University
of New York Press.
Inoue, Shun. 1998b. “The Invention of the Martial Arts: Kano Jigoro and Kodokan Judo,” in Mirror
of Modernity: Invented Traditions of Modern Japan, edited by Stephen Vlastos, 163–173. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Inoue Shun. 2004. Budo no tanjo [The Birth of Martial Arts]. Tokyo: Yoshikawa Kobunkan.
Irie Katsumi. 1986. Nihon fashizumu-ka no taiiku shiso [Japanese Fascism and Physical Education The-
ories]. Tokyo: Fumaido.
Irie Kohei, and Sugie Masatoshi, editors. 1988. Nihon budogaku kenkyu: Watanabe Ichiro kyoju
henkan kinen ronshu [Studies in Japanese Martial Arts: Research Commemorating the Retire-
ment of Professor Watanabe Ichiro]. Tokyo: Shimazu Shobo.
392
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868

Jaffe, Richard. 2001. Neither Monk nor Layman: Clerical Marriage in Modern Japanese Buddhism. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
James, William. 1912. “A World of Pure Experience,” in Essays in Radical Empiricism, edited by Ralph Bar-
ton Perry, 39–91. New York: Longmans, Green, and Co., via http:// books.google.com, accessed Octo-
ber 16, 2009.
Kano Jigoro. 1889. “Judo ippan narabi ni sono kyoikujo no kachi” [An Overview of Judo and its Edu-
cational Value], in Shiryo Meiji budoshi [Sources of Martial Art History during the Meiji Period],
edited by Watanabe Ichiro, 79–97. Tokyo: Shin Jinbutsu Oraisha, 1971.
Kennedy, Malcolm Duncan. 1924. The Military Side of Japanese Life. London: Constable.
Ketelaar, James E. 1993. Of Heretics and Martyrs in Meiji Japan: Buddhism and Its Persecution.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Mangan, J. A. 1986. The Games Ethic and Imperialism: Aspects of the Diffusion of an Ideal. New York: Viking.
Mangan, J. A. 1992. “Britain’s Chief Spiritual Export: Imperial Sport as Moral Metaphor, Political
Symbol and Cultural Bond,” in The Cultural Bond: Sport, Empire, Society, edited by J. A. Mangan,
1–9. London: Frank Cass.
Matsumae Shigeyoshi. 1987. Toward an Understanding of Budo Thought. Tokyo: Tokai University Press.
Monbusho [Ministry of Education]. 1890. “Honho gakko taisoka shisetsu enkaku ryaku” [Summary of
Alterations to the Established Calisthenics Curriculum in Our Nation’s Schools], in Budo no mei-
cho [Martial Art Classics], edited by Watanabe Ichiro, 772. Tokyo: Tokyo Kopii Shuppanbu, 1979.
Murakami Shigeyoshi. 1970. Kokka shinto [State Shinto]. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten.
Nakabayashi Shinji. 1994/1982. “Kendo no ayumi” [The Development of Japanese Swordsmanship],
in Budo no Susume [Introduction to Martial Arts], edited by Nakabyashi Shinji. Tokyo: Shimazu
Shobo, 1998.
Nakamura Tamio. 1985. Shiryo kindai kendoshi [Sources for Early Twentieth-Century History of
Kendo]. Tokyo: Shimatsu Shobo.
Nakamura Tamio. 1994. Kendo jiten: gijutsu to bunka no rekishi [Kendo Gazetteer: A Technical and
Cultural History]. Tokyo: Shimatsu Shobo.
Needham, Rodney. 1985. Exemplars. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Nitobe, Inazo. 1905/1900. Bushido, the Soul of Japan: An Exposition of Japanese Thought, revised edi-
tion. New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons; see also: the 12th edition, copyright 1907 Teibi Publishing
House, revised for Japan (but in English) via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Oimatsu Shinichi. 1982. “Judoshi” [History of Judo], in Nihon budo taikei [Systems of Japanese Mar-
tial Arts], Volume 10, edited by Imamura Yoshi. Kyoto: Dohosha.
Omichi Hitoshi, and Yorizumi Kazuteru, editors. 2003. Kindai budo no keifu [Geneology of Modern
Martial Arts]. Tokyo: Korin Shoin.
Omori Nobumasa. 1991. Bujutsu densho no kenkyu: kinsei budoshi he no apurochi [The Study of Martial
Arts Initiation Documents: A New Approach to Tokugawa-Period Martial Arts History]. Tokyo:
Seiunsha.
Osano Jun. 1994. Zusetsu Nihon bugei bunka gairon [Illustrated Overview of Japanese Martial Arts Cul-
ture]. Tokyo: Fuyosha.
Otsuka Tadayoshi. 1995. Nihon kendo no rekishi [History of Japanese Kendo]. Tokyo: Madosha.
Sasaki Sadami. 2005. “Twentieth Century Budo and Mystic Experience,” in Budo Perspectives, edited
by Alexander Bennett, 15–41. Auckland, New Zealand: Kendo World Publications.
Sato Yutaka, and Yoshihara Hiroyuki. 1990. Taiiku kyoikugaku [The Science of Physical Education].
Volume 23 of Kyoshoku Kagaku Koza. Tokyo: Fukumura Shuppan.
Schleiermacher, Friedrich. 1988. On Religion: Speeches to Its Cultured Despisers (originally Über die
Religion, 1799), translated by Richard Crouter. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Sharf, Robert H. 1995/1993. “The Zen of Nationalism,” reprinted in Donald S. Lopez Jr., Curators of
the Buddha: The Study of Buddhism under Colonialism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sharf, Robert H. 1998. “Experience,” in Critical Terms for Religious Studies, edited by Mark C. Taylor,
94–115. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Smith, Jonathan Z. 1998. “Religion, Religions, Religious,” in Critical Terms for Religious Studies, edited
Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868
393
www.ebook3000.com

by Mark C. Taylor, 269–284. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sugie Masatoshi. 1988. “The Problems of the Modernization of the Martial Arts of Japan,” in Nihon
budogaku kenkyu: Watanabe Ichiro kyoju henkan kinen ronshu [Studies in Japanese Martial Arts:
Research Commemorating the Retirement of Professor Watanabe Ichiro], edited by Irie Kohei and
Sugie Masatoshi, 191–203. Tokyo: Shimazu Shobo.
Suzuki, Daisetz T. 1938. Zen Buddhism and Its Inﬂuence on Japanese Culture. Kyoto: Otani Buddhist College.
Suzuki, Daisetz T. 1940. Zen to Nihon bunka (Japanese translation of Zen Buddhism and Its Inﬂuence on
Japanese Culture), translated by Kitagawa Momo. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten.
Suzuki, Daisetz T. 1959. Zen and Japanese Culture (Revised edition of Zen Buddhism and Its Inﬂuence
on Japanese Culture). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Taylor, Mark C., editor. 1998. Critical Terms for Religious Studies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Todo Yoshiaki. 1988. “Kano Jigoro no judo kan ni tsuite no ichi kosatsu” [Kano Jigoro’s Conception
of Judo], in Nihon budogaku kenkyu: Watanabe Ichiro kyoju henkan kinen ronshu [Studies in Japanese
Martial Arts: Research Commemorating the Retirement of Professor Watanabe Ichiro], edited by
Irie Kohei and Sugie Masatoshi, pp. 144–172. Tokyo: Shimazu Shobo.
Tominaga Kengo. 1972. Kendo gohyakunenshi [Five Hundred Years of Japanese Swordsmanship].
Tokyo: Hyakusen Shobo.
Victoria, Brian. 1997. Zen at War. New York: John Weatherhill.
Yamada Shoji. 2001. “The Myth of Zen in the Art of Archery,” Japanese Journal of Religious Studies
28(1/2), 1–30, via http://www.nanzan-u.ac.jp/SHUBUNKEN/publications/jjrs/pdf/586.pdf, accessed
October 17, 2009.
Yamada Shoji. 2009. Shots in the Dark: Japan, the West, and Zen, translated by Earl Hartman. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Yuasa Akira. 2001. Budo densho o yomu [Reading Martial Art Initiation Texts]. Tokyo: Nihon Budokan.
BELIEF SYSTEMS: SILAT
Silat, a martial art indigenous to the Malay cultures of Southeast Asia, cannot be understood
without understanding its ritual and socio-religious background.
The Malays are an Austronesian people. The Austronesians originated in Taiwan some
5,000 years ago. From Taiwan, they spread ﬁrst into Southeast Asia (especially the Philippines,
Indonesia, and Malaysia), and then into Polynesia and Micronesia. Today, Austronesian lan-
guages and cultures are among the most geographically widespread in the world, ranging as they
do from Taiwan to Madagascar to Easter Island.
Austronesian traditions are basically oral. Even through the process of Indianization and Islam-
icization, this emphasis on oral transmission remained characteristic for the Malays. This has led
to much local creativity and to a large extension of regional and subregional trends of Silat.
The socio-religious background for Silat practice ﬁrst appeared around the sixth century CE,
as South Asian merchants, many of them Hindu, began following the maritime spice trade into
Southeast and East Asia. During the thirteenth century, Southeast Asia came under increasing
Chinese and Islamic inﬂuence, with Muslim inﬂuence becoming predominant during the
ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries.
Today, traditional Silat is taught using the way of transmission speciﬁc to oral embodied tradi-
tions. The main purpose is not the strict reproduction of codiﬁed series of body motions. It is
instead the ability to reproduce at once a complete set of body motion (and the ability to under-
stand the intrinsic meaning of it) directly in one’s body, rather than through thinking. This method
394
Belief Systems: Silat

of transmission is often given Suﬁ(heterodox Islamic) explanations. In contrast, transmission of
body features through speciﬁc sequences appears to be characteristic of sociocultural contexts inﬂu-
enced by written traditions and centralized political states. Certainly, this has become the case
after the creation of the Indonesian and Malaysian states during the twentieth century.
Other speciﬁc cultural characteristics of the Malays are tied into Austronesian ascendancy.
Austronesian features include rules regarding space orientation in terms of the valorization of the
East, and the conception of space opposition between inside and outside: inside/outside of the
island, of the kingdom, of the village, of the person.
An example is provided by the relationship between war and peace. Speciﬁcally, a Master of
Peace—the Big Man in Oceania—must have been ﬁrst a Master of Warfare. Such characteris-
tics converged with Hindu and Muslim religious and political conceptions, and especially with
the Indian notion of a “knight” (satria or kshatria), a notion that subsumes aspects of war and
peace, and which plays a broad ethic reference in today’s Malay languages and conceptions.
A systematic comparative study of Malay martial practices, to include their social anchorage
and ethical conceptions, has yet to be written. Nevertheless, some themes emerge.
Because of the close ties between Silat and the different expressions of Islam in Southeast
Asia (to be presented below), regional descriptions of the art expose the relationship of Silat to
religion. Evidence clearly demonstrates that Silat often appears and continues to exist as a spe-
cial medium for pre-Islamic practices to remain active without creating unacceptable tensions
with more orthodox trends of Islam. This is true to such a degree that one may wonder whether
it makes sense to use the word religion to describe cultural elements that are so deeply integrated
into social life, unless one accepts, as do some West Sumatran Minangkabau masters and schol-
ars, that Silat is their “second religion.”
Because there are signiﬁcant regional variations, the following account describes Silat by geo-
graphical region. Yet, while regional differences may be pronounced, Malays, Sundanese,
Javanese, Bugis, and Minangkabau were famous sailors and merchants, and they traveled widely
to acquire mystical knowledge or enhance ﬁghting skills. Furthermore, over time, diasporic com-
munities become ethnic minorities—and in some cases, even become ethnic majorities. Exam-
ples are the residents of Negri Sembilan in Malaysia, who are predominantly matrilineal, as were
their Sumatran ancestors.
—Jean-Marc de Grave and Douglas S. Farrer
MALAYSIA
For somebody to be considered a Malay in Malaysia, he or she must observe the customary law
(adat) and follow customary standards of etiquette and behavior, speak the Malay language
(bahasa Melayu), and be (or become) a Muslim. Hence, all Malaysians are Muslim by deﬁnition.
Most Malaysians are Muslims of the Sunni creed, but Malaysian Islam has also absorbed com-
plex Suﬁmystical ideas and practices for over ﬁve hundred years. Thus, it harbors a labyrinthine
fusion of indigenous animist beliefs (kebatinan) alongside Buddhist, Gnostic, Hindu, and Islamic
teachings.
Suﬁpractices such as rhythmic chanting of the ninety-nine names of Allah (dhikr or remem-
brance) have been adapted by martial arts exponents, who harness such methods for meditation
Belief Systems: Silat
395
www.ebook3000.com

and yoga (prana) to develop Divine Power (known as nafas batin or tenaga dalam). Here, it is
difﬁcult to disentangle animist “beliefs” from so-called Hindu notions. For example, Aum, the
sound of the tiger uttered by Silat practitioners (pesilat), could also be rendered Om. The tiger
(harimau) is the most frequently occurring example of a spirit familiar attached to the practitioner,
and such spirits may be linked to an entire lineage and must be appeased. Note that these are spir-
its from outside of the Islamic pantheon of evil spirits (jinn hitam) and good spirits (jinn Islam).
According to “traditional” Silat teachers (guru silat), Malaysian Silat is around 70 percent
knowledge (ilmu), and 30 percent practice (a mix possibly biased in the other direction for those
who prefer sport Silat). Ilmu requires an embodied understanding of Suﬁsm (mystical Islam), an
orthopraxy that proceeds from Islamic law (sharia) to the order of mystics (tarekat), through truth
(hakikat) to perfect gnosis (marifat). Suﬁabilities are said to include the suspension of time and
space, the denial of death, the ability to appear in two places at once, and the ability to walk on
water, cure sickness, and travel through time.
At the same time, Suﬁknowledge (tasawwuf) coexists with pre-Islamic animist metaphysics
(kebatinan). For instance, many Malaysians recognize a composite sevenfold soul. The sevenfold
soul (semangat, “vital force”) is an umbrella term that includes the shadow and reﬂection souls
(bayang), the bird-soul, the manikin soul, and so on. The ability to manipulate the opponent’s
semangat forms the basis of Malaysian witchcraft and sorcery, and the ability to resist such manip-
ulation forms the rationale behind scrupulous Islamic observance, including ritual cleanliness
(wuduk) and the ﬁve compulsory daily prayers. Sometimes, strict Islamic observance is combined
with local cultlike rituals. The idea is to render the Silat practitioner (pesilat) invulnerable (kebal).
In Silat Gayong, currently the predominant style of Silat in Malaysia, fearsome ritual ordeals
are endured, including immersing the hands into boiling oil (mandi minyak), jumping off a pillar of
ten men onto a bed of broken glass, and catching a spear which has been driven with force down
a waterfall (mandi lembing). Another style, Silat Hulubalang Melaka, encourages female students to
pick random street ﬁghts with unknown men, male students to ﬁght with tigers in the jungle, and
everyone to stand immersed in well water for seven days and nights. Even allowing for exaggera-
tion (tigers are, after all, almost extinct in Malaysia), preparing for such ordeals trains practition-
ers in physical, psychological, and spiritual endurance and creates warriors capable of obeying any
orders, even if they contravene the legislation of the state or the dictates of orthodox religion.
—Douglas S. Farrer
MINANGKABAU (WEST SUMATRA)
The Minangkabau constitute one of the largest ethnic groups in Indonesia and are well-known
among anthropologists both for following the custom (adat) tied to their matrilineal kinship sys-
tem and for being among the most Islamized groups of the archipelago.
The Minangkabau refer to the indigenous styles of Silat as silek. Their silek practice is deeply
rooted in both sociocultural organization and religious life.
Although Muslim, Minangkabau are divided into matrilineal clans. Traditionally, several
generations of women who belonged to a same clan lived together in a big house (rumah gadang)
with their husbands and children. Boys as young as seven years old were not allowed to stay at
their mothers’ houses; instead, they had to sleep at the clan’s prayer house (surau). The surau
396
Belief Systems: Silat

acted as a place of instruction where silek was taught alongside Islam, arts (music and dances),
and custom (adat). The instructor was called maternal uncle (mamak). All these elements were
indispensable to become an adult (urang nan saban urang), as they prepared young boys to leave
their village temporarily (merantau) in order to seek wealth. In Minangkabau culture, only
women inherit the lands and heirlooms of the clan.
Into the present, the practice of silek is wrapped in secrecy, and advanced techniques are
transmitted only to a few chosen students, preferably within the borders of the clan. Thus, one
who wants to study silek has ﬁrst to undergo a ritual of initiation. Although this initiation ritual
varies according to the different styles of silek, it always involves the fulﬁllment of particular
“conditions” (syarat)—such as certain objects to be given to the teacher—and the puriﬁcation
of the postulant. Common syarat include knives, chicken, shrouds (kain kapan), and limes, but
other syarat include needles, gold, chili, rice, black cloth, betel leaves, areca nuts, and tobacco.
Each of these syarat has a speciﬁc function. For instance, lime juice is said to purify the new stu-
dent, and the blood of the chicken is poured on the training ground (sasaran) to create a magi-
cal fence protecting the training ground from magic attacks and evil spirits. In any event, all aim
at facilitating the apprenticeship of the new student.
Although none of the foregoing activities describe orthodox Islamic practices, silek is
nonetheless linked to Islam, and it is said that the ultimate aim of silek is to achieve oneness
with Allah. Since the penetration of Islam in Minangkabau society, especially since the six-
teenth century when Islamic preachers used surau as a base to diffuse their religion, the practice
of silek has been closely associated with heterodox Islamic mysticism (Suﬁsm). Thus, a Silat mas-
ter (pandeka) is expected to follow the rules ﬁxed by the Islamic texts rigorously, and it is said
that his skills will vanish if he drinks alcohol, gambles, or has sexual relations outside of mar-
riage. Nevertheless, if most of the pandeka associate silek with Islam, saying that they follow
Islam’s path, pre-Islamic practices are still as widespread among silek practitioners as they are
among the Minangkabau in general.
Silek is also linked to practices aiming at gaining supernatural powers (ilmu batin or kebati-
nan). Commonly sought abilities include invulnerability to blades (ilmu kebal), and the ability to
strike or to kill at a distance (gayuang angin). The alliance with tiger spirit (Inyek) seems to be
central to this perspective, which in turn is tied to an ancestor’s cult where the ancestor takes
the form of a tiger. Other common elements include jinns (Muslim spirit entities created by
Allah), magic spells (jampi-jampi), talismans, fasting, and pilgrimages to valorized places such as
the grave of Suﬁsaints, certain caves, volcanoes, and sacred forests. The main contribution of
Islamic mysticism to these pre-Islamic practices is the idea that one can obtain supernatural
power through the study of the Quran and by reciting the names of Allah (dhikr).
—Martin Bastide
SUNDA (JAVA)
West Java is home the Sundanese ethnic group, and one of the centers for the development of
pencak silat in Indonesia.
Sundanese is a hierarchical language with three speech levels, each having a different lexi-
con, for high, respectful speech (lemes), middle levels (sedeng), and lowbrow or coarse speech
Belief Systems: Silat
397
www.ebook3000.com

(kasar). Which level is used depends on the relative social status of the interlocutors. Thus, in
Sundanese, Silat can be described as penca ameng, ulin, or maen po. All mean “play,” but ameng
is the more respectful word, while ulin and maen are lower speech levels. A common explanation
of the term “Po” is that it is a Chinese colloquialism for martial arts. Therefore, “maen po” is
literally to “play Po.”
In Cianjur, hailed as the heartland of Sundanese culture, an oft-cited aphorism states that men
of the region should be proﬁcient in the recitation of the Quran, the singing of poetry, and pencak
silat (ngaos, mamaos dan maenpo), all of which are held to be distinctly Sundanese practices.
Styles of Silat associated with Cianjur include Cikalong, Cikaret, and Syabandar. The
founder of Cikalong, Raden Jayaperbata (1816–1906; also known as Haji Ibrahim), is said to
have received the style in a moment of divine inspiration (ilham) after spending time in retreat
in a cave in the village of Cikalong Kulon in the regency of Cianjur. The style is named after the
village in which the cave is located.
Cimande takes its name from the river Mande, which runs through the settlement of Tari
Kolot, on the outskirts of Bogor, where the style is said to have developed. The origin of the
name Cimande is commonly attributed to the phrase “water that is good for the faith” (cai iman
nu hade), in reference to the water used for the ritual ablution before prayer in Islam (wudhu).
The practice of Cimande is heavily associated with Suﬁsm, and particularly the teachings of the
Suﬁorder Qadiriyyah. One account of the origin of the name of Tari Kolot” is that the settle-
ment was originally called Tarekat Kokolot, meaning the spiritual path or way of the elders.
The founding of the style of Cimande is credited to an eighteenth-century man named
Embah Kahir. All accounts of the life of Embah Kahir are subject to the vicissitudes of oral his-
tories, but it is commonly agreed that his birthplace was in the area surrounding Bogor, in West
Java, and that he came to prominence as a penca teacher around 1760. It is also generally agreed
that Embah Kahir apprenticed himself to Embah Buyut, and eventually settled in the area,
teaching penca to the local community. After that, stories vary. One version of the story says that
Embah Kahir came to Tari Kolot after the death of the Regent of Cianjur Adipati Wiratanudatar,
who governed the city from 1776 until 1813, and that Embah Kahir served the regent in the
capacity of commander in chief (pamuk). In this version, Embah Kahir came to Tari Kolot in
search of the founder of the settlement, Embah Buyut, who was renowned for his mystical knowl-
edge (elmu). This pattern is a common motif in foundational myths in West Java (Wessing 1978,
91–105). The founders of settlements in West Java were revered for their possession of elmu and
skill in penca and for mediating relations between the visible and unseen worlds. Other elders in
Cimande state that Embah Kahir was related to Embah Buyut, and it was for this reason that he
ﬁrst came to the settlement.
In West Java, it is commonly held that the ancestors continue to look over and safeguard
their descendants as guardian spirits, adopting the form of a tiger upon their death. Such beliefs
are evident in Tari Kolot, where, in exchange for propitiatory offerings, the ancestors (karuhun)
assume a tutelary role, continuing to watch over the community in the form of tiger spirits. The
elders of Cimande, by virtue of patrilineal descent from Embah Buyut, are held to be the living
representatives of penca Cimande and thereby able to mediate relations with the ancestors. The
chain of “spiritual mediation” (wasila) stretches from the present-day elders via Embah Buyut to
Sunan Gunung Jati (the legendary conqueror of Banten in the early sixteenth century and one
of the nine apostles of Islam in Java) to the Prophet Muhammad (ca. 570–632 CE).Thus, the
398
Belief Systems: Silat

role of present-day elders is underpinned by line of transmission—it is part of their inheritance
and is reckoned by descent from Buyut, the revered founder of the settlement, and the founder
of the aliran Cimande, Embah Kahir. Within Cimande, the elders retain authority over spiritual
matters and those pertaining to the practice and propagation of the art.
Before prospective students can begin to practice penca Cimande, they must be initiated by a
senior representative of the art (a process referred to as kecer) and swear an oath (talek) to their
teacher (guru). Thus, instruction in the art is via a personal relationship between teacher and
student. Those that come to Cimande in search of instruction in penca literally apprentice them-
selves to a teacher. Prospective students often offer their labor in exchange for food, board, and
instruction in penca, training in the evening after working all day in the guru’s house as a servant
or as a laborer in his rice paddy. The relationship is not, however, a simple commercial transac-
tion, and a student’s progression is often as dependent upon the teacher’s evaluation of the stu-
dent’s moral character as it is upon the student’s ability to learn the art.
—Lee Wilson
BANTEN (WEST JAVA)
In Banten, in the western part of West Java, Cimande style is widespread. It has also been trans-
posed or has inﬂuenced other local “currents” (Silat styles). An example of this inﬂuence
involves the Pusaka Medal style practiced in the Pamarayan area of Banten.
The Pusaka Medal’s initiation is divided into three steps, adapted from Cimande’s initiation:
pertalekan, urut, and keceran.
Pertalekan takes place on a malam jumat kliwon (the ﬁfth Thursday night in the same month,
using the Javanese calendar). The prospective student swears an oath to the master, who in turn
stipulates the religious rules and local cult associations. Before the ceremony is held, the student
gathers different offerings, and he offers a ritual meal. This ritual meal is prepared by the mas-
ter’s spouse and is eaten by the master, the elders, and the student.
Apprenticeship starts with the urut, which consists of blows given on the forearms while
applying a special oil called minyak Cimande or minyak balur. This oil is composed of a coconut oil
extracted from the so-called kelapa nunggal (this “coconut,” kelapa, is the “single,” nunggal, or the
highest on the tree, and it must be oriented on the direction of Mecca), water collected during an
annual ritual called keceran, and palm sugar. Ritual ingredients are prepared by the master’s
spouse. The prepared oil is blessed by the master, with references to Allah, the Prophet, the saints,
and the ancestors. Minyak Cimande is supposed to consolidate the power of Allah, the Prophet,
and so on in the character and arms of the student. Indeed, it is even said to have the power to
heal broken bones. This ritual is repeated every week on the next seven malam jumat, thus every
thirty-ﬁve nights that succeed the ﬁrst initiation night. This initiation represents a necessary con-
dition before advancing to upper-level training, where foot techniques, weapons techniques such
as stick and machete, and speciﬁc ritual movements are taught.
The third ritual, the keceran, is a communal ceremony. During the keceran ritual, the mas-
ter drips drops of water in the eyes of all the students, aiming to purify their hearts and sharpen
their visions. The composition of this water is held secret. A sample of earth is taken from
Embah Kahir’s grave and added to the liquid. The resulting mixture is poured along a knife
Belief Systems: Silat
399
www.ebook3000.com

around which is rolled a betel leaf. Before the ceremony, each student brings a bottle of perfume
known as minyak dhuyung. The master mixes this liquid with secret elements to make an essence
oil called minyak biyang. The bottle has to be brought each year, seven times, for the succeeding
keceran rituals, so the liquid can be mixed again. Minyak biyang is used to heal, to help practi-
tioners be possessed by spirits, and to exorcise, and through the practices associated with it, the
student is said to able to develop the links with the ancestral and tiger tutelary spirits that pos-
sess the knowledge of penca.
—Gabriel Facal
JAVA
On Java, pencak is closely tied to ritual and ceremonial conceptions called kejawèn or kejawan.
These conceptions are linked to notions of space, time, human life cycles, and protective spirits.
Like human life, kejawan starts with pregnancy and delivery. In Javanese conceptions, when a
human being comes to life, four spirit “siblings” (sadulur) follow him: one from the placenta, one
from the umbilical cord, one from the amniotic ﬂuid, and one from the blood. These four spirit
siblings are supposed to accompany the person throughout his or her life. The spirit siblings’
strengths may be helpful or harmful; it depends on the way the family (and subsequently the per-
son) take care of them. Rituals and ascetic rules and practices help to develop a good relationship
with one’s spirit siblings.
This set of rules constitutes the basis for Javanese and Balinese kanuragan (i.e. martial
initiation) and traditional warfare. Speciﬁcally, they are combined with the acquisition of
speciﬁc entities (aji), which confer to the practitioner speciﬁc kinds of strength and
invulnerability.
Other entities or spirits besides one’s spirit siblings may be evoked, too. These include local
spirits, such as spirits of trees or stones (dhanyang), spirits of holy people, holy warriors, and king-
dom protective spirits. Examples of holy people whose spirits are sought include Panembahan
Senopati, the founder of a Javanese Muslim dynasty (ruled 1584–1601). Popular kingdom pro-
tective spirits include Ratu Kidul, the sea goddess of the southern ocean, and the main protec-
tive spirit of Javanese kingship and kingdom. It is for this purpose that some pencak schools
organize training or other activities on sacred beaches associated with the goddess. If the practi-
tioner pays special attention to his spirit siblings, he uses his birthday according to the Javanese
calendar, but if he pays attention to other spirits, he might use other sacred days such as Tuesday
Kliwon or Friday Kliwon.
Complementary elements include breathing exercises and meditation promoted by the so-
called “inner power” (tenaga dalam) schools, which are very numerous in Java. Among the best
known are Marga Luyu 151, Merpati Putih, Satria Nusantara, Prana Sakti, and Sinar Putih.
Membership in some of these schools may reach tens or even hundreds of thousands of people.
Javanese pencak schools used to be strongly inﬂuenced by Islam, but since the 1990s, as pen-
cak practice developed on a bigger scale, many new schools were opened to practitioners of any
faith. In the latter schools, techniques were reoriented toward health purposes. Nonetheless,
many Javanese pencak schools remain anchored into Islamic networks. This is the case for the
members of the Pagar Nusa organization located in East Java. Pagar Nusa schools are tied to the
400
Belief Systems: Silat

pesantren (Islamic schools) which are members (for the most part) of Indonesia’s largest Islamic
organization, the conservative Nahdlatul Ulama. Nahdlatul Ulama was established in 1926, and
traditionally, the students (santri) of its pesantren practiced pencak. The course of instruction
lasts at least four years, and at the end of their studies, graduates receive from the head of the
school protective formulas from the Quran. In some pesantren, initiation (kanuragan) is also
practiced, but in a speciﬁcally Islamic version. In these latter schools, practices such as invul-
nerability may also be taught.
Another important Islamic group is called Muhammadiyah. This reformist and modernist
organization was founded in 1912 in Yogyakarta. Today, it is the second largest Indonesian Mus-
lim organization. In 1963, the Silat current called Tapak Suci was made an ofﬁcial part of the
Muhammadiyah. The structure of the Silat masters and practitioners of Muhammadiyah has
been notably inﬂuenced by the desire to oppose the increasing and threatening inﬂuence of the
Indonesian Communist Party (Partai Komunis Indonesia or PKI). In theory, Indonesian mod-
ernist Muslims are strictly opposed to local cults, but in practice, Tapak Suci is frequently not so
strict. Nonetheless, while Tapak Suci members openly demonstrated special breathing exercises
during the 1960s, these special methods are now shrouded in secrecy.
SuﬁIslam has also inﬂuenced pencak schools. For example, Persaudaraan Setia Hati Teratai
included “brotherhood” (persaudaraan) in its name. Originating from the town of Madiun, it is
one of the oldest Javanese schools of pencak.
Finally, it should be noted that kejawan adepts can and do adopt formal religions other than
Islam. For example, Tunggal Hati Seminari is a Silat school founded by a Catholic priest, and it is
devoted to Catholics. Tunggal Hati Seminari was inﬂuenced by kejawan conceptions in relation
to meditation and breathing exercises, but its teaching also includes speciﬁc Catholic prayers
and religious conceptions.
—Jean-Marc de Grave
SULAWESI (SOUTH CELEBES)
Sulawesi is in the eastern part of Indonesia. Three groups live in its southern peninsula: the Mus-
lim Bugis and Makassar and, on the highlands, the Christian Toraja. The local martial techniques,
called masempe’ in Bugis, masempa’ in Makassar, and sisemba’ in Toraja, emphasize kicking tech-
niques and are explicitly tied to harvest festivals, fecundity rituals (including wedding ceremonies),
and death rituals.
In Toraja, intervillage communal ﬁghts executed by young men are seen during the harvest
season. According to Draeger (1972, 220–222), the sisemba’ used during these ﬁghts represents
the continuation of a traditional or ritual war. (He found a similar game opposing different vil-
lages in the Mamala district of Ambon Island.)
Elder local informants (de Grave 1993, 81–82) say that sisemba’ predated the arrival of Islam
in the seventeenth century, and that it originally took the form of a game played by the slaves
to satisfy the nobles. In the Toraja region, peasants began to use this formerly noble entertain-
ment for ritual purposes. Some local specialists insist that the ﬁghts used to be extremely violent
and were often settled by death. In the last few decades, new rules have attenuated sisemba’s vio-
lent expression.
Belief Systems: Silat
401
www.ebook3000.com

In comparison to local practice, Silat seems to be a relative newcomer. Even if it is still
difﬁcult to provide a detailed historical overview of its arrival and development, school
genealogies present clear evidence of Silat’s imported origins. Essentially, Sumatran and
Javanese currents penetrated the region through local persons who stayed for long periods of
time in Java and Sumatra and then returned home. It is possible that Sumatran techniques
were introduced before Javanese ones. For instance, rituals undergone to gain access to the
teaching are often the same as in different regions of South Celebes (Makassar, Bone, and
Soppeng). Typically, these rituals involve the sacriﬁce of a chicken, and students giving small
gifts such as white cloth (kain kafan), knives, needles, and limes to the master. Another inter-
esting element is the relation to water in the town of Gowa (an old Makassar royal town),
where Silat practitioners used to come to the well called Sumur Berani Galeson for ritual
accession bathing.
Silat sendeng, a special form of Silat using only arm blows, is very popular in Sulawesi, espe-
cially in and around the town of Bone, situated in the Bugis area. At the same time, we ﬁnd
numerous currents where techniques are similar to the tenaga dalam (“inner power”) schools of
Java. The most ancient currents, such as Wali Suci, are tied to Sundanese schools (West Java),
but more recent imports, such as Marga Luyu 151 and Satria Nusantara, are tied to Central
Javanese schools that originally came from West Java (in the 1950s, in the case of Marga Luyu).
In Sulawesi, the speciﬁc practices of tenaga dalam schools are interpreted differently than in
Java, and this sometimes leads to local tensions. Tenaga dalam masters and students claim that
tenaga dalam represents a privileged medium with which to deepen Islam’s teachings. Pious Mus-
lims reply that those techniques are not in accordance with orthodox Islam, on account of some
breathing exercises that show Hindu inﬂuence and, more especially, due to possession techniques
involving animal spirits. This recalls the opposition that occurred between the pre-Islamic Bugis
ritual specialists called bisu (transvestite monks) and orthodox Muslims.
According to Toraja informants (personal communication with de Grave), local schools
called sila’ present training that is similar to that of tenaga dalam schools in terms of their bod-
ily movements, breathing exercises, and use of Arabic formulas. This training occurs at night, as
in the Bugis and Makassar areas.
Because these schools are closely tied to Islam, they represent an effective tool of proselytiz-
ing the people of the Toraja area and elsewhere to Islam. With that in mind, it should be noted
that the Tunggal Hati Seminari current of pencak silat penetrated Makassar region in the 1980s
and Toraja region in the 1990s via Catholic networks. This school, which comes from Central
Java, plays an important role in strengthening Catholic solidarity.
—Jean-Marc de Grave
See also: South Asian Martial Arts; Kuntao; Silat (in Volume I); Expressive Culture; 
Folklore; Invented Tradition; Political Uses of the Martial Arts; and Secret 
Societies and Fraternal Organizations (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Bruinessen, Martin van. 1994. “The Origins and Development of SuﬁOrders (Tarékat) in Southeast
Asia,” Studia Islamika 1(1), 1–23, via http://www.let.uu.nl/~Martin.vanBruinessen/personal/
publications/Suﬁ%20orders%20in%20Indonesia.htm, accessed May 28, 2009.
402
Belief Systems: Silat

Darmana (Nana), et al. 1977. Aliran-aliran pokok pencak silat Jawa Barat [The Main Pencak Silat Currents
of West Java]. Bandung: Depdikbud.
de Grave, Jean-Marc. 1993. “Le pencak silat en Indonésie—Etude sur la région de Célèbes-Sud” [Pencak
Silat in Indonesia—A Study on South-Celebes Region]. Unpublished Master’s thesis, Paris, Institut
National des Langues et Civilisations Orientales.
de Grave, Jean-Marc. 1996. “Une école catholique de pencak silat—Tunggal Hati Seminari” [A
Catholic School of Pencak Silat: Tunggal Hati Seminari], Archipel 52, 65–93, via
http://www.persee.fr/web/revues/home/prescript/article/arch_0044-8613_1996_num_52_1_3353,
accessed October 17, 2009.
de Grave, Jean-Marc. 2000. “Un ‘champion’ issu du kraton: l’histoire de Ndara Harimurti” [A “Cham-
pion” from the Kraton: Ndara Harimurti’s Story]. Archipel 160, 141–166, http://www.persee.fr/web/
revues/home/prescript/article/arch_0044-8613_2000_num_60_4_3585, accessed October 16, 2009.
de Grave, Jean-Marc. 2001. Initiation rituelle et arts martiaux—Trois écoles de kanuragan javanais [Ritual
Initiation and Martial Arts: Three Schools of Javanese Kanuragan]. Paris: Archipel/L’Harmattan
(Jeanne Cuisinier reward).
de Grave, Jean-Marc. 2007. “Quand ressentir c’est toucher. Techniques javanaises d’apprentissage
sensorial” [When Feeling Is Touching: Javanese Techniques of Sensory Apprenticeship], Terrain
49, 77–88, http://terrain.revues.org/index6061.htm, accessed October 17, 2009.
Draeger, Donn F. 1972. The Weapons and Fighting Arts of the Indonesian Archipelago. Rutland, VT and
Tokyo: Charles E. Tuttle Co.
Farrer, Douglas S. 2009. Shadows of the Prophet: Martial Arts and SuﬁMysticism, Volume 2, Muslims in
Global Societies Series. Berlin: Springer Science+Business Media B.V.
Heryana, Agus. 1995. Laporan Penelitian Pencak Silat Aliran Cimande di Jawa Barat [Research Reports
for Cimande Pencak Silat Currents in West Java]. Bandung: Depdikbud, Direkorat Jenderal
Kebudayaan Balai Kajian Sejarah dan Nilai Tradisional Jawa Barat.
Rosidi, Ajip. 2000. Ensiklopedi Sunda: Alam, Manusia, Dan Budaya [Sunda Encyclopedia: Nature,
Human Beings, and Culture]. Jakarta: LL Pustaka Jaya.
Sastrahadiprawira, R. Memed. 1978. Pangeran Kornel. Jakarta: Balai Pustaka.
Wessing, Robert. 1978. Cosmology and Social Behavior in a West Javanese Settlement, Center for Inter-
national Studies Southeast Asia Series, no. 47. Athens, OH: Ohio University.
Belief Systems: Silat
403
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank 

Commodiﬁcation of Leisure
A Bill Mauldin (1921–2003) cartoon dated November 1944 shows two U.S. Army ofﬁcers
admiring a sunset in the French mountains. “Beautiful view,” the captain says to the major. “Is
there one for the enlisted men?” (Mauldin 2000, 179).
Although Mauldin’s cartoon was intended to satirize the social stratiﬁcation of the U.S.
Army, it also perfectly captures the commodiﬁcation of leisure. Simply put, commodiﬁcation
involves putting a price tag on phenomena that are not customarily traded or sold.
For the seller of leisure, the goal is to make money. For the purchaser, the goal is the desire to
possess something unique—but not too unique. As folklorist Deirdre Evans-Pritchard (1987, 292)
wrote about the marketing of Native American art in New Mexico, “Consciousness of tourist
expectations informs much of the . . . Indians’ display. They are aware that they must project a par-
ticular image for their work to be evaluated as true Indian craft and for them to be able to sell it.”
All this relates directly to martial arts practiced as leisure activities. To discover why things
are done as they are, follow the money.
True, many practitioners make a public display of resisting commercial motivation. Yet, at the
same time, those same practitioners boast of their close personal relationship with the teacher, a
relationship frequently acquired primarily by their spending years performing menial tasks for
said teacher. Other practitioners are quite straightforward about their commercial intent. In
1989, Brazilian jiu-jitsu teacher Rorion Gracie (1952–) acquired a service mark for the name
Gracie Jiu-Jitsu. It is U.S. service mark 73790471, ﬁled April 3, 1989, registered December 5,
1989: “No claim is made to the exclusive right to the use ‘Jiu-Jitsu’ apart from the mark as shown.”
In the United States, franchise karate and taekwondo clubs are often viewed as the exemplars of
commercialized martial arts; thus, the mocking terms McDojo and McDojang. Nonetheless, the
transition from grimy garage clubs to slick storefront operations represents an enormously sensible
development, once one realizes that a club is operated one way if an external agency such as a
church, school, or youth organization is paying the club’s utilities, rent, and premises liability, and
another way if the club is run as a self-sustaining business. Gordon Franks, a former professional kick-
boxer who started in the Jhoon Rhee (Rhee Jhoon Goo, 1932–) taekwondo system, was a pioneer
in the process of bringing taekwondo and karate to the mass market. Franks (interview with Thomas
Green, 2005) notes that until the mid-1980s, the primary market for martial arts in the United
States was males aged 18–24. This is not surprising. The karate that returning veterans brought to
the United States during the 1950s and 1960s was the physical education and “sport karate” devel-
oped for Japanese high schools and colleges during the 1930s (Krug 2001, 401). However, males aged
18–24 are only one part of the potential market. Recognizing this, Franks and his business partner
Pat Worley “started marketing, in the eighties, to women. Because they’re the ones that make time
www.ebook3000.com

406
Chinese Martial Arts and Money
decisions for their kids. We . . . focused more on the need and the beneﬁts for children and less
assured kids” (interview with Green, 2005).
Thus, we reiterate: to understand the martial arts, follow the money. Sometimes the money
comes from a church or youth group. In this case, the organization probably emphasizes
“building character in boys,” which in practice means discouraging youths from drugs, alcohol,
tobacco, gambling, masturbation, and prostitutes. Sometimes the money comes from cultural
nationalists. In this case, “self-defense” often includes preparing for ﬁghts with members of rival
nationalist groups. Or the money may come from industrialists hoping to sell more products,
from governments wanting to hear their national anthems played at the Olympics, or even from
self-funding. Whatever the answer, it is likely to reveal something fundamental about both the
art and the people who practice it.
—Thomas A. Green and Joseph Svinth
See also: Kenpo Karate; Japan: Sumo; Korea: Ssireum (in Volume I); Chinese Martial Arts and
Money; Martial Arts Tourism; Expressive Culture; Invented Traditions; Film and the 
Martial Arts; Gunﬁghters; International Boxing; International Karate; Mixed 
Martial Arts; Professional Wrestling; Women’s Boxing, 1972–Present; 
Television and the Martial Arts; The Internet and the Martial Arts; 
Action Design for Professional Wrestling; and Stage Combat in 
the Elizabethan Tradition (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Evans-Pritchard, Deirdre. 1987. “The Portal Case: Authenticity, Tourism, Traditions, and the Law,” Jour-
nal of American Folklore 100(397), July to September, 287–296, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/540325,
accessed October 17, 2009.
Krug, Gary J. 2001. “At the Feet of the Master: Three Stages in the Appropriation of Okinawan
Karate into Anglo-American Culture,” Cultural Studies↔Methodologies 1, 395–410, DOI:
10.1177/153270860100100401, via http://online.sagepub.com/, accessed October 16, 2009.
Mauldin, Bill, with introduction by Stephen E. Ambrose. 2000. Up Front. New York: Norton.
McLean, Daniel D., Amy R. Hurd, and Nancy Brattain Rogers. 2007. Kraus’ Recreation and Leisure in
Modern Society, 8th edition. Boston: Jones and Bartlett Publishers.
CHINESE MARTIAL ARTS AND MONEY
“I would not refuse instruction to any student who brought even the smallest strip of meat as
tuition,” Confucius (Kong Zi, 551–479 BCE) wrote in Analects (Book 7, verse 7), and hong bao,
the red envelopes of discreet payment that are ubiquitous to Chinese society, have always been
a major part of Chinese martial arts. Yet there seems to be a taboo about speaking of Chinese
martial arts and money in the same breath. Instead, there is a widely held and quite beloved
belief that “true” Chinese martial arts existed in some idyllic time when Taoist sages and Shaolin
monks engaged in martial arts purely for the love of martial arts, untainted by the evil of money
and marketing. This beloved myth usually goes on to say that “true” modern Chinese martial arts
should follow this approach, and stay clear of “business.” But this belief is false. Whatever else
Chinese martial arts may be, they have always been about making money.

THE TWO PHASES: MANUAL TRADE AND RECREATION
The history of the business underlying the Chinese martial arts can be divided into two major
phases: the “martial arts as a manual trade” phase and the “martial arts as recreation” phase.
“Martial arts as a manual trade” refers to the times when martial arts were primarily a skilled
manual trade, somewhat along the lines of bricklaying or seamanship. As the name implies, a
manual trade focuses on the use of the hands to manipulate tools to accomplish a task. In this
business, the tools are weapons (spears, shields, sabers, etc.), and the task is beating up or killing
people.
As a manual trade, martial arts were normally taught to groups. After all, that was how the
“trade” usually operated, with teams of soldiers, militia, bandits, or bodyguards working together.
The focus was far more on weapons than barehanded ﬁghting. The manual phase was prominent
from the dawn of Chinese martial arts to the start of the Republican Period (around 1911). For
many current Chinese martial arts teachers, martial arts are still a manual skill that applies to
day jobs such as soldier, police ofﬁcer, or private security.
The other phase of the Chinese martial arts business began with the fall of the Qing dynasty
(ca. 1895–1911) and the formation of the Republic of China (ca. 1905–1912). During this
period of transition, Chinese martial arts became primarily a recreational activity pursued by
people who did not have any direct need for ﬁghting skills. Instead, they practiced martial arts
as a form of physical exercise, to connect with their Chinese culture, as a social activity, or
simply as recreation.
The “typical” martial artists of each phase had fundamental differences. For one, the typical
Chinese martial artist working in the manual trade could not read. He did not have unlimited
time to attain proﬁciency. He did not have a lot of money, either. In contrast, a typical martial
artist of the recreational type was a member of the middle class. He (or she; women with
unbound feet also exercised) could read, had disposable income, and learned martial arts at a
leisurely part-time pace.
These two phases overlap and coexist, but the main engine driving the Chinese martial arts
business shifted during the early 1900s. The dividing line starts with the Boxer unrest of the
1890s and ends with the establishment of the Jing Wu Tiyuhui (“Pure Martial Athletic
Association”) in Shanghai, during 1909–1910.
The Boxers represented the old method: martial artists as warriors. During 1900 and 1901,
imperialist machine guns and artillery shot them down, and the old methods died with them.
Nine years later, the Jing Wu Association was established in Shanghai. The Jing Wu Association’s
place in the history of the business of Chinese martial arts has to do with a number of “ﬁrsts.” Jing
Wu was the ﬁrst public martial arts training facility in China, the ﬁrst to teach Chinese martial
arts as a sport or recreation, the ﬁrst to place women’s programs on an equal footing with men’s
programs, and the ﬁrst to use books, magazines, and movies to promote Chinese martial arts. All
of these “ﬁrsts” marked a major shift in the business model of the Chinese martial arts.
BUSINESS SECTORS
Direct teaching of martial arts, teacher to student with lessons being given on a regular basis, is cer-
tainly the oldest martial arts business. “Kwai Chang Caine” images to the contrary, students paid
Chinese martial arts teachers for these lessons. Teachers in Chinese culture do not work for free.
Chinese Martial Arts and Money
407
www.ebook3000.com

While it may be true that there are hobbyist teachers whose income comes from other
sources and who do not charge, they are not the norm in China. In China, past and present,
martial arts teachers are paid. In Taiwan, for example, some martial arts teachers make hand-
some livings by charging equally handsome fees for their teaching. A speciﬁc example of a
modern Chinese martial artist who charged a hefty fee was Bruce Lee (Li Xiaolong,
1940–1973), whose business card famously stated his teaching fee as “$1,000 per hour plus
expenses.” Given that many Chinese martial arts teachers of the past maintained decent
lifestyles without other visible sources of income, we can deduce that high teaching fees are
not just modern phenomena.
Books are another important part of the modern Chinese martial arts industry. The produc-
tion of “teach yourself” martial arts books began on a wide scale in China with the founding of
the Republic of China in 1912. This was a period of modernization, and literacy rates continued
to rise, just as they had over the latter half of the 1800s.
The ﬁrst author to publish commercially successful do-it-yourself training manuals was Sun
Lu Tang (1861–1933). Sun taught baguaquan, taijiquan, and xingyiquan, and his system of
taijiquan is still widely practiced. During his lifetime, Sun published ﬁve martial arts books.
Jiang Rong Chiao (1891–1874), who cranked out dozens of manuals during the 1930s, was
an even more proliﬁc Republican-era author. As with European and American publications, the
inside covers of Jiang’s manuals often had ads urging the purchaser to buy another manual of
some other martial arts training routine. During the 1950s and 1960s, Jiang’s baguaquan book
was reputed to have sold “millions of copies” in the People’s Republic, and without doubt, cheap
training manuals were widely available in China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore, Indonesia,
and the Chinatowns of North America. That golden era repeated itself a few decades later, this
time driven by the Bruce Lee–Kung Fu craze. Sales of Chinese martial arts books—both in Asia
and in the West—peaked during the 1970s and 1980s.
The book craze is not over in China. The twenty-ﬁrst century has seen a resurgence of both
inexpensive and more upscale martial arts training books. Government sports organizations have
geared up to produce a wide range of inexpensive manuals, while private publishers focus on
“coffee table” editions that are modeled on classical Chinese book designs, complete with the
folded pages, elegant illustrations, and premium storage boxes.
The 1920s also saw the ﬁrst regular publication of Chinese-language martial arts magazines.
Both the Jing Wu Association and the government-sponsored National Martial Arts Program
published magazines during the 1920s and 1930s. These magazines had photographs of teachers
and training routines, and they were stocked with advertisements for martial arts books, training
equipment, herbal tonics, and vitamins. Put simply, they were just like modern-day martial arts
magazines. There was a lull in martial arts magazines in China during the Cultural Revolution
of the 1960s, but in the twenty-ﬁrst century, there are many martial arts magazines in regular cir-
culation in China. Hong Kong also had a variety of martial arts magazines, both in English and
in Chinese, from the 1960s to the present. Taiwan has had several martial arts magazines appear,
too, although not on the scale of Hong Kong.
In 1921, the Jing Wu Association was the ﬁrst Chinese martial arts group to widely distribute
8-millimeter ﬁlm footage showing actual martial arts training, and during the 1920s the
association used these ﬁlms to promote the Jing Wu program throughout China, Southeast Asia,
408
Chinese Martial Arts and Money

and Indonesia. The ﬁrst Chinese martial arts training ﬁlms to be sold commercially date from the
1950s. Most of these 8-millimeter ﬁlms came from Hong Kong and usually featured southern
Shaolin systems or taijiquan. Today, there has been an explosion of video and digital video from
mainland China, and many Chinese martial arts books now have a “teach yourself” disc
included, all at a modest price.
Selling martial arts training equipment is probably as old as martial arts teaching. By the early
Republican period (1911–1932), Chinese martial arts magazines ran advertisements showing
various strength training devices, some of Western design, and much of it made in factories. Also
available for purchase were factory-made training uniforms and practice weapons.
Franchise martial art schools date from the 1920s. The Jing Wu Association was again a pio-
neer. Franchise schools provide a standardized training program, and in return for being allowed
to use the name and the training program, fees are split between the headquarters (franchiser)
and the branch school (franchisee).
Seminars, in the sense of visiting teachers who stay and teach for some short period of time,
are not new, either. Itinerant teachers were common in the Qing dynasty. An example is A-Shan
Shi (died 1860s), one of Taiwan’s most famous martial arts teachers. He traveled about Fujian
during the 1820s and 1830s and reportedly commanded a very large seminar fee.
Martial tourism is another aspect of Chinese martial arts business. This sector has become
quite active since the 1990s, with travel agencies offering accommodations and tours to the
Shaolin Temple, the Wudang Mountains, and Yung Chen City (the reputed hometown of Wing
Chun and Crane Boxing). But martial arts tourism is also an old part of the Chinese martial arts
business. Admittedly, it is not a kind of business that left much of a record, but based on scenes
portrayed in Ming dynasty ﬁction, primarily the novel Outlaws of the Marsh, one can deduce that
inns grew up around famous martial arts places, and that steerers lurked about these inns
directing newly arrived visitors to a certain martial arts teacher while collecting a fee from one
or both sides.
HOW MUCH MONEY?
It is impossible to quantify the actual value of these sectors, in dollars and cents, either currently
or in the past. There simply is no data upon which to base estimates. Even the question of how
much Chinese martial arts teachers of the past charged is problematical. There is little ﬁrsthand
documentation, and money matters are unlikely to make their way into martial arts hagiogra-
phies. For many teachers, payment was a bottle of liquor, some tobacco, or a chicken; until
recently, most people simply did not have that much cash. There are clues, however, that suggest
that some Chinese martial artists became comparatively wealthy. Sun Lu Tang (1861–1933) pro-
vides perhaps the best example. Sun did not inherit any wealth, nor is there any indication that
he had any trade other than teaching martial arts. Nonetheless, his biography, which his daugh-
ter claimed was accurate, mentions several times where Sun had sufﬁcient personal ﬁnancial
resources to act as a banker to shore up his village’s failing ﬁnances. Thus, the implication is that
he was at least upper middle class.
So, what was being sold? Usually, it was a brand name (e.g., taijiquan) or a trade secret (e.g.,
the so-called death touch). People looking for an edge, be they soldiers, militiamen, or
bodyguards, would pay for teachers who claimed to have “secret techniques,” and if the teacher
Chinese Martial Arts and Money
409
www.ebook3000.com

got a reputation for being able to deliver superior martial arts teaching, then the teacher acquired
a “brand name” type of identiﬁcation. For example “Yang style” taijiquan (from the Yang family)
or Che style xingyiquan (from Che Yonghong, 1833–1914) were “brand names” that Qing
dynasty martial arts students sought out. In more recent times, Bruce Lee’s family took legal steps
to protect the use of his “brand name” in the martial arts business.
The secrecy of Chinese martial arts systems is usually said to be due to some religious or
ethical reason. For example, the master wants to judge the student’s character. A more mundane
reason is that the master wants to protect the cash value of his trade secrets. If the teacher has
some way to punch or throw that is better (or believed to be better) than those of his competi-
tors, then that technique has cash value, and like any other trade secret, that cash value needed
to be kept close to the company. Thus the secrecy, thus the screening of students.
“Business,” as used here, encompasses both legitimate businesses and illegal businesses.
“Legitimacy” is of course in the eye of the beholder, and because it is often vague what the
student hopes to buy, or obtain, from the teacher, it is hard to determine whether the teacher
delivered or not. Nonetheless, some aspects of the Chinese martial arts business are essen-
tially con games. Such aspects generally fall into one of two categories. The ﬁrst are foolish
or dangerous training regimes, and the second are ineffective or dangerous training medi-
cines. The Chinese martial arts business is replete with both kinds of illegitimacy. The fol-
lowing example is from a recent Taiwanese criminal indictment (Defendant: Hung Shih-ho,
Taipei District Court Criminal Division, 2006). Here, the defendant reportedly taught the art
of “Divine Attack on a Bull” which allows an adept to kill an animal or human from a few
meters (yards) away. The defendant in that case was accused of bilking several thousand
students out of at least US $25 million. This case is hardly one of a kind. Taiwan also has
teachers who advise male students to attach weights to their genitals to increase their “inner
energy,” and for the ladies, other teachers sell herbal “qi balls” which are claimed to increase
“female inner energy.”
In China, Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan, Indonesia, and increasingly, Europe and the
Americas, such aspects of the martial arts business become criminal justice problems. Once
again, this fraudulent aspect of the Chinese martial arts business is hardly new. One widely
read Qing-dynasty martial arts manual was titled The Secret Manual of Chinese and Foreign
Magic Tricks. The original was published in the fifteenth year of the Quanshi Emperor
(1890) and then reprinted in 1916. The manual details a wide variety of tricks, including
sleight of hand, strongman stunts, and ways of defrauding people using Taoist talismans.
Many of the stock martial arts demonstrations still seen today come straight out of that
manual.
The current situation with the Shaolin Temple and Wudang Mountain developments
summarize the current state of the Chinese martial arts business. Today, there are at least ﬁfty mar-
tial art schools in the town of Dengfeng, outside Shaolin monastery, and between them, they are
said to have something like eighty thousand students. Even casual perusal of mainland Chinese
martial arts magazines reveals full-page color ads that show an interesting mix of elements. A
typical ad (Wu Lin, inside back cover, January 2001) has a headline blazing, “50 percent of your
tuition at ﬁrst, the remaining 50 percent, we will withdraw from your future salary after we get you
a [good, career-level] job with the People’s Liberation Army” (author’s translation). Photos
gracing these full-page ads show the monks who make up the teaching staff riding in army jeeps,
410
Chinese Martial Arts and Money

and lines of happy grads showing off their camouﬂage uniforms and newly obtained military or
police rank. It is an odd juxtaposition.
—Brian Kennedy and Elizabeth Nai-Jia Guo
See also: China: Shaolin Temple Legends (in Volume I); Commodiﬁcation of Leisure; 
Martial Arts Tourism; Expressive Culture; Folklore; Globalization of 
Martial Arts; and Film and the Martial Arts (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Kennedy, Brian, and Guo, Elizabeth. 2005. Chinese Martial Arts Training Manuals: A Historical Survey.
Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books.
Morris, Andrew D. 2004. Marrow of the Nation: A History of Sport and Physical Culture in Republican
China. Berkeley: University of California Press.
MARTIAL ARTS TOURISM
Some scholarly considerations of tourism claim that the impulse to tour comes from a desire for
re-creation, and that alternating sacred and profane moments leads to rejuvenation (e.g.,
Graburn 1989). Others argue that in industrial and post-industrial societies, individuals are
alienated from their own lives and seek authenticity in the lives of others (see MacCannell
1976). In recent years, the tourism industry has created various niche markets. Some of these,
such as “fourth world” or “ethnic” tourism, are concerned with providing precisely this type of
authenticity. In individual cases, people may be in search of a more specialized authenticity. In
the context of martial arts, this means that they are seeking their own legitimization within the
global sphere of martial art practice. These individuals undertake trips to the birthplace or hub
of a particular martial art with the zeal of pilgrims. Many others are armchair travelers. Conse-
quently, an entire genre of travel writing exists around this central theme of martial arts tourism.
THE DESIRE TO TOUR
Legitimacy is at stake for many martial arts tourists. Globalization is directly linked to the rise in
martial arts tourism. A myriad of martial arts can be found outside of their original cultural
contexts, and today many have a high degree of accessibility to foreigners, being taught in
schools, athletic clubs, and even neighborhood strip malls. The increased demand for martial
arts instruction leads to new migration patterns. At ﬁrst, the accreditation of instructors is not
always of paramount concern. Concerns about legitimacy and authenticity grow in tandem with
both commercialization and growth. To give an example, it is common in the Afro-Brazilian
martial art capoeira for Brazilian mestres (master teachers) to question the legitimacy of teachers
abroad. Even with the best intentions, an instructor living and teaching in a new cultural
context may ﬁnd “value differences and incongruency” between the country of origin and the
host country (Ko and Yang 2008, 14).
The question of legitimacy is further compounded by new generations of foreign teachers
who have learned, not from the traditional masters in the land where the art originated, but from
those who chose to migrate. Remembering a European who passed through the Shaolin Temple
Martial Arts Tourism
411
www.ebook3000.com

during his two-year stay in China, Matthew Polly, author of American Shaolin (2007, 141), wrote,
“He’d saved for years to come to Shaolin for a month or two, thinking of it as a kind of graduate
school where he could acquire the necessary accreditation to attract more kungfu students.” This
exempliﬁes how visiting the source can lend credibility or legitimacy to foreigners wanting to
progress through the martial arts hierarchy.
One strategy for a foreigner interested in increasing his or her legitimacy, should it be called
into question, is traveling to the country where the martial art originated and developing
personal ties there. When asked why foreigners visit Brazil to train in capoeira, mestre Cobra
Mansa Mansa (Cinézio Feliciano Peçanha, 1960–) answered that you can drink water from a
bottle, but nothing compares to drinking from the fountain (personal communication, 2008).
Despite this and other similar responses sounding mystical in tone, visiting the cradle of a martial
art is in large part about experiencing the quotidian life of the local people and learning from
masters and students a foreigner would not otherwise meet.
Attaining new knowledge and honing skills are additional goals of this type of tourism.
Prevailing mentality claims that a martial artist can improve his or her craft far faster and easier
in its place of origin. After training in Muay Thai in Australia for several weeks, Sam Sheridan’s
instructor said “that months spent training in Thailand were worth years of training anywhere
else, including his gym” (Sheridan 2007, 8). In many cases this is true, not because of any
magical essence of the place in question, but because the martial artist is removed from day-to-
day concerns that tend to distract from training. Also, the martial artist brings a greater inten-
sity to training because this place seems special. Finally, there is often a greater concentration of
talented practitioners in the place where a martial art originated. By interacting with a greater
number of talented practitioners, students develop their skills and learn faster than they would
be able to do in isolation.
Exposure to another culture is another motivation for this type of travel, particularly for those
who view martial arts as one among a constellation of interesting tourist attractions. Travel seems
like a natural complement to many martial arts because preliminary research on martial artists as a
consumer market has found that many people “perceive martial arts training as a cultural learning
process” (Ko and Yang 2008, 15). This learning process gives tourists greater insight into themselves.
According to Dean MacCannell, a noted theorist on tourism, tourism helps people to understand
who they are vis-à-vis other cultures and historic periods (Kominz 1988, 196).
TAKING THE TOUR
The interests and needs of martial arts tourists are amazingly diverse. Individuals vary greatly in
terms of talent, skill, experience, facility with the local language, and ﬁnancial resources. Some,
but not all, martial arts tourists undertake an intensiﬁed training regimen. While on tour, martial
artists may cultivate an interest in other cultural expressions such as music, dance, or the local
religion. In addition to training, these tourists prioritize visiting legendary cultural sites within
the country, perhaps including those that ﬁgure heavily in the lore of their particular martial art;
examples would be temples, training facilities, masters’ homes, or natural attractions. The length
of these trips is quite variable depending on a traveler’s intent, income, and obligations at home.
For example, foreign capoeiristas visiting Brazil tend to stay anywhere from ﬁfteen to ninety days
(Esteves 2004, 85), but stays of six months to a year are not uncommon.
412
Martial Arts Tourism

Some travelers rely on their teacher’s connections for designing their trip. International
networks of martial arts schools facilitate this type of travel. In other cases, the leader of an acad-
emy organizes trips for a group of his or her students. Often these teachers are from the country
they will visit, speak the local language, and have family and other well-established contacts that
can offer classes and other amenities to the students.
Other martial arts tourists prefer to organize their quests independent of their academy. Thus,
a niche market of tour operators exists to ﬁll their needs. The Internet offers many resources for
these travelers, as do many popular martial arts magazines that feature advertisements for
training facilities in China, Thailand, and elsewhere. According to their magazine advertise-
ments and their website, the Shaolin Temple in China has been offering customizable tour
packages since 1985 (www.shaolinkungfutour.com). A sample package would include visits to
the Great Wall, Tiananmen Square, and the Forbidden City, along with “kung fu” demonstra-
tions and scheduled “exchanges” with the masters. Martial artists may also choose to enroll in
long-term training at the temple. While the shorter training packages focus exclusively on the
physical aspects of training, longer sessions include classes on theory, traditional Chinese
medicine, and language. The Tiger Muay Thai and Mixed Martial Arts training camp
(http://www.tigermuaythai.com/) offers weekly and monthly packages for training, room and
board in Phuket, Thailand, with such diverse offerings as Muay Thai, Mixed Martial Arts, yoga,
Boxer Detox, and trained nutritionists to assist with weight loss. Accommodations range from
basic rooms to deluxe private bungalows. Visitors can even prepay for their meal plans at the
Tiger Grill. Prices are listed in baht (the Thai currency) and can be paid with major credit cards.
Their website even offers some basic Thai vocabulary to help the farang (foreigners) in their
interactions with local ﬁghters, trainers, and staff. The backs of martial arts trade publications
offer a plethora of similar advertisements.
EFFECTS ON THE TOURIST
Martial arts tourists often romanticize their destination. When taking American students to Brazil
to study capoeira, Mestre Acordeon (Ubirajara “Bira” Almeida, 1943–) writes, “the feeling was so
strong there we could breathe Capoeira in every corner of the city” (Almeida 1986, 60). One dan-
ger of this type of attitude is ﬁxing the toured “Other” in a particular moment, both temporally and
spatially, which denies both the student and the destination their own agency to adapt and change
in response to new situations. Another danger is that the locals whose livelihoods rely upon
tourism sometimes consciously ﬁt themselves into the narratives built by and for international
audiences based on their imagination and fantasies about the “Other” (Bruner 1991, 241).
An entire genre of travel books has arisen to capture the emotional intensity, trials, and
tribulations of martial arts tourism. These books are reminiscent of ethnography. They place the
author squarely within the phenomenon they discuss as a full participant. While most of these
have been published since the mid to late 1990s, even Eugen Herrigel’s Zen in the Art of Archery,
ﬁrst published in German in 1948 and translated into English in 1953, shows the fascination
people have with chronicling and sharing their quest to learn a martial art in its place of origin.
One of the major themes in the recent accounts, exempliﬁed by Polly’s American Shaolin (2007)
and Sheridan’s A Fighter’s Heart (2007), is the willingness to eat bitter—or, rather, that dedica-
tion and perseverance outweigh skill in a martial artist’s quest for legitimacy. Others, like
Martial Arts Tourism
413
www.ebook3000.com

Twigger’s Angry White Pajamas (2000) and Sabat’s Zen and the Art of Street Fighting (1996),
chronicle the suffering required to actually become a master. A few, like Salzman’s Iron and Silk
(1986) and even Gilbert’s nonmartial Eat, Pray, Love (2006), testify to the intense emotional
relationships that tourists can make with local people.
EFFECTS ON THE LOCAL CULTURE
Once a travel pattern is set, it can take on a life of its own. Sam Sheridan (2007, 253), author of
A Fighter’s Heart, describes his return to the Muay Thai training camp in Bangkok where he trained
for several months and found that “[it] had undergone a total transformation; it was now a spa as
much as a training center.” As foreign interest in the training camp grew, so did the demand for
modern amenities. A paradoxical element “of cultural tourism is the way massive tourist attention
often destroys the very culture that visitors come to examine” (Boissevain 1996, 8).
The commodiﬁcation of the martial arts includes governmental initiatives that speciﬁcally
market the martial arts to tourists. Ofﬁcial tourism websites create hype about local martial
arts to increase sports-based tourism. The Thai government site http://www.tourismthailand
.org/ publicized the ﬁrst Asian Martial Arts games hosted in Thailand in the spring of 2009; the
Washington State tourism site, http://www.experiencewa.com/, makes note of Seattle’s famous
former resident Bruce Lee (Li Xiaolong, 1940–1973); and http://www.indianholiday.com/ touts
the cultural richness of Kerala, India, to include its martial arts. The Japanese government allows
foreigners wishing to study martial arts to stay in Japan for extended periods under their “cultural
visa,” and the government “has also used the martial arts as an avenue for the promotion of
Japanese culture abroad” (Ko and Yang 2008, 11). From the 1960s to the present, the Republic
of Korea has used the international propagation of taekwondo to bolster South Korean national
cultural identity (Gillis 2008). In July 2008, the Brazilian government pronounced capoeira to
be part part of the nation’s cultural patrimony, which is as much a formal recognition of
foreigners’ interest in capoeira as it is valorization of local culture and reparation for years of
repression.
Both cultures and bodily practice are dynamic systems, and they are constantly changing and
adapting to new situations. Change is inevitable, but it is not always clear whether a culture or
a martial art is undergoing natural change or losing its essential identity (Esteves 2004, 63). In
some cases, the commodiﬁcation of culture ushered in by tourism can be detrimental to local
practices, including traditional body culture. Traditionalists fear that passively accepting the
changes made for tourists will lead locals to lose their genuine culture and that the local martial
arts will become known to the outside world only through tourists’ photos (see Esteves 2004,
25–26). Commodiﬁcation also may lead to changes in traditional pedagogy. For example, in his
memoirs of his two years at the Shaolin Temple, Matthew Polly (2007, 82) reveals that the
martial art instructors at the temple sped up their traditional teachings in the interest of for-
eigners’ impatience.
Conversely, the commodiﬁcation of culture sometimes “provides an extra resource with
which traditional forms can be continued” (Crick 1989, 337)—the attention tourists pay to the
martial art may increase its legitimization among the local population (Esteves 2004, 37). In
Bali, traditional dance was not viewed as art, and it took the tourists’ globally informed gaze for
the locals to realize the uniqueness of their dances (Picard 1997, 190). Foreigners’ interest in
414
Martial Arts Tourism

traditional Balinese arts raised the status of these practices and led locals to renew their interest
in them (Picard 1997, 183).
Beneﬁts for the local community are debatable and surely differ from place to place. In Brazil,
people often cite the opportunity for locals, many of whom will never have the opportunity to
travel internationally, to enter into cultural and intellectual interchange with foreign visitors.
Others focus on the ﬁnancial beneﬁts. Increased tourism of any type leads to additional jobs
within the community and additional paying students at the particular academy helps to keep
that institution running.
CONCLUSION
Since the Enlightenment (ca. 1637 to ca. 1789), most Europeans and North Americans have
prioritized the visual in their understanding of the world. Urry (1990) has shown quite clearly
the impulse of tourists to consume destinations visually, even using the term “tourist gaze” to
describe this socially conditioned way of seeing. But the body offers tourists more possibilities
than simply looking at the scenery. Traveling is an embodied and deeply sensual experience,
involving not only sight but also taste, touch, hearing, and smelling. Active participation in
martial arts gives tourists the opportunity to experience all of these. The physicality of these
experiences gives the tourist a claim to the locality, visceral memories of which the reality or
authenticity cannot be denied—there may even be scars to prove it. Martial artists, particularly
foreigners whose practice is plagued with questions of authenticity and legitimacy, make secular
pilgrimages to the birthplace of their art to augment their own practice and drink from the
source. This type of tourism leaves a lasting mark on both host and guest.
—Lauren Miller
See also: China: Shaolin Temple Legends; Muay Thai (in Volume I); Commodiﬁcation 
of Leisure; Chinese Martial Arts and Money; Expressive Culture; Globalization 
of Martial Arts; and The Internet and the Martial Arts (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Almeida, Bira. 1986. Capoeira, a Brazilian Art Form: History, Philosophy and Practice. Berkeley, CA:
North Atlantic Books.
Boissevain, Jeremy, editor. 1996. Coping with Tourists: European Reactions to Mass Tourism. Providence,
RI: Berghahn Books.
Bruner, Edward M. 1991. “Transformation of Self in Tourism,” Annals of Tourism Research 18, 238–250.
Crick, Malcolm. 1989. “Representations of International Tourism in the Social Sciences: Sun, Sex,
Sights, Savings, and Servility,” Annual Review of Anthropology 18, 307–344, DOI:10.1146/
annurev.an.18.100189.001515, via http://www.annualreviews.org/, accessed October 17, 2009.
Esteves, Acursio Pereira. 2004. A “Capoeira” da Industria do Entretenimento [Capoeira of the
Entertainment Industry]. Salvador: Bureau Graﬁca e Editora.
Gilbert, Elizabeth. 2006. Eat, Pray, Love. New York: Penguin Books.
Gillis, Alex. 2008. A Killing Art: The Untold History of Tae Kwon Do. Toronto: ECW Press.
Graburn, Nelson H. H. 1989. “Tourism: The Sacred Journey,” in Hosts and Guests: The Anthropology
of Tourism, edited by Valene L. Smith, 33–47. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Herrigel, Eugen. 1953. Zen in the Art of Archery [originally, Zen in der Kunst des Bogenschiessens (1948)],
translated by Richard F. C. Hull., with an introduction by D. T. Suzuki. New York: Pantheon
Books.
Martial Arts Tourism
415
www.ebook3000.com

Ko Yong Jae, and Yang Jin Bang. 2008. “The Globalization of Martial Arts: The Change of Rules for
New Markets,” Journal of Asian Martial Arts 17(4), 8–19.
Kominz, Laurence R. 1988. “The Impact of Tourism on Japanese Kyogen: Two Case Studies,” Asian
Folklore Studies 47, 195–213, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/1178277, accessed October 17, 2009.
MacCannell, Dean. 1976. The Tourist: A New Theory of the Leisure Class. New York: Schocken.
Picard, Michel. 1997. “Cultural Tourism, Nation-Building, and Regional Culture: The Making of a
Balinese Identity,” in Tourism, Ethnicity, and the State in Asian and Paciﬁc Societies, edited by Michel
Picard and Robert E. Wood, 181–214. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Polly, Matthew. 2007. American Shaolin. New York: Gotham Books.
Sabat, Jack. 1996. Zen and the Art of Street Fighting: True Battles of a Modern-Day Warrior. London:
Frog.
Salzman, Mark. 1986. Iron and Silk. New York: Vintage.
Sheridan, Sam. 2007. A Fighter’s Heart: One Man’s Journey through the World of Fighting. New York:
Atlantic Monthly Press.
Twigger, Robert. 2000. Angry White Pyjamas: A Scrawny Oxford Poet Takes Lessons from the Tokyo Riot
Police. New York: Harper Paperbacks.
Urry, John. 1990. The Tourist Gaze: Leisure and Travel in Contemporary Societies. London: Sage.
416
Martial Arts Tourism

Expressive Culture
Art is a culturally speciﬁc concept. To avoid imposing one culture’s concepts on another culture,
anthropologists commonly substitute the term expressive culture for art.
When viewed this way, there are several different kinds of expressive culture. One is the
presentational mode. This describes oral epics and written stories. In these stories, martial
methods may not be described in much more detail than, “They wrestled.” Another is the rep-
resentational mode. The representational mode describes martial behavior that is done by actors
or players. Depending on the culture and the skills of the players, the representation is done with
varying degrees of realism. A third mode describes material culture. This refers to presentations
done in media such as painting, sculpture, and fabric.
In the expressive culture related to martial behavior, art exists not for aesthetic purposes
alone, but also to reﬂect the martial attitudes and identities of the group.
PRESENTATIONAL FORMS
Presentational forms of expressive culture are events that use words and accompanying features
such as gestures and vocal tones. Actions are presented rather than represented, and imagined
rather than observed. In other words, presentational genres talk about martial behavior but do
not bring it to life.
Mythology is a common presentational form. Physical conﬂict abounds in the world’s
mythologies, ranging from the individual struggle of Jacob versus the angel in Genesis 32 to the
epic warfare at Ragnarök that marked the end of the Norse cosmos. In most cases, there is little
real martial knowledge transmitted in such narratives. To end their wrestling bout, the angel
touched Jacob’s thigh and put his hip out of joint. This may allude to an ancient Semitic pres-
sure point technique, but the particulars of application are lacking.
In most cases, there is not even this much detail. In a Native American example, Wunzh is
an Ojibwe cultural hero who fasted in order to acquire a guardian spirit. During the last days of
his ritual fast, a spirit appeared with whom Wunzh wrestled on three successive days. At last the
spirit fell dead. Wunzh buried him, venerated his grave, and the ﬁrst corn plants sprang up from
the burial spot.
In classical Greek mythology, Antaeus, son of Poseidon and Gaia, forced all outsiders who
passed through his country (modern Libya) to wrestle him. The price of defeat was death. The
Greek hero Herakles, son of Zeus and Alcmene, encountered Antaeus, and they wrestled. Every
time Herakles threw Antaeus to the ground, Antaeus arose with renewed strength. The goddess
Athena then advised Herakles that Antaeus was invincible as long as he was in contact with his
mother. (Gaia was the earth goddess.) Herakles thereupon lifted the Libyan giant into the air
and choked him to death.
www.ebook3000.com

In Celtic myths surrounding Cú Chulainn of the Red Branch of Ulster, the use of battle char-
iots and the technique of mounting spearheads on both ends of a staff are mentioned, but hardly
described. Epic literature is full of such allusions. They are intriguing, but rarely sufﬁciently
informative to reconstruct martial arts from them in any consistent fashion.
The ﬁght between Bhima and Jarasandha depicted in sections 23 and 24 of Book II of the
Hindu classic Mahabharata (eighth to fourth centuries BCE) is an exception to this rule (Ganguli
1883–1896). The combatants prepare for battle using both herbal and supernatural medicines.
They grapple in what appears to be a collar and elbow position, kick nerve centers, deliver closed-
handed strikes to the chest, catch each other around the waist in order to throw, and use joint
locks (described as twisting each other’s limbs). Techniques include feints, leg dives, and knee
strikes. They strike each other with arms like maces of iron. Some maneuvers are named, includ-
ing Prishtabhanga, which is described as the grandest of all feats in wrestling: throwing the oppo-
nent down with face towards the earth and maintaining the opponent in that position as long as
possible. In the coup de grâce, Bhima lifts Jarasandha high in the air and whirls him one hundred
times before ﬂinging him onto his knee and breaking Jarasandha’s body in two.
REPRESENTATIONAL GENRES
Representational genres provide much better resources for presentation and preservation of
martial arts than do presentational genres. In representational genres, action is presented by
performers in real time and real space. Festivals, games, staged dramas, and dances provide many
examples.
Festivals are held at times of special signiﬁcance to the celebrating community, and are a
complex of interrelated events. During festivals, combat traditions emerge as game, dance, and
drama. The traditions embedded in festival practice draw on martial forms, but they are not pri-
marily defensive systems. Instead, they transform the methods (slashes, stabs, and kicks) and
materials (swords, sticks, and daggers) into dance, drama, ritual, or games that are incorporated
into public celebration and display.
Festival events are understood as not entirely serious, and normal behavior is systematically
altered by exaggeration, inversion, or parody. These conventions, among others, signal, “This is
play.” Therefore, aggressive behavior is limited to what is permissible within festival frameworks.
The introduction of the martial into dance, procession, and other choreographed enactments
may be as superﬁcial as the display of weapons during an otherwise nonmartial performance. This
is the case with the “Head Dance” done by the Kel Ewey Tuareg of Niger. This dance is
performed by a female patient during exorcism rites. While swaying in place, the woman holds
a sheathed sword point up and perpendicular to the ground. The sword is a powerful martial
instrument in Tuareg culture, and normally forbidden to women, but here, the weapon is put to
no martial use. It is simply a display (Rasmussen 1994, 75).
On the southeast coast of the Arabian Peninsula, Yemeni and Omani Arabs dance al-Razha.
In Yemen today, the dance is associated with cotton harvests and weddings, but in Muscat
(Oman) during the early twentieth century, this dance was said to be associated with warfare. It
acted as a signal to gather troops, announced victory, and comprised an element of mediation
rituals. In the Omani dance, two rows of men faced each other holding swords or daggers. The
418
Representational Genres

weapons were held perpendicular to the ground using only the thumb and ﬁrst two ﬁngers of the
sword arm. The rows advanced toward each other to the rhythm of a drum. In some local
traditions dancers leaped into the air holding their swords or threw the sharp, heavy blades into
the air and caught them. No genuine martial moves were mimed, but the act of holding the
sword in the distinctive fashion used for the dance was believed to strengthen the sword arm
(Skene 1917, 413). In contemporary performances held for amusement or cultural display,
dancers may also engage in separate displays of sword and shield combat.
Among the Swahili who live along the coasts and islands of modern Kenya, Tanzania, and
Mozambique, a more directly combative form of festive dancing developed. The Walking Stick
Dance is danced at weddings, circumcisions, religious festivals, and, during the late twentieth
and early twenty-ﬁrst centuries, dance competitions. The music is provided by drums, cymbals,
buffalo horns beaten with sticks, and a native clarinet (zumara). Historically, female slaves pro-
vided additional percussion by tapping buffalo horns with small sticks. The dancers are male, and
all carry sticks. The dancers form a ring and follow the percussive rhythm by shifting balance
from one foot to the other, while a pair of the company goes into the center of the dancing cir-
cle and mimes a sword ﬁght. Periodically, a new pair of stick-dancers replaces the couple in the
center. This continues until all participants have performed in the ring (Skene 1917, 416).
Rebecca Gearhart contends that the Kenyan stick dances were originally sword dances. When
these dances reached less-afﬂuent villages, sticks were substituted for swords (Gearhart 1998,
193). This explanation may be relevant to other locations as well.
The circle is a common pattern for ritualized combat: thus, the boxing ring, the capoeira
roda. Lines represent another common conﬁguration. In Oman, al-Sharh places two men
wielding sticks (shal) in front of a line of men similarly armed with sticks. The two principal per-
formers sing a song, and at its conclusion, they try to trip one another using low, sweeping strikes
of their weapons. These sweeps are generally avoided by leaping maneuvers, but variations exist,
such as dueling from a kneeling position. When one combatant “wins” or if the action becomes
too intense, the pair is separated by a stick-wielding member of the company. There are regional
variations of this combat dance throughout Oman, some of which are essentially choreographed
dances, while others are more like free-form games than like dance.
Egyptian tahtib (“wooden stick”) lies in this middle ground between dance and competitive
play. Tahtib play is divided into three distinct sections. First is the processional of combatants
and musicians. The second is a rapidly paced dance involving the two combatants and others of
the company. Third is the actual performance. Tahtib players wield sticks (nabut) that are about
120 to 180 centimeters (48 to 72 inches) in length. Although players may appear to be ﬁghting,
they are not dueling. In other words, the action suggests combat without it being actual combat
(Al Faruqi 1978, 10). Consequently, participants say they “play” tahtib. Nonetheless, there is
considerable physical risk, as combatants’ skill is judged by how close they can come using ﬂashy
maneuvers of dagger, sword, or stick (Al Faruqi 1978, 12). Circular sweeps of the nabut defend
the player from the slashing attacks of the other player. Both players parry, feint, dodge, and
strike while alternating with long intervals of virtually no motion during which the players wait
for the other to reveal an opening or lapse of attention. Despite the overtly combative appear-
ance of the action, it is vital to avoid harming one’s partner (Chapman-Sutton 2006, 5–6).
Historically, males played tahtib during festivals, weddings, and other cultural celebrations. More
recently, especially in consumer-oriented performances and the “folkloric” displays organized
Representational Genres
419
www.ebook3000.com

today by government entities, tahtib sometimes features female performers. In these cases,
combative elements may be sacriﬁced to emphasize highly stylized manipulation of the feet and
sticks.
Chhau is a dance genre of eastern India, especially in Bihar, Orissa, and Bengal, that is more
overtly martial than any of the preceding examples. Themes in this dance are drawn from Hindu
sacred narratives such as the Mahabharata (Richmond et al., 1993, 263–267). Parikhanda (“shield
and sword”) chhau uses martial movements done by people wearing papier-mâché masks. Purulia
chhau is another kind of masked chhau dancing. Mayurbhanj chhau, the kind commonly seen
during Spring Festival (Chaitra Parva), does not use masks but does use sticks and blunted swords
(Roy 2003). In Chhau, the sword and stick dances are noted for ﬁghts done in rhythm, and
tradition alleges that in Orissa (the Indian state regarded as the point of origin for Chhau), the
martial prowess of its warriors was attributed to skill in dancing. Daily practice in the sword
dance constitutes the basic physical discipline of Chhau dancers (Devi 2002, 162).
During festival, ritual, and celebration, the line between display and competition is often
blurred. These performances exist on a continuum that represents their relative emphasis on
improvisation and competition at one extreme versus choreography and coordinated effort at the
other. The labels imposed by in-group members add to the confusion. African-American calinda
(also colinda, kalenda, and various other spellings) is known throughout the Caribbean and the
southern United States as both a social dance and as a men’s stick ﬁghting display. One
explanation offered for calinda describes a mock battle fought in Louisiana between pairs of men
who were armed with sticks who fought while balancing bottles of water on their heads. In this
context, calinda was referred to as a “war dance” (Bernard and Girouard 1992, 44).
External distinctions between dance and drama are equally blurred. Both dance and drama
are ensemble activities: the actions of two or more individuals have to be coordinated. In dance,
this is accomplished by rhythm. Dramas, on the other hand, require narrative development; they
have a plot, which is not a requirement for dance. In drama, coordination is accomplished by
means of the script, a set of directions encompassing both words and actions. Put another way,
dance is choreographed while drama is scripted. That is, dramatic action is motivated, intensi-
ﬁed, and linked by dialogue. When performances lack dialogue, then we have a choreographed
rather than scripted enactment.
Representational genres frequently intertwine choreography and script. In Britain and
former British colonies, sword dances and combat plays were performed traditionally by
amateur groups who visited houses throughout their communities during the Christmas season
(late December), offering performances in return for food, money, and especially liquor. The
groups were known as mummers (or, in the West Indies, as “mummies”). Despite the label
“sword dances,” true martial elements are lacking in the British sword plays. The swords are
either mock, unsharpened versions of real swords, in the case of the hilt and point dance of
Yorkshire, or rapper swords, meaning short, two-handled, ﬂexible strips of metal which dancers
hold end to end in order to form an unbroken chain. In either case, the highlight of the action
involves weaving the swords into elaborate geometric designs. These designs are known as
locks, because the swords become bound together during the dance. The lock is held aloft by
the chief dancer, and in the case of plays with dialogue and a plot, a Fool character may be
“executed” by placing the sword lock over his head and around his neck and then drawing the
swords apart simultaneously, thereby simulating decapitation. The “dead” man is then revived
420
Representational Genres

by the timely arrival of a character playing a quack doctor, and then a ﬁnal dance is performed.
In these performances the sword is present as an object to accomplish an execution, but there
is no genuine martial use of the sword.
Some British combat plays are slightly more martial. In these, the dancing is minimal or
nonexistent. Instead, the core of the dramatic action is a mock sword battle between two
warriors, typically St. George and the Turkish Knight. The duels are stylized and frequently
parodies of genuine swordplay. The ﬁghts end when one of the combatants fells the other, and
again, the slain warrior is cured by a comic doctor. These plays conclude with antics by buffoons
who play little if any part in the previous action. After some slapstick byplay and usually a
Christmas carol or two, the players take up a collection and then go to another location to
repeat the performance. Any true martial action takes place when different bands encounter
one another along the roads. In such cases, drunken brawls have been known to take place.
Equally rowdy confrontations are widely reported between Caribbean performance troupes and
Brazilian samba bands.
In the Philippines, Moro-Moro plays and Komedya (Tagalog, from the Spanish Comedia)
were traditional folk dramas customarily performed during saints’ day festivals. There is consid-
erable variation within the plot repertoires. The two terms are sometimes used synonymously,
but some commentators make the distinction that Moro-Moro depicts clashes between Moro
(Muslim) and Christian armies, while the Komedya focuses on the story of a Christian princess
falling in love with a Moro prince, thereby leading to conﬂicts between the two families that
escalates into religious warfare (Rodell 2002, 159). Duels using the Filipino stick-ﬁghting art of
escrima often make up the high points of these plays (Wylie 1996, 111). Assertions that these
folk plays were major vehicles for the preservation of escrima during the Spanish era are some-
times used to support the authenticity of modern-day Filipino sword and stick styles, but as
everywhere else, the swordplay seen in Filipino dramas is more stylized than practical.
Silat, a martial art of Malaysia, Indonesia, and Brunei, maintains close ties with dance. Silat
is practiced to musical accompaniment, which gives the forms a dancelike quality, and the qual-
ity of a player’s Silat is judged both in terms of aesthetic criteria and martial effectiveness. There-
fore, the practice of Silat as a ﬁghting art has an expressive dimension. Folk narratives may be
included, too. Randai, a folk theatre tradition of West Sumatra, incorporates silek (Minangkabau
Silat) into performances based on regional folk narratives. Randai is usually performed for wed-
dings, festivals, and similar social occasions. The silek movements that are incorporated into
Randai are modiﬁed to make them even more dancelike than those seen outside the sphere of
performance, thereby increasing their theatricality. Nonetheless, in comparison to the British
and Filipino examples cited above, the martial arts seen in Randai are more like what one would
expect to see during actual ﬁghting.
Poetry is frequently recited, composed, or sung in conjunction with physical displays. This
display of verbal art along with physical dexterity and/or courage is essentially universal. Thus,
the Icelander Egill Skallagrimsson (910–990) allegedly saved his head by creating a skaldic poem
the night before his projected execution; Japanese warriors and nobles who commit ritual suicide
have been expected to compose a poem while preparing for it, such as that of Minamoto no
Yorimasa (1106–1180); and boxer Muhammad Ali (1942–) famously rhymed his name with
“ﬂoat like a butterﬂy, sting like a bee.” Whether the verse was created extemporaneously or by
subsequent panegyrics is irrelevant—the poems and stories are integral parts of the tradition.
Representational Genres
421
www.ebook3000.com

MATERIAL CULTURE
Cross-culturally and from the very earliest historical periods, plastic and visual arts have pro-
vided the media for the preservation of martial images. Often, visual representations are the only
clues we have to the reconstruction or even the existence of martial culture. Frescoes at Beni
Hassan in Egypt, dating from around 2000 BCE, show stick ﬁghting and wrestling holds with
such accuracy that contemporary scholars can determine their modern equivalents. Similarly,
sketches by German artist Albrecht Dürer (1471–1528) depict armed and empty-hand combat
in enough detail that they have helped in the reconstruction of Renaissance ﬁghting arts.
Other important forms of expressive culture include clothing items (black belts and club
patches), body modiﬁcations (tattoos and hair styles), and weapons. Aikido practitioners buy
practice sticks made of exotic hardwoods, and the Tiwi, who reside on Melville Island, off the
coast of Australia, create intricately carved and painted ceremonial spears. Here, it is worth
noting that Tiwi ceremonial spears are not weapons in the conventional physical sense. Instead,
the Tiwi spear is carved and painted by a high-status elder and then used in ritual duels between
elders and younger rivals. In these duels, the carved spear is held in the nondominant hand of
the offended elder as a signal of the nature of the event and the role the holder is playing. The
elder throws less elaborate spears at his younger opponent, who is expected to dodge, but not
ﬁght back. When blood is drawn, the duel is over. Tiwi spears also were used as marks of prestige
(as with jeweled swords in other cultures) and as commodities of exchange within the group.
Among the Nuba of the Sudan, the wrestling season traditionally extended from late fall
until early spring. Although the number of wrestling matches increased in direct proportion to
the yield during a growing season, traditional Nuba wrestling tournaments were more than
agrarian rites or martial competition. They also provided opportunities to celebrate virile
physicality. Speciﬁcally, competitors shaved their eyebrows and cut their hair into creative
designs, and applied mud and ash as a form of body painting. Competitors strove for designs that
were original and symmetrical and that accentuated their physical attributes. To permit greater
admiration of their physiques and body painting, the Nuba wrestled nude. Therefore, while body
painting and nudity were not necessary to ﬁght or wrestle, these bodily practices worked in
tandem with wrestling, stick ﬁghting, and knife ﬁghting to celebrate the vigor and physicality
that are a core value within traditional Nuba society.
—Thomas A. Green
See also: 52 Hand Blocks/Jailhouse Rock; Capoeira; Caribbean Martial Arts; Iranian Martial Arts;
Celtic Martial Arts; Fighting Arts of the Hellenic, Hellenistic, and Roman Eras; Oceania; Arnis (in
Volume I); Silat; Belief Systems: Introduction; Folklore; Invented Traditions; Performing Arts;
Action Design for Professional Wrestling; Stage Combat in the Elizabethan Tradition; Taiwanese
Street Performances; and Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Al Faruqi, Lois Ibsen. 1978. “Dance as an Expression of Islamic Culture,” Journal of Dance Research
10, 6–13, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/1477998, accessed July 7, 2009.
Bernard, Shane, and Julia Girouard. 1992. “‘Colinda’: Mysterious Origins of a Cajun Folksong,” Journal
of Folklore Research 29(1), 37–52, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/3814282, accessed July 7, 2009.
422
Material Culture

Chapman-Sutton, Taylor. 2006. “The Evolution and Role of Middle Eastern Dance in Arab Society,”
http://www.oregonculture.org/ﬁles/2006_GrantsAndActivitiesReport.pdf, accessed July 7, 2009.
Devi, Ragini. 2002. Dance Dialects of India, 3rd edition. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Faris, James. 1972. Nuba Personal Art. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Fuller, Anne. 2008. “Proud to Be Nuba,” Sudan Tribune, January 14, http://www.sudantribune.com/
spip.php?article25557, accessed July 11, 2009.
Ganguli, Kisari Mohan, translator. 1883–1896. The Mahabharata of Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa. Book 2.
Sabha Parva. Translated into English Prose from the Original Sanskrit Text, via http://www.sacred-texts
.com/hin/m02/m02023.htm, accessed January 2, 2010.
Gearhart, Rebecca Kathleen. 1998. “Ngoma Memories: A History of Competitive Music and Dance
Performance on the Kenya Coast.” Unpublished Ph. D. dissertation, University of Florida, http://
etd.fcla.edu/UF/amd0044/ngoma.pdf, accessed July 11, 2009.
Ministry of Information, Sultantate of Oman. 2002. “Folk Songs and Dances,” http://www.omanet
.om/english/culture/folk_song.asp?cat=cult, accessed July 11, 2009.
Rasmussen, Susan J. 1994. “The ‘Head Dance,’ Contested Self, and Art as a Balancing Act in Tuareg
Spirit Possession,” Africa: Journal of the International African Institute 64(1), 74–98, via http://www
.jstor.org/stable/1161095, accessed July 11, 2009.
Richmond, Farley P., Darius L. Swann, and Phillip B. Zarrilli. 1993. Indian Theatre: Traditions of Per-
formance. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Riefenstahl, Leni. 1976. People of Kau, translated by J. Maxwell Brownjohn. New York: Harper and
Row.
Rodell, Paul A. 2002. Culture and Customs of the Philippines. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing
Group.
Roy, Ratna. 2003. “Chau,” in South Asian Folklore, edited by Peter J. Claus, Sarah Diamond, and
Margaret Ann Mills, 109–110. London: Routledge.
Skene, R. 1917. “Arab and Swahili Dances and Ceremonies,” Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 47, 413–434, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/2843346, accessed
July 11, 2009.
Tiddy, Reginald John Elliott. 1923. The Mummer’s Play. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Wiley, Mark V. 1996. Filipino Martial Culture. Rutland, VT: Tuttle.
FOLKLORE
Back when ﬁghting arts operated at the village or family level, all knowledge was folk
knowledge—stories were told over drinks, around the campﬁre, and so on, much as family sto-
ries are told and retold today, at every holiday. At the village or family level, changes to the
existing narrative occurred only with the tacit agreement of the listeners. Change the story
without the agreement of listeners, and the listeners would soon start telling new stories about
the silly person who tried to change the narrative.
Today, few martial arts operate solely at the village or family level. Instead, most of them are
regulated by bureaucracies. Bureaucracies produce formalized curricula, sanctioned histories, and
so on, and change is approved from above. The advantage of this system is that it standardizes
practices and curriculum, thereby allowing an art to survive, reasonably intact, even during times
of rapid expansion.
A bureaucracy keeps money and power ﬂowing to the center. Thus, the people nearest the
center (the elite) tend to rewrite their practices and curricula to protect their own political and
economic interests. For example, elite members are usually given disproportionate coverage in
ofﬁcial histories, whereas people who have displeased the elite are written out of the ofﬁcial
Folklore
423
www.ebook3000.com

histories altogether. Nonetheless, even in the most bureaucratic systems, folklore continues to
circulate informally. Some people still have the old text, or the old curriculum, or simply dislike
the central leaders, and have no problem telling anyone who will listen.
Martial arts provide a rich medium for folklore studies. For traditional systems, folklore
provides insight into a worldview, whereas for bureaucratic systems, folklore provides clues into
what may have actually happened (as opposed to what the elite wishes had happened).
Put another way, folklore consists of a store of traditional knowledge embodied in the
customs (e.g., rituals and costumes) and art forms (e.g., proverbs and tales) that are transmitted
among members of a group. The folklore in turn helps build and maintain group identity. In this
context, the label “folk” is not a prejudicial comment on the validity of the material so labeled.
Neither should anything labeled “folk” be discounted as nonsense. Even if folk stories cannot be
proven using historical documents, the stories often lead researchers to more concrete data. Even
when documentation and archaeological evidence actually disproves individual stories, such
elements of expressive culture reﬂect qualities of self-image and worldview current at the time
the story was told. Thus, folk perspectives warrant our respect and attention.
NARRATIVE
Martial folk narratives should be viewed as efforts to “ﬂesh out” the practical aspects of the system
of which they are a part. Although many of the tales eventually ﬁnd their way into print, the tales
frequently exist apart from written media. Committing a narrative to print, however, does not
change the folk status, but print versions do give the impression of the story being genuine.
At one level, orally transmitted narratives are suspect. As any trial lawyer, police ofﬁcer, or
parent can attest, stories change once you get somebody on the stand. In addition, if we tell the
story enough, we start to believe it ourselves. Moreover, the “same” story often exists in differ-
ent versions: folktales change to respond to changing social situations and audience feedback
during performance.
At another level, however, orally transmitted narratives give us insight into motivations that
may never have been put on paper. This happens because the fundamental goals of the story-
telling are to reinforce group identity, legitimize the worldview arising from that identity, and
support a common bond among members of the folk group. Thus, orally transmitted narratives
are best considered as gauges of attitude rather than as funds of historical fact.
In the martial arts, lineage is a traditional means of establishing credibility for a system. As
in the Bible, who begat whom? Therefore, origin narratives are among the most common types
encountered in martial arts systems.
Many origin legends maintain that the point of the art’s origin lies outside the human realm.
For example, Japanese tradition preserves legends of warriors who attained martial skill by con-
tact with supernatural ﬁgures called tengu, meaning goblins that combined the physical attrib-
utes of men and raptors. Tengu had a particular talent for swordsmanship, a gift they passed along
to humans who won their favor. One such fencer was Minamoto Yoshitsune (1159–1189).
While Prince Yoshitsune was training to become a monk at Tokobo Monastery, an apparition of
his mother visited him in a dream and implored him to avenge his father, who had died at the
hands of the rival Taira clan. Although little more than a child, he resolved to answer his
mother’s call by roaming the mountainous area around the monastery after dark, striking stones
424
Folklore

and trees with his wooden practice sword. In this manner, he intended to teach himself the art
of swordsmanship. The King of the Tengu, observing his dedicated practice, appeared to the
youth, defeated him using only a feathered fan, and then took on the task of teaching him to
master the sword.
Another common motif credits the animal world with laying the foundation of a new mar-
tial art or technique. For example, although the particulars of the surrounding events vary,
tradition indicates that Praying Mantis quanfa was developed after a Chinese martial artist
known as Wang Lang heard a ferocious hissing from the bushes. He went to look, and witnessed
a struggle between a praying mantis and another insect (a cicada, grasshopper, or ﬂy, depending
on the version).
Many other martial arts creation legends hinge on the founder witnessing a life-and-death
struggle between different animal species. Indeed, some plots recur so frequently and are
dispersed so widely that they should be considered international tale types. For instance, a clash
between a snake and a bird has been claimed as the origin legend of the Chinese arts of taijiquan
and yongchun (wing chun) and the Sumatran art of pencak silat; the clash also appears on the
Mexican ﬂag.
The animal-modeling motif incorporated into the taijiquan, yongchun, and Silat legends is
not limited to Asia. In the Gidigbo wrestling of the Yoruba of West Africa, there is a technique
of snatching an opponent’s arm in an attempt to dislocate the shoulder or elbow. The technique
is called ja-di ilafa (“he who ﬁghts like a gorilla”), and is said to have been derived from watch-
ing the gorilla’s attempt to intimidate rival gorillas by snatching and breaking young trees.
The reasons for basing martial arts on animal models are open to speculation. More impor-
tant at this point is the fact that these origin narratives provide a point of common reference and
a source of core attributes (strength, ferocity, endurance, for example) that encourages bonding
among practitioners of a martial art.
Another common genre consists of stories about the system’s heroes. For example, a tradi-
tional history of yongchun maintains that this system was created by the Buddhist nun named
Wu Mei (Ng Mui in Cantonese), who had escaped from a destroyed Shaolin temple (various
locations are identiﬁed) following an attack by the forces of the Qing dynasty (1644–1911). The
widely spread legend continues that Wu Mei created a simple, quickly learned ﬁghting system,
which she transmitted to Yan Yongchun, after whom the martial art was named.
In the United States, a unique variant of the Wu Mei legend is perpetuated within the
contemporary Won Hop Loong Chuan (WHLC) system. According to this group’s traditional
history, Ng Mui was allowed to leave the temple at the conclusion of the battle because she was
“only a woman” (this feature was emphasized by one of the WHLC’s female senior instructors).
Ng Mui was accompanied by her children: one who held her hand, one she bore in her arms, and
a third whom she carried in her womb. The oldest child was named Soy, and the fact that the
family was later attacked by Qing troops is commemorated in a WHLC form called Inky Toy
San Soy, a name said to mean “The Three Steps of Little Soy.” To continue the WHLC story,
Ng Mui was said to have raised a family of ten sons and several daughters (the number varies).
She developed wing chun as a relatively low level art (in contrast to the secret family styles
taught to the sons) so that the daughters could barter these arts to their husbands (famous
martial artists all) in exchange for learning the spouse’s superior arts. Thus, thanks to Ng Mui,
students of WHLC are ultimately heirs to the “best of the best” martial arts (Green 1997).
Folklore
425
www.ebook3000.com

In Brazil, King Zumbi (1655–1695) is both a historical ﬁgure and a legendary hero, especially
for capoeiristas of African descent. According to oral tradition, Zumbi was the last leader of the
quilombo (runaway slave colony) of Palmares in what is now the state of Alagoas, Brazil, and
for years Zumbi led resistance against conquest of his quilombo and recapture of his people using
his skills as a capoeirista. Like the WHLC version of the Ng Mui saga, the legends of Zumbi
argue for a truly superior martial art, one that enabled unarmed resistance against swords and
guns. Solid early evidence connecting Zumbi to capoeira is lacking. Nevertheless, Zumbi’s
central role in the African Brazilian martial arts community is attested to both by the persist-
ence of his legends and by the commemoration of November 20, the anniversary of his execu-
tion, as a day for African Brazilian awareness.
In some cases, legendary heroes cross beyond speciﬁc martial arts groups and become the
property of most of the martial arts community. Following the U.S. releases of the ﬁlms Fists
of Fury (Golden Harvest, 1971) and The Chinese Connection (Golden Harvest, 1972), Bruce
Lee (Li Xiaolong, 1940–1973) “mania” generated a spate of contemporary legends focused on
Lee’s martial prowess. Among these was a narrative that was transmitted from Hong Kong by
students studying at the University of Texas at El Paso in 1972. This tale described a challenge
to Lee by a cast member in one of Lee’s ﬁlms who was an accomplished martial artist. In
response to the invitation to combat, Lee was said to have walked over to an oil drum and
pierced its metal side with a single thrust of his index ﬁnger. This act squelched the ﬁght
before it began. Both the narrator and his audience were active practitioners of yongchun, the
system Lee had studied in Hong Kong, and, most important, the performer was an instructor
and the audience members were his students. The tale used Lee as an example of what diligent
practice could produce.
Counter claims regarding Lee’s superhuman abilities also have surfaced within the martial
arts community. For example, Gene LeBell (1932–), a former Amateur Athletic Union judo
champion, professional wrestler, and stunt man, allegedly gave Lee a beating while working on
the set of Lee’s Green Hornet television series (ABC, 1966–1967). According to some versions,
LeBell choked the actor into unconsciousness. The actual event, according to LeBell’s website,
was a prank during which the stunt man lifted Lee onto his shoulders and refused to put him
down until the actor promised not to kill him. The two then became close friends (LeBell). The
tale entered oral circulation around 2000 (probably as a result of its being posted on LeBell’s
website in that year), long after Bruce Lee’s death and virtual canonization by his admirers.
Reasons for the story’s popularity include debunking the Lee mythology and exemplifying the
maxim that no one is invulnerable.
FOLK BELIEF
Unsurprisingly, folktales embody folk beliefs. Folk beliefs in the martial arts can range from the
mundane to the fantastic and tend to articulate relationships between the ﬁghting system itself
and larger belief systems, such as religion, politics, or medicine. Folk belief may be cast in narra-
tive form, exist as a succinct statement of belief, or simply as allusions to common knowledge
within the group.
A mundane folk belief is the one common among martial arts that the cloth belt or sash
used as a mark of rank should not be washed. The usual folk explanation for this custom is
426
Folklore

that the white belt of the beginner eventually turns black through years of wear, and then,
after countless more hours, turns back to a threadbare white. Thus, the natural
(dis)coloration represents the effort expended in developing one’s expertise, and washing
unnaturally changes the color, thereby leading to a misrepresentation of the wearer’s place in
the martial order.
Beliefs in esoteric powers are also common. Examples are the concept known as qi (in
Chinese) or ki (in Japanese). Other martial arts have comparable beliefs. For example, Southeast
Asian Silat preserves a concept of supernormal power. The sources vary but are internally
consistent with the prevailing religious systems (in this case, Islam). Gurus in the Sumatran style
of Silat called Silek Bayang (shadow Silat) reportedly have the power to kill opponents by direct-
ing their power at the victim’s head, neck, stomach, or navel; some even claim to have the
ability to kill with a glance. Equally esoteric Silat is said to render a practitioner invulnerable.
The signature weapon of Silat, the keris or kris, is believed to have an animating presence akin
to a soul that can trap a slain victim’s soul at the moment of death, thus increasing its own power
(Farrer 2006, 32–33). Some krisses are said to have the ability to rattle inside their sheaths,
thereby warning their owners of danger, and some are said to leap from the sheath unbidden
(Draeger 1972, 86). In the drive for Indonesian independence following World War II, some
nationalists who were Silat practitioners credited the supernatural powers of their art (rather
than international political pressure) for the success of their efforts to force the Netherlands in
1949 to abandon colonialism in Southeast Asia.
Similarly, belief in the anting-anting (a physical charm or amulet) persists among some
practitioners of the Filipino martial arts. The anting-anting is said to confer invulnerability on
the bearer, as long as it remains in his possession. The belief in the animate nature of weapons
that was noted in the Indonesian Silat community is also found among some members of the
Filipino martial arts community. For example, a particular bladed weapon can have the power to
cut the person who removes it from its sheath. Protection against being cut is provided by
ownership of an anting-anting or by personal charisma that confers protection against such a
“malicious” weapon.
In capoeira, the power of corpo fechado (“closed body”), a practice by which the body becomes
invulnerable not only to the blows encountered in the roda (the circle in which capoeira is
played) but against blades and bullets, is sometimes claimed. The closed body was achieved by
the use of amulets. Oral tradition also attributes the power of shape-shifting to some capoeiris-
tas of the past, claiming that they had the power to transform into an animal or tree, or to van-
ish into thin air.
Folklore, as a consequence of arising from members of a group needing to crystallize and
express identity, reﬂects the preoccupations of the group, embodies collective self-image,
projects images of others, and crystallizes worldview. Wherever it exists, folklore serves the ends
of deﬁning the group and the group’s relationships to a given social, cultural, or historical
environment.
—Thomas A. Green
See also: Gidigbo; Capoeira; China: Shaolin Temple Legends; Japanese 
Martial Arts; Oceania; Silat (in Volume I); Belief Systems: Introduction;
Jeet Kune Do; and Written Texts: Japan (in this volume).
Folklore
427
www.ebook3000.com

REFERENCES
Chozanshi Issai. 2006. The Demon’s Sermon on the Martial Arts, translated by William Scott Wilson.
Tokyo: Kodansha International.
Draeger, Donn. 1972. The Weapons and Fighting Arts of Indonesia. Rutland, VT: Tuttle.
Farrer, Douglas. 2006. “‘Deathscapes’ of the Malay Martial Artist,” Social Analysis 50(1) (Spring),
25–50, DOI: 10.3167/015597706780886076, via http://www.ingentaconnect.com, accessed
October 17, 2009.
Green, Thomas A. 1997. “Historical Narrative in the Martial Arts: A Case Study,” in Usable Pasts:
Traditions and Group Expressions in North America, in Tad Tuleja, editor, 156–174. Logan: Utah
State University Press.
Green, Thomas A. 2003. “Sense in Nonsense: The Role of Folk History in the Martial Arts,” in Mar-
tial Arts in the Modern World, edited by Thomas A. Green and Joseph R. Svinth, 1–11.Westport,
CT: Praeger.
Henning, Stanley. 1994. “Ignorance, Legend and Taijiquan,” Journal of the Chen Style Taijiquan
Research Association of Hawaii 2(3), Autumn/Winter, 1–7, via http://seinenkai.com/articles/
henning/il&t.pdf, accessed October 26, 2008.
LeBell, Gene. ”Stories,” http://www.genelebell.com/stories.html, accessed October 29, 2008.
Lewis, J. Lowell. 1992. Ring of Liberation: Deceptive Discourse in Brazilian Capoeira. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press.
Ozaki, Yei Theodora. 1909. Warriors of Old Japan and Other Stories. New York: Houghton Mifﬂin, via
http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Spiessbach, Michael F. 1992. “Bodhidharma: Meditating Monk, Martial Arts Master or Make-
Believe?” Journal of Asian Martial Arts 1(4), 10–27.
Talmon-Cvaicher, Maya. 2007. The Hidden History of Capoeira: The Collision of Cultures in the 
Brazilian Battle Dance. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Un, H. B. 1974. Praying Mantis Kung Fu. London: Paul H. Crompton.
Wiley, Mark. 1997. Filipino Martial Culture. Rutland, VT: Tuttle.
Wilson, James. 1993. “Chasing the Magic: Mysticism and Martial Arts on the Island of Java,” Journal
of Asian Martial Arts 2(2), 10–43.
INVENTED TRADITIONS
As introduced by Eric Hobsbawm (1983/1992), the term “invented traditions” refers to “instant
formulations of new traditions.”
Invented traditions may appear to be (and in many cases claim to be) ancient. However,
many (perhaps most) “ancient” traditions are more recent than claimed and often were estab-
lished as a result of political or business needs rather than longstanding custom.
When (or if) the new traditions become widely accepted, then members of the group or
community begin ﬁlling in the gaps in the story, thereby creating their own new histories and
traditions.
Understanding this concept depends on realizing that expressive culture—to include ritual
and folk histories—is dynamic and responsive to social change rather than static and rigid.
In the introduction to Invention of Tradition, Hobsbawm (1992, 2) confronted this issue
directly. According to Hobsbawm, tradition is not rigid or ﬁxed. Instead, tradition is ﬂuid,
and is a construct created and used to serve the needs of a group. The idea is to build solidar-
ity in groups that lack genuine shared traditions. Because invented traditions immediately
address social stressors while providing comforting links to imagined pasts, their creation is
428
Invented Traditions

especially important to people during times of rapid social change. Thus, for Hobsbawm,
invented traditions “are responses to novel situations which take the form of reference to old
situations.”
The following are some examples of invented traditions taken from the well-known modern
martial arts of judo and karate.
LINEAGE AND AUTHENTICITY
During the twentieth century, Japan began exporting its martial arts with considerable intensity.
As these arts became more readily available, the need to demonstrate the authenticity of the
teachers and their methods became an issue.
Often this was done by emphasizing lineage. For example, Kodokan judo, which was not
established in Japan until 1882, was introduced into the United States during the early 1900s.
By 1904, it had acquired no less a patron than President Theodore Roosevelt (1858–1919).
Roosevelt’s teacher was Yamashita Yoshiaki (also known as Yamashita Yoshitsugu, 1865–1935).
Yamashita had earned his 6-dan ranking in Kodokan judo by this point; therefore, the judo he
introduced to Roosevelt and other Washington elites was unquestionably authentic Kodokan
judo (Svinth 2003). This is not to imply that most other Japanese martial arts teachers of 1904
lacked equally legitimate pedigrees, only to observe that the meticulous record-keeping of the
Kodokan makes it comparatively straightforward for people today to substantiate Yamashita’s
claims of lineage.
For karate, the documentation is less precise and more fragmented. Karate comes from
Okinawa, an island between Japan and Taiwan. Because the island is not very big, prospective
students living there until well into the 1920s did not require much documentation. They simply
asked a friend or relative to introduce them to a good teacher, and the introduction was made.
Once karate was transplanted to the Japanese home islands during the 1920s, getting introductions
became harder to accomplish, and after karate started going abroad during the 1940s and 1950s,
getting introductions was generally impossible. Consequently, in karate, legitimacy began to be
claimed by showing direct links to famous karate teachers. Some of these links demonstrated wish-
ful thinking, supposition, or outright fabrication. Thus, as Kevin S. Y. Tan (2004, 177) politely puts
it, “In spite of the growing proliferation of self-acclaimed ‘grandmasters’ . . . during the second half
of the 20th century, few written reliable records can be found.”
Once outside Japan, even the most legitimate karate systems soon ﬁltered through
unorthodox local sources, to include military hand-to-hand combat training, roughly
analogous local systems (e.g., boxing and capoeira), and eclectic independent martial art
systems. Many, perhaps most, foreign practitioners readily admitted this, but some did not.
Instead, in an effort to acquire legitimacy, a few non-Japanese martial artists began conferring
on themselves the title “Soke.”
The Japanese word soke means “main family,” and, by extension, “head of that family.” The
foreign martial artists apparently assumed this means “grandmaster.” However, it does not. The
concept of soke is part of the Japanese iemoto (“family foundation”) system of transmitting
authority within real or ﬁctional family lineages. In the iemoto system, the soke is not the creator
of the system. Instead, he usually inherits the position. In addition, he often is not the most
talented or the most senior practitioner of the system. Instead, he is simply the person charged
Invented Traditions
429
www.ebook3000.com

with knowing, preserving, and controlling access to his system’s secret rituals and transmissions
(hiden). Knowing these secret transmissions is vital in iemoto systems because, by practicing in
accordance with the precepts of those secret transmissions, “the pupil follows the teacher’s
actions throughout and, in the fullness of time, comes to realize intuitively what is correct and
acceptable and what is not” (O’Neill 1984, 636).
Now, let’s return to those karate Sokes of the late twentieth century. Although the self-styled
Soke of a commercial martial art system may indeed be the custodian of his school’s “correct skills
and traditions,” if said Soke’s students were to follow his actions throughout, then, in the fullness
of time, they too would break away from the original style—and many do. Nonetheless, this new
pattern is entirely unlike the original Japanese meaning of the term. Consequently, applying the
name of “Soke” to the founder of a modern karate style represents an invented tradition.
Applying the term Dai-Soke (a phrase that is not used in Japanese, but which is usually
translated as “great grandmaster”) to a teacher of a modern karate style is an even more grandiose
invented tradition.
LINGUISTIC INVENTIONS AND REINTERPRETATIONS
In some karate styles, the Japanese word osu (or ossu) has been appropriated and reinterpreted
to the level of invented tradition.
Japanese dictionaries contain separate entries for “osu/ossu” and “o-su.” They gloss the ﬁrst
term as an exclamation, and identify the second term as a verb consisting of the root o and the
inﬂecting ending su. Depending on context, this verb can have many meanings, to include “push
on,” and as an inﬂected word, it assumes tense. The exclamation osu, however, is never inﬂected.
It can be used as a simple grunt, or (chieﬂy among young males) as an informal greeting.
In foreign karate classes, osu/ossu frequently appears in mispronounced variations such as
“oss” and “uss,” and is used in contexts ranging from an informal greeting to “I hear and obey”
(Boone 2008; Fey [no date]; Redmond 2008). Although the use of the language and cultural
artifacts of the donor group is appropriate, these multiple uses indicate a tradition invented to
confer authenticity to the borrower via a command of esoteric terminology rather than an
authentic tradition (except, perhaps, within an individual club or set of clubs, where shouting
“Osu!” at the slightest provocation may indeed be the norm).
Other invented traditions originally had ideological motivations. For example, the contem-
porary Japanese ideograms (kanji) for “karate” are written using characters that mean “empty
hand.” This spelling and meaning did not originate at the level of traditional practice in
Okinawa. Instead, in what seems to have been a well-orchestrated campaign, karate teacher
Funakoshi Gichin (1868–1957) promoted a series of public demonstrations that were designed
to present karate in a politically positive fashion, thereby banking “cultural capital in the eyes of
the Japanese” (Tan 2004, 182). Funakoshi’s campaign was ultimately successful, and in 1933, the
Dai Nippon Butokukai (Greater Japan Martial Virtue Society, a martial arts licensing body
established in Kyoto in 1895) recognized karate as a uniquely Japanese martial art. In return,
there was apparently an agreement to change karate’s name from ideograms that mean “Tang
hand” (e.g., southern Chinese boxing) into ideograms meaning “empty hands,” thereby making
karate an unequivocally Japanese martial art. Because the new name was not traditional, many
Okinawan karate practitioners refused to acknowledge this change, but after it was shown that
430
Invented Traditions

the government and newspapers supported the change, the new rendering became ofﬁcial in
1936 (Funakoshi 1973, 3–4, 36; McCarthy 2005).
Recently, some avowedly Christian karate teachers have started downplaying the fact that the
ideogram for “empty” is the same ideogram that Japanese Buddhists use to describe the Void (Beasley
2002, 42–43). This is despite Funakoshi having written, in so many words, that the ideogram’s rela-
tionship to Buddhist cosmology was one of the reasons that it was chosen in the ﬁrst place
(Funakoshi 1973, 3–4, 36). This recent reinvention is ironic, because in Mahayana Buddhism, one
explanation of sunyata (the root concept that the Japanese describe using the ideogram meaning
“empty”) is that the path to understanding reality as it is (rather than as we imagine it is) starts by
recognizing that everything is in ﬂux and going through transformation all the time.
THE INVENTION OF THE BLACK BELT
By awarding dan-kyu (“rank-step”) grades, Kodokan judo’s founder Kano Jigoro (1860–1938)
set the modern martial art ranking system into motion. Before Kano, there were just four
grades in most Japanese martial arts: beginners, those who had mastery of basic techniques
(mokoroku), those who had a license to teach (menkyo), and those who were initiated into the
secrets (kaiden). (These are typical names, but there are alternatives.) Then, during the 1880s,
says Inoue Shun (1998, 167), “Kano created the dan-kyu system to heighten students’ motiva-
tion. The same logic led him to make randori, free-form sparring, the main component of judo
training.”
Kano’s Kodokan judo system also established the custom of distinguishing between graded
practitioners (yudansha) and nongraded practitioners (mudansha) through the use of colored
belts. At ﬁrst, belts were just black and white. The Kodokan later added symbolic red-and-white
belts for senior practitioners and women, and solid red belts for the very highest-ranking practi-
tioners. The present rainbow of colors for grades below black belt (mudansha) dates to the 1930s.
The latter innovation is generally attributed to Kawaishi Mikonosuke (1899–1969), a former
professional wrestler who began teaching judo in Paris in 1936. Kawaishi’s innovation soon
spread to karate and aikido schools, and today, one sees colored belts showing rank in everything
from capoeira to Marine Corps Martial Art.
What is interesting here is how folk etymologies developed to explain this otherwise
mundane aspect of the development of twentieth-century martial arts.
One explanation tells us that in the old days, training took place outdoors, and students got
white belts when they began training. With exposure to seasonal changes, the white belt
gradually went through various color transformations, starting with green (pollen, grass, and
other vegetation), then brown (dirt and mud), and ﬁnally black (from years of accumulated dirt).
The belt reached this latter state because it was never washed lest the student “wash away” the
hard work and knowledge that the gradually darker belt represented (GojuRyu.com [no date]).
This story is an obvious invention. In the old days, Okinawan karate practitioners used belts
mostly to keep their pants up. See, for example, the photos accompanying “Miyagi Chojun and
Kyoda Juhatsu Practicing a Two-Person Drill” (Swift [no date]) and “Training Scene of Ryukyu
Karate in Those Days” (Fukushodo 2005). Also, as anyone who has ever done the laundry
knows, unwashed white cotton does not turn green, then brown, then black. Instead, it turns
into the dingy brown color that the British call khaki.
Invented Traditions
431
www.ebook3000.com

Another story tells us that in Japanese color symbolism, black (kuro) symbolizes age
and experience whereas white (shiro) symbolizes youth (Ohlenkamp 1997–2009). Yet this
explanation would seem to have it backwards, because in East Asian cosmology, white is the
color of death, whereas black is the color of youth.
A separate color-coded explanation is that in East Asian metaphysics, black and white
represent the eternal binaries of Yin and Yang (Japanese: inyo) (Caile [no date]).
Still another color-coded explanation is that in the Japanese public schools of the 1880s,
advanced swimmers wore black ribbons around their waists, whereas junior swimmers wore white
belts (Cunningham [no date]).
Note that none of these color-coded explanations provides much in the way of contempo-
rary supporting documentation. Until documentation is provided that shows what Kano and the
Kodokan had in mind, all these stories need to be viewed as invented explanations, if not exactly
invented traditions.
As an aside, the ﬁrst synthetic dye to be used for the commercial vat dying of cotton
clothing was patented in Germany in 1885 (Steensma 2001). This dye, known as Congo red,
was introduced into Japan in 1886 (Bayer 2009). Japanese merchants soon began advertising
garments colored with Congo red and related vat dyes as symbols of modernization and
progress (Parmal 2004). Unfortunately, items dyed with Congo red and similar ﬁrst-
generation synthetic dyes faded quickly if exposed to the sun and bled color ruinously if
exposed to sweat, rain, or high humidity. This made them unsuitable for athletic attire.
Reasonably colorfast black dyes began to be sold during the 1890s. For instance, the German
company AGFA introduced Black E into Japan in 1898. Unscrupulous turn-of-the-century
clothing manufacturers sometimes added chemicals to their dye mixes that made new clothes
look bright in the store, but consumers soon learned to their dismay that “the effect
disappeared entirely when the goods were washed” (Park and Shore 1999, 162). Stable blue,
green, and brown dyes became widely available after World War I (1914–1918), and stable
brilliant dyes were invented during the mid-1950s. Nonetheless, to this day, dye makers
continue to recommend washing dyed garments separately from whites, using cooler water
and less powerful detergents.
CONCLUSION
As the foregoing examples show, the histories, hierarchies, and symbols of the martial arts do not
follow an unbroken line from past to present. Instead, they are in a constant state of renegotia-
tion. Changes occur depending on the needs of the community. Known reasons for making these
changes have included eliminating unpopular political and religious allusions, establishing legit-
imacy, providing links to imagined pasts, keeping young people interested in training, and sell-
ing new clothes.
—Thomas A. Green
See also: China: Shaolin Temple Legends; Japan: Jujutsu-based Systems; Japan: Kendo,
Iaido, and Jodo; Japan: Shorinji Kempo; Japan: Sumo; Korea: Taekkyon; Korea: Taekwondo
(in Volume I); Belief Systems: Japanese Budo, Bujutsu, and Bugei; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial
Arts and Religion since 1868; Commodiﬁcation of Leisure; Chinese Martial Arts and Money;
432
Invented Traditions

Martial Arts Tourism; Expressive Culture; Folklore; International Karate; Social and Cultural
Evolution of Kendo; Political Uses of the Martial Arts; Secret Societies and Fraternal 
Organizations; Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Bayer AG. 2009. “History of Bayer in Japan,” http://www.bayer.co.jp/bgj/english/bayerinjapan/
history.html, accessed May 19, 2009.
Beasley, Jerry. 2002. Mastering Karate. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Bodiford, William M. 2002. “Soke: Historical Incarnations of a Title and Its Entitlements,” in Keiko
Shokon: Classical Warrior Traditions of Japan, volume 3, edited by Diane Skoss, 129–144. Berkeley
Heights, NJ: Koryu Books.
Boone, Kevin. 2008. “The KZone: A Short Glossary of Karate Terms,” http://www.kevinboone.com/
karate_terms.html, accessed May 17, 2009.
Caile, Christopher. No date. “Budo Belts and Ranks: The Forgotten Symbolism,” Fighting Arts.com,
http://www.ﬁghtingarts.com/reading/article.php?id=89, accessed May 18, 2009.
Cunningham, Don. No date. “Belt Colors and Ranking Tradition,” E-budokai.com, http://www
.e-budokai.com/articles/belts.htm, accessed May 17, 2009.
Fey, Brian R. No date. “To Oss or Not to Oss: That Is the Question,” http://www.shotojukukai
.com/Articles/tooss.htm, accessed May 17, 2009.
Fukushodo. 2005. “The Legend of Ryukyu Karate,” http://fukushodo.com/sub3/englishfld/
e-history.html, accessed May 17, 2009.
Funakoshi Gichin. 1973. Karate-do Kyohan: The Master Text. Tokyo: Kodansha.
GojuRyu.com. No date. “The Ranking System,” http://www.gojuryu.com/about_rank.html, accessed
May 17, 2009.
Hobsbawm, Eric. 1983/1992. “Introduction: Inventing Traditions,” in The Invention of Tradition, edited
by Eric Hobsbawm and Terence Ranger, 1–14. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Inoue Shun. 1998. “The Invention of the Martial Arts: Kano Jigoro and Kodokan Judo,” in Mirror of
Modernity: Invented Traditions of Modern Japan, edited by Stephen Vlastos, 163–173. Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press.
McCarthy, Patrick. 2005. “Dai Nippon Butokukai,” Fight Times, http://www.ﬁghttimes.com/
magazine/magazine.asp?article=293, accessed May 17, 2009.
Morris, Peter J. T., and Anthony S. Travis. 1992. “A History of the International Dyestuff Industry,”
American Dyestuff Reporter
81(11), November, via http://www.colorantshistory.org/
HistoryInternationalDyeIndustry.html, accessed May 19, 2009.
Ohlenkamp, Neil. 1997–2009. “The Judo Rank System,” JudoInfo.com, http://judoinfo.com/obi.htm,
accessed May 17, 2009.
O’Neill, P. G. 1984. “Organization and Authority in the Traditional Arts,” Modern Asian Studies
18(4), Special Issue: Edo Culture and Its Modern Legacy, 631–645, via http://www.jstor.org/
stable/312340, accessed October 17, 2009.
Park, James, and John Shore. 1999. “Dye and Fibre Discoveries of the Twentieth Century. Part 1: From
the Magic of Electric Light to the Nightmare of World War,” Coloration Technology, 115(5-6),
May–June, 157–167, DOI 10.1111/j.1478-4408.1999.tb00354.x, via http://www3.interscience
.wiley.com/cgi-bin/home, accessed October 17, 2009.
Parmal, Pamela A. 2004. “The Impact of Synthetic Dyes on Meiji Japan,” Abstract of paper read to
the Textile Society of America, October 9, http://textilesociety.org/abstracts_2004/parmal.htm,
accessed May 18, 2009.
Redmond, Rob. 2005. “Appropriate Use of Osu,” 24 Fighting Chickens, http://www.24ﬁghtingchickens
.com/2005/08/29/appropriate-usage-of-osu/, accessed May 17, 2009.
Steensma, David P. 2001 “‘Congo’ Red: Out of Africa?” Archives of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine
125(2), 250–252, via http://arpa.allenpress.com/arpaonline/?request=get-document&doi=
10.1043%2F0003-9985(2001)125%3C0250:CR%3E2.0.CO%3B2, accessed May 19, 2009.
The Invention of the Black Belt
433
www.ebook3000.com

Svinth, Joseph R. 2003. “Professor Yamashita Goes to Washington,” in Martial Arts in the Modern
World, edited by Thomas A. Green and Joseph R. Svinth, 47–59. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Swift, Joe. No date. “Unraveling the Mysteries of the Nafadi Tradition: Its Kata,” Fighting Arts,
http://www.ﬁghtingarts.com/reading/article.php?id=276, accessed May 17, 2009.
Tan, Kevin S. Y. 2004. “Constructing a Martial Tradition: Rethinking a Popular History of Karate-
Dou,” Journal of Sport and Social Issues 28(2), May, 169–192, DOI: 10.1177/0193723504264772,
via http://online.sagepub.com/, accessed October 16, 2009.
434
The Invention of the Black Belt

Globalization of Martial Arts
The term globalization is complex and open to a variety of different deﬁnitions (for a discussion,
see Scheuerman 2008). In this respect, the term is similar to the term martial arts, which (despite
its familiarity) is equally slippery, complex, and difﬁcult to deﬁne. Stephen Chan (2000, 69)
illustrates this by pointing out that a study on the martial arts of the world commissioned by
UNESCO had to be disbanded before it even began because its authors could not agree on a
working deﬁnition or organizing concept of “martial art.” “Globalization” can be understood in
just as many different (often antithetical) ways, and while many of these perspectives are justi-
ﬁed in one way or another, a coherent consensus about what globalization means is unlikely to
be reached. Nonetheless, some of the salient preconditions for and coordinates of globalization
are (1) the expansion of increasingly instantaneous telecommunication networks; (2) the open-
ing of ever more contexts to market mechanisms owing to the internationalization of ﬁnance sys-
tems; and (3) the deregulation of those ﬁnance systems, the effect of which has been to
undermine the traditional power of nation-states to control their own economies and societies.
The deregulation of global ﬁnance markets since the 1970s had the effect of outﬂanking any
government’s ability to be able to intervene signiﬁcantly into its own economy—raising taxa-
tion or minimum wages beyond a level deemed acceptable (or efﬁcient) to capitalists simply
results in capital investment being moved elsewhere. Castells (2000) describes this radical trans-
formation of global power relations through the following analogy. Formerly, nation-states were
like receptacles containing water. Each had the ability to control the ﬂow of that water through
ﬁxed conduits to other receptacles (nation-states). Globalization turned the tables on nation-
states, so that now they ﬁnd themselves emptied of water (capital), and instead of controlling
their destinies, they bob about, sinking or swimming, on the ebbs and ﬂows of the seas of ﬁnance.
These processes have affected culture and society the world over, and this includes the forms,
practices, institutions, orientations, and indeed the very deﬁnitions of martial arts. In this con-
text, the most relevant aspect or understanding of globalization is in terms of the international-
ization of mass media. The development of global media is particularly relevant because,
historically, the spread of martial arts could be strongly correlated with military, margins, and
migration. The effects of global media have exponentially increased martial arts’ dissemination.
COMMODIFICATION
Historically, martial arts developed around zones and sites of conﬂict and antagonism, and their
spread or dissemination was linked to the cultural and social diasporas that spread out from these
historical sites. However, since the 1970s, the easy availability of media and multimedia images,
representations, accounts, and even manuals has taken control of the ability of martial arts
www.ebook3000.com

styles to spread and transform. TV, ﬁlm, print media, and multimedia have increasingly freed
knowledge or awareness of martial arts styles from speciﬁc cultural contexts. In the process,
martial arts have become increasingly deracinated and commodiﬁed. Deracination means that
ethnic or cultural characteristics are uprooted and sometimes sanitized for external consumption;
commodiﬁcation means that goods or services that were never originally intended to be bought
and sold are transformed into things that can be bought and sold. Thus, traditional martial arts
have been uprooted from their historical locations, new hybrid forms have emerged, and in the
process, the places, roles, and functions of martial arts have changed considerably.
The development of Tae Bo by Billy Blanks (1955–) is a case in point. Blanks developed his
aerobic workout program during the late 1980s, and in the mid-1990s he registered the service
mark Tae Bo and began marketing exercise videos (U.S. service mark 75043289, ﬁled January
16, 1996; see also: Doyle 1994; Gardetta 1999). In creating Tae Bo, Blanks took moves from
amateur boxing and taekwondo, combined them together with music, and thereby created a new
form of aerobics. As such, Tae Bo is hybridized (grafted together), deracinated (severed from
roots and traditions), commodiﬁed (from the outset, Tae Bo was mass marketed through
globalized media and ﬁnance networks), and reconﬁgured. The clear lines of demarcation
between aerobic exercise and combat training are utterly blurred.
Today, deracination and commodiﬁcation are arguably the dominant forces acting on martial
arts. An example is the Shaolin Temple in China’s Hunan Province. The reopening of this
temple in the 1980s by the Chinese government was effectively no different from the opening
of a theme park or gift shop: A novel or niche demand (a market) was perceived; a supply was
provided. An entrepreneurial government capitalized on fantasies about the authenticity and
austere, mystical, almost magical “ancient history” of such locations and practices and exploited
it as a marketing opportunity. Financially, this Shaolin temple did so well that in 2009, plans
were announced to build a second Shaolin temple in Hong Kong.
Of course, this is only one aspect of the productivity and inventiveness of the connections
between mediatization (the increasing role of ﬁlm and TV representations) and commodiﬁca-
tion, both of which are part and parcel of globalization. In the wake of the global success of Bruce
Lee’s ﬁlms (1971–1973) and the Kung Fu TV series (ABC, 1972–1975)—shows that effectively
introduced “kung fu” to the Western popular culture consciousness—myriad kung fu and karate
schools sprang up (Thompson 1993, 19; Miller 2000). These schools often made various kinds
of claim to “authenticity,” usually deﬁned through some form of connection to an “authentic”
ethnic East Asian lineage. Over time, the perceived necessity of claiming a direct and authentic
connection to Asia has diminished in many modern martial arts, but it has certainly not
disappeared. We will return to this later.
POSTMODERN MARTIAL ARTS
There is arguably a strong difference between (1) martial art development and dissemination in
the cultural epochs and contexts of war, colonialism, and imperialism (i.e., the internal and
external peripheries or margins of cultures and societies) on the one hand, and (2) martial art
development and dissemination in the context of martial arts ﬁlms, magazines, and businesses in
the context of peacetime. What is often called “Westernization” has always been bound up in
both processes, but in rather different ways.
436
Postmodern Martial Arts

Until recently, the major impetus to developing martial arts has been overwhelmingly related
to cultural exigencies and necessities: defense, security, conquest, domination, survival, and so
on (Brown 1997; Kennedy and Guo 2005). As such, martial arts developed on the margins:
margins of territory, margins of empire and colony; economic and cultural margins, sites of
struggle and antagonism between the disenfranchised and the state, and a whole range of
borders, whether political, geographical, or cultural. Thus, there are the martial arts of the
powerful and martial arts of the relatively powerless; the martial arts of the military and security
apparatus and the martial arts of the antagonists of power, whether by default (the enslaved, the
poor, disenfranchised, occupied, or colonized, etc.) or by design (guerrillas, paramilitaries, etc.).
There are martial arts that are extremely codiﬁed, whose roles and functions are predominantly
ceremonial, often nationalistic, dynastic, or even nostalgic. There are martial arts that are
entirely pragmatic. And of course, there are martial arts that combine these and add yet other
dimensions, too—such as health, philosophy, or spirituality.
In the contemporary globalized world, there has been a proliferation of knowledge,
information, and discourses about these myriad martial arts of the world. This has arguably
transformed the nature of the “borders” on which martial arts now develop. For, as opposed to
martial arts developing on sites and lines of conﬂict and warfare (as they did in premodern and
modern times), in the contemporary technology- and information-saturated context, innovation
in martial arts—especially hand-to-hand combat—today takes place knowingly and self-
consciously on the borders between styles and approaches. Rather than springing from the
urgencies and exigencies of a particular conﬂict, this kind of development is self-reﬂexive and
deliberately informed by research. Such innovation may take place for sporting purposes (cross-
training, for example), for pragmatic reasons (doing something that might reduce the risk of civil
suit), or for marketing reasons. In any case, this type of development is technically postmodern.
There are strong reasons for the postmodern proliferation of martial arts. On the one hand,
military and paramilitary methods are increasingly technologized, dehumanized, and virtualized.
Indeed, for soldiers, the (literal and metaphorical) distances between combatants have expanded
to the point that the lines between warfare and computer game play are increasingly blurred
(Hables Gray 1997). For law enforcement, conﬂict is more and more premised on digital surveil-
lance and technological action at a distance, and when force is required, it typically involves
ﬁrearms, chemical sprays, and Tasers rather than wrist locks and batons. For private citizens,
handguns and knives are increasingly encountered during violent situations. With knives and
ﬁrearms entering ever more contexts, the necessity of skill in unarmed combat either increases
astronomically or declines altogether. That is, skill in unarmed ﬁghting does not become obsolete,
but its ﬁeld of applicability becomes more circumscribed. Consequently, wherever martial practice
survives, elements other than the “martial” are usually accentuated: health, sport, discipline, self-
actualization, cultural artifact, and simple fun become more signiﬁcant in more contexts.
MARTIAL ARTS, MILITARY, MIGRATION, AND MEDIA
One of the contexts in which martial arts historically developed was on the margin of empire,
meaning places where a colonizing power or government was being resisted. Examples of this
include Silat in the East Indies, kali and eskrima in the Philippines, and capoeira in Brazil. These
arts have all been subsequently globalized in various ways, ways that are inextricably linked to the
Martial Arts, Military, Migration, and Media
437
www.ebook3000.com

media. But their initial development was linked to military, and their older forms of dissemination
and spread were linked to migration. All of these factors and more combine in a very famous exam-
ple of martial arts, namely Okinawan karate. Although karate, like other arts, was spread commu-
nally at ﬁrst, by practitioners often associated with clan, military, or paramilitary training, it ﬁrst
entered into a global circuit of representation and discourse with “mythologized” media represen-
tations. That is, the world (including Japan, where it proliferated ﬁrst during the late 1910s and
early 1920s) learned of karate via an assortment of amazing tales, fantastic legends, and entrancing
fantasies, popularized ﬁrst in travel literature and later in ﬁlm and TV (Krug 2001, 398). These tales
often reﬂected what are called “Orientalist” fantasies (Said 1978), but even some Japanese (notably
ethnologist Yanagita Kunio, 1875–1962) saw Okinawa as “a vast, living replica or even a labora-
tory of seventh-century Japan” (Harootunian 1998, 155). Such fantasies perhaps spoke more about
the daydreams (and prejudices) of the observers than about reality. Nevertheless, ethnological
speculations, travel literature, and media representations—no matter how apocryphal—played a
large role in promoting interest around the world.
But why was it that karate gained such global fame? The answer relates to the post–World War
II military occupation of Japan by the mid-twentieth century’s military and cultural superpower,
the United States of America. The fact that the cultural and martial experiences of U.S. service-
men could infect and reorient the imagination of Hollywood, and the fact that Hollywood’s reach
could have an impact on the cultural literacy of the rest of the world (in terms of “knowing about”
karate, judo, ninjas, etc.) indicates the global reach of American ﬁlm and media.
Asian martial arts began to be seen in the Hollywood ﬁlms of the 1930s, and this usage was
common by the 1960s. The reason for this proliferation relates strongly to military and global geopo-
litical events and processes. The cinematic proliferation marks the advent of martial arts becoming
in their own right a new familiar form of knowledge in the West, as more and more American soldiers
who had experienced karate and judo in Japan and taekwondo in Korea returned to the United States
and opened schools (Krug 2001, 401). Krug also argues that what took hold in America was, by and
large, sport-oriented. This result was derived from the revised orientation of karate set in motion by
Funakoshi Gichin (1868–1957). Funakoshi had successfully institutionalized Okinawan karate
within Japanese culture before the war by getting it accepted and taught in Japanese schools and uni-
versities, and then changed its presentation again afterward (Krug 2001, 401–402). The process of
standardization and institutionalization that Funakoshi and his peers initiated is a model for the way
martial arts have been institutionalized and disseminated more broadly.
This institutionalization chieﬂy took the form of uniforms, formal lesson structures, ﬁxed
syllabuses, and the colored belt system. This version of karate had also been sanitized, with lethal
moves either removed or redeﬁned as “block” or “punch.” It was this version, developed during and
after World War II, that American servicemen encountered: an almost Fordist mass-production-line
approach to martial arts, whose rhythmic, repetitive straight-line drills and nuts-and-bolts approach
were already akin to military basic training. Thus, what ﬁrst emerged on a large scale in the United
States, the United Kingdom, Australia, and in other Western cultures was substantially different from
pre-Funakoshi Okinawan karate. Indeed, Okinawan karate had already been effectively transformed,
ﬁrst by its entry into Japanese social institutions and then into a larger, more Westernized, global cir-
cuit. What was originally a local practice that was stitched through the fabric of the culture of the
towns of Naha and Shuri became disconnected and rewired very differently into a different set of
social and cultural relations. Thus, karate soon became connected with the discourses of sport, of
health, and of various ideas (beliefs and fantasies) about “Oriental” mysticism and spiritualism.
438
Martial Arts, Military, Migration, and Media

The form of the integration of karate and other martial practices into overseas culture was
always going to be conditioned by the environment of its reception. The cultural textures of late
nineteenth-century Okinawa, early twentieth-century Japan, and mid-to-late twentieth-century
North America are all drastically different. As such, the karate of these places and periods is very
different. According to Krug (2001, 402), from the early 1960s until the present day, martial arts
have been increasingly stitched into a relationship not only with sport in general but also with
bodybuilding in particular. This relationship was occasionally almost high-brow—noted martial
arts researchers Donn Draeger (1982–1982) and Robert W. Smith (1926–) each published
articles in Bob Hoffman’s Strength & Health magazine during the early 1960s—but was more often
“Learn self-defense in twelve easy lessons.” The effects of the inﬂuence of discourses of sport, phys-
ical self-defense, and body image on the practices of martial arts are signiﬁcant and noticeable.
Spectacular ﬁlm representations of improbable and impossible feats of athleticism (cinematic
wushu, aka “wire fu”) and ultra-athletic bodies feed these preconceptions and beliefs about martial
arts. But in addition to the rapid growth in participation in the most spectacular of styles (such as
taekwondo and capoeira), there have also been strong reactions away from spectacular and showy
styles. An example is the various versions of ultimate ﬁghter and no-holds-barred Mixed Martial
Arts competitions that have appeared on television (normally on pay-per-view and subscription
channels) since the early 1990s. This commoditized and media-driven development has had a
pronounced impact on the character of many martial arts practices. Firstly, it has in many ways
made problematical the very idea of adhering to a martial art style at all. As Royce Gracie
(1966–), winner of many of the early televised Ultimate Fighting Competitions, once put it: “At
ﬁrst it was style versus style, now it’s athlete versus athlete, because everyone cross-trains. . . . And
now with time limits built into the ﬁghts, not always the best wins, sometimes it’s just the most
aggressive” (quoted in Preston 2007, 64). “Because everyone cross-trains,” there soon developed
an irreducible connection to the imposition of postmodern sportive and televisual conventions:
rules, time limits, the banning of potentially lethal techniques, and so forth. In this way, the media
imposes demands and thereby drives the art, which is ironic, inasmuch as the standardized,
commoditized media form claims to be “authentic,” “real,” “no holds barred,” and “ultimate.”
GLOBALIZATION AND LINEAGES, TRADITIONS, INSTITUTIONS, AND FASHIONS
Martial arts once required the presence of the authentic master, whether “authentically” ethnically
East Asian or, more recently, authentically ex-military or ex-tournament champion. Over time, the
internationalization of martial arts has gradually loosened the belief in the importance of an
“authentic” master as a guarantee of a style’s legitimacy. Nevertheless, for a long time throughout the
twentieth century, authenticity and legitimacy were largely associated with ethnicity. Thus, masters
were associated with migrant communities, ethnic lineages, and geographical regions. After that,
legitimacy came to be associated with military or sporting accomplishments. Later, martial practices
were further severed from former historical locations and feats. Authenticity and direct lineage were
discarded as yardsticks of legitimacy in favor of procedures of bureaucratic veriﬁcation: trophies,
titles, examinations, and other measures. Most recently, entire new martial systems have been
devised and/or popularized around movie action choreography, with stunt men replacing elite
military soldiers as innovators and celebrities replacing “authentic natives” as martial arts conduits.
Bureaucracies have increasingly replaced or supplanted local (often patrilineal) structures.
Standards, examinations, trophies, titles, and similar forms of veriﬁcation and demonstration
have replaced unconditional deference to those who went before. This is not to say that
Martial Arts, Military, Migration, and Media
439
www.ebook3000.com

hierarchies and codes of behavior have vanished. Rather, it is to say that martial arts are now
ensnared in other networks of circulation. It is certainly still the case that many will wish for
(and seek to ﬁnd) what they believe to be an authentic or ancient martial art, and so will seek
to ﬁnd a traditional master. But the point is that this choice is today a consumption choice, and
the status of the notion of being a master is now indelibly associated with branding and market-
ing, even when those involved do not want this to be the case (Krug 2001, 403–404).
None of this should be taken to mean that the globalization of martial arts is a process of
leveling or homogenization. Indeed, in some respects, perhaps the older notion of internation-
alization is more useful than globalization. While many things are international, few are truly
global. Vast differences in styles remain evident regionally, nationally, and internationally.
Indeed, these differences are more visible today than ever, thanks to such technologies as the
Internet and websites such as YouTube.
Globalization also does not simply mean that everything is ubiquitous. Instead, globalization
refers to the proliferation of communication technologies and networks, particularly within the
context of the increasing deregulation of aspects of social and cultural life, with their transforma-
tion into commodities within markets. Proliferation does not bring, or even imply, homogeneity.
Instead, it often brings fragmentation – or, as cultural theorist Marc Froment-Meurice (2001, 60)
calls it, “globalkanization.” And these two forces, homogenization and fragmentation, operate
simultaneously, pulling in opposite directions. On the one hand, there is the spread or hegemony
(dominance) of certain forms that have become common as a result of their promulgation via sport,
ﬁlm, and TV. On the other hand, there is fragmentation, splintering, and proliferation of diversity.
Certain martial arts styles have become hegemonic and ubiquitous, for various reasons: ﬁrst,
judo and karate, owing to the American occupation of Japan, and the power of American movies
and television. Next was “kung fu” (quanfa), thanks to the Hong Kong ﬁlm industry, the cinematic
feats of Bruce Lee (Li Xiaolong, 1940–1973), and the Kung Fu television series. After that, it was
taekwondo, due partly to its relative similarity to the already-familiar Shotokan karate but supple-
mented with even more spectacular kicks (something which satisﬁed an enduring Western fantasy
about the spectacular character of martial arts), and partly to signiﬁcant ﬁnancial and political sup-
port from the South Korean government. Next was capoeira, which is even more visually spectac-
ular and novel than kung fu and taekwondo, and also brought an immediate subcultural and
countercultural cachet because of its connections with Brazilian slaves and outlaws. Even more
recently, perhaps in response to these “spectacular” forms, came mixed martial arts, no-holds-
barred martial arts, and reality-based defense, in all their various manifestations.
Globalkanization occurs in the sense of fragmentation, splitting, and the production of a sense
of difference. Development takes the form of combinations and recombinations, often of unex-
pected elements borrowed from different societies and cultural traditions. These hybrids do not
remain conﬁned within the circumscribed sphere of martial arts: martial arts shade into fantasy as
well as sport and self-defense. Novelty in martial arts inﬂuences cinematographic choreography,
which feeds back into martial arts fashions and inﬂuences. Examples include the Keysi ﬁghting
system, which was popularized in Batman Begins (Warner Brothers, 2005). Elsewhere, taijiquan
has been combined with yoga and Pilates and sold on exercise videodiscs, while Thai boxing, box-
ing, and taekwondo have been combined with music and aerobics to create Tae-Bo. And so on.
Of course, all martial styles are arguably hybrid, multidisciplinary, and multicultural and
invested with elements of invented tradition. Thus, the Japanese characters for karate-do were
440
Martial Arts, Military, Migration, and Media

changed by Funakoshi Gichin from ideograms that meant “China-hand” into ideograms mean-
ing “empty-hand,” for reasons that were essentially nationalistic (Funakoshi 1975). Nonetheless,
the intensiﬁcation and acceleration of the development of martial arts in the contemporary
world is overwhelmingly related to the saturation of media and communication networks and to
the marketing of franchises.
An index of this can be seen in the expansion of martial arts into contexts that are not
traditional. The baseline for all movie ﬁght and action choreography was utterly transformed
by Bruce Lee’s Hollywood success with Enter the Dragon (Golden Harvest, 1973)—a transfor-
mation in ﬁlm that itself has further effects in other cultural realms, practices, and contexts. It
is not just that major recent ﬁlms such as Kill Bill (Miramax, 2003 and 2004), the Matrix trilogy
(Warner Brothers, 1999–2003), Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (Columbia Tri-Star, 2003) and
Unleashed (Rogue Pictures, 2005) have all been choreographed by Hong Kong-based Yuen 
Wo-Ping (1945–), the man who also choreographed the ﬁlms that ﬁrst made Jackie Chan
(Chan Kong Sang, 1954–) into a star, namely Drunken Master (Seasonal Film, 1978) and Snake
in the Eagle’s Shadow (Seasonal Film, 1978). It is that virtually any movie or TV show with ﬁghts
in it, from Raiders of the Lost Ark (Lucasﬁlm, 1981) to The Lion King (Walt Disney, 1994) is
indebted to martial arts generally and to Bruce Lee’s trailblazing cinematic success speciﬁcally
(Miller 2000).
The cinematic globalization of the sort of spectacular choreography that is—no matter how
putatively “realist”—ultimately informed by Hong Kong wire-fu is not merely a contribution to
the ﬁlm industry. It is also a massive contribution to global popular culture. Without the global
success of kung fu ﬁlms, it seems unlikely that China would have opened the Shaolin Temple as
a tourist destination in the 1980s and even less likely that China would have planned to
construct a Shaolin Temple and amusement park in Hong Kong during the early 2010s. Indeed,
before the Kung Fu television show and the Hong Kong martial arts movies of the 1970s, the
Shaolin Monastery was scarcely known outside China, and then mostly in martial arts circles.
As Stanley Henning (2003, 21) notes, myths about the Shaolin Temple were largely created in
two books: a popular novel, Travels of Lao Can, written between 1904 and 1907, and the anony-
mous 1915 Secrets of Shaolin Temple Boxing, a spurious training manual that had instantly been
debunked by the martial arts historians Tang Hao and Xu Je Dong (Lui 2005; Kennedy and Guo
2005, 70–71). True, Robert W. Smith published an English-language book in 1964 called Secrets
of Shaolin Temple Boxing, but it was never a bestseller. Yet, today, thanks to kung fu ﬁlms, the
Shaolin Temple is ﬁrmly enthroned in global consciousness. Along with this interest came
increased fascination with traditional Chinese culture, history, beliefs, and practices—an inter-
est that arguably transformed global popular culture in the 1970s in ways that continue to be felt
throughout the world. Indeed, as we can see in this example (and many others), the globaliza-
tion of martial arts has had effects not just on martial arts but on cultures and economies more
widely.
—Paul Bowman
See also: China: Shaolin Temple Legends (in Volume I); Commodiﬁcation of Leisure; 
Chinese Martial Arts and Money; Martial Arts Tourism; Invented Traditions; Martial 
Media; Film and the Martial Arts; Television and the Martial Arts; The Internet and the 
Martial Arts; and Police Defensive Tactics Training in the United States (in this volume).
Martial Arts, Military, Migration, and Media
441
www.ebook3000.com

REFERENCES
Brown, Terry. 1997. English Martial Arts. Frithgarth, UK: Anglo-Saxon Books.
Castells, Manuel. 2000. The Rise of the Network Society. London: Blackwell.
Chan, Stephen. 2000. “The Construction and Export of Culture as Artefact: The Case of Japanese
Martial Arts,” Body & Society 6(1), 69–74, DOI: 10.1177/1357034X00006001005, via http://
online.sagepub.com/, accessed October 16, 2009.
Downey, Greg. 2002. “Domesticating an Urban Menace: Reforming Capoeira as a Brazilian National
Sport,” The International Journal of the History of Sport 19(4), December, 1–32, via DOI: 10.1080/
714001792, via http://www.informaworld.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Doyle, Alicia. 1994. “A New Exercise: Kick Fitness Classes Combining Self-Defense and Martial Arts
Workout,” Los Angeles Times, Valley Life, 32, via http://articles.latimes.com/1994-11-04/news/
va-58651_1_american-martial-arts, accessed October 16, 2009.
Froment-Meurice, Marc. 2001. “Specters of M,” Parallax 7(3), July-September, 51–62, DOI:
080/13534640110064011, via http://www.informaworld.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Funakoshi Gichin. 1975. Karate-Do: My Way of Life. Tokyo, New York, and London: Kodansha
International.
Gardetta, Dave. 1999. “Inside Story: Elvis Has Just Entered the Building,” Los Angeles Times, August
15, Magazine, 1, via ProQuest, accessed October 17, 2009.
Hables Gray, Chris. 1997. Postmodern War: The New Politics of Conﬂict. London and New York:
Routledge.
Harootunian, H. D. 1998. “Figuring the Folk: History, Poetics, and Representation,” in Mirror of
Modernity: Invented Traditions of Modern Japan, edited by Stephen Vlastos, 144–159. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
Henning, Stanley. 2003. “The Martial Arts in Chinese Physical Culture, 1865–1965,” in Martial Arts
in the Modern World, edited by Thomas A. Green and Joseph R. Svinth, 13–35. Westport, CT:
Praeger.
Kennedy, Brian, and Elizabeth Guo. 2005. Chinese Martial Arts Training Manuals: A Historical Survey.
Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books.
Krug, Gary J. 2001. “At the Feet of the Master: Three Stages in the Appropriation of Okinawan
Karate into Anglo-American Culture,” Cultural Studies↔Methodologies 1, 395–410, DOI:
10.1177/153270860100100401, via http://online.sagepub.com/, accessed October 16, 2009.
Lui, Elizabeth. 2005. The Travels of Lao Ts’an. Nanjing: Yi Lin Chu Ban She.
Miller, Davis. 2000. The Tao of Bruce Lee. London: Vintage.
Preston, Brian. 2007. Bruce Lee and Me: A Martial Arts Adventure. London: Penguin.
Said, Edward. 1978. Orientalism. London: Vintage.
Scheuerman, William. 2008. “Globalization,” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by
Edward N. Zalta (Fall Edition), http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2008/entries/globalization/,
accessed April 20, 2009.
Thompson, Geoff. 1993. Real Self Defence. Chichester, UK: Summersdale.
ASIAN MARTIAL ARTS IN 
THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA
Asians began immigrating to the North American mainland soon after the discovery of gold in
California in January 1848, and they began settling in what was then the Kingdom of Hawaii in
1885. These immigrants brought both traditional and modern martial arts and combative sports
with them.
Between 1848 and 1923, these immigrants came in waves based on ethnicity. In succession,
these were Chinese, then Japanese, South Asians, and Filipinos. By the 1920s, a series of
442
Asian Martial Arts in the United States and Canada

discriminatory laws stopped Asian immigration into North America, but by then, large numbers of
Asian children were being born in North America and the Territory of Hawaii. Consequently, by
the 1940s, civil rights became an issue for native-born people of Asian ancestry, and by the mid-
1960s the legal basis for direct discrimination had ended in the United States and Canada.
From 1848 to 1968, the Asian martial arts taught and practiced in the United States and
Canada generally ﬁtted into one of the following categories:
1.
Professional activities. This includes working in circuses, working as professional boxers or wrestlers,
doing stunt work in ﬁlm, and so on.
2.
Cultural nationalism/festival arts. These are arts presented during events designed to promote a
speciﬁc ethnicity or culture, such as lion dancing during a Chinese New Year festival or kendo
exhibitions during a Japanese Bon festival.
3.
Group cohesion. Cultural nationalism and festival also built group cohesion, but in the group
cohesion category the association was not necessarily ethnic, and the occasion was not necessarily
festive. For instance, labor unions organized wrestling matches, while community newspapers
organized sumo and judo tournaments. The purpose of the former was sometimes to promote work
slowdowns, and the purpose of the latter was always to sell newspapers and advertising.
4.
Building character in youth. Venues varied, but an example would be teaching at a YMCA or church.
Teachers did not get paid much, but they enjoyed working with young people.
5.
Prowess and social recognition. In the bachelor subculture of the early days, young men went out
back to ﬁght, thereby determining status or settling grudges. In the subsequent family subculture,
this same urge was sublimated using refereed sports such as judo and boxing.
Although all the foregoing motivations are still seen in the martial arts practiced in the
United States and Canada, additional motivations began developing after 1900. These new
motivations were not driven from within the existing Asian martial art community. Instead, they
were driven by external players—governments, businesses (to include the publishing and ﬁlm
industries), and so on:
1.
Preparation for future military service. From the early 1900s until the early 1970s, the U.S. govern-
ment encouraged teenaged youths to participate in martial arts and combative sports in prepara-
tion for future military service. Since the end of the draft in 1973, this emphasis has declined.
2.
Feminism. Few North American women undertook systematic training in unarmed martial arts
before World War II. Thus, in June 1937, it made national news when two European American
women from Los Angeles (Grace B. Logan, 1886–1974, and Annabel Pritchett, 1899–1965), went
to Japan, speciﬁcally to learn judo. Then, during World War II, the U.S. military began providing
rudimentary judo training to female personnel, and afterwards, martial arts training came to be
seen as useful for nurses, college coeds, and female factory workers.
3.
International sport. Judo became a permanent Olympic sport in 1972, and taekwondo became a per-
manent Olympic sport in 2000. Making this happen resulted in enormous changes in the pedagogy,
practice, and, in some cases, rituals of both judo and taekwondo. It also led to some bitter ﬁghting
(and the loss of many friendships) over issues such as who got to authorize promotions and sanc-
tion tournaments.
4.
Commodiﬁcation of leisure. During the late 1950s, storefront martial arts clubs sprang up across
North America. To give an example, Jerome Mackey’s Judo, Inc., incorporated in New York in
1958. Soon, this was the largest storefront chain in New York Metro. One paid for classes in
Asian Martial Arts in the United States and Canada
443
www.ebook3000.com

advance; according to an advertisement in the Village Voice (January 28, 1971, column 2, 40), the
cost was $625 for 273 lessons. In 1973, Judo, Inc. folded on account of stock fraud (United States v. 
E Corr III, 543 F.2d 1042, 1976). In storefront martial arts clubs, books, uniforms, rank, photos,
pride—everything had a price.
5.
“New Age” spirituality. Mysticism, the occult, and the array of practices known as New Age were
popular in North America during the late twentieth century, and sometimes yoga, theosophy, med-
itation, and Asian martial arts ran together. As “nonviolent” martial arts, taijiquan and aikido were
especially susceptible to this tendency.
6.
Mass marketing, often using lurid advertising. To this day, relatively few traditional martial arts clubs
in the United States and Canada advertise much. In commercial clubs, hardly anyone is so reti-
cent, and the martial arts club advertisements seen in twentieth-century North American comic
books were especially colorful—in one classic series, Chicago’s Count Dante (born John Keehan,
1939–1975) advertised himself as the deadliest man alive. After the 1950s, television and print ads
for nonmartial businesses frequently featured martial arts scenes. Sumo was used to advertise banks
and computer giants; karate was used to advertise sales at department stores; kendo was used to
advertise Canadian whisky. This commercial usage was hardly unique to North America. Japanese
merchants were using woodblock prints of martial arts scenes to hawk wares during the eighteenth
century, and cigarette cards featuring martial arts techniques appeared in China during the early
twentieth century. But again, this was not something driven from within the Asian martial arts
community within the United States and Canada.
From the mid-1960s on, the commoditized martial arts hit North America in waves; as the
popularity of one art waned, a new art was found to replace it.
During the 1940s and 1950s, the Asian martial art one was most likely to ﬁnd in the United
States and Canada was Kodokan judo, usually taught by a Japanese American or a former serv-
iceman. Then, in 1959, entertainer Elvis Presley (1935–1977) began doing karate while serving
in the U.S. Army in Germany. Within a year, Presley was awarded a black belt, and suddenly
karate was the rage.
In 1964, Presley’s karate teacher, Ed Parker (1931–1990), introduced Bruce Lee (Li
Xiaolong, 1940–1973) to Parker’s friends in Hollywood, and after that, Lee and his Jeet Kune
Do took off in the TV series Green Hornet (ABC, 1966–1967), Longstreet (ABC, 1971–1972),
and the ﬁlm The Big Boss (Golden Harvest, 1971).
In 1971, Billy Jack (Warner Brothers, 1971) brought the Korean martial art of Hapkido to the
forefront. Several years later, in Kentucky Fried Movie (independent production, 1977), Bong Soo
Han (Han Pong-su, 1933–2007), said, on screen, in Korean: “Oh, the many pathetic things I
have to endure to make movies in America! Not just once or twice, either. Please excuse me,
Korean fans” (Chung 2006, 55–56). Korean-speaking audiences howled, but in English, no one
was listening.
During 1972–1973, the television show Kung Fu (ABC, 1972–1975) popularized Shaolin
boxing, at least as imagined by Hollywood, and after the movie Enter the Dragon (Golden
Harvest, 1973) appeared, Bruce Lee was on the cover of all the martial arts magazines. Carlos
“Chuck” Norris (1940–) and Bill “Superfoot” Wallace (1945–) were popular, too. Norris started
training in judo and tangsudo while serving in the U.S. Air Force. Afterwards, he operated a
chain of karate schools and acted in movies and television. Wallace also started training in judo
and karate while serving in the U.S. Air Force. Following his discharge, he became a professional
444
Asian Martial Arts in the United States and Canada

kickboxer. He was acquainted with Elvis Presley and was an on-air commentator for the ﬁrst
Ultimate Fighting Championship in 1993.
If karate, Jeet Kune Do, Hapkido, and Shaolin were too violent for the buyer’s tastes, there
was always aikido or taijiquan. Political activist Joan Baez (1941–) told syndicated columnist
Mary McGrory (1979) that she, Baez, could “handle the hostility coming at her from all sides
because she’s studying aikido, the Japanese non-violent martial art.”
During the late 1960s, Hatsumi Masaaki (1931–) organized the Bujinkan Ninpo organiza-
tion in Japan, and by the late 1970s, foreign students such as Stephen K. Hayes (1949–) had
brought Bujinkan budo taijutsu (martial way body techniques) to North America. Most of
these North American instructors were technically proﬁcient and well-intentioned. Then, in
1980, fantasy writer Eric van Lustbader (1946–) began publishing novels about ninjas. In
1984, the ﬁrst comic book featuring Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles appeared. This was followed
by comic books, action ﬁgures, two animated television series, a live television series, twenty
separate video games, and four Hollywood movies. Meanwhile, the pseudonymous Ashida Kim
published Ninja, Hands of Death (1985). North American Ninpo would take decades to
recover.
Brazilian jiu-jitsu and capoeira; Filipino arnis; Indonesian Silat: wave after wave of “new”
crashed into North America. The advertising moved beyond death touch; now all it took to
develop secret powers was watching a video or DVD. “Fear no man!” screamed the Internet
advertisement for Captain Chris’s Close Combat Training, adding: “WARNING: Do Not Read
This If You Have Moral, Ethical Or Religious Reasons Against Hurting (Or Even Killing) Some-
one Who Violently Attacks You, Your Wife, Or Your Kids.”
The developments of the years 1953 to present are discussed in detail elsewhere. Conse-
quently, they do not need to be discussed in detail here. Instead, the following sections are
intended simply to provide readers with a brief introduction to the history and development of
Asian martial arts in North America before Hollywood got hold of them.
IMMIGRANTS, 1848–1924
Asian immigration to North America started during 1848–1849, following the discovery of gold
in California. Most of the early immigrants were young men from Guangdong Province and
Hong Kong. Until the 1910s, most of these men lived a male bachelor subculture, meaning com-
munities in which men “measured manliness by skill at wenching, drinking, gambling, and ﬁght-
ing”; they shared jokes and drinks, and made “temporary acquaintanceships but not necessarily
life-long friendships” (Riess 1991, 23). Large-scale Chinese immigration into North America
ended with the enactment of the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 in the United States and the
Chinese Immigration Act of 1885 in Canada.
North America’s second wave of Asian immigration came from the Empire of Japan. This
wave lasted from 1885 to 1907. From a cultural standpoint, immigrants from the Empire of Japan
included Japanese, Koreans, and Okinawans. Like other Asian pioneers, Imperial Japanese
immigrants originally lived in a bachelor subculture.
North America’s third wave of Asian immigration came from the Punjab, in the northwest
corner of British India. Most of these British Indian immigrants were Urdu-speaking Jatts, and
from a religious standpoint, many of them were Sikh. Nonetheless, they were almost universally
known in the United States and Canada as “Hindoos.” Jatt immigration into North America
Asian Martial Arts in the United States and Canada
445
www.ebook3000.com

lasted from 1897 to 1915. Although a few Jatt men circumvented miscegenation laws by living
with Mexican or African American women, most Jatt immigrants lived in a bachelor subculture.
The ﬁnal wave of Asian immigration came from the Philippines. Filipino immigration started
shortly after the U.S. victory in the Filipino-American War of 1898–1902 and ended in 1934
with the enactment of a law (the Tydings-Mcdufﬁe Act) that effectively stopped Filipino immi-
gration into the United States. Filipino immigrants also had a bachelor subculture.
During the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–1905, the Japanese martial arts received extensive
mainstream exposure. During 1904–1905, H. Irving Hancock (1868–1922) published books on
judo that were reviewed in the New York Times, and U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt
(1858–1919) and U.S. Naval Academy cadets trained in Kodokan judo. In January 1905, in British
Columbia, there was a sumo tournament staged in the park in front of Vancouver City Hall. And,
in New York, during the winter of 1905–1906, industrialist E. H. Harriman (1848–1909) organ-
ized a gala visit by top Japanese judo and kendo experts; the latter exhibitions were part of a war
bond tour that Harriman’s banks were underwriting for the Japanese government.
From the 1860s to the 1930s, jujutsu, sumo, and kendo were featured in circus and vaudeville
acts. The following describes a show staged at Madison Square Garden in August 1902. For the
price of 50 cents, visitors were promised to see geisha girls, Japanese street scenes, and Japanese
fencers and jujitsu wrestlers (New York Times 1902). Barnum and Bailey’s circus visited Atlanta,
Georgia, in October 1913, and, said the Atlanta Constitution (1913): “The mikado’s jiu jitsu
experts will show how even a frail woman trained in the art of Japanese scientiﬁc defense may
easily overcome an assailant and slap-bang wrestling combats will be indulged in by the bulky
wrestlers (shuma [sumo] men) who compose a part of the troupe.” In Syracuse, New York
(Syracuse Herald 1922), “Prof. Kitose Nakae [Nakae Kiyose, 1883–1962], champion jiu jitsu
artist of Japan appearing at Keith’s [vaudeville theater] this week, exhibited his skill before the
entire squad of [Syracuse] policemen. . . . Using an unloaded revolver, several of the policemen
attempted to pull the trigger of the gun before [Nakae] could either twist it so that the bullet
would be sent in an opposite direction or to wrest the gun from their hands.”
There were Asian professional wrestlers and boxers, too. The professional wrestlers were usu-
ally Japanese. For example, Sorakichi Matsuda (Matsuda Kojiro, ca. 1858–1891) came to the
United States in 1883. He was originally a circus performer, but he decided to take up profes-
sional wrestling instead. Matsuda’s promoter was William Muldoon (1852–1933), who also
trained boxer John L. Sullivan (1858–1918), and his opponents ranged from then champion
Evan “Strangler” Lewis (1860-1919) to Lulu, the “the piney and pork fed female Samson from
Georgia” (Brooklyn Daily Eagle 1884). Other notable Japanese American wrestlers of the early
days include Tokugoro Ito (Ito Tokugoro, 1880–1939), Taro Miyake (Miyake Taruji, ca.
1881–1935), and Matty Matsuda (Matsuda Manjiro, 1887–1929).
Chinese Americans were more likely to be boxers than wrestlers. On February 27, 1890, Ah
Giang and Foo Jung had a four-round ﬁght with feet and ﬁsts in Mott Street, in New York City.
From the American perspective (Salt Lake Tribune 1890), “The idea on the part of the contest-
ants seemed to be to avoid as much as possible hitting each other. Every once in a while they
would forget themselves and land a slap on the other fellow’s face or neck or body.” Ah Giang
worked as an actor (a female impersonator, actually) for the Soen Tien Lok theatrical company.
In the American ring, Ah Wing (died 1917) boxed bantamweight ﬁghts in California and
Oregon during the early 1900s.
446
Asian Martial Arts in the United States and Canada

During the early 1900s, sumo, kushti (Indian wrestling), and comparable ethnic arts were
often seen during labor holidays. Wrestling during labor holidays was not unique to Asians, of
course; Finns, Swedes, and Germans also wrestled during labor holidays. In most cases, the
wrestling was essentially recreational competition. For instance, during 1913, “Hindoo”
(actually, in this case, Sikh) wrestlers were active in Oregon. These men worked at an Astoria
lumber mill, and were reportedly very good at real (as opposed to show) wrestling. Other
times, the wrestling was directly related to union activities. During May 1904, Sen Katayama
(Yabuki Sugataro, 1859–1933), a future leader of the Communist Party of Japan, gave a judo
demonstration during an American Socialist Party convention in Chicago, and during 1909,
labor organizers in Honolulu organized sumo tournaments to coincide with planned sugar
plantation strikes.
RAISED IN NORTH AMERICA, 1924–1941
The second period starts with the passage of the Immigration Act of May 26, 1924 (43 Statutes-
at-Large 153). This U.S. law entirely excluded immigration of Asians and placed severe limita-
tions on the immigration of Jews. This law was backed by trade unionists, who viewed new
immigrants as unfair competition. Canada had similar laws. Draconian as these laws were, it was
too little, too late. During the preceding two decades, mail-order wives (“picture brides”) had
caused the decline of the bachelor subculture in all Asian American and Canadian communities
except the Jatt. The phrase “picture brides” describes arranged marriages—the bride and groom
exchanged photos and agreed to be married. Arranged marriages were hardly unique to Asians
in America; many other immigrants did this, too. In any case, the arrival of young Asian wives
soon led to the establishment of community-based athletic clubs catering to the interests of
native-born youth. Most early athletic clubs were organized along ethnic lines, but there were a
few interracial examples. The Nuuanu YMCA, which opened in Honolulu in April 1918, is an
example of an early interracial athletic club.
During World War I (1917–1918 in the United States), judo and jujutsu were taught in some
U.S. Army camps. The instructors included European, Canadian, and American men who had
trained in Japan and been graded in judo or jujutsu. In these programs, the traditional arts were
extensively modiﬁed to meet wartime needs. After the war ended in November 1918, these
modiﬁed martial arts, generally known as jujitsu, passed into police training programs, where
they were further modiﬁed. These developments and modiﬁcations are further discussed
elsewhere in this volume.
During the 1920s and 1930s, circus and professional wrestling acts remained as popular (and
nationalistic) as ever. In those days, Japanese American professional wrestlers were rarely
presented as treacherous villains (“heels”). Instead, they were billed as clean-living, skilled
wrestlers (“babyfaces”) who were too small to beat big, mean American heavyweights like Man
Mountain Dean (Frank Leavitt, 1891–1953). Japanese American wrestlers who ﬁt this
stereotype included Rubberman Higami (Higami Tsutao, 1896–1972), Kaimon Kudo
(1906–1993), and Don Sugai (1913–1952). American and Canadian wrestlers in turn donned
jackets and learned judo tricks. A popular North American wrestler of the 1930s and 1940s was
the Canadian, Judo Jack Terry (Charles Van Audenarde, 1914–1978).
There were still some Hindoo wrestlers, and in 1937, Prince Bhu Pinder (Ranjit Singh, 1912–)
participated in some of the ﬁrst mud wrestling contests in the United States. The promoter, Paul
Asian Martial Arts in the United States and Canada
447
www.ebook3000.com

Boesch (1912–1989), had used too much water to settle the dirt used to cover the ring for a Hindoo
match, and the crowds loved it.
Chinese American youths of the 1920s and 1930s continued to box rather than wrestle. The
chief reason was that boxing promoters paid ﬁve dollars for three rounds, a sum that represented
a day’s wage for a skilled laborer during the 1930s. The best of these Chinese American boxers,
David Kui Kong Young (1916–), was world-class.
As a group, Filipino American men loved boxing. Americans introduced professional boxing
into Manila around 1909, and in 1923, Francisco Guilledo (1901–1925), a Filipino who fought
under the name Pancho Villa, became the world ﬂyweight champion. Other top-ranked Filipino
American boxers of the 1920s and 1930s included Small Montana (Benjamin Gan, 1913–1976),
U.S. ﬂyweight champion in 1935, and Ceferino Garcia (1912–1981), world middleweight
champion in 1939.
There were a handful of second generation boxers of Korean American descent, and at least
one professional wrestler of Okinawan descent. These men were mostly from the Territory of
Hawaii. Examples of Korean American professional boxers include Walter Cho (1911–1985)
and Philip “Wildcat” Kim (1926–1958). Examples of professional wrestlers of Okinawan descent
include Oki Shikina (1904–1983).
During the 1930s, sumo developed into a popular spectator sport in the Territory of Hawaii
and parts of California. By this time, non-Japanese sometimes did sumo, too. For example, the
winners of a sumo tournament held in Seattle in 1930 included the starting center of the
University of Washington football team. For participatory sports, Japanese parents generally pre-
ferred that their children learn judo or kendo. By 1940, there were dozens of judo and kendo
clubs in the Territory of Hawaii, the states of Washington, Oregon, California, and Utah, and
the province of British Columbia. Here, the word “children” is intentional. Schoolgirls in the
Territory of Hawaii received training in Danzan Ryu jujutsu during the 1920s, and between 1936
and 1941, some Japanese American schoolgirls living in British Columbia and the western
United States trained in kendo.
Community-based karate clubs began appearing in the Territory of Hawaii during the late
1920s and early 1930s. By this time, Hawaiian martial art classes were about as multiethnic as
the organization that hosted the club. In this context, it is worth noting that many of the
post–World War II pioneers of Danzan Ryu jujutsu, to include Raymond Law (1899–1969),
Richard Rickerts (1906–1998), and Siegfried “Sig” Kufferath (1911–1999), trained in Honolulu
under Seishiro Henry Okazaki (1890–1951). During the 1930s, Los Angeles had two racially
integrated clubs (Seinan [Southwestern] and Uyemachi [Uptown]). There were also Kodokan
judo clubs in Chicago, New York City, and Charleston, West Virginia, and at Harvard Univer-
sity. These integrated clubs remained open during World War II, but after the Japanese attack
on Pearl Harbor, the Harvard University judo club did change its name to “Liberty Scientiﬁc
Self-Defense Association” (Harvard Crimson 1941).
There were not as many community-based clubs providing Chinese martial art instruction.
Partly this was because Chinese American parents tended to associate Chinese martial arts with
Chinese gamblers, gang violence, and protection rackets (what the U.S. and Canadian press
called tong wars), and mostly it was because there were few qualiﬁed instructors of traditional
Chinese martial arts in North America. When qualiﬁed instructors who were not gamblers or
thugs offered classes, then parents would reconsider. For instance, in 1922, Ark Yuey Wong
448
Asian Martial Arts in the United States and Canada

(Wong Ark-Yuey, 1901–1987) started teaching southern Shaolin in California, and within a few
years, Wong’s students were giving public exhibitions during local cultural festivals. The Hon
Hsing Athletic Club of Vancouver, British Columbia, started offering instruction in a Shaolin
style in 1940, and in 1941, Choy Hak-Peng began teaching Yang-style taijiquan in a Chinese
neighborhood of New York City. In the wider community, Chinese students attending universi-
ties sometimes offered demonstrations or classes. Thus, the University of Illinois Daily Illini of
January 11, 1917, remarked that a group of Chinese exchange students planned to give “an
exhibition of Oriental boxing which is quite different from the American [boxing] and from the
Japanese Jiujitsu.”
WORLD WAR II, DESEGREGATION, AND CIVIL RIGHTS, 1941–1968
The third period starts with the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941. Within
hours, the U.S. military put the Territory of Hawaii under martial law, and on the mainland, it
began taking steps toward forcibly relocating 120,000 Japanese Americans into internment
camps and relocation centers. The Canadians enacted similar policies, and during 1942, about
21,000 Japanese Canadians were relocated or interned. Judo was widely practiced in these
wartime relocation centers and internment camps, and at the relocation center at Heart
Mountain, Wyoming, there were even judo classes for high school girls. Sumo and kendo were
also done in the relocation centers, but not as universally as judo.
After World War II ended in August 1945, 145,000 people of Japanese ancestry wanted to
return home, and Hawaiians of all races were unhappy about having been kept under martial law
for nearly three years. Throughout the late 1940s and early 1950s, Americans and Canadians of
Asian ancestry waged a long series of court battles. They won more signiﬁcant decisions than
they lost, and by 1959, Hawaii was a state and on the mainland, Americans and Canadians of
Asian ancestry had achieved the right to vote, move, own property, and marry as they liked.
In 1948, separate political exigencies led to the desegregation of the U.S. military. This is
relevant to the history of Asian martial arts in North America, because from 1949 to 1968, the
U.S. military was a major patron of judo, karate, and taekwondo, and, to a lesser extent, it also
patronized Tomiki aikido and Hapkido. To give an idea how diverse this draft-era military
patronage was, note that the four-man U.S. Olympic judo team of 1964 included a Japanese
American, an African American, a Cheyenne Indian, and a Jew—and three of those four men
had served in the U.S. Air Force. As for how important the U.S. military patronage was,
consider this. In 1954, the Air Force’s Strategic Air Command (SAC) organized a judo society
that was recognized by the Kodokan. Other Air Force commands wanted to participate in SAC
training, tournaments, and promotions, so in 1959 the SAC Judo Society became the Air Force
Judo Association. Other branches of the service had judo teams, too, so in 1962, the Air Force
Judo Association became the Armed Forces Judo Association. In 1968, the Armed Forces Judo
Association reorganized to become the United States Judo Association (USJA). In 1969, USJA
reorganized yet again, and today USJA is one of three national level judo sanctioning bodies in
the United States. (The other two are the U.S. Judo Federation, which was historically associ-
ated with Japanese American leadership, and USA Judo, which is the only U.S. judo association
recognized by the International Olympic Committee.)
During the 1950s, Japanese American wrestlers such as Harold Sakata (1920–1982) and
Robert “Kinji” Shibuya (1922–) became notorious heels: sneak attacks were their specialty.
Asian Martial Arts in the United States and Canada
449
www.ebook3000.com

During the same decade Sakata helped pioneer pro wrestling in Japan, and during the 1960s and
1970s both Sakata and Shibuya appeared in ﬁlms and television series: Sakata was Oddjob in the
James Bond movie Goldﬁnger (Eon Productions, 1964), while Shibuya played assorted villains in
the ABC television series Kung Fu. The Japanese American Citizens League was outraged, say-
ing that the wrestlers’ portrayals were insulting, but the wrestlers made money and had fun.
Although arnis is the martial art that non-Filipinos today associate with Filipinos, Filipino
American men are more likely to view boxing as the Filipino American combative sport (Bacho
1997). Mid-century Filipino American boxing heroes include the brothers Bernard (1927–2009)
and Max (1928–) Docusen. The Docusens were from New Orleans, Louisiana. They had a
Filipino father and a Creole mother, and they were among the best middleweight boxers of the
late 1940s. As “colored” ﬁghters, Louisiana law prohibited them from engaging in professional
boxing contests with white men. To get around this, a Louisiana judge simply changed the
Docusens’ legal status to “half-white” (Chicago Tribune 1949).
Finally, during the late 1950s, non-Asian practitioners such as Donn Draeger (1922–1982)
and Robert W. Smith (1926–) began the daunting task of explaining traditional Asian martial
arts to North American readers. That task remains unﬁnished.
—Joseph Svinth
See also: Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu; Kenpo Karate; China: Martial Arts in Hong Kong; China: Martial 
Arts in Taiwan; Japan: Jujutsu-based Systems; Korea: Taekwondo; Oceania (in Volume I);
Commodiﬁcation of Leisure; Globalization of Martial Arts; International Boxing; International
Karate; Jeet Kune Do; Professional Wrestling; Film and the Martial Arts; Television and 
the Martial Arts; The Internet and the Martial Arts; American Judo, 1942–1945; Action 
Design for Professional Wrestling; and Political Uses of the Martial Arts (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Atlanta Constitution. 1913. “With Tooting of Calliope and Roar of Lions, Barnum & Bailey Big Show
Arrives,” October 26, 32, via http://www.newspaperarchive.com, accessed October 17, 2009.
Bacho, Peter. 1997. Dark Blue Suit and Other Stories. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
British Pathe. 1937. Wrestling in the Mud in San Francisco (video), BritishPathe.com, October 18,
Cannister ID 37/83, Film ID: 939.49.
Brooklyn Daily Eagle. 1884. “Lulu and the Jap,” August 8, 2, via http://eagle.brooklynpubliclibrary
.org/Default/Skins/BEagle/Client.asp?Skin=BEagle, accessed October 17, 2009.
Brousse, Michel, and David Matsumoto. 2005. Judo in the U.S.: A Century of Dedication. Berkeley,
CA: North Atlantic Books/US Judo Federation.
Captain Chris. No date. “Close Combat Training,” http://www.closecombattraining.com/cctraining/
start.php?gclid=CMmpi8Sor5wCFSYoawodR1iUjw, accessed August 19, 2009.
Chicago Tribune. 1949. “Docusen Brothers Declared Half White and Half Filipino,” March 31, B2,
Part 4, via ProQuest, accessed October 17, 2009.
Chung, Hye Seung. 2006. Hollywood Asian: Philip Ahn and the Politics of Cross-Ethnic Performance.
Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Corcoran, John, and Emil Farkas. 1988. Martial Arts: Traditions: History, People. New York: Gallery
Books.
Daily Illini. 1917. “Chinese Students to Give Entertainment Friday Night,” January 11, 3, via Illinois
Digital Newspaper Collection, http://www.library.illinois.edu/dnc/Default/Skins/UIUC/Client
.asp?Skin=UIUC&AppName=2&enter=true&BaseHref=DIL/1917/01/11&EntityId=Ar00302,
accessed October 17, 2009.
450
Asian Martial Arts in the United States and Canada

Draeger, Donn, and Robert W. Smith. 1969. Asian Fighting Arts. Tokyo: Kodansha International.
Gillis, Alex. 2008. A Killing Art: The Untold Story of Tae Kwon Do. Toronto: ECW Press.
Goodin, Charles. 2008. “Hawaii Karate Seinenkai,” http://seinenkai.com, accessed June 29, 2008.
Harvard Crimson. 1941. “Work of Judo Club to Continue Rest of Year,” December 18, via
http://www.thecrimson.com/article.aspx?ref=196663, accessed October 4, 2009.
Hewitt, Mark S. 2005. Catch Wrestling: A Wild and Wooly Look at the Early Days of Pro Wrestling in
America. Boulder, CO: Paladin Press.
Leyshon, Glynn A. 1998. Judoka: The History of Judo in Canada. Gloucester, Ontario: Judo Canada.
McGrory, Mary. 1979. “Baez Simply Doesn’t Believe in Killing,” Toledo Blade, July 2, 7, via http://news
.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
New York Times. 1902. “Broadway Theatres Are Ready for New Season,” August 24, 9, via http://news
.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Niiya, Brian, editor. 2000. More than a Game: Sport in the Japanese American Community Los Angeles:
Japanese American National Museum.
Paciotti, Brian. 2005. “Homicide in Seattle’s Chinatown, 1900–1940: Evaluating the Inﬂuence of
Social Organizations,” Homicide Studies 9(3), 229–255, DOI: 10.1177/1088767905277201, via
http://online.sagepub.com/, accessed October 16, 2009.
Paterson, Shane. 1995. “Elvis and the Martial Arts,” http://members.tripod.com/beyondthereef
__1/tigerman.html, accessed August 17, 2009.
Riess, Steven A. 1991. City Games: The Evolution of American Urban Society and the Rise of Sports.
Urbana: University of Illinois.
Salt Lake Tribune. 1890. “Chinese Sluggers,” March 1, 1, via http://www.newspaperarchive.com,
accessed October 15, 2009.
Sibia, T. S. 2009. “Pioneer Asian Indian Immigration to the Paciﬁc Coast,” http://www.sikhpioneers
.org/chrono.html, accessed August 15, 2009.
Svinth, Joseph R. 2002. “A Celebration of Tradition and Community: Sumo in the Paciﬁc North-
west, 1905–1943,” Journal of Combative Sport, http://ejmas.com/jcs/jcsart_svinth_0202.htm,
accessed June 29, 2008.
Svinth, Joseph R. 2003a. Getting a Grip: Judo in the Nikkei Communities of the Paciﬁc Northwest
1900–1950. Guelph, Ontario: EJMAS.
Svinth, Joseph R. 2003b. “Kendo in North America, 1885–1955,” in Martial Arts in the Modern World,
edited by Thomas A. Green and Joseph R. Svinth, 149–166. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Svinth, Joseph R. 2003c. “Western Boxing in Hawaii: The Bootleg Era,” Journal of Combative Sport,
http://ejmas.com/jcs/jcsart_svinthetal_0303.htm, accessed June 29, 2008.
Syracuse Herald. 1922. “Prof. Kitose Nakae, Champion Jiu Jitsu Artist of Japan Appearing at Keith’s,”
November 3, 14, via http://www.newspaperarchive.com, accessed October 15, 2009.
Uchima, Ansho Mas, and Larry Akira Kobayashi. 2006. Fighting Spirit: Judo in Southern California,
1930–1941. Pasadena, CA: Midori Books.
BARTITSU
In 1898, Britain’s E. W. Barton-Wright announced a “New Art of Self Defence” called Bartitsu.
The “New Art’s” name combined Barton-Wright’s surname and “jiu-jitsu,” which was a common
contemporary transliteration of the Japanese word jujutsu. After some brief notoriety, Barton-
Wright and his martial art were all but forgotten. Then, after the best part of a century, his work
was rediscovered, broadcast over the Internet, and subsequently revived. The following describes
the history of Bartitsu and the process of its creation, slide into obscurity, rediscovery, and revival.
Edward William Barton-Wright was born in Bangalore, India, on November 8, 1860, and
during the early 1890s he spent three years living and working as a railway engineer in Japan.
Bartitsu
451
www.ebook3000.com

His “New Art” was originally based on the Shinden-Fudo style of jujutsu, which he had studied
while living in Kobe; there also may have been some inﬂuence from Kodokan judo, because
Barton-Wright reported having taken some lessons with its founder, Kano Jigoro (1860–1938),
whose cousin lived in Kobe. In any case, when Barton-Wright began to promote Bartitsu in
London via a series of music hall exhibitions, tournaments, and magazine articles, the novelty of
“Japanese wrestling” attracted curious audiences and considerable press coverage.
Inspired by this success, Barton-Wright established a full-time health club and training
academy in London’s Soho District that he called the Bartitsu School of Arms and Physical
Culture. Between 1899 and 1900, Barton-Wright hired self-defense specialists from Japan and
Switzerland to help him promote and teach his “antagonistics,” as self-defense methods were
then known. By late 1901, Bartitsu had developed into a process of cross-training between
Japanese jujutsu, English boxing, and Swiss/French stick ﬁghting and wrestling styles, ideally to
the point where any one method could be used against the others as required.
Although Barton-Wright was an enthusiastic promoter, he was a less successful businessman,
and his School of Arms closed during 1902–1903. Friction with staff may have played a role in
this closure, as several of his associates went on to establish their own self-defense schools. In
any case, Bartitsu soon lapsed into obscurity, and Barton-Wright was almost completely forgot-
ten by the movement that he had pioneered. He died in 1951, in a condition of poverty, at the
age of ninety. In 2007 Phil Giles located Barton-Wright’s unmarked grave in Kingston upon
Thames Cemetery in Surrey, England. A temporary marker was placed, and a more permanent
headstone was scheduled to be installed by 2010.
That Bartitsu is remembered today is due almost entirely to Sherlock Holmes’ creator
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle (1859–1930). In a 1903 short story called “The Adventure of the
Empty House,” Conan Doyle had Holmes survive a ﬁght to the death with his archenemy, Pro-
fessor Moriarty. In a subsequent conversation with Dr. Watson, Holmes attributed his survival to
his knowledge of “baritsu, or the Japanese system of wrestling . . . which has more than once been
very useful.” With this tantalizing hint, Conan Doyle not only managed to misspell the name of
the art and give the false impression that Bartitsu is (or would be) mentioned elsewhere in the
Sherlock Holmes stories (it is not), but also gave Holmes knowledge of an art that had not been
invented yet—although Bartitsu dates to the late 1890s, Holmes’ adventure was set in 1894.
This anachronism generally confused literary and martial arts scholars until 1997, when British
judo historian Richard Bowen (1926–2005) published an obscure essay setting things straight.
Bowen shared his ﬁndings with fellow martial arts researcher Graham Noble, who subsequently
published some more accessible articles about Barton-Wright and his former employee Yukio
Tani (Noble 1999, 2000).
In 2000, the on-line Electronic Journals of Martial Arts and Sciences (http://ejmas.com)
reprinted both Barton-Wright’s contemporary articles and Noble’s recent biographical essays.
On the Internet, Barton-Wright’s “Self-Defence with a Walking Stick” articles soon attracted
a cult following; typically, readers who did not practice martial arts added their own humorous
captions to the articles’ photos of men dressed in Edwardian clothing ﬁghting with canes and
sticks. At the same time, however, the articles about Barton-Wright and his methods also
began attracting the attention of serious martial arts enthusiasts. First, Barton-Wright was
among the ﬁrst Europeans to study jujutsu in Japan. Second, his School of Arms was the ﬁrst
known school for Japanese martial arts instruction in Europe. Third, Barton-Wright’s efforts
452
Bartitsu

to combine traditional Asian and modern European combat styles into an eclectic but har-
monious system were conceptually several decades ahead of their time. Fourth, Barton-Wright
offered practical self-defense classes for women, a concept that was not widespread in 1900.
Finally, Barton-Wright was arguably a pioneer of what would today be considered Mixed Mar-
tial Arts contests.
In light of so many accomplishments, some of the martial arts enthusiasts thought it a shame
that Barton-Wright’s role as an innovator and pioneer had been so thoroughly neglected. There-
fore, steps were taken to recreate his art and recognize his contributions.
The ﬁrst known reconstruction of Bartitsu took place in 2001, at the Royal Armouries
Museum in Leeds, England. Fight arranger Keith Ducklin had seen the online articles, and
during a series of presentations entitled “The Martial Art of Sherlock Holmes,” actors portray-
ing Holmes and Watson demonstrated a number of Bartitsu stick ﬁghting sequences for visitors
to the museum’s Oriental Gallery (Wolf [no date]). In 2009, Mark Donnelly arranged a similar
exhibition for visitors to a National Park Service site in Hampton, Maryland (Couch 2009).
A Bartitsu Society (http://www.bartitsu.org) was organized in 2002. Despite some shared
acquaintances, the Bartitsu Society was unrelated to the Royal Armouries project. Instead,
Bartitsu Society members were martial arts enthusiasts interested in (and in some cases,
dedicated to) researching the life of Barton-Wright and accurately describing his New Art of Self
Defence. Between late 2002 and early 2005, Society members found and duplicated contempo-
rary magazine and newspaper articles, and translated French, Dutch, and Japanese texts and
articles into English. To archive and share their discoveries, members used the Internet, and
especially an e-mail list (http://sports.groups.yahoo.com/group/Bartitsu_Forum/) managed by
novelist Will Thomas (1958–). In 2005, the results of their combined efforts appeared in a print-
on-demand book called The Bartitsu Compendium.
Several Society members were involved concurrently in unrelated projects designed to
reconstruct various medieval and Renaissance ﬁghting arts, and the question arose whether
Bartitsu could be similarly reconstructed. Barton-Wright’s articles were written in modern
English and well illustrated using photographic sequences. Furthermore, the component
methods (e.g., amateur boxing, jujutsu, savate, and walking stick defense) were widely practiced.
Thus, there seemed to be enough to begin.
Unfortunately, the overall structure and pedagogy of Bartitsu were difﬁcult to deﬁne. While
Barton-Wright had outlined his over-arching philosophy and offered details in some areas, his
writings left other areas open to speculation. For example, when he ﬁrst started describing and
showing his methods during 1898 and 1899, he had an eclectic blend of techniques derived
primarily from different schools of jujutsu. His writings on Bartitsu during that period were
correspondingly ambiguous. Over the next several years, Barton-Wright codiﬁed his thoughts,
and by 1901, his writings clearly distinguished the eclectic Japanese/European art of Bartitsu
from Japanese jujutsu. Even so, his writings did not provide speciﬁc guidance in several key areas.
For example, while he advocated the Vigny method of stick ﬁghting at the striking range and
jujutsu at the grappling range, he left the strategic applications of boxing and savate somewhat
open to question.
Addressing such issues led to active debate within the Bartitsu Society. Members knew that
in the hothouse environment of historical martial arts reconstruction, enthusiasts sometimes
vehemently disagreed on points of interpretation, emphasis, and direction. In order to avoid (or
Bartitsu
453
www.ebook3000.com

at least mitigate) similar problems in the reconstruction of Bartitsu, the Bartitsu Society decided
upon a two-tiered approach.
The ﬁrst tier involved the canonical syllabus (Wolf 2005). The term “canon” was borrowed
from Sherlock Holmes scholarship, and its purpose was to deﬁne “Bartitsu as we know it was.”
The canon was to include all of the writings and self-defense sequences speciﬁcally presented by
Barton-Wright and his collaborators during the period 1898–1901. The canon was highly
detailed in some areas, but incomplete in others; obviously, there was more to Bartitsu than was
recorded in print at the time. Nonetheless, the published material was concrete, and something
that could be agreed upon and reconstructed at the practical level.
The second tier was “neo-Bartitsu,” a term that came to describe both “Bartitsu as it might
have been” and “Bartitsu as it can be today” (Wolf 2008). The premise of neo-Bartitsu was not
only to preserve but also to extend Barton-Wright’s work, in order to bring it fully back to life.
The temporal parameters for neo-Bartitsu were set informally between 1898 and 1923. The start-
ing date was when Barton-Wright began to demonstrate his art in London, while the ending date
was when H. G. Lang published his Walking Stick Method of Self-Defence, a book that detailed the
methods taught by Barton-Wright’s Swiss stick ﬁghting instructor, Pierre Vigny (1869–?). This
time period encompassed the ﬁrst martial arts boom in modern European popular culture and
provided a wealth of books, articles, and other resources. Special attention was given to those
sources written by or about people from the Bartitsu teaching lineage, supplemented as required
by non-lineage material.
Via a combination of scholarship and experimental pressure-testing, both Bartitsu and
neo-Bartitsu are subject to interpretation and innovation by individual practitioners.
Whether they are practiced as a self-defense system, a sport, an academic re-creation, a form
of stage combat, or a combination of all of these is ultimately for individual practitioners to
decide.
—Tony Wolf
See also: Japan: Jujutsu-based Systems; Canne de Combat; Savate, Chausson, and 
French Boxing (in Volume I); Globalization of Martial Arts; International Boxing; 
The Internet and the Martial Arts; and Jujutsuffragettes (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Bowen, Richard. 1997. “Further Lessons in Baritsu,” The Ritual: Review of the Northern Musgraves
Sherlock Holmes Society 20, 22–26.
Couch, Jason. 2009. “Manly Arts Day in Maryland,” Martial History Magazine, September, http://
martialhistory.com/2009/09/manly-arts-day-in-maryland/, accessed October 11, 2009.
Lawson, Kirk. 2002. The Walking Stick Method of Self Defence by H. G. Lang. Lulu:
http://www.lulu.com/content/517076.
Noble, Graham. 1999. “An Introduction to E. W. Barton-Wright (1860–1951) and the Eclectic Art
of Bartitsu,” Journal of Asian Martial Arts 8(2), 50–61, via http://ejmas.com/jmanly/articles/
2001/jmanlyart_noble_0301.htm, accessed February 16, 2009.
Noble, Graham. 2000. “The Odyssey of Yukio Tani,” InYo: Journal of Alternative Perspectives,
http://ejmas.com/jalt/jaltart_Noble_1000.htm, accessed February 21, 2009.
Wolf, Tony. No date. “Gallery: Self-Defence with a Walking Stick: Pictures Courtesy of Keith
Ducklin of the Royal Armouries, Leeds,” http://www.geocities.com/lone_wolf_92001/Gallery.html,
accessed February 21, 2009.
454
Bartitsu

Wolf, Tony, editor. 2005. The Bartitsu Compendium, Volume I: History and the Canonical Syllabus. Lulu:
http://www.lulu.com/content/138834.
Wolf, Tony, editor. 2008. The Bartitsu Compendium, Volume II: Antagonistics. Lulu: http://www.lulu
.com/content/3115394.
CAPOEIRA IN EUROPE
Since the 1990s, the development of capoeira outside Brazil has shown astonishing growth. The
translocation of this African-Brazilian practice into the rest of the world created opportunities
for intercultural exchanges. Existing on the margins between ﬁght and dance and labeled as a
“game,” this art offers opportunities for experiments, negotiations, and the discovery of the
cultural “Other.”
Practiced in a roda, a circle formed by the players and the musicians, two capoeiristas (players
of capoeira) enter the game and communicate in a system of techniques, codes, and values that
are based on the skill level of the participants, the style of capoeira that they practice, and the
challenges at the moment of the exchange. The musical accompaniment by percussion
instruments, particularly the berimbau (a single-stringed percussion bow) controls the exchange.
No referee or sports regulation system dictates the development of these events. Instead, the par-
ticipants forming the circle, especially the master (mestre) or his representative, control the
interactions. Therefore, the “game of capoeira” differs from the model of modern sports
competitions but also from artistic or folk representations.
Essential aspects of capoeira interaction include malicia and malandragem. Malicia is literally
“malice,” but in the context of capoeira, Downey (2005, 167) more accurately deﬁnes it as
“cunning comportment.” Dias (2006, 19) deﬁnes malandragem historically as what one does to
survive in a “violent, miserable and discriminatory environment.” These attitudes emerged
because at the end of the nineteenth century, the practice of capoeira was associated with
criminal activity and marginality in Brazil.
During the early twentieth century, capoeira started a dual process of recognition and “sporti-
ﬁcation.” Thus, there appeared a system called capoeira regional. To generalize, efﬁciency,
technique, and spectacular aestheticism are features of the regional style. At the same time, there
also appeared a separate system called capoeira Angola. Capoeira Angola tends to emphasize the
traditions, African heritage, and promotion of the black community. Thanks to what Downey
(2005, 181) calls “distinctive kinesthetic and playfulness,” each offers an original form of
existential corporal expression.
Nowadays, capoeira in Europe is practiced in diverse contexts—martial arts centers, dance
studios, university sports complexes, community centers in run-down areas, and parks,
beaches, and public squares. There are also formal exhibitions before audiences. During these
formal exhibitions, the African-Brazilian character of the practice is emphasized via the inclu-
sion of dances, rituals, and food. Sample dances and rituals may include samba dances, ritual-
ized stick ﬁghts (maculélê), and Candomblé rituals (e.g., candles or blessings). References to
Brazilian culture also play an important part in the process of marketing capoeira in Europe,
where “Brazil” becomes an imaginary construct of celebration, sensuality, conviviality, and
cultural mix rooted in the myth of racial democracy. Such postcard attributes contribute to
capoeira’s success.
Capoeira in Europe
455
www.ebook3000.com

CAPOEIRA EMERGES IN EUROPE
Capoeira ﬁrst appeared in Europe during the 1950s, usually as elements of touring shows.
Examples include Companhia Brasiliana, which toured Europe in 1951, and Skindô, which
toured Europe in 1958 and 1959. Other folkloric groups, such as VIVA BAHIA and Brasil
Tropical, followed. In show contexts, the practice, derived from the capoeira regional lineage, is
sensationalized, and the plasticity of the movement, the aesthetics of the sequences, and
acrobatic performances are emphasized.
The teaching of capoeira in Europe is a more recent activity. In 1971, Nestor Capoeira
(Nestor Sezefredo dos Passos Neto, 1946–) began teaching capoeira at the London School of
Contemporary Dance. At that time, Capoeira (1981, 11) said “there was nobody teaching classes
‘outside.’” Other European pioneers included Martinho Fiúza in Germany in 1977, followed by
Paulo Siqueira (1955–), also in Germany, in 1980. Two years later, Mestre Canela (Floriano
Franklin Canela, 1951–) introduced capoeira into Southern Italy; while in 1983, Mestre Lua
Rasta (Gilson Fernandes, 1950–) tried to do the same in Switzerland. In Paris, pioneers included
Grande da Bahia (birth name not known), then Gégé (Gildo Gomes, dates unknown), followed
by Samara (Cláudio Lemos, 1957–), all circa 1984.
Subsequently, various capoeiristas arrived in Europe through entertainment companies, and
seized the opportunity to stay on the continent. They then found work either as artists, dancers,
musicians, or capoeira teachers. Capoeira ﬁrst attracted Europeans from artistic backgrounds, to
include comedians, actors, and dancers (interview with Mestre China, July 2006).
In 1986, Mestres China (Marcos Fustagno), Samara, and Marreta (Luiz Carlos Afonso)
organized a “baptism” (batizado, ceremony of graduation in capoeira regional) in Paris, and in
1987 the ﬁrst European meeting of capoeira was hosted in Paris by the Senzala group. This event
has been hosted annually since—in the summer by Paulo Siqueira in Hamburg, and at Easter by
Samara and Marreta in Amsterdam.
The transmission of the cultural codes of the game is more complex than the teaching of the
technical and physical aspects of capoeira. The capoeiristas acquire these implicit codes by
playing the game. This is mentioned because the development of European capoeira was
originally hampered through the lack of opportunities to play in rodas. At the same time, for
Brazilians, integration into a European country also required a time of adaptation. Learning the
language and the norms of the new country are a precondition for developing a viable school.
As a Swiss capoeira teacher put it (interview with master, April 2004): “I come to a place . . .
where everyone is white, ﬁrst world . . . You don’t speak the language . . . You’re lost . . . You
fumble about in order to know, your eyes are closed, you can only hear voices, things and then I
was like . . . smart in Brazil, but here I was . . . lost.” In addition, working conditions for Brazilian
immigrants were precarious, particularly when they had no work permit. Despite these
difﬁculties, Europe’s economic conditions and greater opportunities for upward social mobility
stimulated Brazilian migration.
MARKETING CAPOEIRA
The second stage in the globalization process began with ﬁlms featuring capoeira. An example
is the American action ﬁlm Only the Strong (Twentieth Century Fox, 1993). Subsequently, many
advertisements began using capoeira; examples include Ushuaïa, Asics, 100 Plus Aktiv, Nokia,
456
Capoeira in Europe

Nike, Puma, and Mini BN. The character of Eddy Gordo, introduced in the video game Tekken
3 in 1999, also contributed to the diffusion of a stereotypical image of the capoeirista as someone
who combines the features of the manly warrior with the athletic performances of acrobats. In
other media, capoeira players, often represented stripped to the waist, offer ostentatious bodies
to a public eager for “exoticism” (Henou 2000, 124). If this model answered the European
demand for spectacles and performances, then the quest for an “authentic” capoeira counterbal-
anced the previous tendency. Thus, the global, spectacular, appealing capoeira presented by the
entertainment industry soon generated demands for a more authentic capoeira that would
respect traditions and rituals (Estevez 2003). This called for a return to the roots in Brazil,
initiatory trips, and a search for traditional identity.
The phenomenon of comings and goings between Brazil and Europe has developed into a
full-ﬂedged market for equipment ranging from musical instruments to capoeira clothing, books,
literature, music, ﬁlms, and handicrafts. Professional capoeiristas settled in Europe also organize
trips to Brazil for their students. Besides arranging visits to famous academies, they also include
cultural activities such as concerts (usually batucada, which are orchestras of Brazilian percussion
instruments), dance nights (forro), visits to shanty towns (favela) and Candomblé shrines
(terreiro), relaxing moments at the beach, and culinary discoveries. The traditional aspects
surrounding the practice as well as the personal quest lead some Europeans to more intensive
pilgrimages to Brazil, and sometimes even trigger a “Brazilianization process.” Exterior signs
(necklaces, Rastafarian hairstyles, wearing ﬂip-ﬂops) as well as an inner incorporation of a “jeito
de ser capoeirista” (way of being capoeirista) lead the Europeans to their own appropriation of the
practice.
NETWORKING CAPOEIRA
For Brazilians, the European Eldorado gives rise to vocations and to the drafting of professional
projects. This is often accompanied by marriage to a European, which in turn facilitates a
capoeirista’s assimilation into the social life of the host country. Professional success depends on
the level of integration, teaching proﬁciency, and the quality of the networking, both within the
group of afﬁliation and with other social groups. Promotion ceremonies (batizados) provide
opportunities for professional exchanges between teachers, and to renew acquaintance and
solidarity. As capoeira spreads through Europe, the schedule grows increasingly tight, and this
sometimes forces choices between different events taking place simultaneously: “Just there I was
in Brussels, Turin, Poland, and Warsaw. From now, I’ll follow on (every weekend) . . . with
Montpellier, our baptism, Paris, Copenhagen, Lisbon . . . Soon I’ll know all European cities! Yes,
well . . . all the airports and all the gymnasiums of Europe! (Laughs)” (ﬁeld observations, master,
March 2008).
The rewards for these training courses vary greatly, ranging from an exchange system of
unpaid presence to thousand-euro salaries. This migratory phenomenon produces a snowball
effect among Brazilians. On the one hand, it drains the Brazilian academies of their best players.
On the other, it stimulates new recruits. Indeed, the training of the young players in some
academies in Brazil is motivated by a professional, economic, and tangible opportunity. The
expatriation of the Brazilian “brains” (interview with mestre Toni Vargas, June 2006) leads to a
translocation process of the practice from Brazil to an environment more suitable to its economic
development. Thus, in 2008, Paris and its surroundings hosted more than a hundred groups,
Capoeira in Europe
457
www.ebook3000.com

according to the French virtual portal Capoeira-France.com, whereas in 1999 only ﬁfteen
Brazilian teachers could be found in Paris, and in the mid-1980s, there may have been ﬁve
(Vassallo 2001). Today, European mega-events, such as the Bilbao World Capoeira Capu 2006,
which gathered more than twenty-ﬁve prestigious Brazilian mestres, represent the globalization
of capoeira. The development of the marketing of capoeira and related activities such as work-
shops for instrument making, combined with Portuguese lessons and celebrations with forro,
samba, and batucada concerts, links capoeira to a “cultural good,” which in turn constitutes a
true commercial niche.
The advent of new information technologies and the increasing use of e-mail, personal
Websites, social sites (MySpace, Facebook), and streaming video (YouTube) has led to much less
formal diffusion. Via the Internet, capoeira groups have extended that ﬂout national and
organizational frontiers, and as such, exist outside any state or institutional aegis. From an
organizational standpoint, the diffusion of capoeira is largely headed by supranational organiza-
tions. These “mega-groups” (e.g., ABADÁ, Capoeira Brasil, Senzala, Capoeira Gerais, Topázio,
Muzenza, GCAP, FICA, etc.) are all built on traditional hierarchical functioning, depending on
a mother structure in Brazil. Each group developed its own codes of conduct and games, and this
has led to the promulgation of differences between practice, techniques, and philosophies.
During the early 2000s, capoeira entered still another phase in Europe. This latest phase is
characterized by the stakes and tensions of competition between established pioneers, waves of
talented young Brazilians, and the rising number of locally trained European students. The prox-
imity of professionals in the same city sometimes leads to conﬂicts over territory. To gain a place
in a saturated market, capoeira groups and teachers develop strategies of legitimization or
boycott of rival structures. For instance, the ABADÁ group, probably the largest capoeira asso-
ciation in the world with over 40,000 members (ABADA Capoeira), has developed from the
middle of the 1990s as an organization that stresses autonomy. Another strategy, speciﬁc to the
cultural market, consists of using the label of “authenticity.” Authenticity attributes legitimiza-
tion to links to tradition. Such attribution is at the root of the functioning of capoeira Angola,
but it is also found in the Regional style. Renowned people are invited to sustain “authentic”
events, thanks to their reputation, career, and political inﬂuence in the world of capoeira.
Could this marketing be in conﬂict with the legendary value of the practice? Capoeira was
originally a tool of liberation against the domination of Portuguese colonists and was then
reinvested in the struggle against class segregation, racism, and neoliberal capitalism. In Europe,
the symbolism of capoeira is often reinvested in a contemporary and metaphorical way as a strug-
gle against oppression of all kinds. Even social injustices reputedly may be exorcised by the
egalitarian myth of the capoeira roda, a democratic space where the individuals of all origins can
meet (Vassallo 2001, 273). Thus, an imaginary construct of controversy accompanies the diffu-
sion of capoeira in Europe. The fact is that the assignment of capoeira values to such things is
mostly a method for navigating the relationships between masters and disciples, business needs,
and community volunteer work (Aceti forthcoming).
TRIANGULATING CAPOEIRA
Although the globalization process has led to homogenization, it has been countered by the
demand for cultural authenticity. Standardization is further counterbalanced by the implanta-
tion of capoeira into new European spaces. Indeed, the integration of Brazilians is accompanied
by a local adaptation process of the practice.
458
Capoeira in Europe

In Europe, the “ﬁght” side of capoeira is usually less developed than in Brazil. Technical
marketing, on the other hand, is probably better developed (Aceti 2009). This trend reﬂects
a sign of adaptation to the sociocultural context and the moral values of the new environment,
marked by euphemization of violence (Elias and Dunning 1986). Other contextual adjust-
ments have stimulated innovations, such as the concept of capoeira “workshops” and “inter-
national meetings.” These meetings (such as those in Hamburg and Amsterdam) at ﬁrst
gathered capoeiristas from all over Europe, from different groups and styles, and left space for
technical as well as interpersonal exchanges. Other adaptations can be noted, such as the
establishment of additional rank (new belt colors, or concept of double belts). Added to the
apparent “homogenization” of a global capoeira and the quest for “authenticity” of an original
capoeira are “particularisms” of each local context. These particularisms are speciﬁc to places,
actors, and additional circumstances and allow groups to differentiate themselves in the land-
scape of the capoeira market. If capoeira regional is at the forefront, both quantitatively and
in the media, then capoeira Angola generates an increasing interest among Europeans: tradi-
tional references and rites enact stability and serenity. Thus, the values of capoeira Angola can
seem particularly welcome, providing reassurance in a context of precarious social change. In
contrast, capoeira regional displays values of progress proper to the rising modernity of the
twentieth and early twenty-ﬁrst centuries. In addition, capoeira regional has integrated well
into the entertainment and consumption society. The dialectic between the representations of
modernity in capoeira regional (the quest for progress) and the symbols of tradition in capoeira
Angola (the revival of tradition) reveals the social mutations and evolutions.
Such dialectic and diversity corresponds to the body movement of capoeira practice itself,
with its sidestepping, feints, circumstantial malleability, and occasional malice. In fact, from the
pioneering experiences of the 1980s to its contemporary internationalization, the adaptability of
the practice of capoeira seems to be the key to understanding its development in Europe as well
as its worldwide expansion. In the end, this dimension of ﬂexibility incarnated and developed by
capoeira seems to particularly meet the values and demands of a mutating world, with its
simultaneous doubts and certitude.
—Monica Aceti
See also: Capoeira (in Volume I); Globalization of Martial Arts; 
and Martial Arts Tourism (in this volume).
REFERENCES
ABADA Capoeira. No date. “ABADA History,” http://www.abadacapoeira.com/html/aba.html,
accessed November 11, 2008.
Aceti, Monica. 2008. “L’essor de la capoeira en Europe: Ajustements contextuels des codes de jeu et
évolution des formes de violences” [The Rise of Capoeira in Europe: Contextual Adjustments of
the Codes of Play and Evolution of the Forms of Violence], Revue Internationale Esporte e Sociedade
3:7, http://cev.org.br/biblioteca/esporte-sociedade-2008-n7-v3, accessed October 17, 2009.
Aceti, Monica. 2009. “Teaching and Learning Capoeira in Europe: An Intercultural Experimentation
Space,” Revue Studi Emigrazione, Post-colonial outlook on ethnic music and dance towards intercultural
dialogue, 9–26, http://grundtvig.acide.it/documenti/D.2.pdf, accessed October 26, 2009.
Aceti, Monica. Forthcoming. “Des imaginaires en controverse dans la pratique de la capoeira en
Europe” [Imaginary Constructs in Controversy in the Practice of Capoeira in Europe], Revue
STAPS.
Capoeira in Europe
459
www.ebook3000.com

Capoeira France.com. No date. “Annuaire des academies de capoeira” [Directory of Capoeira Acad-
emies], http://www.capoeira-france.com/Academies/academies.php3, accessed September 4, 2008.
Capoeira, Nestor. 1981. O pequeno manual do jogador de capoeira [The Capoeira Player’s Little
Handbook]. São Paulo: Ground.
Dias, Adriana Albert. 2006. Mandinga, Manha & Malicia, uma história sobre os capoeiras na capital da
Bahia (1910–1925) [Mandinga, Manha, and Malica, A History of Capoeira in the Capital of Bahia
(1910–1925)]. Salvador, Bahia: EDUFBA.
Downey, Greg. 2005. Learning Capoeira: Lessons in Cunning from an Afro-Brazilian Art. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Elias, Norbert, and Eric Dunning. 1986. Quest for Excitement: Sport and Leisure in the Civilizing Process.
Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Estevez, Acúrsio. 2003. A “Capoeira” da Industria do Entretenimento, Corpo, Acrobacia e Espetáculo para
Turista Ver [The “Capoeira” of the Entertainment Industry, Body, Acrobatics, and Spectacle for the
Tourist View]. Salvador, Bahia: Bureau Gráﬁca e Editora.
Henou, Jessica. 2000. “Pratiques de corps, pratiques communautaires, étude comparée de la danse Hip
Hop et de la Capoeira” [Practices of the Body, Practices of Community, and Comparative Studies
of Hip Hop Dancing and Capoeira]. In Danses «latines» et identité, d’une rive à l’autre . . . Tango,
cumbia, fado, samba, rumba, capoeira . . . [Latin Dances and Identity, from One Bank to the Other
. . .], edited by Élisabeth Dorier-Apprill. Paris: L’Harmattan, Logiques sociale.
Lacé Lopez, Andre Luiz. 1999. A volta do Mundo da Capoeira [Around the World of Capoeira], cho-
reography. Rio de Janeiro: Edito Gráﬁca.
Vassallo, Simone Pondé. 2001. “Ethnicité, tradition et pouvoir: le jeu de la capoeira à Rio de Janeiro
et à Paris” [Ethnicity, Tradition, and Power: The Play of Capoeira in Rio de Janeiro and Paris.]
Unpublished thesis in sociology and ethnology, Paris: École des hautes études en sciences sociales.
FINNISH-CANADIAN WRESTLERS
Wrestling was a popular spectator and participatory sport among many ethnic groups in early
twentieth-century Canada. Within the northern regions of Ontario, Canada’s largest province,
wrestling was particularly favored by ethnic Finns, whose participation in the sport was
extremely high between 1906 and 1939. Finnish-Canadian athletes had a distinct set of sporting
values, and, despite pressures from both their community and Canadian authorities, they were
able to ensure high levels of competitive success through their commitment to widespread
athletic training and their class-based organization.
Finnish immigration to Northern Ontario (here used to mean the vast but sparsely populated
areas north of Lakes Huron and Superior) began in the 1870s. The earliest migrants did not
arrive directly from Finland but came to Canada after having settled previously in United States
(Kero 1976, 13). Direct migration to Northern Ontario began in the 1880s, largely as a result of
the availability of work in railway construction (Puumala 2004, 42). After the early 1890s, the
number of Finnish immigrants to Canada increased markedly, owing in part to the efforts of
recruiting agents employed by both the Canadian federal government and the Canadian Paciﬁc
Railway (Kero 1976, 8–9; Kouhi 1975, 5). Although railway work drew many Finns to Canada,
later decades saw Finnish employment patterns shift toward the mining and timber industries
(Radforth 1987; Vasiliadis 1988).
Early sporting organization amongst the Finnish population of Northern Ontario appears to
have been associated with temperance societies (Kahara 1989, 52). However, during the early
460
Finnish-Canadian Wrestlers

1900s, socialism and unions came to replace temperance as a central theme of Finnish-Canadian
organizational life. Many of the Finns immigrating to Canada in the early 1900s had been
inﬂuenced by the socialist doctrines that were gaining popularity in their homeland, which was
in those days an autonomous grand duchy of Russia (Veltri 1981, 33; Saarinen 1999, 266).
Within the framework of socialist thought, sport served important social functions. Sport was
said to rejuvenate the body and foster more productive workers, cultivate community solidarity,
and build strong bodies capable of furthering the revolutionary cause (Riordan 1976, 152–159).
It was within this larger context that much of the wrestling in Northern Ontario occurred.
Wrestling was not a sport that Finns adopted after their arrival in North America. Instead, it
was one of several sporting traditions (including gymnastics and skiing) that Finns brought with
them. While literary accounts of folk wrestling in Finland date to the 1870s, the ﬁrst organized
wrestling occurred in Helsinki in 1891 following the formation of the Helsinki Athletic Club.
Thereafter, wrestling gained widespread popularity in Finland (Tester 1986, 117). Wrestling’s
rise as a popular organized sport in Finland occurred during the same period as the proliferation
of socialist ideas. Many Finnish wrestlers, having ﬁrst gained renown in their homeland, later
migrated to Northern Ontario. They brought with them both their athletic abilities and their
distinct worldview.
The earliest Finnish-Canadian sporting clubs were founded in 1906. Toronto’s Yritys
(“Endeavor”) club appears to have been the ﬁrst, but within months at least two more clubs were
formed in the Northern Ontario communities of Port Arthur (part of modern Thunder Bay) and
Copper Cliff (part of modern Greater Sudbury). Wrestling was among the ﬁrst organized athletic
activities conducted by these associations. In addition to establishing sports clubs in permanent
population centers, Finnish-Canadian athletes also organized in the numerous itinerant mining
and bush camps throughout the North (Tester 1986, 7, 117).
Among the limitations faced by early Canadian athletes of any ethnicity was the scarcity of
equipment and training space. Within a few years, growing population numbers and intense
efforts at fundraising allowed for the construction of community halls large enough to accom-
modate popular activities such as wrestling. One of the most striking examples of the Finnish-
Canadian community’s ability to organize collectively to accomplish a goal can be seen in the
construction of the Finnish Labour Temple (now the Finlandia Club). Located at 314 Bay Street
in Port Arthur, and built in 1910 at a cost of CAD $42,000 (about CAD $900,000 in 2009 dollars),
the hall measured 138 feet (42 meters) in length and 60 feet (18.3 meters) in width, with an
overall height of 80 feet (24.4 meters). Following its ofﬁcial opening, the Port Arthur Daily
News-Chronicle (March 17, 1910) opined, “A visit to it will convince the most skeptical citizen
that the Finnish Labour Temple is a credit not only to those who built it and to those whose
home it will be, but also to the whole city.” The Finnish Labour Temple thereafter became the
training center for wrestlers from the Port Arthur Jyry (“Determined”) Athletic Club who main-
tained a close association with the socialist Finnish Workingmen’s Association (Metsaranta
1989, 120–121). The facility also became host to numerous public exhibitions of professional
and amateur wrestling during the next two decades.
As Finnish-Canadian wrestlers continued to organize programs throughout Northern Ontario,
some of them chose to take advantage of the lucrative opportunities offered by professional
wrestling prior to the outbreak of World War I in 1914. One such athlete was Karl Lehto (ﬂour-
ished 1911–1921), who toured extensively throughout the United States. Despite remarkable
Finnish-Canadian Wrestlers
461
www.ebook3000.com

success, Lehto was not able to secure a place among North American wrestling’s upper echelon of
heavyweights. On March 7, 1911, Lehto lost in 17 minutes to World Champion Frank Gotch
(1878–1917), who had agreed to throw the smaller Finn three times within an hour. In 1911,
Lehto took up permanent residence in Sudbury, Ontario, where he opened a clothing store. Lehto
remained active in wrestling as an amateur coach and occasionally accepted challenges from vis-
iting professionals such as Canadian Light-Heavyweight Champion George Walker (1888–?),
whom Lehto defeated on October 14, 1921 (Pagnucco 1982, 131–132).
Lehto’s example typiﬁes another prevalent trend amongst Finnish-Canadian wrestlers during
the early twentieth century, namely, the close relationship between amateurs and professionals.
In Port Arthur, wrestlers received instruction from world professional middleweight title-
claimant Henry Karhunsaari (1887–1936), who made occasional trips from Minnesota’s Iron
Range to the Thunder Bay district. Additionally, active professionals were counted amongst the
ranks of athletes training at the Finnish Labour Temple. Examples included David Takala
(1884–1960) and Ole Kolehmainen (dates unknown) (Hatton 2007, 76). Such activities were
not welcomed by the Amateur Athletic Union of Canada (AAUC), whose policies strongly
discouraged fraternization between professional and amateur athletes.
Wrestling training and competition continued into the early part of World War I
(1914–1918), but Canada’s Finnish community faced mounting pressures during the war years
that made athletic organization increasingly difﬁcult. Immigration, which had increased steadily
before the war, virtually ceased. Additionally, the War Measures Act, ﬁrst implemented by the
Canadian federal government in August 1914, placed restrictions on the publication of socialist
literature and made acquiring citizenship more difﬁcult for non-British immigrants. In 1918, the
Royal North-West Mounted Police launched an investigation into labor activity and unrest
among immigrant workers. Investigation director Charles H. Cahan (1861–1944) a Conserva-
tive politician and corporate lawyer from Montreal, reported the existence of a Bolshevik
conspiracy, and declared the Finns to be a culture of anarchists. As a result, all Finnish-language
publications were banned, and severe constraints were placed on public gatherings under the
War Measures Act. Restrictions were not lifted until early 1919, after which Finnish labor organ-
izations and associated athletic clubs were able to operate more freely (Vasiladis 1987, 86; Veltri
1981, 50–51, 65–66).
During the 1920s, Finnish-Canadian wrestlers achieved unprecedented success, but the period
continued to be marked by ideological divisions—Marxist, unionist (but not Communist), reli-
gious (Lutheran versus atheist), and so on. To give an example of how deep these divisions could
be, in 1920, the Jyry Athletic Club of Port Arthur disbanded, and the newly-formed Nahjus
(“Dawdler”) Athletic Club, which had close afﬁliation with the syndicalist-oriented International
Workers of the World (IWW), took control of athletic activities at the Finnish Labour Temple.
Nahjus director Alphons Oja (1877–?) was both the coach of the wrestling program and an active
competitive wrestler. In 1922, members of the Finnish Organization of Canada (FOC), an afﬁli-
ate of the Communist Party of Canada, decided to form their own separate athletic club, Isku
(“Hard Blow”). Isku’s headquarters were located directly next door to the Finnish Labour Temple
at 314 Bay Street (Tester 1986, 59; Vasiladis 1987, 131–132). Thus, two rival Finnish-Canadian
wrestling programs were operating within a few feet of one another!
Several Finnish-Canadian wrestlers residing in Northern Ontario rose to national
prominence during the 1920s. In September, 1921, Ole Kolehmainen defeated Ernie Arthur
462
Finnish-Canadian Wrestlers

(ﬂourished 1920s–1930s) in Port Arthur to claim the Canadian Professional Middleweight
Wrestling Championship. Kolehmainen retained the title for nearly two years. In 1923, Nahjus
wrestlers Tauno Makela (dates unknown) entered the AAUC-sponsored amateur national
championships, winning ﬁrst place in the 145-pound (65.8 kilogram) division. David Takala,
now wrestling as an amateur, claimed silver in the 158 pound (71.7 kilogram) class. Makela
repeated his gold medal performance at the 1927 national championships in Winnipeg.
During the 1920s the United States placed restrictions on Finnish immigration, so within a
few years, Finnish arrivals into Canada soon surpassed prewar levels. Many of these immigrants
left Finland as a consequence of the persecution they faced for supporting Red (punaiset) forces
during Finland’s 1918 Civil War (Kidd 1997, 161; Tester 1986, 1). The refugees included
athletes. Prominent wrestlers included Sulo Kokko (dates unknown), who had been a Finnish
national champion, and August Jokinen (1888–1970), who was a middle and light-heavyweight
wrestler and coach to the 1920 Swedish Olympic team, both of whom settled in Sudbury. Former
Olympic champion Arvo Linko (1887–1941) also took up residence in Port Arthur. Each of
these men competed at the professional level upon arrival in Canada.
Owing to the inﬂux of Finnish wrestlers, the ﬁrst half of the 1920s saw the resurgence of pro-
fessional Greco-Roman wrestling in Northern Ontario, a sport that had largely died out in North
America since its introduction two decades earlier. This can be attributed almost exclusively to
the presence of Finnish athletes and spectators with whom the sport retained favor.
As members of the Port Arthur Nahjus club gained national recognition within main-
stream Canadian amateur athletics, the upsurge in immigration from Finland aided the rapid
expansion of Finnish athletic clubs throughout Northern Ontario. Like the Port Arthur Isku,
many of these clubs became informally afﬁliated with the Communist-aligned FOC. On
March 22, 1925, following a district wrestling meet at the Creighton Mine village, it was
agreed to form a nationwide socialist sport association, whose purpose was to “raise the
physical, intellectual and cultural level of workers by promoting an interest in physical
activity; and to further the country’s militant labor movement.” The new organizational body,
named the Finnish-Canadian Workers Sports Federation (FCWSF), was initially composed of
ﬁve clubs, with a collective membership of about 400. By the early 1930s, approximately forty
Finnish-Canadian sports clubs, representing 2,000 athletes, were afﬁliated with the FCWSF.
Most of these clubs were located in the Thunder Bay and Sudbury districts and other com-
munities in Northern Ontario (Tester 1986, 7, 9).
The decade following the FCWSF’s founding saw an explosion of coordinated athletic activ-
ity. The large number of athletic meets conducted was remarkable, given the vast distances and
frequently harsh climate conditions that athletes often had to endure to reach their destination.
Travel by freight car or in open trucks in the dead of winter was not uncommon (Kidd 1997,
163). While Finnish-Canadian athletes regularly competed in Federation-sponsored meets, it
was rare to see them compete in non-Federation events. On April 13, 1929, a FCWSF wrestling
meet was held in Fort William featuring individuals from Sault Ste. Marie, Beaver Lake, and
Sudbury. Less than a week later, the AAUC held its national wrestling championships in nearby
Port Arthur. Nahjus athletes competed in the AAUC meet, but neither Isku athletes, nor any
other athletes representing the FCWSF, participated. The reason was that participation in non-
labor events could lead to an athlete’s suspension. Hannes Sula (died 1955), former secretary of
the FCWSF, noted in 1950 that, “[I]f our federation wrestlers [in the 1920s and 1930s] had
Finnish-Canadian Wrestlers
463
www.ebook3000.com

entered Canadian wrestling championships they would have easily won in most classes, so good
was the wrestling strength among Finnish immigrants” (Tester 1986, 119). The threat of sus-
pension effectively precluded the possibility.
The Finnish-Canadian passion for wrestling lasted over three decades, but during the
Depression, interest waned, and the last FCWSF (by then named the Finnish Canadian
Amateur Sports Federation) wrestling championship took place at Timmins in 1939 (Tester
1986, 119). In some non-Federation afﬁliated Finnish sporting clubs, wrestling went into decline
even earlier, as evidenced by Port Arthur Najus’s inability to send athletes to the AAUC-
sponsored Thunder Bay District Boxing and Wrestling Championships after 1930 (Hatton 2007,
174). Although the precise reasons for wrestling’s decline are not clear, the ending of large-scale
Finnish immigration into Canada with the start of the Depression, Finnish-Canadians’ partici-
pation in the Spanish Civil War, and the emigration of athletes to Soviet Karelia had a negative
impact on all branches of Finnish-Canadian sport.
After World War II (1939–1945), individual Finnish-Canadians still made their mark. Antti
Filppula (dates unknown) was Canadian national freestyle champion in 1955, and Matti Jutila
(1932–) won ten national freestyle and Greco-Roman titles between 1956 and 1964, plus silver
medals at both the Pan-American and Commonwealth Games. However, their accomplishments
occurred during a period when the link between socialist values, ethnic halls, and wrestling was
already fading into the past (Pagnucco 1982, 133; Leyshon 1984, 112, 114). The decades-long
popularity of wrestling in the Finnish-Canadian community earlier in the century nonetheless
deserves attention for its successful melding of class-consciousness and combative sport.
—C. Nathan Hatton
See also: Expressive Culture; Globalization of Martial Arts; International Freestyle and Greco-Roman
Wrestling; Professional Wrestling; and Political Uses of the Martial Arts (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Hatton, Charles Nathan. 2007. “Headlocks at the Lakehead: Wrestling in Fort William and Port
Arthur, 1913–1933.” Master’s thesis, Lakehead University,
Kahara, Tellervo. 1989. “The New Attempt Temperance Society 1902–1909,” in Project Bay Street:
Activities of Finnish-Canadians in Thunder Bay before 1915, edited by Marc Metsaranta. Thunder
Bay, Ontario: Finnish Canadian Historical Society.
Kero, Reino. 1976. “Emigration from Finland to Canada before the First World War,” Lakehead
University Review 9(1), 7–16, via http://www.genealogia.ﬁ/emi/art/article227e.htm, accessed
October 17, 2009.
Kidd, Bruce. 1997. The Struggle for Canadian Sport. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Kouhi, Christine. 1975. “Finnish Immigrants in Thunder Bay: 1876–1914.” Honours dissertation,
Lakehead University.
Leyshon, Glynn A. 1984. Of Mats and Men: The Story of Canadian Amateur and Olympic Wrestling to
1984. London, Ontario: Sports Dynamics.
Metsaranta, Marc, editor. 1989. Project Bay Street: Activities of Finnish-Canadians in Thunder Bay before
1915. Thunder Bay, Ontario: Thunder Bay Finnish-Canadian Historical Society; the portion
describing the Finnish Labour Temple is online [CE] at http://www.hoito.ca/article/the-ﬁnnish-
labour-temple-by-marc-metsaranta-126.asp, accessed November 23, 2008.
Pagnucco, Frank. 1982. Home Grown Heroes: A Sports History of Sudbury. Sudbury, Ontario: Miller
Publishing.
464
Finnish-Canadian Wrestlers

Puumala, Lana. 2004. “Themes on Finnish Settlement in the Thunder Bay Area.” Master’s thesis,
Lakehead University.
Radforth, Ian. 1987. Bushworkers and Bosses: Logging in Northern Ontario, 1900–1980. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press.
Riordan, James. 1976. “Marx, Lenin and Physical Culture,” Journal of Sport History 3(2), Summer,
152–161, via http://www.la84foundation.org/SportsLibrary/JSH/JSH1976/JSH0302/jsh0302f.pdf,
accessed November 23, 2008.
Saarinen, Oiva. 1999. Between a Rock and a Hard Place: A Historical Geography of the Finns in the
Sudbury Area. Waterloo, Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier University Press.
Tester, Jim, editor. 1986. Sports Pioneers: A History of the Finnish-Canadian Sports Federation,
1906–1986. Sudbury, Ontario: Alerts AC Athletic Committee.
Vasiliadis, Peter. 1988. Dangerous Truth: Interethnic Competition in a Northeastern Ontario Goldmining
Center. New York: AMS Press.
Veltri, Mary. 1981. “Labour Radicalism among Finnish Bushworkers at the Lakehead, 1916–1936.”
Honours Bachelor of Arts dissertation, Lakehead University.
INTERNATIONAL BOXING
International boxing is a descendant of English bare-knuckle pugilism. Participants wear padded
gloves. Bouts take place inside roped rings of prescribed dimensions. Referees and timekeepers
regulate individual contests. There are both professional and amateur divisions. Professional
boxers include some of the most famous athletic heroes of the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries, and excepting the Stockholm Games of 1912, amateur boxing has been included in
every Summer Olympics since 1904. Boxing is also a staple of the Asian Games.
ORIGINS
From a legal perspective, the nineteenth-century British government viewed bare-knuckle
pugilism the same way it viewed bear-baiting, cockﬁghting, and dog-ﬁghting: dismally. Thus,
from the 1830s to 1860s, British legislators issued a series of laws aimed at eliminating bare-
knuckle pugilism. Meanwhile, London’s Metropolitan Police was increasing in numbers and
professionalism. By the mid-1860s, this combination led to a signiﬁcant court case and an impor-
tant regulatory act.
The signiﬁcant court case was Regina v. Young and others (1866), 10 Cox 371. On October 9,
1866, boxer Edward Wilmot died of injuries received during a gloved sparring exhibition with
John Young. A boxer’s death from subdural hemorrhage was hardly newsworthy; boxers had been
dying of ring injuries since the 1720s. What made this case special was that Young obtained the
services of a ﬁrst-rate barrister named Montagu Williams (1835–1892), and through Williams’
efforts, Young was acquitted. The published case law established the legal precedent in Britain
that a boxing death “caused by an injury received in a friendly sparring match, which is not a
thing likely to cause death . . . is not manslaughter, unless the parties ﬁght on until the sport
becomes dangerous” (Roscoe et al., 1888, 912).
The important regulatory act was the Regulation of Railways Act of 1868. The Railways Act
allowed magistrates to ﬁne railway companies if the railways hired special trains to transport ﬁght
fans to rural areas where the Metropolitan Police lacked jurisdiction. British railway companies
did not pay ﬁnes for their customers, and subsequently, special trains stopped.
International Boxing
465
www.ebook3000.com

These events set the background for two additional events. These two additional events are
the ones that most people associate with the advent of international boxing during the mid-
1860s. The ﬁrst additional event was the promulgation of Queensberry’s rules in 1867.
Queensberry’s rules required gloves, three-minute rounds, referees, and so on. Queensberry’s rules
were not original with their author, John Graham Chambers (1843–1883), or their patron, John
Sholto Douglas, Marquess of Queensberry (1844–1900). Instead, they were simply a codiﬁcation
of the rules that English fairground boxers (“booth ﬁghters”) had been using since at least the
1830s. Gloves reduced cuts and bruises. Timed rounds increased the number of “fast” ﬁghts,
meaning ones in which there was lots of action. Finally, the presence of referees showed that
these were friendly sparring matches rather than brawls. Thus, the risk of manslaughter
conviction in the event of a death, or premises liability in the event of an injury, was reduced to
acceptable levels.
The second additional event was the decision of James “Jem” Mace (1831–1910) to go to
New York. Mace was a talented booth ﬁghter and bare-knuckle pugilist. However, by the late
1860s, the boxing business was not good in England. Therefore, in 1869, Mace sailed to New
York to see whether he could do better in America. Mace proved to be as talented a showman
as he was a boxer, and for the next thirty years, his exhibitions thrilled music hall crowds
throughout the United States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand. In addition, his theories
about how to score ﬁghts contributed to the development of ﬁghting for points, a practice that
became doctrinal in England after the National Sporting Club published new rules for gloved
boxing in 1891.
AMATEUR BOXING
Although amateur boxing looks a lot like professional boxing, there are signiﬁcant differences.
These include amateur boxing having strict prohibitions against gambling on the outcome of
bouts, and the promoters of amateur boxing usually having genuine concern for ﬁghter safety.
The concern for safety is why victory in amateur ﬁghts is usually determined by points instead of
knockouts, and it is also why ﬁghts (and rounds) are almost always shorter in amateur boxing.
The original idea behind amateur boxing was to create a scenario in which middle-class
athletes would not have to compete against working-class or minority athletes. See, for example,
this deﬁnition taken from the constitution of the Montreal Amateur Athletic Association: “An
amateur is any person who has never competed in any open competition, or for a stake, or for
public money, or for admission money, or under a false name, or with a professional, for a prize
or where gate money is charged; and who has never at any period of his life taught or assisted in
the pursuit of athletic exercises as a means of livelihood” (cited in Vennum 1994, 273).
After ensuring that they would not have to compete straight up against working men or
ethnic minorities, university and club men began organizing tournaments. Michigan State
boxers, for instance, engaged in intercollegiate bouts as early as June 1884. Within twenty years,
amateur boxing was respectable enough for President Theodore Roosevelt (1858–1919) to box
with aides in the basement of the White House, and for boxing to be included in the St. Louis
Olympics of 1904. Even church groups began promoting amateur boxing. Anthony J. Drexel
Biddle (1874–1948), founder of an Episcopalian evangelical movement known as Athletic
Christianity, famously urged young men to box “in the same spirit as though Christ were the
referee” (Biddle 1912).
466
International Boxing

During (and after) World War I (1914–1918), many belligerent governments, especially on
the Allied side, patronized amateur boxing. From a propaganda standpoint, governments could
use well-known boxers as exemplars of both heroes and slackers. Examples of decorated war
heroes include Georges Carpentier (1894–1975), who served in the French air force during
World War I. Examples of alleged slackers include Australia’s Les Darcy (1895–1917) and the
United States’ Jack Dempsey (William H. Dempsey, 1895–1983), both of whom avoided service.
From a training standpoint, the postures of amateur boxing were supposedly similar to postures
of bayonet ﬁghting (Jacomb 1918, 67–69).
From a morale standpoint, there is no doubt that boxing matches provided cheap entertain-
ment to soldiers in garrison. Thus, the British weekly paper Boxing sent boxing gloves to British
military units serving overseas, and the Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA) and
Knights of Columbus often organized ﬁght cards (“smokers”) for troops serving in rear areas.
After World War I ended in 1918, civilians, many of them demobilized soldiers, began
introducing their own ideas into the administration of amateur boxing. For example, in 1921,
the Fédération Internationale de Boxe Amateur was organized in Antwerp for the purpose of
administering Olympic boxing. American educators did not pay much attention to anything the
Belgians suggested, so that same year, North American educators developed an alternative set of
rules for National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) boxing. American and Canadian
newspapermen had still other ideas, and so they began patronizing citywide boxing tournaments
of the kind known today as the Golden Gloves. In those days, even church groups supported
amateur boxing, probably because there were few viable athletic alternatives—basketball and
volleyball did not become widely played sports until the 1930s. The YMCA and Catholic Youth
Organization (CYO) supported amateur boxing in the United States, the Caribbean, the British
Commonwealth, Japan (to include Korea), and the Philippines, while the Young Men’s Hebrew
Association supported boxing clubs in North America and Europe.
During the 1960s, church, newspaper, and university patronage of amateur boxing declined.
Mostly, this was because it was found that basketball ﬁlled more seats and sold more newspapers
than boxing did and had fewer well-publicized fatalities. During the same decade, the U.S.,
British, and Australian militaries also began giving less support to amateur boxing; instead, they
began directing their attention toward Asian martial arts. On the other hand, interest in
amateur boxing grew in dozens of other countries. The reason was that modest ﬁnancial
investments in amateur boxing, with its enormous number of weight classes, provided solid
returns at the Olympics. Consequently, amateur boxing became a truly international sport.
PROFESSIONAL BOXING
From the 1870s to the 1910s, professional boxing remained a socially marginal activity that was pop-
ularly associated with gamblers, saloons, circuses, and, in modern sociological terms, the bachelor
subculture. Advertisers were well aware of this. Thus, pictures of boxers appeared on tobacco cards
(the practice appears to date to about 1862) and beer advertisements; the hard-drinking John L. Sul-
livan (1858–1918) was always a favorite of the brewers. Nevertheless, the temperance movement
was equally powerful in the United States, and by 1916, twenty-three of the forty-eight United
States had laws prohibiting the sale or manufacture of alcoholic beverages. Consequently, if profes-
sional boxing hoped to survive Prohibition, it had to be transformed from something associated with
gamblers and saloons into something associated with wholesome athletics.
International Boxing
467
www.ebook3000.com

This was accomplished through the creation of regulatory bodies. The ﬁrst effective regula-
tory body was Britain’s National Sporting Club, a private club established in London in 1891.
Although superseded by the British Boxing Board of Control in 1929, the National Sporting
Club was responsible for establishing ﬂyweight, bantamweight, featherweight, lightweight,
welterweight, middleweight, light heavyweight, and heavyweight as weight classes in profes-
sional boxing. More weights meant more title ﬁghts, and more title ﬁghts led to increased ticket
sales. Thus, by the 1990s there were seventeen separate weight divisions in professional boxing,
ranging from mini-ﬂyweight to heavyweight, and a title ﬁght every 2.1 days (Amateur Athletic
Foundation 1999).
In Australia, the rules established in Sydney set the national standard. Originally, most
Australian boxing was done behind race tracks or inside tents put up by traveling circuses. Hence
its local name, “tent boxing.” However, by the 1870s, there was saloon boxing in cities (and
particularly, Sydney). Sydney’s first important promoter was Laurence “Larry” Foley
(ca. 1849–1917), a Jem Mace protégé who effectively controlled Australian boxing from the
1870s to the early 1900s. Then, in 1908, Hugh McIntosh (1876–1942) effectively took control
of Australian boxing via his management of Sydney Stadium. The ﬁrst famous bout at Sydney
Stadium was the one between Jack Johnson (1878–1946) and Tommy Burns (1881–1955) in
December 1908, after which Johnson became the ﬁrst black man to win a world heavyweight
title. The rule at Sydney Stadium was that referees did not stop ﬁghts unless it was absolutely
necessary. Moreover, seconds were not encouraged to throw in the towel if they expected their
boxer to get paid. Thus, at Sydney Stadium, the bout continued until time was called or some-
one was knocked out. This resulted in many injuries and deaths (Svinth 2000–2007).
In the United States, the Walker Law of 1920 established the New York State Athletic
Commission, the ﬁrst important boxing commission in the nation. Because the New York ﬁght
market was the country’s most lucrative, New York rules soon became the U.S. standard.
Changes to professional boxing mandated by the New York State Athletic Commission included
preﬁght physicals, the two judge scoring system (with the referee settling ties), padded ropes and
ring ﬂooring, mandatory 30-day layoffs following knockouts, and ringside ambulances. Although
all the listed innovations were touted as things done to improve ﬁghter safety, it is worth noting
that they were implemented only in response to publicized ﬁxing scandals and litigated ring
deaths. Thus, they are better described as business decisions.
PROFESSIONAL BOXING IN POPULAR CULTURE
Professional boxing helped shape twentieth-century American cultural identity. In July 1910,
Jack Johnson’s knockout of Great White Hope James J. Jeffries (1875–1953) was widely per-
ceived as a slap in the face of Jim Crow (i.e., institutionalized racial discrimination). Jack
Dempsey, who was viewed as a draft dodger during World War I, volunteered for deployment to
Okinawa during World War II. Joe Louis’s (1914–1981) victory during his 1938 rematch with
Max Schmeling (1905–2005) was turned into an American victory over Nazism, and Muham-
mad Ali’s (born Cassius Clay, 1942–) statement to his draft board in 1966, “I ain’t got no quar-
rel with them Viet Cong,” came to represent the viewpoint of many young people of his
generation. Even the music seemed to epitomize the most important heavyweight champions:
ragtime for Jack Johnson, jazz for Jack Dempsey, swing for Joe Louis, blues for Sonny Liston (ca.
1932–1970), Motown sound for Muhammad Ali, and hip-hop for Mike Tyson (1966–).
468
International Boxing

Although books, magazines, newspapers, and radio broadcasts helped spread the allure of
boxing, ﬁlm was the medium that made heavyweight boxing so central to American culture.
Between 1894 and 1915, at least a hundred ﬁght ﬁlms were made, and the best-sellers always
featured champions such as “Gentleman Jim” Corbett (1866–1933), “Ruby Bob” Fitzsimmons
(1863–1917), and Jim Jeffries. The riots that followed the ﬁght between Jack Johnson and Jim
Jeffries in 1910 caused the U.S. government to ban the interstate transportation of actual ﬁght
footage. To get around this, Hollywood began making movies starring white boxers. Since then,
many movies with boxing themes have appeared, sometimes starring real boxers (Jack Dempsey
starred in a string of forgotten ﬁlms), but more often featuring actors. Noted boxing movies
featuring actors include The Champ (MGM, 1931), Champion (United Artists, 1949), Here
Comes Mr. Jordan (Columbia Pictures, 1941), Somebody Up There Likes Me (MGM, 1956), Fat
City (Columbia Pictures, 1972), Rocky (six movies, 1976–2006), Raging Bull (United Artists,
1980), and Million Dollar Baby (Warner Brothers, 2004).
Television featured boxing matches almost from the beginning. On February 23, 1939, the
British Broadcasting Corporation broadcast the ﬁrst televised championship ﬁght; the featured
ﬁghters were the British lightweights Eric Boon (1919–1981) and Arthur Danahar (1918–1992).
This proved the commercial plausibility of the process, so in 1940, the nascent television industry
got the U.S. laws barring the interstate transmission of ﬁght ﬁlms reversed. However, as a result
of the intervention of World War II, the next televised championship did not take place until
June 19, 1946. This bout featured Joe Louis against Billy Conn (1917–1993), and it was the one
before which Louis was quoted as saying, “He can run, but he can’t hide,” and after which sports-
writer Jimmy Cannon (1910–1973) wrote that Louis was “a credit to his race—the human race.”
Early television dramas sometimes explored boxing themes, too, with a powerful example being
Rod Serling’s Requiem for a Heavyweight, starring Jack Palance (CBS, Playhouse 90, debut October
11, 1956).
In 1949, recognizing the economic potential of televised boxing, a group of Chicago
businessmen incorporated the International Boxing Club of New York (IBC). The IBC was both
monopolistic (International Boxing Club of New York v. United States, 358 U.S. 242, 79 S. Ct. 245,
3 L. ED. 2d 270 [1959]) and connected to organized crime (Carbo v. United States, 314 F.2d 718
[9th Cir., 1963]). So, while the IBC soon controlled televised boxing in most major U.S.
markets, its control also attracted the attention of the newspapers and Congress. Thus, the
company lasted barely more than a decade. Nonetheless, during that decade, the International
Boxing Club exerted enormous inﬂuence on the way that boxing was presented on North
American television.
Following the demise of the International Boxing Club, television executives were uncertain
how to broadcast professional boxing. If production companies showed boxing live, then they
risked having millions of viewers seeing terrible beatings, or even deaths, in real time. Advertis-
ers did not like seeing photographs of dead boxers lying on top of corporate logos. On the other
hand, if production companies delayed presentation of the bouts, then proﬁts were reduced,
because viewers already knew the outcome. The solution proved to be cable television. Cable
television networks debuted during the late 1940s. Although cable television was popular in
suburban and rural areas where rooftop antennas did not work well, it was slow to catch on in
urban markets, where rooftop antennas worked ﬁne. Then, in April 1974, Western Union
launched the world’s ﬁrst nonmilitary communications satellite. Soon after, a small cable
International Boxing
469
www.ebook3000.com

network from Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, called Home Box Ofﬁce (HBO) obtained permission
to broadcast a heavyweight championship ﬁght live via satellite from the Philippines. The
boxers were Muhammad Ali and Joe Frazier (1944–). The date of the bout was September 30,
1975, in the United States and October 1, 1975, in the Philippines. The ﬁght was advertised as
the “Thrilla in Manila,” and for once, a ﬁght lived up to its hype. Live boxing shows had just
gone global, and a new era in television history had begun.
Cable television proved to be a mixed blessing. Although it created enormous demand for
a few boxers —Mike Tyson and Oscar De La Hoya (1973–) are examples—it also decreased
demand for club ﬁghts. After all, who wanted to go downtown to watch a couple guys box at
the armory when one could stay home and watch championship boxing on TV? During the
1980s, the answer was found in the casinos operated by Native American communities. Native
American (“tribal”) casinos ﬁrst appeared in Florida in 1979, and by the early 2000s, they were
found across the United States. Native American casinos offered patrons comfort and physical
security while still allowing them to drink, gamble, and smoke. Thus, by 2003, at least 10
percent of all professional boxing in the United States was taking place in Native American
casinos (Alexander 2005).
—Joseph Svinth
See also: English Pugilism (in Volume I); Commodiﬁcation of Leisure; Globalization of Martial Arts;
Mixed Martial Arts; Women’s Boxing, 1972–Present; Television and the Martial Arts;
and Military Unarmed Fighting Systems in the United States (in this volume).
REFERENCES
ABC Queensland. 2006. “Last Outback Boxing Troupe.” ABC Queensland, May 30, http://www.abc
.net.au/queensland/boxingtent, accessed July 21, 2008.
Alexander, James. 2005. “The Regulation of Boxing on Tribal Lands: Towards a Pan-Indian Boxing
Commission,” CyberBoxingZone, http://www.cyberboxingzone.com/boxing/w0505-alexander.htm,
accessed July 20, 2008.
Amateur Athletic Foundation of Los Angeles. 1999. “SportsLetter,” May 14, http://www.la84foundation
.org/10ap/SportsLetter/sl599_.htm, accessed July 13, 2008.
Biddle, A. J. D. 1912. “Boxing and Religion—A Winning Combination,” Fort Wayne Weekly
Sentinel, June 5, Sunday Supplement, 12, via http://www.newspaperarchive.com, accessed 
October 17, 2009.
Broome, Richard, and Corinne Manning. 2006. A Man of All Tribes: The Life of Alick Jackomos.
Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press.
Goodwin, Eleanor. 2007. “A Knock-Out! The Arnold Thomas Boxing Collection,” National Library
of Australia Gateways 85, February, via http://www.nla.gov.au/pub/gateways/issues/85/story04.html,
accessed October 17, 2009.
Gorn, Elliot J., and Warren Goldstein. 1993. A Brief History of American Sports. New York: Hill and
Wang.
Heinz, W. C. 1961. Fireside Book of Boxing. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Jacomb, William J. 1918. Boxing for Beginners: with Chapter Showing Its Relationship to Bayonet Fighting.
Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Liebling, A. J. 1956. The Sweet Science. New York: Viking Press.
Roscoe, Henry, Horace Smith, George Sharswood, and Francis Lincoln Wayland. 1888. Roscoe’s
Digest of the Law of Evidence in Criminal Cases, Eighth American Edition, volume II. Philadelphia,
PA: T. & J.W. Johnson & Co., via http://books.google.com, accessed January 15, 2010.
470
International Boxing

Sammons, Jeffrey T. 1990. Beyond the Ring: The Role of Boxing in American Society. Champaign: Uni-
versity of Illinois Press.
Sheard, Kenneth C. 1997. “Aspects of Boxing in the Western ‘Civilizing Process’,” International
Review for the Sociology of Sport, 32(1), 31–57, DOI: 10.1177/101269097032001004, via http://
online.sagepub.com/, accessed October 16, 2009.
Svinth, Joseph R. 2000–2007. “Death under the Spotlight: The Manuel Velasquez Collection,”
Electronic Journals of Martial Arts and Sciences, http://ejmas.com/jcs/velazquez/index.html, accessed
July 20, 2008.
Toulmin, Vanessa. 1999. A Fair Fight: An Illustrated Review of Boxing on British Fairgrounds. Oldham,
UK: World’s Fair, Ltd.
Vennum, Thomas Jr. 1994. American Indian Lacrosse: Little Brother of War. Washington, DC:
Smithsonian Institution Press.
Wallenfeldt, E. C. 1994. The Six-Minute Fraternity: The Rise and Fall of NCAA Tournament Boxing,
1932–1960. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group.
INTERNATIONAL FREESTYLE AND 
GRECO-ROMAN WRESTLING
Wrestling is among the most universal (and ancient) of sports and games, and there are count-
less variations. Are there belts, as in sumo? Are there jackets, as in sambo and Cornish? Are joint
attacks allowed, as in aikido? Are strangulation attacks legal, as in judo? Are attacks on the legs
barred, as in Greco-Roman? Understanding the rules is important, because the rules deﬁne the
game. However, despite all these countless variations, there are really just two distinct modes of
wrestling: standing and ground.
Many older styles of wrestling, the so-called folk-styles, do not feature ground wrestling, and
for good reason. From the standpoint of wrestling for fun, recreational wrestling was usually
practiced and done outdoors. Recreational wrestlers were understandably reluctant to grovel in
dust, mud, or snow. From a combative standpoint, the ground is not safe. So, if one’s wrestling
represents training for battle amid swords and horses, then there is no point attempting intricate
groundwork.
In folk styles, wrestling surfaces were simple. Usually, the wrestlers wrestled on the beach, or
in the middle of the village, or on a grassy meadow, each seeking to throw the other irrespective
of where the other might land.
Bouts rarely lasted more than a minute, because they were over as soon as a man hit the
ground. If the referee could not decide who hit ﬁrst, it was considered a “dog fall,” and the match
restarted.
Rules were simple, too. One wrestler sought to throw the other to the ground. So natural is
this kind of wrestling that early explorers and fur traders in North America found that a simple
form of grappling could amicably settle disputes with Native Americans. Although neither
wrestler understood the language of the other, the matter of understanding rules was never a
question: bouts were fought and no one was at a loss to decide the winner.
Cumberland and Westmorland (more correctly called backhold) is an example of a folk-style
wrestling art that remains popular to this day. Backhold is indigenous to Britain north of
Yorkshire. In backhold wrestling, a “closed hold” is taken to start the bout. The wrestler reaches
under his opponent’s right arm and then over the opponent’s left arm. When he is satisﬁed with
International Freestyle and Greco-Roman Wrestling
471
www.ebook3000.com

the hold, then he locks his hands around the body. The opponent does the same. Once the
referee (known as the stickler) is satisﬁed that both holds have been fairly taken, a signal is given
and the bout begins. During the bout, the original hold must be kept, and the ﬁrst man to let go
his hold loses. Meanwhile, all manner of trips and “hypes” ensue. Here, hype means a kind of
throw. An example involves the wrestler lifting his opponent from the ground, swinging the
opponent to one side, and then using his own near-side thigh to send the opponent crashing to
the ground.
In backhold wrestling, weight classes began to be used circa 1820. Early weight classes were
simple: lightweight, middleweight, and heavyweight. Before that, if a wrestler was unlucky
enough to be small, he had to make up for lack of size by being more artful, quick, or agile.
The basic moves and procedures of backhold wrestling are described because they are typical
of folk styles throughout the world. This similarity created problems when it came time to estab-
lish a set of universal rules for the Olympics. All of these systems (and countries, and ethnic
groups) had advocates pushing for their speciﬁc type of wrestling to be the standard. How to
arrive at a set of rules acceptable to the whole world?
The ﬁrst meeting of the International Amateur Wrestling Federation (IAWF) took place in
1921. Not until 1937 was any sort of compromise reached that allowed the publication of written
rules, and with the intervention of World War II (1939–1945), these new rules did not come
into effect until 1948. During the 1950s, the Fédération Internationale de Lutte Amateur
(FILA) supplanted the IWAF, and FILA has been in command of the rules ever since.
In 1994, FILA changed its name to Fédération Internationale des Luttes Associées (Federa-
tion of Associated Wrestling Styles). In 2002, FILA recognized a new style (beach wrestling),
apparently in hopes of increasing television audiences for wrestling matches. At the same time,
however, FILA also took steps toward preserving traditional wrestling styles. For example, the
Federation International des Luttes Celtiques (International Federation of Celtic Wrestling)
ﬁled a partnership agreement with FILA in 2006. In addition, FILA established a program
designed to help developing countries meet Olympic standards in wrestling by providing
equipment, coaches, and other assistance. This initiative has been very successful in Africa and
South Asia.
Under FILA, international freestyle and Greco-Roman wrestling became the standard for
World Championships and the Olympics. The main holdout to the adoption of international
freestyle rules has been the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) in the United
States. Today, varsity wrestlers at U.S. universities wrestle using NCAA rules, but U.S. athletes
intending to compete internationally must also learn FILA rules.
At this point, it should be noted that Greco-Roman wrestling is neither Greek nor Roman.
Instead, it is a form of French folk-style wrestling originally called in the Provençal language
lucho de la centuro en aut (wrestling above the waist) or, later in French, la lutte à mains plates
(open-hand wrestling). The modern name Greco-Roman only dates to the nineteenth century.
In both international freestyle and Greco-Roman, the purpose of the match is simple: to
take the opponent down to the mat and pin his or her shoulders to the mat for a fall. How this
is done is very different. In freestyle, achieving leverage can involve tackling the legs, grasp-
ing the arms, grasping the head, or grasping the body. One cannot use a hold that would obvi-
ously result in injury (e.g., no ﬁngers in the eyes or grasping of testicles), but injuries still occur
inadvertently. Meanwhile, the essence of Greco-Roman is that all holds must be applied above
472
International Freestyle and Greco-Roman Wrestling

the waist, even during the ground phase. In addition, tripping is prohibited. With this nar-
rowing of the ﬁeld of attack, Greco-Roman bouts can be dull for spectators, and champi-
onships can be won by the athlete who has one penalty point fewer than his opponent. Thus,
present rules include stopping a Greco-Roman match after one minute and resuming in the
par terre position. In French, par terre means “on the ground,” but in this context it describes
a starting position in which one wrestler kneels on the mat, on hands and knees, while the
other wrestler kneels beside him, with both hands on his opponent’s shoulders or back. In the
United States this is often called “referee’s position.” The idea behind starting over is to gen-
erate more scoring chances.
Points are scored for successful takedowns. The number of points depends on how the
maneuver was executed. A high-amplitude throw, for example, gains a maximum of ﬁve points,
a leg tackle (in freestyle; leg attacks are not allowed in Greco-Roman) gains one or two points,
and the position of the opponent when he lands on the mat also counts—face down or face up.
In freestyle, by far the most successful types of takedowns are leg attacks.
Following the takedown, the wrestler attempts to pin the shoulders of his opponent to the
mat for one second (2008 rules). This symbolic “kill” ends the match immediately. It is, however,
difﬁcult to turn a trained wrestler from face down to face up. Thus, a whole realm of different
techniques has been developed, and par terre is almost a separate form of wrestling. Again, points
are awarded for maneuvers that turn the opponent over and expose his or her shoulders to the
mat but do not result in a pin fall. If, after about ten to ﬁfteen seconds, the top wrestler remains
unsuccessful in scoring any points from the position of advantage, the bout is resumed in
standing position.
Folk-style competitions rarely use a clock or restrict the area in which the match takes place.
However, once international rules were introduced, matches were limited in time and space, and
weight classes were mandatory; gone were the days of overall champions. The introduction of
weight classes was copied from professional Greco-Roman and catch-as-catch-can tournaments;
other modiﬁcations came gradually. For example, during the 1908 Olympic tournament in
London, there were four Greco-Roman and ﬁve catch-as-catch-can categories. In 2008, the
weight classes in freestyle and Greco-Roman were the same: seven in each category, although
there have been as many as ten. In 2008, there is a restriction to the maximum weight of
120 kilograms (264.55 pounds).
The length of a wrestling match has gone through a long evolution. At the 1912 Olympic
Games in Stockholm, a match in the Greco-Roman middleweight category lasted eleven hours.
By contrast, FILA rules in effect in 2008 call for three 2-minute rounds and, barring a fall, the
winner is the wrestler who wins two rounds by outpointing the opponent.
The mat surface for international competition is standardized. The mat is a high-impact foam
surface painted with a circle 9 meters (29 feet, 6 inches) in diameter. Around this circle is a 
1-meter (39-inch) warning zone that is painted red. Beyond that is an additional 2-meter
(78.7 inch) safety zone that is painted blue.
In 2004, women’s freestyle wrestling was instituted at the Olympic Games. The rules for
women’s competition were exactly the same as for the men’s, except that the weight classes were
different, there being but four weight classes instead of the seven that are presented for men.
However, during World Championships there are seven weight classes for women, same as for
men. There is no international competition for women in Greco-Roman wrestling at present.
International Freestyle and Greco-Roman Wrestling
473
www.ebook3000.com

There are three ofﬁcials involved in a FILA wrestling match: a mat chairman, a judge, and a
referee. In the event of disputes, the ﬁnal decision rests with the mat chairman.
FILA rules are adjusted every year, and the constant tinkering leaves aﬁcionados, spectators,
athletes, coaches, and journalists alike puzzled and bewildered by the variations. Certainly for
the casual spectator it is difﬁcult to understand when, with the score showing 7–6, the wrestler
with six points is declared winner. (In this case, the winner was decided by his having a high-
amplitude throw whereas his counterpart achieved a series of one-point takedowns.)
—Glynn A. Leyshon
See also: Celtic Martial Arts (in Volume I); Globalization of Martial Arts; Finnish-Canadian
Wrestlers; Professional Wrestling; and Women’s Freestyle Wrestling (in this volume).
REFERENCES
International Federation of Associated Wrestling Styles. 2005. International Wrestling Rules,
http://www.ﬁla-wrestling.com/download/rules_jan2005.pdf, accessed September 24, 2008.
Leyshon, Glynn. 1984. Of Mats and Men. London, Ontario: Sports Dynamics.
Sayenga, Donald. 1995. “The Problem of Wrestling Styles in the Modern Olympic Games—a Failure
of Olympic Philosophy,” Citius, Altius, Fortius 3(3), via http://www.la84foundation.org/
SportsLibrary/JOH/JOHv3n3/JOHv3n3e.pdf, accessed September 21, 2008.
Wallechinsky, David. 2000. The Complete Book of the Summer Olympics. Woodstock, NY: Overlook
Press.
INTERNATIONAL KARATE
After karate was taken from Okinawa to Japan during the late 1910s and early 1920s, it
underwent a radical change. This in turn set the stage for karate’s expansion and popularity in
the decades after World War II (1939–1945). These changes may be viewed from three
perspectives: cultural, historical, and psychological. While each of these perspectives has distinct
characteristics, all are intertwined. Thus, it helps to view this structure as interlocking circles.
Strict demarcations between the perspectives cannot realistically be achieved.
CULTURAL PERSPECTIVES
Although Japan annexed the Ryukyu Kingdom in 1879, thereby creating the modern Okinawa
Prefecture, the Okinawan culture that developed karate was and is distinct from Japanese
culture. The Okinawan dialect (hogan) is different from Japanese. Known as Uchinaguchi, this is
the language still used by Okinawan karate-ka to discuss the ﬁner points of karate. Indeed, some
Okinawans say this is because the Japanese language has no words to discuss the art properly
(Higaonna 1996). That answer is unlikely; just because the speaker does not know the words
does not mean the concepts do not exist. Nonetheless, it does suggest that the ways in which
concepts are communicated are different between cultures.
One difference involves the manner of instruction itself. In Okinawa, karate was considered
to be an individual pursuit, and teaching was done on an individual basis. True, instruction often
took place in groups, but the instruction was communicated from teacher to individual student
according to the characteristics of the student. Basic kata (kihongata) such as Naihanchi (in
474
International Karate

Shorin styles) or Sanchin (in Shorei styles) were taught to all beginning students. After they sat-
isfactorily learned these basic forms, students were assigned individual kata from the repertoire
of kaishugata (traditional kata), each according to his (there were few girls or women in karate
in those days) strengths and weaknesses. Teachers expected that these kata would be mastered,
and it was rare that any student ever learned more than a few kata. The master teacher (shihan)
passed along all of the kata in his system only to the student he expected to follow him as master
teacher.
Beneath the instructor were senior (sempai) and junior (kohai) students. Seniors had respon-
sibility for the instruction of junior students. On Okinawa the relationship was not based on
rank but on seniority. As far as is known, no formal ranking system existed in Okinawa before
the twentieth century. Although there is some indication that the manner of wearing an obi (belt
worn as part of daily dress) indicated social rank (Funakoshi 1982), this had little to do with
karate; instead, it had to do with social and cultural traditions. Well into the twentieth century,
karate had no special uniform. Instead, training in Okinawa was done in loose daily apparel. The
modern equivalent would be T-shirts and sweat pants. This practice of training in daily clothing
indicated karate’s utilitarian and civil combative function.
Finally, on early twentieth-century Okinawa, karate was a pragmatic undertaking. One prac-
ticed for self-defense, to build a strong body, or simply for exercise. There were not many sports,
as we know them today, in Okinawa before the twentieth century.
When karate went to Japan, it was proclaimed a do (way or path). It was given standardized
dogi, meaning the uniform one wears when practicing the way. Color belts were adopted from
judo, and the sempai/kohai relationship changed from older brother/younger brother to one of
upperclassman/underclassmen, complete with hazing rituals. In addition, in Japan, karate was
seen mostly as a civilian ﬁghting art, perhaps with sporting applications. In one sense, it was seen
as a “uniquely Japanese” kind of boxing. Further changes included naming individual systems ryu
(literally ﬂows, but ﬁguratively, styles) or kan (associations), changing the traditional Okinawan
names for kata to new Japanese names, and ﬁnally, changing the name of karate itself. Before
going to Japan, it had been known as Todi (Chinese Hand, written in ideograms that could be
pronounced kara-te), but by the 1930s, it was becoming known as empty-hand, using other
ideograms that were pronounced kara-te.
All these changes were undertaken in good faith, for the purpose of expanding the inﬂuence
of karate and establishing it as a legitimate part of Japanese culture. The changes accomplished
that purpose, but at a signiﬁcant cost to the traditional ﬁghting art. Japanese proclivities favored
the concept of wa (harmony), which dictated things run smoothly. Wa is best achieved by every-
one acting (outwardly, at least) in the same manner. In Imperial Japan before World War II, this
meant a preference for group instruction and hierarchical management. Gone were the days of
individualized instruction based on students’ personal strengths and weaknesses, where personal
success meant the reward of additional individualized instruction and the opportunity to ask new
questions or learn new kata. Instead, everyone was expected to perform what their fellows were
performing. The Okinawan cultural practice of training students toward individual successes was
no longer desired. Instead, it was supplanted by the Japanese practice of training students to
become a part of a harmonious group.
In addition, new kata were developed and taught as a part of a standardized advancement
plan. This new, standardized way of practicing karate had its roots in the militarization of
International Karate
475
www.ebook3000.com

Japan. After 1931, the Japanese Empire was increasingly militarized, and the Japanese
military found it more productive and effective to train people as groups and hold their
communities collectively accountable than to attempt individualized instruction and
accountability. The individual nature of karate as a personal ﬁghting art was replaced by
karate as group enterprise.
As karate began to be taught to large groups, in-depth understanding of the kata was lost. In
traditional karate, kata are the primary vehicles for transmission of karate principles. Learning
kata amounts to a cognitive apprenticeship, and understanding kata comes about only through
training with a teacher. Although anyone can learn the outward movements of a kata in a
relatively short time, the interpretation of the movements (kaisai) can be learned only through
personal study with a master teacher. Group instruction limited this relationship with the
instructor and created a system where knowledge of techniques within the kata (bunkai) became
more important than being able to interpret techniques according to the changing situations of
combat (hyomengi). As such, kata naturally came to be viewed as old-fashioned exercises rather
than as rich troves of understanding that could be applied to the innumerable ﬂuctuating
situations in combat.
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES
The change from Todi to karate represented more than a change in the characters used to write
the name; it also represented a change in philosophical attitudes. Closer political afﬁliation with
Japan necessitated karate distancing itself from the Chinese inﬂuences that had originally helped
to create and shape it. The Japanese fought wars with China three times between 1879 and 1945,
and Japanese society was extensively militarized between 1937 and 1945. Thus, Chinese prac-
tices were not in good political standing in Japan during most of the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries. The decision to change the characters for karate helped smooth the way of
karate in Japanese society and culture.
From 1937 to 1945, Japanese educators and soldiers both emphasized karate’s utilitarian
value, and during the 1940s several karate instructors were hired as trainers for Japanese com-
mandos. The effect of this militarization on karate should not be underestimated. At the same
time, many older instructors died or lost interest in the martial arts. Miyagi Chojun
(1888–1953) had chosen Shinzato Jinan (1901–1945) as his successor in Goju Ryu karate.
This plan ended when Shinzato was killed during the Battle of Okinawa (March to June
1945). Afraid that his karate would die with him, Miyagi subsequently began to dispense his
knowledge more freely among his students (Higaonna 1996; Toguchi 1976). In addition, he
also instituted changes in his kata. In particular, Sanchin, the fundamental kata of Goju Ryu,
was altered. There now exist what are known as prewar and postwar versions of Sanchin
(Toguchi 2001).
The period following World War II saw the spread of karate throughout the world. Okinawa
was in shambles, and young men were eager to earn money any way they could. This included
teaching foreign servicemen. Consequently, karate soon came to mean any sporting endeavor
that involved punching and kicking. This was due, in part, to the karate learned by the early pro-
ponents of karate, who took the simplistic karate they had learned back to their own countries.
Much of this misunderstanding of karate was due to the lack of communication skills between
Japanese instructors and non-Japanese students. Not only were there language barriers and
476
International Karate

cultural difference; there were also time constraints: foreign students and servicemen simply did
not stay in the community forever. Before World War II, it was expected that kihongata would be
the basis of karate practice for years. The idea was to develop the body and mind in preparation
for the kaishugata. This practice was abandoned after the war, ostensibly to foster the spread of
karate. Finally, many young people, Japanese as well as non-Japanese, saw karate simply as a
method of physical exercise with a martial ﬂavor (such as boxing or wrestling), or as a source of
presumably practical self-defense techniques. Their patience with years of repetition of the same
form was limited.
Although civilian self-defense was close enough to the original Okinawan concept of karate,
teaching karate to high school and college students required different teaching methods. During the
period 1937–1945, the Japanese military stressed that martial arts were a form of paramilitary train-
ing. Foreign servicemen and veterans readily took to these wartime methods of instruction because
their own military training had been based on similar models. The servicemen and veterans then
took that method of teaching karate home with them—by now, it was traditional. However, youths
in school or after-school programs wanted sports.
Free sparring (jyu-kumite) became very popular during and after World War II. Free sparring
was invented in Japan, Korea, and Manchuria during the 1930s and 1940s. Originally, on
Okinawa, sparring had been prearranged. The methods for this were known as kiso kumite
(fundamental sparring). Defender and attacker, and the methods they used, were predetermined.
Practice was generally one-step (ippon), three-step (sanbon), or ﬁve-step (gohon). The step drills
helped students understand movements drawn from kata. The advent of free sparring not only
helped spread karate into universities, high schools, and industrial athletic leagues but also
deﬁned its future. New methods that were not found in kata were developed, while older
methods found in kata were discarded because they did not work easily in free sparring. This
pragmatic aspect directly inﬂuenced the development of kickboxing and, indirectly, the mixed
martial arts venues that are widely popular today.
PSYCHOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVES
The rapid spread of karate through the world following World War II suggests that it spoke
to something within the mid-twentieth-century human psyche. Something in it crossed cul-
tural barriers and made it able to flourish. Something within karate was flexible enough to
fulfill basic human needs without losing its essential, martial nature, which itself speaks to
basic needs.
It probably helped that, during the 1920s and 1930s, the Japanese made karate into a -do
(Way). When this happened, karate became more than a utilitarian ﬁghting art from Okinawa.
Not only was it imbued with a cultural, historical, and psychological signiﬁcance; it was now
on a par with other Japanese martial arts. This development was important because the Japan-
ese deﬁne their cultural identity, in part, on their martial arts (budo)—and not totally because
of the militarization of Japan during World War II; otherwise, martial arts would have declined
after the victorious Allies proscribed the practice of budo. Nonetheless, the Japanese openly
continued to practice karate and other martial arts; thus, the headline to a newspaper article
published in the Williamsport Gazette and Bulletin in March 1947 reads “Japanese Still Are
Taught Art of Breaking Arms.”
International Karate
477
www.ebook3000.com

Defeat rarely changes the beliefs of the conquered. Instead, it causes those beliefs to be subli-
mated. In this case, people saw that martial arts could be a sport and exercise. Through sport, the
Japanese could rebuild karate, just as they rebuilt Japan itself, and in the process, they could win.
Meanwhile, for foreign students, part of karate’s allure was its exoticism. In 1947, karate was
essentially unknown outside Japan and Korea. Even in Hawaii it was rare. So, as the Spanish
Jesuit Balthazar Gracián (1601–1658) put it in The Art of Worldly Wisdom (1647), at ﬁrst, even
a needle brought from afar is valued.
The combative nature of the art was also helpful. This was the era of the Cold War, civil
rights movements, and wars of national liberation. The U.S. military sponsored karate training;
so did various “freedom ﬁghters.” For both sides, the reason was that karate was a physically
demanding activity that had a stockpile of ﬁghting techniques. This appeal was not unique to
karate but was fulﬁlled by karate.
In short, karate fulﬁlled psychological needs. For soldiers and freedom ﬁghters, the needs were
often as simple as “this protects us from them.” For the commercial karate class, the need was
simply to provide paying customers with (1) the illusion of training in self-defense, (2) outward
recognition through belt ranking, (3) peer relationships through belonging to a group, (4) the
opportunity to learn new things combined with the freedom to quit, and so on.
Of course, reality has a way of intruding. Whenever special classes are offered in self-defense
in a karate dojo, it is a good bet that what is being taught is not the traditional karate of Okinawa
(or even the transplanted karate of 1930s Japan). Moreover, feelings get hurt over things as silly
as who got promoted, teachers and students sometimes have emotional issues, and schools go out
of business.
This is mentioned because the presentation of karate as a Way of Life allowed it to be used
(or at least presented) as a spiritual path. The karate explosion that occurred in the 1960s
was not simply related to the development of sport-based karate. The 1960s were a period of
countercultural experimentation. Karate was no exception. For example, Goju-Kai karate
leader Yamaguchi Gogen (1909–1989) combined yoga, Zen Buddhism (as well as other
religions), and karate to create Goju-Shinto. “Doing one’s own thing” was another cultural
value of the 1960s, and it gradually seeped into the practice of martial arts. This was most
famously done by Bruce Lee (Li Xiaolong, 1940–1973), with his conceptualization of Jeet
Kune Do, but Lee’s popularity allowed other martial arts instructors to do their own thing,
and the result was that a plethora of new karate styles began to emerge, each with its new 
O-Sensei (great teacher).
CONCLUSION
Karate started out as a civilian martial art in the ports and towns of the Ryukyu Kingdom. During
the 1920s and 1930s, it spread to Japan, Korea, and Manchuria. As a result of the general
militarization of Japan during that period, karate became a paramilitary martial art. After World
War II, the Japanese, Koreans, and Okinawans were enthusiastic exporters of karate, and as a
rule, the product was received partly as an example of an exotic culture, and partly as a sport.
Over time, karate has changed. Sparring, for example, changed from one-step drills to noncon-
tact point ﬁghting, then to point ﬁghting with limited targets, and ﬁnally to kickboxing and
mixed martial arts. Training has also changed. Sometimes, classes are taught in the old way, with
personal relationships. Other times, classes are taught as military drill. And sometimes, training
478
International Karate

is simply punch/kick calisthenics. Through it all, karate has proven adaptable to its environment
and retained its essential utility.
—Ron Mottern
See also: Kenpo Karate; Korea: Taekwondo; Okinawa: Karate (in Volume I); 
Globalization of Martial Arts; Asian Martial Arts in the United States and Canada; 
Jeet Kune Do; and Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Bishop, Mark. 1999. Okinawan Karate: Teachers, Styles and Secret Techniques. Boston: Tuttle.
Egami Shigeru. 1980. The Heart of Karate-do. New York: Kodansha.
Funakoshi Gichin. 1981. Karate-do Kyohan. New York: Kodansha.
Funakoshi Gichin. 1982. Karate-do: My Way of Life. New York: Kodansha.
Goodin, Charles. No date. “Hawaii Karate Seinen Kai,” http://www.seinenkai.com, accessed 
October 17, 2009.
Higaonna, Morio. 1996. The History of Karate: Okinawan Goju Ryu. Westlake Village, CA: Dragon.
Kise Fusei. 2003. The Spirit of Okinawan Karate. Tilton, NH: Sant Bani.
Nagamine Shosin. 1991. The Essence of Okinawan Karate-do: Shorin-ryu. Rutland, VT: Tuttle.
Noble, Graham. 1998. “Gichin Funakoshi and the Development of Japanese Karate,” Dragon Times 3(11),
7–9, via http://seinenkai.com/articles/noble/noble-funakoshi1.html, accessed October 17, 2009.
Toguchi Seikichi. 1976. Okinawan Goju-ryu: Fundamentals of Shorei-kan karate. Burbank, CA: Ohara.
Toguchi Seikichi. 2001. Okinawan Goju Ryu II: Advanced Techniques of Shorei-Kan Karate. Santa
Clarita, CA: Ohara.
Williamsport Gazette and Bulletin. 1947. “Japanese Still Are Taught Art of Breaking Arms,” March 10,
12, via http://www.newspaperarchive.com, accessed October 17, 2009.
Yamaguchi Gogen. 1999. Goju Ryu Karate Do Kyohan [Goju Ryu Karate Master Text], translated by
Andrea Lee. Hamilton, Ontario: Masters Publication.
JEET KUNE DO
Jeet Kune Do is both a martial art and a set of principles that was named and popularized by
Bruce Lee (Lee Jun Fan or Li Xiaolong, 1940–1973). It came into existence through Lee’s
critique of existing martial arts styles (as he saw them in the U.S. context) and a process of inter-
disciplinary research, experimentation, and innovation. Jeet Kune Do has been credited as a key
precursor of, ﬁrst, “American Freestyle Karate” and, subsequently, of “no holds barred,”
“Ultimate Fighting,” and “Mixed Martial Arts.”
There are a huge number of texts written about Jeet Kune Do. These are of widely (and
indeed wildly) differing degrees of reliability, veriﬁability, and accuracy. Reasonably reliable texts
on the history, development, philosophy, training, and ﬁghting strategies of Jeet Kune Do
include the books and articles written by Lee’s ﬁrst generation students Dan Inosanto (1936–)
and Takauki “Taky” Kimura (1924–). Unfortunately, other equally well-informed works, such as
the many edited collections and books authored by John Little (1960–), tend to shade into
hagiography and hero-worship.
This article is concerned chieﬂy with the theory behind Jeet Kune Do. This focus has been
chosen because the theory of how to develop pragmatically useful and efﬁcient ﬁght training
was Lee’s primary concern. For Lee, the outward forms, practices, and execution of Jeet Kune
Jeet Kune Do
479
www.ebook3000.com

Do would differ from person to person and place to place, but what always mattered was the
set of theoretical principles that one applied to the training and combat strategies. In choosing
this focus on theories and principles, this article might therefore be said to be aligned with the
thinking one of the two major factions of post–Bruce Lee Jeet Kune Do, namely the “Jeet
Kune Do Principles” school of thought, as opposed to the “Original Jeet Kune Do” school,
which focuses on preserving the integrity of what Lee himself taught. These distinctions are
discussed in the following pages.
HISTORICAL AND CONCEPTUAL ORIGINS
The term “Jeet Kune Do” ﬁrst appeared in Bruce Lee’s notebooks in 1967 (Little 1996, 96), but
Lee’s friend and student Dan Inosanto claims that the deﬁnite decision to use the term to refer
to the style of martial arts that they were practicing came in 1968 (Inosanto 1980, 66). Accord-
ing to Inosanto, the idea for the name reputedly took its inspiration from European fencing’s
stop-hit technique, which Lee regarded as “the highest and most economical of all the counters.”
Lee regarded the stop-hit so highly because it accomplishes blocking, interception/neutralization
(jeet), and attacking (kune) in one economical movement. According to Inosanto, a “stop-hit is
when you do not parry and then counter, it’s all done in one step” (Inosanto 1980, 66). Thus, in
the face of an attack, the attack is intercepted not with a block, but with a block that is also a
strike: the move is “designed to score a hit in the midst of the attacker’s action” (ibid). Accord-
ing to Inosanto, Lee translated this “stop” and “hit” into the Chinese martial terms jeet and kune
and added the conventional or obligatory (Japanese) sufﬁx -do to refer to martial art way or style
(when spoken, “do” follows the Japanese sound, as opposed to the Chinese dao or dou). Thus, the
literal meaning of Jeet Kune Do is “stop-hit-way” or “intercept/interrupt-hit-way” (Inosanto
1980, 66).
Before this baptism (that is, taking the name of an idealized technique to designate both
the principle and the name of the “art”—which might be better termed “research program”),
Lee had practiced and taught a bricolage of techniques that he called Jun Fan Gung Fu. Jun
Fan was not derived from or founded on any one complete system. Instead, it took the form of
techniques appropriated from a wide range of styles. Inosanto (1980, 66) lists Northern Pray-
ing Mantis, Southern Praying Mantis, Choy Li Fut, Eagle Claw, Hung Gar, Muay Thai, West-
ern boxing, freestyle wrestling, judo, and jujutsu, along with “several Northern Gung-Fu
styles” as sources for Jun Fan Gung Fu. Yet, Inosanto admits, it is “obvious” that wing chun
(yongchun in Mandarin) was the “nucleus” and that the other methods evolved around this
core (Inosanto 1980, 67).
Jun Fan and then Jeet Kune Do took from wing chun such principles as the centerline theory,
the privileging of direct linear attacking, simultaneous attack and defense, vertical punches,
forward pressure, and “sticking hands” (Cantonese chi sau, Pinyin chishou) sensitivity training.
However, Lee modiﬁed wing chun postures and movements (which are often compact and close
range) in light of his aim of establishing complete ﬂuidity and economy of movement and
motion at any range. To this end, Lee experimented with principles, stances, and footwork from
European fencing—in which the practitioner literally puts his or her best foot (and hand)
forward—in conjunction with those of Western boxing. Thus, Lee would come to propose that
the lead (jabbing) hand of a right-handed ﬁghter should not be the left hand (as it would be in
480
Jeet Kune Do

traditional boxing), but rather it should be the strongest weapon: the right hand. In other words,
the righthanded ﬁghter should hold the right hand forward, so that the lead jab—or, more
precisely, the straight right—could realistically aspire to be a knockout punch. Similarly, Lee’s
dissatisfaction with the idea that any ﬁghting sequence should take more than one move to
complete caused him to develop a stance from which any kick could be delivered by the front
leg without any preparatory stance adjustment. Hence, the characteristic Bruce Lee stance, since
immortalized in countless images including a statue on the Avenue of Stars in Hong Kong. Most
of his weight is in the rear supporting leg, its heel slightly raised, the front leg is ready to deliver
any kick; the rear hand is primarily in a defensive position, held high and relatively close to the
face and head, while the lead hand is loose and low, and ready to ﬂick out a wide range of
potential strikes—most characteristically a direct ﬁnger jab to the eyes.
THE “STYLE” OF JEET KUNE DO
If Jeet Kune Do came to have this deﬁnitive stance and a characteristic “look,” then we
encounter a paradox, namely Lee’s frequently repeated claim to have “no-style.” For if, in imple-
menting a dynamic principle rather than a ﬁxed form, a characteristic set of postures,
movements, and responses is developed, is this not in fact the institution of a style—the very
thing that Lee regarded as limited and limiting, and sought to critique and dispense with or
indeed “transcend” (Lee 1971, 24)? Indeed, Lee was adamant that he had “not invented a ‘new
style,’ composite, modiﬁed or otherwise that is set within distinct form as apart from ‘this’
method or ‘that’ method. On the contrary, I hope to free my followers from clinging to styles,
patterns, or molds” (1971, 24).
In later years, Dan Inosanto notes (1980, 66–67), Lee “became sorry that he ever coined the
term Jeet Kune Do because he felt that it, too, was limiting, and according to Bruce, ‘There is
no such thing as a style if you totally understand the roots of combat.’” Inosanto (whom Lee
certiﬁed as the most senior instructor of Jeet Kune Do) then goes on to handle the paradox by
adding to the term Jeet Kune Do a supplementary sufﬁx: the word “concept.” Hence, Inosanto
almost always says or writes “Jeet Kune Do concept.” His point is that, in contradistinction to
the names of martial arts styles—with their ﬁxed syllabi of traditional forms, patterns or kata,
and so forth—the term Jeet Kune Do was initially intended to refer to a guiding principle rather
than a ﬁxed form. In taking this stance of maintaining ﬁdelity to the concept but allowing the
appearance and syllabus to develop, Inosanto (along with Richard Bustillo and Larry Hartsell)
differs from other students of Bruce Lee (such as Taky Kimura, James Lee, Jerry Poteet, and Ted
Wong), who have tried instead to preserve the “original form” of Jeet Kune Do. Thus, “Jeet Kune
Do concept” practitioners proceed in a spirit of innovation, while “original form” practitioners
stick to doing things the way Bruce Lee did them.
In any interpretation, what Bruce Lee popularized was something like the “scientiﬁc” or prag-
matic search for efﬁciency in martial arts. His procedure involved exposing an existing form to
the scrutiny of a guiding idea—in other words, questioning the current institutional form of a
martial art by way of the ideals implied by the guiding idea of efﬁciency and effectiveness. This
“science” involved a four-step methodology: “1. Research your own experience; 2. Absorb what
is useful; 3. Reject what is useless; 4. Add what is speciﬁcally your own” (Lee, quoted in Bolelli
2003, 175).
Jeet Kune Do
481
www.ebook3000.com

Lee’s rhetoric sounds very slick. Yet these words—like others of Lee’s “striking thoughts” and
“wise words”—echo aphorisms more commonly attributed to Chinese leader Mao Zedong
(1893–1976). Indeed, even if Lee was not directly reiterating one of Mao’s formulations, he
often sounded close. Consider, for instance, “There are two different attitudes toward learning
from others. One is the dogmatic attitude of transplanting everything, whether or not it is suited
to our conditions. This is no good. The other attitude is to use our heads and learn those things
that suit our conditions, that is, to absorb whatever experience is useful to us.” Those words are
not from Lee, but from Chairman Mao’s On the Correct Handling of Contradictions among the
People, February 27, 1957, page 75. Thus, it is unfortunate that, since his death, Lee’s name has
become attached to the wholesale and indiscriminate posthumous publication of selections from
his notebooks, college essays, journals, and jotters and that these often include unattributed but
readily traceable quotations from other thinkers, for all of this ultimately makes Bruce Lee seem
to be a barefaced plagiarist. But it is not as if he himself made the decision to publish “his” words
in that form, after he died. The packaging of “Bruce Lee Wisdom” is something that happened
after his death.
The question arises whether it is really possible to know with certainty what might be use-
ful and what might be useless in a martial art system without having studied that system for
enough time to have mastered it and hence be qualiﬁed to judge its usefulness. Indeed, Robert
W. Smith (1926–) suggested that it was precisely because Bruce Lee did not have enough
experience in any martial art (Lee neither completed any formal syllabus nor ofﬁcially mastered
any system in any martial art) that he could think that existing martial arts styles needed to
be signiﬁcantly improved or even eradicated (Smith 1999, 346).
Finally (and perhaps most importantly), how does one know in advance what will be needed
to survive a ﬁght or win a contest, and what will not? Here, perhaps another quote from Chairman
Mao answers the question: “All genuine knowledge originates in direct experience” (from a
speech given by Mao in July 1937). Or, as Lee phrased it, “Research your own experience.”
THE CONTROVERSIAL CHARACTER OF JEET KUNE DO
It is clear, then, that aspects of Jeet Kune Do are controversial. The controversial characteristics
of Jeet Kune Do include: its critique of styles and its championing of pragmatic experimentation;
the fact that this critique came from someone who had no recognized or recognizable qualiﬁca-
tions or the authority ascribed to them; and—overall, perhaps—the fact that it became well-
known solely because its originator was, ﬁrst, a Hollywood ﬁght choreographer and,
subsequently, a world-famous movie star.
Nonetheless, there is something particularly interesting—indeed exemplary and instruc-
tive—about Jeet Kune Do. First, it developed during an epoch of great upheaval: in 1968, the
critique of established institutions was proliferating in many realms, and the advocacy of inter-
disciplinary approaches was growing in any number of ﬁelds and contexts. As such, Jeet Kune
Do might be regarded as a trailblazing part of a wider cultural transformation that later came to
be called “postmodern.” Thus, in part, Jeet Kune Do remains controversial simply because it
exempliﬁes many of the cutting-edge transformations, debates, and issues in modern martial
arts, such as controversies about the place and role of tradition, the place of innovation vis-à-
vis established forms, how to verify effectiveness or reality, and the reasons why one does what
one does.
482
Jeet Kune Do

Jeet Kune Do is also controversial because its success is so directly related to celebrity.
Because of the massive success of Lee’s ﬁlms, coupled with the cultural capital (and kudos) of the
countercultural “radical chic” attached to all things “Oriental” and anti-institutional in late
1960s and early 1970s Hollywood, Bruce Lee was instrumental in the popularization of Asian
martial arts, both in the West and in Asia. The impact of Lee’s ﬁlms on the global awareness of
East Asian martial arts cannot be overstated. It is as a function of this celebrity that Jeet Kune
Do itself came to be mythologized and popularized as an innovative, revolutionary, or superla-
tive “Westernized” (yet still supposedly “Oriental”) martial art. Indeed, the rhetoric associated
with Jeet Kune Do proceeds in two directions at once. On the one hand, Bruce Lee used broadly
Taoist ideas (about ﬂow, ﬂexibility, spontaneous nature, vitality, etc.), while on the other hand
insisting upon the need for scientiﬁc research, rationality, and logic in one’s training. These two
approaches became synthesized into a deliberate anti-institutional pragmatism.
In other words, whether justiﬁed or not, Lee translated into the martial arts putatively
“Oriental” (but arguably deeply Westernized) countercultural ideas about the stultifying effects
of the institution on the individual. Bolelli (2003) calls Jeet Kune Do the “archetypal martial
art of the 1960s.” And it is true that one can discern a very 1960s (vitalist, individualist,
humanist) philosophy or ideology in Lee’s belief in the possibility of a “return” (paradoxically
via pragmatic “scientiﬁc method”) to a kind of spontaneous state of nature, somehow unfettered
or unconstrained by culture’s “arbitrary” conventions (Lee 1971; Lee 1975). Despite the signif-
icant cultural limitations of this Utopian individualist idealism, “what this translated to in
practical terms,” argues Bolelli (2003, 171), “was a radical departure from the methodology
normally used by martial arts schools.” For, “rather than following the standard curriculum of
an established style, Lee began advocating a form of cross-training aimed at picking the best
from different martial arts styles” (ibid.). Inevitably, then, “Lee moved away from the Wing
Chun style that he had learned in Hong Kong from Yip Man [Ye Wen, 1893–1972] and
established his own ‘non-style’ of Jeet Kune Do” (171–172). Nonetheless, the principles which
guided the decision making and selection processes of identifying and “picking the best”
arguably remained ﬁrmly rooted in the paradigm of wing chun (or Lee’s understanding thereof).
The “move away” from the wing chun appearance was governed by interdisciplinary cross-
training that was (consciously or otherwise) driven by Lee’s understandings of the wing chun
principles of efﬁciency and economy of motion.
If the guiding principle is indeed jeet, then this was not in itself new or unique, even if the
way Lee tried to implement it was. As a concept, jeet is explicitly found in existing Chinese
martial arts such as xingiquan. And, as Inosanto’s account of the decision to call their style “Jeet
Kune Do” makes plain, jeet can also be seen in aspects of other combat sports, such as fencing.
But jeet need not necessarily be actualized in the same way as a fencing-like stop-hit. Jeet can
also take the form of an interruption of the other’s rhythm that is not premised on intercepting
or parrying their attack.
The aim of being able to respond instantaneously and decisively to an attack from any angle
is regarded by some as profound and somehow revolutionary (Little 1996). However, others have
called this original principle naive (Miller 2000), because such an aim presumes the opponent
will not be able to anticipate or interrupt your stop-hit or that your own direct linear attack will
not be—no matter how fast—equally predictable and hence subject to counter by the oppo-
nent’s stop-hit. Indeed, the search for an ideal technique or superlative principle might be coun-
Jeet Kune Do
483
www.ebook3000.com

terposed with the proposition that when it comes to styles, tactics, and strategies, martial arts are
ultimately rather like the game of rock–paper–scissors: one may take the other by surprise, but
there will always be something that trumps your manner of attack or defense, especially if the
opponent learns to predict what is coming.
Thus, the problem with Bruce Lee’s proposition that “there is no such thing as a style if you
totally understand the roots of combat” is that no one totally understands the roots of combat.
There are such things as styles, and they have been used in combat. There are also luck, chance,
contingency, and personal preferences.
Consequently, the question of what a nonstyle should, will, or “must” look like or how a
principle should be actualized is a difﬁcult one to answer.
JEET KUNE DO IN FILM
Lee referred to Jeet Kune Do as broken rhythm. The most famous illustration of broken rhythm
is reputedly seen in Way of the Dragon (also known as Return of the Dragon, Golden Harvest,
1972), during Lee’s ﬁght with Chuck Norris (1940–) in the Colosseum in Rome. In this ﬁght,
Lee is at ﬁrst formal and predictable; hence his equally formal opponent (“Colt,” played by
Norris) is able to fare well against him. Upon realizing this limitation, Lee’s character switches
to a more anarchic, ﬂuid, and unpredictable style, one that Miller (2000) argues was heavily
indebted to Lee’s attempts to emulate the movements of boxer Muhammad Ali (1942–). Lee’s
new style then breaks through his opponent’s formal movements and rhythms, and Lee emerges
victorious. This scene is widely held to constitute a Jeet Kune Do lesson that illustrates the
need to “be like water” and to use “broken rhythm.” Yet, as Meaghan Morris (2001) points out,
the dramatic logic of this scene is also a common movie cliché: ﬂexibility and adaptability over-
come rigidity and ﬁxity.
A more literal illustration of broken rhythm is shown in the footage for Lee’s Game of Death
(Golden Harvest/Columbia, 1973/1978), a ﬁlm that remained incomplete and unﬁnished at the
time of Lee’s death. In this footage, Lee plays an unorthodox and unconventional martial artist.
His lack of orthodoxy is signaled by his wearing a bright yellow tracksuit rather than anything
that might associate him with any recognizable martial arts style. At one stage he faces an oppo-
nent (played by Dan Inosanto) who is dressed as and performs according to the conventions of
Filipino kali/eskrima. Thus, Inosanto ceremonially beats out traditional rhythms with his
eskrima sticks. In response, Lee conﬁdently brandishes a length of ﬂexible bamboo and tells his
opponent that his ﬁxed forms will be no use against his own broken rhythm. Lee proceeds to
break through his opponent’s predictable patterns and rhythms by delivering quick, unpre-
dictable whipping and stinging blows. With this “lesson,” Lee believed he was demonstrating a
superior martial principle—a “free-ﬂowing” vitality (and vitalism) that he was convinced was
lacking in existing martial arts styles.
—Paul Bowman
See also: Kenpo Karate; China: Martial Art Theory; China: Martial Arts in Hong Kong; 
China: Martial Women (in Volume I); Globalization of Martial Arts; Asian Martial Arts 
in the United States and Canada; Film and the Asian Martial Arts; and Television 
and the Martial Arts (in this volume).
484
Jeet Kune Do

REFERENCES
Bolelli, Daniele. 2003. On the Warrior’s Path: Philosophy, Fighting, and Martial Arts Mythology. Berkeley,
CA: Blue Snake Books.
Inosanto, Dan. 1980. Jeet Kune Do: The Art and Philosophy of Bruce Lee. Los Angeles: Know How
Publishing.
Lee, Bruce. 1971. “Liberate Yourself from Classical Karate,” Black Belt 9(9), September, 24, via http://
www.bruce-lee.ws/article3.html, accessed October 17, 2009.
Lee, Bruce. 1975. The Tao of Jeet Kune Do. Santa Clarita, CA: Ohara Publications.
Little, John. 1996. Bruce Lee: A Warrior’s Journey. Chicago: McGraw Hill Contemporary.
Morris, Meaghan. 2001. “Learning from Bruce Lee,” in Keyframes: Popular Cinema and Cultural
Studies, edited by Matthew Tinkcom and Amy Villarejo, 171–184. London: Routledge.
Smith, Robert W. 1999. Martial Musings: A Portrayal of Martial Arts in the 20th Century. Erie, PA: Via
Media.
MIXED MARTIAL ARTS
Mixed martial arts (MMA) is a modern combat sport. The “mixed” refers to interdisciplinary
competition under a rule set that permits an expansive list of striking and grappling techniques.
MMA is also known as no-holds-barred (NHB), extreme ﬁghting, cage ﬁghting, submission
ﬁghting, and ultimate ﬁghting.
MMA rules allow for matches that may suddenly shift through a number of ranges, from kick-
boxing, to wrestling clinches punctuated by inside striking, to dynamic throws to the ground, to
ground grappling with strike-ﬁlled ﬂurries and submission attempts, and then back to the feet—
all in a matter of seconds.
Striking techniques typically permitted include open- and closed-hand strikes, elbow strikes,
knees, and kicks, while grappling techniques typically include throws, takedowns, chokes, and
joint locks. Competitors may come from many martial backgrounds, but common styles include
Brazilian jiu-jitsu, wrestling, judo, Muay Thai, kickboxing, karate, and professional boxing.
While MMA began as style-versus-style matchups, the exposure to these many different martial
arts, coupled with the sport’s evolution toward uniform rules, has led to MMA being increasingly
taught as its own distinct style of martial arts.
For safety equipment, MMA competitors wear mouth guards, groin protection, and light
open-ﬁngered gloves (4 to 7 ounces, 113 to 198 grams) that allow both grappling and striking.
For apparel, shoes may be permitted, but briefs or shorts are often the only attire allowed.
Matches are held in a boxing ring or fenced cage enclosure and last from three to ﬁve rounds.
Length of rounds ranges between one to ﬁve minutes each. Methods of winning, except for
submission, are similar to those of professional boxing and include knockout, technical knock-
out (includes referee, doctor, and corner stoppage), and judge’s decision. Submission, meaning
an indication that a competitor surrenders, may be verbalized but is generally signaled by tapping
an opponent or the ﬂoor repeatedly with the hand.
Mixed martial arts are not new. The ancient Greeks and Romans had pankration, a mixed
martial arts sport involving punching, kicking, and some of the same prohibitions, such as no
ﬁsh-hooking (placing ﬁngers in the mouth and pulling the cheeks) or gouging (pushing ﬁngers
into the eye socket). Matches between boxers and wrestlers were also popular during the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Mark Hewitt (2005) has documented approximately
Mixed Martial Arts
485
www.ebook3000.com

ninety mixed matches in North America that pitted catch-as-catch-can wrestlers, judo players,
jujutsu stylists, and boxers against one another under varying rule sets during the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries. There were also boxing vs. judo matches in Japan, the Philippines,
and the Territory of Hawaii, plus Vale Tudo (“anything goes”) matches in Brazil.
However, while owing a debt to past mixed-style matches, the chief inﬂuence on modern-day
mixed martial arts is the Ultimate Fighting Championships (UFC) begun in November 1993.
With UFC’s pay-per-view (PPV) events being broadcast in over a hundred countries, and its
recent purchase of several of its major competitors (notably Pride and World Extreme
Cageﬁghting), there is no single MMA organization that currently approaches the inﬂuence of
the UFC. The UFC, in turn, owes its origins to the Gracie family of Brazil.
Rorion Gracie (1952–) began teaching Gracie Jiu-Jitsu in the United States during the early
1970s. In 1979, Gracie moved to California, and began teaching Brazilian jiu-jitsu out of his
garage. In 1986, he was picked to be one of the three ﬁght choreographers for the Mel Gibson
(1956–) movie Lethal Weapon (Warner Brothers, 1987). This led to an interview in Playboy
(Jordan 1989) in which the author labeled Gracie the “toughest man in the west.” Soon after-
wards, Gracie met advertising man Art Davie, and between them, Gracie and Davie developed
the idea of a mixed-styles tournament to showcase Gracie Jiu-Jitsu (Krauss and Aita 2002).
Gracie Jiu-Jitsu began in Brazil in the late 1910s, when traveling judoka and professional
wrestler Mitsuyo Maeda (1878–1941) introduced Gracie’s uncle Carlos (1902–1994) to judo
(which was known in Brazil as jiu-jitsu). Maeda had experience at Japanese university jujutsu
and Kodokan judo, and newspapers described him equally as a judo or jiu-jitsu man. Since Maeda
made his living as a professional wrestler, marketing was likely the biggest factor in the choice of
presentation to the media.
Carlos Gracie was a talented wrestler, and along with his brother Hélio (1913–2009) and his
son Carlson (1935–2006), he and his sons and nephews made the Gracie name synonymous
with jiu-jitsu in Brazil. The Gracies emphasized groundwork and specialized in closing with an
opponent and bringing him to the ground to work for a choke or joint lock. As a consequence,
generations of Gracies and their students fought challenge matches using this strategy.
Armed with a video showing dojo-storming matches done by the Gracies and using the name
“War of the Worlds,” Rorion Gracie and Davie pitched the UFC idea to cable television
executives. Eventually, the idea was sold to Campbell McLaren of Semaphore Entertainment
Group (SEG), who ﬁgured that the show could make a proﬁt selling to just 100,000 homes
(Cerone 1993).
The ﬁrst UFC took place on November 12, 1993. Rickson Gracie (1958–) was the logical
choice to represent the family style, but after Rorion discovered Rickson teaching students
outside Rorion’s Gracie Academy, Rorion instead chose another brother, Royce (1966–), to
showcase Gracie Jiu-Jitsu in this event (Gentry 2002).
The event began as an eight-man tournament. Each participant was paid $1,000 to show,
with the tournament winner promised $50,000. Each ﬁght was scheduled for ﬁve rounds of ﬁve
minutes, and it took place in an octagonal chain-link cage with a sprung ﬂoor. The UFC cage
was a compromise from more extravagant suggestions, to include barbed wire pits and crocodile-
ﬁlled moats. Professional wrestling had used cages using chicken wire since at least 1937, and the
UFC adopted cages for the same reasons that professional wrestlers did—the cage kept partici-
pants from falling out, reduced the amount of debris that spectators could throw into the ring,
486
Mixed Martial Arts

and gave the impression that the participants were unwillingly imprisoned and forced to ﬁght
their way out. MMA competitors were quick to seize upon advantages offered by the cage. For
example, they could hold on to the links. This led to rule changes, and today, competitors are
limited to using the cage as a tool to force a clinch when standing or in forcing an opponent on
the ground against the cage to gain a better position for striking (Downey 2007).
The ﬁrst UFC was advertised as “no rules.” In practice, gouging, biting, and groin strikes were
restricted techniques, at least in the sense that ﬁghters could be ﬁned for using them. Nonethe-
less, it was a spectacularly dangerous event, with men of wildly varying abilities and weights
ﬁghting one another. At the same time, it equally spectacularly accomplished Gracie’s goal,
which was to showcase Gracie Jiu-Jitsu.
Toward that end, the initial lineup pitted Royce Gracie against professional boxer Art
Jimmerson (1963–). To ﬁght Jimmerson, Gracie took the traditional family approach by closing,
taking him to the ground, and submitting him.
In a similar sequence, Japanese submission wrestling–trained competitor Ken Shamrock
(Kenneth Kilpatrick, 1964–) faced kickboxer Pat Smith (1963–) in his preliminary matchup.
Shamrock had fought previously in a similar Japanese mixed ﬁghting promotion called Pancrase,
with his most recent match in that system taking place just days before the inaugural UFC.
In Japan, the origins of MMA date to the 1980s. During the 1970s, Japanese Brazilian
professional wrestling innovator Kanji “Antonio” Inoki (1943–) realized that there was a
market in Japan for “strong style” matches, meaning matches in which the results were pre-
determined, just as in professional wrestling, but in which the combative techniques were
more realistic. Toward that end, Inoki founded New Japan Pro Wrestling in 1972. Over time,
Inoki’s stable of wrestlers—most trained by Japan’s “God of Pro Wrestling,” Belgian wrestler
Karl Gotch (Karl Istaz, 1924–2007)—extended the trend for strong style matches into full-
blown MMA. Thus, in 1986, a semi-retired professional wrestler, Satoru “Tiger Mask”
Sayama (1957–), opened a gym in Japan in which he taught an ancestor of MMA that he
called Shooto. This was essentially submission wrestling, taught as a martial art. A promo-
tion led by Sayama under the same name, Shooto, began holding legitimate MMA matches
in the mid-1980s and continues today. In 1991, professional wrestler Akira Maeda (1959–)
started a similar promotion called RINGS. RINGS started with Shooto-style matches but
with prearranged outcomes, same as is done in pro wrestling. However, later in the decade,
RINGS switched to MMA, thereby straddling that blurry line in Japan between worked (pre-
determined) shoot-style matches and legitimate shoots (meaning matches in which the
results are not determined in advance).
In 1993, pro wrestlers Masakatsu Funaki, Minoru Suzuki, Yoshiki Takahashi, and Yusuke
Fuke formed a Japanese promotion called Pancrase. Pancrase allowed kicks and open-hand
strikes while standing: open-hand strikes were more acceptable to Japanese audiences than were
strikes with ﬁsts, probably because open-handed strikes were common in both professional
wrestling and sumo (Krauss and Aita 2002).
This brings us back to Ken Shamrock. In high school, Shamrock had wrestled and boxed, and
afterwards, he participated in Original Toughman and pro wrestling matches. He was subse-
quently hired to work in a short-lived Japanese pro wrestling promotion called Universal
Wrestling Federation (UWF). While wrestling in Japan, Shamrock met Suzuki and Funaki, and
when Suzuki and Funaki went to Pancrase, Shamrock went with them.
Mixed Martial Arts
487
www.ebook3000.com

During his preliminary UFC bout with Smith, Shamrock made short work of him, submit-
ting him via heel hook (leg lock submission) after a quick takedown.
In the semi-ﬁnals, Gracie fought Shamrock. Both played the techniques that worked in the
past, but Shamrock’s experience in worked matches did not prepare him for Gracie’s chokes.
Gracie then went on to win the tournament.
Although the ﬁrst UFC performed well in the ratings, it paid a price for its hype. In
November 1985, an organization called Battlecade (owned in part by Penthouse publisher Bob
Guccione, 1930–) tried to organize a similar show in Brooklyn, New York. New York State
Senator Roy Goodman (R-Manhattan, 1930–) said no, saying MMA was “human cockﬁghting”
(Liff 1995). Syndicated columnist George Will (1941–) got into the act a week later, describing
the sport’s customers as including “slack-jawed children whose parents must be cretins” (Will
1995). A week after that, U.S. senators John McCain (R-Arizona, 1936–) and Ben Nighthorse
Campbell (R-Colorado, 1933–) sent letters to state governors asking them to prohibit this
“repugnant blood sport” (Brooke 1995). McCain also began using his position as head of the
Senate Commerce Committee to pressure pay-per-view corporations to drop Ultimate Fighting
shows (Wertheim 2009).
The upshot was that MMA promoters began facing expensive legal battles wherever they
went, and the last-minute venue and rules changes were analogous to the problems that prizeﬁght
promoters had faced a century before. For example, in Michigan, SEG was forced to institute last-
minute rule changes that included a ban on striking with the closed ﬁst. The Supreme Court of
Michigan, in order to make that determination, viewed past UFC matches, and in its published
opinion, Kelly v. SEG Sports Corp. 1997 WL 37475 (June 4, 1997), the court remarked that it was
the ﬁrst time that its members had performed legal research at Blockbuster Video.
During this period, the popularity of MMA was sustained largely through video sales and the
Internet. Web sites became the virtual gathering place for tens of thousands of fans to discuss
events that relatively few could see ﬁrsthand (Wertheim 2009).
However, web sites generated no income for MMA and its promoters. So, toward avoiding
legal problems while still making money, promoters began staging MMA events at Native
American casinos. This proved reasonably lucrative and also attracted the attention of the
gaming industry. The question was, if MMA were legalized, and introduced into New Jersey and
Nevada casinos, would MMA prove as lucrative as professional boxing? Members of the gam-
ing industry apparently believed that it would, because in September 2000, the New Jersey
State Athletic Control Board instituted its Mixed Martial Arts Uniﬁed Rules of Conduct
(N.J.A.C. 13.24A and N.J.A.C. 13.24B). California and Nevada soon enacted similar legisla-
tion, and after that, MMA was a legal sport, subject to essentially the same requirements as pro-
fessional boxing.
In 2001, casino interests purchased ownership of the UFC brand from SEG. The UFC’s new
owner, Zuffa LLC, was based in Las Vegas, and its ﬁnancing was provided by the gaming indus-
try billionaires Frank J. Fertitta III and his brother Lorenzo. The Fertittas’ holdings stretched
across the United States, and their guess that MMA could be proﬁtable for the casinos proved
correct. The ﬁrst MMA show sanctioned by the Nevada State Athletic Commission took place
at the Mandalay Bay Hotel and Casino (an MGM property) on September 28, 2001. While
ofﬁcial attendance was just 7,238, pay-per-view sales took the total gate to $816,660 (Nevada
State Athletic Commission 2009).
488
Mixed Martial Arts

Rebranding MMA began soon after. Cable television was used to do this, and the process
included developing a UFC-owned reality show called The Ultimate Fighter (Spike TV, January
2005-present). The premiere was slotted so that it followed Spike’s telecast of the World
Wrestling Entertainment promotion called Raw (Larson 2005), and it soon proved to be among
Spike’s most popular shows. Zuffa also sought corporate sponsorship for its UFC brand. In
January 2008, motorcycle manufacturer Harley-Davidson became a major sponsor for the UFC,
and a month later, brewery giant Anheuser-Busch, a longtime advertiser at boxing matches,
also partnered with the UFC. Since then, Zuffa’s earnings have reportedly reached hundreds of
millions of dollars per year (Miller 2008), and the name “ultimate ﬁghting” has become a
generic brand name of the kind more commonly associated with soft drinks than professional
wrestling acts.
Other promotions having signiﬁcant corporate ties also contributed to the commercial
success of the MMA. For example, King of the Cage (KOTC) was started in 1998. King of the
Cage is considered a minor league circuit for MMA ﬁghters. Its shows were funded by a promo-
tion called ProElite, which in turn was owned by the cable network Showtime (a CBS afﬁliate).
Similarly, World Extreme Cage Fighting (WEC) was started in 2001. Zuffa bought WEC in
December 2006, and today, WEC is geared toward developing lighter-weight ﬁghters.
The market demographic for the UFC is white males aged 18–35. The UFC does not
perceive large pay-per-view sales from African American viewers (Wertheim 2009). Nonethe-
less, African Americans are frequent participants in UFC events, and in March 2008, Black
Entertainment Television introduced its own MMA reality show, Iron Ring. In this show, the
concept was that celebrity hip-hop and sports ﬁgures would pick teams of MMA contestants to
compete against one another. A year later, in April 2009, Bellator Fighting Championships, a
promotion aimed at the Hispanic market, made its debut on ESPN Deportes (Gross 2009).
Today, MMA is marketed internationally, and schools and professional promotions can be
found in many countries. MMA remains very strong in Japan, and two of the longest running
promotions, Shooto and Pancrase, continue to regularly organize major events. South Korea also
has several large promotions and its own reality show. In China, the Art of War promotion has
imported ﬁghters from Europe and Japan and boasts of its satellite television availability across
East Asia. Mexico and Canada hold professional MMA events, and Brazilian ﬁghters travel
internationally. In Western Europe, Netherlands turns out many ﬁne MMA practitioners, to
include Bas Rutten (1965–), as does Eastern Europe, where locally developed champions include
the Ukrainian heavyweight Fedor Emelianenko (1976–).
Although MMA is being used to sell beer around the world, it has not experienced global-
ization and commodiﬁcation in quite the same way as other martial arts and combative sports.
First, MMA was always intended to borrow techniques from anywhere. Second, it was developed
speciﬁcally to attract male television viewers aged 18–35. In that regard, MMA is unique. At the
same time, however, less blatantly commercial users have begun appropriating MMA for their
own purposes. For example, fans have created enthusiastic on-line communities, and amateur
participants down to high school level ﬁnd agonistic competition and dream of fame and fortune
(Porter 2008).
One of the more interesting noncommercial appropriations involves the U.S. military. Since
the mid-1990s, the U.S. military has been interested in Brazilian jiu-jitsu and MMA. Although
learning to drop to the guard (a supine position on one’s back) is less than ideal in military
Mixed Martial Arts
489
www.ebook3000.com

scenarios, learning to take down and hold prisoners is very useful during peacekeeping opera-
tions. In addition, teaching and promoting martial arts has been shown to have a positive effect
on morale. Thus, by styling MMA as a training aid, the U.S. military is capitalizing on the
popularity of MMA within the age groups from which it recruits.
Another interesting appropriation involves women. Although the UFC steadfastly refuses to
hold women’s events, Japan has held signiﬁcant women-only events. For example, Smackgirl has
been holding women’s only events since December 2000. In the United States, some smaller
promotions, such as Hook N Shoot, run by a former pro wrestler and UFC announcer named Jeff
Osborne, have also been holding women’s events since March 2001.
Part of the promoters’ resistance to female participation involves the presentation of
masculinity that MMA represents. The market for UFC is the male demographic, aged 18–35.
At the same time, a mixed martial art match is an intimate encounter. Its language (submission,
mount) has sexual connotations, and the activity prominently features scantily clad but
muscular competitors swapping sweat, breath, and blood while grasping one another tightly. The
promotions also present the actions of physically beating, dominating, and submitting an
opponent as quintessentially masculine activities. Introducing female MMA practitioners simply
underscores the inherently homoerotic elements of MMA, while at the same time providing
undeniable evidence that women are capable of engaging in the same kinds of aggressive
physical activity as men. Presumably, this is not what cable executives believe young male
drinkers of Bud Light want to pay money to see on late-night TV.
From the standpoint of safety, the record of MMA appears consistent with other striking
sports. In contrast to professional boxing, only a few deaths have been reported, and of these,
just one of these deaths (Sam Vasquez in October 2007) was the direct result of injuries received
during a match sanctioned by an athletic commission. Nonetheless, injuries to the hands and
face are common, occurring in more than a third of all participants (Bledsoe et al., 2006). The
current trend favoring striking intensive matchups and restarts for slow action bouts may work
to increase the injury rate. As in boxing, the general risk of injury appears to rise with the age of
the participants.
—Jason Couch
See also: Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu; Fighting Arts of the Hellenic, Hellenistic, and Roman Eras 
(in Volume I); Commodiﬁcation of Leisure; Globalization of Martial Arts; International 
Boxing; Professional Wrestling; Television and the Martial Arts; The Internet and the 
Martial Arts; Military Unarmed Fighting Systems in the United States; and Action 
Design for Professional Wrestling (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Bledsoe, Gregory H., Edbert B. Hsu, Jurek George Grabowski, Justin D. Brill, and Guohua Li. 2006.
“Incidence of Injury in Professional Mixed Martial Arts Competitions,” Journal of Sports Science
and Medicine 5, July 1, 136–142, via http://www.jssm.org, accessed October 17, 2009.
Bolelli, Daniele. 2003. “Mixed Martial Arts: A Technical Analysis of the Ultimate Fighting Cham-
pionship in Its Formative Years,” Journal of Asian Martial Arts 12(3), 40–51.
Bottenburg, Marten van, and Johan Heilbron. 2006. “De-Sportization of Fighting Contests: The
Origins and Dynamics of No Holds Barred Events and the Theory of Sportization,” International
Review for the Sociology of Sport 41(3–4), 259–282, DOI: 10.1177/1012690207078043, via
http://online.sagepub.com/, accessed October 16, 2009.
490
Mixed Martial Arts

Brooke, James. 2005. “Modern-Day Gladiators Head for Denver, but the Welcome Mat is Rolled Up,”
New York Times, December 10, Sunday edition, Section 1, 22, via http://news.google.com/
archivesearch, accessed October 17, 2009.
Cerone, Daniel. 1993. “Kapow! No-Holds-Barred-Violence-$14.95 Television: Friday’s Pay-Per-View
Event With No Rules Brings Together Eight Fighters Who Will Battle One Another for $50,000
in Prize Money,” Los Angeles Times, November 10, F-1, via ProQuest, accessed October 17, 2009.
Downey, Greg. 2007. “Producing Pain: Techniques and Technologies in No-Holds-Barred Fighting,”
Social Studies of Science 37(2), April, 201–226, DOI: 10.1177/0306312706072174, via
http://online.sagepub.com/, accessed October 16, 2009.
Gentry, Clyde. 2002. No Holds Barred: The Story of Ultimate Fighting. Preston, UK: Milo Books Ltd.
Gross, Josh. 2009. “With UFC Still a Powerhouse, Regional Promoters Walk a Fine Line,” SI.com,
http://sportsillustrated.cnn.com/2009/writers/josh_gross/02/20/regional.mma/?eref=sircrc, accessed
May 10, 2009.
Hewitt, Mark. 2005. Catch Wrestling: A Wild and Wooly Look at the Early Days of Pro Wrestling in
America. Boulder, CO: Paladin Press.
Jordan, Pat. 1989. “Bad,” Playboy 36(9), September, via http://stickgrappler.tripod.com/bjj/bad.html,
accessed May 28, 2009.
Krauss, Erich, and Bret Aita. 2002. Brawl: A Behind-the-Scenes Look at Mixed Martial Arts Competition.
Toronto: ECW Press.
Larson, Megan. 2005. “Ultimate Fighter Punches Up Spike Ratings,” AllBusiness.com, January 20,
http://www.allbusiness.com/services/business-services-miscellaneous-business/4761479-1.html,
accessed May 11, 2009.
Liff, Bob. 1995. “They’d KO Extreme Fighting,” New York Daily News, November 14, via
http://www.nydailynews.com/archives/news/1995/11/14/1995-11-14_they_d_ko_extreme_ﬁghting
.html, accessed October 17, 2009.
Logan-Browne, R. No date. “Neo-Pancratium,” Health and Strength, via http://www.geocities.com/
michaelmunro2003/, accessed October 17, 2009
Miller, Matthew. 2008. “Ultimate Cash Machine,” Forbes.com, April 10, http://www.forbes.com/
forbes/2008/0505/080.html, accessed May 10, 2009.
Nevada State Athletic Commission. 2009. “Nevada’s Top MMA Gates.” http://boxing.nv.gov/
New_MMAGates.htm, accessed May 11, 2009.
Porter, Justin. 2008. “Mixed Martial Arts Makes Its Way to High School,” New York Times, November
18, http://www.nytimes.com/2008/11/18/sports/othersports/18mma.html?_r=1, accessed May 10,
2009.
Wertheim, L. Jon. 2009. Blood in the Cage: Mixed Martial Arts, Pat Miletich, and the Furious Rise of the
UFC. New York: Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt Publishing Co.
Will, George. 1995. “Competition No Elevator in the Entertainment World,” Galveston Daily News,
November 26, 13, via http://www.newspaperarchive.com, accessed October 17, 2009.
PROFESSIONAL WRESTLING
Professional wrestling is live muscular theater. Its purpose is to separate the audience (known as
“marks”) from their money. Venues for nineteenth-century professional wrestling included music
halls and saloons. The wrestlers worked between dance routines, singers, and juggling acts. The
wrestlers were there for the money rather than to hurt one another, but at the same time, they
had to give the crowd a good show. Thus, wrestlers developed a system known as “working,” in
which they built audience suspense while making each other look good. Most nineteenth-
century professional wrestlers were technically competent and all were strong, and when
audience members could be induced to bet upon the outcome of their matches, then bets were
Professional Wrestling
491
www.ebook3000.com

placed, just as in boxing. And, as in boxing, wrestlers and their managers sometimes sought to
prearrange, or ﬁx, results. A typical wrestling scam involved a wrestler spending several months
in a town, beating everyone in sight, and then losing to a partner who drifted into town
pretending to be a scrawny, underfed unknown.
During well-publicized matches, nationalism and ethnicity mattered. For example, in 1869,
a Dane named Frederik Safft defeated a German named Wilhelm Heygster. Because the
Prussians had defeated Denmark in a war just ﬁve years earlier, that victory made Safft a hero in
Denmark. During the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–1905, jujutsu acts became popular in the
vaudeville circuits of the United States, Europe, and Latin America. In these acts, the Japanese
were often portrayed as almost unbeatable ﬁghters, but after World War II, Japanese wrestlers
were more often portrayed as villains (“heels”). Similarly, during 1909–1910, a wealthy Bengali
nationalist sent four Indian wrestlers to Europe as part of a scheme to prove that Europeans could
be beaten using Indian methods. As expected, the Indian wrestlers did well in Europe, and on
their return home, Indian nationalists treated them as conquering heroes. On the other hand, in
California during the 1930s, “Hindoo match” was simply a synonym for mud wrestling.
Popular turn-of-the-century European wrestling champions included George Hackenschmidt
(1878–1968) and Stanley Zbyszko (Stanislaw Cyganiewicz, 1879–1967). These men worked in
the music halls of Paris, London, and Vienna, and they did turns with partners, lifted weights,
and accepted challenges from the crowd. These challengers were often shills, because champi-
ons had nothing to gain and everything to lose by wrestling unknowns. As Hackenschmidt put
it in an article published in Health and Strength on March 20, 1909, “Wrestling is my business . . .
[Although] I am certainly very fond of the sporting element which enters into it, [I] should be
absurdly careless if I allowed my tastes in that direction to interfere too seriously with my career
in life.”
In North America, prominent turn-of-the-century wrestlers included Evan “Strangler” Lewis
(1860–1919), Martin “Farmer” Burns (1861–1937), Tom Jenkins (1872–1957), and Frank
Gotch (1878–1917). Jingoistic sportswriters clamored to learn whether European or American
wrestling was best. This led to two well-publicized matches between Gotch and Hackenschmidt.
Gotch won both times, and so U.S. sportswriters awarded him the title of “Champion of the
World.” The ending of the Gotch–Hackenschmidt rematch of September 1911 was anticlimac-
tic, and this contributed to the decline of heavyweight wrestling in North America throughout
the rest of the decade.
Scandals plagued North American professional wrestling throughout the 1910s. One notori-
ous case happened in March 1910, when John C. Maybray and about eighty others (including
Gotch’s former manager, Joe Carroll) pleaded guilty to charges of using the postal service to ﬁx
wrestling matches. Toward reducing the appearance of corruption, the National Boxing Associ-
ation began recognizing “ofﬁcial” wrestling championships and subsequently organized a
National Wrestling Association. In practice, however, promoters and wrestlers continued doing
business as usual.
What was business as usual? For a few wrestlers, it meant going back to hustling. Fred
Grubmeier, who ﬂourished during the 1920s, was legendary for dressing like a hick, losing
matches to second-rate local wrestlers, and then “accidentally” defeating the regional champion
once the money was down.
492
Professional Wrestling

Some wrestlers worked in carnival sideshows. Sideshow wrestlers were not much different
from British and Australian tent boxers or Brazilian Vale Tudo participants. That is, the wrestlers
were real, and some of their challengers were equally real. A local wrestler would think he could
beat the traveling wrestler, and decide to prove it to his friends. Other times, the champion of
one troupe decided to challenge the champion of another troupe to determine which troupe got
the best spaces. Sometimes, however, the wrestling was simply between the troupe wrestler and
a shill from the crowd.
Other wrestlers worked in Wild West shows and big-top circuses. These wrestlers did not
wrestle in the sideshow. Instead, they wrestled under the big top. The product was known
generically as “Slam Bang Western Style Wrestling,” and it was said to combine the showiest
moves of boxing, football, and Greco-Roman wrestling with old-time lumber camp ﬁghting. In
other words, this was movie-style stunt work performed before live audiences. Pioneers of this
style included Joseph “Toots” Mondt (1894–1976), Billy Sandow (ca. 1884–1972), and Ed
“Strangler” Lewis (born Robert Friedrich, 1891–1966).
Eventually, though, most professional wrestlers went to work for regional promoters whose
areas of control were known as “territories.” Noted regional promoters included Jack Curley in
New York (1876–1937), Lou Daro in Los Angeles (1886–1958), and Paul Bowser in Boston
(ca. 1886–1960).
During the Great Depression, vaudeville circuits closed and circuses retrenched, and this led
to ﬁnancial difﬁculties for promoters, contract wrestlers, and hustlers alike. Also, because few
wrestling promoters had chosen to follow boxing promoters’ practice of paying sportswriters to
write favorable things about their stars, scandalous exposés continued to appear in the newspa-
pers. Worse, newspaper sports editors often refused to write about pro wrestling acts in their
columns and instead required promoters to take out paid ads in the classiﬁed sections of the
newspaper. This led to further decline in business, and by the mid-1930s, big venues such as
Madison Square Garden often refused to book wrestling shows.
Promoters used gimmicks to draw the fans back to wrestling. These gimmicks included
midgets, women, ugly wrestlers (e.g., French Angels), enormous men (e.g., Man Mountains and
Blimps) and an assortment of ﬂashy athletic techniques (e.g., airplane spins, ﬂying tackles, and
jumping kicks). Mud wrestling also dates to the 1930s, as part of the Hindoo wrestling done in
California. These Hindoo matches are mentioned because wrestling acts that exacerbated
national or ethnic rivalries were very popular during most of the twentieth century.
During World War II (1939–1945), professional wrestlers were sometimes hired as hand-to-
hand combat instructors. At one Royal Marine Commando camp, instructors included a
professional wrestler aptly known as Bellringer and a judo black belt and Olympic-caliber freestyle
wrestler named Stanley “Sonny” Bissell (1906–1999). Trainee exposure to Commando hand-to-
hand ﬁghting methods began with a rehearsed act. In James Dunning’s words (2000, 116), this act
“started with a summary of the vulnerable points including, quite naturally, the ‘goollies’ . . . It was
a very ‘professional’ and stimulating demonstration that had the trainees raring to ‘have a go.’”
Professional wrestlers trained U.S. soldiers similarly. Hand-to-hand combat instructors at an
Army Ranger training course in Hawaii, for instance, included the Japanese American profes-
sional wrestler Kaimon Kudo (1906–1993), while instructors at Fort Lewis, Washington,
included professional wrestler Aloysius “Lou” Thesz (1916–2002).
Professional Wrestling
493
www.ebook3000.com

With so many male wrestlers in military service, women’s wrestling became popular in the
United States during the early 1940s. Women had been wrestling on the vaudeville circuit since the
nineteenth century, but now, for the ﬁrst time, female wrestlers were featured as main events rather
than novelty acts. German newspapers picked up on this, and during 1943 and 1944, Nazi propa-
gandists used the story to tell the German public how corrupt and immoral the Americans were.
In 1948, a group of North American wrestling promoters organized the National Wrestling
Alliance (NWA). The idea was to reduce competition between territories. Unfortunately, as Lou
Thesz put it, most of the promoters were “thieves, and the one quality all of them shared was
suspicion of each other” (Thesz 1995, 107).
By 1956, thirty-eight promoters belonged to the NWA, and between them, they effectively
controlled professional wrestling in North America and exerted considerable inﬂuence in
Mexico and Japan. This arrangement eventually led to still another scandal, namely the U.S.
courts ruling that NWA practices represented an illegal restraint of trade.
Fans were generally unaware of this. Or, more precisely, if they were aware, they dismissed it
as unimportant. Thus, to many wrestling fans, the period from the early 1950s to the late 1970s
represents the Golden Age of Wrestling. The nostalgia is owed in part to the energy, or “heat,”
which charismatic wrestlers such as Lou Thesz, Buddy Rogers (Herman Rohde Jr., 1921–1992),
and Killer Kowalski (Wladek “Walter” Kowalski, 1926–2008) could generate from live audi-
ences. Mostly, though, it was due to the popularity of televised wrestling.
It was as if wrestling was made for television. The action was limited to a small, well-lit area,
and everything could be ﬁlmed by one camera. Thus, in Japan, people soon stood by the
thousands in the street to watch their hero Rikidozan (Kim Sin-nak, 1924–1963) beat
Americans, while in the United States Americans congregated in bars to watch their heroes beat
Japanese American wrestlers called the Great Togo and Mr. Moto. Perhaps the most infamous of
the early television wrestlers was Gorgeous George (1915–1963). Originally named George
Wagner (he changed his name legally), George was a dandy whose costumes, pomaded hair, and
abrasive style fans loved to hate. His performances offended special interest groups ranging from
churches to civil rights groups. Ticket sales soared.
During the early 1960s the National Wrestling Alliance split up. Important new organiza-
tions included the American Wrestling Association (AWA), headed by Verne Gagne (1926–),
and the World Wide Wrestling Federation (WWWF), headed by Vincent J. McMahon
(1914–1984). Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, business continued as it had since the 1940s. In
1983, McMahon relinquished control of his organization, by then known as the World Wrestling
Federation (WWF), to his son, Vincent K. McMahon (1945–). About the same time, cable
television networks began looking to ﬁll niche markets. The younger McMahon soon moved to
ﬁll those niches with WWF wrestling. Toward this end, he raided other territories for talent. He
also told the media that professional wrestling was moribund, and that he and the WWF were
going to revitalize it. The reporters bought the line, and so promoted his story of “the amazing
revival of wrestling.”
McMahon’s plan included creating Hulkamania. Hulkamania revolved around soap opera
plots surrounding a wrestler called Hulk Hogan (Terry Bollea, 1953–), and his adventures with
celebrities such as pop singer Cyndi Lauper (1953–) and TV action star Mr. T (born Laurence
Tureaud, 1952–). Fans of old-time wrestling claimed to hate the WWF storylines and vowed
never to watch wrestling again. But, like alcoholics or drug addicts, few stuck to their promises,
494
Professional Wrestling

and in 1987, Hogan beat Andre the Giant (André Roussimoff, 1946–1993) in Detroit before a
live audience said to have numbered over 90,000 people.
This ﬁnancial success piqued the interest of Atlanta businessman Ted Turner (Robert Edward
Turner III, 1938–). Toward jumpstarting his own wrestling show, Turner bought Jim Crockett
Promotions. The new Turner production was called World Championship Wrestling (WCW).
A problem for both WCW and WWF was the lack of farm systems. Toward correcting this
shortfall, schools taught by retired wrestlers such as Karl Gotch (born Karl Istaz, 1924–2007) and
Killer Kowalski emerged. Local independent promotions also developed. Known as “indies,”
local promotions made little money for anyone but still provided wrestlers with training, crowd
interaction, and dreams of stardom.
At ﬁrst, WCW attempted to portray an image similar to that of wrestling during the Golden
Age of Television. Thus, WCW performers wrestled in Spartan attire of boots and trunks, and
feuds and angles were reminiscent of the 1950s, where the wrestlers lost due to concern over sick
relatives. Meanwhile, in the WWF soap opera, wrestlers were reported having affairs with other
wrestlers’ wives. The Undertaker (Mark Calaway, 1965–) “rose from the dead.” Women stripped
in the ring. And in 1998, wrestler Val Venis (born Sean Morley, 1971–) supposedly came within
seconds of having his penis chopped off, but in a guest appearance, John Wayne Bobbitt
(1967–), whose penis really had been severed during an argument with his wife, came to the
wrestler’s rescue. WWF ratings soared, and the WCW soon followed the WWF model.
As the soap opera raked in the money, both on television and on the Internet, performers
from basketball, boxing, and football gleefully joined the show. Thus, there were ex-NFL play-
ers in the WWF and WCW during the late 1990s and early 2000s, and boxer Mike Tyson
(1966–) and basketball stars Dennis Rodman (1961–) and Karl Malone (1963–) participated in
professional wrestling angles and events.
So, is wrestling theater in a squared circle, the Shakespeare of sport? That is certainly a plau-
sible explanation. Nonetheless, even that explanation does not explain why millions of people
enjoy watching professional wrestling yet ignore Olympic wrestling and judo, or why the market
for Mixed Martial Arts is growing dramatically in pay-per-view.
—Jeff Archer and Joseph Svinth
See also: Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu; Japan: Jujutsu-based Systems; Japan: Sumo; Korea: Ssireum; 
South Asian Martial Arts (in Volume I); Invented Traditions; Globalization of the 
Martial Arts; Finnish-Canadian Wrestling; Mixed Martial Arts; International 
Freestyle and Greco-Roman Wrestling; Television and the Martial Arts; 
and American Judo, 1942–1945 (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Archer, Jeff. 1998. Theater in a Squared Circle. Lafayette, CO: White-Boucke Publishing.
Ayoub, Libnan, with Tom Gannon. 1998. 100 Years of Australian Professional Wrestling. Marrickville,
New South Wales: Topmill Pty.
Beekman, Scott. 2006. Ringside: A History of Professional Wrestling in America. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Dunning, James. 2000. “It Had To Be Tough”: The Fascinating Story of the Origins of the Commandos and
Their Special Training in World War II. Hampshire, UK: James Dunning.
Freedman, Jim. 1988. Drawing Heat. Windsor, Ontario: Black Moss Press.
Garﬁeld, Simon. 1996. The Wrestling. London: Faber and Faber.
Professional Wrestling
495
www.ebook3000.com

Grifﬁn, Marcus. 1937. Fall Guys: The Barnums of Bounce, the Inside Story of the Wrestling Business,
America’s Most Proﬁtable and Best Organized Professional Sport. Chicago: Reilly and Lee, via
http://martialhistory.com/reprints/fall-guys-the-barnums-of-bounce-by-marcus-grifﬁn-1937/13/,
accessed October 17, 2009.
Hewitt, Mark S. 2005. Catch Wrestling: A Wild and Wooly Look at the Early Days of Pro Wrestling in
America. Boulder, CO: Paladin Press.
Jares, Joe. 1974. Whatever Happened to Gorgeous George? Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Rugg, George K. 1996. “The Jack Pfefer Wrestling Collection,” The Reverend Edmund P. Joyce, C. S. C.
Sports Research Collection, University Libraries of Notre Dame, http://www.nd.edu/~joycecol/
Wrestling/pfefer.html, accessed January 18, 2010.
Thesz, Lou, with Kit Bauman. 1995. Hooker: An Authentic Wrestler’s Adventures inside the Bizarre World
of Professional Wrestling. Norfolk, VA: Lou Thesz and Kit Bauman.
REALITY-BASED DEFENSE
“Reality-based defense” describes a method of self-defense training developed in North America
during the late twentieth century. The name was popularized by Jim Wagner, who wrote a
column on the topic for the California-based Black Belt magazine during the late 1990s and early
2000s. The method subsequently spread overseas, ﬁrst into Britain (Geoff Thompson was a
pioneer), and then Switzerland, Germany, and Australia. Common synonyms include “reality
defense,” “reality-based training,” and “reality self-defense.”
Reality is a social construct. Our perception of reality is based on things such as culture,
religion, media, advertising, and technology. News reports, speeches by political or religious
leaders, and the stories of our family and friends can all generate fear, even in people who are not
objectively at much risk.
Because reality-based defense is offered mostly in cities (one needs a large enough population
to support the trainers ﬁnancially), reality-based defense has an urban focus. Because participa-
tion in the training costs hundreds of dollars, most of the people training in reality-based defense
live in the cities’ wealthier neighborhoods or immediate suburbs. These people do not, as a rule,
experience overt physical violence as part of daily life. Moreover, these people have different
physical and emotional needs from teenagers and young adults training to be soldiers or Olympic
athletes. Reality-based training methodologies have been developed with these facts in mind.
TECHNIQUES
Structurally, reality-based defense lies at the intersection of several overlapping ﬁelds. These
ﬁelds are, in no particular order:
1.
Military and law enforcement training
2.
Traditional martial arts and combative sports
3.
Commercial self-defense programs such as Model Mugging and Kidpower
4.
Advances in protective equipment
5.
Academic, legal, and scientiﬁc research
6.
Media and mass marketing inﬂuences
The advertisements for reality-based defense courses typically set up traditional and sportive
martial arts as straw men. Traditional and sportive martial arts take too long to learn, focus too
496
Reality-Based Defense

much on tradition and etiquette, and so on. However, by the deﬁnitions of this book, reality-
based defense is martial art. That is, it blends the physical components of combat with strategy
and philosophy. It simply follows different models to different conclusions.
Techniques of reality-based defense range from the advice, “Lock your door and call 9-1-1”
to practicing every technique forbidden in any sensible martial art. So that these dangerous tech-
niques can be practiced safely, they are practiced against trainers (not opponents) who are
wearing helmets and substantial protective gear.
At the conceptual level, reality-based defense is distinguished from World War II combatives
or Krav Maga by the fact that practitioners of reality-based defense are not expected to attack.
Instead, in reality-based defense, breaking contact and running away is perfectly acceptable. More-
over, the reality-based practitioner is constantly reminded that it is important to stop his or her
attack as soon as the threat is neutralized. Litigation is part of twenty-ﬁrst-century urban reality.
At the same time, several things distinguish reality-based defense from traditional martial art
or modern combative sport. For one thing, in reality-based defense, the violence does not occur
through mutual consent. The victim did not put on a special uniform or go to a mutually agreed-
upon space. The victim did not even necessarily agree to the famously spare Shakespearean stage
direction, “They ﬁght.”
Another important difference is that reality-based defense discusses both pre- and postcon-
ﬂict stages. This is important.
Rory Miller (2008, 42) has named one common preconﬂict stage “the Monkey Dance.” The
Monkey Dance starts with a stare. Next is a verbal challenge. After that comes some chest
thumping or a ﬁnger poke. Finally, the ﬁght starts when somebody throws a dominant-hand
roundhouse punch. Miller notes that one can ﬁnish the Monkey Dance simply by jumping
steps. However, as Miller notes elsewhere in his book, resisting a true predatory attack is some-
thing else altogether. Predators are hunters. Hunters do not announce themselves to their prey.
Hunters attack from ambush, and they attack with lethal intent. It is very hard to defend
against a competent predator, but reality-based defense does its best to show people ways of
doing just that.
The aftermath is equally important. In traditional martial arts and combative sports, the
focus is entirely on what one does after passing step four of the Monkey Dance. The post-
traumatic stress is rarely mentioned at all.
TYPICAL PROGRAMS
Most reality-based programs are offered in seminar format. Individual topics may include (but are
not limited to) legal issues, ﬁrst aid training, awareness training, introductory unarmed defense,
advanced unarmed defense, adrenal stress training, self-defense using ﬁrearms, self-defense using
edged and blunt impact weapons, and unarmed self-defense against edged and blunt impact
weapons.
Jim Wagner organized the ﬁrst commercial courses in reality-based defense, but today, many
other courses are available. As in any other business, instructors specialize, or offer services that
others do not. For example, James Keating and Raymond Floro specialize in edged weapons. Bill
Kipp specializes in adrenaline-based training. Darren Lauer specializes in awareness training.
Realﬁghting offers weekly training as well as seminars, while Tony Blauer offers courses at a
training site in addition to seminars.
Reality-Based Defense
497
www.ebook3000.com

Unless they are being sent by their parents or employers, students at these courses gener-
ally fall into one of two categories. The ﬁrst is individuals who had a recent incident. These
people are often timid and may have to be taught to ﬁght back. The second is individuals who
used to box, wrestle, or train in martial arts. Now that they are older, and not training as
much, they are not sure whether the techniques they learned will still work in self-defense.
Because the mindsets of these two groups are very different, the two groups are usually kept
separated.
In any event, the premise of all these courses is that one can learn the fundamentals of self-
defense in surprisingly short periods of time—usually, no more than a couple of weekends, fol-
lowed by occasional refresher courses.
Most courses begin with an introduction. Bill Kipp, for instance, begins by asking why the
attendees came. What is it that they fear? “Where they would set the boundaries. When would
you risk your life for another, when would you risk venting a rage that could hurt someone.
When is it OK to feel angry or vulnerable?” (Scanlon 1990).
During the second phase of the course, trainers discuss ways of reducing risk. For example, be
aware of your surroundings. Work on conﬂict resolution skills. Learn to employ verbal and phys-
ical boundaries. Learn to recognize threats while there is still time to mitigate the danger. Learn
your own physiological responses to fear and stress.
During the third phase of the course, trainers go over the use of force continuum. The use of
force continuum is a concept borrowed from law enforcement, and it discusses how much force
one can legally use in response to a given situation. The bottom line is that if you hit someone
with your bare hands, you probably won’t kill him or her, but the action will put you at risk of
serious legal difﬁculties. If you use a weapon, then you are almost guaranteed to be facing time-
consuming and expensive legal battles, and you may go to prison. This is why, for civilian self-
defense, avoidance is always the preferable option.
Unfortunately, avoidance is not always possible. There are human predators, and you can be
their intended prey. Not everyone has the resolve to hurt or maim another person, even to save
his or her own life. Predators know this. Indeed, they count on it.
This brings us to the fourth stage, the hands-on portion of the course. When training the
timid, the purpose of reality-based training is to help seminar attendees face their fears and over-
come their qualms. Toward that end, attendees spend a few hours learning and practicing proven
techniques such as palm-heel to chin and knee to groin, and how to escape common holding and
pinning techniques. (When you are defending against sexual assault, it is axiomatic that the
attacker wants to take you to the ground.) When training people who have already been trained
in some other system, it is usually necessary to get them to quit thinking that their old ways are
the only ways. People get lost in the intricacy of their own systems.
Training usually includes some force-on-force training. The attacker is normally the person
giving the seminar, or one of his or her employees. The attacker is usually wearing considerable
padding, so that he or she can be struck with full force. The padded attacker is not trying to win,
in the traditional sense. When working with the timid, the attacker is simply trying to increase
attendees’ self-conﬁdence. On the other hand, when working with experienced ﬁghters, the
attacker may try to intentionally provoke attendees into an adrenalized state. The idea is so that
the attendees learn (or get reminded) that when the adrenaline kicks in and the pulse soars to
over 175 beats per minute, judgment fails and fancy moves are forgotten.
498
Reality-Based Defense

The last part of the training is (or should be) a discussion of what comes next. Win, lose, or
draw, there are always ramiﬁcations—ﬁrst aid, permanent physical or emotional disability,
medical or burial expenses, police, lawyers, potential court actions, and well-meaning friends and
relatives.
BACKGROUND
Martial art instructors have offered self-defense classes to well-to-do urban clients for a very long
time. During the early eighteenth century, James Figg (ca. 1684–1734), the champion bare-knuckle
pugilist of England, taught fencing, boxing, and cudgeling to the friends of Frederick, Prince of
Wales (1707–1751). The Prince’s friends were afraid of street gangs such as the Scowrers, Hectors,
and Mohocks, whose members had the unpleasant habit of slicing the noses of young gentlemen.
During the nineteenth century, attacks by members of street gangs with names such as Apaches
caused Parisian gentlemen to study savate and la canne. During the early twentieth century, there
was a worldwide jiujitsu craze, due, in part, to the perception of increased street violence in rapidly
growing industrial cities. During World War II (1939–1945), men’s self-defense was taught as part
of wartime civil defense. Following World War II, there was considerable interest in the United
States in developing self-defense training for female college students (coeds).
Reality-based defense is part of this tradition. Its pioneers include Matt Thomas, who started
teaching self-defense to coeds in California during the early 1970s. Thomas had trained in karate,
kendo, and judo, but after one of his students was beaten and raped, he began questioning
whether these modern sportive arts had any value during violent encounters. After several years
of study, he came to the conclusion that many people—men as well as women—simply were not
programmed to physically strike someone else, unless ﬁrst told it was okay.
Toward teaching people that it was sometimes okay to physically strike someone else,
Thomas helped pioneer the program known as Model Mugging. Model Mugging has been
described, accurately enough, as “the most famous, intensive, and expensive course of its kind”
(McCaughey 1997, 60). Its classes cater to women, and its advertisement tells us that “in just
20 hours, Model Mugging provides the actual ﬁghting experience that is needed to successfully
defend oneself” (Zero Hour).
Structurally, Model Mugging is as much about empowerment as physical technique. Pub-
lished studies suggest that in the United States, one female in four and one male in six are
sexually assaulted before age sixteen (Heyden et al., 1999). Physical self-conﬁdence generally is
not high in this group. Thus, says Martha McCaughey (1997, 61), “Each class begins and ends
with the students circling up,” and as the students recount the events that led them to the
seminar, “a box of Kleenex gets passed around the circle.”
Of course, Model Mugging also teaches physical techniques—striking, kneeing, clawing,
biting, etc. When using these techniques, trainees are encouraged to “be sneaky, ﬁght dirty, and
win” (Chue 1978).
To ensure the concepts are understood, attendees are put into role playing simulations. You
are asleep, and someone enters your room. What do you do?
To make these simulations more realistic, the instructors at Model Mugging developed
padded assailant suits. That way, trainees could hit something more realistic than a bag. The suits
started as a padded hockey mask, hockey shin guards, a groin cup, and a pillow, but today, the
suits are highly sophisticated pieces of equipment.
Reality-Based Defense
499
www.ebook3000.com

Programs similar to Model Mugging include Impact, Prepare, Kidpower, and FAST Defense.
These are all brand names, and the difference between the various programs involves what the
owners think the paying customers want. Thus, some of these programs cater to soccer moms,
others are geared toward empowering abused women and children, and a few are essentially a day
of training with the bouncers from a rough bar.
Gavin de Becker’s thesis (1997) is that fear is a gift. All of us have these intuitive feelings
that let us know when something bad is about to happen. De Becker (1954–), a Senior Fel-
low at the UCLA School of Public Affairs and a former security advisor to President Ronald
Reagan (1911–2004), says that this intuitive radar is usually right, and that if we ignore it,
we risk becoming victims. De Becker asserts that violence is predictable, and that by learn-
ing to predict violence, we can prevent it. He even sells computer software that he says will
assist with this prediction. While this sounds good, the intuitive radar is not entirely reliable.
In 1999, a recent immigrant to the United States went outside his apartment late one night
to get some air. Standing on his stoop, he saw several big men moving toward him. The men
were of a different ethnic group, and they were shouting words he did not understand. He got
scared. He turned to run, then saw there was nowhere to go—there were four of them, not
just two. He reached for his wallet, pushed it toward them. “Gun!” shouted one of the big
men. All four men drew pistols, and in less than three seconds, they ﬁred forty-one shots,
center mass, exactly as trained. The four men were plainclothes police ofﬁcers, and in their
minds, in that neighborhood, law-abiding citizens did not stand motionless in the shadows in
the middle of the night. They decided to investigate. The man in the shadows turned away
from them, then turned back to face them, with a ﬂat, dark object in his hand. About the
same time, one of the ofﬁcers stumbled. “Gun!” a second ofﬁcer shouted. The young man’s
intuitive radar was wrong—and so was that of the plainclothes police ofﬁcers who killed him
(Gladwell 2005, 189–244).
David Grossman (dates unknown) is a former U.S. Army ofﬁcer. In his book, On Killing
(1995), Grossman argues that very few people are emotionally capable of killing someone else,
using bare hands, on their own volition. One can train people to kill with weapons easily
enough; armies have done this for thousands of years. But killing with bare hands is more
personal, and more difﬁcult.
The ideas of John Boyd (1927–1997) are also worth remarking. A former U.S. Air Force
ﬁghter pilot, Boyd argued that both individuals and bureaucracies make decisions according to a
decision cycle that he called the OODA Loop. The acronym stands for Observation, Orienta-
tion, Decision, and Action. Boyd said the usual response to ﬁascoes, by both individuals and
institutions, is to buy new hardware or create a new training model, but a more useful response
would be pay more attention to “the implicit nature of human beings” (Boyd 1987, 2).
If we accept Boyd’s premise, then the question is where one ﬁnds reliable information on the
implicit nature of violent people. Historically, most of the information has been anecdotal, or
based on what we read in the newspapers or saw on television. The problem is that newspapers
and television emphasize the sensational. At the other extreme, government data is dry and
describes only reported crime. But, according to one recent study based on Washington State
data, about 88 percent of the children who received mental health treatment through the state
crime victims program had been sexually assaulted, and about 40 percent of the adults had been
both sexually and physically assaulted (New and Berliner 2000).
500
Reality-Based Defense

Digital technologies are changing our understanding of reality, too. Police car cameras,
nanny cams, infrared cameras, security cameras, cell phones, and disposable digital cameras
have enabled the government, private ﬁrms, and the public to intrude on each other almost
at will and then post their ﬁndings almost instantly via the Internet. Although the graphic
imagery is often disturbing, it does not make us any safer—perpetrators may be apprehended
based on the visual evidence, but the crime was still committed. At the same time, the
imagery does give people who do not live on mean streets a better understanding of what real
violence looks like. It is fast, furious, and not nearly as elegant as anything staged for movies
or television.
—WR Mann and Joseph Svinth
See also: Savate, Chausson, and French Boxing (in Volume I); American Judo, 1942–1945; 
Kapap and Krav Maga; Military Unarmed Fighting Systems in the United States; 
Police Defensive Tactics Training in the United States; Jujutsuffragettes; 
and Women in Combat: The U.S. Military, 2001–Present.
REFERENCES
Boyd, John R. 1987. “Organic Design for Command and Control,” via http://www.d-n-i.net/
boyd/pdf/c&c.pdf, accessed September 6, 2009.
Chue, Teresa. 1978. “Women Told It’s OK to Fight Dirty,” Toledo Blade, August 5, 43, via http://news
.google.com/archivesearch, accessed October 17, 2009.
De Becker, Gavin. 1997. The Gift of Fear: Survival Signals That Protect Us from Violence. New York:
Random House.
Gladwell, Malcolm. 2005. Blink: The Power of Thinking without Thinking. New York and Boston: Little,
Brown.
Gockley, Catherine. 1992. “Hear Me Roar: ‘Model Mugging’ Self-Defense Courses Teach Women to
Fight Back under Attack and Win,” American Fitness, November-December, via http://ﬁndarticles
.com/p/articles/mi_m0675/is_n6_v10/ai_12934048/, accessed September 6, 2009.
Grossman, David A. 1995. On Killing: The Psychological Cost of Learning to Kill in War and Society.
Boston: Little, Brown.
Heyden, S. Margaret, Billie Francis Anger, Tiel Theng-Woo Jackson, and Todd David Ellner. 1999.
“Fighting Back Works: The Case for Advocating and Teaching Self-Defense against Rape,” Journal
of Physical Education, Recreation & Dance 70(5), 31–34, 39, via http://www.questia.com/Index.jsp,
accessed September 6, 2009.
Hristidis, Michalis, and WR Mann. 2009. “Reality Based Defense in Switzerland,” http://www
.swissrealitydefense.ch/, accessed September 7, 2009.
Mann, WR. 2008. “About Realﬁghting,” http://www.realﬁghting.com/content.php?id=61, accessed
September 7, 2009.
Miller, Rory. 2008. Meditations on Violence: A Comparison of Martial Arts Training & Real World
Violence. Boston: YMAA Publication Center.
McCaughey, Martha. 1997. Real Knockouts: The Physical Feminism of Women’s Self-Defense. New York:
New York University.
New, Michelle, and Lucy Berliner. 2000. “Mental Health Service Utilization by Victims of Crime,”
Journal of Traumatic Stress
13(4), 693–707, via http://www.springerlink.com/content/
w0739184k1rp3173/, accessed September 6, 2009.
Scanlon, Bill. 1990. “Class Fights against Fear of Crime,” Toledo Blade, October 18, 24, via http://
news.google.com/archivesearch, accessed October 17, 2009.
Zero Hour: Institute of Self Defense. No date. “What Makes the Model Mugging Program Different?”
http://www.modelmugging.org/diff.htm, accessed September 6, 2009.
Reality-Based Defense
501
www.ebook3000.com

SAMBO
Sambo is a combative system created in the Soviet Union during the twentieth century. It
embraces two interrelated divisions, namely self-defense and sport. The name Sambo is an abbre-
viation. This acronym is usually deciphered as SAMozashchita Bez Oruzhiya (self-defense without
weapons), but Anatoly Kharlampiev (2007, 15) has proposed another interpretation, namely
SAMozashchita i BOr’ba (self-defense and wrestling). In the United States, the name is some-
times spelled sombo or (misreading the Cyrillic letter for s) cambo.
Sport Sambo is done while wearing special jackets, colored belts, sports shorts, and wrestling
shoes. The rules allow throws and locks. These locks are generally applied to arm and leg joints
while the wrestlers are grappling on mats. Victory is awarded for a clear throw to the back, by
the submission of the opponent to a lock, or by points.
Combat Sambo contains most of the sport Sambo’s wrestling techniques (e.g., throws, locks),
but adapted for use against street attackers, criminal suspects, and enemy soldiers. Combat
Sambo teaches additional techniques. These include strikes and kicks; locks applied to the neck,
hands, and ﬁngers; strangulation techniques; defenses against strikes, kicks, locks, and strangu-
lation techniques; defenses against bladed weapons, sticks, and military entrenching tools; and
against ﬁrearms at very close distances.
Despite the relative youth of Sambo, its origins and the role of various specialists in its
creation are still a subject of arguments, especially inside Russia. Often, the scientiﬁc
approach has surrendered to the pressure of ideological considerations, personal and group
interests, and personal sympathies. This in turn has led to manipulations with the facts, and
many different versions of Sambo’s creation can be found. Nonetheless, many government
documents have become public over the years, and many interviews with eyewitnesses have
been gathered. Thus, it is now possible to reconstruct the making of Sambo in considerable
detail.
The founder of Sambo was Vasily Sergeevich Oshchepkov. Oshchepkov was born on January
7, 1893, in Alexandrovsky Post settlement on Sakhalin Island, which is located in the North
Paciﬁc Ocean, off the coast of Siberia, at the mouth of the Amur River.
At the time, Aleksandrovsky Post was the site of a convict prison that achieved infamy
following the publication of Anton Chekhov’s Ostrov Sakhalin [The Island Sakhalin] in 1893.
Oshchepkov’s mother, Mariya Oshchepkova, was a state convict and a peasant widow. His
father, Sergey Plisak, was a peasant by birth and carpenter by profession, and his mother’s
cohabite. Oshchepkov’s parents did everything they could to protect their son against the
noxious inﬂuence of criminals, and they sent him to school. However, in 1902, his father died,
and in 1904, so did his mother. Thus, the 11-year-old Oschepkov was orphaned at the height of
the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–1905 and was an eyewitness of the Japanese occupation of
Sakhalin.
After the Russo-Japanese War ended, Oshchepkov was put in ward, and in the summer of
1908 his guardian sent the youth to attend the seminary attached to the Orthodox Church
mission in Tokyo. There, at the expense of the Tsarist military, a group of Russian orphans
received training as future interpreters, with the assumption that most of them would eventually
work for the Tsarist military headquarters in the Far East. Oshchepkov, being a successful
student, was included in this group.
502
Sambo

Oshchepkov attended the Orthodox seminary from 1908 to 1913. During these years,
Oshchepkov took a great interest in Kodokan judo. A judo study group was organized in the sem-
inary in 1908. Its instructor was a man named Okamoto, who held a second-degree black belt
(nidan) in Kodokan judo. Training took place daily during the evenings, and the great effect of
judo practice on the physical ﬁtness of the students led the seminary leadership to make judo an
obligatory part of their physical education curriculum. Thus, all students were soon obligated to
train in judo two times a week. In summer, the seminarians also trained in sumo.
On October 29, 1911, Oshchepkov formally enrolled at the Kodokan, and on June 15, 1913,
he was awarded the rank of ﬁrst-degree black belt (shodan). Thus, he became the ﬁrst Russian (and
only the fourth known non-Japanese) to be awarded a ﬁrst-degree black belt in Kodokan judo.
On June 23, 1913, Oshchepkov received the certiﬁcate of graduation from Tokyo Orthodox
Church Seminary. After that, he returned to Russia, where he was appointed an interpreter to the
counterespionage department of Zaamur command of the Frontier Guards, which was then head-
quartered in Harbin. After several months in Harbin, Oshchepkov was transferred to the intelli-
gence department of the Priamur command, which had its headquarters in Vladivostok. Serving as
an intelligence agent, Oshchepkov visited Japan several times. He took advantage of the training
opportunities, and on October 4, 1917, he was awarded a Kodokan second-degree black belt.
Those were the years of a jujutsu craze in Russia, but qualiﬁed instructors trained by Japanese
specialists were almost absent. So, with his unique qualiﬁcation, Oshchepkov organized in
Vladivostok the ﬁrst Russian study group for judo and sumo. Classes took place at the Sport
Society’s athletic club. Oshchepkov’s judo class had as many as sixty members. Oshchepkov’s
club maintained good relations with Japanese practitioners, and there were matches between
Russian and Japanese teams in 1915 and 1917. As far as is known, these were the ﬁrst interna-
tional judo tournaments in the history of world judo.
This activity developed against the background of World War I (1914–1917 in Russia).
During World War I, Russia and Japan were both on the Allied side, so political issues were min-
imized. Meanwhile, in Russia, “mobilization of sports” was declared. What that meant was that
Russian sports organizations were obliged to provide physical training to youths. This included
teaching them combative methods, to include bayonet ﬁghting. In those days, Kodokan judo was
not meant to train soldiers for hand-to-hand combat; speciﬁcally, it did not have methods for
disarming attackers armed with riﬂes tipped with bayonets, soldiers with pistols, and so on. This
led Oshchepkov at the very outset of his instructor career to combine judo techniques with tech-
niques of other ﬁghting arts. For this purpose, he drew necessary information from special liter-
ature that he had gathered and studied for years, and from colleagues who had trained in
Greco-Roman wrestling, English boxing, savate, and fencing. Among these colleagues we must
mention an Englishman, E. J. Harrison (1873–1961), who had trained in jujutsu, was ranked in
Kodokan judo, and was skilled in English wrestling (Harrison 1999).
In 1917, the socialists overthrew the Tsarist government. The Japanese were opposed to
socialist governments, and so the Japanese occupied Vladivostok from 1918 to 1921. During
this period, Oshchepkov was originally attached to the anti-Bolshevik Siberian White Army
and detached to the Japanese Forces Field Communications Department. However, in 1920,
he chose to become an undercover agent of the Bolsheviks, and after the defeat of the White
Army he became an ofﬁcer in the Intelligence Department of the RKKA (an acronym for the
Workers and Peasants Red Army, which became known as Ground Forces after World War II).
Sambo
503
www.ebook3000.com

First he gathered intelligence information in Vladivostok. Then, from the middle of 1921, he
gathered intelligence on northern Sakhalin (the former Russian areas, now occupied by the
Japanese). Finally, from January 1925 to April 1926, he was in Japan, ﬁrst in Kobe, and later
in Tokyo.
While in Tokyo, Oshchepkov was very busy with his cover and undercover work and was not
able to concentrate on study of judo. Nonetheless, he purchased books on judo and jujutsu,
visited the Kodokan on occasion, and participated in trainings at the First Infantry Regiment
(Azabu) Judo Club.
Oshchepkov’s return to the now-Soviet Vladivostok was caused by conﬂict with his direct supe-
riors, who ﬁnally through unprofessional acts had uncovered their agent, thereby depriving him of the
ability to do undercover work in Japan. Back in Vladivostok, Oshchepkov was again an interpreter
and judo instructor, and in 1926, he, together with P. Azanchevsky, conducted a course of instruction
in judo and boxing. This ﬁrst course lasted three months, and during it, the ﬁrst ten Soviet instruc-
tors of judo received training. These early students included V. Kuzovlev and F. Zhamkov.
The collaboration with Azanchevsky, a specialist in boxing, European jujitsu, and savate, was
important to the further development of the self-defense system being created by Oshchepkov.
Speciﬁcally, it gave Oshchepkov the ability to appraise merits and demerits of boxing and savate
as self-defense systems and to add savate’s kicks to his arsenal.
In January 1927, Oschepkov was transferred to Novosibirsk, where he was assigned as
Japanese language interpreter for the Siberia command headquarters. While in Novosibirsk, he
began to propagandize his science of self-defense. In the local military newspaper
Krasnoarmeyskaya Zvezda (September 30, 1927, No. 188, 1427), he published an article titled
“Japanese Jujutsu—to the Red Army.” In this article, he discussed the relevance of hand-to-hand
combat in modern war. This included recent developments at Japan’s Toyama Military Academy,
where “a number of techniques against not only riﬂe, saber, and revolver, but also against
entrenching tools were developed.” In the same article, Oshchepkov outlined his vision of a uni-
versal hand-to-hand combat system that would meet the needs of the Red Army: “In our army
we must give the widest scope to the development of saber fencing and bayonet ﬁghting . . . ,
and combine fencing techniques with jujutsu techniques.”
Throughout the late 1920s, Oshchepkov delivered reports on his hand-to-hand combat
system, organized judo study groups (including one for women) in sports clubs of the Siberia
command, and gave demonstrations for the Novosibirsk branch of the Dynamo sports society
(which was in charge of physical training of national security ofﬁcers and frontier troops and
later of militia) and the school for militia junior ofﬁcers.
Because Oshchepkov’s hand-to-hand combat system had no analogs in the Soviet Union, it
soon attracted the attention of the Red Army’s physical training and sports supervisor, Boris
Kalpus. At Kalpus’s request, Oshchepkov and Kuzovlev demonstrated combat and sport judo
techniques before army physical training instructors assembled from all over the Soviet Union.
The context was the military exhibition section of the ﬁrst All-USSR Sports Contest
(Spartakiad) held in Moscow in August 1928. The military specialists appraised judo highly, call-
ing it “the most realistic self-defense system and an interesting kind of freestyle wrestling,” and
recommended that it be adopted by the Red Army. Thus, in 1929, Oshchepkov was transferred
to Moscow and appointed as judo instructor to the CDKA (an acronym referring to the Central
House of the Red Army).
504
Sambo

In Moscow, Oschepkov conducted courses for ofﬁcers of the Moscow Military District and
instructors of physical training; he also gave many exhibitions in army units. His hand-to-hand
combat system attracted attention at the highest levels: one of his judo trainings at CDKA was
attended by RKKA Cavalry Inspector (from 1935 Marshal) Semyon Budyonny (1883–1973),
and a large group of his ofﬁcers.
Positive comments by military specialists opened way to the implementation of
Oshchepkov’s system to Red Army training. In 1931, Oshchepkov took part in making an
ofﬁcial manual called Physical Exercises in RKKA. In this manual, for the ﬁrst time in Russian
military history, hand-to-hand combat techniques were combined into an integral system. The
system included techniques for ﬁghting with the Moisin-Nagant Model 1891 infantry riﬂe with
afﬁxed bayonet; ﬁghting with the Moisin-Nagant cavalry riﬂe (which did not have a bayonet
lug); ﬁghting with engineer shovel and infantry entrenching tool; defending without weapons
against attacks by men armed with riﬂes, bayonets, or revolvers; and ﬁghting unarmed against
other unarmed opponents. The methods shown for unarmed combat (and also for some of the
armed combat) came from Oshchepkov’s judo system.
Meanwhile, in Moscow, Oshchepkov continued teaching judo at CDKA, which was then a
center of scientiﬁc research into physical training methods. The idea was to see what lessons
learned through sport and physical culture could be applied to army physical training. CDKA
had excellent training halls and medical facilities, and its staff included many of the best avail-
able specialists in sport and physical culture. These included specialists in international boxing,
Greco-Roman wrestling, fencing, and bayonet ﬁghting. At CDKA, Oshchepkov organized two
separate judo study groups, one for men and the other for women. Their trainings were con-
ducted under constant supervision of the famous sport doctor G. Kotov. After eighteen months
of research, Kotov highly appraised Oshchepkov’s teaching methods and endorsed judo as a
system of physical education suitable for inclusion in GTO (an acronym for Gotov k Trudu i
Oborone, meaning “Ready for Labor and Defense”), which was the name of a compulsory
physical ﬁtness program introduced in 1931.
GTO was created as a part of a program designed to prepare Soviet citizens for military serv-
ice. It included a set of norms and then taught the specially chosen physical exercises that were
expected to allow people to achieve them. Thus, GTO was the basis of the entire Soviet system
of physical education. In GTO there were two grade levels: basic and advanced. The GTO
second level, introduced in late 1932, required applicants to pass a test in one of various systems
of self-defense; the exact kind was the choice of the person being examined. The choices
included Greco-Roman wrestling, boxing, bayonet or spadroon fencing, saber slashing while
riding a horse, and judo. The judo test required knowledge of thirty-nine techniques. Statistics
documenting the numbers of persons who passed the GTO test in judo are not available, but
before the Great Patriotic War (World War II, 1941–1945), at least 165,500 persons successfully
completed all the tests of GTO second level (Larionov and Potapchuck 1985, 4).
Implementing judo training nationwide made it imperative to train instructors. Thus, in
1931, Oshchepkov began working at the State Central Institute of Physical Culture
(GCOLIFK). His job was head instructor of judo. A mandatory judo course was instituted for
Main faculty, and supplementary evening classes were organized for interested students.
After Oshchepkov’s arrival at GCOLIFK, a new phase began in development of his system.
Speciﬁcally, from 1931 to 1937, in the “Department of Defensive and Offensive Methods,”
Sambo
505
www.ebook3000.com

where various combative methods were taught, Oschepkov had the ability to work alongside the
Soviet Union’s leading specialists in Greco-Roman wrestling, international boxing, and fencing
and to discuss with them the most difﬁcult questions of technique and teaching methods. This
joint work contributed greatly to the perfection of Oshchepkov’s judo system.
The implementation of the second GTO grade at the end of 1932 meant that from that time
forward, all graduates of physical culture institutes (there were four of them in the USSR) or
physical culture secondary schools (there were 24 of them) had to be prepared to pass examina-
tions in judo and, in addition, be prepared to teach this system in the scope of the second GTO
grade requirements. This gave impetus to Oshchepkov’s judo development in the USSR as self-
defense system, but at the same time it struck a hard blow to the development of judo as a sport
wrestling, as all the physical culture institutes and secondary schools had to restrict their instruc-
tion to teaching the GTO curriculum. Thus, all sport judo activities were shifted to after-school
hours. Oshchepkov, who believed that self-defense techniques could be mastered only with a
profound mastery of wrestling technique, objected. Thus, he continued working toward devel-
oping sport judo.
In November 1932, GCOLIFK established a military faculty. It was meant to train specialists
of physical culture and sports for the Red Army, internal security forces (known from 1934 to
1946 as the NKVD), and Dynamo. Attached to this faculty were short-term courses for army
specialists of physical training. Oshchepkov taught judo both to faculty and to visiting students.
Meanwhile, to prepare highly qualiﬁed instructors, a postgraduate course was introduced in
November 1933. The ﬁrst postgraduate student was N. Galkovsky, who soon became the closest
assistant to Oschepkov.
During the period 1931–1933, Oschepkov also taught judo to militia (police) ofﬁcers in
Central Higher School of Militia. To adapt judo to the needs of militia ofﬁcers, Oschepkov
analyzed 1,200 episodes of real conﬂicts involving law enforcement ofﬁcers and criminals, and
conducted a questionnaire poll of high-ranking militia ofﬁcers.
In addition, Oschepkov tried to establish closer relationships with Dynamo’s Central Coun-
cil Division of Self-Defense without Weapons. The latter organization was headed by Viktor
Spiridonov (1883–1943). Spiridonov had developed his own system of self-defense. He laid
European jujitsu as the base of this system and later appended some elements of Greco-Roman
wrestling, catch-as-catch-can wrestling, and boxing. Spiridonov had not learned his jujitsu
under skilled instructors. Instead, he learned it from books combined with trial-and-error. Nev-
ertheless, this system was ofﬁcially adopted by national security forces during the 1920s, and it
was the system cultivated within Dynamo system. The system was known by various names—
ﬁrst as Jiu-Jitsu, then as samoz, then as sam, and ﬁnally as Sambo. All these latter terms were
abbreviations for “self-defense without weapons.” Spiridonov described techniques, tactics, and
training methods in three books, published in 1927, 1928, and 1933.
Like Oshchepkov’s judo, Spiridonov’s Sambo had combat and sport divisions. However,
Spiridonov’s Sambo had only closed competitions, with participation limited to internal security
ofﬁcers. Thus, when Spiridonov’s pupils met Oshchepkov’s students on the mat during unofﬁcial
matches, it turned out that they could not do much to them. Rather than recognizing the defects
of his system and teaching methods, Spiridonov instead rejected all contacts with Oshchepkov.
He started by saying that his system was secret, that it was meant only for national security
ofﬁcers, and that in the future it could not be demonstrated to outsiders. Next, he chose the way
506
Sambo

of intrigues. Using his connections in Dynamo, he convinced the command that the prolifera-
tion of judo threatened the safety of internal security ofﬁcers. Thus, Spiridonov was able to
depose Oshchepkov from all Dynamo subdivisions and the Central Higher School of Militia.
This conﬂict later played major role in Sambo history.
During 1934, GCOLIFK established a program in which people could major in judo studies.
The idea was to train professional judo instructors. Future Sambo players and trainers including
Kharlampiev, V. Dudnik, N. Gladkov, and B. Sagatelyan all trained with Oschepkov during this
period, and soon they, together with earlier students such as S. Dashkevich, V. Kuzovlev,
A. Rubanchik, V. Sidorov, R. Shkol’nikov, and I. Vasil’yev joined in the work of spreading judo
throughout the country.
In 1935, the Moscow City Federation of Judo (chairman, N. Galkovsky) and the Leningrad
City Federation of freestyle wrestling (chairman, I. Vasil’yev) were established, and many study
groups of judo in Moscow, Leningrad, Kharkov, and other cities were organized. The ﬁrst
Moscow and Leningrad judo tournaments also date to 1935, as do the ﬁrst Soviet judo classes for
elementary school children. The organizer was V. Sidorov. Sidorov’s study group trained at the
Children’s House of Culture named after Bauman in Moscow. This was the ﬁrst class of its kind
in the USSR; in those years, the very possibility of children’s participation in wrestling and box-
ing was a highly disputed question. Thus, the establishment of the children study group of judo
was a real breakthrough. The study group later turned out some very high-class Sambo wrestlers
and coaches. In 1936, Sidorov also established a separate children’s judo study group in the Sport
club of GCOLIFK.
During the 1935–1936 academic year, Oshchepkov designed the GCOLIFK judo program. A
major in judo required about two years of study and about 700 class hours. During this period,
Oshchepkov called his system “Judo according to the GCOLIFK scheme,” thereby distinguish-
ing it from “Judo according to the Kodokan scheme.” His system included “Judo Combat
Division” and “Judo Freestyle Wrestling.” The latter was the sport division.
Although Kodokan judo techniques constituted the basis of Judo Freestyle Wrestling,
Oshchepkov’s system included techniques from other jujutsu styles, Greco-Roman wrestling,
international freestyle wrestling, and various ethnic wrestling systems from within the borders of
the Soviet Union. This is remarked because the nations included in the Soviet Union possessed
a great wealth of national wrestling styles. The Georgians practiced chidaoba, the Armenians koh,
the Azerbaijani gyulesh, the Kazakhs kures, the Uzbeks kuresh, the Turkmens goresh, the Tajiks
gushtingiri, and so on. From the second half of the 1920s, the Soviet physical culture leadership
began to encourage the practice of national wrestling styles, aiming to use them to promote the
health of population and to train youth for military service. Various competitions and exhibi-
tions were held, and the rules published. During the ﬁrst All-USSR Sports Contest in 1928 it
was decided to hold a tournament using compromise rules among the teams of various national-
ities. Although nothing came of the compromise rules, for three days, residents and guests of
Moscow were able to see matches and exhibitions of Georgian chidaoba, Armenian koh, and
Uzbek kuresh. Later, such exhibitions were held frequently in Moscow and other cities and cov-
ered in the sports pages. Consequently, Oshchepkov and his students, interested in perfection of
their judo, had good possibilities to familiarize themselves with wrestling styles of the nations of
the Soviet Union. Oschepkov took a special interest in Georgian chidaoba, which possessed
sophisticated techniques of throwing with mainly the legs.
Sambo
507
www.ebook3000.com

According to the rules of those times, Soviet institutes of higher education admitted stu-
dents from national republics of Caucasus and Central Asia on special quota without
entrance examinations. Oshchepkov met such students both in the Central Higher School
of Militia and in the GCOLIFK. During judo classes, students often applied techniques of
their national styles of wrestling. Oschepkov watched such attempts with great interest,
believing that the most effective techniques of national kinds of wrestling must be included
into his system.
In 1933, Oshchepkov and A. Rubanchik published the Soviet Union’s ﬁrst judo competition
rules. These rules differed greatly from Kodokan judo rules. For instance, they prescribed eight
weight categories, required the use of different costumes (e.g., jackets of special cut of contrast-
ing colors; belts, made of cloth; shorts and athletic supporters; soft leather shoes), required hand-
shakes instead of bows, and stated that victory could be achieved by various means. The rules
speciﬁcally allowed “any trick of Finnish-French [e.g., Greco-Roman], American freestyle, Swiss
or Caucasus wrestling,” whether standing or on the mat.
Oshchepkov’s “Combat Division” described a comprehensive system of hand-to-hand com-
bat, with close attention paid to the needs of the army. Combat Division included techniques of
ﬁghting unarmed against an unarmed opponent, of ﬁghting unarmed against an opponent armed
with various edged weapons or ﬁrearms at close distance, and ﬁnally, provided methods for ﬁght-
ing armed against an armed opponent.
In the subdivision of ﬁghting unarmed against another unarmed opponent, all the techniques
of Judo Freestyle Wrestling were used, supplemented with punches and strikes from old-style
jujutsu and boxing and kicks from savate. To prepare his students to meet any opponent in hand-
to-hand combat, Oshchepkov organized matches against boxers. To make full-contact ﬁghts
with kicks possible, he even designed foot, body, and groin protectors made from plywood.
The subdivision of ﬁghting unarmed against armed opponents was thoroughly developed. For
example, Oshchepkov taught defenses against attacks with knife not only from front, but also
from behind. In all, there were forty-four separate techniques taught against all possible attacks
with riﬂe with bayonet (stabs, strikes with the butt, and strikes with the barrel).
The subdivision of ﬁghting armed against an armed opponent taught pupils not to rely solely
on the weapon. Instead, they were taught the importance of closing the distance to strike or to
unbalance the opponent. Once there, they were encouraged to use leg sweeps and trips. Train-
ing also included the study of fencing with spadroon, ofﬁcer’s sword, and bayonet. Again,
wrestling techniques were encouraged. Unlike contemporary Japanese, European, and American
systems, the Oshchepkov system encouraged strikes with the barrel or the butt of the weapon,
not just its bayonet. Oshchepkov himself was a real master of bayonet ﬁghting, having won the
1930 Moscow garrison commander’s tournament.
Also described in this program were techniques for tying up prisoners, convoying prisoners,
attacking sentries, and so on.
Finally, Oshchepkov’s program stipulated the study of massage and ﬁrst aid. This included
techniques from both European medicine and kappo, the traditional Japanese system of resuscitation.
Deﬁning the sources of Oshchepkov’s judo system, his student N. Galkovsky (1936, 15–16)
wrote that it “embraced main elements of all hand-to-hand combat kinds in existence, begin-
ning from French boxing, the Chinese self-defense system called wushu or wu-yi, and ﬁnishing
with techniques of various wrestling styles.”
508
Sambo

The breadth of technique and the sophistication of the teaching methodology of this system
were without parallel for the times. Moreover, requiring instructors to train in a central physical
culture institute produced specialists of the highest qualiﬁcation; it ensured that all of them pos-
sessed a fundamental knowledge of anatomy, physiology, hygiene, traumatology, pedagogy, and
methods of coaching.
On October 11, 1936, the Judo Section of the All-USSR Committee of Physical Culture
and Sports was established and an All-USSR judo committee was elected. The ﬁrst committee
was composed of V. Oshchepkov (chairman), N. Galkovsky (vice-chairman); V. Sidorov
(secretary), and A. Rubanchik, V. Shchegolev, V. Dudnik, and F. Zhamkov (members). The
Judo Section went to work immediately. It conﬁrmed the work schedule and promulgated judo
competition rules, the judo self-defense techniques complex, the judo freestyle wrestling sport
techniques complex, and the judo combat techniques complex for the Red Army, all designed
by Oshchepkov.
At the same time, F. Zhamkov became the head of the training department at Dynamo. This
meant a student of Oshchepkov now supervised the work of the Division of Self-Defense with-
out Weapons. Zhamkov soon forced Spiridonov out of Dynamo, and after that, Oshchepkov’s
judo began its spread in Dynamo.
With this, it seemed that judo was ﬁrmly rooted in the USSR, and nothing was of ill omen.
Unfortunately, 1937 was a terrible year for Soviet judo. In 1937, the Japanese invaded China.
The Soviets sent arms and technicians to China, and Japanese relations with the USSR deteri-
orated rapidly. Judo was unexpectedly excluded from programs of the faculties of physical culture
institutes and secondary schools. The Leningrad committee of physical culture refused to stage
a planned Moscow–Leningrad judo match, and on the night of October 1–2, 1937, Oshchepkov
was arrested on charges of spying for Japan. Nine days later, he died in prison, allegedly of a heart
condition. He was 44 years of age.
The now declassiﬁed Accusation File contains only several pages of documents, and none of
them provides evidences of Oshchepkov’s involvement in espionage. Thus, in 1956, for the
reason of “lack of evidence of the case of crime,” the accusation was formally dismissed (FSB
[Federal Security Service] Archive, Accusation File # 2641). The Stalin repressions which fell
upon the USSR in those years resulted in millions of deaths of guiltless people, and Oshchepkov
was one of them.
With Oshchepkov’s passing, Soviet judo received a devastating blow. Nonetheless, Soviet
leadership did not plan to extinguish such a valuable defense sport and self-defense system. No
order banning judo followed, and by the end of 1937, an initiative group resumed work on the
organization of the All-USSR Judo Section, the Moscow–Leningrad judo match was held, and
a new all-USSR judo committee was re-elected. The latter was composed now of Rubanchik
(chairman), Galkovsky (vice-chairman), Gladkov, Kharlampiev, Sidorov, Sagatelyan, and
Vasil’ev, all of whom were Oshchepkov’s students.
The ﬁrst All-USSR Judo Freestyle coaching course took place in June and July 1938. The
supervisor was Rubanchik, while the head coach was Kharlampiev. This was followed by a
methodological conference. At the conference, the birth of Soviet freestyle wrestling was
announced. According to the announcement, Soviet freestyle wrestling was not based on
Japanese judo but, instead, on the systematic study of the national wrestling styles found in
the Soviet Union. The participants of the practice session were mostly Oshchepkov’s students
Sambo
509
www.ebook3000.com

or students of his students, and knew very well that this was a lie. Nonetheless, in a time of
mass repressions, where one risked one’s life simply mentioning Oshchepkov’s name, they
quite sensibly decided to dissociate from the discreditable name “Judo,” which connected their
system to Japan, which was portrayed in the Soviet press as a nest of militant fascism.
The timing of the name change was good, because in July and August 1938, Japan and the
Soviet Union had an armed border clash in Manchuria. Suddenly, Soviet Freestyle Wrestling
was in, and equally suddenly, Judo Freestyle Wrestling was out. Two years later, the name
“freestyle wrestling” was shortened further, simply to “free wrestling.” At the time, there was no
replacement story about how Soviet freestyle wrestling came to be, but within a few years, a
colorful creation story had been invented that detailed the travels of Kharlampiev through the
Caucasus and Soviet Central Asia in search of national wrestling techniques on order of the
Russian revolutionary Nikolai Podvoisky (1880–1948).
On November 16, 1938, the All-USSR committee of physical culture and sports issued Order
Number 633, “On the Development of Freestyle Wrestling.” This date is still celebrated in
Russia (as it was in the Soviet Union) as the starting point of Sambo’s ofﬁcial history, but as a
matter of fact, the order only formally legalized the already existent and rapidly spreading sport.
The ofﬁcial recognition led to a period of large-scale competitions. In 1939, the ﬁrst USSR
championship was held and in 1940, the second was held. Masters of national kinds of wrestling
participated in these championships, and this promoted the enrichment of Sambo’s technical
arsenal. The ﬁrst manuals were published, too, to include Shkol’nikov’s Freestyle Wrestling
(Kharkov, 1940) and Galkovsky’s Free Wrestling (Moscow, 1940).
In 1940, V. Volkov, a student of both Spiridonov and Oshchepkov, published a manual for
NKVD schools titled The Course of Self-Defense without Weapons—“Sambo” (1940). In this book,
the methods and tactical principles followed Spiridonov, but the techniques united elements of
systems of both teachers. In the title of the book, the abbreviation Sambo was used for the ﬁrst
time. Spiridonov answered the publication by written report. In his report, he accused Volkov of
plagiarism. Yet, at the same time, Spiridonov said that Volkov’s manual was not suitable for
training NKVD ofﬁcers.
A special commission was organized to resolve this dispute. Most of the commission’s
members were representatives of Oshchepkov’s school. Thus, they were hostile to
Spiridonov, perhaps on account of rumors that Oshchepkov’s arrest was due to Spiridonov’s
insinuations. This charge was not true, but they had no way of knowing that. In any case,
the commission did not perceive plagiarism in Volkov’s work. In addition, their review
essentially sentenced Spiridonov’s system to death; the official report described Spiridonov
as “an unskilled worker in the field of self-defense and physical culture,” and that he was
“technically incompetent in questions of self-defense.” That said, they agreed with
Spiridonov that Volkov’s manual was not suitable for as an official training manual
(Kharlampiyev 2007, 357–358).
That determination alarmed the NKVD leadership and caused it to seek more qualiﬁed
specialists. Several months later, Dynamo organized the ﬁrst All-USSR free wrestling training
session at Dynamo for Dynamo self-defense instructors, and the head coach was none other than
Kharlampiev. From this time forward, free wrestling (e.g., Oshchepkov’s judo system) took root
in the bodies of the Soviet national security forces. Spiridonov’s Sambo system was supplanted
and, from a technical standpoint, mostly forgotten.
510
Sambo

In fairness, it should be noted that Spiridonov and Volkov did much to train national security
ofﬁcers in self-defense methods and to develop principles and methods of teaching and training.
Moreover, some of their technical, tactical, and methodological developments continued to be
popular at lower levels, especially in areas far from Moscow, where local trainers were unaware
of political issues and were generally happy to get doctrinal training manuals of any kind.
Meanwhile, Oshchepkov’s students continued perfecting the Red Army’s hand-to-hand com-
bat system. Galkovsky participated in writing the RKKA Manual of Training for Hand-to-Hand
Fighting (NPRB-38), while Sagatelyan contributed to Instructions for Training for Hand-to-
Hand Fighting (RPRB-41). These manuals were widely promulgated during the years before, dur-
ing, and just after World War II. In other words, Oshchepkov’s system of hand-to-hand combat,
proved its high effectiveness during the Great Patriotic War and formed the core of the Soviet
military’s hand-to-hand combat system.
The war suspended development of free wrestling. Many notable sportsmen did not come
back from the front; many trainers had to change profession. The leader of the postwar free
wrestling revival was Anatoly Kharlampiev, who in the autumn of 1945 was assigned a position
as assistant to the head of the Defense Sport Department of Dynamo’s Central Council. This
posting made him the NKVD’s chief instructor in ﬁghting without weapons.
In this role, Kharlampiev prepared various programs, conducted practice sessions for
instructors of self-defense, and at the same time tried to convince his commanders that it was
impossible to attain profound skills in self-defense without an equally strong background in
sport. In 1946, thanks to Kharlampiev’s efforts, the All-USSR Committee of Physical Culture
and Sports ofﬁcially recognized “Sambo free wrestling.” This was the ofﬁcial name, and it was
used to distinguish the Oshchepkov-derived system from international freestyle wrestling, which
had begun to be cultivated in the USSR in 1944. In 1947, USSR championships in Sambo free
wrestling resumed, and in 1948, Sambo wrestling received its current name.
During the late 1940s and early 1950s, the combat and sport divisions of Oshchepkov’s judo
were separated. Training in combat Sambo was limited solely to military personnel, internal
security agents, and members of law enforcement. Everyone else was trained in sport Sambo.
Anatoly Kharlampiev played the greatest role in the spread of both combat and sport Sambo
in this period. He published a range of valuable manuals, including Sambo Wrestling (ﬁrst edition
1949, second revised edition 1952, and several other editions) , a three-volume manual for the
Soviet Army called Sambo Wrestling (1952), followed by Sambo Wrestling Tactics (1958), Self-
Defense without Weapons “Sambo” (1958) (a book aimed at militia ofﬁcers), Sambo Wrestling
Technique (1960), and Sambo Wrestling (1964). The latter was a seventh edition of the manual
of 1949, and a quarter million copies were produced. Kharlampiev also coached many national-
class athletes, ﬁrst in Dynamo, and later, from 1954, at Moscow Energetic Institute, some of
whom in their turn became famous Sambo coaches.
Taking all this into consideration, it is not surprising that many people believed the colorful
(but absolutely groundless stories) about Kharlampiev traveling through the Caucasus and
Central Asia to gather techniques of ethnic wrestling styles, and this story of the creation of
Sambo frequently appeared in press. But if we would compare, say, the throwing techniques
speciﬁed in Oshchepkov’s program of 1935–36 with the throwing techniques described in Sambo
Wrestling (1964), the most complete book by Kharlampiev on sport Sambo, we would see that
the overwhelming majority of the throwing techniques in Kharlampiev’s book derive from
Sambo
511
www.ebook3000.com

Oshchepkov’s judo. The same can be said for the joint locks and the strangulation techniques
found in combat Sambo; indeed, the fact of their adoption from Kodokan judo was acknowl-
edged during the methodological conference of 1938. Finally, and this is extremely signiﬁcant,
the really broad development of sport Sambo began only after the untimely death of
Oshchepkov, as did the broad participation of masters of ethnic wrestling styles in various Sambo
competitions. This led to the enrichment of the Sambo arsenal, but the fundamentals were
clearly based in judo.
In his own publications, Kharlampiev never stated that he was the creator of Sambo, but
at the same time, he never made any effort to discredit the story. Instead, he left it to other
Sambo veterans, such as Galkovsky, Sidorov, Sagatelyan, A. Bujinsky, G. Zvyagintsev, and
A. Larionov, and researchers such as Y. Sorokin, L. Matveev, and N. Kulik to gather docu-
ments and evidences to reconstruct and introduce to the public the real history of Sambo
foundation. In this process, Mikhail Lukashev deserves special mention for writing important
works on the history of Sambo.
During the 1950s, Sambo entered the international arena. Soviet sambists held ﬁrst
ofﬁcial matches by compromise rules with judoka from Hungary and from the German
Democratic Republic and achieved convincing victories. In 1961, Japan received the right to
include judo as a demonstration sport in the 1964 Olympics, and in response, the Soviet
Union decided that sambists should begin representing the USSR in international judo
competitions. In 1962 the team of Soviet sambists debuted in the European Championship
and won two gold, two silver, and one bronze medals. In 1964, at the Tokyo Olympics, all
four Soviet sambists won bronze medals and demonstrated that Sambo wrestling—
Oshchepkov’s Judo Freestyle Wrestling, developing in full isolation, in absence of any con-
tacts with Japanese specialists—was able to attain the highest level of technical, tactical, and
methodological sophistication.
At the same time, the world discovered Sambo. In 1965, a Sambo federation was established
in Japan. In 1966, the International Federation of Amateur Wrestling (FILA) recognized Sambo
as an international wrestling sport. In 1967, in Riga, Latvia, the ﬁrst truly international Sambo
competition was held—teams came from Bulgaria, Mongolia, Yugoslavia, and Japan as well as
the Soviet Union. In 1972, the ﬁrst European Championship was held, again in Riga. In 1973
the ﬁrst world championship was held in Tehran, Iran, and in 1981 the ﬁrst women’s world
championship took place in Madrid, Spain.
In 1984, sambists left FILA and created the International Amateur Sambo Federation
(FIAS). As of 2009, ﬁfty-three countries are members of FIAS. Under FIAS aegis, a variety of
international and regional youth and adult championships are held each year, to include world
and European championships.
Sport Sambo has had many brilliant coaches and sportsmen. Vasilyev played a major role
in the Sambo development in Leningrad, as did Shkol’nikov in Ukraine and L. Turin in the
Russian Republic. Other prominent trainers include N. Makarov (Samara), S. Klyuchnikov
(Ekaterinburg), V. Velichcko (Saratov), A. Shirokov (Perm), P. Solyack (Krasnoyarsk), V.
Khorikov (Krasnoyarsk), M. Timoshechkin (Altay region), and I. Shegelman (Karelia). On
the list of famous Sambo coaches, Evgeny Chumakov (1921–1998) deserves special mention.
Chumakov began to study Sambo in 1937 under Kharlampiev and won four USSR
championships (in 1939, 1947, 1950, and in 1951). In 1953, in GCOLIFK he presented a
512
Sambo

doctoral dissertation titled The Methods of Study and Mastery of Sambo Wrestling Techniques.
Later, his theory of phased study and mastery of wrestling techniques helped him to train
thirteen USSR champions. Obviously, such success had a powerful impact on the develop-
ment of Sambo methodology, and Chumakov’s books, The Tactics of the Sambo Wrestler
(1976) and One Hundred Lessons of Sambo (1977) are still treasured by Russian sambists.
In post-Soviet Russia, the development of Sambo wrestling is directed by the All-Russia
Sambo Federation. This organization was established in 1990, and it unites Sambo organizations
in seventy-two regions of the Russian Federation. According to its ofﬁcial reports, perhaps
400,000 people are involved in the practice of Sambo, and in 2003, the Russian Ministry of Sports
declared Sambo to be Russia’s national sport. All Russian sambists cherish hopes that the next
step in Sambo wrestling development will be the recognition of Sambo as an Olympic sport.
From the beginning of 1990s, Russian sambists also began to participate in international “no
rules” matches (e.g., UFC, Pride, Rings) The victories of Sambo masters such as O. Taktarov, M.
Gamzathanov (Volk-Khan), and F. Emel’yanenko in these competitions gave evidence of the
high effectiveness of Sambo, and also gave impulse to the development of a new sport called
“Combat Sambo.” In Combat Sambo, all the techniques of Sambo wrestling are allowed, along
with strikes, kicks, and strangulation techniques. Locks can be applied standing as well as lying
down. This sport, which is akin to Mixed Martial Arts, is administered by the Combat Sambo
Federation of Russia. This organization was established in 2001, and currently has branches in
ﬁfty-six regions of the Russian Federation. Combat Sambo is also beginning to attract foreign
attention.
—Alexey Gorbylev
See also: Japan: Jujutsu-based Systems; Savate, Chausson, and French Boxing (in Volume I);
Invented Traditions; Finnish-Canadian Wrestling; International Freestyle and Greco-Roman
Wrestling; Mixed Martial Arts; American Judo, 1942-1945; Bayonet Training in 
the United States; Judo in Japan, 1931-1950; Jukendo; Kapap and Krav Maga; 
Military Unarmed Fighting Systems in the United States; and Police Defensive 
Tactics Training in the United States (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Chumakov, Evgeny. 1976. Taktika bortsa-sambista [The Tactics of the Sambo Wrestler]. Moscow:
Fizkultura i sport.
Chumakov, Evgeny. 1977. Sto urokov sambo [One Hundred Lessons of Sambo]. Moscow: Fizkultura i
sport.
Fizicheskiye uprazhneniya v RKKA [Physical Exercises in RKKA]. 1931. Moscow: Gosudarstvennoye
voyennoye izdatelstvo.
Galkovsky, Nikolay. 1936. “Chto takoye Juu-do” [What is Judo?], Fizkultura i sport, 15–16.
Galkovsky, Nikolay. 1940. Volnaya borba [Free Wrestling]. Moscow: Fizkultura i sport.
Harrison, E. J. 1999. “A Resumé of My Chequered Career,” Aikido Journal 26(1), 48–51, via
http://ejmas.com/jcs/jcsart_svinth2_1199.htm, accessed March 15, 2009.
Kharlampiyev, Alexander. 2006. Zhizn i deyatelnost Anatoliya Arkad’yevicha Kharlampieva [The Life
and Deeds of Anatoliy Arkad’yevich Kharlampiev]. Moscow: Fair-press.
Kharlampiyev, Alexander, editor 2007. Sistema Sambo. Stanovleniye i razvitiye. Iz semeynogo arkhiva
Kharlampiyevykh [Sambo System. The Formation and Development. From the Kharlampiyev
Family Archives]. 2007. Moscow: Fair-press.
Sambo
513
www.ebook3000.com

Kharlampiev, Anatoly. 1949. Borba sambo [Sambo Wrestling], 1st edition. Moscow: Fizkultura i sport.
Kharlampiev, Anatoly. 1952. Borba sambo [Sambo Wrestling], three volumes (Volume 1. Sport Wrestling.
Volume 2. Combat Techniques. Volume 3. Special Techniques). Moscow: Fizkultura i sport.
Kharlampiev, Anatoly. 1958. Samozaschita bez oruzhiya “Sambo” [Self-defense without Weapons
“Sambo”]. Moscow: Militia Headquarters of Ministry of Internal Affars.
Kharlampiev, Anatoly. 1958. Taktika borby sambo [Sambo Wrestling Tactics]. Moscow: Fizkultura i sport.
Kharlampiev, Anatoly. 1960. Tehnika borby sambo [Sambo Wrestling Techniques]. Moscow: Fizkultura
i sport.
Kharlampiev, Anatoly. 1964. Borba sambo [Sambo Wrestling], 7th edition. Moscow: Fizkultura i sport.
Larionov, Andrey, and A. Potapchuck, 1985. Razvitiye rukopashnogo boya v vooruzhennykh silakh SSSR
[The Development of Self-Defense Training in the USSR Military Forces]. Leningrad: Military
Institute of Physical Culture.
Lukashev, Mikhail. 2003. Rukopashny boi v Rossii v pervoi polovine XX veka [Hand-to-Hand Combat
Systems in Russia in the First Half of the 20th Century], ﬁve volumes (Volume 1. On the Eve of
the Russian Revolution Hand-to-hand Combat Systems. Volume 2. Self-defense for the Revolu-
tion. Volume 3. SAM System Turns into Sambo. Volume 4. Sambo Creation: To Be Born in a
Tsarist Prison and to Die in One of Stalin’s. Volume 5. Sambo in the Service of the Motherland).
Moscow: Budo-sport.
Nastavleniye po podgotovke k rukopashnomu boyu RKKA (NPRB-38) [RKKA Manual of Training for
Hand-to-Hand Fighting]. 1939. Moscow: Gosudarstvennoye voyennoye izdatelstvo Narodnogo
Komissariata oborony Soyuza SSR.
Riordan, James. 1993. “Rewriting Soviet Sports History,” Journal of Sports History 20(3), Winter,
247–258, via http://www.la84foundation.org/SportsLibrary/JSH/JSH1993/JSH2003/jsh2003c.pdf,
accessed February 1, 2009.
Rudman, David. 1982. Sambo. Tekhnika borby lyozha. Napadenie [Sambo. Ground Techniques.
Offense]. Moscow: Fizkultura i sport.
Rudman, David. 1983. Sambo. Tekhnika borby lyozha. Zashchita [Sambo. Ground Techniques.
Defense]. Moscow: Fizkultura i sport.
Rudman, David. 2003. Samozashchita bez oruzhiya ot Viktora Spiridonova do Vladimira Putina/Sambo.
Self-Defense without Weapons from Viktor Spiridonov to Vladimir Putin. Bilingual (Russian-English)
edition. Moscow: Comfort M.
Rukovodstvo po podgotovke k rukopashnomu boyu Krasnoy Armii (RPRB-41) [Instructions for Training for
Hand-to-Hand Fighting]. 1941. Moscow: Voyennoye izdatelstvo Narkomata Oborony Soyuza SSR.
Shkol’nikov, Roman. 1940. Borba volnogo stilya [Freestyle Wrestling]. Kharkov.
Spiridonov, Viktor. 1927. Rukovodstvo samozashchity bez oruzhiya po sisteme jiu-jitsu [The Manual of
Self-Defense without Weapons according to Jiu-Jitsu System]. Moscow: Narkomvoenmor Execu-
tive Ofﬁce and the USSR RVS Military Typography.
Spiridonov, Viktor. 1928. Samozashchita bez oruzhiya. Trenirovka i sostyazaniya [Self-Defense without
Weapons. The Training and the Competitions]. Moscow: Voenny Vestnik.
Spiridonov, Viktor. 1933. Samozashchita bez oruzhiya. Osnovy samozashchity. Metodika izucheniya [Self-
Defense without Weapons. The Basics of Self-Defense. The Methods of Study]. Moscow: Training
Department of Dynamo’s Central Council.
Volkov, Viktor. 1940. Kurs samozashchity bez oruzhiya “Sambo” [The Course of Self-Defense without
Weapons—“Sambo”]. Moscow: Training Board of the USSR NKVD Personnel Department.
WOMEN’S BOXING, 1972–PRESENT
Although the origins of women’s boxing are found in the British fairground boxing of the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the modern sport dates only to the 1970s. Structurally,
modern women’s boxing is organized much the same as men’s international boxing. That is,
514
Women’s Boxing, 1972–Present

there are weight classes, referees, and rules established by commission. One minor difference is
in the length of rounds, which are generally shorter in women’s events than in the comparable
men’s events; a major difference is that women continue to have reduced access to major (that
is, most lucrative) amateur and professional championships.
The origins of women’s boxing are traced to England, where there have been prizeﬁghts
between women since the early eighteenth century (Hargreaves 2003). During the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries, small numbers of British women toured as members of tent boxing
shows, or boxed in music halls (Toulmin 1999).
Boxing booths were large tents set up on a fairground, and the boxers traveled as part of the
sideshow. Spectators paid a few pence to enter the tent. Once inside, they could watch profes-
sional boxers spar, or even challenge the professionals to a match. During challenge matches, the
standard pattern was that the challenger was promised a small sum of money if he could last
three rounds with the pro. Because working the crowd was important, the professional generally
went easy on unskilled opponents. To reduce the risk of obvious injury, participants in booth
boxing matches usually wore gloves. The boxing code known today as Queensberry rules is
essentially a codiﬁcation of mid-Victorian booth boxing rules.
Music halls describe a form of live entertainment developed in Britain during the 1850s;
vaudeville was its American cousin. Music halls featured a variety of live entertainment, and
they remained popular until the 1920s, at which point theater owners began transforming their
venues into movie houses. An example of a nineteenth-century music hall boxing match is the
one staged in March 1876 at Harry Hill’s (ca. 1827–1896) concert saloon. For this contest, Nelly
Saunders (the Irish-born wife of pugilist James Saunders) and Rose Harland (an English-born
dancer) trained for a few weeks before participating in a “sparring match with boxing-gloves.”
The newspaper decision was awarded to Saunders on points (New York Times 1876).
Most early female boxers were the relatives of a boxer or promoter. For instance, Polly
Fairclough Burns (1881–1958), who boxed in London between 1900 and 1913, was the wife of
Irish boxing promoter James A. “Tommy” Burns (1890–1946).
During the early twentieth century, owners of commercial gyms sometimes advertised boxing
for women, and photos show an exhibition of female boxing at the Summer Olympics held at
St. Louis, Missouri, in 1904. In those days, women’s training emphasized speed bag drills and
conditioning rather than competitive boxing, and so is conceptually closer to modern boxer
aerobics than modern competitive boxing.
During the mid-twentieth century, there were several prominent female boxing promoters. A
British example is Bella Burge (1877–1962), who continued running her husband’s London box-
ing club after he died of pneumonia in 1918. Burge’s club, known as Blackfriars Ring, was
destroyed by German air raids in 1940. In the United States, prominent female promoters
included Aileen Eaton (1909–1987), who began promoting boxing at the Olympic Auditorium
in Los Angeles in 1942. There was also at least one licensed referee who was female. This was
California’s Belle Martell (1894–1972), who passed the test to become a referee in May 1940.
Within two weeks, the California Athletic Commission had resolved that challenge to tradition
by publishing a new rule that prohibited female referees and seconds in the California prize ring.
After World War II, a handful of women became professional boxers. They mostly fought
exhibition matches, often in association with booth ﬁghting. An example is Barbara Buttrick
(1930–), who started boxing in a British tent show in 1948, and continued to box professionally
Women’s Boxing, 1972–Present
515
www.ebook3000.com

until 1960. In 1952, Buttrick came to the United States, where she was one of the ﬁrst women
to have her ﬁght broadcast on television. After retiring from the ring, Buttrick became a pho-
tographer of boxing matches, and later, a promoter.
During the mid-1970s, the feminist movement led to signiﬁcant changes in gender-based leg-
islation, and these legislative changes soon led to equally signiﬁcant changes in women’s boxing.
In Britain, the important piece of gender-based legislation is the Sex Discrimination Act 1975
and the closely related Sex Discrimination Act (Northern Ireland) Order 1976. Both acts pro-
hibited gender-based discrimination in the workplace, and in 1998, that protection was
extended to women’s boxing. The published case law is Couch v. British Boxing Board of Control
Ltd. (1998 ET). In U.S. amateur boxing, the signiﬁcant date is June 1976, and the enactment of
Title IX, Educational Amendments of 1972, Section 1681 (a), which reads, in part, “No person
in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the
beneﬁts of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving
Federal ﬁnancial assistance.” For U.S. women’s professional boxing, the signiﬁcant date is July
1975, when Nevada granted a professional boxing license to Caroline Svendsen. California
began licensing female boxers in 1976, as did New York in 1978.
Licensing is one thing, but respect is another. Many of the early female boxers had more
enthusiasm than experience, and promoters continued to represent women’s boxing as
something akin to a circus act. Thus, state athletic commissions restricted female boxers to just
four rounds. In 1979, boxer Shirley Tucker challenged the California state athletic commission.
She prevailed, and after that, women could ﬁght the same number of rounds as men.
The ﬁrst all-women’s professional boxing championships were held at the Los Angeles Sports
Arena on July 13, 1979. Participants included Graciela Casillas, who had a kickboxing back-
ground but had never previously boxed in a ring. Her opponent was the current champion,
Karen Bennett. Bennett planned to use this four-round bout as a tune-up for a title defense
against Ginger Kaufman. Bennett lost the ﬁght with Casillas, and then announced her retire-
ment. Casillas replaced Bennett in the title defense against Kaufman. The Kaufman–Casillas
ﬁght took place in San Antonio, Texas, on July 31, 1979. The ﬁght was scheduled for ten rounds,
and the rounds were three minutes instead of two. The ﬁght went the distance, and Casillas was
named the winner by unanimous decision.
Over the next few years, other female kickboxers, including Marion Bermudez, Lilly
Rodriguez, Carlotta Lee, and Ginate Troy, also transitioned into boxing. The reason was that
there was even less money in women’s kickboxing than there was in women’s boxing. As
recently as 1996, Kim Messer fought a kickboxing match in Puerto Rico; the promoter gave her
a worthless check and then boasted to his friends that he was about to take his third vacation of
the year (Svinth 2001).
Despite the increasing numbers of women in the gym, it continued to be hard to ﬁnd rep-
utable promoters and trainers. Consequently, most female boxers found themselves hitting a
heavy bag in the garage or gym, hoping to be noticed. In essence, they lived the life portrayed
in Million Dollar Baby (Warner Brothers, 2004). Here, the example of Graciela Casillas is
instructive. She trained at the Olympic Boxing Gym in downtown Los Angeles. Her trainer at
the time, Jimmy Montoya, had one of the largest boxing stables in the United States, yet
Casillas was the only female boxer in the gym. In this environment, women had to prove them-
selves in order to receive the training they were seeking—being the only woman in a boxing
516
Women’s Boxing, 1972–Present

gym with nearly ﬁfty professional male boxers meant that one needed to have (or develop)
considerable patience, tenacity, and backbone. Casillas would arrive early, hoping to get time
with Montoya, but usually had to wait until Montoya had worked with all the men before
getting any personal attention. Sparring with the men was also a challenge—most male boxers
were embarrassed to be punched by a woman, and so female boxers had to be very cautious
during sparring, otherwise a real ﬁght might start. (Most of the injuries Casillas sustained while
boxing were incurred while training with men, not during an actual bout.) Outside the ring,
the women also had to ward off advances from male boxers and promoters. Privately, though,
Montoya recognized discipline and ability, and so he would frequently tell Casillas, “If only you
were a man, you would be earning what male world champions get, instead of $100 per round”
(personal communication, Montoya to Casillas).
From a promotional standpoint, promoters did not want to take risks. While a woman might
be advertised as a world champion, that was box ofﬁce talk. Promoters did not view female
champions as being equal to male champions, in either box ofﬁce draw or talent, and promoters
are motivated by what they believe will sell seats or pay-per-view subscriptions. During the 1970s
and 1980s, promoters had no ﬁnancial motivation to give women’s boxing an opportunity to
establish itself as a legitimate sport. At the same time, they were aware that women’s boxing was
in its infancy, and they took advantage of the situation by underpaying female boxers. Female
champions were not awarded the same perks that male club ﬁghters got, and they prepared for
ﬁghts with no guarantees of stepping into the ring on ﬁght night. Casillas recalls training for
many ﬁghts that never materialized. One time, she had ﬁnished weighing in at the Los Angeles
Commission before heading to a ﬁght in San Diego, only to be told that the promoter had called
to say that he no longer needed the “girls.” This was after months of training and losing twelve
pounds to make the expected weight!
During the 1980s, female boxers rarely got training expense money or contracts. Weight
divisions were almost nonexistent, or at least not enforced. If the opponent did not make weight,
the ﬁghter had the choice of walking away or taking the ﬁght anyway. Fights were few and far
between, so the reaction in most cases was simply to take the ﬁght. After all, the boxer did not
know whether she would get another chance to ﬁght.
Promoters wanted to emphasize the “feminine image.” Often, this included having
boxers dress like a ring girl rather than a champion. For example, Casillas had her picture
on several fight posters while fighting in Las Vegas at the Silver Slipper and the Show Boat
Casino. Being the first boxer to pose in a sequin skirt, the pictures attracted media
attention. Meanwhile, promoters reminded her that she was fortunate to be getting paid
$100 per round.
In 1982, after signing to ﬁght on one of Bob Arum’s Top Rank Promotions cards in Las Vegas,
Casillas thought she might ﬁnally receive a little recognition. After all, she was the International
Women’s Boxing Association (IWBA) Bantamweight World Champion. She was wrong. On
this card, the women’s ﬁghts were the “cleanup” match. That is, after the main event was over,
and the audience began to thin out, then the women were allowed to come out and ﬁght. To the
promoters’ surprise, most of the audience stayed. So did the TV crews, who taped the women’s
ﬁghts to the last round. Nonetheless, Casillas was still paid just $100 per round. When she asked
to be paid more, she was told that the only reason she was there at all was that the promoter was
doing a favor to her trainers, and that demanding more money would result in her being labeled
Women’s Boxing, 1972–Present
517
www.ebook3000.com

difﬁcult to work with and not being offered future ﬁghts. The bottom line in those days was the
promoters did not think the public was ready to see women box.
In January 1983, the cable sports network ESPN, which had taped the end of Casillas’s ﬁght
with Sue Carlson in Las Vegas, asked promoter Bob Arum (1931–) about the possibility of
introducing Casillas on television. The exposure would have helped her boxing career, but Arum
would not have it. Casillas approached Arum and explained to him that she had just fought on
his card in Las Vegas. She asked him whether the reason he would not allow her to be intro-
duced on television was that she was a woman, and his response was one word, “Absolutely!”
Things were not much different in amateur boxing. Although women had the legal right to
box on campus (by May 1978, female students at the University of Minnesota had organized a
four-bout card) (Fox 1999), few campuses of the 1980s had boxing clubs—and even when they
did, women were generally encouraged to learn judo or karate rather than box. Off-campus,
there was no reason to change, because Title IX did not apply to private organizations such as
the Golden Gloves (Fields 2004, 125). Consequently, while there were court challenges to
professional boxing legislations as early as 1979, signiﬁcant legal challenges did not appear in
amateur boxing until the mid-1980s. A signiﬁcant case started in November 1984, when the
New England branch of the USA Amateur Boxing Federation (now USA Boxing) refused to
allow a Massachusetts woman named Gail Grandchamp to participate in a tournament. Grand-
champ ﬁled suit on October 21, 1985. Following several years of litigation, the courts ruled
against USA Amateur Boxing Federation, in part because its Olympic divisions receive govern-
ment subsidies. By the time the decision was announced, Grandchamp had already turned pro,
but the ruling opened the door for younger boxers (most famously, Washington State’s Dallas
Malloy in May 1993) to force USA Boxing into allowing females to participate in sanctioned
amateur events (Svinth 2000, FN10).
The ﬁrst U.S. national amateur boxing championships to have a women’s division was held
in Augusta, Georgia, in July 1997. Winners included New York’s Tamami “Sky” Hosoya. Hosoya
started boxing in 1993. She trained at Gleason’s Gym in Brooklyn, and her trainer was Antonio
Tomahawk. Following Hosoya’s win at Augusta, Tomahawk told a reporter, “We used to stick her
in there with kids who were, 16, 17 years old. These kids were strong and fast. But she knocked
one out of the ring with a jab alone. She punches so hard these kids would forget she was a
woman; they would come back and throw the kitchen sink” (Ginzburg 2000).
The fear of the media and legal backlash that follows the serious injury or death of a boxer
was part of the organizational trepidation at including women’s boxing in sanctioned competi-
tion. When USA Boxing began designing rules for women’s amateur boxing, women were
required to wear chest and abdominal protectors as well as groin protection and headgear. These
additional safety precautions were not in place before the mid-1980s and were often ignored in
training. It was not that the foam-dipped chest and abdominal protectors were not available;
they were, having been developed for karate and taekwondo tournaments. Instead, they were
simply too cumbersome.
Referees, most of whom were male, tended to stop women’s bouts earlier than they stopped
men’s bouts. In 1981, Casillas was defending her title in Santo Domingo Dominican Republic
against Holly McDaniels. The heat was overbearing and McDaniels appeared fatigued, but she
was still punching. Nonetheless, the referee stopped the ﬁght. Both boxers looked at each other,
puzzled; both wanted to ﬁnish the ﬁght.
518
Women’s Boxing, 1972–Present

Until 2005, no woman died in a sanctioned boxing contest. The death of New Jersey police
cadet Patricia Quinn happened in October 1987, before USA Boxing sanctioned female
boxing. Moreover, Quinn’s fatal injury occurred during police defensive tactics training rather
than during a sanctioned boxing match. In 1996, boxer Katie Dallam suffered cerebral
hemorrhage following a bout in St. Joseph, Missouri. She survived, but her injuries were so
severe that they apparently inspired the F. X. Toole short story that was ﬁlmed as Million Dollar
Baby. In April 2001, Patricia Devellerez, a 26-year-old Australian woman, suffered a severe
brain injury during an amateur match in New Zealand. Although seriously injured, Devellerez
did not die. In June 2003, a woman named Stacy Young (1972–2003) died of injuries received
in an Original Toughman bout in Florida. Because the bout had not been sanctioned by the
state athletic commission, Young’s death was ofﬁcially blamed on inadequate oversight rather
than boxing. Then, on April 3, 2005, amateur boxer Becky Zerlentes (1970–2005) died of
injuries received during a sanctioned match in Fort Collins, Colorado. There was the expected
media backlash, but women’s boxing survived, same as men’s boxing had done a thousand
times before.
Today, women’s boxing is a truly international sport. There are active clubs in dozens of
countries (to include Egypt, Jordan, and India), and in August 2009, the International Olympic
Committee announced that there would be women’s boxing in the 2012 Olympics. (Previously,
boxing had been one of the few Olympic sports without a women’s division.)
The question is always why women want to box. Boxing doesn’t pay much, the risk of injury
is high, the discipline is hard, and outside the gym, the culture generally isn’t supportive. Here,
Graciela Casillas’s explanation is probably as good as any. For Casillas, the real issue was never
about becoming the greatest pound-for-pound ﬁghter. Instead, the real issue was equality. She
wanted to gain equality within her own sport, competing against other women.
Equality is still some ways off. Women are now featured more often on pay-per view. This
change dates to March 16, 1996, when a bout between Christy Martin and Deirdre Gogerty
appeared on pay-per-view, as part of the undercard of a Mike Tyson ﬁght. The following month
(April 15, 1996), Sports Illustrated put Martin’s picture on the cover rather than Tyson’s, and
subsequently, both Bob Arum and Don King (1931–) began regularly including female boxers
on their televised cards. Unfortunately, the old ring girl perception died hard, and in November
1999, Mia St. John received more attention for her appearance on the cover of Playboy than she
ever did for her pugilistic skills. The pay didn’t improve much, either. Although a handful of
celebrity ﬁghters began getting lucrative contracts, most female boxers continued ﬁghting for
just $100 per round.
As for the name recognition, women’s boxing is not much different from men’s boxing—
there are a few celebrities and thousands of female ﬁghters who are barely mentioned in the
record books. For the latter ﬁghters, support comes mostly from family, friends, and other boxers
in the gym. However, the Internet has helped female boxers learn more about other female box-
ers. Web sites of special value include Sue Fox’s Women Boxing Archive Network (WBAN,
http://www.womenboxing.com/), which ﬁrst went on-line in May 1998.
—Graciela Casillas-Tortorelli and Joseph Svinth
See also: Amazons and Gladiatrices; China: Martial Women; English Pugilism; 
Commodiﬁcation of Leisure; Globalization of Martial Arts; International 
Women’s Boxing, 1972–Present
519
www.ebook3000.com

Boxing; Women’s Freestyle Wrestling; Television and the Martial Arts; 
The Internet and the Martial Arts; and Jujutsuffragettes.
REFERENCES
“Barbara Buttrick.” No date. National Fairground Archives, University of Sheffield,
http://www.nfa.dept.shef.ac.uk/holdings/collections/buttrick.html, accessed May 19, 2009.
Cahn, Susan. 1994. Coming On Strong: Gender and Sexuality in Twentieth-Century Women’s Sport. New
York: Free Press.
Cove, Leslie, and Marisa Young. 2007. “Coaching and Athletic Career Investments: Using Organisa-
tional Theories to Explore Women’s Boxing,” Annals of Leisure Research 10 (3-4), 257–271, via
http://www.cinsiyetvespor.org/canan/annalsleisure.pdf#page=29, accessed October 17, 2009.
Fields, Sarah K. 2004. Female Gladiators: Gender, Law, and Contact Sport in America. Champaign: Uni-
versity of Illinois Press.
Fox, Sue T. L. 1999. “Dallas Malloy, She Would Not Take ‘No’ for an Answer . . . But Was Malloy
‘Really’ the First Woman to Box in Amateurs?” Women Boxing Archive Network, http://www
.womenboxing.com/amateur.htm, accessed May 1, 2009.
Fox, Sue T. L. 2003. “Historical Events in Women’s Boxing,” ESPN.com,February 10, http://sports
.espn.go.com/espn/print?id=1504885&type=story, accessed May 2, 2009.
Ginzburg, Evan. 2000. “Strong, Intelligent, Powerful and Feminine: A Proﬁle of Tamami ‘Sky’
Hosoya,” Inyo: Journal of Alternative Perspectives, http://ejmas.com/jalt/jaltart_ginzburg1_0500
.htm, accessed May 1, 2009.
Hargreaves, Jennifer. 2003. “Women’s Boxing and Related Activities: Introducing Images and
Meanings,” in Martial Arts of the World, edited by Thomas A. Green and Joseph R. Svinth,
209–228. Westport, CT: Greenwood.
Kram, Mark. 1967. “The Lady is a Champ,” Sport Illustrated, November 6, 76–92, via http://vault
.sportsillustrated.cnn.com/vault/article/magazine/MAG1080539/index.htm, accessed May 2, 2009.
Manchester, Elizabeth. 2003. “The Ring: Bella Burge. 2000.” Collection Tate: Thomas Kilpper,
http://www.tate.org.uk/servlet/ViewWork?cgroupid=999999961&workid=27347&searchid=
12140&tabview=text, accessed May 2, 2009.
New York Times. 1876. “A Female Boxing Match; a Novel and Nonsensical Exhibition at Harry
Hill’s,” March 17, via http://news.google.com/archivesearch, accessed October 17, 2009.
“Photo: A Women’s Boxing Match, St Louis 1904,” http://en.beijing2008.cn/cptvenues/sports/boxing/
pastgames/n214086859.shtml, accessed May 1, 2009.
Svinth, Joseph R. 2000. “Women Who Would Not Be Sheep,” InYo: Journal of Alternative Perspectives,
http://ejmas.com/jalt/jaltart_svinth4_1199.htm, accessed May 2, 2009.
Svinth, Joseph R. 2000-2007. “Death under the Spotlight: The Manuel Velazquez Boxing Fatality
Collection,” Journal of Combative Sport, http://ejmas.com/jcs/velazquez/jcsart_svinth_0711.html,
accessed May 2, 2009.
Svinth, Joseph R. 2001. “Boxing: Women’s Champion Kim Messer,” InYo: Journal of Alternative
Perspectives, http://ejmas.com/jalt/jaltart_svinth_1101.htm, accessed May 1, 2009.
Toole, F. X. (pseud. Jerold H. Boyd). 2001. Rope Burns. New York: Ecco Press.
Toulmin, Vanessa. 1999. A Fair Fight: An Illustrated Review of Boxing on British Fairgrounds. Oldham,
UK: World’s Fair Ltd.
WOMEN’S FREESTYLE WRESTLING
In 2004, the Olympics in Athens ﬁrst presented women’s freestyle wrestling as a bona ﬁde com-
petition. Although the number of entries was not large, FILA (Fédération Internationale des
Luttes Associés, the ruling body of international wrestling) predictably decided to limit the
520
Women’s Freestyle Wrestling

weight classes for women to four as opposed to seven weight classes for men. The women’s classes
are 48 kilograms (105 pounds); 55 kilograms (121 pounds); 63 kilograms (138 pounds); and
72 kilograms (158 pounds). Women’s freestyle rules were the same as for men, with one
exception—the full nelson was not allowed. This ruling was probably inserted at the behest of a
male from the old school who deemed the hold too dangerous for women to use, although there
is no known evidence to support this claim. Also, there was no Greco-Roman wrestling for
women, just freestyle. Some habits die hard.
It should be noted that the admission of women’s freestyle wrestling into the Olympic family
was not without impact on male participation. To make room for the women in the overall
Olympic program, the men’s competition was reduced from eight weight classes to the afore-
mentioned seven. In this ﬁrst-ever Olympic wrestling competition for women, twelve medals
were awarded: four to Japan, two to the United States, two to France, and one each to Canada,
China, Russia, and Ukraine.
OVERCOMING CULTURAL BIAS
Until recently, the idea of two women ﬁghting, sweating, straining, grunting with exertion,
bruising and being bruised was contrary to most images of femaleness, motherhood, and, in
general, all things feminine. Wrestling was the polar opposite to “ladylike.”
The change in attitude took about three decades and was abetted by the women’s liberation
movement. This change took place not only in North America and Europe, but also occurred in
South America, East and South Asia, Africa, and Australia. Essentially, women began divesting
themselves of the restrictions imposed by patriarchal societies, and being free to participate in
sport (any sport) was among the most visible steps in this divestiture. With the possible excep-
tion of women’s boxing, no sport makes more deﬁnite a statement of this new attitude than does
wrestling.
There is, of course, still much room for improvement. At the women’s World Championships
held in Soﬁa, Bulgaria, in 2000, the organizers (male) arranged a special award for the most
beautiful female wrestler! What does beauty have to do with athletic performance? To the credit
of the winner of this dubious distinction, it was refused and subsequently, that particular award
was quietly dropped from FILA’s list of honors. In addition, there remain pockets of denial. In
July 2004, the government of Bangladesh cancelled that country’s very ﬁrst women’s wrestling
meet after Islamic fundamentalists threatened to wreak havoc should the tournament proceed
(BBC News, 2004). But, overall, things are looking up for women’s freestyle wrestling.
THE BEGINNINGS OF WOMEN’S AMATEUR WRESTLING
In the United States, one of the contributing factors in the rise of women’s amateur wrestling
was the enactment of Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972. The relevant statute was
Section 1681 (a), which said, in part, “No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex,
be excluded from participation in, be denied the beneﬁts of, or be subjected to discrimination
under any education program or activity receiving Federal ﬁnancial assistance.” Without going
into detail, this piece of federal legislation catapulted the general issue of women’s sports into the
public eye, for it ensured that female athletic teams in schools, colleges, and universities had to
have equality in numbers and funding with the male programs.
Women’s Freestyle Wrestling
521
www.ebook3000.com

Litigation was sometimes required to make this happen. In 1987, Stephani Saint, a high
school sophomore from Omaha, Nebraska, decided she wanted to try out for her school wrestling
team. Although her coach and principal requested a waiver, the Nebraska School Activities
Association said it would not allow coed wrestling. Saint took that decision to court, and in a
published decision (Saint v. Nebraska Sch. Activities Assn, U.S. District Court for the District of
Nebraska, dated February 3, 1988), the court ruled that Saint could wrestle, provided she was
otherwise qualiﬁed.
Similarly, in 1996, Tiffany Adams, a freshman at a Kansas high school, was refused the right
to try out for her wrestling team. The reason was that the school superintendent did not believe
that girls should be allowed to wrestle competitively. Adams took the district to court. In a pub-
lished decision—Adams v. Baker, 919 F. Supp. 1496 (D. Kan. 02/2/1996)—the court ruled that
Adams could participate, saying, “Wrestling is an athletic activity and not a sexual activity.”
There were also male coaches and wrestlers who perceived Title IX as discrimination against
males. Following the enactment of Title IX, more than 150 post-secondary institutions discon-
tinued existing men’s wrestling programs and then moved the recouped funds into unrelated
women’s athletic programs. Marquette University, for example, dropped men’s wrestling and
substituted in its place women’s soccer. Women’s basketball and volleyball were other popular
substitutions for men’s wrestling. The ensuing perception of reverse gender bias led to yet
another signiﬁcant court decision, namely National Wrestling Coaches Assoc. v. U.S. Department
of Educ., 263 F. Supp. 2d 82 (D.D.C. 2003), afﬁrmed, 366 F.3d 930 (D.C. Cir. 2004). In this case,
the court ruled that the coaches’ real complaint was against the individual colleges and
universities rather than Title IX, and from the court’s standpoint, that ended that. Something
that was never adequately explained was why the affected coaches did not simply offer to add
women’s wrestling to existing programs. The most likely answer is that the idea never seriously
occurred to them (Fields 2004, 120). That was their loss, too, because, in the words of Jim
Abbott, athletic director for Oklahoma City University, organizing women’s varsity wrestling
teams brings colleges “great, talented, hard-working kids that you wouldn’t have otherwise had”
(Thomas 2008).
In Canada, female wrestling was introduced during the same decades, but more casually, even
tentatively at ﬁrst, usually starting with age-group wrestlers. Up to age 12 or so, the differences in
strength between boys and girls are minimal. Consequently, the limited number of young girls in
those early years was accommodated by allowing them participate with age-group boys. There were
occasional problems to be sure, but by and large, no one raised serious objection (Leyshon 2000).
After the children reached puberty, there were sometimes concerns about mixed-gender
matches. Eventually, many regulatory bodies decided that they would not sanction mixed-gender
matches. Same-gender matches are no problem when there are large numbers of female wrestlers
(as is the case at the Olympics), but they are a problem when there are only a couple of female
wrestlers, as is common at the high school level. At this level, when the rules require same-
gender matches, the result is often that a lone female wrestler does not get to wrestle in varsity
meets (Zander 2004).
A smaller roadblock involved determining proper attire. Throughout much of the twentieth
century, high school and collegiate wrestlers wore trunks and shoes, and at the international
level, the uniform was singlet and shoes. In the early days of women’s wrestling, females merely
522
Women’s Freestyle Wrestling

wore a T-shirt under their male-cut singlet. The current women’s singlet is tailored somewhat to
accommodate a female body.
CHANGING PERSPECTIVES
Even today, there are not many qualiﬁed wrestling coaches who are female, and practice sessions
are usually coed. Some wrestlers, coaches, and parents found (or ﬁnd) it difﬁcult to adjust. For
parents, there is the question of different genders and different body parts. For coaches, there are
fears of potential sexual harassment charges. For boys, there is the fear of being beaten by a girl.
However, after the strangeness of seeing women on the mats is overcome, respect follows. “‘Out-
side the [wrestling] room, it’s different, but inside Jenni [Toth] is just one of the guys,’ said var-
sity wrestler Arthur Sprecher. ‘We treat her just the same. There are no breaks. She does the
same things we have to do. I think if Jenni pins a guy, it’s because she’s a good wrestler. If the guy
cries, he should give up the sport’” (San Diego Union-Tribune 1988).
Moreover, as coaches started training females, they often found females more attentive and
less hormone-driven than male athletes of the same age and experience. With less horseplay and
a more serious approach to training, females often advanced from the novice stage to full-ﬂedged
wrestlers more quickly than males. As for the spectators, today there are those who swear that
females, as a group, are more aggressive on the mat and less likely to stall. In other words, females
offered better entertainment. Whether these perceptions are objectively true is immaterial; what
is important is that a fundamental change in perception occurred in just thirty years.
Another sign of changing attitudes involves cauliﬂower ears. These are usually the result of
being hit too many times on the ear. Unless treated by a doctor, the bruised skin eventually
separates from its cartilage, the blood ﬂow is reduced, and the cartilage shrivels. During the
1970s and 1980s, female wrestlers were less likely than their male counterparts to ﬂaunt a
twisted, misshapen cauliﬂower ear as a badge of toughness, and to accommodate this, FILA insti-
tuted rule changes that allowed women to wear headgear during international competition. But,
during the 1990s, young women’s attitudes toward appropriate appearance underwent their own
changes, and in 2007, a high school wrestler at a national-level tournament in Las Vegas was
observed with a star tattoo on her cauliﬂower ear, thereby accentuating rather than minimizing
it (Williams 2008).
TOURNAMENTS
Early competitions for women were held in conjunction with male tournaments. Termed
“exhibition” contests, they rode on the coattails of the male tournaments and were regarded as
a kind of sideshow.
The problem was that there were not enough female competitors in a weight division to
ensure a match. Thus, girls wrestled boys. In the early days, it was not unusual in an age-group
tourney for a match on one mat to be deserted as the participants, audience, and ofﬁcials alike
crowded around the next mat to watch a girl wrestle a boy. And woe to the boy who lost to a
girl! Many a male psyche—adult as well as adolescent—came near to self-destruction in such
circumstances. A well-publicized instance of this occurred in late 1985 when 15-year-old
America Morris pinned Russell Cain in San Diego (Friend 1986). That particular victory got
Morris on The Tonight Show (NBC) with Johnny Carson (1925–2005).
Women’s Freestyle Wrestling
523
www.ebook3000.com

The ideal solution would have been to have separate events for female wrestlers, but the small
numbers of entries was a problem—how to ensure every female wrestler had the best possible expe-
rience as well as a maximum number of matches, thereby justifying traveling expenses? Where the
associations wanted women’s wrestling to work, then compromises were reached. For example,
weight classiﬁcations were often made up on the spot, by simply grouping ﬁve or six females into a
weight class according to how close they were to the median weight of the group. Alternatively,
the elimination format was altered to allow every female entrant to wrestle every other entrant in
her group, with the group being every female who weighed within ﬁve or six pounds of the others.
In this format, losing did not mean elimination—every entrant simply wrestled with every other
entrant. Sadly, there were cases where associations did not want women’s wrestling to work. In
those cases, good wrestlers were lost to the sport, simply because they were female.
Weighing-in presented another roadblock, as the rules stated that the competitors must be
weighed nude. Since the ofﬁcials responsible for checking weight were male, this was a problem.
Here, solutions were obvious. One was to have the chaperons accompanying the teams supervise
weigh-ins, and another was to allow female wrestlers to weigh in while wearing singlets.
STANDING ALONE INTERNATIONALLY
Gradually, the “exhibitions” graduated into “festivals,” and eventually women’s wrestling events
stood on their own as bona ﬁde tournament competitions. The 2004 Olympic Games was hardly
the ﬁrst important international competition for female wrestlers, but it was a major factor in
global acceptance of their sport. The ﬁrst FILA-sanctioned international tournament for women
was held in Lørenskog, Norway in 1987. The ﬁrst female world gold medalist was Brigitte
Weigert (44 kilograms, 96.8 pounds) of Belgium, and the ﬁrst team championship went to
France. Today, there are many international tournaments for women. Examples include the
World Student Games, World Championships, Pan-Am Games, Pan Asian Games, and now the
Summer Olympics.
In general, media coverage of women’s athletics continues to lag behind media coverage of
comparable male events (Bishop 2003). However, there are glimmers of hope for women’s
wrestling. For instance, in 2006, Canada’s Christine Nordhagen-Vierling was inducted into the
International Wrestling Hall of Fame. Between 1993 and 2001, Nordhagen-Vierling won a total
of eight medals in the world championships, six of them gold. She is well-deserving of being
named to anyone’s athletic hall of fame.
Also, as more female wrestlers end their competitive careers, there should be a corresponding
increase in the number of female coaches, referees, and administrators. It remains to be seen
what changes occur as more women take their rightful places in wrestling administration.
THE FUTURE
Inadequate funding is an obstacle to the growth of women’s wrestling. It costs money to train
and travel, and without ﬁnancial support from schools, businesses, or the government, many
talented wrestlers cannot afford to participate. Fortunately, access to scholarships, top-level
coaches, paid travel, and endorsements appears to be improving, so there is every reason to
believe that women’s wrestling will continue to prosper and develop. As of 2009 there were
female wrestling groups in about seventy countries. While Olympic competition for women
was limited to four weight classes in 2008, other major international competitions such as the
524
Women’s Freestyle Wrestling

Pan-Am Games and Commonwealth Games had seven weight categories, and in North Amer-
ican collegiate wrestling, there were eight weight classes. Thus, it is likely that the Olympic
slate will be adjusted in the future so that the number of female weight classes matches the
number of male weight classes. Meanwhile, female candidates for the Olympics must qualify
in lesser competitions, just as males must do. In the process, the women might visit virtually
every continent. What a marvelous opportunity to see and to learn! Nothing but good can
come of this.
—Glynn A. Leyshon and Joseph Svinth
See also: Amazons and Gladiatrices; China: Martial Women (in Volume I); 
Martial Arts Tourism; Globalization of Martial Arts; International Freestyle 
and Greco-Roman Wrestling; Women’s Boxing, 1972–Present; 
and Jujutsuffragettes (in this volume).
REFERENCES
BBC News. 2004. “Women’s Wrestling Called Off,” July 4, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/south_asia/
3864783.stm, accessed October 17, 2009.
Bishop, Ronald. 2003. “Missing in Action: Feature Coverage of Women’s Sports in Sports Illustrated,”
Journal of Sport and Social Issues 27(2), 284–194, DOI: 10.1177/0193732502250718, via http://
online.sagepub.com/, accessed October 16, 2009.
Bryson, Lois. 1987. “Sport and the Maintenance of Masculine Hegemony,” Women’s Studies Interna-
tional Forum 10(4), 349–360, DOI 10.1016/0277-5395(87)90052-5, via ScienceDirect, accessed
October 17, 2009.
Fields, Sarah K. 2004. Female Gladiators: Gender, Law, and Contact Sport in America. Champaign:
University of Illinois Press.
Friend, Tom. 1986. “America the Wrestler,” Los Angeles Times, January 13, San Diego County, 
SD-B1, via ProQuest, accessed October 17, 2009.
Leyshon, Glynn. 2000. “Mat Wars: The Story of Ontario High School Girls’ Wrestling,” InYo: Journal
of Alternative Perspectives, http://ejmas.com/jalt/jaltart_leyshon_0800.htm, accessed May 2, 2009.
San Diego Union-Tribune. 1988.“Girls Invading Male Sports Teams Are Winning Respect,” January
19, via http://www.fortunecity.com/olympia/romario/912/gnews4.htm, accessed October 17, 2009.
Thomas, Katie. 2008. “Women Want to Wrestle; Small Colleges Oblige,” New York Times, May 27,
via http://www.nytimes.com/2008/05/27/sports/othersports/27wrestling.html?pagewanted=all,
accessed October 17, 2009.
Williams, Preston. 2008. “For Wrestlers, a Swelled Sense of Pride,” Washington Post, March 6, PG-14,
via http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/03/04/AR2008030402360.html,
accessed October 17, 2009.
Zander, Diane (Director). 2004. Girl Wrestler [video]. New York: Women Make Movies.
Women’s Freestyle Wrestling
525
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank 

Martial Media
In nonliterate societies, knowledge is transmitted from generation to generation via dramatic
means—plays, recitations, and so on. In literate societies, knowledge is also transmitted using
physical media such as books and newspapers. For the latter transmission, the invention of paper
during the second century CE is critically important, because it meant that for the ﬁrst time, one
did not have to be a king to afford a book. The subsequent development of woodblock printing
in China and printing presses in Europe is important, too, because these developments meant
that even people of modest means could afford printed broadsheets and books.
During the nineteenth century, entirely new methods of transmitting information were
developed (to include ﬁlm and sound recordings), and during the late twentieth century, digital
transmission of information became common.
The following section brieﬂy explores these themes, particularly as they apply to the East
Asian martial arts.
FILM AND THE MARTIAL ARTS
Audience expectations play an important role in deﬁning genres, and the “martial arts” sections
of DVD stores suggest that martial arts ﬁlms extensively feature Asian ﬁghting skills. However,
even this deﬁnition begs the question of how much Asian martial arts are required to make a ﬁlm
a martial arts ﬁlm. Most agree that the James Bond–inspired Enter the Dragon (Golden Harvest,
1973) is a martial arts ﬁlm because it stars Bruce Lee (Li Xiaolong, also known as Lee Jun Fan,
1940–1973), but what about the actual Bond movies, which often feature lavish ﬁght scenes, or
studio blockbusters such as The Matrix (Warner Brothers, 1999) and The Bourne Identity (Uni-
versal, 2002), where martial arts were created speciﬁcally for the movies?
Given the restrictions of space, this article works within the commonsense deﬁnition, which
emerged out of the international distribution of action ﬁlms from East Asia. The reader will also
observe a particular focus on the period after 1950, during which martial arts cinema had its
widest international impact and produced some of its most enduring achievements.
Some of the generic labels are indicative of different emphases. For instance, Japanese martial
arts ﬁlms are sometimes called “samurai ﬁlms.” This is often a misnomer—the quintessential hero
was an outcast and loner, a “stray dog” rather than a warrior in service to a lord. Inagaki Hiroshi’s
(1905–1980) Miyamoto Musashi (Toho, 1954), Kurosawa Akira’s (1910–1998) Yojimbo (Toho,
1961) and Sanjuro (Toho, 1962), and the Baby Cart/Lone Wolf and Cub series (various produc-
tion companies and directors, 1972–1980) center on protagonists who are ronin (masterless wan-
derers). Names that critics use for these ﬁlms include jidaigeki (period ﬁlm, referring especially to
www.ebook3000.com

swordplay ﬁlms set in historical periods), chanbara (an onomatopoeic term deriving from the
percussive accompaniment to silent Japanese swordplay ﬁlms), and ken-geki (sword theater).
The Chinese term wuxia pian (martial arts chivalry ﬁlm) follows the expectations set by an
older literary genre and combines the promise of martial arts (wu) with a preoccupation with
heroic attributes (xia). The word xia deﬁnes the qualities expected of the genre’s heroes—
altruistic, loyal, defenders of the powerless. Although the wuxia ﬁlm is less interested in the
detailed exploration of historical sociopolitics than its Japanese counterpart, a recurring preoccu-
pation with invading forces can be seen, perhaps reﬂecting Hong Kong’s former colonial status.
The Japanese and Chinese traditions overlap in their dramatic purpose, but with signiﬁcant
differences in how the hero or heroes operate in society. Chanbara often presents heroism as com-
promised by the samurai’s social constraints, caught between giri (duty) and ninjo (conscience),
whereas the xia is traditionally a more romantic and unconstrained ﬁgure who operates more inde-
pendently of the ofﬁcial order. The xia inhabit their own mythical subculture, jianghu (literally
“rivers and lakes”—often translated as “the martial world”) and are closer in some ways to the
“stray dog” ronin than the military samurai. Another Chinese generic term has some currency.
This is the wuda pian (martial arts ﬁghting ﬁlm), which downplays the thematic preoccupation
with heroism as a deﬁning feature of the genre. From the 1970s, the genre seemed predicated
increasingly on the promise of longer and more intricate ﬁght sequences. The “kung fu ﬁlm,” or
gongfu pian, is a slightly more contested term. It was not used as a generic label before the 1970s,
when Bruce Lee popularized the term, particularly in the West. Kung fu cinema is associated with
a more realistic depiction of recognizable martial arts styles—in its classic period, a concern with
“authenticity” became a deﬁning feature. Even so, some Chinese critics do not see “kung fu” as a
subgenre in its own right, but rather subsumed under either wuxia pian or wuda pian.
STRAY DOGS: CHANBARA CINEMA
The chanbara, like the wuxia pian, dates back to silent cinema and draws on both literary and
theatrical traditions. The jidaigeki was banned during the American occupation of Japan
(1945–1952), but the decade of the 1950s is often seen as the “Golden Age” of the chanbara.
Chanbara of the 1950s and 1960s displayed a growing emphasis on spectacle, with color and
widescreen becoming common by the mid-1960s. Toho and Toei studios revived the legendary
swordsman Miyamoto Musashi (1582 [not 1584]–1645), in a three-ﬁlm series (1954–1956) and
a ﬁve-ﬁlm (1961–1965) series; the former starred Kurosawa’s discovery Mifune Toshiro
(1920–1997) as Musashi. Equally importantly, Kurosawa’s ﬁlms attracted international atten-
tion: Seven Samurai (Toho, 1954), Throne of Blood (Toho, 1957), and The Hidden Fortress (Toho,
1958) were often Western audiences’ ﬁrst exposure to Asian martial arts cinema.
By the early 1960s, the genre transformed signiﬁcantly with the emergence of the “cruel
jidaigeki” (Standish 2005, 273). The inﬂuence of Kurosawa’s Yojimbo (1961) was considerable.
Remade as Sergio Leone’s (1929–1989) Italian western A Fistful of Dollars (Constantin Film,
1964), Yojimbo provided the template for many 1960s “antiheroes.” Arriving in a town split by
two warring factions, and greeted by a dog carrying a severed hand in his mouth, Mifune’s
Sanjuro plays both ends against each other. Aside from his skill at political manipulation, Sanjuro
also demonstrates equal mastery of the sword and the dark quip. The scruffy, cynical ronin
seemed to be in tune with the rebellious “New Wave” that was emerging in Japanese cinema.
528
Film and the Martial Arts

Some of these protagonists are so dark that they cease to be heroic at all. For example, Nakadai
Tetsuya’s nihilistic swordsman in Okamoto Kihachi’s (1924–2005) Sword of Doom (Toho, 1966)
is ﬁrst seen murdering an old man at a Buddhist shrine and last seen in freeze frame amidst a
seemingly unending onslaught of (possibly imaginary) opponents.
As these descriptions suggest, graphic violence takes center stage in the “cruel jidaigeki.” In
Sanjuro, the climactic duel between Mifune and Nakadai is settled by a single sword stroke.
There is a fast draw followed, after a beat, by a torrent of blood from Nakadai’s chest. The spec-
tacle of arterial spray progresses to greater extremes in the Baby Cart/Lone Wolf and Cub series,
which featured a former royal executioner and his infant son. The ﬁlms’ outlandish violence led
some critics to suggest that their victims must have garden hoses for veins. If the ﬁlms of Kurosawa
and Kobayashi Masaki (1916–1996) circulated internationally as arthouse cinema, the carnage
of some 1970s chanbara made them appealing to cult and exploitation audiences outside Japan.
Episodes from the ﬁrst two Baby Cart ﬁlms were repackaged as the dubbed Shogun Assassin
(Toho, 1980), a veritable crimson geyser of a ﬁlm.
Another key chanbara cycle emerged during the 1960s. The Zatoichi ﬁlms (1962 –1989) ran
to twenty-six ﬁlms and a TV series, and there was a recent (2003) remake by the cult director-star
Kitano Takeshi (1947–). The role of the blind masseur, preternaturally accomplished with his sig-
nature sword-cane (shikomi-zue) held in a reverse grip, became synonymous with the actor
Shintaro Katsu (born Okumura Toshio, 1931–1997). The ﬁlms beneﬁt from his grizzled charm and
exceptional physical skill. Zatoichi is the ultimate chanbara outsider, simultaneously heroic and
abject. As Alain Silver explains (2005, 107), masseurs during the Tokugawa era were at the bot-
tom of the social hierarchy—given his impairment (common amongst masseurs), Zatoichi is
classed hinin, meaning not legally human.
While the jidaigeki and chanbara declined in popularity—or migrated to television—they
have enjoyed a couple of revivals. The most recent successes, including When the Last Sword Is
Drawn (Shochiku, 2003) and The Hidden Blade (Shochiku, 2004), are sometimes attributed to
the success of the Hollywood ﬁlm The Last Samurai (Radar Pictures/Warner Brothers, 2003),
with its elegy for the declining warrior class in the post-Shogunate Meiji-era. However, these
somber ﬁlms were already anticipated by The Twilight Samurai (Eisei Gekijo, 2002), in which the
protagonist’s shabby demeanor denotes not the individualism of a Sanjuro but instead the pathos
of a low-ranking samurai who must sell his sword to pay for his wife’s funeral. Kitano’s Zatoichi
meanwhile revived the super-heroic stray dog, but in postmodern packaging—the blind swords-
man has peroxide-blond hair, the blood is computer-generated, and the ﬁlm culminates with a
bravura tap-dance sequence.
WUXIA AND KUNG FU
Wuxia pian appeared in Shanghai soon after the arrival of motion pictures in 1896, but the
Shanghai ﬁlm industry did not really take off until the late 1910s. Wuxia pian were often in
serial form, reﬂecting the format of many popular novels. The action is fanciful and fantastical,
and ﬁlms like Red Heroine (1929) feature an early version of the kind of “wire work” later made
famous by ﬁlms such as Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (Columbia Tri-Star, 2003).
During the 1930s, wuxia pian fell out of favor with the Chinese Nationalist government, and
it was not liked much more by the Communist government of Mao Zedong (1893–1976). Thus,
Film and the Martial Arts
529
www.ebook3000.com

from the 1940s to the 1970s, wuxia pian’s home was Hong Kong (and to a lesser extent, Taiwan),
and it was from Hong Kong and Taiwan that the genre achieved its eventual global popularity.
Then, in the early 1980s, the Shaolin Temple in Songshan was reopened as a tourist attraction
and allowed to become the location for Jet Li’s (Li Lianjie, 1963–) ﬁlm debut, The Shaolin Tem-
ple (Chung Yuen Film Production Co., 1982). Since then, there have also been mainland Chi-
nese wuxia movies, often co-produced by Hong Kong.
Few early wuxia ﬁlms showed much interest in depicting Chinese martial arts accurately. An
exception was a Cantonese-dialect series that began in 1949; it dealt with the adventures of a
celebrated southern hung gar master called Wong Fei-hung/Huang Feihong (ca. 1847–1924).
While the ﬁght sequences drew on the Beijing Opera background of choreographer Yuen Siu-tin
(1912–1979), they also incorporated recognizable techniques, including one of the ﬁrst onscreen
appearances of drunken boxing. In retrospect, they can be seen as the ﬁrst kung fu ﬁlms.
The wuxia pian entered its Golden Age from the late 1960s into the 1970s. Spurred by the
high standards of the postwar jidaigeki, Shaw Brothers Studio sought both to raise the quality of
their own martial arts ﬁlms and to make them more appealing to international audiences. The
“new style” wuxia pian was initiated by ﬁlms such as King Hu’s (Hu Jinquan, 1931–1997) Come
Drink with Me (Shaw Brothers, 1966) and Chang Cheh’s (Zhang Che, 1923–2002) The One-
Armed Swordsman (Shaw Brothers, 1967). These ﬁlms were presented in color and widescreen,
and with a newly graphic level of bloodshed. In Chang Cheh’s Golden Swallow (1968), some of
the nihilism of the “cruel jidaigeki” seems to have passed to the previously clean-cut wuxia—
Wang Yu’s brooding Silver Roc is equally committed to demonstrating his superior skill and
bringing about his own demise.
The early 1970s saw a seismic shift with the ﬁlms of Bruce Lee, whose star vehicles, starting with
The Big Boss (Golden Harvest, 1971), brought an unprecedented level of authenticity to martial arts
cinema and signaled a move toward kung fu. Enter the Dragon was Hong Kong cinema’s ﬁrst English-
language co-production with a Hollywood studio, and its star’s premature death before the ﬁlm’s
release cemented his almost mythical status. Lee’s authenticity transformed what it meant to be a
“martial arts star” and opened the gates for several generations of physically gifted performers.
The move toward authenticity also appears in the ﬁlms of Lau Kar-leung (Liu Jialiang,
1936–), a choreographer and supporting actor for Shaw Brothers who later made the transition
to director. In a series of ﬁlms dealing with the legendary southern Shaolin Temple, Lau made
authentic ﬁghting styles central to their narratives. Executioners from Shaolin (Shaw Brothers,
1976) is an apocryphal tale of the development of hung gar by Hong Xiguan’s son, combining his
father’s Tiger and his mother’s Crane to defeat the wudang master Bai Mei. One of Lau’s most
celebrated works, The 36th Chamber of Shaolin (Shaw Brothers, 1978), devotes its lengthy mid-
dle section to the physical training of San-de, played by Gordon Liu (Lau Kar-fai, 1955–).
By the end of the 1970s, kung fu ﬁlms began falling out of favor, but by then, martial
arts–derived spectacle had become integral to Hong Kong ﬁlm’s action traditions. In the short
term the genre enjoyed extended life through the injection of comedy. Comedic stars included
Sammo Hung (Hung Kam Po, 1952–) and Jackie Chan (Chan Kong Sang, 1954–). Their back-
ground was in Beijing Opera, which both heightened the acrobatic spectacle and enabled them
to withstand the painful and dangerous stunts that became a hallmark of their ﬁlms. Chan (in
particular) was also a student of American silent comedies and Technicolor musicals, and took
routines and stunts from actors such as Buster Keaton (1895–1966), Harold Lloyd (1893–1971),
530
Film and the Martial Arts

Fred Astaire (1899–1987), and Gene Kelly (1912–1996). Thus, during the 1980s, wuxia pian
was converted into modern-day action and comedy suitable for international audiences.
Both the traditional wuxia pian and the kung fu ﬁlm were revived in the 1990s by producer-
director Tsui Hark (Xu Wen Guang, 1951–) with the Swordsman trilogy (1990–1992) and the
Once Upon a Time in China series (1990–1997). The latter reinvented the ﬁgure of Wong Fei-hung,
now played by former wushu champion Jet Li. From the different versions of “authenticity”
embodied by Bruce Lee, Lau Kar-leung, and Jackie Chan, Hong Kong ﬁght choreography had
changed again, this time through a sophisticated use of wires and computer-generated imagery,
thereby pushing martial arts abilities into the realm of the video game.
ZATOICHI MEETS THE ONE-ARMED SWORDSMAN: THE
SINO-JAPANESE CONNECTION
There are signiﬁcant differences between Japanese and Hong Kong martial arts ﬁlms, but there
are points of convergence, too. Both encompass an elegiac tradition, as traditional martial arts
face up to impending redundancy in the modern world. Chanbara’s action scenes are brisk and
economical, whereas wuxia’s incline towards the expansive, but both are intensely rhythmic
because of their roots in theatrical performance. The distinctive rhythm that author David
Bordwell (2000, 221–231) discerns in Hong Kong action—bursts of action punctuated by moments
of stasis—can be found in both traditions.
Shaw Brothers bought a collection of chanbara classics for their directors to study, and some
critics have speculated that the success of Zatoichi might have been partly responsible for Hong
Kong’s One-Armed Swordsman ﬁlms—the two characters even met in a co-production called
Zatoichi Meets the One-Armed Swordsman (Daiei, 1971). However, as Kinnia Yau Shuk-ting
(2005, 45) explains, Japan was the last major international market to succumb to the “kung fu
craze.” Hong Kong ﬁlms failed to penetrate Japan until the success of Bruce Lee led to distribu-
tors ﬁghting over the rights to his ﬁlms. The impact of Lee on Japan can be seen in the Satsu-
jinken!/Streetﬁghter ﬁlms (Toei, 1974–1976) starring Sonny Chiba (Maeda Sadaho, 1939–).
Chiba was by no means the ﬁrst Japanese martial arts star to use empty-handed ﬁghting rather
than swordplay, but his manic performance owed a great deal to Lee’s mannerisms. The Street-
ﬁghter ﬁlms were distributed internationally as though part of the wave of Hong Kong kung fu
ﬁlms, but the level of graphic violence (bare-handed castrations, X-ray views of shattered bones,
etc.) exceeded even those. Subsequently, the cycle of mutual inﬂuences between Hong Kong and
Japan has sometimes been harder to disentangle.
HOLLYWOOD MARTIAL ARTS FILMS
Asian martial arts made sporadic, if sometimes spectacular, appearances in Western television
and cinema long before the 1970s. There were James Bond’s adversaries, secret agents in televi-
sion series such as The Avengers (various companies, 1961–1969), and a long line of war veter-
ans who brought back special skills from Asia.
Martial arts feature tellingly in ﬁlms about America’s “Encounters with Asia.” Although the
Hawaiian Chinese Charlie Chan relied upon logic, the Japanese Mr. Moto, as played by Peter
Lorre (1904–1964), (eight ﬁlms, 1935–1937) was an expert in jiujitsu—to use the spelling of
Film and the Martial Arts
531
www.ebook3000.com

the time. In Behind the Rising Sun (RKO, 1943), Robert Ryan (1909–1973) boxes a “Japanese”
judo expert played by pro wrestler Mike Mazurki (ca. 1909–1990) into submission. In Blood on
the Sun (United Artists, 1945), James Cagney (1899–1986) uses judo to defeat another “Japan-
ese” judo expert, this time, former Los Angeles police ofﬁcer Jack Sergel (1902–1968). In Bad
Day at Black Rock (MGM, 1954), Spencer Tracy’s (1900–1967) one-armed World War II vet
anticipates the disabled Asian martial arts heroes of the 1960s, defeating racist small-town thugs
using judo skills acquired from a murdered Japanese American friend. The hero of Billy Jack
(Warner Brothers, 1971) is a Vietnam vet equipped with exceptional Hapkido skills and a coun-
tercultural sensibility.
Perhaps the most interesting example of America’s countercultural investment in Asian mar-
tial arts is the network television series Kung Fu (ABC, 1972–1975). Although Kung Fu now
seems compromised by the producer’s decision to cast a white American actor (David Carradine,
1936–2009) as a half-Chinese character, it is striking for its focus on a paciﬁst Buddhist hero. In
On Deadly Ground (Warner Brothers, 1994), Steven Seagal (1952–) cuts a more macho ﬁgure,
but the environmentalist theme of this movie is also representative of a countercultural hero. On
the other hand, as David Desser (2000, 39) has observed, some of the European and American
action stars who emerged after the “kung fu craze”—such as Chuck Norris, Sylvester Stallone
(1946–), and Jean Claude Van Damme (1960–)—have embodied a more imperialist version of
the “Encounter with Asia,” returning to Vietnam or conquering other parts of the “savage” East.
Hollywood made little attempt to incorporate chanbara cinema, apart from Mifune’s samurai
appearing in the Western Red Sun (Corona Films, 1971) alongside a gunﬁghter played by
Charles Bronson (1921–2003). Mifune also played a leading role in the TV adaptation of
James Clavell’s bestseller Shogun (NBC, 1980). Hollywood arguably offered its best swordplay
role to Takakura Ken (1931–) in The Yakuza (Warner Brothers, 1971), where Takakura played
alongside Robert Mitchum (1917–1997) in a ﬁlm that manages to incorporate the giri–ninjo
(obligation vs. personal desire) conﬂict into a contemporary crime ﬁlm. Ninjutsu seemed to
lend itself more easily to Western action cinema, with Enter the Ninja (Cannon Productions,
1981) spawning a cycle of low-budget ﬁlms. The North American blaxploitation ﬁlms of the
1970s responded to Hong Kong cinema using African American martial artist Jim Kelly
(1946–) in ﬁlms such as Black Belt Jones (Warner Brothers, 1974). There were also assorted
ﬁlms about martial arts tournaments; examples include The Karate Kid (Columbia Pictures,
1984) and Bloodsport (Cannon Group, 1986).
The so-called “Asian invasion” of the 1990s was speciﬁcally focused on Hong Kong and was
viewed as a means of revitalizing Hollywood action cinema. If the 1970s craze dissipated after
the death of Lee, the mid-1990s saw the crossover of Hong Kong stars, directors, and choreog-
raphers to Hollywood productions. Perhaps the most signiﬁcant shift was the incorporation of
Hong Kong’s action ﬁlmmaking practices. Films like The Matrix and Kill Bill (Miramax, 2003,
2004) not only used Yuen Wo-ping’s (Yuan Heping, 1945–) expertise as a choreographer but also
adopted the practice of equipping their stars with martial arts performance skills so that they
could perform many of their own stunts. Over the last ten years, such unlikely ﬁgures as Keanu
Reeves (1964–), Uma Thurman (1970–), and Jason Statham (1972–) have passed as creditable
martial arts performers. Kill Bill is particularly interesting in combining inﬂuences from both
Hong Kong wuxia and kung fu with Japanese chanbara cinema—its stars included icons such as
Sonny Chiba, Gordon Liu Jiahui, and David Carradine. Less celebrated but equally ingenious is
532
Film and the Martial Arts

The Forbidden Kingdom (Casey Silver/Lionsgate/Relativity Media, 2008), which was both Holly-
wood’s ﬁrst attempt at a period wuxia fantasy and the ﬁrst onscreen pairing of Jackie Chan and
Jet Li. The ﬁlm propels its kung fu–obsessed hero into a world composed of wuxia literature and
myth, Hong Kong movie classics, and speciﬁc quanfa styles (Drunken Fist, Praying Mantis), none
of which are common in Hollywood blockbusters. Like Kill Bill, The Forbidden Kingdom testiﬁes
to the impact these ﬁlms have had on the Western imagination.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS: MARTIAL ARTHOUSE AND MUAY THAI
Although traditional martial arts genres always seem to be living on borrowed time, they have
proved extraordinarily resilient. Perhaps the most signiﬁcant of these resurgences was triggered
by the success of director Ang Lee’s (1954–) arthouse wuxia ﬁlm Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon,
which brought the genre to an entirely new audience. Arthouse wuxia was nothing new—King
Hu’s A Touch of Zen (International Film Company, 1971) won an award at the Cannes Film Fes-
tival, and Wong Kar-wai’s Ashes of Time (Beijing Film Studios, 1994, re-released in a “Redux”
version in 2008) is an idiosyncratic adaptation of wuxia novels by Louis Cha (Jin Yong, 1924–)
that are generally known in English as the Condor Trilogy. By 2000, Lee had also established
mainstream successes, such as Sense and Sensibility (Columbia Pictures, 1995) and The Ice Storm
(Fox Searchlight, 1997), which may have helped broaden his work’s appeal.
Crouching Tiger inadvertently generated a trend for wuxia blockbusters by other arthouse direc-
tors. The mainland director Zhang Yimou (1951–) has been particularly active in the genre—Hero
(Beijing New Picture, 2002), House of Flying Daggers (Beijing New Picture, 2004) and The Curse
of the Golden Flower (Beijing New Picture, 2006)—but some of the best wuxia blockbusters have
been made by more commercial Hong Kong directors. Ronny Yu’s (1950–) Fearless (China Film
Group, 2006) allowed Jet Li to add the founder of the Jing Wu Association, Huo Yuanjia (ca.
1868–1910), to his gallery of celebrated kung fu heroes, while Peter Chan’s (1962–) The Warlords
(China Film Group, 2008) is an epic remake of Zhang Che’s Blood Brothers (Shaw Brothers, 1973).
Recently, a new tiger has joined Hong Kong and Japan on the mountain. While Thailand had
produced Muay Thai action ﬁlms for decades, few of them were shown outside Thailand. But, as
Thai cinema raised its production standards, it produced a martial arts ﬁlm, Ong-Bak: The Thai
Warrior (Baa-Ram-Ewe, 2003) that seemed to offer audiences a “return to the real” during the era
of wirework and digital special effects. With its uncomplicated narrative, Ong-Bak is primarily a
vehicle for its star Tony Jaa (Tatchakorn Yeerum, 1976–). Some of the ﬁght sequences showcase
hard-hitting Muay Thai elbow and knee strikes, but Jaa’s talents extend beyond indigenous martial
arts to demonstrate the inﬂuence of Hong Kong stunt work and choreography—acrobatic grace,
aerial (but wire-free) stunts, and the sort of on-set danger that Jackie Chan once made his trade-
mark. In one extended chase sequence, Jaa runs across the shoulders of his adversaries, ﬂips
between parallel sheets of glass and slides underneath a moving car. On a tour to promote the ﬁlm,
Jaa performed some of the stunts live to prove that he was the real thing. The follow-up Tom Yum
Goong/The Warrior King (Baa-Ram-Ewe, 2005), which was released under a variety of names in
North America and Europe, manages to take such stunt work further, but it remains to be seen
whether Jaa will acquire the screen presence to accompany his physical skills and become a lasting
successor to Lee et al. Nevertheless, few could have predicted that the early 2000s would see the
rise of a new, “authentic” martial arts star, and even fewer would have guessed that he would emerge
Film and the Martial Arts
533
www.ebook3000.com

from a country having no international reputation for making martial arts ﬁlms. He already has a
female rival, JeeJa Yanin (Yanin Vismitananda, 1984–), who made an equally bone-crunching
debut in the ﬁlm Chocolate (Baa-Ram-Ewe, 2008) as an autistic girl who acquires some of her Muay
Thai skills from watching Ong Bak. Thai martial arts cinema is clearly still on the rise.
—Leon Hunt
See also: Globalization of Martial Arts; Gunﬁghters; Television and the Martial Arts; 
Performing Arts; Action Design for Professional Wrestling; Stage and 
Combat in the Elizabethan Tradition (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Bordwell, David. 2000. Planet Hong Kong: Popular Cinema and the Art of Entertainment. Cambridge,
MA and London: Harvard University Press.
Desser, David. 2000. “The Kung Fu Craze: Hong Kong Cinema’s First American Reception,” in The Cin-
ema of Hong Kong: History, Arts, Identity, edited by Poshek Fu and David Desser, 19–43. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Hunt, Leon. 1993. Kung Fu Cult Masters: From Bruce Lee to Crouching Tiger. London: Wallﬂower.
Hunt, Leon. 2005. “Ong-Bak: New Thai Cinema, Hong Kong and the Cult of the ‘Real’,” New Cinemas
3(2), 69–84.
Mintz, Marilyn D. 1978. The Martial Arts Films. South Brunswick, NJ and New York: A. S. Barnes and
Company.
Silver, Alain. 2005. The Samurai Film, revised edition. Woodstock, NY and New York: Overlook Press.
Standish, Isolde. 2005. A New History of Japanese Cinema. New York and London: Continuum.
Yau Shuk-ting, Kinnia. 2005. “Interactions between Japanese and Hong Kong Action Cinemas,” in
Hong Kong Connections: Transnational Imagination in Action Cinema, edited by Meaghan Morris, Siu
Leung Li and Stephen Chan Ching-ku, 21–34. Durham, London, and Hong Kong: Hong Kong
University Press.
GUNFIGHTERS
Gunﬁghters (also known as gunslingers, shootists, pistoleers, or simply gunmen) are a ﬁxture of
literary and cinematic depictions of the post-Civil War American West. The term is still applied
to individuals who were (or are) celebrated for their proﬁciency with handguns and their will-
ingness to use them in deadly confrontations.
Because ﬁghts between men armed with “six-shooters” were allegedly common in the Trans-
Mississippi West, the gunﬁghter is often viewed as the prototypical Westerner. However, not all
Westerners carried (or even owned) revolvers, and more people were shot down in the back alleys
of New York and Chicago than were ever murdered in Kansas cow towns. The term is therefore
best applied more narrowly to those Westerners who employed handguns in a regular, professional
capacity. This would exclude mere hotheads armed with pistols but would include lawmen, pro-
fessional criminals, and quasi-legal ﬁgures such as Pinkerton detectives, private-army “regulators,”
and bounty hunters.
The word quasi-legal suggests an important proviso. During the gunﬁghter’s alleged heyday
(roughly the three decades following the American Civil War, 1866–1895), social order on the fron-
tier was shaky at best. With centers of legal authority widely dispersed, a large vagrant population,
534
Gunfighters

and suspected crimes often punished by impromptu hangings, there was some truth to the literary
image of the Wild West. The cattle culture often precipitated violence, both on the range, where
rustlers battled regulators, and at the railheads, where inebriated cowboys sometimes “shot up the
town.” Alongside the cattlemen were sheep ranchers, farmers, miners, railroaders, union organizers,
scabs, freed slaves, and immigrants.
In this milieu, a gunman’s ability to keep order was often more respected than legal niceties
were. Hence, some of the most famous gunﬁghters of western legend were ambiguous characters
such as the hired gun William (Billy the Kid) Bonney (1859–1881) and the gambling “civilizer”
James Butler (Wild Bill) Hickok (1837–1876). The intermediary status of such historical char-
acters is reﬂected in the movies’ fascination with the “good bad man”—a central ﬁgure since the
days of actor William S. Hart (1872–1946).
Hickok was the ﬁrst western gunﬁghter to attain legendary status, and his career illustrates the
importance of myth-making machinery. Born James Butler Hickok in 1837, he acquired the nick-
name “Wild Bill” in the 1860s after he allegedly made a lynch mob back down. After working as
a Union Army scout, a wagon master, and a gambler, he rose to national prominence in 1867 on
the strength of a Harper’s New Monthly Magazine story that depicted him as a superhuman
“Scout of the Plains.” Subsequent dime novel treatments ﬂeshed out the formula, highlighting
the shooting of this “Prince of Pistoleers.” Although Hickok served only two years as a frontier
lawman, popular media, from dime novels to stage plays, made him a national icon, the swiftest
and deadliest practitioner of his trade. Anecdotes about Hickok’s “almost hypnotic” marksman-
ship are ﬁrmly in the frontier “roarer” tradition (Rosa 1969, 61–76). Later, thanks to Gary
Cooper’s (1901–1961) portrayal in the The Plainsman (Paramount, 1936) Hickok acquired a
mantle that he never wore in life, that of a defender of American civilization against lawlessness
and savagery.
Because writers romanticized gunmen, the best known were not necessarily the deadliest.
Instead, they were men who caught the fancy of novelists and ﬁlmmakers. Bill O’Neal (1979),
who “rated” over 250 gunﬁghters based on the number of veriﬁed killings and the number of
ﬁghts, ranked among the deadliest gunmen the celebrities Hickok, Billy the Kid, John Wesley
Hardin (1853–1895), King Fisher (1854–1884), and Ben Thompson (1843–1884). But the
most lethal of all shootists, “Deacon” Jim Miller (1866–1909), is obscure to the general pub-
lic, while the famous Wyatt Earp (1848–1929), John “Doc” Holliday (1851–1887), and
William “Bat” Masterson (1853–1921) long enjoyed reputations that, O’Neal notes, “greatly
exceeded their accomplishments” (1979, 5). Earp’s fame was made by Wyatt Earp: Frontier
Marshal, a ﬁctionalized 1931 biography by Stuart Lake (1889–1964) that provided the basis
for John Ford’s ﬁlm My Darling Clementine (Twentieth Century Fox, 1946). Holliday’s fame
soared largely on Earp’s coattails, and Masterson, once he retired his guns, became his own best
publicist. In his later career as a journalist, he wrote a series of sketches of “famous gun ﬁghters”
for Human Life magazine.
In addition to skewing individual reputations, the popular press and movies contributed heav-
ily to the image of the gunﬁghter as a heroic loner who employs his skills in the defense of justice.
One famous (ﬁctional) example, Shane, comes to the aid of embattled ranchers “out of the heart
of the great glowing West” and, after killing his evil counterpart, disappears, like Cain in the Old
Testament, “alone and unfollowed . . . and no one knows where” (Schaefer 1983, 115). A similar
mythic isolation deﬁnes other ﬁlm gunﬁghters, including the heroes of The Gunﬁghter (Twentieth
Gunfighters
535
www.ebook3000.com

Century Fox, 1950), Warlock (Twentieth Century Fox, 1959), The Magniﬁcent Seven (United
Artists, 1960), and The Shootist (Paramount, 1976).
Although most actual gunﬁghters had more or less stable occupations—many in strike-
breaking, law enforcement, or gambling—the Hollywood version is a more paradoxical ﬁgure,
protecting helpless citizens with a lethal skill whose very possession brands him as a pariah. In
one standard plot line, the gunﬁghter is hired as a town tamer and then shunned by his
respectable employers for doing his job. In another, the “good” gunslinger ﬁghts an evil twin who
is the objectiﬁcation of his own dark urges; this doubling is humorously parodied in Cat Ballou
(Columbia, 1965), where Lee Marvin (1924–1987) plays both villain and hero.
The mechanics of the gunﬁghter’s skill, including variable rules for carrying, drawing, and ﬁr-
ing a gun, have been much debated, especially in response to ﬁlmmakers’ penchant for stan-
dardization. Among actual Westerners, some wore their guns with the butt end facing backward,
some wore them with the butt end facing forward to facilitate a reverse draw, others wore them
in shoulder holsters, and yet others tucked them into waistbands or pockets. Yet virtually all Hol-
lywood gunﬁghters wear side holsters with the butt ends of their guns facing backward. This has
become the standard version of “fast draw” dress.
The fast draw itself (the nineteenth-century term was “quick draw”) deﬁnes the normative
gunﬁght, which the movies give the etiquette of a formal duel. In the typical movie showdown,
the hero, often forced to ﬁght despite the apprehensions of his wife or sweetheart, faces down
the villain in a western street. The villain draws his gun ﬁrst, and when he does, the hero draws
and kills him in a “fair ﬁght”—sometimes by “fanning” the pistol’s hammer for even greater
speed. With the exception of the fanning trickery, all of the dramatic motifs of this convention
were established in the 1902 novel The Virginian, by Owen Wister (1860–1938). This book was
the basis for Hollywood ﬁlms in 1914, 1923, 1929, and 1946, an NBC television series that ran
from 1962 to 1971, and a made-for-TV movie in 2000.
As for the accuracy of this tableau, Texas gunman King Fisher is reputed to have said, “Fair play
is a jewel, but I don’t care for jewelry” (quoted in Horan 1976, 4). Many of his compatriots seem to
have agreed. Sheriff Pat Garrett (1850–1908) shot Billy the Kid from the protection of a darkened
room. Fisher died in a vaudeville theater scufﬂe. The “unerring” Hickok accidentally killed his own
deputy. And according to one version, the canonical gunﬁght at the OK Corral in 1881 started
when Morgan Earp (1851–1882), Wyatt’s brother, ignored Billy Clanton’s (1862–1881) protesta-
tion “I don’t want to ﬁght” and shot the young rustler dead at point-blank range (O’Neal 1979).
Alert to such unromantic facts, ﬁlmmakers of the 1960s turned to more realistic treatment.
Prominent examples include John Ford’s (1894–1973) The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance (Para-
mount, 1962) and the “spaghetti Westerns” of director Sergio Leone (1929–1989). By 1992,
Unforgiven, made by Leone’s protégé Clint Eastwood (1930–), made a point of debunking this
heroic tradition. Yet, in popular memory, the fair ﬁght remains de rigueur.
With regard to the fast draw, too, convention rules: movies ritualize the instant of “getting
the drop” on the bad guy. Wyatt Earp, recalling the value of mental deliberation, said he never
knew “a really proﬁcient gun-ﬁghter who had anything but contempt for the gun-fanner, or the
man who literally shot from the hip. . . . [He] stood small chance to live against a man who . . .
took his time and pulled the trigger once” (Lake 1931, 39). Ben Thompson, the famous city mar-
shal of Austin, Texas, agreed. “I always make it a rule to let the other fellow ﬁre ﬁrst,” he said. “I
know that he is pretty certain, in his hurry, to miss. I never do” (quoted in Horan 1976, 142).
536
Gunfighters

Such deliberation is not emphasized by ﬁctional gunmen. A rare exception is the Anthony
Mann (1906–1967) ﬁlm The Tin Star (Paramount, 1957), in which veteran gunﬁghter Morgan
Hickman (Henry Fonda, 1905–1982) counsels the novice sheriff (Anthony Perkins,
1932–1992), “Draw fast but don’t snap shoot. Take that split second.”
Mythology also surrounds the idea that gunﬁghters kept tallies of their victims by carving
notches in the handles of their guns—one notch for each man killed. Although the practice was
not unknown, it was hardly routine. Outlaw Emmett Dalton (1871–1937) recalled that braggarts
and “fake bad men” sometimes notched their guns, but added that the custom’s alleged ubiquity
was “a ﬁction writer’s elaboration.” Wyatt Earp reﬂected that no man “who amounted to any-
thing” ever observed it (Hendricks 1950, 45).
Not that gunﬁghters or their followers were oblivious to the numbers. Indeed, a gunman’s rep-
utation was fatefully linked to the number of men he was thought to have slain, and tallies of a
dozen or more were not uncommon. Billy the Kid’s reputation was linked to the belief that he had
killed twenty-one men—one for each year of his life—and similar beliefs swelled the legends of
other gunmen. Although even Hardin, the most lethal of the celebrated bad men, probably had
no more than eleven victims (O’Neal, 1979, 5), popular culture has enshrined Western gunmen
as proﬂigate “man-killers” (Masterson 1957, 25). The aging Jimmy Ringo in Henry King’s
(1886–1982) The Gunﬁghter (1950) kills an even dozen before he himself is gunned down, while
in the Louis L’Amour (1908–1988) novel Heller with a Gun, King Mabry is credited with ﬁfteen—
before he corrects the record by admitting to just eleven (1992, 19).
Mabry’s tally, it should be noted, is “not counting Indians.” L’Amour here alludes to a racial
peculiarity that gunﬁghter legends often overlook. In the animosities evoked by the Mexican
War (1846–1848), the American Civil War (1861–1865), Reconstruction (1866–1867), and
Indian removal (1830–1890), the phrases “not counting Indians,” “not counting Negroes,” and
“not counting Mexicans” were common grotesque refrains in Western tales. To the “rip-roarin’,
hell-raisin’, ﬁre-spittin’ American bad man of probable Anglo-Saxon birth,” nonwhites didn’t
count because “everybody shot them” (Hendricks 1950, 46, 92).
This racist disdain made the gunﬁghter less an anomaly than a paralegal extension of main-
stream mores, and when mainstream mores began to change, “socially conscious” western ﬁlms
reﬂected the shift. “Bad” gunmen, like the villain of The Tin Star, demanded the customary
immunity for shooting Indians, while “good” gunmen, like the mercenary cavaliers of John
Sturges’s (1910–1992) The Magniﬁcent Seven, could now defend a black man’s right to a proper
burial and admit a Mexican hothead as a member of their band.
Of all the legends built around the Western gunﬁghter, none has been more resonant than
the knight errant image, which sees the gunman as “a two-gun Galahad whose pistols are always
at the service of those in trouble” (Rosa 1969, 4). The CBS television series Have Gun, Will
Travel (1957–1963) featured a professional gunman called Paladin, and defense of the weak is
a common attribute of the movies’ “good bad man.” Chivalry also has been applied to unlikely
historical prototypes. Billy the Kid became a southwestern Robin Hood in Walter Noble Burns’s
(1908–1964) The Saga of Billy the Kid (1926), a book that inspired countless “good Billy” west-
erns; a similar fate befell Frank (1843–1915) and Jesse James (1847–1882). In Bob Dylan’s
(1941–) song “John Wesley Harding” (sic) (Columbia Records, 1967), even Wes Hardin, who
claimed his ﬁrst victim at the age of ﬁfteen, became “a friend to the poor” who was “never
known to hurt an honest man.” Ever since The Virginian, ﬁctional gunmen have been similarly
Gunfighters
537
www.ebook3000.com

characterized, lending popularity to the notion that, next to quickness, the gunﬁghter’s most
valued quality was a sense of honor.
Questions of honor invite comparisons not only to European knights but also to Asian martial
artists, and the parallel is not lost on students of the Western. It animates Terence Young’s
(1915–1994) ﬁlm Red Sun (Evergreen Entertainment, 1971), where a gunﬁghter comes to appreci-
ate the importance of honor by watching a samurai bodyguard observe the code of Bushido. The tel-
evision series Kung Fu (ABC, 1972–1975) pitted a wandering Shaolin monk against Wild West bad
men, and one of the most successful of gunﬁghter vehicles, The Magniﬁcent Seven, was a sagebrush
remake of Akira Kurosawa’s (Kurosawa Akira, 1910–1998) Seven Samurai (Toho, 1954).
The differences between East and West are, to be sure, profound. Despite jocular references
to “triggernometry” and to “leather slapping as a ﬁne art” (Cunningham, 1947), gun ﬁghting was
too chaotic and personal a practice ever to be considered a martial system. Gunﬁghters formed
no schools, passed on no ﬁghting “styles,” and respected no lineages or training hierarchies. Nor,
beyond the quick draw and a few “eye-training, ﬁnger ﬂexing exercises” like the ﬁnger roll (Cun-
ningham 1947, 424), did they perfect marksmanship; even the few print and ﬁlm references to
shooting lessons suggest only perfunctory admonitions: Shane’s “Your holster’s too low” (Schae-
fer 1983, 53) and Morgan Hickman’s “Take that split second.” In addition, gunﬁghter culture
was, to borrow anthropologist Ruth Benedict’s (1887–1948) famous distinction, as Dionysian as
samurai culture was Apollonian. A high percentage of gunmen were gamblers, highwaymen,
saloonkeepers, rowdies, or drifters.
Nonetheless, most appear to have observed a certain wild decorum, memorialized in the
often cited Code of the West: Play fair, stand by your word, and don’t run. Again the locus clas-
sicus is found in Wister’s The Virginian, when the hero, explaining to his ﬁancée why he must
face the villain, says that a man who refuses to defend his name is “a poor sort of jay” (Wister
1956, 343). The gunman’s bravery, Bat Masterson (1957, 54) suggested, was made up largely of
“self-respect, egotism, and an apprehension of the opinion of others.” Critic Robert Warshow put
it pointedly when he observed that the Westerner in general (and the gunﬁghter in particular)
defends at bottom “the purity of his own image—in fact his honor” (Warshow 1974, 153). The
dying gunﬁghter of Don Siegel’s (1912–1991) elegiac The Shootist, John Wayne’s (1907–1979)
last ﬁlm, puts it eloquently: “I won’t be wronged, I won’t be insulted, and I won’t be laid a hand
on. I don’t do these things to other people, and I require the same from them.”
The gunﬁghter dramatizes the contradiction of a society that hires professional killers to
ensure tranquility, and in which weapons called Peacemakers are touted as instruments of
progress. The gunﬁghter resolves this contradiction with a personal style that is as much about
deportment as it is about courage. Warshow (1974, 153) again gets to the heart of the matter.
He asks us to observe a child playing with toy guns: “What interests him is not . . . the fantasy
of hurting others, but to work out how a man might look when he shoots or is shot. A hero is
one who looks like a hero.” In this, the mythic gunﬁghter, no less than the samurai, pays an
ironic allegiance not only to fairness, but also to a public, theatrical, behavior that popular culture
enshrines as a mythical dramatization of the paradox of violence.
—Tad Tuleja
See also: Belief Systems: European Chivalry; Expressive Culture; Folklore; Invented 
Traditions; Film and the Martial Arts; Television and the Martial Arts; 
and Plains Indians Warrior Societies (in this volume).
538
Gunfighters

REFERENCES
Cunningham, Eugene. 1947. Triggernometry: A Gallery of Gunﬁghters. Caldwell, ID: Caxton Printers.
Hendricks, George D. 1950. The Bad Man of the West. San Antonio, TX: Naylor Company.
Horan, James D. 1976. The Gunﬁghters. New York: Crown Publishers.
Lake, Stuart N. 1931. Wyatt Earp, Frontier Marshal. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
L’Amour, Louis. 1992/1955. Heller with a Gun. New York: Bantam Books.
Masterson, W. B. 1957/1907. Famous Gunﬁghters of the Western Frontier. Houston: Frontier Press of Texas.
Nichols, George Ward. 1867. “Wild Bill,” Harper’s New Monthly Magazine, 34(201), 273–286, via
http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/ndlpcoop/moahtml/title/lists/harp_V34I201.html, accessed October
18, 2009.
O’Neal, Bill. 1979. Encyclopedia of Western Gunﬁghters. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Rosa, Joseph G. 1969. The Gunﬁghter: Man or Myth? Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Schaefer, Jack. 1983/1949. Shane. New York: Bantam Books.
Warshow, Robert. 1974/1962 The Immediate Experience. New York: Atheneum.
Wister, Owen. 1956/1902. The Virginian. New York: Pocket Books.
TELEVISION AND THE MARTIAL ARTS
As with many hand-me-down trends from cinema, television caught onto the martial arts early
in the medium’s incarnation. In the 1950s and 1960s, Asian ﬁghting arts popped up in crime-
ﬁghting shows, situation comedies, and Westerns.
By the 1970s, television was ahead of big-screen fashions, starting a mini-martial arts craze
with two shows, The Green Hornet (ABC, 1966–1967) and Kung Fu (ABC, 1972–1975). The
late 1970s ushered in videocassette players and video gaming, two technologies that converted
televisions into arenas for characters skilled in combat. The following decade, the blockbuster
era showcased cinematic martial action—invariably male, muscular, far removed from its aes-
thetic core and philosophical components, and focused on bone-crunching violence rather than
on its resolution: In other words, the means justiﬁed the means. At the same time, television’s
forward-thinking approach to the martial arts stalled. Besides budget restraints, living room sen-
sitivities meant TV had to tone down the ﬁghting arts. Moreover, its episodic nature forced
screenwriters to integrate the weekly big ﬁght in ways that made the inevitable confrontations
seem fresh, but still conclude in 48 minutes of air time. Televised martial choreography became
the stuff of cartoons during daytime and fantasy shows in prime time.
By the early 1990s, television had domesticated the arts, putting them primarily in the hands
of live-action women and animated children. Such depictions were usually within the fantasy or
comic narrative, told with a wink and a nudge, but the movement created a breed of action hero-
ines who had few counterparts in the movies. Paradoxically, even as martial arts became the stuff
of fantasy, it found a new outlet in the sports arena. While the living room box could not com-
pete with larger-than-life spectacles, the medium could boast one advantage: it had built a sports
audience. By the end of the twentieth century, cable television networks became the destination
for “real” ﬁghting, not only in mixed martial arts sportscasts but also in the reality television genre.
HOW THE WEST WAS WON: MARTIAL ARTS IN PRIME TIME
As in cinema, the Japanese disciplines ﬁrst ushered TV audiences into the martial arts sphere.
The on-screen debut of karate, jujutsu, and judo depended upon several factors, among them
Japan, having extensive political and trading ties with Europe and the Americas, and also some
Television and the Martial Arts
539
www.ebook3000.com

of the best ﬁlm production facilities in Asia. In addition, many Americans were exposed to both
Japanese martial arts and Japanese martial art ﬁlms while serving in the U.S. military during the
1950s and 1960s.
Honolulu-born Kenpo karate practitioner Ed Parker (1931–1990), Los Angeles-based judo
champion Gene LeBell (1932–), and Chicago-born (and judo-trained) Bruce Tegner
(1929–1985) served as early ambassadors of the martial arts. Their celebrity students included
TV personalities Ricky Nelson (1940–1985) and George Reeves (1914–1959). Parker himself
did acting stints on I Love Lucy (CBS, 1951–1957), The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet (ABC,
1952–1966), The Detectives Starring Robert Taylor (ABC, 1959–1962), and The Courtship of
Eddie’s Father (ABC, 1969–1972). LeBell made his career in Hollywood stunt work, but he also
played the occasional on-camera villain in shows such as Adventures of Superman (syndicated,
1952–1958) and The Green Hornet (ABC, 1966–1967).
The martial arts made guest appearances in Westerns (The Wild Wild West, CBS, 1965–1969)
and comedies (The Andy Grifﬁth Show, CBS, 1960–1968), and occasionally took prominence in
spy capers (The Avengers, syndicated, 1961–1969), superhero capers (Batman, ABC, 1966–1968;
The Green Hornet), science ﬁction (Star Trek, NBC, 1966–1969), and detective series
(Longstreet, ABC, 1971–1972). These early depictions usually took place in a dojo or teaching
context, as beﬁtting an unfamiliar, exotic tradition being introduced to American audiences.
This context, even when comical, paid homage (unwittingly or intentionally) to the martial arts’
pedagogical legacy.
In 1966 The Green Hornet launched a martial mini-craze when the titular hero’s sidekick,
played by Bruce Lee (Lee Jun Fan, also known as Li Xiaolong, 1940–1973), displayed impressive
maneuvers against miscreants. Ed Parker has been credited with introducing the San Francisco-
born and Hong Kong-raised actor to the Hollywood community. Lee, the son of a Cantonese
opera personality, had done cameos in Hong Kong ﬁlms by the time he co-starred as sidekick
Kato in the crime-ﬁghter revival. The role kickstarted Lee’s rise to prominence while managing
to dilute racial identity and martial arts systems: A Chinese man cast as Filipino, Lee employed
Chinese systems in what was understood to be karate. He did have an opportunity to remedy this
in Longstreet, in which he played a ﬁghting instructor to a blind insurance investigator, played
by James Franciscus (1934–1991).
What came next in martial TV history, Kung Fu (ABC, 1972–1975), is a subject of debate.
According to his widow’s 1978 biography, Lee proposed a concept titled “The Warrior.” On the
other hand, the program’s producers credit another pitch designed to tap into the underground
appeal of independent ﬁlms such as Billy Jack (Warner Brothers, 1971) and Hong Kong imports
such as The Five Fingers of Death (Shaw Brothers, 1972). In either case, Lee auditioned for the lead
in Kung Fu, a show about a biracial Shaolin monk roaming late nineteenth-century America in
search of his half brother, but the role of Kwai Chang Caine went to David Carradine
(1936–2009). Carradine later reprised the character in a TV movie (Kung Fu, The Movie, CBS,
1986) and a second series (Kung Fu, The Legend Continues, syndication, 1993–1997). For his part,
Lee returned to Hong Kong, where he starred in the four movies that would establish his iconic
status. He was ﬁlming his ﬁfth when he died from an allergic reaction to medication in 1973.
Back in America, Kung Fu had updated the familiar Western frontier hero to ﬁt 1970s sensi-
bilities. Caine’s hybrid breeding touched upon the period’s seething ethnic politics and chang-
ing immigration patterns, while his peaceable philosophy intrigued a soul-searching generation
540
Television and the Martial Arts

weaned on spiritual experimentation. Training ﬂashbacks to the Shaolin Temple introduced the
master–apprentice relationship and traded upon the ﬁghting arts’ mysticism. Seventies America
may not have been ready for a Chinese man on-camera, but the producers hired David Chow
(1924–2007) as their choreographer to keep the moves realistic. (Chow’s formal background was
in judo.) In response to fan questions, Chow and his student Richard Spangler published Kung
Fu: History, Philosophy, Traditions (1980). In this book, producer-director Jerry Thorpe (1926–)
emphasized how the show never showed blood or hit below the belt. Likely, this sensitive paean
to peace stemmed less from nonviolent Buddhist dictates than to FCC decrees specifying four-
minute ﬁghts and no killings.
The peacenik Caine differed remarkably from the theatrical version of the new genre of
action hero, single-minded in his or her pursuits, untroubled by too much self-introspection, and
unafraid to wreak violence upon villains. Ironically, this increased cinematic brutality emerged
partly in response to the threat of television. The box began inﬁltrating households at an alarm-
ing rate during the 1950s, a period when Congress was investigating Hollywood studios to learn
whether they had been inﬁltrated by Communists. By the time this threat was contained, Hol-
lywood needed a new money-making gimmick, a new spectacle, to recapture a ﬁckle postwar
generation that had found plenty of other ways to spend its money. One low budget genre proved
to be the black action ﬁlm, an exuberant medium that had also digested Hong Kong kung fu cin-
ema’s countercultural message. Mainstream Hollywood noted this independent success and
waded into the action, dispensing with the peskier themes of rebellion, revolution, and individ-
ual empowerment; in Hollywood, martial action became the tool of enforcing traditional social
order, whether used by black FBI agents in Watts battling the Maﬁa or by Chuck Norris (1940–)
as a born-again Christian Texas Ranger.
Despite its limitations and Orientalist controversies, Kung Fu added a countervailing image
of martial arts as a way of being, rather than a means of vengeance. The series, coupled with the
emerging fan base for Hong Kong cinema, also tilted the entertainment balance from Japanese-
style techniques to Chinese movements. Japanese arts still retained an unassailable place in
shows such as Charlie’s Angels (ABC, 1976–1981). Around the same time, the ﬁve-part minis-
eries Shogun (NBC, 1980) introduced the mystique of the ninja, a seductive black-clad band of
assassins that would make their way to theatrical releases, straight-to-video fare, and ﬁnally chil-
dren’s programming (Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, syndicated, 1987–1996).
Martial arts as a “Way” had a short-lived onscreen existence. The growth of the movie multi-
plex coincided with the 1980s action blockbuster era, which was distinguished by serials such as
Die Hard (four movies, 1988–2007) and Rambo (four movies, 1982–2008). Martial arts sprouted
as a natural action sub-genre, with B-list stars such as Dolph Lundgren (1957–), Chuck Norris,
Jean Claude Van Damme (1960–), and Steven Seagal (1952–). Much of this proliﬁc output was
expected to have an afterlife on the home videocassette player. At the same time, a Hong Kong
migration brought martial actors Jackie Chan (Chan Kong Sang, 1954–) and Jet Li (Li Lianjie,
1963–) as well as choreographers such as Yuen Wo Ping (Yuan Heping, 1945–), to the United
States. These inﬂuences shaped on-screen American combat, and Yuen’s work would later deﬁne
its turning point in The Matrix (Warner Brothers, 1999).
Although these effects rippled onto the small screen by the 1990s, a similarly robust genre
did not develop. Instead, martial arts became a skill more often employed in fantasy series. Exam-
ples include Hercules: The Legendary Journeys (syndicated, 1995–1996), Xena: Warrior Princess
Television and the Martial Arts
541
www.ebook3000.com

(syndicated, 1995–2001), and Buffy the Vampire Slayer (WB, 1997–2003). Highlander (syndi-
cated, 1992-98), Hercules, and Xena showcased combat skills (primarily swordplay) of European
origin, but even those programs featured Eastern martial arts: Xena directly borrowed a ﬁght
sequence involving multiple ladders from the Hong Kong cinematic series starring Jet Li, Once
Upon a Time in China (Golden Harvest, 1991).
Meanwhile, detective shows were built around aging action stars. Chuck Norris, who faced off
against Bruce Lee in Return of the Dragon (Golden Harvest, 1972), brought his tangsudo and judo
skills to Walker, Texas Ranger (CBS, 1994–2001). The show superﬁcially carried on the Kung Fu
legacy with twists beﬁtting the times: Western setting, spirituality (ﬁrst Native American, then
later Christian after Norris recommitted himself to that religion), and bloodless non-fatal ﬁghts.
Sammo Hung (Hung Kam Po, 1952–), a seasoned Hong Kong actor and ﬁlmmaker who trained
in the same Peking Opera school as Jackie Chan, starred as Chinese detective Sammo Law in
Martial Law (CBS, 1998–2000). The show ostensibly borrowed heavily from the movie Rush Hour
(1998), which paired a Hong Kong chief inspector (Chan) and a sassy black detective (Chris
Tucker, 1972–); Martial Law cast former comedian and talk show host Arsenio Hall (1955–) in
the mismatched partnership. Hung made network television history as the ﬁrst Chinese male lead,
more than a quarter-century after Lee’s failed audition for Kung Fu.
Moody millennial programming, in the wake of The Matrix, granted martial arts prowess to
genetically enhanced super soldiers (Dark Angel, Fox, 2000–2002), government spies (Alias, ABC,
2001–2006), and futuristic space travelers (Battlestar Galactica, SciFi Channel, 2004–2008). Such
overt skills didn’t appear in police procedurals, however, which were dominated by the Law &
Order (1990-present) and CSI (2000-present) franchises. After more than a half-century of ﬁc-
tional television, the martial arts had moved from a teaching setting to philosophical paciﬁsm, and
then into the realm of magic.
THE CHILDREN’S HOUR: KUNG FU DOGS, NINJA TURTLES,
AND THE ANIME EXPLOSION
One segment on television, though, did pair martial didactics with super-powered mysticism.
This was children’s programming.
By 1974, animated dogs as superheroes—the most famous progenitor perhaps being Under-
dog (NBC and CBS, 1964–1973)—were a familiar breed on television. Following the wake of
Underdog’s retirement, a Hanna-Barbera creation by the name of Hong Kong Phooey (ABC,
1974–1976) came to the Saturday morning cartoon block. Benjamin “Scatman” Crothers
(1910–1986), familiar as the garbage man in the sitcom Chico and the Man (NBC, 1974–1978),
voiced a more unusual sanitation role as a police station’s canine janitor.
The title’s wordplay referred to the hero’s alter ego and the then-British colony’s newest
chopsocky exports. Do-gooder custodian Penrod “Henry” Pooch was a well-intentioned bum-
bler who earned his martial arts credibility via a correspondence manual. Invariably, Pooch had
to be rescued by police cat Spot from predicaments and caught criminals by sheer happen-
stance. Kung fu itself wasn’t being mocked: The joke lay in Henry’s quixotic aspirations, the
notion of learning ﬁghting by mail, and the overconﬁdence in martial arts’ magical powers. The
cartoon lasted just two seasons, but the character reappeared in other Hanna-Barbera vehicles
and its distinctive theme song persisted in popular culture, like a poor child’s “Kung Fu Fighting”
(Carl Douglas song, 1974).
542
Television and the Martial Arts

Since then, the martial arts have become an important part of the cartoon crime-ﬁghter’s
arsenal. Homegrown shows include Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (syndicated, 1987–1996), The
Powerpuff Girls (Cartoon Network, 1998–2005), Jackie Chan Adventures (WB, 2000–2005), Kim
Possible (Disney, 2002–2005, 2007), American Dragon: Jake Long (Disney, 2005–2007), Yin Yang
Yo (Toon Disney, 2006–present), and Three Delivery (Nicktoons, 2008–present).
Hong Kong action may have heavily inﬂuenced primetime programming, but Japanese ani-
mation jumpstarted American storylines on kids’ TV. Anime traces its history to the early days
of cinema, and the ﬁrst surviving example of the style features a samurai warrior. In its native
habitat, anime covers diverse subject matters for all age ranges, but Western familiarity with the
genre arose from family shows such as Astro Boy (NBC, 1963–1966) and Speed Racer (NBC,
1967–1968), and science fiction–themed programs such as Transformers (syndicated,
1984–1988).
Among the martial offerings, The Mighty Morphin Power Rangers was a live-action show created
in the United States but rooted in a Japanese program. The ﬁrst incarnation ran 1993 through 1996;
offshoots since then have made the Power-house among one of the longest-running children’s fran-
chises. Anime’s most inﬂuential import may have been Sailor Moon (syndication, 1995–2000). The
titular character featured a young girl reincarnated from a line of soldiers, and it developed a strong
female following that soon changed the demographics of anime conventions within the United
States and beyond. Others included Gundam Wing (Cartoon Network, 2000), Dragon Ball Z (WB,
1996–1998, Cartoon Network, 1996–2003), Pokemon (Cartoon Network, 1998–present), Samurai
Champloo (Cartoon Network, 2004–2006), and Naruto (Cartoon Network, 2005–present). Anime’s
success bred cross-cultural creations like the Irish Skunk Fu! (import to WB, 2007–2008, Cartoon
Network, 2008–2009), French Shuriken School (import to Nickelodeon, 2006 to present), and U.S.
Avatar: The Last Airbender (Nickelodeon, 2005–2008).
East-West differences—of which there are many—emerge clearly in the use of martial arts
as a storytelling device. Japanese cartoons tended to emphasize the grueling training (Rurouni
Kenshin, Cartoon Network, 2003), cooperation among teams (Sailor Moon), the threat of fascism
in ongoing conﬂicts (Gundam Wing), and martial arts as redemption (Naruto). On the other
hand, American-style anime minimized the learning aspect of martial arts, thereby lessening the
arts’ gravitas and philosophical effect in character building. The Americans’ heavy use of smart
alecky irony also engaged martial arts as an almost disdainful display of the hero or heroine’s
natural superiority: Witness the Toon Disney rabbit heroes of Yin Yang Yo, whose motto is, “Giv-
ing Evil a Wedgie.”
SHE-FIGHTS: A WOMAN’S PLACE IS IN THE MARTIAL ARTS
In 1992, the same year as Warner Brothers’ blockbuster sequels Batman Returns and Lethal
Weapon 3 appeared, and during the same hot July as Columbia Picture’s female sports ﬁlm A
League of Their Own, an irreverent 20th Century Fox comedy called Buffy the Vampire Slayer pre-
miered at the box ofﬁce. Its weekend gross was tepid at best (a distant second to Universal’s
underrated Death Becomes Her), and critics noted it mostly for the comeback of Paul Reubens
(1952–), the Pee Wee Herman actor arrested in 1991 for lewd conduct in an X-rated Florida the-
ater. Five years later, the ﬁlm’s scriptwriter Joss Whedon (1964–) had an opportunity to realize
his take of empowered women, but on television. By then, Xena: Warrior Princess (whose pop
culture antecedents included Greek mythology and MGM’s cult favorite Red Sonja, 1982) had
Television and the Martial Arts
543
www.ebook3000.com

been on for two seasons. Buffy Summers (Sarah Michelle Gellar, 1977–) gave ﬂedgling network
WB its ﬁrst identity, but in 1995, WB consolidated with UPN to become CW.
For Buffy’s fans, it mattered little that Gellar’s athleticism couldn’t disguise her medium-grade
martial art skill, at least whenever her stunt double didn’t step in. For them, Buffy’s hunting skills
and ﬁghting prowess were simply part of the job, rather than the weekly dramatic pinnacle. The
increasingly grim storytelling arc paralleled her character’s coming-of-age vulnerability. The
slayer’s martial expertise was not meant to be the end-all, ﬁx-all, but instead just one of many
skills one needed to survive adolescence.
Buffy (as well as syndicated success Xena) left the green light on for projects such as Dark Angel,
Alias, and a Terminator-spinoff called The Sarah Connor Chronicles (Fox, 2008–2009). Battlestar
Galactica’s updated re-imagining even tinkered with the gender of its 1980s playboy character
Starbuck and toughened up the Viper pilot’s kicking and punching skills.
Not all of television’s female ﬁghters congregated in science ﬁction or fantasy. Their martial
lineage could be traced through tongue-in-cheek detective series, comic spy capers, and eye-candy
showmanship, among them The Avengers (with the coolly incomparable Emma Peel), Honey West
(ABC, 1965–1966), Charlie’s Angels, La Femme Nikita (USA, 1997–2001), V.I.P. (syndicated,
1998–2002), and She Spies (NBC, 2002–2004). Kelly Hu (1968–) was only marginally more seri-
ous as sidekick to Sammo Hung’s short-lived American adventure, Martial Law. The grimmest
offering was Alias, in which lead character Sydney Bristow underwent brainwashing, betrayals,
and the deaths of friends and loved ones during the course of the series’ ﬁve-year run.
That lethally trained women ended up primarily in fantasy or comic narratives testiﬁes both
to skewed gender politics and the perception of martial arts as a magical equalizer. Until the
2000s, women rarely carried detective dramas or action shows, unless such programs were meant
to be taken lightly. Relegating the few women martial ﬁghters to television also illustrated Hol-
lywood’s unease with tough gals. Female leads—action or otherwise—have been disproportion-
ately absent from the big screen in the past quarter century. Contemporary action ﬁlms attracted
A-list actors like Bruce Willis (1955–), Harrison Ford (1942–), Christian Bale (1974–), and
James McAvoy (1979–), but similar action vehicles built for women were few. Conventional
wisdom blamed early box-ofﬁce failures (V.I. Warshawski, Buena Vista Entertainment, 1991; The
Long Kiss Goodnight, New Line Cinema, 1996) on audiences that were not ready for female leads,
rather than on bad scripts. Later, however, B-list actress Milla Jovovich (1975–) did well in the
video game–inspired Resident Evil franchise (all British productions), while Ashley Judd (1968–)
freshened up the women-in-peril genre in Kiss the Girls (Paramount, 1997). Jennifer Lopez
(1969–) crossed over from music and did two ﬁlms with varying degrees of martial action (Out
of Sight, Universal, 1998; Enough, Columbia Pictures, 2002).
TV audiences elevated their ﬁghting heroines to cult status, replete with graphic novel off-
shoots and convention appearances. That fondness extended to animated champions such as
Sailor Moon and Disney character Kim Possible (a cheerleader and A-student who openly
fought villains and was acquainted with sixteen types of kung fu). A change, however, may be
in the ofﬁng in the big screen. Angelina Jolie (1975–), who alternated between Oscar-nomi-
nated dramas and lightweight fare, proved her mettle in Lara Croft: Tomb Raider (Paramount,
2001) and was prominently featured in the marketing for assassin fraternity shoot-’em-up Wanted
(Universal, 2008). Wanted’s ﬁrst summer domestic weekend grosses totaled more than $50 million,
a very respectable number given its critically acclaimed Pixar competition, WALL-E. After a half
544
Television and the Martial Arts

century of persistent action, television’s ﬁghting women may have helped to lay the groundwork
for their sisters’ big-screen battles.
A NEW REALITY: THE RISE OF ULTIMATE FIGHTING CHAMPIONS
For years, baseball was America’s national pastime, until television began converting audiences
into spectators for other professional sports. One was boxing, which became a weekly feature in
the 1950s with the Pabst Blue Ribbon Bouts on Wednesdays and Gillette Friday Night Fights.
Its on-screen decline in the 1960s came about from changing social mores, Senate hearings into
Maﬁa inﬂuence, the deaths of Benny Kid Paret (1937–1962) and Davey Moore (1933–1963)
(their ultimately fatal knockouts were broadcast live on national TV), and the networks’ increas-
ing sophistication in showcasing options such as football. National Football League revenues, for
instance, leapt to $3 million in 1962, and by 1998 those numbers reached $2.2 billion.
The occasional martial arts tournaments—primarily judo self-defense demonstrations and
karate championships—aired during the 1950s and 1960s on local stations, but networks objected
to their violent aspect. After decades of cartoon and prime time kung faux, however, television
gradually became center stage for so-called real combat due to a conﬂuence of multiple trends:
sports programming, cable identity, and the reality genre.
Cable’s proliferation created venues for niche sports. Pay-per-view revived professional box-
ing during the 1970s and, in turn, made powerhouse outlets out of HBO Sports and Showtime
Boxing. A decade later, the World Wide Wrestling Federation (later World Wrestling Enter-
tainment) built its empire on pay-per-view, MTV, and then on NBC with Saturday Night’s Main
Event (1985–1992). Against this backdrop, the Brazilian jiu-jitsu Gracie family developed the
Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC), which nurtured its base on pay-per-view after a shaky
start in 1993.
In 2003, The Nashville Network reinvented itself as Spike TV and sought to brand itself as
the “ﬁrst network for men,” especially men aged 18–34. By this period, reality shows and reality
game competitions had emerged as a cheap and quick alternative to scripted programming. The
Real World (MTV, 1992–present) turned viewers into voyeurs by setting cameras on strangers
living in a household. Survivor (CBS, 2000-present) added a competitive element in making
strangers fend for themselves in primitive foreign locales. Spike spun reality from UFC to make
The Ultimate Fighter (2005–present). This show blended a Real World approach with behind-the-
scenes punishing workouts and multiple Octagon matches. The hour-long program became part
of Spike TV’s core schedule and reinforced the network’s male-oriented identity (albeit older
than the original intended demographic). Boxing followed this format in The Next Great Champ
(Fox, 2005) and The Contender (NBC, 2005; ESPN, 2006–2007; Versus, 2008–present). The
Oxygen Channel even hosted a female kickboxing version called Fight Girls (2006–2007).
Attempts to take a contest approach were not so successful. Ernie Reyes, Jr. (1972–), best
known for his child-actor roles in Red Sonja and the Sidekicks TV show (Disney Channel,
1986–1987), hosted a single season of Final Fu (MTV, 2006), where obstacle-style challenges
and sparring largely adhered to taekwondo’s traditional points scoring and target restrictions.
NBC dangled a movie contract as the prize in Next Action Star (2004), but the reality show
debuted so poorly in its summer slot that the network cut episodes to hasten its run.
Other performances included martial arts travelogues such as Human Weapon (History
Channel, 2007–2008) and Fight Quest (Discovery Channel, 2007–2009). Both sent a pair of
Television and the Martial Arts
545
www.ebook3000.com

American male ﬁghters to different countries to learn the native ﬁghting art in a week and then
engage in prearranged matches with the locals. These two shows not only were similar to one
another, but they also looked remarkably like the French-Canadian and National Geographic
Channel (NGC) production Deadly Arts (FitTV, 2003). Josette Normandeau, a sort of female
Jacques Cousteau (1910–1997) of the ﬁghting world, took an arguably more respectful turn by
focusing on the art and forms and less on challenging the natives. NGC went on to invest in a
lab purported to analyze martial arts biomechanics; the resulting special was called Fight Science
(2006). Critics found fault in its scientiﬁc methods and historical inaccuracies, but that did not
stop NGC from commissioning additional specials (Fight Science: Mixed Martial Arts and Fight
Science: Special Ops).
Mixed martial arts competition reached mainstream status in spring 2008, when CBS set
aside Saturday nights for kickboxing. The premiere provoked controversy by pitting British
heavyweight James “The Colossus” Thompson (1978–) against Kevin “Kimbo Slice” Ferguson
(1974–). Ferguson had not risen through any formal ranks. Instead, he was created via Internet
hype. He won this bout, but was knocked out within 14 seconds during another televised match
four months later. More notable was the ﬁrst female match ever aired on network television. In
this face-off, Hook N Shoot BodogFIGHT winner Kaitlin Young (1985–) lost to Muay Thai
champion Gina Carano (1982–), who had recently come to America’s attention in the revived
American Gladiators (MGM Television, 2008–2009) reality game show.
By falling into the grooves of professional sports and entertainment reality, martial arts rein-
forced itself as a theatrical competition complete with temperamental outbursts. Still, viewers
could discern a different camaraderie and respect in the ring when ﬁghters congratulated or
hugged one another—a contrast to pro boxing’s glossy, smack-talk bravado or the campy good
vs. evil fables enacted on the pro wrestling ring.
MARTIAL ENTERTAINMENT: AUTHENTICITY VERSUS ACCESSIBILITY
With martial arts ﬁrmly entrenched in American popular culture, a handful of TV documentaries
and specials have gone on a quest for “true” disciplines and their disciples. Major box-ofﬁce talent
Wesley Snipes (1962–) lent his name to a two-hour special called Masters of the Martial Arts (TNT,
1998), a Who’s Who in martial arts. Shaolin Ulysses: Kungfu Monks in America (PBS, 2003) turned
cameras on ﬁve monks seeking to establish their martial traditions in the United States.
The Slanted Screen (PBS, 2006) did not focus on martial arts but reviewed the kung fu mas-
ter stereotype in its overview of Asian males in Hollywood. The polemic reactions to Bruce Lee
underscore his double-edged fame as at once a source of male (Asian) pride and distress.
Tellingly, this dismay over the late actor’s legacy revealed its own tacit acceptance of Holly-
wood’s stereotype of martial arts—removed of their history, stripped of their cultural context,
and abstracted from their aesthetic core. The community whose heritage gave forth these tradi-
tions thereby placed the kung fu master in the same line-up as Caucasian actors in yellowface,
sinister Fu Manchu villains, and Hop Sing manservants.
In the end, ﬁlmed entertainment deliberately dramatizes, distorts, and disjoints. As with
many inﬂuences that Hollywood takes in, martial authenticity yields to the mass-audience acces-
sibility, as the creators perceive it. Television has touched upon martial arts’ philosophies, but
more often it trades upon their cool glamor, especially in the lethal hands of the righteous.
546
Television and the Martial Arts

Mixed martial arts have drawn widespread criticism for brutality, but reality shows and cable
travelogues have spotlighted the rigorous training aspect and how the local region inﬂuences
movement.
On the other extreme, fans and academics alike complain about how mass entertainment has
violated the arts’ purity and authenticity. The notion of authenticity (versus realism) in martial
choreography implies at some level that the martial arts themselves boast a clean lineage in
which regions can lay ownership to certain inviolate styles (e.g., a Korean specialty in high kicks
or the Chinese inclination for low circular stances). Cross-cultural inﬂuences over the millennia
make such generalizations suspect.
What complicates the idea of authenticity is action choreography’s own mutt pedigree. To
single out the case study of Jackie Chan, the actor had his theatrical training in Peking Opera
but directly borrowed movements from Buster Keaton (1895–1966), Charlie Chaplin
(1889–1977), Fred Astaire (1899–1987), and Gene Kelly (1912–1996). In other words, adopt-
ing the Jackie Chan style also requires homage to the American and British silent comedians of
the mid-twentieth century.
The need to stamp authenticity may arise partly from armchair critics who do not practice
martial arts themselves, and partly from practitioners who stand to gain ﬁnancially or in reputa-
tion for marketing authenticity. The Shaolin Temple may be the most potent example of the
worship that has sprung up around its allure. While the skills evinced by its current practition-
ers underscore a real dedicated excellence, Shaolin quanfa has had to conform signiﬁcantly over
the years to qualify for sports competitions. The Temple’s rebirth has made it as much at least a
tourist destination as a place of worship: A quarter of its annual intake (reported at nearly U.S.
$10 million in 2007) goes to the temple, and the remainder goes to the Shaolin Temple Tourism
Development Ltd. Co.
Television bears some responsibility in constraining the discipline’s full expression, but it has
also helped the cause of its competitive sports among a mainstream audience. However televi-
sion has presented martial arts, the medium has stoked a fascination and delight in the move-
ments. In turn, martial arts bestowed magical powers for animated children and live-action
women and allowed them to play the same action leagues long dominated by men.
The destination for serious scrutiny—and perhaps not so serious, à la Ask a Ninja (podcast,
2005–present)—may lie in the Internet with its fan pages, forums, bulletin boards, tournaments
live streaming, online radio and journals, and “amateur” instructional videos. For instance, on
the video hosting Website YouTube, the keyword term “martial arts” surfaced nearly 350,000
videos in October 2008, while “kung fu” yielded nearly 150,000. Whether so-called Internet sen-
sations such as Kimbo Slice (Kevin Ferguson) will continue to cross over to commercial televi-
sion remains to be seen. However, for self-motivated curiosity seekers, the Web has emerged as
an arena not only to introduce lesser-known arts but also to host visual discussions on authen-
ticity and the fuller range of martial arts training.
—Vera Chan
See also: Commodiﬁcation of Leisure; Chinese Martial Arts and Money; Globalization of 
Martial Arts; International Boxing; Mixed Martial Arts; Professional Wrestling; Women’s 
Boxing, 1972-present; Film and the Martial Arts; Gunﬁghters; The Internet and the 
Martial Arts; and Action Design for Professional Wrestling (this volume).
Television and the Martial Arts
547
www.ebook3000.com

REFERENCES
Bolleli, Danielle. 2003. “Mixed Martial Arts: A Technical Analysis of the Ultimate Fighting Cham-
pionship in its Formative Years,” Journal of Asian Martial Arts 12(3), 41–51.
Caldwell, Linda. 1975. Bruce Lee: The Man Only I Knew. New York: Warner Paperback Library.
Chow, David, and Richard Spangler. 1980. Kung Fu: History, Philosophy, and Technique. Hollywood,
CA: Unique Publications Co.
Clary, David W. 1992. “The Return of Caine,” Black Belt 30(3), March, via http://lklawson.isa-geek
.org/sync/Martial_Arts/BB_Mag/blackbelt/1992/mar92/carradine/carradine.html, accessed October
28, 2008.
Clements, Jonathan, and Tamamura Motoko. 2003. The Dorama Encyclopedia: A Guide to Japanese TV
Drama since 1953. Berkeley, CA: Stone Bridge Press.
Corcoran, John. 1977. The Complete Martial Arts Catalogue. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Corcoran, John. 1994. The Martial Arts Sourcebook. New York: HarperCollins Publishers, Inc.
Corcoran, John, and John Graden. 2001. The Ultimate Martial Arts Q&A Book. Chicago: Contemporary
Books.
d’Acci, Julie. 1997. “Nobody’s Woman? Honey West and the New Sexuality on Mid-Sixties TV,” in
The Revolution Wasn’t Televised: Sixties Television and Social Conﬂict, edited by Lynn Spiegel and
Michael Curtin, 73–93. New York: Routledge.
Donohue, John. 2002. “Virtual Enlightenment: The Martial Arts, Cyberspace, and American Culture,”
Journal of Asian Martial Arts 2(2), 8–27.
Hamamoto, Darrell Y. 1994. Monitored Peril: Asian Americans and the Politics of TV Representation.
Minneapolis and London: University of Minnesota Press.
Hunt, Leon. 2003. Kung Fu Cult Masters: From Bruce Lee to Crouching Tiger. London and New York:
Wallﬂower Press.
Kato, M. T. 2007. From Kung Fu to Hip Hop: Globalization, Revolution, and Popular Culture. Albany:
State University of New York Press.
Keyser, Les. 1981. Hollywood in the Seventies. New York: A. S. Barnes & Co.
Kohata Atsuko, “History of Anime: The Evolution of the Artform,” Variety, http://www.variety.com/
article/VR1117990775.html?categoryid=13&cs=1&nid=2565, accessed October 5, 2008.
Lambert, Craig. 2001. “The Dow of Professional Sports,” Harvard Magazine, http://harvardmagazine.
com/2001/09/the-dow-of-professional.html, accessed October 17, 2008.
Lott, M. Ray. 2004. The American Martial Arts Film. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Co.
Middleton, Jason. 2007. “Buffy as Femme Fatal: The Cult Heroine and the Male Spectator,” in
Undead TV: Essays on Buffy the Vampire Slayer, edited by Elana Levine and Lisa Parks, 145–166.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Oates, Joyce Carol. “The Mystery of the Ring: A Review,” http://www.powells.com/review/
2008_06_02.html, accessed June 2, 2008.
Parish, James R., and George H. Hill. 1989. Black Action Film. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Co.
Paumgarten, Nick. 1999. “How Sweet It Is! Boxing Behemoths Don King and Seth Abraham Rec-
oncile,” Observer.com, http://www.observer.com/node/41166, accessed October 17, 2008.
Romano, Allyson. 2003. “TNN Hopes Mainly Men Will Watch ‘Spike TV’: Niche Channel’s New Name
is Intended to Evoke Race Cars, Strippers and Muscles,” http://www.broadcastingcable.com/article/
CA293348.html, accessed October 17, 2008.
Sieg, Linda. 2008. “Pioneer ‘Anime’ Films Found in Japan,” ReutersUK, March 27, http://uk.reuters.com/
article/idUKT23069120080327, accessed October 18, 2009.
Tasker, Yvonne. 1993. Spectacular Bodies: Gender, Genre and the Action Cinema. New York: Routledge.
United States of America Traditional Kodokan Judo. No date. “Gene LeBell,” http://www.usatkj.org/bio/
lebell/ index.html, accessed October 4, 2008.
Wang Zhiyong, translator. 2007. “Pilgrim Criticizes Temple for Tourist Scams,” http://www.china.org.cn/
english/travel/206059.htm, accessed October 17, 2008.
Yan Ning. 2006. “Shaolin Temple—Temple or Business?” http://english.cri.cn/3166/2006/11/29/44@
168572.htm, accessed October 17, 2008.
548
Television and the Martial Arts

Zhang Xueying. 2004. “The Shaolin Kungfu Legacy,” China Today, http://www.chinatoday.com.cn/Eng-
lish/ e2004/e200409/p38.htm, accessed October 17, 2008.
THE INTERNET AND THE MARTIAL ARTS
From its inception in the early 1980s to the present (2010), the main feature and function of the
Internet has been the rapid exchange of information. Its reach is far beyond what was achieved
by previous information networks such as the letter post (“snail mail”) or the telephone, both in
speed and in global reach.
From the standpoint of communications, the Internet has brought about a shrinking and a
ﬂattening of the world. Today, we can communicate virtually instantly with anyone in reach of
the Internet. Geography has become almost meaningless.
In addition, anyone can now talk directly to anyone. There is far less hierarchy of access. I
can communicate directly with the chief executive ofﬁcer (CEO) of a company or the head of a
school and perhaps more commonly, the CEO or head can communicate directly with me.
Internet communication is largely without editorial intervention. On the plus side, we can
ask questions directly at a search engine and get our own relational answers. On the down side,
this means everyone writes and no one is an expert. There are no editors or fact checkers. Any-
one, educated or otherwise, can publish both irrational opinions and reasoned scholarship for
anyone else to read.
How has this change in the way that information is transmitted affected the practice of the
martial arts?
The original human communication was the direct physical exchange of language and demon-
stration between two individuals. This occurred between teacher and student, but also between
students who might be discussing their school or between members of a school and the public.
Such communication was local and limited to the “word of mouth” social networks that
developed. Language was a limitation to this type of communication, because a student who did
not speak the language of the teacher or fellow students would be learning at a slower rate and
be limited in what could be learned. For students who did not speak the language, the emphasis
was necessarily on physical technique rather than on the history or philosophy of an art.
If literate, instructors could write books, letters, or scrolls and use these to pass along infor-
mation to students and friends. Books and scrolls tend to be “top down,” meaning that the
instructors and experts wrote for their students or the general public. Letters could be passed
along between anyone but were limited in speed and tended to move along the same personal
contacts as did vocal communication. Letters would normally be thoughtful and detailed because
of the time lag in the response and the consequent need to be clear and perhaps to carry on sev-
eral lines of discourse at once.
Magazines devoted to boxing and wrestling appeared in the late nineteenth century. Maga-
zines required presses and distribution systems and were essentially quickly published books.
Again, they were top-down.
Physically mailed newsletters became possible with the spread of mimeograph stencil duplica-
tors during the early twentieth century. With the proliferation of xerographic copying machines
during the 1960s, fanzines or zines (privately produced publications with small distributions that
The Internet and the Martial Arts
549
www.ebook3000.com

were not written primarily to make money for authors or publishers) appeared. Newsletters and
zines let people who could not afford printing presses publish their own little magazines. An
example of such a publication is The Iaido Newsletter, which was created at the University of
Guelph in 1989 for the purpose of building a wider community of iaido practitioners. The Iaido
Newsletter was photocopied and sent to regional and national distributors, who further photo-
copied and mailed it to their own contacts. The Iaido Newsletter was free to anyone who wanted
it (the motto on the masthead was “Photocopy and share this newsletter”), but some recipients
sent postage costs back to their distributors.
After email was introduced widely to universities during the late 1980s and early 1990s, email
lists began replacing photocopied newsletters. Early email systems tended to be provided for and
used by people studying or working at universities or government institutions, and the discourse
reﬂected this. Newsletters and messages tended to be short and to the point, with a minimum of
low-information “noise.”
Informal email lists were soon aided by the introduction of listservers. Listservers are software
programs that manage the membership of the email lists. Early (but still extant, as of 2009) email
lists included Karate-L (1993), Aikido-L (1993), and Iaido-L (1994). About the same time,
access to the Internet (and email) opened up to the public via commercial networks such as
AOL and CompuServe. This brought nonacademic and nongovernmental people onto the lists
and brought about the commercialization of the Internet.
Along with email listservers, which are best understood as “push” communications, meaning
they deliver (or push) messages to individuals, came “pull” systems. Pull systems developed spe-
cial discussion forums that people connected to the Internet could sign onto and then post mes-
sages back and forth. Usenet newsgroups and local Bulletin Board Systems (BBS) are examples
of popular pull systems.
The ﬁrst major Usenet group devoted to martial arts was rec.martial-arts. Wags soon came to
call this “Wreck dot Martial Arts” because of its anonymous inﬂammatory postings. This
“trolling” was a problem for many years, as it is in many other Internet venues, but it has since
been reduced by message systems that allow moderators to remove or edit posts. The increasing
sophistication of Internet users has reduced the amount of trolling and spam (spurious advertis-
ing messages), as people have learned not to respond to trolls and spam. Thus, rec.martial-arts is
still active and is easily accessed using Web-based search engines. There is a rec.martial-
arts.moderated, which is less active.
During the mid-1990s the World Wide Web began to have the graphical interface browsers
that we are familiar with today. After this, growth was exponential. In 1993, the pioneering
browser Mosaic was installed on about twenty-six sites worldwide, but by the end of 1994, there
were a million copies. Netscape (1994–2008) was the ﬁrst important graphical browser. In 1995
Amazon.com—one of the ﬁrst large online shopping sites—began selling books via the Inter-
net, and by 1998 there were over 750,000 commercial sites on the Internet. The growth has
never slowed down, and the World Wide Web system has been the front end of the Internet for
most people ever since.
Individual Web sites followed the development of the World Wide Web. Today, the Web
site is often the ﬁrst line of communication between an organization, club, or instructor and
the public. A Web site is a self-published document that can range from a simple poster to a
multilayered multimedia presentation. Hawaii Jujitsu Kodenkai, a Danzan Ryu jujutsu club,
550
The Internet and the Martial Arts

was among the ﬁrst martial art groups to establish a permanent Web site on the Internet,
which it did in 1994.
Like books and newspapers, Web sites are essentially one-way communication from publisher
to reader. Readers want to respond to what they read, and discussion forums soon became a major
way of communicating on the World Wide Web. Discussion forums allow two-way discussion to
happen in much the same way as Usenet, Bulletin Boards, and listservers do, but in a much more
intuitive fashion, and often with ﬁle and photo sharing capacities, calendars, and much more.
Discussion forums can be attached to web sites, as is the case with Judo Information Site, estab-
lished in 1995, or be part of an aggregation of groups such as can be found at Yahoo!
During the late 1990s, discussion forums were followed by the Web log, a term soon short-
ened to blog. A blog is a kind of Web site on which an individual (the blogger) can present essays
and aggregations of information to readers, who may be invited to reply online via a comments
feature. Blogs are essentially a combination of Web site and discussion forum and have some
resemblance to newsletters, diaries, and newspaper columns.
During the early 2000s, Facebook, MySpace and equivalent social networking systems were
created. Social networking systems are Web sites where individuals can present what amounts to
an online resume and can communicate with others in the same system, particularly designated
friends.
The latest evolution (as of 2010) is digital video. Digital video came about because enough
people presently access the Internet using the high-speed connections necessary for download-
ing digital video. Combined with cheap and easy-to-edit digital video recorders, digital video
sites such as YouTube have allowed martial artists to ﬁlm and display their arts at an unprece-
dented rate.
The overall effect of these various Web sites, forums, blogs, and social sites has been to split
up the Internet. Where there were once a few relatively large groups to join online, now there
is a vast array of small and specialized groups one can join—provided one can ﬁnd them.
So, how does one attract people to one’s Web site, forum, blog, or social site? One way is via
self-promotion using existing forums, links to other sites, listing in search engines and directo-
ries, and constant promotion of the base Web site. At the same time, however, one needs con-
tent. Visitors do not bookmark sites without content.
There are several ways in which a martial arts school or organization routinely uses the Inter-
net. A common use is for recruiting purposes. Before the Internet, a potential student had few
sources of information on local schools—perhaps the Yellow Pages and the local parks and recre-
ation bulletin. This restricted the potential groups a student would ﬁnd to commercial schools
or those associated with community centers or the YMCA. Once in those classes, the student
might ﬁnd sources of information on more obscure groups, but that process could take years.
With the Internet, there is now an efﬁcient, fast, and cheap method of advertising. Obscure
“study groups” can be found as easily as major organizations, and sometimes the study groups have
nicer-looking and more informative Web sites. The Internet has provided the opportunity for
groups that were small and obscure to gain a national and international presence and to give the
impression that they are much larger and more inﬂuential than they are. All it takes is a good Web
site and some enthusiastic students to promote the school in forums, blogs, and other groups.
From the public’s point of view, the search for a school has moved from a rather random
search of classiﬁed ads, Yellow Pages, and word of mouth to the Internet search engine, where
The Internet and the Martial Arts
551
www.ebook3000.com

one can search for speciﬁc martial arts, ﬁnding links to groups all over the world. Although
this search can result in dubious information, it allows small groups and arts to grow and pros-
per. In addition, people may ﬁnd martial art groups or schools that they never knew existed,
simply by searching for topics such as movies, books, or animation. Such serendipitous dis-
covery may be reduced as search engines become more sophisticated. On the other hand, pro-
grams such as StumbleUpon have been developed that take advantage of random links. Some
people like to wander.
With a wider community of students in the same art, a greater feeling of belonging can
develop in students. Their loyalty may stretch beyond their immediate instructor and class and
extend to other schools in the art. This may be reinforced with specialized discussion groups that
are dominated by or restricted to certain schools in an art.
For students who have learned a martial art in a foreign country, the Internet allows easier and
more frequent communication with teachers. This promotes loyalty and allows continued learning
for the student. This easy communication, combined with the inexpensive air travel we have expe-
rienced during the past few decades, can facilitate visits by the student to the teacher, or vice versa.
At the same time, however, the increase of communication has created efforts to ﬂatten the
vertical hierarchy of the martial arts and make it more horizontal. In short, junior students want
more say in their arts. This sometimes leads to more democratic organizations and larger and more
widely spread organizations with multiple locations. Alternatively, it can result in fragmentation
of existing organizations.
There is a switch in who is providing the information to the students. While it used to be a
very top-down process to gain information about the school, its history, and its philosophy, that
process is now “bottom to bottom” (or at least horizontal), as students all over the world discuss
their art with one another. This can be a good thing, but it can provide a level of noise that
drowns the voices of the instructor and seniors.
Another effect that the Internet has is to increase access to source material. This includes old
books and newspaper articles, sometimes written in languages other than one’s own, or from for-
eign countries. Machine translation of documents and Web sites is getting better, and this means
that students can gain direct access to the materials that formerly came through speciﬁc con-
duits, such as people who both speak the language and practice the arts. Greater access to the
documents without a language barrier may reduce the role of the “cultural expert” in communi-
cating the arts to other language groups.
With the advent of broadband connections and fast downloads, the Internet is becoming a
major archive of historical records. These records range from scans of rare books to videos show-
ing demonstrations and instruction by all levels of students and teachers in the arts. The books
and newspapers are probably fairly permanent, as they are sponsored by organizations such as the
British Library and Google. However, ephemera such as digital videos are equally likely to be
fairly permanent. Even if the images are removed from original sites such as YouTube, they
remain in existence in server caches or on the storage media of people who saved them. Thus,
future generations should have records of instructors’ performances (and written statements)
throughout their careers. Future research will be improved, but legends concerning incredible
feats may have a harder time being taken literally.
On the positive side, the constant stream of discussion and information on the Internet can prod
students into attending their classes more often. A problem is that the easy access to information
552
The Internet and the Martial Arts

about other arts and study groups can encourage students’ natural desire to “learn it all.” By trying
to learn everything, students end up retaining nothing. Finally, the easy access to information pres-
ents a problem for certain old-style or very traditional martial arts, as the perceived purity of the line
becomes diluted (some teachers would say polluted) with information from other sources.
As the Internet increases direct access to information, it reduces the role of the traditional
expert. Organizations such as Wikipedia (2001–present) have removed the idea that it takes a
learned scholar to write encyclopedia entries. Instead, Wikipedia relies on the common knowl-
edge base of its users. At its best, this reliance on common knowledge can be very good, but at
its worst, it can be embarrassing.
This does not mean that the expert has disappeared. In online discussion groups, there tends
to develop a set of experts who are relied upon to give the last or latest word on any topic. These
experts can be different in each group, or they may hold sway over several groups. They may be
formal moderators of the group (that position is often associated with special knowledge of the
topic), but mostly the experts are members whose information is generally trustworthy, who doc-
ument their sources, who communicate in reasonable tones, and otherwise do the things that
one used to expect from editors and fact checkers.
The moderators are mentioned because, before the Internet, discussions of martial arts
tended to be face-to-face. Thus, discussions were generally polite and courteous. The exception
was the letters columns of the martial arts magazines, but even there, the letters were edited for
content and vocabulary. With the anonymity of the Internet, there has arisen a more con-
frontational tone of discourse. Thoughts ﬂy off keyboards without any ﬁlters, often with unspo-
ken assumptions of superior knowledge by all parties involved, followed by shocked silence when
those assumptions are proven incorrect.
Online, the most contentious issues tend to revolve around issues of legitimacy, both of
groups and individuals, and great delight is taken in ﬁnding “fakes and frauds” of various types.
Other contentious areas involve individuals from one organization prodding individuals from a
rival organization every chance they get. This eventually causes an explosion, which settles
down to a simmer until the next provocation. These rivalries between groups can carry over into
what might be described as Wikipedia wars, with assertions and “facts” being posted and taken
down until either accommodation is reached or the users are banned from the site. Because ban-
ning can occur, some groups seek a kind of “legitimacy by noise,” a phrase that describes indi-
viduals or groups participating in several forums, boards, or lists, on the principle that he who
shouts loudest should be assigned the most veracity.
Regardless of expanded information and opportunities for both diatribe and dialogue, a stu-
dent of the martial arts must still ﬁnd a teacher, and then study with that teacher several times a
week, for indeﬁnite periods of time. There is no way by which the Internet can replace the face-
to-face instruction necessary to pass on an art. In addition, the student who looks for reliable
information on the Internet without guidance is unlikely to know who is providing reliable infor-
mation and who is not. It is difﬁcult to gauge the quality of knowledge simply by reading Web sites
or online posts. Remember, voices of authority can be diluted by the noise of thousands of others;
he who shouts loudest may simply be loudest.
A ﬁnal, separate, risk involves the movement from traditional print documents to the Inter-
net. As students and potential students move from edited sources such as books and magazines to
unchecked blogs, edited resources may dry up. On the other hand, edited resources may simply
The Internet and the Martial Arts
553
www.ebook3000.com

move online, much as academic journals and daily newspapers are beginning to do. Aikido Jour-
nal was a pioneer in this regard, and other publications may follow suit, in hopes that a paying
subscriber base can be established.
—Kim Taylor
See also: Expressive Culture; Globalization of Martial Arts (in this volume).
REFERENCE
Svinth, Joseph R. 1999–2005. “Other Online Resources,” Kronos: A Chronological History of the Mar-
tial Arts and Combative Sports, http://ejmas.com/kronos/#Online%20Resources, accessed October
6, 2009.
WRITTEN TEXTS: JAPAN
Japanese martial arts literature encompasses such a wide variety of genres, both ﬁction and non-
ﬁction, produced over such a long period of history, that it deﬁes all attempts at simple charac-
terization. The production of martial literature began with early chronicles and anonymous
collections of tales concerning wars and warriors and reached its zenith during the Tokugawa
regime (1603–1868), when government policies enforced a strict division of social classes,
according to which members of the ofﬁcially designated hereditary class of warriors (bushi or
buke) were placed above all other segments of society and charged with administration of gov-
ernment. The Tokugawa combination of more than 250 years of peace, high status afforded to
warriors, widespread literacy, and printing technology resulted in the production of vast numbers
of texts in which warriors sought to celebrate their heroes, establish universal principles of war-
fare, record their methods of martial training, adapt arts of war to an age of peace, and resolve
the contradiction inherent in government regulations that demanded that they master both civil
(bun, peaceful) and military (bu) skills. It is this last endeavor more than any other that contin-
ues to capture the imagination of modern readers, insofar as Tokugawa warriors applied abstract
concepts derived from Chinese cosmology, neo-Confucian metaphysics, Taoist magic, and Bud-
dhist doctrines of consciousness to give new meanings to the physical mediation of concrete
martial conﬂicts.
Some idea of the number of martial arts treatises produced by Tokugawa-period warriors can
be gleamed from the Kinsei budo bunken mokuroku (References of Tokugawa-Period Martial Art
Texts), which lists more than 15,000 separate titles. This list, moreover, is incomplete, since it
includes titles only of treatises found at major library facilities and ignores private manuscripts,
scrolls, and initiation documents that were handed down within martial art schools. Following
the Meiji Restoration (1868), which marked the beginning both of the end of the hereditary
status of warriors and of Japan’s drive toward becoming a modern industrialized state, interest
in martial arts immediately declined. Despite a brief resurgence of interest during the militaris-
tic decades of the 1930s and 1940s and the reformulation of certain martial arts (e.g., judo and
kendo) into popular competitive sports, relatively few books about martial arts have appeared
since the end of the Tokugawa period. The 1979 References (supplement to Budogaku kenkyu
11:3) of monographs concerning martial arts published since 1868 includes only about 2,000
554
Written Texts: Japan

titles, the vast bulk of which concern modern competitive forms of kendo, judo, and karate. No
more than a few Tokugawa-period treatises about martial arts have been reprinted in modern,
easily accessible editions. For this reason, knowledge of traditional (i.e., warrior) martial arts
traditions, practices, and philosophy remains hidden not just from students of modern Japanese
martial art sports but also from historians of Japanese education, literature, popular life, and
warrior culture.
The following survey of Japanese martial arts literature, therefore, is of necessity incomplete.
It concentrates on works from the Tokugawa period (or before) that have been reprinted and/or
inﬂuential during modern (i.e., post-1868) times. However inﬂuential a work might have been
during premodern periods, if it has been ignored by subsequent generations it is omitted here.
Even with this limitation, texts from several disparate genres must be surveyed. Through theater,
novels, cinema, and television the image of the traditional Japanese warrior (the samurai) has
attained mythic status (analogous to that of the cowboy or gunﬁghter of America’s Old West).
Insofar as contemporary practitioners and teachers of Japanese martial arts consciously and
unconsciously identify themselves with that mythic image, texts depicting legendary warriors
and their traits and ethos constitute an indispensable part of Japanese martial arts literature. In
addition, the texts in which Tokugawa-period warriors analyzed their battleﬁeld experiences and
systematized their ﬁghting arts remain our best sources for understanding the development and
essential characteristics of Japanese martial training. Finally, one cannot fail to mention the
early textbooks that laid the foundation for the development of the modern competitive forms
of martial arts that are practiced throughout the world. Thus, our survey covers the following
genres: war tales, warrior exploits, military manuals, initiation documents, martial art treatises,
and educational works.
WAR TALES
War tales (gunki mono) consist of collections of ﬁctional tales and chronicles about historical
wars and warriors. Literary scholars often conﬁne their use of this term to works of the thirteenth
through ﬁfteenth centuries, such as Heike monogatari (Tales of the Heike; i.e., the 1180–1185 war
between the Minamoto and Taira clans) or Taiheiki (Chronicle of Great Peace; i.e., Godaigo’s
1331–1336 failed revolt against warrior rule), which originally were recited to musical accom-
paniment and which evolved orally and textually over a long period of time. In a broader sense,
however, the term sometimes applies even to earlier battleﬁeld accounts such as Shomonki
(Chronicle of Masakado; i.e., his 930s revolt). None of these tales can be read as history. Their
authors were neither themselves warriors nor present at the battles they describe. Episodic in
nature, they derive dramatic effect primarily from repetition of stereotyped formulas (e.g., styl-
ized descriptions of arms and armor, speeches in which heroes recite their illustrious genealogies,
the pathos of death). Overall, they present the rise of warrior power as a sign of the decline of
civilization and sympathize with the losers: individuals and families of ﬂeeting power and status
who suffer utter destruction as the tide of events turns against them. Thus, Heike monogatari
states, in one of the most famous lines of Japanese literature: “The proud do not last forever, but
are like dreams of a spring night; the mighty will perish, just like dust before the wind.”
Although the war tales are obvious works of ﬁction, many authors, from Tokugawa times down
to the present, have used these works as sources to construct idealistic and romanticized images of
Written Texts: Japan
555
www.ebook3000.com

traditional Japanese warriors and their ethos. The names of ﬁghting techniques (e.g., tanbo gaeshi,
dragonﬂy counter) mentioned therein have been collected in futile attempts to chart the evolution
of pre-Tokugawa-period martial arts. Excerpts have been cited out of context to show that medieval
warriors exempliﬁed various martial virtues: loyalty, valor, self-discipline, self-sacriﬁce, and so forth.
At the same time, however, these texts also contain numerous counterexamples in which protag-
onists exemplify the opposite qualities (disloyalty, cowardice). Perhaps because of this very mixture
of heroes and villains, these tales continue to entertain and to provide story lines for creative
retellings in theater, puppet shows, cinema, television, anime, and cartoons (Adachi 1967).
WARRIOR EXPLOITS
Whereas war tales describe the course of military campaigns or the rise and fall of prominent fam-
ilies, tales of warrior exploits focus on the accomplishments of individuals who gained fame for
founding new styles (ryuha), for duels or for feats of daring. The practice of recounting warrior
exploits no doubt is as old as the origins of the war tales mentioned above, but credit for the ﬁrst
real attempt to compile historically accurate accounts of the lives and deeds of famous martial
artists belongs to Hinatsu Shigetaka’s Honcho bugei shoden (1716; reprinted in Hayakawa et al.,
1915). Living in an age of peace when the thought of engaging in life-or-death battles already
seemed remote, Hinatsu hoped that his accounts of martial valor would inspire his contempo-
raries, so that they might emulate the warrior ideals of their forebears. Repeatedly reprinted and
copied by subsequent authors, Hinatsu’s work formed the basis for the general public’s under-
standing of Japanese martial arts down to recent times. Playwrights, authors, and movie directors
have mined Hinatsu for the plots of countless swordplay adventures. The most notable of these,
perhaps, is the 1939 (reprinted 1953) novel Miyamoto Musashi by Yoshikawa Eiji (1892–1962).
This novel (which was translated into English in 1981) helped more than anything else to trans-
form the popular image of Miyamoto Musashi (1582 [not 1584]–1645) from that of a brutal killer
into one of an enlightened master of self-cultivation. It formed the basis for an Academy
Award–winning 1954 movie (released in the United States as Samurai) directed by Inagaki
Hiroshi (1905–1980).
MILITARY MANUALS
Japanese martial arts traditions developed within the social context of lord–vassal relationships
in which the explicit purpose of martial training was for vassals to prepare themselves to partic-
ipate in military campaigns as directed by their lords. Therefore, instruction in individual ﬁght-
ing skills (e.g., swordsmanship) not infrequently addressed larger military concerns such as
organization, command, supply, fortiﬁcations, geomancy, strategy, and so forth. Manuals of mil-
itary science (gungaku or heigaku), likewise, often included detailed information on types of
armor, weapons, and the best ways to learn how to use them.
The most widely read and inﬂuential military manual was Koyo gunkan (Martial Mirror Used
by Warriors of Koshu; reprinted in Isogai and Hattori 1965), published in 1656 by Obata
Kagenori (1572–1662). Koyo gunkan consists of various texts that purport to record details of
the military organization, tactics, training, martial arts, and battles fought by warriors under the
command of the celebrated warlord Takeda Shingen (1521–1573). Although ascribed to one
556
Written Texts: Japan

of Takeda’s senior advisers, Kosaka Danjo Nobumasa (died 1578), it was probably compiled
long after its principal characters had died, since it contains numerous historical inaccuracies,
including ﬁctional battles and imaginary personages (e.g., the infamous Yamamoto Kanzuke).
In spite of its inaccuracies, Koyo gunkan has been treasured down to the present for its rich evo-
cation of the axioms, motivational techniques, and personal relations of late sixteenth-century
ﬁghting men.
Yamaga Soko (1632–1685) was the most celebrated instructor of military science during the
Tokugawa period. Yamaga combined military science (which he studied under Obata Kagenori)
with Confucianism and Ancient Learning (kogaku) to situate military rule within a larger social
and ethical framework. His Bukyo shogaku (Primary Learning in the Warrior Creed, 1658;
reprinted 1917) formulated what was to become the standard Tokugawa-period justiﬁcation for
the existence of the hereditary warrior class and their status as rulers: Warriors serve all classes
of people because they achieve not just military proﬁciency but also self-cultivation, duty, regu-
lation of the state, and paciﬁcation of the realm. Through his inﬂuence, martial arts training
came to be interpreted as a means by which warriors could internalize the fundamental principles
that should be employed in managing the great affairs of state.
INITIATION DOCUMENTS
Before the Meiji Restoration (1868), martial arts skills usually were acquired by training under an
instructor, who taught a private tradition or style that was handed down in secret from father to
son or from master to disciple. There were hundreds of such styles, and most of them gave birth
to new styles in endless permutations. This multiplication of martial traditions occurred because
of government regulations designed to prevent warriors from forming centralized teaching net-
works across administrative borders. Ryuha, the Japanese term commonly used to designate these
martial art styles, denotes a stream or current branching out from generation to generation. By
deﬁnition, though not necessarily so in practice, each style possesses its own unique techniques
and teachings (ryugi), which are conveyed through its own unique curriculum of pattern practice
(kata). Typically, each style bestowed a wide variety of secret initiation documents (densho) on
students who mastered its teachings. Although some martial art styles still guard their secrets,
today hundreds of initiation documents from many different styles have become available to
scholars. Many of them have been published (see reprints in Imamura 1982; Sasamori 1965).
These documents provide the most detailed and the most difﬁcult-to-understand accounts of
traditional Japanese martial arts.
Martial art initiation documents vary greatly from style to style, from generation to genera-
tion within the same style, and sometimes even from student to student within the same gener-
ation. They were composed in every format: single sheets of paper (kirikami), scrolls (makimono),
and bound volumes (sasshi). There were no standards. Nonetheless, certain patterns reappear.
Students usually began their training by signing pledges (kishomon) of obedience, secrecy, and
good behavior. Extant martial art pledges, such as the ones signed by shogun Tokugawa Ieyasu
(1542–1616), provide invaluable historical data about the relationships between martial art
styles and political alliances. As students proceeded through their course of training, they
received a series of written initiations. These writings might have consisted of curricula
(mokuroku), genealogies (keifu), songs and poetry of the way (doka), teachings adapted from
Written Texts: Japan
557
www.ebook3000.com

558
Written Texts: Japan
other styles (to no mono), lists of moral axioms and daily cautions (kokoroe), diplomas (menjo),
and treatises. In many styles the documents were awarded in a predetermined sequence, such as
initial, middle, deep, and full initiation (shoden, chuden, okuden, and kaiden).
A key characteristic of initiation documents, regardless of style, is that they were bestowed
only on advanced students who had already mastered the techniques, vocabulary, and concepts
mentioned therein. For this reason they typically recorded reminders rather than instructions.
Sometimes they contained little more than a list of terms, without any commentary whatsoever.
Or, perhaps the only comment was the word kuden (oral initiation), which meant that the stu-
dent must learn this teaching directly from the teacher. Many initiation documents use vocabu-
lary borrowed from Buddhism but with denotations completely unrelated to any Buddhist
doctrines or practices. Moreover, initiation documents from different styles sometimes used iden-
tical terminology to convey unrelated meanings or to refer to dissimilar technical applications.
For this reason, initiation documents cannot be understood by anyone who has not been trained
by a living teacher of that same style. Recently, however, it has been demonstrated that the
comparative study of initiation documents from a variety of styles can reveal previously unsus-
pected relationships among geographically and historically separated traditions.
MARTIAL ART TREATISES
Systematic expositions of a particular style’s curriculum or of the general principles of martial
performance also were produced in great numbers. The earliest extant martial art treatises are
Heiho kadensho (Our Family’s Tradition of Swordsmanship, 1632) by Yagyu Munenori
(1571–1646) and Gorin no sho (Five Elemental Spheres, 1643) by Miyamoto Musashi (both
reprinted in Watanabe et al. 1972). Both texts were written by elderly men who in the ﬁnal years
of their lives sought to present their disciples with a concluding summation of their teachings.
Until modern times, both texts were secret initiation documents. Like other initiation docu-
ments, they contain vocabulary that cannot be fathomed by outsiders who lack training in their
respective martial styles. For this reason, modern interpretations and translations that have
appeared thus far in publications intended for a general audience have failed to do them justice.
In some cases, the specialized martial art terminology in these works has been interpreted and
translated into English in the most fanciful ways (e.g., Suzuki 1959).
Heiho kadensho begins by listing the elements (i.e., names of kata) in the martial art cur-
riculum that Munenori had learned from his father. This list is followed by a random collec-
tion of short essays in which Munenori records his own insights into the meaning of old
sayings or concepts that are applicable to martial art training. In this section he cites the
teachings of the Zen monk Takuan Soho (1573–1643), Chinese military manuals, neo-Confucian
tenets, and doctrines of the Konparu school of Noh theater. Munenori asserts that real mar-
tial art is not about personal duels, but rather lies in establishing peace and preventing war by
serving one’s lord and protecting him from self-serving advisers. He emphasizes that one must
practice neo-Confucian investigation of things (kakubutsu; in Chinese, gewu) and that for success
in any aspect of life, and especially in martial arts, one must maintain an everyday state of
mind (byojoshin).
Gorin no sho eschews the Chinese vocabulary and philosophical reﬂection found in Heiho
kadensho and concentrates exclusively on ﬁghting techniques. Written as a private rebuttal to

Munenori’s treatise—which Munenori had given to Musashi’s lord, Hosokawa Tadatoshi
(1586–1641)—it reworks Musashi’s earlier Heiho sanjugoka jo (Thirty-Five Initiations into
Swordsmanship, 1640; reprinted in Watanabe et al. 1972) by organizing his teachings into ﬁve
sections according to the Buddhist scheme of ﬁve elements: Earth concerns key points for
studying swordsmanship; Water concerns Musashi’s sword techniques; Fire concerns battleﬁeld
techniques; Wind concerns the techniques of other styles; and Space (i.e., emptiness) encour-
ages his disciples to avoid delusion by perfecting their skills, tempering their spirits, and devel-
oping insight. Throughout the work, Musashi’s style is terse to the point of incomprehensibility.
Despite his use of the elemental scheme to give his work some semblance of structure, the indi-
vidual sections lack any internal organization whatsoever. Some assertions reappear in several
different contexts without adding any new information. Much of what can be understood
appears self-contradictory. This unintelligibility, however, allows the text to function as
Rorschach inkblots within which modern readers (businessmen, perhaps) can project their own
meanings.
Many other formerly secret martial art treatises have commanded the attention of modern
readers. Kotoda Toshisada’s Ittosai sensei kenpo sho (Master Ittosai’s Swordsmanship, 1664;
reprinted in Hayakawa et al. 1915) uses neo-Confucian concepts to explain doctrines of Itto-ryu,
a style that greatly inﬂuenced modern kendo. Mansen shukai (All Rivers Gather in the Sea;
reprinted in Imamura 1982, volume 5) is an encyclopedia of espionage (ninjutsu) techniques.
Shibugawa Tokifusa’s Jujutsu taiseiroku (Perfecting Flexibility Skills, 1770s; reprinted in Imamura
1982, volume 6) explains the essence of Shibugawa-ryu jujutsu so well that it is still studied by
students of modern judo. Sekiunryu kenjutsu sho (a.k.a. Kenpo Seikun sensei soden; reprinted in
Watanabe 1979) by Odagiri (or Kodegiri) Ichiun (1630–1706) has garnered attention for its
sharp criticism of traditional swordsmanship as a beastly practice and its assertion that the high-
est martial art avoids harm both to self and to one’s opponent.
Not all martial art treatises were kept secret. Many were published during the Tokugawa period.
Not surprisingly, these are the ones that modern readers can understand with the least difﬁculty.
Tengu geijutsuron (Performance Theory of the Mountain Demons; reprinted in Hayakawa et al.
1915) and Neko no myojutsu (Marvelous Skill of Cats; reprinted in Watanabe 1979) both appeared
in print in 1727 as part of Inaka Soji (Countriﬁed Zhuangzi) by Issai Chozan (1659–1741). Liken-
ing himself to the legendary Chinese sage Zhuangzi (traditional: fourth century BCE), Issai
explains swordsmanship in Confucian terms in Tengu geijutsuron and in Taoist terms in Neko no
myojutsu. Both works were enormously popular and saw many reprints. Hirase Mitsuo’s Shagaku
yoroku (Essentials for Studying Archery; published 1788; reprinted in Watanabe 1979) provides an
invaluable overview of how archery evolved during the eighteenth century. Hirase asserts that
archery is the martial art par excellence and laments that contemporary archers have forgotten its
true forms, which he then proceeds to explain. Similar works were published regarding other forms
of martial training: gunnery, horsemanship, pole-arms, and so forth.
The most inﬂuential treatise was not written by a warrior but by a Buddhist monk. It consists
of the instructions that Takuan Soho presented to Yagyu Munenori regarding the way the men-
tal freedom attained through Buddhist training can help one to better master swordsmanship and
to better serve one’s lord. First published in 1779 as Fudochi shinmyoroku (Marvelous Power of
Immovable Wisdom; reprinted in Sato 2001), Takuan’s treatise has been reprinted countless
times ever since and has reached an audience far beyond the usual martial art circles. Takuan
Written Texts: Japan
559
www.ebook3000.com

emphasized the importance of cultivating a strong sense of imperturbability, the immovable wis-
dom that allows the mind to move freely, with spontaneity and ﬂexibility, even in the face of
fear, intimidation, or temptation. For Takuan, the realization of true freedom must be anchored
to ﬁrm moral righteousness. He likened this attainment to a well-trained cat that can be released
to roam freely only after it no longer needs to be restrained by a leash in order to prevent it from
attacking songbirds. Under the inﬂuence of the extreme militarism of the 1930s and 1940s, how-
ever, the freedom advocated by Takuan was interpreted in amoral, antinomian terms, as con-
doning killing without thought or remorse. For this reason it has been condemned by recent
social critics for contributing to the commission of wartime crimes and atrocities.
EDUCATIONAL WORKS
In 1872, the Meiji government established a nationwide system of compulsory public education.
That same year, the ministry in charge of schools promulgated a single nationwide curriculum
that included courses in hygiene and physical exercise. In developing these courses, Japanese
educators translated a great number of textbooks and manuals from European countries, which
only a few decades earlier had developed the then-novel practices of citizen armies, military
gymnastics, schoolyard drills, and organized athletic games. Tsuboi Gendo (1852–1922) was the
ﬁrst person to attempt to introduce to a general Japanese audience the notion that exercise could
be a form of recreation and a pleasant way to attain strength and health, to develop team spirit,
and to ﬁnd joy simply in trying to do one’s best. His Togai yuge ho (Methods of Outdoor Recre-
ation, 1884) helped ordinary Japanese accept the concepts of sport and, more importantly,
sportsmanship.
In the eyes of many Japanese educators, a huge gulf separated traditional martial arts from
sports and sportsmanship. The Ministry of Education, for example, initially rejected swords-
manship (kenjutsu) and jujutsu instruction at public schools. Its evaluation of martial art cur-
riculums (“Bugika no keikyo,” Monbusho 1890) found martial arts to be deﬁcient physically
because they fail to develop all muscle groups equally and because they are dangerous in that a
stronger student can easily apply too much force to a weaker student. They are deﬁcient spiritu-
ally because they promote violence and emphasize winning at all costs, even to the point of
encouraging students to resort to trickery. In addition, they are deﬁcient pedagogically because
they require individual instruction, they cannot be taught as a group activity, they require too
large a training area, and they require special uniforms and equipment that students cannot keep
hygienic. At the same time that the Ministry of Education was rejecting traditional Japanese
martial arts, however, it sought other means to actively promote the development of a strong
military (kyohei). In 1891, it ordered compulsory training in European-style military calisthenics
(heishiki taiso) at all elementary and middle schools. The ministry stated that physically these
exercises would promote health and balanced muscular development, spiritually they would pro-
mote cheerfulness and fortitude, and socially they would teach obedience to commands.
Faced with this situation, many martial art enthusiasts sought to reform their training meth-
ods to meet the new educational standards and policies. In particular, they developed methods
of group instruction, exercises for balanced physical development, principles of hygiene, rules
barring illegal techniques, referees to enforce rules, tournament procedures that would ensure the
safety of weaker contestants, and an ethos of sportsmanship. Kano Jigoro (1860–1938), the
founder of Kodokan judo, exerted enormous inﬂuence on all these efforts in his roles as president
560
Written Texts: Japan

(for twenty-seven years) of Tokyo Teachers College (shihan gakko), as the ﬁrst president of the
Japanese Physical Education Association, and as Japan’s ﬁrst representative to the International
Olympic Committee. Under Kano’s leadership, Tokyo Teachers College became the ﬁrst gov-
ernment institution of higher education to train instructors of martial arts. Kano was a proliﬁc
writer. His collected works (three volumes, 1992) provide extraordinarily rich information on
the development of Japanese public education, judo, and international sports.
Kano also encouraged others to write modern martial art textbooks, several of which are still
used today. Judo kyohan (Judo Teaching Manual, 1908; reprinted in Watanabe 1971) by two of
Kano’s students, Yokoyama Sakujiro (1863–1912) and Oshima Eisuke, was translated into Eng-
lish in 1915. Takano Sasaburo (1863–1950), an instructor at Tokyo Teachers College, wrote a
series of works, Kendo (1915; reprinted 1984), Nihon kendo kyohan (Japanese Kendo Teaching
Manual, 1920), and Kendo kyohan (Kendo Teaching Manual, 1930; reprinted 1993), that helped
transform rough-and-tumble gekken (battling swords) into a modern sport with systematic teach-
ing methods and clear standards for judging tournaments. These authors (as well as pressure from
nationalist politicians) prompted the Ministry of Education to adopt jujutsu and gekken as part
of the standard school curriculum in 1912 and to change their names to judo and kendo, respec-
tively, in 1926. Finally, Kano was instrumental in helping Funakoshi Gichin (1870–1956) intro-
duce Okinawan karate to Japan (from whence it spread to the rest of the world). Funakoshi’s
Karatedo kyohan (Karate Teaching Manual, 1935; English translation 1973) remains the standard
introduction to this martial art.
—William M. Bodiford
See also: Japan: Jujutsu-based Systems; Japan: Kendo, Iaido, and Jodo; Japan: Kyudo; Japan:
Naginata; Japan: Ninpo; Japan: Shorinji Kempo (in Volume I); Belief Systems: Japanese 
Budo, Bujutsu, and Bugei; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 
1868; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868; Film and the 
Martial Arts; Television and the Martial Arts; The Internet and the Martial 
Arts; Social and Cultural Evolution of Kendo; Political Conﬂict and Aikido, 
1931–1942; and Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Adachi Ken’ichi. 1967. Taishu geijutsu no fukuryu [Undercurrents of Popular Literature]. Tokyo: Rironsha.
Akabane Tasuo, and Akabane Daisuke, editors. 2008. Kamiizumi Nobutsuna den Shinkageryu gungaku
‘Kin’etsushu’ [Kin’etsushu: A Manual of Shinkage-ryu Military Science Attributed to Kamiizumi
Nobutsuna]. Tokyo: Ski Journal.
Bodiford, William M. 2005. “Takuan Soho: Marvelous Power of Immovable Wisdom,” in Sources of
Japanese Tradition, Volume 2: 1600 to 2000, compiled by William Theodore de Bary, 527–531. New
York: Columbia University Press.
Funakoshi Gichin. 1973. Karate-do kyohan: The Master Text, translated by Tsutomu Ohshima. Tokyo:
Kodansha International.
Guttmann, Allen, and Lee Thompson. 2001. Japanese Sports: A History. Honolulu: University of
Hawai‘i Press.
Hayakawa Junzoro et al., editors. 1915. Bujutsu sosho [Martial Art Treatises]. Kokusho Kankokai.
Imamura Yoshio. 1989/1967. Jukyu seiki ni okeru Nihon taiiku no kenkyu [Studies in Nineteenth-Century
Japanese Physical Education], revised edition. Tokyo: Fumaido Shoten.
Written Texts: Japan
561
www.ebook3000.com

Imamura Yoshio. 1977. Nihon budo zenshu [Collected Works of Japanese Martial Arts], seven volumes.
Tokyo: Jinbutsu Oraisha.
Imamura Yoshio. 1982. Nihon budo taikei [Systems of Japanese Martial Art], ten volumes. Kyoto: Dohosha.
Imamura Yoshio, editor. 1989. Budoka senshu [Anthology of Martial Art Songs and Poetry], two volumes.
Tokyo: Daiichi Shobo.
Imamura Yoshio. 1995. Shiryo Yagyu shinkageryu [Historical Documents of the Yagyu Family’s Shinkage
-ryu], revised edition. Tokyo: Shin Jinbutsu Oraisha.
Irie Kohei. 1989. Kinsei budo bunken mokuroku [References of Tokugawa-Period Martial Art Texts].
Tokyo: Daiichi Shobo.
Isogai Masayoshi, and Hattori Harunori, editors. 1965. Koyo gunkan [Martial Mirror Used by Warriors
of Koshu)]. Sengoku Shiryo Sosho. Tokyo: Shin Jinbutsu Oraisha.
Kano Jigoro. 1992. Kano Jigoro chosakushu [Collected Works], new edition, three volumes. Tokyo:
Gogatsu Shobo.
Kato Jun’ichi. 2003a. Heiho kadensho ni manabu [Learning from the Yagyu Family’s Heiho kadensho].
Tokyo: Nihon Budokan.
Kato Jun’ichi. 2003b. Yagyu Shinkageryu no kenkyu [Research on the Yagyu Family’s Shinkage-ryu].
Tokyo: Bunri.
McCullough, Helen C., translator. 1959. The Taiheiki: A Chronicle of Medieval Japan. New York:
Columbia University Press.
McCullough, Helen C. 1988. The Tale of the Heike. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Miyata Kazuhiro. 2002. Miyamoto Musashi jissen: Niten Ichiryu heiho [Miyamoto Musashi in Practice:
The Swordsmanship of Niten Ichi-ryu]. Tokyo: Bungeisha.
Monbusho (Ministry of Education). 1890. Honho gakko taisoka shisetsu enkaku ryaku [Summary of
Alterations to the Established Callisthenic Curriculum in Our Nation’s Schools], 772; extract in
Watanabe Ichiro, Shiryo Meiji budoshi [Sources of Martial Art History during the Meiji Period].
Tokyo: Shin Jinbutsu Oraisha, 1971.
Omori Nobumasa. 1991. Bujutsu densho no kenkyu: Kinsei budoshi he no apurochi [The Study of Mar-
tial Art Initiation Documents: A New Approach to Tokugawa-Period Martial Art History]. Tokyo:
Seiunsha.
Rogers, John M. 1990a. “Arts of War in Times of Peace: Swordsmanship in the Honcho Bugei
Shoden, Chapter 6,” Monumenta Nipponica 46(2), 173–202.
Rogers, John M. 1990b. “Arts of War in Times of Peace: Archery in the Honcho Bugei Shoden,” Monu-
menta Nipponica 45(3), 253–260, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/2384902, accessed October 17, 2009.
Rogers, John M. 1990c. “Arts of War in Times of Peace: Swordsmanship in the Honcho Bugei Shoden,
Chapter 5,” Monumenta Nipponica 45(4), 413–447, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/2385378,
accessed October 17, 2009.
Sakurai Ryoju. 2003. Miyamoto Musashi no yomarekata [Interpretations of the Novel Miyamoto
Musashi]. Tokyo: Yoshikawa Kobunkan.
Sasamori Junzo. 1965. Ittoryu gokui [Ultimate Secrets of Itto-ryu Swordsmanship]. Tokyo: Ittoryu
Gokui Kankokai.
Sato Rentaro. 2001. “Takuan Soko ‘Fudochi shinmyoroku’ ko shahon sanshu, ‘Taiaki’ ko shahon
isshu” [Reprint of Three Manuscript Editions of Takuan Shoko’s Essay on Immovable Wisdom and
One Manuscript Edition of his Essay on Taia]. Hokkaido daigaku bungaku kenkyuka kiyo [Bulletin of
the Graduate School of Hokkaido University] 103, 24–139 [from back].
Suzuki, Daisetz T. 1959. Zen and Japanese Culture, revised edition. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Takano Sasaburo. 1920. Nihon kendo kyohan [Japanese Kendo Teaching Manual]. Tokyo: Asano
Shoten.
Takano Sasaburo. 1984/1915. Kendo. Reprint, Tokyo: Shimazu Shobo.
Takano Sasaburo. 1993/1930. Kendo kyohan [Kendo Teaching Manual], two volumes. Reprint, Tokyo:
Shimazu Shobo.
Uozumi Takashi. 2002. Miyamoto Musashi: Nihonjin no michi [Miyamoto Musashi: The Path of a
Japanese Person]. Tokyo: Perikansha.
562
Written Texts: Japan

Uozumi Takashi. 2005. Teihon Gorin no sho [Critical Edition of Miyamoto Musashi’s Goriin no sho].
Tokyo: Shin Jinbutsu Oraisha.
Varley, Paul. 1994. Warriors of Japan as Portrayed in the War Tales. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Waddell, Norman, translator. 2002. “Hakuin’s ‘Yasenkanna,’” The Eastern Buddhist, new series, 34(1),
79-119.
Watanabe Ichiro. 1971. Shiryo Meiji budoshi [Sources of Martial Arts History during the Meiji Period].
Tokyo: Shin Jinbutsu Oraisha.
Watanabe Ichiro et al., editors. 1972. Kinsei geidoron [Tokugawa-Period Performance Theory], Volume
61 of Nihon Shiso Taikei [Japanese Thought Series]. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten.
Watanabe Ichiro, editor. 1979. Budo no meicho [Martial Art Classics]. Tokyo: Tokyo Kopii Shuppanbu.
Yamaga Soko. 1917. Yamaga heigaku zenshu [Complete Works of Yamaga Soko’s Military Science].
Tokyo: Yamaga Heigaku Zenshu Kankokai.
Yokoyama Sakujiro, and Oshima Eisuke. 1915. Judo, translated by Horiguchi Yamakichi. Tokyo: Nishodo.
Yoshikawa Eiji. 1981. Musashi, translated by Charles S. Terry. Tokyo: Kodansha International.
Yuasa Akira. 2001. Budo densho o yomu [Reading Martial Arts Initiation Texts]. Tokyo: Nihon Budokan.
Written Texts: Japan
563
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank 

Military, Paramilitary, and
Law Enforcement Methods
In historic cultures, young men wrestled, fenced, shot arrows, and rode horses as part of daily life.
However, in the societies that have dominated global politics for the past few hundred years,
central governments usually discouraged young men from wrestling, fencing, shooting arrows,
and riding horses except under special conditions.
A typical “special condition” involved training for military service. Although the
development of modern ﬁrearms diminished the importance of unarmed combat and traditional
weapons, modern military organizations taught hand-to-hand combat as a way of instilling the
warrior spirit in recruits. During this military training in hand-to-hand combat, links (sometimes
historic but often fanciful) were made to historic cultural martial arts, and in the process, recruits
were intentionally imbued with the spirit of traditional warriors.
Modern police forces also date from the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. Early
policemen were simply handed a club or a pistol and told to be careful, but by the early twentieth
century, formal training was commonplace. The reason for this increased training was to reduce
the department’s civil liability; ofﬁcer safety was only a secondary consideration. Ironically, the
improved training simply led to criminals, nationalists, union organizers, and revolutionaries
providing better training to their own forces, and in this way, there was both an arms race and
escalation.
The following section discusses military, paramilitary, and police training during the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The focus in these entries is on developments in the United
States, Japan, and Israel. This selection is due mostly to space; similar developments took place
worldwide.
AMERICAN JUDO, 1942–1945
The United States entered World War II in December 1941. Within weeks, the nation’s physical
educators and military ofﬁcers were meeting to decide how to train the millions of youths that
would soon be entering military service.
Both educators and ofﬁcers agreed that prospective servicemen needed to get over their “soft,
luxurious, loose thinking, lazy, peacetime life in our homes and schools” (as opposed to the youth
of the Axis powers, who were raised in a “nationalistic and fanatical frame of mind” (New York
Times 1942a). However, after some discussion, both educators and ofﬁcers decided that they could
not, in good conscience, support the establishment of Soviet-style youth camps. Instead, they
decided to encourage compulsory physical education in existing public schools and universities.
American judo was a component of the resulting mandatory physical education programs.
www.ebook3000.com

The word “judo” was of course associated with the jujutsu-based system developed and
promulgated by the Japanese educator Kano Jigoro (1860–1938) during the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries. That said, the purpose (and intent) of American judo differed from
Kano’s. While Kano’s judo gave equal emphasis to discipline, loyalty, and patriotism, American
judo of 1942 was described as “a modiﬁed mixture of murder and mayhem, concocted of the
bloodiest aspects of barroom and alley ﬁghting, barred wrestling holds, and foul boxing blows”
(Zurlinden 1942). As Navy trainer and former pro football player Benny Friedman
(1905–1982) put it (Whitaker 1942): “Mothers once reared their sons to be gentlemen but
they must now rear them to be killers. . . . We need contact sports in our high schools, rough
and tumble games—the rougher the better—and we have to forget the ‘good loser, pardon me’
philosophy for a while.”
Toward teaching these methods (and mindsets) to American teachers and athletic directors,
the U.S. military quickly arranged a series of seminars. For example, during August 1942, the
U.S. Navy organized a two-week course at St. Mary’s College in Moraga, California. After com-
pleting this course, the director of athletics at New Mexico A&M said that for the duration of
the war, his physical education classes would include “hand-to-hand combat, as practiced
by British commandos” (Las Cruces Sun-News 1942). On the East Coast, the New York Board
of Education similarly announced that it would revise its school physical education curricula
so that they would be “more in line with requirements set forth in Army manuals” (New York
Times 1942b). Just two weeks later, commando courses were introduced into Central High
School at Valley Stream, New York (New York Times 1942c).
Although trained instructors were scarce during 1942, how-to books were not. Titles pub-
lished during 1942 included Jack Dempsey’s How to Fight Tough, Dick Hanley’s Combat Condi-
tioning Manual: Jiu Jitsu Defense, and William E. Fairbairn’s All-in Fighting. For those who found
books a bit challenging, there were always comic books. Thus, the January 1943 issue of the Real
Heroes comic book featured Fairbairn teaching “Commandos to Get Tough.”
By December 1942, the American judo program was in full swing, and in Medford, Oregon,
the high school principal personally instructed students in “how to creep and crawl, break arms,
kill with bayonets and knives, gouge eyes, knee the enemy in the groin. They [the students] are
warned at the start to expect bloody noses and black eyes—especially when teams tear into each
other with no holds barred” (Time 1942).
Adults were soon wondering if it was a good idea to teach high school boys to break arms,
knee groins, and kill with bayonets. School teachers asked whether they could get insurance
policies to protect them from lawsuits (Fitchburg Sentinel 1943a), and in Fitchburg,
Massachusetts, the newspaper editor complained, “If some day a high school boy must be
trained to be a hell-cat of a Commando, eager to rip open the body of a Nazi or Jap with a
bayonet, it will be time enough when the army gets him to teach him the bloody business”
(Fitchburg Sentinel 1943b). In June 1943 the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
declared that the rising rates of “destruction of industrial and railroad property by youths is
as serious a menace to the success of the war effort as ‘deliberate, enemy-inspired sabotage’”
(Wisconsin State-Journal 1943), and in November 1943, the U.S. Ofﬁce of War Information
published a report stating that “Commando gangs” posed a growing threat to American cities
(Cedar Rapids Tribune 1943).
Accordingly, American physical educators gradually began pointing high school boys away
from American judo and toward American football. As former Big Ten football commissioner
566
American Judo, 1942–1945

John L. Grifﬁth (1877–1944) put it, American football gave American youth sufﬁcient training,
both physically and emotionally, for war (Brainerd Daily Dispatch 1943).
At the same time, large numbers of women were beginning to serve in the U.S. military or
work in war industries. Since women were not expected to play football, this meant an increased
demand for women’s self-defense courses. Women’s self-defense books published during 1944
included Bill Underwood’s Self Defense for Women: Combato.
During 1943 and 1944, as the U.S. military began routinely engaging the Japanese and
Germans in battle, U.S. newspapers began running human interest stories about casualties.
Several of these stories described close combat instructors who had been shot without ever getting
the chance to close to hand-to-hand ranges. For example, at Tarawa in 1943, U.S. Marine Corps
private Clifford Houston, “who spent months teaching judo to military trainees at the University
of Cincinnati,” was shot in the neck while still ﬁfty yards from the beach (Sheboygan Journal
1944). Similarly, during January 1944, U.S. Marine Corps Captain Stephen Stavers, former com-
mander of the Marine Corps hand-to-hand and bayonet program at Camp Lejeune, North
Carolina, was shot to death by a Japanese sniper (New York Times 1944). Such stories did little for
trainees’ faith in the efﬁcacy of bare-handed ﬁghting methods. Football, on the other hand—now
that was something for which soldiers, families, and girlfriends alike could cheer.
During August 1945, the B-29s Enola Gay and Bock’s Car dropped atomic bombs on the
Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Against atomic bombs, Junior Commando T-shirts
were no longer warrior garb; instead, they were simply something that one bought for children
at Sears (Valley Morning Star 1945). By November 1945, commando training ended for all but a
handful of soldiers, Junior Commandos received their honorable discharge certiﬁcates in the
mail (Pittsburgh Post-Gazette 1945), and U.S. military and naval ofﬁcers went to Japan, deter-
mined to purge judo of its militarism (Svinth 2002). Thus, by the early 1950s, it was American
football coaches rather than American judo teachers who were famous for saying, “Men, winning
isn’t everything. It’s the only thing.”
—Joseph Svinth
See also: Sambo; Japanese Judo, 1937–1945; Kapap and Krav Maga; 
and Military Unarmed Fighting Systems (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Brainerd Daily Dispatch. 1943. “College Football to Continue on Home Front during Fall,” August 6,
6, via http://www.newspaperarchive.com, accessed October 18, 2009.
Cedar Rapids Tribune, 1943. “Boys’ ‘Gangs’ Multiply, Girls a Social Puzzle,” November 25, 4, via
http://www.newspaperarchive.com, accessed October 18, 2009.
Dempsey, Jack. 1942. How to Fight Tough. New York: Hillman Periodicals.
Fairbairn, William E. 1942. Get Tough! How to Win in Hand-to-Hand Fighting. New York and London:
D. Appleton-Century.
Fitchburg Sentinel. 1943a. “Seek Insurance for Teachers to Protect Them against Suits as Result of Com-
mando Training,” January 15, 14, via http://www.newspaperarchive.com, accessed October 18, 2009.
Fitchburg Sentinel. 1943b. “Educational Jitters,” April 17, 6, via http://www.newspaperarchive.com,
accessed October 18, 2009.
Hanley, Richard E. 1942. Combat Conditioning Manual: Jiu-Jitsu Defense. Chicago: Gorday Service Co.
Journal of Non-Lethal Combatives. 2002. “Fairbairn in the Comics,” http://ejmas.com/jnc/
jncart_fairbairn_0802.htm, accessed October 18, 2009.
Las Cruces Sun-News. 1942. “College to Use Fitness Program Army, Navy Back,” August 30, 1, via
http://www.newspaperarchive.com, accessed October 18, 2009.
American Judo, 1942–1945
567
www.ebook3000.com

New York Times. 1942a. “Notes,” August 9, Magazine, SM17; via http://news.google.com/archivesearch.
See also: Hanson W. Baldwin, “Need for Toughness—I; Value of Physical and Mental Strength
Noted by Navy in Air-Training Program,” New York Times, July 24, 6, via http://news.google
.com/archivesearch, accessed October 18, 2009.
New York Times. 1942b. “Study Is Linked to Army Manuals; High School Courses Will Be Revised to Pre-
pare 18 and 19 Year-Olds for the Draft,” September 1, 7, via http://news.google.com/archivesearch,
accessed October 18, 2009.
New York Times. 1942c. “Stronger Muscle Is Aim of School; Difﬁcult ‘Commando’ Course at Valley
Stream Central High Given to 480 Youths,” September 19, 7, via http://news.google.com/archive
search, accessed October 18, 2009.
New York Times. 1944. “Bayonet Expert Killed by Sniper,” October 5, 13, via http://news
.google.com/archivesearch, accessed October 18, 2009.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. 1945. “Commandos Ask to Re-Enlist after ‘Juniors’ Disband on Armistice
Day,” November 20, 21, via http://news.google.com/archivesearch, accessed October 18, 2009.
Rominger, Donald W. Jr. 1985. “From Playing Field to Battleground: The United States Navy V-5
Preﬂight Program in World War II,” Journal of Sport History 12(3) Winter, 252–264, via
http://www.la84foundation.org/SportsLibrary/JSH/JSH1985/JSH1203/jsh1203d.pdf, accessed
October 10, 2008.
Sheboygan Journal. 1944. “Wanted to Practice on Japanese,” April 13, 9, via http://www.newspaperarchive
.com, accessed October 18, 2009.
Svinth, Joseph R., editor. 2002. “Documentation Regarding the Budo Ban in Japan, 1945–1950,”
Journal of Combative Sport, http://ejmas.com/jcs/jcsart_svinth_1202.htm, accessed September 6,
2008.
Time. 1942. “Education: Mayhem in Medford,” December 21, via http://www.time.com/time/
magazine/article/0,9171,886045,00.html, accessed October 7, 2009.
Underwood, William J. 1944. Self Defense for Women: Combato. Garden City, NY: Blue Ribbon Books.
Valley Morning Star. 1945. Advertisement, Sears, Roebuck and Company, “Junior Commando Polo
Shirts, sizes 4 to 10 47c,” November 4, 31, via http://www.newspaperarchive.com, accessed
October 18, 2009.
Whitaker, John. 1942. “Speculating in Sports,” Hammond Times, October 23, 45, via http://www
.newspaperarchive.com, accessed October 18, 2009.
Wisconsin State-Journal. 1943. “Practical Jokes Hurt War Work,” June 13, 7, via http://www
.newspaperarchive.com, accessed October 18, 2009.
Zurlinden, Pete. 1942. “Navy Learns Art of Dirty Fighting; Ready for Jujitsu of Japs,” Wisconsin Rapids
Daily Tribune, April 4, 12, via http://www.newspaperarchive.com, accessed October 18, 2009.
BAYONET TRAINING IN THE UNITED STATES
A bayonet is a short sword, knife, or sharpened skewer that can be afﬁxed to the muzzle end of
a musket or riﬂe. Its purpose is to transform the ﬁrearm into a pike. For about 350 years, the bay-
onet was deemed central to clearing enemy fortiﬁcations, and bayonets are still used to teach
recruits to be more aggressive.
Matchlock muskets take a minute or more to reload. Therefore, early musketeers were often
escorted by pikemen. Otherwise, the musketeers risked being overrun by the people at whom
they were shooting. Tip the unloaded musket with a blade, however, and then one has a
functional pike, which in turn saves the expense of having both musketeers and pikemen. The
hard part of this process involved ﬁnding ways to attach blades to muskets securely that did not
simultaneously prevent muzzle-loading weapons from being reloaded or ﬁred. This was
accomplished during the late sixteenth century, and the result was the bayonet.
568
Bayonet Training in the United States

Care is required during bayonet drill to avoid hurting people standing nearby. Consequently,
during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, bayonet manuals were essentially drill manu-
als. Examples include Jacob de Gheyn’s (1565–1629) Wapenhandelinghe van Roers, Musquetten
ende Speissen (translated as Exercise of Armes for Caliures [calivers, or arquebuses], Muskettes, and
Pikes, 1607) and General Sir Humphrey Bland’s (1686–1763) Treatise of Military Discipline
(1724). Although the American general George Washington (1732–1799) encouraged his
ofﬁcers to read Bland, it is doubtful whether many drill sergeants ever read these books. The rea-
son is that careful reading was less important than regular practice. In addition, the bayonet drills
described in these manuals emphasized parade rather than combat. That is, the authors paid con-
siderable attention to ﬁxing and unﬁxing bayonets, turning while standing in lines, and so on,
while dismissing combat with a few words about how men needed to advance across open ﬁelds
in straight lines, carrying their muskets breast high.
During the nineteenth century, doctrinal bayonet manuals continued to emphasize drill. See,
for example, Riﬂe and Light Infantry Tactics by William J. Hardee (1815–1873). When Hardee
wrote this book in 1854, he was Superintendent at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. In
June 1861, Hardee became a brigadier general in the Confederate Army. Thus, his opinions were
doctrinal to both sides during the American Civil War (1861–1865). In Tactics, Hardee
described ﬁxing and unﬁxing bayonets. He also described how to use bayonets to stack arms, how
to shoulder arms with bayonets afﬁxed, and how to make facing movements with ﬁxed bayonets.
As for combat, he dismissed that with the commands, “Charge bayonets,” “Guard against
infantry” and “Guard against cavalry.” The ﬁrst command discussed how soldiers change from
the carrying position of shoulder arms to the attack position in which bayonets were pointed
toward the enemy, while the second and third commands provided brief descriptions of how sol-
diers caught in the open should turn to face the attack.
Another manual commonly consulted during the American Civil War was George
McClellan’s Manual of Bayonet Exercise (1852). In 1852, McClellan (1826–1885) was a captain
in the U.S. Army, and a decade later, he was a Union general. Manual of Bayonet Exercise was
essentially a translation of a recent French manual titled L’Escrime à la Baionette (1847); the orig-
inal author was A. J. J. Posselier, writing under the pseudonym of Gomard (dates unknown). In
this book, the author described how he believed combat infantry should use their weapons. Rec-
ommended techniques included lunges, thrusts, parries, butt strokes (“Stock to the REAR!”),
and so forth. Training weapons included wooden muskets tipped with ﬂexible practice bayonets.
The latter were made of whalebone and tipped with rubber balls. Fencing masks and fencing
jackets were also described. The assumption throughout this book was that the soldier would be
standing above ground, in a long line, facing an enemy who was also standing above ground, in
a long line. In reality, of course, most Civil War bayonet charges were made against entrenched
riﬂemen supported by artillery. Advancing in long lines against fortiﬁed riﬂemen supported by
artillery was bloody business.
In 1859, France fought a war with Austria. Because the countries had no common borders,
most of this war was fought in Italy. Austrian conscripts were not thrilled about serving in Italy,
so French bayonet charges usually succeeded in clearing Austrian defenses. Was this French
success due to the élan of the French soldiers or the demoralized state of the polyglot Austrian
conscripts? The French said it was due to French élan, whereas the Prussians said it was due to
the demoralized state of the polyglot Austrian conscripts. Examples of these arguments include
Bayonet Training in the United States
569
www.ebook3000.com

the writings of Ardant Du Picq (1819–1870) on the French side and William Balck
(1859–1924) on the Prussian side. Sixteen years later, during the Franco-Prussian War of
1870–1871, it was French morale that collapsed at the sight of Prussian bayonets. Again, was
this due to low morale or the sight of determined troops carrying bayonets? Because both these
European wars were short, the jury stayed out on the answer.
During the 1880s, magazine-fed riﬂes began to enter European military service. Magazine-fed
riﬂes were accurate to hundreds of yards and could ﬁre dozens of smokeless cartridges per minute.
About the same time, the British fought a war with the Afrikaners (Boers) in South Africa. The
Afrikaners refused to ﬁght hand-to-hand; instead, they preferred shooting riﬂes from ranges in
excess of 150 yards. British casualties were high. This caused many people to believe that bayo-
nets were being made obsolete. Consequently, in 1887, the U.S. Army’s Chief of Ordnance,
Major General Stephen Vincent Benét (1827–1895) recommended that the U.S. Army replace
its current bayonet and saber with an entrenching tool and a multifunction pocket knife. The
Swiss cutler Karl Elsener (1860–1918) famously sold his design for just such a multifunction
knife to the Swiss Army in 1891, and by 1908, small folding spades (“entrenching tools”) had
entered general service throughout the world.
Old weapons die hard, and during the Russo–Japanese War of 1904–1905, the Japanese
showed that carefully planned bayonet charges could capture well-designed modern fortiﬁca-
tions. The methods of bayonet fencing that the Japanese used during the early 1900s had been
learned from the French and Germans, so these Japanese victories are probably appropriately
attributed to Japanese spirit rather than their bayonet tactics. As for the Russians, although
Tsarist generals talked about the value of bayonets as much as any Japanese general, the Russians
rarely provided anyone with formal training in their use (Morse 1916, 13, 136, 207–208).
During the Balkan Wars (1912–1913), the Greeks, Bulgarians, and Ottomans also managed
to clear enemy fortiﬁcations using bayonet charges, and taken together, these successes in
Southern Europe and Manchuria caused European theorists to reassess the value of bayonets.
The British were especially proliﬁc theorists, and between 1910 and 1915, their infantry journals
routinely published articles describing ways to improve bayonet training. An example is an arti-
cle by C. N. Sawyer (dates unknown) that appeared in 1915. In this article, Sawyer wrote that
existing bayonet manuals were “not based on practical principles” (Willcox and Stuart 1917,
79). Sawyer wrote that the traditional foot positions were wrong. The old ﬂexible practice bay-
onets tipped with rubber balls were worthless. The soldier’s weight needed to be on the balls of
the feet rather than the heels. The cutting edge of the bayonet needed to be down, not across.
The left hand needed to be kept ﬁrmly on the weapon, rather than allowed to slide. Famous
trainers of this new method included Captain (later Colonel) Ronald B. Campbell
(1878–1963). His article, “The Tactical Importance of Bayonet Fighting,” appeared in The
Canadian Military Gazette in July 1910, and his wartime classes inspired Siegfried Sassoon’s
(1886–1967) famous poem “The Kiss” (1916). During 1917–1918, Campbell was Deputy
Inspector of Bayonet and Physical Training for the British Army, and in this role, he also super-
vised the bayonet training provided to the U.S. Army Expeditionary Forces.
This subaltern unhappiness with the current state of the military bayonet was deserved. For
instance, the U.S. Army manual of 1911 said that military bayonet fencers should begin by
facing each other at the position of order arms—that is, with weapons grounded. Following a
formal riﬂe salute, the fencers were to assume a guard position. “Neither man may take the
570
Bayonet Training in the United States

position of guard before his opponent has completed his salute.” On command from the
instructor, one fencer advanced toward the other. Turns were taken in the attack, and the
instructor was cautioned to “at once stop the contest upon the slightest indication of temper.”
When scoring, the instructor was to ignore bayonet thrusts to the legs, multiple hits to the
body, or single hits to the body that did not result in the person being struck calling out: “Hit”
(War Department 1911/1917, 148–149).
In 1917, the U.S. military began adopting the more aggressive British and Canadian bayonet
training methods. The British and Canadian bayonet methods of 1917 started with military
instructors teaching the fundamentals of boxing to recruits. Boxing was taught because it was a
comparatively safe, familiar way of introducing recruits to basic hand and foot positions. In addi-
tion, it encouraged aggressiveness. After the fundamentals of boxing had been taught, then
trainees were given riﬂes and bayonets and made to run through obstacle courses and trenches
while stabbing sandbags and screaming, “Blood makes the grass grow! Kill! Kill!” During ﬁnish-
ing exercises, the trainees even got to stab dead mules and human-shaped dummies.
Following World War I, the American, British, and Canadian infatuation with what
Siegfried Sassoon called the nakedness of Sister Steel went into decline. Partly, this was because
machine guns, tanks, and rapid-ﬁre artillery had made bayonet charges problematic. Partly, it was
because wartime training methods involving dead mules and human-shaped dummies got peace-
time trainers into trouble with the postwar peace movement. Partly, too, it was the casualty rate
during training. During the late 1910s and early 1920s, U.S. Army reservists died at the rate of
one or two per year during bayonet training. In any case, in 1926, the U.S. Army quietly dis-
continued its British-inspired bayonet training methods.
The Japanese did not have the same problem with peace organizations as did the Americans,
and during the 1920s, the Japanese army revised its bayonet programs to resemble those of the
French more closely. Although the lessons that the Japanese took from World War I owed more
to observation of British and French training methods than to direct combat experience, the
Japanese were keen observers, and their observations led to the Japanese army promoting ama-
teur boxing and creating jukenjutsu (bayonet methods) and Toyama-ryu batto jutsu (Toyama
Military Academy sword cutting methods).
Between the World Wars, the Chinese military also expanded its training in bayonet ﬁght-
ing. The Nationalists generally used German bayonet drills, whereas the Communists generally
used Soviet drills. A Chinese bayonet motto of the period, attributed to the armies of warlord
Feng Yuxiang (1882–1948), expresses the East Asian spirit of the bayonet well: “When we ﬁght,
we use bullets; when the bullets are gone, we use bayonets; when the bayonets are dull, we use
the riﬂe barrel; when this is broken, we use our ﬁsts; when our ﬁsts are broken, we bite” (Sheridan
1966, 72–96).
During World War II (1941–1945 for the United States), the U.S. military resumed training
its military personnel in the spirit and methods of the bayonet. Well-known U.S. bayonet trainers
of World War II included Anthony J. Drexel Biddle (1874–1948), Francois D’Eliscu (1895–1972),
and Stephen Stavers (1916–1944). Although their methods included many of the British innova-
tions from World War I, the U.S. bayonet methods continued to be based on fencing paradigms.
Meanwhile, knowing about the Japanese efforts in the area of bayonet training, during 1944, the
War Department (1944, 53) thought it advisable to reassure soldiers ofﬁcially that “the individual
Japanese soldier has not proven very adept at bayonet ﬁghting.” This statement was not solely
Bayonet Training in the United States
571
www.ebook3000.com

propaganda, either, because a study of Allied casualties at Bougainville found that suicide caused
more Allied deaths than did Japanese bayonets (Oughterson et al. 1962).
During the Korean War (1950–1953), it was found that the North Koreans and Chinese
were quite adept at close quarter battle. Hence, new methods of bayonet ﬁghting were developed
in the United States. Probably the most famous U.S. exponent of the bayonet during the 1950s
and 1960s was Lewis Millett (1920–), a U.S. Army ofﬁcer who led a successful bayonet charge
in Korea during February 1951. Millett received a Medal of Honor for that action and was sub-
sequently tasked with designing training programs for the Army’s airborne divisions, the South
Vietnamese Rangers, and the CIA.
These new American methods were based on biomechanical studies rather than pre–World
War I theories, and they were adopted by the U.S. Marine Corps in 1955 and the U.S. Army in
1962. Pioneers of these new methods included Armond Seidler (1919–). Seidler had taught
hand-to-hand combat in the Army in 1942, and following separation from the service, got a
graduate degree in sports medicine from the University of Illinois at Urbana.
The heart of Seidler’s program was pugil sticks. Pugil sticks are long wooden poles that have thick
canvas and foam pads at each end; essentially, they look like giant cotton swabs. People ﬁghting with
pugil sticks wear football helmets, groin protectors, and (sometimes) ﬂak jackets, and they are
encouraged to bang away with abandon. “The Marine Corps says such bouts with the big sticks stim-
ulate interest, enthusiasm, competitive spirit and aggressiveness,” explained the caption to a syndi-
cated wire photo published in U.S. newspapers during March 1955 (Great Bend Daily-Tribune 1955).
Although bayonets and entrenching tools were used during close-quarter battle in Vietnam,
many people, both in the military and out, were by this time associating bayonets with war
crimes rather than military necessity. Consequently, after the United States established its all-
volunteer military in 1973, the U.S. Army stopped training with bayonets altogether, and the
U.S. Marines restricted bayonet training almost entirely to recruit depots. Then, in June 1982,
British soldiers used bayonets to clear Argentine positions in the Falkland Islands (Islas
Malvinas). This led to the U.S. military reconsidering its position on bayonets. In 1983, bayo-
net training was reintroduced to U.S. Army recruit training, and during the early 2000s, thought
was given to adding a pre–World War II Japanese bayonet training system (jukendo) to Marine
Corps Martial Art. Proponents were careful to state, however, that this training was intended
primarily to develop an aggressive mindset.
—Joseph Svinth
See also: Sambo; Jukendo; Kapap and Krav Maga; Military Unarmed Fighting Systems 
in the United States; Social and Cultural Evolution of Kendo; and Women 
in Combat: The U.S. Military, 2001–Present (in this volume). 
REFERENCES
Anonymous. 1920. “Bayonet Fighting,” in Harper’s Pictorial Library of the World War, Volume VIII,
edited by Austin C. Lescaboura and J. M. Bird, 105–106. New York: Harper & Brothers, via
http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Biddle, Anthony J. Drexel. 1937. Do or Die: A Supplementary Manual on Individual Combat. Quantico:
Marine Corps Association. Reprint, Boulder, CO: Paladin Press, 1994.
Curtis, Paul C. 1957. “The Pugil Stick,” Leatherneck, September, 26–29, 76.
572
Bayonet Training in the United States

Dela Cruz, Georgia R., Joseph J. Knapik, and Marcella G. Birk. 2008. “Evaluation of Mouthguards for
the Prevention of Orofacial Injuries during United States Army Basic Military Training,” Dental
Traumatology 24(1), February, 86–90, via PMID: 18173673 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE].
Engen, Rob. 2006. “Steel against Fire: The Bayonet in the First World War,” Journal of Military and
Strategic Studies 8(3), Spring, http://www.jmss.org/2006/2006spring/articles/engen.pdf, accessed
January 11, 2009.
Great Bend Daily-Tribune. 1955. “Catching the Spirit,” March 6, 5, via http://www.newspaperarchive
.com , accessed October 18, 2009.
Hodges, Paul. 2008. “‘They Don’t Like It Up ‘Em’: Bayonet Fetishization in the British Army during
the First World War,” Journal of War and Culture Studies
1(21), 123–138, DOI
10.1386/jwcs.1.2.123_1, via http://www.atypon-link.com/INT/doi/abs/10.1386/jwcs.1.2.123_1,
accessed October 17, 2009.
Jacomb, William J. 1918. Boxing for Beginners with Chapter Showing Its Relationship to Bayonet Fighting.
Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 17, 2009.
Morse, John. 1916. In the Russian Ranks. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, via http://books.google.com,
accessed October 16, 2009.
O’Leary, Michael R. 1999. “A la Bayonet, or, ‘Hot Blood and Cold Steel’,” http://regimentalrogue
.com/papers/bayonet.htm, accessed August 17, 2008.
Oughterson, Ashley W., Harry C. Hull, Francis A. Sutherland, and Daniel J. Greiner, 1962. “Study
on Wound Ballistics—Bougainville Campaign,” in Wound Ballistics, edited by James C. Beyer,
281–436. Washington, DC: Medical Department, United States Army, via http://books
.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Seidler, Armond H., and George Golleher. 1954. “Close for the Kill,” Marine Corps Gazette, April, 12–19.
Sheridan, James E. 1966. Chinese Warlord: The Career of Feng Yü-hsiang. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Styers, John. 1952. Cold Steel. Reprint, Boulder, CO: Paladin Press, 1974.
Todd, Frederick P. 1938. “The Knife and Club in Trench Warfare, 1914–1918,” Journal of the Ameri-
can Military History Foundation 2(3), Autumn, 139–153, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/3038757,
accessed October 18, 2009.
U.S. Marine Corps. 1944. U.S. Marine Corps Individual Combat Course, July, via http://ejmas
.com/jnc/jncart_usmc1942_0503.htm, accessed September 10, 2008.
War Department. 1911/1917. Infantry Drill Regulations, United States Army, 1911, Corrected to April
15, 1917 (Changes Nos. 1 to 19). Washington, DC: War Department, 1911.
War Department. 1940. Field Manual 23–25, Bayonet M1905. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Ofﬁce.
War Department. 1943. Field Manual 23–25, Bayonet. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Ofﬁce.
War Department, Military Intelligence Division. 1944. “Japanese Bayonet Technique,” Intelligence
Bulletin Volume II, Section I, January.
Willcox, Cornélis De Witt, and Edwin Roy Stuart. 1917. The International Military Digest Annual: A
Review of the Current Literature of Military Science for 1916. New York: Cumulative Digest Corpo-
ration, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
JUDO IN JAPAN, 1931–1950
By the 1930s, judo had triumphed over every traditional Japanese jujutsu system to become
the ofﬁcial grappling art of Japan. Kano Jigoro (1860–1938), the founder of judo, also played
a key role in the movement that created Japan’s entire modern budo culture, helped introduce
Western sports and the Olympics into Japan, invented the dan/kyu ranking system and “black
belt” system later adopted by many other martial arts and martial ways, and incorporated
Judo in Japan, 1931–1950
573
www.ebook3000.com

all these new concepts and creations into the educational and popular culture of Japan (Inoue
1998, 164).
The Greater Japan Martial Virtue Society (Dai Nippon Butokukai), established in Kyoto in
1895, was recognized and authorized by the Ministry of Education to control martial arts instruc-
tion in Japan. Kano helped convince the Butokukai to add a jujutsu division, and in 1906 he
chaired the Butokukai Jujutsu Standard Kata (prearranged forms) Committee. Members of this
committee included senior representatives of most of the best known traditional (koryu) jujutsu
schools, including Yoshin-ryu, Takeuchi-ryu, Takeuchi-santo-ryu, Fusen-ryu, Sekiguchi-ryu, Miura-
ryu, Shiten-ryu, and Sosuishitsu-ryu, plus senior members of the Kodokan (Kano 1906, 3).
The committee’s objective was to standardize two jujutsu kata, one for free sparring (randori)
and the other for armed combat. The proposed randori kata, including both throwing (nage) and
grappling (katame) techniques, was adopted from the Kodokan draft; with minor changes, it is
still practiced today in two separate parts, as Kodokan judo’s Nage-no-Kata and Katame-no-Kata;
collectively, they are known as Randori-no-Kata. The draft combat kata, more controversial
between the numerous jujutsu stylists, was later adopted as the Kodokan’s Kime-no-Kata (Deci-
sive Form). The modernized jujutsu sometimes known as Kodokan ryu then spread throughout
Japan, in part because of Butokukai-organized jujutsu competitions, which used rules conducive
to Kodokan techniques, and in part because of Kano’s role in expanding Japan’s modern educa-
tional system. Kano worked tirelessly to get the new schools to adopt judo as part of their edu-
cational curriculum, which further helped spread judo across Japan. Kano was careful to
downplay institutional and personal frictions, and he assured readers that the judo taught by the
Butokukai was Kodokan judo (Kano 1987, 304). In fact, the Butokukai, despite using standard
Kodokan judo, independently granted judo ranks, developed its own instructors, and had great
inﬂuence in the administration of school judo instruction.
Kano was also editor of the Kodokan’s Judo magazine and co-editor of the Butokukai maga-
zine. Today, Kano’s writings and articles in these magazines on nationalism, the role of the indi-
vidual in supporting the state (in the personiﬁcation of the Emperor), Japan’s greater destiny, and
other topics can sound jingoistic, but to be understood, they really should be considered in the
context of a Japan desperate to maintain its independence and catch up with the West (Wray
1997, 122).
At the Butokukai, Kano’s co-editor was Nitobe Inazo (1862–1933), the author of Bushido,
Soul of Japan (1905). That book was originally written in English, and it was intended to and did
introduce the modern Japanese fabrication of Bushido to the Western world. Sample explana-
tions associated with Nitobe (1905, 23) included that the study of Bushido teaches one that once
a course of action is decided “with reason,” it is appropriate, “without wavering—to die when it
is right to die, to strike when to strike is right.”
Kodokan judo is a comprehensive martial way, with techniques encompassing everything
from gentle solo exercises to deadly strangulations. Kano and the Kodokan staff researched dan-
gerous jujutsu throwing and grappling techniques to eliminate or modify them so that judo can
be performed safely, but at the same time, they studied and practiced methods for striking or
kicking vital points (atemi waza). In 1937, Kano wrote that the “Art of Attacking the Vital
Points” is meant “to hit, chop, thrust, poke or kick the vital points of the opponent with the ﬁst,
the side of the little ﬁnger, the ﬁngertip, the elbow, the kneecap, the ball of the foot and the heel,
to cause him pain, to disable him or even to kill him” (Kano 1937, 60). This combative nature
574
Judo in Japan, 1931–1950

of judo is also represented in contemporary Imperial Japanese military judo manuals that stress
atemi waza and escapes (Imperial Japanese Army Toyama School 1924, 78–81). Today, these
methods are primarily practiced only in prearranged forms (kata).
During the 1930s, Japan fought battles against “bandits” in Manchuria, had border clashes
with the Soviet Union, and entered into open war in China. During this period, Japan’s mobi-
lization for war went into full swing, and school martial arts (gakko budo) played its role. In 1931,
the Ministry of Education enacted compulsory judo or kendo training for all able-bodied Japan-
ese schoolboys. The instructors had typically been taught or qualiﬁed by the Butokukai or one
of its local associations. In portent of a darker future, by 1937, schoolboys from middle school
through graduation were made to study military subjects and riﬂe bayonet techniques (juken-
jutsu). The Butokukai delegated this instruction to the Imperial Military Reserve Association
(Teikoku Zaigo Gunjinkai) and its members, who were demobilized Imperial Army ofﬁcers and
noncommissioned ofﬁcers (Smethurst 1974, 157–159).
From 1931 to 1938, Kano played a key role in the successful Japanese effort to obtain the 1940
Olympics for Japan. Judo, kendo, and kyudo (Japanese archery) were all to be included as exhibi-
tion sports in the 1940 Tokyo Summer Olympics (Bernett 1980). However, in May 1938, Kano
died aboard a ship at sea while returning to Japan from a meeting of the International Olympics
Committee, and his nephew, Nango Jiro (1876–1951), succeeded him as the second head of the
Kodokan. Eventually, the 1940 Games were abandoned, ﬁrst in Japan and then in Europe.
Nango was a graduate of the Navy School at Etajima (the Japanese equivalent of the U.S.
Naval Academy at Annapolis), and he retired with the rank of rear admiral. The Imperial Navy
had a long relationship with judo, and the Navy School was the ﬁrst major naval organization
to adopt judo, which was eventually practiced on bases and warships throughout the ﬂeet. The
Navy’s objectives for judo were to instill spiritual discipline, strengthen the body, and teach self
defense skills (Imperial Japanese Navy Engineering School 1917, 1). While the Imperial Army
also practiced judo, the Army preferred kendo, Toyama ryu batto-jutsu (Toyama Style sword-
drawing methods, a utilitarian, military version of iaido), and jukenjutsu (sparring with the riﬂe
and bayonet) as its primary budo.
Nango had joined the Kodokan as a child, and eventually he earned the grade of second-degree
black belt. During a port call in Melbourne in 1902, he participated in one of the ﬁrst demonstrations
of judo ever held in Australia, and after retirement, he helped lead the Navy’s portion of a fundrais-
ing drive for a new Kodokan building (Maritime Self Defense Force Judo Federation, no date).
Nango’s comments on judo and budo were captured when he addressed a visiting foreign
group in 1939. He opined that the word “budo” is very difﬁcult to translate into English.
Nonetheless, understanding the term was fundamental to understanding the character of the
Japanese Empire. In general, he said, budo described the moral training needed to learn to “sac-
riﬁce oneself in time of need, to the cause of the Emperor, and this training must be done by the
kinetic practice, not by the statical (sic) meditation.” The spirit of budo, he continued, is con-
centrated in the Emperor, the Army and Navy, and the common people. Judo, he said, was
regarded outside Japan as the premier budo of Japan (Nango 1939, 2–8). When Nango spoke
these words, his eldest son Mochifumi, a Navy ﬁghter pilot, had already been killed in combat
over China. (Today, the younger Nango is memorialized with a bust in the Yushukan, the
military museum inside the Yasukuni Shrine, Tokyo.) In early 1944, another son, Shigeo, an
Army ﬁghter pilot, would be killed over New Guinea.
Judo in Japan, 1931–1950
575
www.ebook3000.com

As the war progressed, the Japanese military began criticizing Butokukai support of such
ancient arts as archery and spearmanship (kyudo and sojutsu) as wasteful and anachronistic.
Instead, emphasis needed to be placed on providing manpower for the war effort and indoctri-
nating young people for military service. Unable to serve both tradition and the new demands,
the old Dai Nippon Butokukai was disbanded in December 1941. In its place, a new Dai Nippon
Butokukai was established in March 1942 under the shared jurisdiction of the Ministries of Edu-
cation, Health, Army, Navy, and Home Affairs. Prince and Imperial Army Field Marshal
Nashimoto Morimasao (1874–1951), a minor member of the Imperial family, patronized it as the
honorary founder, while Prime Minister and Minister of War Tojo Hideki (1884–1948) became
the chairman. The ministers of the other ministries listed above were installed as vice-chairmen
(Dai Nippon Butokukai n.d., 2). For the rest of the war, archery and spear ﬁghting were dropped
in favor of riﬂe marksmanship and grenade throwing.
In this environment of militarism, with its demands for an increasingly total war, some judo
instructors taught atemi waza to children through the aerobics-style striking and kicking exer-
cises from judo’s Maximum Efﬁciency National Physical Education (Seiryoku Zen’yo Kokumin
Taiiku) series (Ishiguro 1942, 30), and training was done in much the same way as modern karate
is done. There were even instructors, caught up in the fever of the war and indoctrinated in the
nationalist Bushido myth, who taught that the ultimate objective of judo and other budo was to
provide the best human material possible for use by the state (Kimura 1942, 8).
During 1943 the Ministry of Health began promulgating standards for testing students’ skills
in judo, kendo, jukendo, sumo, and riﬂe marksmanship. The objective was to measure virility as
embodied in physical ﬁtness and spirit. Judo students were tested for their skill in judo courte-
sies, stances, body movement, throwing, grappling, and striking (Ministry of Health and Welfare
1943, 16).
Despite all attempts to indoctrinate and mobilize Japan’s youth, the war went badly for
Japan. On September 2, 1945, Japan formally surrendered, and the Occupation began.
The question of what to do with school martial arts was not originally considered by the
Occupation forces. However, because of the past inﬂuence of the militarists, senior judo and
kendo instructors were concerned about the possibility of a budo ban. Thus, they brought up the
topic themselves, and to explain the true nature of judo, someone even provided the occupation
authorities with a copy of Kano’s 1932 lecture “The Contribution of Jiudo to Education,” which
reads, in part, that “judo is a study and a training in mind and body as well as in the regulation
of one’s life and affairs” (Hall 1949, 79).
Alerted by this direct inquiry, the Occupation’s Education Division began to study the issue.
It soon realized that many school budo instructors were former military personnel who likely
would be banned from public ofﬁce under an unrelated policy being developed (Hall 1949, 80).
The Butokukai was also under scrutiny because of its wartime oversight of military instruction
(jukendo, riﬂe marksmanship, etc.). Postwar, many Butokukai ofﬁcials were civil police person-
nel, many of them ex-military, and eventually 1,219 Butokukai staff members were purged from
public service (Baerwald 1959, 80).
The Occupation’s Education Division actually had no authority to ban school budo; it could
only recommend policy. Nonetheless, Occupation authorities met with Ministry of Education
bureaucrats and explained that it would be a good idea to stop all school budo completely. If
forced to request a decision, they hinted, all private budo might be banned, too. The Japanese
576
Judo in Japan, 1931–1950

bureaucrats took the hint. By early October 1945, the Ministry of Education had revised the
school physical education curriculum to remove “militarism.” By November 1945, the Ministry
suspended school budo, and soon after, it completely banned judo, kendo, and naginata practice
from school curriculum and grounds. Schools were also told to dispose of school-owned budo
gear (Hall 1949, 80).
Stripped of staff, training space, and equipment, the Dai Nippon Butokukai disbanded in
November 1946 (Yamamoto 2003, 143). However, the practice of martial arts in private clubs
was never banned. On the contrary, the Kodokan was crowded with school and college judoka
who could no longer practice at their schools but who could practice at privately-owned
facilities.
Beginning the postwar transition, Nango Jiro resigned from the Kodokan in December 1945.
Eleven months later, Kano Risei (1900–1986), son of Kano Jigoro, became the third Kodokan
president.
Kano Risei was an administrator rather than a judoka, and his published writings docu-
ment the Kodokan’s efforts to establish judo’s reputation as an international sport, not just as
a martial art, and to reestablish judo in Japan’s schools. The younger Kano hoped that some-
day judo would rank as an important sport along with “track and ﬁeld, sumo, wrestling, etc.”
Partly, this was because coaching judo provided jobs, and a generation of judo teachers
needed jobs. But he also adhered to his father’s original concept of judo as physical and spir-
itual training in pursuit of a proper way of life, and that such training should begin in child-
hood (Kano 1954, 5–12).
Toward this end, the Kodokan and judo instructors around Japan began touting the “new
judo” (shin judo). The new judo dropped the militaristic aspects of prewar judo (to include its
description as a martial way; that is, budo), and instead stressed its sportive nature. In addition,
the Kodokan actively tried to become more inclusive. For example, it established an Interna-
tional Division to administer special courses for Occupation soldiers, and in August 1947 it rec-
ognized judo ranks from the defunct Butokukai. This cemented Kodokan inﬂuence over judo
throughout Japan, and when the All Japan Judo Federation was established in May 1948, Kano
was installed as its president. Meanwhile, judo continued to increase in popularity overseas, and
with the establishment of the European Judo Union in 1948, it was ﬁrmly on its way to becom-
ing a global sport. Nonetheless, Occupation authorities did not reward the Kodokan’s efforts to
reestablish judo in the Japanese public schools until 1950.
—Lance Gatling
See also: Japan: Jujutsu-based Systems: Japan: Kendo, Iaido, and Jodo (in Volume I); Belief
Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868; Written Texts: Japan; Jukendo; 
Political Conﬂict and Aikido, 1931–1942; Social and Cultural Evolution of 
Kendo; and Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in this volume). 
REFERENCES
Baerwald, Hans H. 1959. The Purge of Japanese Leaders under the Occupation. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Bernett, Hajo. 1980. “Das Scheitern der Olympischen Spiele von 1940” [The Demise of the Olympic
Games of 1940], Stadion 6, 251–290.
Judo in Japan, 1931–1950
577
www.ebook3000.com

Dai Nippon Butokukai. No date. Dai Nippon Butokukai no Rekishi [History of the Greater Japan
Martial Virtue Society]. Kyoto: Dai Nippon Butokukai.
Hall, Robert King. 1949. Education for a New Japan. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Imperial Japanese Army Toyama School, editors. 1924. Judo Kyoiku Sankosho [Judo Education Refer-
ence Book]. Tokyo: Rikugun Toyama Gakko Shokokai.
Imperial Japanese Navy Engineering School. 1917. Judo Sankosho [Judo Reference Book]. Yokosuka:
Imperial Japanese Navy.
Inoue Shun. 1998. “The Invention of the Martial Arts: Kano Jigoro and Kodokan Judo,” in Mirror of
Modernity: Invented Traditions of Modern Japan, edited by Stephen Vlastos, 163–173. Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press.
Ishiguro Keishichi. 1942. “Kokumin Gakko Budo Bekkenki” [Observations on People’s School Budo],
Shin Budo [New Martial Ways] 2(1) (January), 29–33.
Kano Jigoro. 1906. Dai Nippon Butokukai Seitai Jujutsu Kata [Greater Japan Martial Virtue Society
Standard Jujutsu Kata]. Kyoto: Dai Nippon Butokukai.
Kano Jigoro. 1932. “The Contribution of Jiudo to Education,” Journal of Health and Physical Education
3, 37–40, 58, via http://perhamrin.com/wp/wp-content/uploads/Journal-of-Health-and-Physical-
Education-1932-Kano.pdf, accessed October 20, 2009.
Kano Jigoro. 1937. Judo (Jujutsu). Tokyo: Maruzen.
Kano Jigoro. 1987. Kano Jigoro Taikei [Kano Jigoro Compendium]. Tokyo: Hon no Tomo.
Kano Risei. 1954. Nobiyuku Judo: Sengo Hachinen no Ayami [Judo Progressing: The Postwar Eight-Year
Journey]. Tokyo: Touindo Books.
Kimura Saburo. 1942. Judo Kyohon [Judo Instruction Book]. Tokyo: Koran.
Maritime Self Defense Force Judo Association. No date. “Navy Judo,” http://www5f.biglobe.ne
.jp/~jsdf-judo/NavyJUDO.html (in Japanese), accessed January 5, 2009.
Ministry of Health and Welfare. 1943. Budosho Kentei Jisshi Yoko [Outline of Budo Qualiﬁcation Test-
ing]. Tokyo: Japan Ministry of Health and Welfare.
Nango Jiro. 1939. “General Remarks to the Bu-do & Ju-do.” Tokyo: Oriental Culture Summer College.
Nitobe Inazo. 1905/1900. Bushido, the Soul of Japan: An Exposition of Japanese Thought, revised edition.
New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons; See also: the 12th edition, copyright 1907 Teibi Publishing House,
revised for Japan (but in English) via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Smethurst, Richard J. 1974. A Social Basis for Prewar Japanese Militarism: The Army and the Rural Com-
munity. Berkeley: University of California.
Svinth, Joseph R., editor. 2002. “Documentation Regarding the Budo Ban in Japan, 1945–1950,” Jour-
nal of Combative Sport, http://ejmas.com/jcs/jcsart_svinth_1202.htm, accessed September 6, 2008.
Wray, Harry. 1997. “Attitudes among Education Division Staff during the Occupation of Japan,” Nan-
zan Review of American Studies 19(2), Fall, 101-132, via http://www.nanzan-u.ac.jp/AMERICA/
kanko/documents/19_2-1_Wray.pdf, accessed January 20, 2009.
Yamamoto Reiko. 2003. Beikoku Tai Nichi Senryo Seisaku to Budo Kyoiku: Dai Nippon Butokukai no
Kobo [United States Occupation Policy vis-à-vis Japan and Martial Arts Education: The Demise
of the Dai Nippon Butokukai]. Tokyo: Nihon Map Center.
JUKENDO
Jukendo (“way of the bayonet”) is a modern Japanese martial art that uses the riﬂe–bayonet com-
bination.
In jukendo, the thrust is the only attack; slashes, cross-blocks, and butt-strokes are not legitimate
strikes. Competition is fast-paced, as the contestants are very close and the thrust of the wooden riﬂe
(mokuju) can exceed 150 kilometers (93 miles) per hour. Modern competitions are held on hard
ﬂoors inside an area measuring ten meters (just under 33 feet) square. One point is awarded when
578
Jukendo

at least two of the three judges see solid thrusting contact with one of ﬁve targets: upper left chest,
lower left chest, the throat, the wrist (when it covers the chest), and the shoulder (when the target
is off balance), all targets indicating lethal thrusts to the heart. The ﬁrst to gather three points, or
the leader in points when time expires, wins the match (All Japan Jukendo Federation).
In the original Imperial Army riﬂe-mounted bayonet training (jukenjutsu), a variety of tech-
niques were used for close-in ﬁghting, including butt-strokes, cross-checks, punches, kicks, and,
because of the length of the Japanese military riﬂe with afﬁxed bayonet, a distinctive close-in,
upward stab while holding the muzzle of the riﬂe barrel with both hands (Imperial Japan Jukendo
Promotion Association 1942, 50). These techniques are not practiced in jukendo.
The main weapon is the mokuju (“wooden riﬂe”). This is a wooden (usually white oak)
weapon with a rubber tip. Its length (about 166 centimeters, or 65 inches) and shape approxi-
mate those of the earliest Japanese military riﬂes, the Types 30 and 38, introduced in 1897 and
1905 respectively, with afﬁxed sword bayonet. There is also a shorter version that approximates
the length of the shorter Type 38 cavalry carbine with afﬁxed bayonet. This short mokuju is used
when teaching jukendo to children, but it is also sometimes used during modern military train-
ing because its length more closely resembles that of modern riﬂes (Kanesaka 2007, 70).
An associated weapon is the short sword (tanken). This is a short wooden or bamboo sword,
53 centimeters (21 inches) long, which simulates the dismounted sword bayonet of the kind used
with early twentieth century military riﬂes. Tankendo (the way of the short sword) is an embed-
ded art (fuzoku) taught as part of jukendo (All Japan Jukendo Federation 1990, 7). Tankendo
was developed during the 1920s at the Toyama School, which was the school responsible for
Imperial Army physical and martial arts training (Kanesaka 2007, 263). There are separate com-
petitions for the tanken versus tanken, but the art also has a comprehensive series of techniques
developed for the short sword versus the riﬂe bayonet, spear, and sword (All Japan Jukendo
Federation 1990, 47).
Jukendo protective gear (bogu) is similar to the protective equipment used in kendo and
includes face mask, breastplate, fencing gauntlets, and the tare, a kind of apron that protects the
stomach and hips. One exception is that the right glove is not padded, but the left glove is essen-
tially a kendo gauntlet (kote). Another piece of unique protective gear is the kata (literally
“shoulder”), which is a heavily padded protector worn on the left shoulder that protects the left
side of the abdomen, upper left arm, and some of left shoulder blade (Kanesaka 2007, 195). The
tankendo equivalent is a heavily padded chest guard that protects the upper torso and leaves both
arms exposed above the breastplate (All Japan Jukendo Federation 1990, 78).
Before 1945, jukendo practitioners often wore a uniform consisting of white trousers, a high
collared white tunic, and a wide belt buckled in the back. This uniform design mimicked military
gymnastics uniforms typical of early twentieth-century military gymnastics (Kanesaka 2007, 195).
Since the 1950s, practitioners often wear practice uniforms that closely resemble the uniforms
worn in kendo, namely indigo blue cotton jackets (keikogi) and culottes-like trousers (hakama).
However, the traditional white exercise uniforms are still seen during formal exhibitions.
BACKGROUND
The Portuguese introduced muskets into Japan in 1543. By the 1570s, most Japanese warlords
had acquired ﬁrearms for their armies, and at the battle of Sekigahara in 1600, there were more
ﬁrearms present than at any battle in history to that date. Recognizing the power of ﬁrearms, the
Jukendo
579
www.ebook3000.com

Tokugawa regime (1603–1868) placed strict controls on their manufacture. Thus, well into the
nineteenth century, the standard Japanese military ﬁrearm was a harquebus, meaning a short
musket with a stubby stock. The harquebus was never designed to be used with a bayonet.
Instead, as in Western armies, pikemen were deployed to protect the musketeers. Consequently,
spear techniques were studied at the Kobusho, the military training facility of the Tokugawa
government, until it closed in 1866 (Imamura 1969, 600).
During the 1860s, the Japanese began importing Western military arms and technology. Early
shipments included bayonet-ready riﬂes, but Japanese military training was not ready for this.
Therefore, ﬁrst the Tokugawa government and then the Meiji government established relation-
ships with the French, who subsequently sent numerous military advisors to Japan.
Well into World War I (1914–1918), French military doctrine was enthusiastic about the
training and battleﬁeld use of the bayonet. Unfortunately, the French instructors used a variety
of techniques that were not well suited for the physically smaller Japanese. One example was the
single-handed thrust, in which the bayonet wielder thrusts the entire riﬂe forward with one hand
holding the riﬂe’s pistol grip. Given the long riﬂes of the time, plus their long, heavy sword bay-
onets, there was simply too much weight at the end of a long lever. To correct the problem, the
Japanese began looking to their national traditions. Thus, from a technical standpoint, jukenjutsu
(bayonet methods) eventually came to draw heavily on traditional two-handed spear techniques
(sojutsu), particularly those of Hozoin ryu, one of Japan’s most famous spear schools (Kanesaka
2007, 62). In fact, the relationship between jukenjutsu and traditional spear techniques was so
close that Major Ono, a Toyama School jukendo instructor, liked to say, “Jukenjutsu is an exten-
sion of the spear” (Sanno 1943, 21).
During the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–1905, the Japanese army conducted some large-scale,
disciplined bayonet assaults (Engen 2006, 9). Despite massive losses, the attacks were successful,
and these experiences reinforced the Imperial Japanese Army’s admiration of the bayonet. Several
noted mid-twentieth-century martial arts instructors served in the Japanese army during this
period. For instance, in 1903, Ueshiba Morihei (1883–1969) enlisted in the 37th Infantry Regi-
ment, Imperial Japanese Army. In the army, Ueshiba became known as the “King of Soldiers”
because of his skill with the bayonet (Ueshiba 1991, 6). Several decades later, Ueshiba established
the modern martial art known as aikido. Ellis Amdur, author of Dueling with O-sensei (2000) and
Hidden in Plain Sight (2009), notes that some kobudo (old-style martial arts) practitioners perceive
the inﬂuence of Ueshiba’s jukendo training in certain aikido staff (jo) thrusting and reverse strike
techniques, which are unlike older, traditional Japanese staff styles (personal communication,
January 27, 2009).
Although the Japanese did not engage in much combat or bayonet ﬁghting during World
War I, the Imperial Army paid close attention to developments in Britain and France, and after
the war ended, the Japanese government began stressing budo (martial art) education as a train-
ing and indoctrination tool for the masses. As Lieutenant General Honma Masaharu
(1888–1946), ultimately executed for his role in the Bataan Death March, explained it, “The
military leads the sports of the people” (Kanesaka 2007, 114). This attitude became particularly
evident after Japan annexed Manchuria in 1931, thereby setting in motion events that led to
war with China in 1937. Speciﬁcally, jukenjutsu, heretofore practiced primarily by the Japan-
ese military, began to be taught to middle and high school students. In 1931, the Ministry of
Education enacted compulsory judo or kendo for all able-bodied Japanese schoolboys, and in
580
Jukendo

1937, schoolboys, from middle school through graduation, were required to study military sub-
jects and jukenjutsu under the title “Gymnastics.” While school budo instruction throughout
Japan was under the control of the Greater Japan Martial Virtues Society (Dai Nippon
Butokukai), the Butokukai delegated these military art classes to the Imperial Military Reserve
Association (Teikoku Zaigo Gunjin Kai); its members, former Imperial Army ofﬁcers and non-
commissioned ofﬁcers, taught these military subjects (Smethurst 1974, 157). The push to mobi-
lize Japan’s entire population of young men was in full swing, and budo played a role.
Imperial Japanese Army physical education instructors taught a range of budo skills,
including kendo, jukendo, and tankendo, and developed a unique unarmed combat method
based on judo that had a variety of unarmed defenses and disarming techniques against all
of these weapons (Imperial Army Toyama School Kenjutsu Section 1936, 62). Military juk-
endo instruction manuals also included significant intelligence on the basic characteristics
of the bayonet fighting techniques of various foreign armies, to include the United States,
Great Britain, and the Soviet Union (Imperial Army Toyama School Kenjutsu Section
1936, 458).
In 1943, because of shortages of both actual and wooden rifles, the Japanese military
promulgated bamboo spear (takeyari) techniques. Instructors were jukendo instructors, so
the techniques for using the takeyari were essentially the same as in jukendo. That same
year, a retired Imperial Army general by the name of Nakai Takezo wrote that the
characteristics of jukendo made it the only true “people’s budo”—its techniques were
directly applicable to the battlefield, the limited numbers of techniques made it straightfor-
ward to teach, and most people progressed in skill fairly rapidly. Besides, he noted, as a prac-
tical matter the bamboo spear was the only weapon that could be provided to everyone in
the Empire (Nakai 1943, 12).
JUKENJUTSU BECOMES JUKENDO
Originally, jukenjutsu did not have much sporting application. It was simply a method of using
the bayonet in combat. However, there were those who thought it could be used for sport or to
build character, the same as any other modern Japanese martial art. As early as 1930 there were
public jukenjutsu competitions at national budo events, and in 1940, the Japanese army changed
the name from jukenjutsu to jukendo, ostensibly to reﬂect its focus on character development
(which in the context of the day included antipathy toward Communists and loyalty to the
Emperor). The Jukendo Promotion Association (Jukendo Shinkokai) was established in 1941, pri-
marily with retired Imperial Japanese Army leadership, to teach and promote jukendo inside and
outside the military. As part of this effort, jukendo began to be taught in Manchuria, and there
was also bamboo spear training in Indonesia and Indochina.
Following World War II, the Allies disbanded the Japanese army and curtailed martial arts
instruction in police stations and schools. Consequently, jukendo languished until July 1950, when
the Americans authorized the establishment of a 75,000-man National Police Reserve, which
despite the name was actually a Japanese military force preparing to counter the possible spread of
the Korean War. This organization’s infantry units were equipped with U.S. M-1 riﬂes and carbines
and were trained by U.S. Army instructors in U.S. Army bayonet techniques. This included the
use of the pugil stick, a training device that was previously unknown in Japan. In 1954, the
Jukendo
581
www.ebook3000.com

National Police Reserve became the core of Japan’s Ground Self Defense Force, and a jukendo
revival followed soon thereafter (Kanesaka 2007, 171).
Today, the governing body for jukendo is the All Japan Jukendo Federation. This organi-
zation was established in 1955, with headquarters in the Nihon Budokan. Currently, the Fed-
eration boasts about 300,000 members in Japan. Although most jukendo practitioners are
active or former Japan Self Defense Force members or family members, there is an enthusias-
tic civilian element; indeed, one noted jukendo group is a company club at a Toyota automo-
bile factory.
Participation overseas is small but growing. This spread is due mostly to former foreign resi-
dents of Japan, but there is also increasing professional interest—in March 2008, the U.S.
Defense Logistics Agency issued a bid for the acquisition of “1600 units of the Training Aid, Riﬂe
(Mokuju), NSN 8415-01-519-7783” (Solicitation number SPM1C1-08-Q-0152).
—Lance Gatling
See also: Sambo; American Judo, 1942–1945; Bayonet Training in the United States; Judo in
Japan, 1937–1945; Political Conﬂict and Aikido, 1931–1942; Social and Cultural 
Evolution of Kendo; and Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in this volume).
REFERENCES
All Japan Jukendo Federation. 1990. Tankendo Kyosoku [Short Sword Manual]. Tokyo: All Japan Juk-
endo Federation.
All Japan Jukendo Federation. 2009. “Jukendo,” http://www.jukendo.info/, accessed January 25, 2009
(in Japanese).
Amdur, Ellis. 2000. Old School: Essays on Japanese Martial Traditions. Seattle, WA: Edgework.
Amdur, Ellis, 2009. Hidden in Plain Sight: Tracing the Roots of Ueshiba Morihei’s Power. Seattle, WA:
Edgework.
Draeger, Donn F. 1982. The Martial Arts and Ways of Japan, Volume III: Modern Bujutsu and Budo.
Tokyo: John Weatherhill.
Engen, Rob. 2006. “Steel against Fire: The Bayonet in the First World War,” Journal of Military and
Strategic Studies 8(3), Spring, http://www.jmss.org/2006/2006spring/articles/engen.pdf, accessed
January 11, 2009.
Imamura Yoshio. 1969. Jukyu-seki ni Okeru Nihon Taiiku no Kenkyu [Research Regarding Japanese
Physical Education in the Nineteenth Century]. Tokyo: Fumaido.
Imperial Army Toyama School Kenjutsu Section. 1936. Kenjutsu Kyohon Shokai [Detailed Sword
Techniques Instruction Manual]. Tokyo: Imperial Army Toyama School.
Imperial Japan Jukendo Promotion Association. 1942. Jukendo Shuren no Shishin [Jukendo Training
Guide]. Tokyo: Imperial Japan Jukendo Promotion Association.
Kanesaka Hiromichi, editor. 2007. Jukendo Hyakunen Shi [Centennial History of Jukendo]. Tokyo: All
Japan Jukendo Federation.
Nakai Takezo. 1943. “Kokumin Budo to shite no Jukendo” [Jukendo as a National Martial Way], Shin-
budo [New Budo] 3(3), March.
Sanno Takashi. 1943. “Nihon no Jukendo: Jukenjutsu no Nihonteki Seikaku” [Japan’s Jukendo: The
Japanese Nature of Jukenjutsu], Shinbudo [New Budo] 3(3), March.
Shiobara Kurazo. 1929. Jukendo. Osaka: Teikoku Zaigo Gunjin Kai Osaka Shibu [Imperial Military
Reserve Association Osaka Branch].
Smethurst, Richard J. 1974. A Social Basis for Prewar Japanese Militarism: The Army and the Rural Com-
munity. Berkeley: University of California.
Ueshiba Morihei. 1991. Budo: Teachings of the Founder of Aikido. Tokyo: Kodansha.
582
Jukendo

KAPAP AND KRAV MAGA
During the sixty years preceding the establishment of the state of Israel in 1948, the Jewish pop-
ulation of Palestine experienced strife and violence in many arenas. To deal with this violence,
Jewish community defense forces were formed. These community defense forces developed var-
ious methods for self-defense. One well-known method developed during the 1930s was known
as Kapap. Kapap is an acronym for krav panim-el-panim, or face-to-face combat. The English
equivalent is therefore H2H, meaning hand-to-hand. Although training in Kapap included
training in military jujitsu and boxing, ﬁghting with sticks was emphasized.
After 1948, the Jewish population of Israel continued to experience strife and violence in
many arenas, but now the government was Israeli rather than Ottoman or British. Laws regard-
ing civilian access to handguns changed, and stick ﬁghting was no longer so widely taught, but
the military still included training in hand-to-hand ﬁghting in its physical training programs.
During the late 1940s and early 1950s, the Israeli military began using a new name, krav maga
(“contact ﬁghting”) to describe ofﬁcially approved methods of close-quarter battle. Krav maga,
in this context, included training in the use of bladed weapons, grenades, and submachine guns
as well as hand-to-hand ﬁghting.
About 1964, military krav maga underwent changes that allowed it to become a civilian martial
art, and during the early 1980s, civilian krav maga left Israel to become an international martial art.
HISTORY
The modern Jewish settlement of the Eastern Mediterranean dates to the early 1880s. The late
Ottoman Empire had many problems, and there were frequent riots and much banditry. Jewish
settlers in Ottoman Palestine soon established communal watch units, and later, some even
began organizing regional defense forces. Hashomer, established after 1907, is an example of an
early regional force.
During World War I (1914–1918), the Ottoman Empire allied with the Germans and
Austrians, and in 1917 this alliance led to the British conquering Palestine. The British
promptly established a mandate in Palestine and provided the mandate with its own adminis-
trative and military forces. Following World War I, the Arab population in Palestine did not get
independence, as British wartime propaganda had led them to believe. Instead, they got inter-
national recognition of the British mandate in Palestine. The result was Arab riots. During these
riots, many Jews were attacked. This led to the establishment of new, much larger, community
defense forces during 1919–1920.
The largest of these community defense forces was Hagana (Defense). For most of its
existence, Hagana was a poorly armed and all-civilian militia, and membership was often illegal.
Nonetheless, during 1929–1930 and 1936–1939, there were additional Arab uprisings in
Palestine, and the fall of France in 1940 meant that Syria and Lebanon switched overnight from
safe neighbors to German allies. All these events led to the greater militarization of the Jewish
community in the Mandate of Palestine.
During May 1941, the British began training and arming a Jewish paramilitary force in
Palestine. These paramilitary units were called Palmach (Strike Companies), and they were
intended to assist British and Australian soldiers in the defense of Palestine. By November 1941,
Kapap and Krav Maga
583
www.ebook3000.com

Syria and Lebanon were safely in the hands of the Free French, so the British ordered Palmach
disbanded. Instead of disbanding, Palmach went underground, and before long, its members
represented Hagana’s standing armed force. It was during this underground period that the hand-
to-hand combat disciplines termed Kapap became formalized.
The name kapap dates to 1940, and Hagana’s formal program for training in hand-to-hand
combat dates to early 1941. Hand-to-hand ﬁghting was taught because ﬁrearms and ammunition
were tightly controlled by the British administration. During the 1930s, severe prison terms were
handed down for ﬁrearm violations, and by the 1940s, the death penalty was in place for some
violations. The Hagana Kapap instructor’s course was three weeks long and included training in
stick ﬁghting, stone throwing, boxing, military jujitsu, and knife ﬁghting. Men involved in the
development of the technical syllabus of this program included Gershon Koﬂer, Menashe Harel,
Maishel Horowitz, Yehuda Markus, and Yitzhak Stibel. The Palmach instructors became the core
of the Hagana programs, and often times they were “lent” to the different Hagana units and
organizations, including those in schools and displaced-person camps.
Two types of stick ﬁghting were taught. One system used a short (about 60 centimeters,
24 inches) stick, and the other used a long (about 120 centimeters, 48 inches) walking stick. The
short system was developed locally by Maishel Horowitz during the late 1930s. The methods of
ﬁghting with the short stick emphasized attacking —with a short stick, you could not spar or
fence; you had to attack. However, in Hagana’s youth brigades (Gadna), youths often trained
with long sticks, probably for reasons of safety and legality—it was a walking stick, after all, and
therefore a tool to be used on ﬁeld trips, for building tents, and for other peaceful purposes.
Before the 1948 Arab-Israeli War, Hagana was the bitter rival of a separate Zionist youth
movement, known as Betar. (The name Betar commemorates a Jew who died in defense of his
community.) Known members and supporters of one movement were excluded from the other’s
programs, and youths and older supporters often clashed in the street. Betar methods, though,
were similar to those of Hagana and Gadna.
In May 1948, during the middle of Israel’s war for independence, the Israeli Defense Force
(IDF) was formed. At ﬁrst, IDF was more of a name change than a new organization. Thus,
during the war, IDF methods of teaching hand-to-hand combat did not change much from what
Palmach had been doing. However, after the war ended, IDF began codifying existing practice.
There was a desire to have everyone get the same training, but because of the sheer size of the
rapidly expanded Israeli military, this did not always happen.
The ﬁrst head of the IDF department of physical training was Moshe Pinkel Zohar, who had
held a similar position in Palmach; his second-in-command was Amos Golani. It is not known
exactly when they began to routinely use the name krav maga, but it was during or before
November 1949. The new nomenclature did not mean the adoption or creation of a new system
of hand-to-hand ﬁghting. Instead, whenever krav maga was referred to in military reports written
between 1949 and 1954, the authors usually noted that boxing, knife ﬁghting, jujitsu, and judo
were all integral parts of “contact ﬁghting.”
During the early 1950s, the IDF began creating elite infantry units, and the needs of these
elite units had much inﬂuence on the subsequent direction of krav maga. For example, in August
1953, IDF established a commando unit called Unit 101. The commander of Unit 101 was Major
Ariel Sharon (1928–), a Palmach veteran who was a rising star in Israeli politics (he eventually
became prime minister). The close-combat instructor for Unit 101 was Imrich “Imi” Lichtenfeld
584
Kapap and Krav Maga

(1910–1998), who had been one of the Palmach’s hand-to-hand instructors before independ-
ence and a close-combat instructor for the IDF physical education unit afterwards. Unit 101 was
involved in a controversial cross-border military operation in December 1953, so it was dis-
banded the following year. The paratroop brigade was formed in its stead, and Unit 101 veter-
ans, to include Sharon and Lichtenfeld, formed the foundation and living spirit of this new unit.
Civilian krav maga dates to the 1960s. Again, Imi Lichtenfeld was involved, as were some of
his students, to include Haim Zut and Eli Avikzar. In 1964, after retiring from the IDF, Lichtenfeld
began teaching krav maga to civilians at a gym in Natanya. Lichtenfeld’s methods were the result
of his life experiences. These experiences were not unusual for his generation. Lichtenfeld grew up
in Bratislava, Slovakia, where he was an amateur boxer and wrestler; he also sometimes fought with
anti-Semites in the streets. He came to Palestine at the start of World War II, and around 1942 he
was recruited into the Palmach. He became a Kapap instructor, and was often lent to Hagana units.
In 1948, he joined IDF, and by the mid-1950s, he was teaching Kapap and krav maga to para-
troopers. When Lichtenfeld started his civilian classes in 1964, he had a bare-bones ﬁghting system
that could be learned in a few months. Such an abbreviated program could not keep a commercial
gym open. Consequently, in 1965, Lichtenfeld began bringing instructors to his school to teach
judo and karate, and in 1968, he began awarding belt ranks based on the judo model. Contact spar-
ring was introduced, too. In civilian krav maga, the name was the same, but its concepts were
changing.
During the early 1970s, IDF established a new hostage rescue unit called Lotar (an acronym
meaning counter terrorism). Although the Lotar method of hand-to-hand ﬁghting was called
krav maga, its trainers and department heads were not always civilian krav maga instructors or
even IDF-certiﬁed krav maga instructors. This led to further differences in approach and
perception of the term krav maga, even within the police and IDF.
Public perception of krav maga changed still more during the 1980s, after the Israeli Ministry
of Education began introducing krav maga into extracurricular school programs. Public school
krav maga had its own ﬂavor and style and was wholly separate from the training in hand-to-
hand combat that was being provided to soldiers and counter-terrorists. These different consid-
erations and orientation include clothing, gear, environment, scenarios, and especially attitudes.
In a nutshell, a paratrooper or counterterrorist is taught to attack and destroy the enemy, whereas
a civilian is taught to defend and get away.
With the public schools, police, and military all seeking to hire trained instructors, additional
systems began developing. One of the better known systems is Hisardut, a Hebrew word mean-
ing “survival.” The founder of Hisardut was Dennis Hanover, a South African émigré with a
background in judo and karate. Hisardut was practiced by some elite Israeli military and police
units during the 1980s, and the style became very popular in Israel. Other popular systems devel-
oped during the 1980s and 1990s included Hitgoneut Rehov (street defense), Hashita (the sys-
tem), and Lehima Meshulevet (integrated ﬁghting).
During the 1980s and 1990s, krav maga began spreading outside Israel. For example, in 1981
a team of Israeli instructors traveled to the United States, and in 1984 Lichtenfeld taught some
classes at Akiba Hebrew Academy in Merion, Pennsylvania. In 1982, Americans began going to
Israel speciﬁcally to train in krav maga, and in 1983 one of these Americans, Darren Levine,
helped establish Krav Maga of America Association. International organizations based in Israel
were not far behind. For example, in 1993 Haim Zut and others established Krav Maga
Kapap and Krav Maga
585
www.ebook3000.com

Federation (KMF), and in 1996 Eyal Yanilov and others established International Krav Maga
Federation. Zut had been Imi Lichtenfeld’s ﬁrst civilian student, while Yanilov was among Eli
Avikzar’s earliest students.
In 1998 Imi Lichtenfeld died. While his death ended one era, it began another. The new
era featured krav maga as a brand name. As krav maga spread all over the globe, legal wars were
fought over the right to use the name krav maga as a trademark, and political wars were fought
in which opposing organizations tried to discredit the franchises of competing organizations. To
further muddy the water, during 1999 Avi Nardia introduced Modern Kapap. Although
Nardia’s father taught historical Kapap, Modern Kapap is not based on that—and to his credit,
Nardia has never claimed that it was. Nardia simply chose this name to honor the historical
system while at the same time allowing him to spread a method based on his own experience
in Brazilian jiu-jitsu and Filipino martial arts, his experiences as a krav maga instructor in
the military, and the training he had provided to counter-terrorist ofﬁcers of an elite Israeli
police unit known as Yamam. Nonetheless, Modern Kapap soon became a new brand name and
bandwagon.
TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION
In its original form, krav maga was very simple. It took on aspects of martial arts such as belt
ranks and levels of training only after it became a civilian art.
In krav maga, much energy and time is dedicated to instilling mental readiness. This is done
by simulating life-threatening situations, thereby giving trainees practice in dealing with these
situations in quick and effective ways. This scenario-based training recognizes that there are dif-
ferent social groups and that different genders and age groups have their own speciﬁc needs. For
example, girls and women train with attention to situations in which an attacker is trying to
overpower them during a kidnapping or rape situation, whereas senior citizens train in using
household objects as weapons. There are also geographically oriented drills dealing with situa-
tions on a bus, in a car, on the street, and even on a cruise liner, plus scenarios involving multi-
ple opponents armed with a variety of weapons.
Guiding principles include proper physical preparation. This means overall ﬁtness, balance,
and limberness. Physical preparation is tested by requiring trainees dressed in their usual cloth-
ing and equipment to perform techniques while running through obstacle courses. At advanced
levels, the obstacle courses include mazes, and trainees are expected to deal with surprise attacks
delivered by single or multiple attackers.
In the ﬁrst part of the course, trainees learn falling and rolling, basic stances, and rudimen-
tary punching and kicking. Three distances are taught. In-ﬁghting emphasizes elbows and knees.
Medium-range uses open hand techniques, short kicks, and punches. Distance techniques are
mainly kicks.
In the second part of the course, grappling skills (to include throws, takedowns, and strikes
leading to throws and takedowns) are taught. In contrast to wrestling or judo, emphasis is placed
on teaching techniques that are likely to disable or injure the opponent. The trainee also learns
to apply (and defend against) strangling techniques and lethal chokeholds.
In the third part of the course, trainees are introduced to improvised weapons (riﬂe straps,
weapon magazines, and so on), knife and stick ﬁghting, and weapon disarming techniques.
586
Kapap and Krav Maga

Training emphasizes three core ideas:
1.
The 360-degree circle of defense. This concept refers to all vectors of incoming attacks. Attacks are
to be deﬂected with the arms, moving from the center outwards. Initially, this deﬂection is done
using both arms. (There are four upper defensive sets and three lower defensive sets of blocks.)
Once these blocks are learned, then the trainee advances to using one arm defensively and the
other offensively.
2.
The inner defense. This means protecting the center line. One method for teaching this involves
the trainee blocking strikes and kicks aimed at his or her center line. These attacks initially come
as high, middle, and low, but later, the trainee is expected to respond to any attack from any angle,
height, or direction.
3.
Charging. Charging means attacking, and the principle applies to both armed and unarmed situa-
tions. Charging requires the trainee to use his skills of attack and defense all at once, and reﬂects
the perception that during combat, aggression and closing the distance is the preferred method for
neutralizing the enemy’s advantages.
Other principles of krav maga include the following:
1.
Attack from the threat’s “dead” side. This means off the threat’s centerline, thereby degrading his or
her ability to attack or counterattack.
2.
Both attacks and defenses need to be simple. It is easier to learn, remember, and use a few simple tech-
niques that ﬁt most situations than it is to learn, remember, and use complex combinations
designed for speciﬁc situations.
3.
Keep charging. A ﬁt, motivated attacker is unlikely to quit, collapse, or run away after being struck
just once. Thus, attacks need to continue until the opponent ﬂees, surrenders, or is killed.
—Noah Gross
See also: Canne de Combat (in Volume I); Globalization of Martial Arts; Reality-based Defense;
Sambo; American Judo, 1942–1945; Military Unarmed Fighting Systems in the United 
States; and Police Defensive Tactics Training in the United States (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Adan, Major General Avraham “Bren.” 2007. Interview.
Aviad, Doron. 2008. Interview.
Boneh, Tal. 2008. Interview.
Cohen, Haim. 2008. Interview.
Dinur, Ben-Zion and Yehuda Slutsky, editors. 1954–1972. Sefer Toldot ha-Haganah [History of the
Hagana], three volumes. Tel Aviv: ‘Am ‘Oved.
Gross, Noah. 2004. “The Walking Stick in Mandatory Palestine and Israel,” http://www.savateaustralia
.com/Weaponry%20Essays/Walking%20Stick%20in%20Mandatory%20Palestine%20and%20Israel
.htm, accessed November 1, 2008.
Gross, Noah. Forthcoming. Kapap from the Field to the Battleﬁeld, based on extensive archival research
conducted between 1999 and 2008.
Hanover, Dennis. 2005. Interview.
Nardia, Avi. 2004–2008. Interview and personal correspondence.
Sde-Or, Imi (Lichtenfeld), and Eyal Yanilov. 2001. Krav Maga: How to Defend Yourself against Armed
Assault. Tel Aviv: Dekel Publishing House.
Kapap and Krav Maga
587
www.ebook3000.com

Skornik, Gadi. 2004. Interview.
Zut, Haim. 2007. Question and answers session on Tapuz martial arts forum, http://www.tapuz
.co.il/forums/main/forumpage.asp?id=148 (in Hebrew).
MILITARY UNARMED FIGHTING SYSTEMS
IN THE UNITED STATES
Military unarmed ﬁghting systems are those methods of hand-to-hand ﬁghting formally taught
by military and naval forces during training, generally as part of an overall physical ﬁtness pro-
gram. Although techniques taught in military unarmed ﬁghting systems often have direct value
during survival situations or during trench and house-clearing operations, physical self-
conﬁdence and aggressiveness are more important organizational goals. For political reasons, the
virtues of national or organizational methods are often extolled during military training, some-
times at the expense of tactical advantage. Finally, while military training ofﬁcially stresses safety
for training partners, there are exceptions. Examples include times when such training is used as
hazing or punishment.
The following is a brief overview of the military unarmed ﬁghting systems practiced in the
United States from 1885 to present.
World militaries began developing formal physical training curriculums during the mid-
nineteenth century. For example, in Prussia, a Central Gymnastics Institute was established in
Berlin in 1847. In France, a military physical training school was established at Joinville-le-Pont
in 1852. In the United Kingdom, organized physical training for the British Army dates to 1860,
with the establishment of the Army Gymnastic Staff at Aldershot. And, in the United States, a
general physical ﬁtness curriculum was established at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point
in 1885.
The man who developed the U.S. Military Academy ﬁtness program was Captain (later Lieu-
tenant Colonel) Herman J. Koehler (1859–1927). Although Koehler never served on active
duty, his training program exerted enormous inﬂuence on all subsequent U.S. military training.
In addition, the program was similar to its international counterparts. Thus, it is useful to note
what the U.S. Military Academy expected its physical training programs to accomplish. Specif-
ically, said Koehler (1919, 7) military physical training, of any kind, needed to develop:
1.
General health and vigor
2.
Muscular strength and energy
3.
Discipline
4.
Self-conﬁdence
5.
Enthusiasm, alertness, and pride
In the U.S. Military Academy program, boxing, fencing, wrestling, and jujitsu (the word used in
those days to describe jujutsu-based systems other than Kodokan judo) were viewed mostly as
vehicles for accomplishing these ﬁve goals.
During the ﬁrst decade of the twentieth century, the British began to emphasize international-
style amateur boxing in their military training programs. This was not because British generals
believed that gloved boxing would be a ﬁght stopper on the battleﬁeld. Instead, it was because
588
Military Unarmed Fighting Systems in the United States

British bayonet instructors had noticed that the stances and guard positions of international box-
ing were similar to those of bayonet ﬁghting. Accordingly, millions of British, Commonwealth,
and American servicemen were taught to box during World War I (1914–1918).
During 1917–1918, the U.S. military went so far as to develop new rules for military boxing.
The rules of U.S. military boxing differed “radically from the regulations commonly in use for
the last ten or ﬁfteen years,” explained the New York Times on June 23, 1918. Because the
purpose of U.S. military boxing was to train prospective bayonet ﬁghters, “all back stepping,
covering up and purely defensive work are discouraged.” This was accomplished by developing a
scoring system that rewarded aggressive behavior and penalized defense. In addition, U.S.
military boxing matches were limited to just four rounds of two minutes each (except for
championship bouts, which could have six rounds of two minutes each). Consequently, U.S.
military boxing matches were comparatively fast, which pleased audiences. Also, because this
was a military program, administrative procedures were codiﬁed. Glove weights and fouls were
clearly deﬁned. Boxers had to pass preﬁght physicals, and a medical ofﬁcer had to be present at
ringside. The referee’s power was limited by the introduction of two corner judges with score-
cards. Boxers’ handlers were ordered out of the ring.
These military rules of 1917–1918 had enormous impact on postwar amateur boxing in the
United States. In fact, they formed the basis for the boxing regulations promulgated by the
National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) in 1921 (Wallenfeldt 1994, 2). However,
the new rules for amateur boxing did not have nearly as much inﬂuence on postwar training in
hand-to-hand combat. The reason was that after the World War ended, the U.S. government
had little interest in sending troops over the top with ﬁxed bayonets. Thus, during the 1920s and
1930s, military boxing was viewed (and taught, and done) mostly for physical ﬁtness, discipline,
and sport.
Military jujitsu continued to be taught in specialist courses. Military police, for example,
received some instruction, as did ofﬁcer cadets. U.S. military jujitsu training of the period
1917–1942 was based on the techniques developed for use by U.S. soldiers during World War I.
The men whose programs were used often legitimately ranked in Japanese martial arts. For exam-
ple, Major Risher Thornberry (1875–1937, graded in Jigo Tenshin-ryu jujutsu in 1905) taught
military jujitsu at Camp Lewis, Washington, during 1917, while Captain Allan Corstorphin
Smith (1884–1962, graded in Kodokan judo in 1916) taught classes in military jujitsu at Fort
Myers, Virginia, and Camp Benning, Georgia, from 1917 to 1919. Soldiers trained in these pro-
grams sometimes offered classes to policemen or gave demonstrations to the public. For exam-
ple, in September 1927, U.S. Army ofﬁcers provided jujitsu training to some police ofﬁcers
attending the National Matches (a marksmanship competition) held annually at Camp Perry,
Ohio, and during March 1930, U.S. Army captain Wilbur R. McReynolds (1892–1957) demon-
strated military jujitsu before a civilian audience in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania.
The start of World War II caused the U.S. military to begin rethinking the value of training
in hand-to-hand combat. This renewed interest had its origins in Britain, where a German inva-
sion seemed imminent. Britain’s Prime Minister Winston Churchill (1874–1965) believed that
drastic new methods were needed to forestall an invasion, and one of the methods Churchill
chose to do this involved putting some of Britain’s most physically ﬁt and aggressive soldiers into
special units and then providing those soldiers with hard physical training. These new British
units were called “Special” (for example, the Special Air Service) or “Commandos,” after the
Military Unarmed Fighting Systems in the United States
589
www.ebook3000.com

Boer militia units that had wreaked havoc on British and Commonwealth forces during the
South African War of 1899–1901. During their special training, British soldiers sprinted through
obstacle courses, marched cross-country under enormous packs, and received training in what
were then called “all-in” ﬁghting methods. Although the most famous individual teacher of all-
in ﬁghting methods developed circa 1940 was undoubtedly the former Shanghai Municipal
Police superintendent William E. Fairbairn (1885–1960), most of the daily instruction was actu-
ally provided by former Olympic and professional wrestlers, London policemen, and so on. The
commando training program proved to be a morale builder in Britain, and far more popular with
soldiers than “square bashing” (marching in formation) had ever been. Consequently, during
1941, the British began expanding the commando concept across their forces.
Following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, the U.S. military adopted
the British commando training model. At a tactical level, the Army Ranger and Marine Raider
units raised in 1942 were exact analogs of British commando units, but at the recruit level, the
Americans went one step further—they decided to teach commando methods to virtually every
incoming recruit.
Because each branch of the service (and the Ofﬁce of Strategic Services, or OSS, the fore-
runner of the CIA) had its own ideas and budgets, half a dozen formal systems of hand-to-hand
ﬁghting developed in the United States during World War II.
The system developed for the OSS was heavily inﬂuenced by the ideas of William E.
Fairbairn and Rex Applegate (1914–1998). The British had sent Fairbairn to Canada in 1941.
The idea was that he would teach OSS agents his methods at a training camp (Camp X) outside
Toronto. Then, with the entry of the United States into the war, Fairbairn was seconded directly
to the OSS, ﬁrst in New York, then in Maryland. Fairbairn’s OSS system is the classic palm-heel
to chin, knee-to-groin method usually associated with World War II hand-to-hand ﬁghting
systems.
In the Coast Guard, former heavyweight boxing champion Jack Dempsey (1895–1983) was
program director. There was lots of boxing in Dempsey’s system, but there was also training in
arm locks, chokes, defenses against weapons, and so on. Dempsey’s ghostwritten 1942 book, How
to Fight Tough, was the bestseller, but John Martone’s Handbook of Self-Defense (1955) represents
a more sober look at the Coast Guard system of World War II.
The Marine Corps was inﬂuenced by the modiﬁed World War I methods taught by Anthony
J. Drexel Biddle (1874–1948). Biddle was at least as interested in knife and bayonet ﬁghting as
he was in boxing, and by 1943 the Marine Corps had developed great faith in the ability of its
men to kill using the big knives that Marines called KA-BARs.
The Army and Air Force programs reﬂected the inﬂuence of Francois D’Eliscu (1895–1972),
Joseph Raycroft (1888–1953), and Allan Corstorphin Smith, among others. That is, their pro-
grams taught American jujitsu combined with boxing-based bayonet ﬁghting. At user level,
however, soldiers and airmen were inﬂuenced more by the theories of the professional wrestlers
who usually ended up teaching hand-to-hand combat at Army and Air Force bases. Pro wrestlers
who taught hand-to-hand combat to U.S. Army recruits during World War II included Charles
“Dirty Dick” Raines (1911–1979), Aloysius “Lou” Thesz (1916–2002), and Man Mountain
Dean (Frank Leavitt, 1891–1953).
Yet, of all the U.S. military systems developed during World War II, the system developed
by the U.S. Navy had the greatest impact on postwar American society. In 1942 the Navy
590
Military Unarmed Fighting Systems in the United States

decided that it needed to graduate at least 30,000 trained pilots every year. As in other services,
judo was taught to preﬂight applicants and ofﬁcer cadets, and as in other services, the Navy judo
instructors were often former professional wrestlers. An example is Ed “Don” George
(1905–1985), who taught aviation cadets at University of North Carolina from March 1942 to
December 1945. Naval administrators knew that naval aviators were unlikely to get into bayo-
net ﬁghts, but they did want the cadets to learn to ﬁght as members of teams. Consequently, the
program the U.S. Navy adopted during the summer of 1942 put more emphasis on American
football than on palm-heels and shoulder throws. Within eighteen months, the Navy’s goal of
30,000 trained aviators per year was being met, and every one of them had been trained in
American football, playing hard and without many rules, save one: winning. Famous politicians
who graduated from the U.S. Navy program include Senator Robert Kennedy (1925–1968) and
Presidents Gerald Ford (1913–2006) and George H. W. Bush (1924–), while famous football
coaches who participated in the Navy program include Paul Brown (1908–1991, Cleveland
Browns), Paul “Bear” Bryant (1913–1983, University of Alabama), and Wayne “Woody” Hayes
(1913–1987, Ohio State).
Although American football took off like a rocket after 1943, the all-in ﬁghting style devel-
oped for the OSS did not. Simply put, police organizations and parents’ groups did not like the
idea of millions of youthful killers at large in the general populace. Consequently, at war’s end,
judo was turned into a sport. On the other hand, freedom ﬁghters and terrorists living in former
(or soon-to-become former) colonies began adopting and promulgating the aggressive hand-to-
hand training methods of the war years. Accordingly, Indonesian Muslims attributed almost
magical power to Silat, Palestinian Jews developed krav maga, and South Koreans developed
taekwondo.
Throughout the Cold War (1945–1991), American and afﬁliated military organizations pro-
vided formal martial arts instruction to military police, people who handled nuclear weapons,
and Special Forces. An extremely ambitious military martial arts program of the 1950s was that
of the U.S. Air Force, which taught judo to at least 30,000 men assigned to Strategic Air Com-
mand. In more typical programs, Australian special operations forces during the 1950s received
training in World War II commando methods. During the late 1950s, some French Foreign
Legion soldiers took lessons in aikido. During the mid-1960s, some U.S. soldiers received four
weeks of formal training in taekwondo.
Following the end of the Vietnam War, even this training was reduced, and subsequently, few
U.S. soldiers of the 1970s received more than a couple of hours of martial arts instruction dur-
ing basic training. As one T-shirt of the era put it, “Why waltz when you can rock’n’roll?” (an
allusion to ﬁring weapons on full automatic).
Then, in 1979, the U.S. Army Training Command published a position paper called “First
Earth Battalion.” An astonishingly New Age document for the Army, its recommendations
included the suggestion that soldiers practice yogic stretches and karate kata while listening to
primal rock and eating Belgian wafﬂes (Channon 1979). Although battle tuning with Belgian
wafﬂes was a bit esoteric for most soldiers, in 1985, the concept inspired a U.S. Army general to
hire former Marines Jack Cirie and Richard Strozzi Heckler to provide a select group of Special
Forces soldiers with training in biofeedback, aikido, and “mind-body psychology.” After six
months, the soldiers were not aikido masters, but they were, on average, 75 percent ﬁtter than
when they started (Heckler 1992).
Military Unarmed Fighting Systems in the United States
591
www.ebook3000.com

In 1989 the U.S. Marine Corps started an unrelated project called Combat Hitting Skills
Program. During Combat Hitting Skills Program, Marine recruits put on headgear, boxing
gloves, and chest protectors, and proceeded to hit each other in the head for three 15-second
rounds. There were many injuries, and in 1997, there was a death. This caused the Marine Corps
to begin to look for ways to replace Combat Hitting, pugil stick ﬁghting, and similar programs,
preferably by combining everything into one unitary close-combat system. In 2000, two separate
close-combat systems were evaluated. One was designed by Marine Lieutenant Colonel George
Bristol, while the other was designed by Richard Strozzi Heckler. In 2001, elements of both
programs were adopted into the ﬁnal product, called Marine Corps Martial Art Program.
During 1994–1995, U.S. Army Rangers began developing an unrelated close-combat
program. What happened is that the commander of the 2nd Battalion of the 75th Rangers, then
based at Fort Lewis, Washington, told his sergeants to begin teaching hand-to-hand combat on a
regular basis. When his sergeants replied that they did not ﬁnd the existing manual helpful in that
regard, the ofﬁcer in charge of the program (then–Lieutenant Colonel Stanley A. McChrystal,
1954–) told them to develop something better. What the sergeants decided upon was a system
based (in part) on Brazilian jiu-jitsu. The reasons the sergeants chose Brazilian jiu-jitsu was that
instructors were available, techniques were practical, injury rates were acceptable, and competi-
tion was possible. In addition, elite practitioners of Brazilian jiu-jitsu were currently doing well in
televised mixed martial art bouts. Thus, young soldiers quickly accepted the validity of the
instruction. At ﬁrst, veterans were doubtful, but over time most came around, if only because jun-
ior soldiers liked the new method—and from a sergeant’s standpoint, anything that gets the
troops exercising on their own time is good.
A modiﬁed version of the Ranger program became the Army standard in 2002. In 2009, the
Army program was revised slightly to incorporate lessons learned in Iraq. The current Army
doctrine is based on the following assumptions (US Army 2009, 1.2–1.3):
1.
Every hand-to-hand ﬁght is a grappling ﬁght. Striking is done as part of grappling rather than strik-
ing for its own sake.
2.
Every ﬁght is over control of weapons; whoever controls the weapon wins the ﬁght.
3.
There are no shortcuts to developing skill. One starts with basics, and then progresses to scenario-
based training.
—Joseph Svinth
See also: Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu (in Volume I); International Boxing; Sambo; American Judo,
1942–1945; Bayonet Training in the United States; Judo in Japan, 1931–1950; Jukendo; Kapap
and Krav Maga; Police Defensive Tactics Training in the United States; and Women in Combat: The
U.S. Military, 2001–Present.
REFERENCES
Chambers, John Whiteclay. 2008. OSS Training in the National Parks and Service Abroad in World War
II. Washington, DC: U.S. National Parks Service, http://www.nps.gov/history/history/
online_books/oss/index.htm, accessed August 28, 2009.
Channon, James B. 1979. The First Earth Battalion: Ideas and Ideals for Soldiers Everywhere. Fort Monroe,
VA: U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command, via http://ejmas.com/jnc/jncart_channon
_0200.htm, accessed August 31, 2008.
592
Military Unarmed Fighting Systems in the United States

Heckler, Richard Strozzi. 1992. In Search of the Warrior Spirit, 2nd edition. Berkeley, CA: North
Atlantic Press.
Henderson, Alice Palmer. 1918. The Ninety-First, the First at Camp Lewis. Tacoma, WA: John C. Barr;
the section on Risher Thornberry’s training program is reprinted at http://ejmas.com/
jnc/jncart_henderson_0600.htm, accessed October 7, 2009.
Jolissant, James G., Sean A. Swiatkowski, Sandep S. Mangalmuri, and Gregory D. Gutke. 2006.
History of Recruit Medicine in the United States Military Service, http://www.bordeninstitute
.army.mil/published_volumes/recruit_medicine/RM-ch01.pdf, accessed August 31, 2008.
Koehler, Herman J. 1919. Koehler’s West Point Manual of Disciplinary Physical Training. New York: 
E. P. Dutton & Co, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Martone, John. 1955. Handbook of Self-Defense. New York: Areo Publishing Co., Inc.
New York Times. 1918. “Standup Fight Ordered: Army Ofﬁcials Frown Upon Runaway Defense in
Boxing,” June 23, 29, via http://news.google.com/archivesearch, accessed October 17, 2009.
Rominger, Donald W. Jr. 1985. “From Playing Field to Battleground: The United States Navy V-5
Preﬂight Program in World War II,” Journal of Sport History 12(3) Winter, 252–264, via
http://www.la84foundation.org/SportsLibrary/JSH/JSH1985/JSH1203/jsh1203d.pdf, accessed
October 10, 2008.
Schmidt, Richard, and George H. Bristol. 2005. “The Inﬂuence of the Japanese Martial Disciplines
on the Development of the United States Marine Corps Martial Arts Program,” in Budo Perspec-
tives, edited by Alexander Bennett, 269–286. Auckland, New Zealand: Kendo World Publications.
Smith, Allan C. 1920. The Secrets of Jujitsu, A Complete Course in Self Defense. Columbus, GA:
Stahara Publishing Co., via http://www.ejmas.com/jnc/jncart_cptsmith_0700.htm, accessed
December 9, 2008.
Svinth, Joseph R. 2003. “Martial Arts Meet the New Age: Combatives in the Twenty-First-Century
American Military,” in Martial Arts in the Modern World, edited by Thomas A. Green and Joseph
R. Svinth, 263–270. Westport, CT: Greenwood.
Thornberry, Risher W. 1930. A General Course in Jiu-Jitsu. Los Angeles: The American School of Jiu-
Jitsu.
U.S. Air Force. 1963. “Stead Air Force Base Student Study Guide 140004-3 (Academic), Combative
Measures Instructor Training (Judo), February 1963,” via http://ejmas.com/jnc/jncart
_aircrew_1100.htm, accessed August 31, 2008.
U.S. Army. 2009. Combatives. Field Manual 3-25-150. Fort Benning, GA: U.S. Army Combatives
School.
Wallenfeldt, E. C. 1994. The Six-Minute Fraternity: The Rise and Fall of NCAA Tournament Boxing,
1932–60. Westport, CT: Greenwood.
POLICE DEFENSIVE TACTICS TRAINING IN THE
UNITED STATES
Defensive tactics is a term used by many U.S. police departments to describe the arrest and con-
trol training provided to ofﬁcers. Earlier terms include “police jujitsu.” As deﬁned by former
police defensive tactics trainer Bernard Lau (2001):
Police defensive tactics are NOT the same as self-defense. The role of defensive tactics in law
enforcement and corrections is to assist the ofﬁcer in performance of arrest and restraint, and to
increase the margin of safety for both the ofﬁcer and the suspect. Defensive tactics charge the ofﬁ-
cer with protecting others as well as themselves. The deﬁnition of ‘defend’ as used here is neither
punitive nor passive, but instead ‘to repel danger or harm while serving and protecting.’ Meanwhile,
self-defense encompasses any and all means of protecting oneself. Self-defense techniques are not
Police Defensive Tactics Training in the United States
593
www.ebook3000.com

meant to apprehend an assailant. Indeed, there is no regard for the safety of the attacker whatso-
ever. So obviously self-defense and defensive tactics are not synonymous.
HISTORICAL PROGRAMS
Until the early 1900s, few U.S. police ofﬁcers received any formal instruction of any kind, on
any subject. Instead, as Inspector Cornelius Cahalane (1875–1957) of New York Police Depart-
ment put it (1929, 167) “in many departments a policeman is appointed, uniformed and
equipped with a baton and a revolver and sent out on duty, told to watch the older men, use good
judgment, obey the Ten Commandments, not be too ofﬁcious and never look for trouble, all of
which is excellent advice if it can be applied in a crisis.”
Early police training programs emphasized marksmanship with a revolver. This was to reduce
the litigation that followed when ofﬁcers shot at rabid dogs or suspects and hit bystanders
instead. Thus, New York City instituted marksmanship training during the mid-1890s, other
cities soon followed suit, and by 1910 the National Matches held each year at Camp Perry, Ohio,
included police pistol courses.
As for additional training, St. Louis (Missouri), Cincinnati (Ohio), Berkeley (California),
and New York City were among the ﬁrst U.S. cities to require police ofﬁcers to attend formal
academies. Each of these early academies designed its own program. Thus, the Berkeley course
of 1908 required serving ofﬁcers to study police science one hour per day, ﬁve days per week, for
three years. New York City, on the other hand, instituted a 13-week military-style recruit train-
ing course in 1913. Most programs fell somewhere between these two extremes.
The New York Police Department (NYPD) course had an extensive physical component.
The physical portions of its original curriculum were designed by Herman J. Koehler
(1859–1927), head of physical training at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, and
included instruction in boxing, wrestling, and police jujitsu. New York policemen got their ﬁrst
exposure to Ten-shin-ryu jujutsu (a formal Japanese system) in October 1900. According to an
article that appeared in the New York Times (1900), “A novel exhibition witnessed by a number
of prominent sporting men and representatives of the Police Department yesterday afternoon
was a demonstration of jiu jitsu, a form of the Japanese art of self-defense, in the New York The-
atre. The exhibition was by J. J. O’Brien and K. Inoue, both skilled in the Japanese exercise.”
The NYPD jujitsu program became codiﬁed over time and was described in some detail in
Sergeant (later Commissioner) Arthur W. Wallander’s (1892–1980) book called The Police
Recruit (1923). Instructors in Wallander’s police jujitsu program included Isador Cantor
(1897–1949).
Outside New York City, pioneering police jujitsu instructors of the 1920s were usually sol-
diers rather than policemen. For example, the jujitsu instructor at the New York State Police
academy in 1924 was Major Allan Corstorphin Smith (1884–1962), a New York National
Guard ofﬁcer who had taught a modiﬁed form of Kodokan judo to U.S. Army soldiers from 1917
to 1919. Similarly, in August 1931, military jujitsu instructors at the National Matches, a
national-level marksmanship event held annually at Camp Perry, Ohio, included Captain James
F. Strain (1890–1967) and Lieutenant Fay Smith (1893–1956).
In California, pioneers of police jujitsu included the Berkeley Police Department, which at
the time was among the most progressive departments in the United States. The ﬁrst arrest that
Berkeley police attributed directly to jujitsu took place on September 11, 1924. In this incident,
594
Police Defensive Tactics Training in the United States

Patrolman Gene Woods (dates unknown) used jujitsu holds to detain a drunk driver. Berkeley’s
original trainer was D. R. Hamilton (dates unknown), formerly of the Chicago police, but by
1931 the Berkeley police had replaced Hamilton with a Japanese American instructor, Atsuo
“Frank” Matsuyama (1886–1957). Matsuyama also provided instruction to San Francisco police.
Matsuyama called his method yawara, and in 1937, his direct innovations to police work include
patenting a blackjack that he called a yawara stick.
In 1939, the reform-minded Chief Arthur Hohmann (1895–1985) decided to provide Los
Angeles Police Department (LAPD) ofﬁcers with jujitsu training. Department instructors included
Ofﬁcer John “Jack” Sergel (1902–1968), who had recently thrown ﬁve Japanese American judoka
during a regional judo tournament, thereby earning him a promotion to shodan (ﬁrst-degree black
belt) in Kodokan judo. Hohmann resigned as chief in 1941, and in October 1944 the LAPD ﬁred
Sergel because he had continued training in judo with those same Japanese Americans throughout
World War II. Other pioneers of police jujitsu instruction on the Paciﬁc Coast included Risher
Thornberry (1875–1937) in Los Angeles and Svend Jorgensen (1890–1974) in Seattle.
In 1935, visiting jujitsu instructors at the FBI Academy included Sergeant Eldon Duckworth
(1897–1988) of the West Virginia State Police. Other visiting instructors at the FBI Academy
during the late 1930s included Philadelphia’s Anthony J. Drexel Biddle (1874–1948). Biddle
was well-known for both his political connections and his interest in hand-to-hand ﬁghting
methods, and his book, Do or Die, Military Manual of Advanced Science in Individual Combat, was
ﬁrst published in 1937.
During the 1930s, jujitsu manuals written speciﬁcally for police use were scarce, but recom-
mendations included Judo, by T. Shozo Kuwashima and Ashbel R. Welch (1938). According to
Lieutenant John Leonard of Chicago Police Department, “The many photographs and simple
explanations make the book of special value to all law-enforcement ofﬁcers. The fundamental
defenses illustrated give maximum control to the person employing them, with a minimum of
injury to the attacker. There are only a few instances when kicking and striking are recom-
mended” (Leonard 1940, 368).
From 1948 to 1952, the U.S. State Department sent ofﬁcers from the NYPD to Tokyo to
retrain Japanese police in American methods. Most of this training was administrative, but in
Japan the New York ofﬁcers discovered that the Japanese methods of holding and restraining
prisoners were better than their own. Therefore, in 1950, Lieutenant General Curtis LeMay
(1906–1990) of the U.S. Air Force established ofﬁcial relationships with Japanese martial arts
organizations that allowed top-notch Japanese instructors to teach U.S. servicemen, and by the
late 1950s, tens of thousands of U.S. military personnel were receiving on-base instruction in
aikido, judo, or karate through their commands, while tens of thousands more received off-base
instruction in martial art schools in Japan, Okinawa, and Korea. Some of these former service-
men became pioneers of Asian martial arts instruction in U.S. police forces. An example is
Charles Gruzanski (1933–1972). While serving in Japan with the U.S. military during the early
1950s, Gruzanski was graded in Kodokan judo, Kyokushin Kai karate, Shindo Muso Ryu jodo,
and Yoshinkan aikido. Following his discharge, Gruzanski became a self-defense instructor at the
Chicago Police Academy, and this move ultimately introduced his methods to police depart-
ments throughout the central United States.
During the mid-1950s, Japanese martial art instructors began coming to the United States as
visitors. Some of these instructors taught policemen. Tohei Koichi (1920–), for example, taught
Police Defensive Tactics Training in the United States
595
www.ebook3000.com

aikido to policemen in the Territory of Hawaii, and this in turn led to Hawaiian police intro-
ducing aikido wristlocks and stick techniques into their defensive tactics programs. During
the late 1950s and early 1960s, aikido was also introduced to West Coast police forces; pioneers
in this process included Robert K. Koga (1930–) in Los Angeles and Bernard Lau (1941–) in
Seattle.
During the 1970s and 1980s, U.S. police forces began adding new weapons to their arsenals.
For example, side-handled batons were patented in 1972. Kevlar body armor was introduced in
1974, as was the ancestor of the electric weapon called the Taser. Collapsible batons were
patented in 1976. Capsicum (pepper) sprays were patented in 1978. Toward reducing the civil
liability inherent in the use of these new weapons, departments began seeking ways of providing
ofﬁcers with legally defensible (e.g., certiﬁed) training. This in turn led to the development of
commercial companies that provided certiﬁed training. Examples of such companies include
PPCT Management Systems, established by Bruce Siddle in 1980.
To be legally defensible, training needed to be evidence-based and standardized. Since most
of the evidence was based on studies prepared by the companies selling the programs, the validity
of their evidence is debatable, and not just in court. On the other hand, standardization of pro-
grams is easily done. Thus, it is useful to describe a standardized program. According to an Alaska
Supreme Court case of 2006 (Anderson v. PPCT Management Systems Inc.), the PPCT program
“uses three sequences of practice: static, ﬂuid, and dynamic. Static training moves in slow motion
and breaks down the components of a technique. Fluid training occurs at ﬁfty percent or less of
full speed and is the level at which students perform the most repetitions of a technique.
Dynamic training is full-speed role playing. PPCT does not require dynamic training for certiﬁ-
cation.”
Although the PPCT process of static and ﬂuid training met management expectations for
ofﬁcer-friendly and legally defensible training, some ofﬁcers and agencies wanted to advance to
full-speed role playing. Thus, in 1984, the U.S. Secret Service commissioned the development
of foam-padded training suits. Bureaucrats involved with the original Secret Service designs
included John Desmedt, and early manufacturers included Macho Products, which was a
manufacturer of foam-dipped taekwondo sparring gear.
The downside of this more dynamic training was a greater risk of serious injuries. For
instance, in October 1987, police recruit Patricia Quinn (1962–1987) was struck in the head
while participating in defensive tactics at the police academy and died a couple of days later.
Quinn’s family donated her organs and then sued the police academy for $5 million.
MODERN PROGRAMS
Today, police academy courses typically provide recruits with about forty hours of instruction in
defensive tactics. These hours are usually spread across several weeks or months. Topics usually
include searching methods, handcufﬁng methods, methods for retaining personal weapons dur-
ing an altercation, punches and kicks, grips and releases, and ground grappling techniques that
emphasize weapons retention.
Once in active service, ofﬁcers may receive refresher or advanced training. Because ofﬁcers
can ﬁle workers’ compensation claims for injuries received during training, management is rarely
draconian about requiring active participation in refresher training.
596
Police Defensive Tactics Training in the United States

Ofﬁcers also have the opportunity to attend seminars on topics such as the following:
1.
Verbal de-escalation (a popular commercial program is called Verbal Judo)
2.
Neck holds (a popular commercial program is called Lateral Vascular Neck Restraints)
3.
Use of the so-called less-lethal weapons (e.g., pepper sprays, Tasers, gas grenades, and rubber
bullets)
4.
Use of striking weapons for which certiﬁcation training is available (e.g., nightsticks, collapsible
batons, and side-handle batons)
5.
Edged weapon defense
—Joseph Svinth
See also: Reality-based Defense; Sambo; Kapap and Krav Maga; Military Unarmed 
Fighting Systems in the United States; and Jujutsuffragettes (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Cahalane, Cornelius F. 1914. Police Practice and Procedure. New York: E. P. Dutton & Co., via
http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Cahalane, Cornelius F. 1929. “Police Training,” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sci-
ence 146, November, 166–169, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/1017558, accessed October 16, 2009.
Czarnecki, Fabrice, and Richard Miller. 2006. Trooper-Trainee Active Countermeasures Training Evalu-
ation. Miami, FL: Gables Group, via http://www.txdps.state.tx.us/docs/Active%20Countermea-
sures %20Training%20Evaluation.pdf; see also: Case 2:06-cv-00138-TJW Document 126 ﬁled
09/25/2007 in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Texas, Marshall Division,
http://www.websupp.org/data/EDTX/2:06-cv-00138-126-EDTX.pdf, both accessed September 6,
2008.
Fosdick, Raymond. 1920. American Police Systems. New York: Century Co., via http://books.google
.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Goddard, Calvin. 1930. “Police Pistol Practice,” The American Journal of Police Science 1(5), September
–October, 444–455, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/1147222, accessed October 16, 2009.
Jorgensen, S. J. 1937. American Police Jiu-Jitsu. Seattle, WA: self-published; Paladin reprint, 2005.
Koga, Robert, and John G. Nelson. 1967. The Koga Method: Police Weaponless Control and Defense
Techniques. Beverly Hills, CA: Glencoe.
Kuwashima, T. Shozo, and Ashbel R. Welch. 1938. Judo: Forty-One Lessons in the Modern Science of
Jiu-Jitsu. New York: Prentice-Hall.
Lau, Bernard. 2001. “An Introduction to Police Defensive Tactics,” Journal of Non-lethal Combatives,
http://ejmas.com/jnc/jncart_lau_1101.htm, accessed September 6, 2008. Quote used by
permission.
Leonard, John. D. 1940. “Review of Judo (The Modern Science of Jiu-Jitsu) by T. Shozo Kuwashima;
Ashbel R. Welch,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology (1931–1951) 31(3), September–
October, 368.
New York Times. 1900. “Japanese Self Defense Exhibited,” October 31, 9, via http://news.google
.com/archivesearch, accessed October 16, 2009.
O’Brien, John J. 1905. A Complete Course of Jiu-Jitsu and Physical Culture. Boston: Physician’s Pub-
lishing Co., via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Ragsdale, George T. 1929. “The Police Training School,” Annals of the American Academy of Political
and Social Science 146, November, 170–176, via http://ann.sagepub.com/content/vol146/issue1/
, accessed October 16, 2009.
Sellin, Thorsten. 1934. “Historical Glimpses of Training for Prison Service,” Journal of Criminal Law
and Criminology (1931–1951) 25(4), November–December, 594–600, via http://www.jstor.org/
stable/1136032, accessed October 16, 2009.
Police Defensive Tactics Training in the United States
597
www.ebook3000.com

Smith, Allan C. 1920. The Secrets of Jujitsu, A Complete Course in Self Defense. Columbus, GA:
Stahara Publishing Co., via http://www.ejmas.com/jnc/jncart_cptsmith_0700.htm, accessed
December 9, 2008.
Stutsman, Jesse O. 1931. “The Prison Staff,” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sci-
ence 157, Prisons of Tomorrow (September), 62–71.
Svinth, Joseph R. 2002. “Documentation Regarding the Budo Ban in Japan, 1945–1950,” Journal of
Combative Sport, http://ejmas.com/jcs/jcsart_svinth_1202.htm, accessed September 6, 2008.
U.S. Air Force. 1963. Combatives Measures Instructor Training (Judo): Air Police Techniques, via
http://ejmas.com/jnc/jncart_SAC_0601.htm, accessed September 6, 2008.
Wallander, Arthur W. 1923. The Police Recruit (Police Manual of Physical Training). New York: Siebel
Press.
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL EVOLUTION OF KENDO
Martial arts scholar Nakabayashi Shinji (1994, 23) established some distinct criteria for the for-
mation of a martial art ryuha (system):
1.
The progenitor of a school needed a proven combat record.
2.
The techniques had to be combat-effective.
3.
The methods needed to be systematized into predetermined mock-combat technical sequences
called kata (forms).
If these criteria were met, then a rational pedagogy could be implemented to ensure the survival
of the school and techniques for future generations.
The founders of traditional ryuha probably were not informed of this typology. Prototypical
martial arts systems remained unsophisticated until Japan’s Warring States period (1467–1578),
when ryuha (literally ﬂow, but meaning composite systems) were established that incorporated an
array of weaponry, divination, military strategy, and theory. Although many scholars now consider
the sword to have been a subsidiary weapon after bows, pole weapons (naginata), spears, and (even-
tually) ﬁrearms, most of the early schools taught sword techniques as one of the principal weapons.
During this period, itinerant swordsmen traveled the countryside in search of worthy oppo-
nents. When they found them, they tested their skills in duels. Through demonstrating deftness
with the sword, they hoped to make a name for themselves and perhaps ﬁnd employment or the
patronage of a feudal lord (daimyo). Few realized such lofty ambitions.
With the commencement of the comparatively peaceful Tokugawa period (1603–1867),
warriors had few opportunities to demonstrate their prowess in battle or duels, but were still
expected to train in the military arts. During this period, a number of distinct trends in the
martial arts could be seen.
First, martial arts were intellectualized. This meant the development of highly structured
holistic curricula that were pertinent to combat, personal development, and even political acu-
men. From the 1630s onward there was a proliferation of treatises outlining the universalistic rel-
evance of martial arts theory and principles to all aspects of the warrior’s life. Examples include
Heiho Kadensho (Our Family’s Tradition of Swordsmanship, 1632) by the martial arts teacher to
the Shogun, Yagyu Munenori (1571–1646), and Gorin-no-sho (Five Elemental Spheres, ca.
1645) by the legendary duelist Miyamoto Musashi (1582–1645).
598
Social and Cultural Evolution of Kendo

Second, there was overt spiritualization. From the late seventeenth century on, swordsman-
ship was infused with esoteric ideals of breath and energy transmission (ki), Zen and Confucian
concepts, and the like, and training in martial technique came to be seen as a vehicle for
“enlightenment” (Imamura 1989, 79). Medieval swordsmanship (kenjutsu) was characterized by
deeply spiritual principles, but these elements became more pronounced during the Tokugawa
period, and many ryuha became in many ways pseudo-cult religions.
Third, there was a conspicuous paciﬁcation of kenjutsu. The object of training evolved into
killing the ego and reﬁning character, and avoiding conﬂict altogether. Under this doctrine, a
truly great warrior was said to be able to win the ﬁght without drawing his sword; his was a “spirit
of non-lethality” (Rogers 1998, 135).
At the same time, samurai of the Tokugawa era were required to show proof that they were sus-
taining a state of military preparedness. This triggered a demand for instruction in the martial arts,
and the number of commercial and domain schools proliferated exponentially. To take advantage
of the demand, Tokugawa-period ryuha started to specialize in speciﬁc weapons, and Imamura
(1989, 340–343) estimates that during the period there were 51 schools of archery (kyujutsu), 66
schools of horsemanship (bajutsu), 147 schools of spearmanship (sojutsu), 192 schools of gunnery
(hojutsu), 179 schools of grappling (jujutsu), and, most numerous by far, 743 schools of kenjutsu.
By the late seventeenth century there were few warriors still alive who had participated in
battleﬁeld combat, and the government had outlawed participation in duels. Some ryuha tried
to retain a battle-oriented curriculum, but many were becoming increasingly esoteric and
technically impotent. Kenjutsu of this kind was referred to rather derogatorily as ﬂowery swords-
manship (kaho kenpo). Yet it was this “ﬂowerization” of kenjutsu that provided the catalyst for its
ultimate “sportiﬁcation,” with the gradual promotion of protective training equipment (bogu)
and bamboo swords (shinai), thereby making possible full-contact fencing bouts.
Although leather-padded bamboo training swords (fukuro-shinai) had been employed by the
Shinkage-ryu as early as the sixteenth century, and various pieces of protective equipment were
found in some older ryuha, Naganuma Shirozaemon Kunisato (1688–1716) of the Jikishin Kage-
ryu is attributed with completing the entire set of mask (men), gauntlets (kote), plastron (do),
and lower body protector (tare) during the period 1711–1716. Nakanishi Chuzo Tsugutake (died
1801) of the Itto-ryu made further improvements to the equipment, and between 1751 and 1772,
Nakanishi also introduced full-contact sparring into his school.
Originally, many swordsmen clung to the traditional methods of forms (kata) practice and
were skeptical about full-contact training, but by the late eighteenth century, most major ken-
jutsu ryuha incorporated both training methods to differing degrees.
The rise of commercial training halls having wooden ﬂoors also facilitated the categorization
of universal fencing techniques. Hokushin Itto-ryu master Chiba Shusaku (1793–1855) was at
the forefront of this development. The ensuing sporting form, gekiken, was popular with towns-
men as well as warriors. Although the Tokugawa government frowned on townsmen fencing,
many of the top fencers from the late eighteenth century onwards were not of warrior heritage.
THE MEIJI PERIOD: THE FALL AND RISE OF KENJUTSU
After two centuries of self-imposed national isolation (sakoku), kenjutsu was rich in ritualistic
symbolism and spiritualism, but from a practical standpoint it was no match for the ﬁrearm tech-
nology that had been evolving in Europe. Therefore, following the Meiji Restoration of 1868,
Social and Cultural Evolution of Kendo
599
www.ebook3000.com

the Japanese government sought to revolutionize its military by drawing heavily on Western
technology and military systems. Traditional martial arts quickly fell into decline because of the
lack of perceived application for them in a nation desperately trying to modernize.
But for the efforts of one man, Sakakibara Kenkichi (1830–1894), kenjutsu might have
disappeared altogether. Sakakibara was a direct retainer (hatamoto) of the Tokugawa shogunate
and an accomplished swordsman of the Jikishin Kage-ryu. He also taught kenjutsu at the
Kobusho, the military academy created by the Tokugawa government (bafuku) in 1856. Lament-
ing the sudden decline of kenjutsu, he resolved to rekindle interest, if only to provide a means
of income for the destitute martial artists who knew nothing else. He achieved this by estab-
lishing public fencing demonstrations known as gek(i)ken kogyo (gekiken performance).
The ﬁrst was held in the Asakusa district of Tokyo. It started on April 11, 1873, and went for
ten days. Members of the public paid an entrance fee to witness swordsmen demonstrating their
skills in exciting bouts, and the takings were divided among the ﬁghters. The instant and almost
unbridled popularity encouraged a ﬂurry of similar events throughout the country. Before long,
the media began to criticize the events as shameful exploitation of once-indelible warrior honor
and pride. The government also became wary, as the venues were thought to be providing
gathering places for disgruntled warriors to meet and hatch seditious plans. Eventually gekiken
kogyo meets were outlawed, but they did ensure enough interest for martial arts to continue to
the next stage of development, this time in the police forces and in the education system.
On January 19, 1880, newly formed Tokyo Police Academy guidelines stipulated that cadets
be instructed in kenjutsu and jujutsu, which meant that the stars of the gekiken kogyo soon found
gainful employment with the police as instructors. Although the utilization of kenjutsu by the
police and armed forces was thereby redeﬁned, the road to getting it accepted into the public
school curriculum was long and full of twists and turns. During the 1870s, there were a number of
high-ranking government ofﬁcials who questioned why it was not possible to develop a physical
education (taiiku) curriculum for Japanese schools that was based on traditional Japanese physical
culture (i.e., bujutsu) rather than Anglo-American sports, German gymnastics, or Swedish calis-
thenics. One of the most famous and inﬂuential supporters of this line of thought was judo
founder Kano Jigoro (1860–1938). The Ministry of Education (Monbusho) was guarded about
introducing bujutsu into the curriculum, and surveys were taken to ascertain any potential bene-
ﬁts or hazards. The most notable of these were the 1883 evaluation conducted by the National
Institute of Gymnastics (Taiso Denshujo) and the 1896 evaluation made by the School Health
Advisors Board (Gakko Eisei Komonkai). The conclusion reached in these investigations was
that the teaching of kenjutsu and jujutsu could complement the academic syllabus, assuming the
emphasis was placed on spiritual (moral) development and physical exercise. Unfortunately, the
perceived problems outweighed the beneﬁts, and it was even suggested that in the case of
kenjutsu, repeated striking of the head could result in brain damage in school children. The
debate continued until 1911, when the Ministry of Education promulgated physical education
guidelines said that kenjutsu (and jujutsu) could be taught as a regular subject for boys over the
age of sixteen who were “good of health.” This regulation went into effect from 1913.
NATIONALISM AND THE ROAD TO COMPULSORY KENDO EDUCATION
The formation of the Dai Nippon Butokukai (Greater Japan Martial Virtues Society) in 1895 was
signiﬁcant factor in promoting kenjutsu in schools. In 1905 the Butokukai established a division
600
Social and Cultural Evolution of Kendo

to train martial arts instructors, and after a number of revisions, this school became known as the
Bujutsu Senmon Gakko (Bujutsu Specialist School) in 1912. In 1919, when the school’s head-
master Nishikubo Hiromichi (1863–1930) ofﬁcially replaced the old name for martial arts, bu-
jutsu (martial techniques), with bu-do (martial way), the school was renamed Budo Senmon
Gakko. This was to emphasize the martial “Way” (do, cognate with Chinese Tao)—in other
words, the spiritual aspects of Japan’s traditional martial culture. Subsequently, Budo Senmon
Gakko (or “Busen” as it became known) and the Tokyo Koto Shihan Gakko (Tokyo Higher Nor-
mal School) were the two prominent schools tasked with training young martial arts instructors
for placement in schools throughout the country. It was from this time on that the terms gekiken
and kenjutsu were gradually replaced with kendo (and jujutsu with judo, kyujutsu with kyudo, and
so on). This change was not ratiﬁed by the Ministry of Education until 1926.
Besides changing the name, other problems to overcome included developing group instruc-
tion methods and creating a uniﬁed style of kenjutsu that transcended afﬁliation to a speciﬁc
ryuha. To this purpose, the Butokukai formed a set of three kata in 1906, but this set proved to
be unpopular. In 1912, another set was formulated, and these remain the basis for the ten kata
still studied today as Nippon Kendo Kata.
Kendo was not made a compulsory subject (hisshu kamoku) in Japanese schools until 1931.
As early as 1928, the Minister of Education announced that “all imported ideas were to be thor-
oughly ‘Japanized’, abnormal thought was to be purged, and educators must ﬁrmly support the
kokutai (National polity) and truly understand its meaning” (Guttmann and Thompson 2001,
155). During 1931–1932, Japan embarked on a course of imperial expansion in East Asia, and
school regulations were changed yet again. Speciﬁcally, kendo and judo were elevated to
compulsory subjects for boys because they were “useful in nurturing a resolute, determined
patriotic spirit and training both the mind and the body” (ibid., 156).
Increasingly militaristic ideology became the norm throughout the 1930s, and in the spring
of 1941, the term “physical education” (taiso) was changed to “physical discipline” (tairen). The
Butokukai came under direct government auspices in March 1942, and with combat application
in mind, school kendo training soon reached its peak in terms of violence. For example, as
opposed to the standard method of best of three points, kendo bouts were made ippon-shobu,
where the ﬁrst to score a valid “kill” was deemed the winner. Tripping up and ripping off one’s
opponent’s fencing mask constituted a valid point (decapitation), and shinai (bamboo training
swords) were shortened to the length of military-issue swords.
POSTWAR KENDO AND THE SPORTING DILEMMA
Japan lost World War II, and in October 1946, the Butokukai was dissolved on the grounds of
“perpetuation of militarism or a martial spirit” (Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers
1949). Perhaps it is more accurate to say that the Butokukai decided its own fate by deciding not
to comply with requests from the Supreme Commander Allied Powers. Whatever the case, the
sound of bamboo shinai clashing amid kiai screams was rarely heard immediately after the war.
Nevertheless, enthusiasts maneuvered to legalize kendo again, and in May 1948 a fencing
and kendo demonstration was held in Tokyo. The following year, the Tokyo Collegiate Kendo
Federation Alumni Association was permitted to form the Tokyo Kendo Club. These enthusi-
asts set about reviving kendo as a sport suitable for a postwar democratic society, and the result
Social and Cultural Evolution of Kendo
601
www.ebook3000.com

was called shinai kyogi (pliant-staff sport). As the name suggests, the sporting aspect of kendo was
stressed, and the combative features from before and during the war were consciously extracted.
The All-Japan Shinai Kyogi Association was inaugurated in 1950, and in 1952, the hybrid
sport was included as an elective subject in middle and high schools. The All-Japan Kendo Fed-
eration was formed in the same year, and conventional kendo was revived, albeit in a signiﬁ-
cantly tamer form than in the war years. Shinai kyogi and kendo coexisted temporarily, but in
1957 the two were combined to become “school kendo” (gakko kendo), after which the All-Japan
Shinai Kyogi Association was dissolved.
The ﬁrst All-Japan Kendo Championships were conducted in 1953 following the inaugura-
tion of the All-Japan Kendo Federation in October 1952. The All-Japan Collegiate Kendo Fed-
eration was also formed in 1952. The All-Japan Company (jitsugyodan; the reference is to
corporate sponsorship) Kendo Federation was established in 1957, and the All-Japan School
Kendo Federation followed in 1961. Kendo was featured as a demonstration sport during the
Tokyo Olympics of 1964; the matches took place at the newly constructed Budokan. Kendo was
progressively introduced back into the national curriculum along with judo and sumo, but as
combat sport (kakugi) rather than a martial way (budo).
Kendo experienced a boom of sorts from the mid-1960s, and the popularity of competition
kendo ignited an ongoing heated debate on whether kendo is “martial way” or “sport,” often
without a suitable deﬁnition for either. In any case, emphasis on winning competitions through
trickery or unconventional techniques is widely criticized by conservative kendo authorities as
contradicting the essence of kendo as a “way” for personal development.
KENDO’S FUTURE
Before World War II, Japanese immigrants took kendo to Hawaii, North America, and Brazil, and
colonialists took it to Taiwan, Korea, and Manchuria. Although there were some kendo exhibi-
tions in Europe before World War II, kendo never took root to any signiﬁcant extent in Europe,
Southeast Asia, or Oceania until the 1960s. The European Kendo Association was formed in
1968, and the International Kendo Federation (FIK) was formed at a meeting in Tokyo in 1970.
In 1970, seventeen countries and regions were represented; as of 2008 there were nearly ﬁfty. The
FIK is responsible for holding the World Kendo Championships every three years and sponsoring
international seminars, promotion examinations, and information exchange.
Japan still has the world’s largest kendo population, numbering perhaps 1.5 million nation-
wide. Despite this large number of reported practitioners, Japan’s kendo population is dropping.
This can be attributed to a number of factors, including low birth rates and the attraction of
sports such as baseball and, more recently, soccer.
Outside Japan, only Korea has a sizable kendo population (approximately 400,000). In Korea,
kendo is called kumdo, and it is considered by many Koreans to be part of traditional Korean
culture rather than Japanese. Korean authorities often espouse their desire for kendo/kumdo to
be included as an Olympic sport. The mainstream in the international kendo community is
opposed to this idea out of fears that inclusion, with the ensuing commercialization and obses-
sion with winning medals, would be detrimental to the art. In April 2006, the Japan-based Inter-
national Kendo Federation was successful in becoming an ofﬁcial member of the General
Association of International Sports Federations (GAISF) as the sole representing organization
602
Social and Cultural Evolution of Kendo

for kendo, thereby forming a connection with the International Olympic Committee. To date,
GAISF has voiced no aspirations of making kendo an Olympic event.
The idea of character development is always attractive to educators, and in Japan, kendo is
frequently touted as one of the answers to the problem of the perceived lack of patriotic senti-
ment and knowledge among youth. To this purpose, the Ministry of Education changed the term
“combat sports” (kakugi) back to “martial ways” (budo) in 1989. Kendo continues to be taught at
schools throughout Japan, and recently, the Ministry of Education announced that from 2012,
training in kendo or another of the ofﬁcially recognized martial arts will become compulsory in
Japanese junior high schools. Meanwhile, reﬁnements continue to be made to match rules, con-
cepts, techniques, and equipment. The idea is to facilitate kendo’s continued integration and
acceptance as a socially useful and fulﬁlling activity. In this sense, kendo continues to combine
characteristics of martial art, combative sport, and exercise in self-perfection.
—Alexander Bennett
See also: Japan: Kendo, Iaido, and Jodo; Korea: Kumdo (in Volume I); Belief Systems: 
Budo, Bujutsu, and Bugei; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion before 
1868; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868; Commodiﬁcation
of Leisure; Globalization of Martial Arts; Written Texts: Japan; Judo in Japan, 
1931–1950; Political Conﬂict and Aikido, 1931–1942; and 
Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in this volume).
REFERENCES
All Japan Kendo Federation, editors. 2003. Kendo no Rekishi [History of Kendo]. Tokyo: All Japan
Kendo Federation.
Bennett, Alexander. 2008. “Spiritual Sports: The ‘Civilizing Process’ of Japanese Swordsmanship
from the Tokugawa Period and Beyond,” Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, Bulletin No. 5,
May, http://www.asjapan.org/web.php/lectures/2008/04, accessed January 18, 2010.
Friday, Karl. 2004. Samurai, Warfare and the State in Early Medieval Japan. London: Routledge.
Hurst, G. Cameron III. 1988. Armed Martial Arts of Japan: Swordsmanship and Archery. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.
Guttmann, Allen, and Lee Thompson. 2001. Japanese Sports: A History. Honolulu: University of
Hawai‘i Press.
Imamura Yoshio. 1989. Jukyu Seiki ni Okeru Nihon Taiiku no Kenkyu [Studies in Nineteenth-Century
Japanese Physical Education], corrected edition. Tokyo: Dai Ichi Shobo.
Nakabayashi Shinji. 1998. Budo no Susume [Introduction to Martial Arts]. Tokyo: Shimazu Shobo.
Rogers, John M. 1988. “The Development of the Military Profession in Tokugawa Japan.”:
Unpublished Ph. D. dissertation, Harvard University.
Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers. 1949. Political Reorientation of Japan, September 1945 to
September 1948: Report. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce.
Social and Cultural Evolution of Kendo
603
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank 

Performing Arts
Combat systems and speciﬁc martial arts techniques have had a profound and lasting impact on
the development of cultural performances throughout human history. From decentralized tribal
cultures to politically centralized states, speciﬁc techniques of the hunt or ﬁght have been trans-
formed into cultural performances, enacted either by warriors themselves or by performers who
have incorporated or modiﬁed such techniques to ﬁt a culturally speciﬁc, yet evolving, aesthetic
and performance style. The speciﬁc forms of cultural performance centered on martial systems
may be best thought of as stretching along a continuum from actual to virtual combat.
Classical Greece offers one example of the wide range of combat or martially related cultural
performances along this continuum. Actual combat in ancient Greece was common, but in
addition there were other important forms of cultural performance in which the use of ﬁghting
techniques was central—the game-contests, and preparations or training for warfare. Both were
characteristically violent.
Sociologist Norbert Elias (1897–1990) has ably illustrated that unlike today’s rather tame
modern versions of the original Olympic Games, the early Greek game-contests were regarded
“as an exercise for war and war as an exercise for these contests” (1972, 100). Further toward the
virtual end of the continuum, many of the same martial techniques served as the basis for two
important forms of performance—the Pyrrhic and Anapale. These two forms illustrate the
symbiotic relationship that has always existed between martial training, dance, and performance.
The Pyrrhic was part of the training of boys in Sparta from the age of ﬁve. Similar to the
dramatic contests, where the chorus was trained at the expense of the choregus (citizen-patron)
and performed as part of the festival of Dionysus, Pyrrhic competitions were held at the
Panathenaea Festival. Plato (ca. 429–ca. 347 BCE) was ready to include the Pyrrhic in his ideal
state and provided a vivid description of this martially based performance, which mimetically
transformed actual offensive and defensive maneuvers into a graceful and athletic dance. For
Plato, the Pyrrhic imitated the modes of avoiding blows and missiles, “by dropping or giving way
or springing aside, or rising up or falling down; also the opposite postures which are those of
action as, for example, the imitation of archery and the hurling of javelins, and of all sorts of
blows. And, when the imitation is of brave bodies and souls, the action is direct and muscular,
giving for the most part a straight movement of the limbs of the body” (Laws 7.815A).
While the Pyrrhic was in essence a performance that also served as a preparation for armed
combat, the Anapale, practiced at the gymnopaedia (literally, naked boy event, but in this con-
text meaning sports festival) in Sparta, was a dance performed by boys in the nude “moving
gracefully to the music of ﬂute and lyre, [which] displayed posture, and movements used in
wrestling and boxing” (Lawler 1964, 108).
www.ebook3000.com

Whether on the battleﬁeld, on the game ﬁeld, or in the dancing place in mimetically
transformed versions, both armed and unarmed martial techniques were a highly visible and impor-
tant part of classical Greek culture and social life. Each speciﬁc display or cultural performance
context embodied a shared “display ethos” founded on commonly held assumptions regarding
important attributes of the heroic warriors who practiced such techniques and who were prepared
to die in battle. Elias discusses how both game-contests and ﬁghting in classical Greece “centered on
the ostentatious display of the warrior virtues which gained for a man the highest praise and honor
among other members of his own group and for his group. It was glorious to vanquish enemies or
opponents but it was hardly less glorious to be vanquished” (Lawler 1964, 100).
The heroic display ethos of a culture or subculture is that collective set of behaviors, expected
actions, and principles or codes of conduct that ideally guide and are displayed by a hero and that
are the subject of many traditional ballads or epics where seemingly superhuman heroes display
bravery, courage, and valor in the face of death. As Elias points out, for the Greeks, Hector was
as glorious in defeat as his conqueror, Achilles, since he too fought as one must to be a hero, with
all one’s “might until one was maimed, wounded, or killed and could ﬁght no longer. . . . What
was inglorious and shameful was to surrender victory without a sufﬁcient show of bravery and
endurance” (1972, 100). The game-contests and dances provided opportunities for the
performative display of the heroic ethos that was a legacy of the Homeric epics.
The heroic display ethos of a culture, the oral and/or written mythologies and histories of
martial exploits, and speciﬁc martial techniques collectively constitute a network of three
symbiotically interrelated phenomena. Together, they combine to constitute a variety of genres
of cultural performance ranging from aesthetic, virtual displays choreographed in highly stylized
dance or dramatic forms (such as the Anapale), to game-contests or mock combats arranged as
part of a public festival (such as the original Olympic contests), to duels or combats (the later
gladiatorial combats/contests of the Roman Empire), to external warfare itself. Public displays of
power or arms, socially and legally sanctioned arenas where tests of strength or duels occur, and
mock combats or exhibitions of martial skills have always served as discrete and important types
of cultural performance in which martial techniques have played an important role. Through
such public performances, a particular (sub)culture’s warrior-hero ethos itself is displayed to a
wide public through use of actual techniques.
In Europe, there are many examples of historically signiﬁcant heroic literatures that embody
a particular period’s display ethos; however, few examples of performance forms exist today that
are based on martial forms or that embody the heroic or display ethos of a former era. The forms
that do exist in Europe are instead examples of what Schechner has called “restored behavior.”
Today’s Renaissance Faires, for example, employ actors dressed in period costumes reconstruct-
ing jousting matches in which knights stage mock combats for the hands of fair ladies of court.
Similarly, stage combat ﬁght arrangers reconstruct the precise use of historically accurate
weaponry as part of a staged drama.
In other parts of the world, we ﬁnd cases of living martial traditions whose techniques form
the core of cultural performances that display the culture’s heroic ethos and bring to life the cul-
ture’s mythic, epic, or historical heroic literatures. Such performances include ritual and folk, as
well as “classical,” genres. Indeed, it can be impossible to distinguish in some cases where a mar-
tial art ends and a performing art begins, as with the Randai and silek of the Minangkabau of
Sumatra, or Brazilian capoeira. In these cases, so integral have the martial art and performance
606
Performing Arts

elements become to each other that training takes place through performance, and performance
through the martial arts training.
In other cases, martial arts techniques have been subsumed within, and gradually transformed
into, virtuoso training and/or performance systems. One of the most obvious historical connec-
tions is between the traditional Chinese theater (Beijing Opera), which evolved its wugong (lit-
erally, martial effort) techniques employing both hand-to-hand ﬁghting and manipulation of
pole arms, lances, and swords. Seen today in the spectacular acrobatic feats and mass stylized
combat displays of the Beijing stage, the process of transformation through which wugong stage
combat and choreography developed is as yet unexplored and undocumented, if not lost in the
maze of individual schools of Chinese martial traditions.
In Japan, the popular Kabuki theater developed the tachimawari (stylized ﬁght-scene tech-
niques) associated with portrayal of samurai. In Kabuki, a ﬁght specialist (tateshi) is responsible
for combining various acrobatic moves, poses (mie) used for highly emotional dramatic effect,
and speciﬁc ﬁghting techniques brought from the martial arts into Kabuki’s exciting, fast-paced
battle scenes. The predecessor to Kabuki, the more reserved and restrained Noh drama, was also
inﬂuenced by the martial arts and ways (bugei). For example, the Kita Noh tradition (one of the
ﬁve main schools of acting) was born from the samurai class. Some of today’s contemporary Kita
school actors compare the concentration and mental state of the Noh performer to those of the
martial artist, and in the demon play Funa Benkei (Benka in the Boat), the staging of the demon’s
attack is taken from the use of sword and pole weapon (naginata).
A third example of the close relationship between martial arts and performance is found in
India. As early as the writing of the Natyasastra (Encyclopedia of Dramaturgy, between 200 BCE
and 200 CE), the link between martial techniques, performer training, and stage combat had
been made. The performer is enjoined to prepare himself for the stage by taking “exercise on the
ﬂoor as well as high up in the air, and should have beforehand one’s body massaged with the
[sesame] oil or with barley gruel. The ﬂoor is the proper place [literally, “mother”] for exercise.
Hence one should resort to the ﬂoor, and stretching oneself over it one should take exercise”
(Ghosh 1956). The neophyte receives instructions to follow dietary restrictions as part of the
training. The text also records the types of movement to be used for on-stage “release of
weapons” and use of sword and shield, as well as other weapons in the stage combat arsenal used
to enact scenes drawn from India’s great epics, the Mahabharata and Ramayana. The connection
between martial and performing arts is witnessed in the legacy of extant martial and perform-
ance genres today throughout the Indian subcontinent, from Orissa’s now reﬁned dance genre,
Seraikella chhau, which originated in martial exercises before it became a masked-dance/drama,
to the kathakali dance-drama of Kerala, whose entire training, massage system, and stage combat
are derived directly from its martial precursor, kalarippayattu.
In addition to the symbiotic relationship between traditional martial and performing arts, con-
temporary performers are also making use of martial arts in training performers and as part of the
development of a contemporary movement vocabulary. Theater practitioners and actor trainers A.
C. Scott (1909–1985 ), Herbert Blau (1926–), and Rachel Rosenthal (1926–) were some of the
pioneers during the 1960s, all making use of the Chinese martial art of taijiquan—Scott in training
performers at the Asian/Experimental Theatre Program at the University of Wisconsin–Madison,
Blau and Rosenthal in training members of their performance ensembles. Following their examples
in using taijiquan, but also making use of yoga and the Indian martial art kalarippayattu, during the
Performing Arts
607
www.ebook3000.com

1970s, the author of this entry began to develop a now internationally known system of training
performers using the principles of techniques of Asian martial and meditation arts as a foundation
for the psycho-physiological process of the performer (see Zarrilli 1993, 1995).
An example of the use of an actual martial art in contemporary theater performance is that of
Yoshi and Company. During the 1970s, Yoshi Oida (1933–), an internationally known actor with
Peter Brook’s (1925–) company in Paris, created a complete performance piece, Ame-Tsuchi,
based on kendo. Yoshi used the rituals of combat and full contact exchanges as a theatrical vehicle
for transmission of the symbolic meaning behind the Japanese origin myth that served as the text
for the performance.
Modern Indian dancers, choreographers, and theater directors have also made use of martial
arts when training their companies or for choreography. These include theater director Kavalam
Narayana Panikkar (1928–) of Kerala, who used kalarippayattu in training his company, and
theater director Ratan Thiyam (1948–) of Manipur, who made use of thang-ta. Choreographers
Chandralekha of Madras (1928–2007) and Daksha Sheth (1952–) of Thiruvananthapuram also
have drawn extensively on kalarippayattu in training their companies and creating their con-
temporary choreographies.
—Phillip Zarrilli
See also: Capoeira; Caribbean Martial Arts; Iranian Martial Arts; Celtic Martial Arts; 
Fighting Arts of the Hellenic, Hellenistic, and Roman Eras; South Asian 
Martial Arts; Silat (in Volume I); Action Design for Professional Wrestling; Belief Systems:
European Chivalry; Belief Systems: Iran; Commodiﬁcation of Leisure; Expressive Culture;
Folklore; Invented Traditions; Globalization of Martial Arts; Film and the Martial Arts; 
Gunﬁghters; Television and the Martial Arts; Stage Combat in the Elizabethan 
Tradition; and Taiwanese Street Performances (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Elias, Norbert. 1972. “The Genesis of Sport as a Sociological Problem,” in Sport: Readings from a
Sociological Perspective, edited by Eric Dunning, 88–115. Toronto: University of Toronto.
Ghosh, M. 1956. Natyasastra, Volume 1. Calcutta: Manisha Granthalaya.
Lawler, Lillian B. 1964. The Dance in Ancient Greece. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Schechner, Richard. 1983. Performative Circumstances from Avante Garde to Ramlila. Calcutta: Seagull
Books.
Zarrilli, Phillip B. 1993. Asian Martial Arts in Actor Training. Madison, WI: Center for South Asia.
Zarrilli, Phillip B., editor. 1995. Acting (Re)Considered. London: Routledge Press.
ACTION DESIGN FOR PROFESSIONAL WRESTLING
Professional wrestling is a form of improvisational theater. The following discusses some of the
common themes and structures of professional wrestling.
Professional wrestling developed on the carnival midway. Thus, its jargon owes a debt to early
twentieth-century carnival argot (“carnie”). At the same time, its melodramatic storylines owe
a debt to the acts performed on the vaudeville and music hall circuits of the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries.
608
Action Design for Professional Wrestling

A standard storyline (“program”) ends with the local or national champion defeating all the
out-of-town or foreign champions. The best of these stories are not simply ﬂag-waving paeans;
instead, they contain multiple layers of meaning. Rikidozan (Kim Sin-Nak, 1924–1963) was an
enormously popular professional wrestler in Japan during the 1950s, and “by knocking large-
bodied gaijin [foreigners] around the ring and beating them to the mat, Rikidozan vented in
proxy the pent-up emotions of the Japanese people” (Ono Banboku, quoted in Wetherall 1981,
280). The irony is of course that Rikidozan was not ethnically Japanese. Instead, he was a Korean
who moved to Japan in 1939. His promoters had invented a back story for him. But to reveal the
back story is to unmask the man, and for a Japanese journalist to have announced this while
Rikidozan lived would have been as unthinkable as Lois Lane writing in the Daily Planet that
Superman was really Clark Kent. So, in the end, which is the truth and which is the illusion?
These are the kinds of conundrums that the wrestling melodrama likes to explore.
Another common storyline involves the Caped Crusader. The Crusader wears a mask and a
cape, and he ﬁghts good and evil on morally ambiguous terms. The resemblance to movie swash-
bucklers and comic book superheroes is almost certainly intentional. One of Mexico’s most
famous masked wrestlers, El Santo (Rodolfo Guzmán Huerta, 1917–1984), began wrestling dur-
ing the mid-1930s, a time when radio plays, movies, and comic books featuring masked heroes
such as Zorro, the Lone Ranger, and the Phantom were very popular.
Dominance, submission, and gender roles are popular themes. Wrestling’s representations are
never subtle. Thus, in Mexico, exoticos are male professional wrestlers who dress in drag, thereby
mocking both Latin machismo and the traditional hypermasculinity of the wrestling ring (Levi
1998). Similarly, in the United States during the 1940s and 1950s, a time when many American
men wore crew cuts and gray ﬂannel suits, the wrestler known as Gorgeous George (1915–1963)
grew his hair long, wore sequined gowns, and generally turned the Caped Crusader image upside
down.
The workplace provides wrestling with many of its story lines. For example, wrestling is pre-
sented as The Business, and the Boss (the promoter) is a greedy, sexist, racist pig who unmerci-
fully exploits his Workers (the wrestlers), but is at the same time threatened by competition from
Other Bosses and harassment from The Government. In some speciﬁc instances, this may have
been true, but in general, it is simply a storyline.
Stereotyping is a given. Promoters never needed much help stereotyping dark-skinned wrestlers.
They only needed to call them “Bobo Brazil” (Houston Harris, 1924–1998) or “Abdullah the
Butcher” (Lawrence Shreve, 1941–). Although ofﬁcially called “Lady Wrestlers,” women are
presented in equally brazen ways. Before Lillian Ellison (1923–2007) became the Fabulous Moolah,
she was Slave Girl Moolah, and ﬁfty years later, septuagenarian Mae Young (1923–) pretended to
give birth, in the ring, to a slime-covered plastic hand.
Promoters hire wrestlers to deliver speciﬁc routines. That is, the promoter says, “Do what you
did last week in Tulsa.” If the angle doesn’t work, then the promoter changes the storyline. This
change usually takes place in the context of a match, or a series of matches (e.g., the program).
To make this transition, old routines are used because they still work. For example, one wrestler
may say, “On the shake.” This means that the wrestler who was the crowd favorite (“babyface”)
will stick out his hand, as if to shake hands, and then pretend to strike the other wrestler in the
groin. This technique, known as the “ball shot,” used to be a common way for wrestling promo-
tions to show audiences that a former babyface was turning into a “heel” (villain).
Action Design for Professional Wrestling
609
www.ebook3000.com

Novelty is important to the show. Sometimes this means hiring attractive female wrestlers
(“eye candy”) or unattractive male wrestlers (“uglies”). Other times, it means claiming that a for-
mer babyface has gone insane. During the 1990s, story lines about insane wrestlers (“crazy
heels”) were so commonplace that when World Wrestling Entertainment announced on its web
site that wrestler Chris Benoit (1967–2007) and his family had been found dead in their home,
some people thought that the statement was part of a storyline rather than an understated
acknowledgment of an actual murder–suicide. And, sometimes, novelty simply means increas-
ing risk. Increasing risk ranges from something as comparatively minor as nicking one’s face with
hidden implements to leaping from great heights. Today, falls of 4.5 meters (15 feet) are not
uncommon, and in 1999, Owen Hart (1965–1999) died after a harness malfunction caused him
to fall 21 meters (70 feet).
Promoters hire wrestlers with the assumption that they already know how to wrestle. Before
the advent of training schools during the early 1980s, aspiring wrestlers learned the ropes by
training at whatever gym the local pros frequented, or by joining one of the AT (athletic) shows
that used to tour with carnivals. As Scott Beekman (2006, 39) explains, AT show “wrestlers
engaged in rough bouts in which a local challenger would receive a monetary prize if he man-
aged to last in the ring until the end (generally ﬁfteen minutes) or successfully pinned the car-
nival wrestlers. Under these circumstances, the wrestlers employed by the carnivals had to
obtain falls as quickly as possible.” To ensure constant action, AT show operators would plant
mild-looking wrestlers in the crowd. The job of the plants was to accept the carnival wrestler’s
challenge and to make him look tired or weak. In this way, the plant learned to wrestle, and the
show made money.
A wrestler’s prematch preparation time is minimal. After agreeing to do a show, a name
wrestler decided he wanted to do another show instead. He waited until the week of the match
to let the promoter know that he was not coming, and this left the promoter without a wrestler
for the main event. The tickets were already sold. Rather than give the fans their money back,
the promoter phoned a retired wrestler, Bryan Walsh.
Walsh: “Hey, how’s it going?”
Promoter: “What are you doing Saturday night?”
Walsh: “Nothing, so far.”
Promoter: “How would you like to be in the main event in a match?”
Walsh: “What? I haven’t been in a ring for over six years!”
Promoter: “Don’t worry, we’ll make it work.”
Saturday morning, the promoter drove Walsh to a sporting goods store, where they bought a
pair of wrestling boots, a pair of trunks, and a T-shirt with the numeral 1,000 written across both
front and back. The promoter then drove Walsh to the arena, where, for the main event, he intro-
duced “Bryan Walsh, the Man of a Thousand Holds” (communication with Bryan Walsh, Febru-
ary 22, 2009; communication with Jeff Archer, May 8, 2009). This is known as “putting over.”
At the venue, the promoter tells the wrestlers what he has in mind for the show, and how
long they should be in the ring. The wrestlers then go to the dressing room to discuss what they
want to do, and how they want to do it. The discussion is usually along the lines of, “How about
if I take the ﬁrst fall at about four minutes using the Boston Crab, then you take the second fall
at about three minutes using the Judo Chop followed by rear naked strangle? Then, for the third
fall, at about four minutes, we ﬁnish with you using the airplane spin.” With introductions and
610
Action Design for Professional Wrestling

breaks, total elapsed time for the described act is about ﬁfteen minutes, just as the promoter
intended.
Inside the ring, there is some spoken communication. For example, if the referee says, “Break
that hold,” he may really mean, “It’s time to wrap it up, guys.” How did the referee know that
time was up? He saw the promoter put a pencil in his mouth in a certain way. Similarly, if a
wrestler is truly hurt, then he may use the code word “potato” to advise the other wrestler to take
it easy. Nonetheless, most in-ring communication is nonverbal. Keys to this nonverbal commu-
nication include knowing how to use one technique to set up another. Done right, nobody gets
hurt and the crowd screams. Done wrong, somebody gets hurt and the crowd goes silent.
—Joseph Svinth
See also: Japan: Sumo (in Volume I); Commodiﬁcation of Leisure; Invented Traditions; 
Asian Martial Arts in the United States and Canada; Mixed Martial Arts; Professional 
Wrestling; Film and the Martial Arts; Television and the Martial Arts; The Internet 
and the Martial Arts; and Performing Arts (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Beekman, Scott. 2006. Ringside: A History of Professional Wrestling in America. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Hall, Ward. No date. “AT Shows,” Sideshow World, http://www.sideshowworld.com/tgod-WH-AT
-shows.html, accessed May 5, 2009.
Hardin, Marie, and Brent Hardin. 2000. “Wrestling with Stereotypes: Depictions of the Mentally
Ill/Disabled in the World Wrestling Federation,” Sociology of Sport Online 3(1), http://physed
.otago.ac.nz/sosol/v3i1/v3i1a1.htm, accessed May 5, 2009.
Kerrick, George E. 1980. “The Jargon of Professional Wrestling,” American Speech 55(2), Summer,
142–145, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/3050508, accessed May 5, 2009.
Levi, Heather. 1997. “Sport and Melodrama: The Case of Mexican Professional Wrestling,” Social
Text 50 (Spring), 57–68, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/466814, accessed October 16, 2009.
Levi, Heather. 1998. “Lean Mean Fighting Queens: Drag in the World of Mexican Professional
Wrestling,” Sexualities 1(3), 275–285, DOI: 10.1177/136346098001003003, via http://online
.sagepub.com/, accessed October 16, 2009.
Maurer, David W. 1931. “Carnival Cant: A Glossary of Circus and Carnival Slang,” American Speech
6(5), June, 327–337, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/451479, accessed October 16, 2009.
Russell, Carol L., and Thomas E. Murray. 2004. “The Life and Death of Carnie,” American Speech
79(4), 400–416, DOI:10.1215/00031283-79-4-400, via http://americanspeech.dukejournals.org/
cgi/content/abstract/79/4/400, accessed October 16, 2009.
Wetherall, William. 1981. “Public Figures in Popular Culture: Identity Problems of Minority Heroes,”
in Koreans in Japan: Ethnic Conﬂict and Accommodation, edited by Changsoo Lee and George
DeVos, 281–303 (text), 406–413 (notes). Berkeley: University of California Press; via http://-
members.jcom.home.ne.jp/yosha/minorities/Minority_heroes.html, accessed May 8, 2009.
STAGE COMBAT IN THE ELIZABETHAN TRADITION
The term “stage combat” refers to the theatrical illusion of violence, especially armed and
unarmed combat, as it is employed for dramatic effect in theatrical, operatic, and balletic
productions. The art of stage combat is distinguished from “violence as spectacle,” meaning the
gladiatorial combats of ancient Rome, the jousting contests of the European Middle Ages, and the
professional boxing matches of today. In violence as spectacle, a genuine antagonism between
Stage Combat in the Elizabethan Tradition
611
www.ebook3000.com

participants may exist, and even when there is not, there is still a high chance of injury or even
death. Stage combat, on the other hand, is the mimetic enactment of violence without any vio-
lent or competitive intent, within the context of a dramatic performance. Although stage com-
bat requires both physical skill and mental discipline, it is a comparatively safe and cooperative
performing art rather than a martial art. This essay outlines the history, major themes, and prac-
tices of stage combat pedagogy and choreography in the Elizabethan (or Shakespearean) tradition.
HISTORY
Staged fencing bouts have long provided entertainment at social events such as festivals and
banquets, and some of the later German fechtbücher (combat treatises) include sections dedicated
to ﬂamboyant techniques that were apparently employed by itinerant Klopffechteren (“clown
ﬁghters” or “knockabout fencers”). Nonetheless, beyond William Shakespeare’s (1564–1616)
famous direction “They ﬁght” (Romeo and Juliet, Act V, sc. LII), there is no known documenta-
tion detailing the stage combats of the Elizabethan era (1558–1603). But, given that Elizabethan
audiences were used to bear-baiting and single-stick bouts, it is probably safe to assume that
staged ﬁght scenes were performed in a realistic manner.
English theatrical productions were restrained during the Puritan era (1564–1660), but they
revived during the Georgian era (1714–1811), and by the Victorian era (1837–1901) the
generic theatrical swordplay sequences were known by names such as “round eights,” “Glasgow
tens,” and “drunk combat” (Evangelista 1995, 581). These sets of attacks and defenses were stan-
dardized throughout the theatrical community and were quickly arranged into unique ﬁght
sequences for individual productions.
At the very beginning of the twentieth century, there was some interest in making the fenc-
ing done on stage more historically accurate. The reason was that antiquarian fencers such as
Alfred Hutton (1839–1910) and Egerton Castle (1858–1920) were carrying out extensive
research into archaic systems of combat. Weapons such as the rapier and dagger and two-handed
sword were evaluated, thereby ushering in a new era of historical accuracy in theatrical combat.
These efforts were largely forgotten during the cultural chaos surrounding World War I
(1914–1918), and after the war ended, drama programs began appearing in academic settings. For
example, University of Washington’s School of Drama dates to 1919, while Yale’s Department of
Drama dates to 1924. As a rule, neither the students nor their professors knew much about fencing
except for what they saw in Hollywood swashbucklers starring Douglas Fairbanks Sr. (1883–1939).
Thus, as formal drama schools began appearing during the mid-twentieth century, the stage fencing
style began drawing from a diverse range of sources including dance, mime, professional wrestling,
competitive fencing, theatrical gymnastics, and various Asian martial arts.
Then, in February 1969, Henry Marshall and William Hobbs established the Society of
British Fight Directors (since 1996, the British Academy of Dramatic Combat) in London. This
was the ﬁrst professional organization for people who taught stage combat at drama schools. It
developed formalized training and testing procedures, and over the subsequent decades, similar
organizations were established in the United States, Canada, Scandinavia, New Zealand, and
Australia. Today, national curricula and certiﬁcation protocols have been established, both
national and international conferences are held, and ﬁght arrangers generally give considerable
thought to how theatrical battles are going to be presented and staged.
612
Stage Combat in the Elizabethan Tradition

STAGE COMBAT AS A PERFORMING ART
When considering the importance of stage combat as a performing art, consider Romeo and Juliet
(published ca. 1597). The story opens with a street brawl. That brawl sets the scene; to
appreciate immediately the fundamental dramatic conﬂict that is essential to this story, the audi-
ence must also immediately appreciate the deep enmity between the households of Montague
and Capulet. As a master dramatist, Shakespeare skillfully employs scenes of physical violence—
shouting, duels, and outright battle—to express that essential conﬂict viscerally.
To do justice to this pivotal moment, the director and cast must celebrate the power of story-
telling via physical action that fully expresses the playwright’s intentions, that illuminates the
play’s character, text, and subtexts, and that has a deep emotional impact upon the audience. This
is the goal of professional ﬁght direction and of stage combat as a performing art in its own right.
MARTIAL ARTS AND PERFORMING ARTS
Training in competitive fencing or martial arts develops an actor’s concentration, physical
ﬁtness, coordination, and control. Nonetheless, a ﬁght scene is not a martial arts display.
Actors portray ﬁctional characters within a ﬁctional world, and in Shakespearean presenta-
tions the ﬁght scenes are not simply eye candy. Instead, they help audiences perceive and
inhabit Shakespeare’s world and characters. Not understanding this can sometimes frustrate
martial artists in the audience, who may be unfamiliar with theatrical conventions but
nonetheless have their own ideas about how ﬁght sequences should be created, performed,
and presented.
Martial artists may object when a particular ﬁghting style is represented in drama on the
grounds that the representation is technically inaccurate. Although this objection has some
merit, every aspect of a theatrical production is subject to a range of artistic choices, and histor-
ical and/or technical accuracy is likely to be third or fourth in a scale of priorities headed by
safety and storytelling. Thus, while a ﬁght scene may be inspired by a particular ﬁghting style, it
does not follow that the scene is intended to serve as a textbook presentation of that style. Also,
as professional performers with limited rehearsal time, actors cannot be expected to undertake
the degree of physical risk that professional or amateur ﬁghters willingly assume.
Another difference is that ﬁghters move “against” one another. In competition, the idea is to
see who has the most skill, but on stage the paradigms are “with” and “for.” That is, the actors
move with one another, for the entertainment of their mutual audience. Consequently, actors
have more in common with professional wrestlers than they do with prizeﬁghters.
SAFETY AND STORYTELLING
Safety is a vital aspect of stage combat theory and practice. Fight directors employ a range of very
speciﬁc safety protocols, invisible to the audience but crucial to the performers’ well-being. Not
only must actors safely perform the physical actions of the ﬁght scene; they must do so in such a
way that the audience sees only their characters’ hatred for each other. To achieve this illusion,
the actors must, in reality, cooperate at a very deep level; cueing each other in a myriad of sub-
tle ways, controlling the momentum and direction of their attacks, physically supporting each
other while appearing to struggle, rolling, falling, springing back to their feet to attack again;
always in perfect safety, yet never seeming safe.
Stage Combat in the Elizabethan Tradition
613
www.ebook3000.com

The guiding principle of Shakespearean combat is “suit the action to the word” (Hamlet, Act
III, sc. 2, published ca. 1601). Technical correctness is not necessarily identical to realism, nor is
realism necessarily the best choice for a particular ﬁght sequence. Rather, these are points on a
spectrum of artistic choices that include surrealism, comedic slapstick, naturalism, and so on. If a
given story is about martial masters who ﬁght with expert grace and poise, then the actors should
be equipped to perform in masterful style. On the other hand, it can be deeply disconcerting for
an audience to see otherwise mortal characters suddenly transform into impeccable combatants
the moment they begin to ﬁght. If the story is about people who feel real fear, who are not always
poised to strike the perfect blow, who make mistakes and must scramble to recover the advantage,
or to save themselves, then the ﬁght sequences should be informed by that aesthetic.
Today, stage combat is taught in drama schools. Student actors undertake the study of a range
of speciﬁc theatrical ﬁghting styles; examples include generic unarmed combat, rapier and dag-
ger fencing, quarterstaff fencing, and so on. Following this preparation, many drama schools offer
practical examinations in association with the various national stage combat certifying bodies.
Advanced and specialized training is offered through regional, national, and international stage
combat workshops and conferences. These conferences and workshops also provide a structure
for recertifying in various stage combat disciplines.
Actors receive additional training during rehearsal. During the rehearsal process, especially
if the production involves extensive or complex ﬁght sequences, the ﬁght director or an assistant
(“ﬁght captain”) supervise stage combat-speciﬁc rehearsals (“ﬁght calls”). During ﬁght calls, the
cast typically runs through each ﬁght scene several times at half-speed. The tempo gradually
picks up as the actors become conﬁdent with the action.
Because lighting, sound, set, and costume designs all have an impact on ﬁght scenes, it helps
if the ﬁght director is involved in the production from the beginning. For example, after studying
the script and discussing the play with the director and producer, the ﬁght director can develop
a training program that is customized for the production and then guide the actors through basic
training into the rehearsal of speciﬁc ﬁght choreography. The ﬁght director is also available to
advise production personnel about safety protocols, prop weapons, ﬁght rehearsal schedules, and
other practical aspects of the craft. Finally, the ﬁght director can advise on any changes required
by the transition from rehearsal rooms to actual performance space.
—Tony Wolf
See also: Fighting Arts of the Renaissance (in Volume I); Film and the Martial Arts; 
Gunﬁghters; Television and the Martial Arts; Performing Arts; Action Design for 
Professional Wrestling; and Taiwanese Street Performances (in this volume).
REFERENCES
British Academy of Dramatic Combat. 2007. “History of the British Academy of Dramatic Combat,”
http://www.badc.co.uk/history/history.html, accessed December 22, 2008.
Castle, Egerton. 1885. Schools & Masters of Fence. London: G. Bell and Sons, via http://books
.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Evangelista, Nick. 1995. The Encyclopedia of the Sword. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Hobbs, William. 1980. Fight Direction for Stage and Screen. London: Barrie & Jenkins.
Katz, Samuel. 1976. Stage Violence: Techniques of Offense, Defense and Safety. New York: Richards
Rosen Press.
614
Stage Combat in the Elizabethan Tradition

Lennox, John. 2008. “The Relationship between Personal Combat and Stage Combat from the Late
16th Century to the Early 20th Century.” Doctoral dissertation, Wayne State University, Detroit,
Michigan.
Suddeth, J. Allen. 1996. Fight Directing for the Theatre. London: Heinemann Drama.
Wise, Arthur. 1968. Weapons in the Theatre. London: Longmans.
Wolf, Tony. 2003. “Action Design: New Directions in Fight Choreography,” in Martial Arts in the
Modern World, edited by Thomas A. Green and Joseph R. Svinth, 249–261. Westport, CT: Praeger.
TAIWANESE STREET PERFORMANCES
For most modern Taiwanese, their main live exposure to Chinese martial arts or traditional
martial characters comes through the ubiquitous temple parades. Common martial motifs
include performances by the martial deities represented by huge puppets, Dragon and Lion
dances, and Sung Jiang Battle Arrays.
MOTIFS
Each temple in Taiwan has one main deity to which the temple is dedicated. On special
occasions such as the deity’s “birthday,” representations of the deity are taken from the altars in
the temple and given a tour of the neighborhood. Thus, the deity sees how its devotees live, and
its devotees get to see the deity.
Normally, these parades include other temples whose deities have been invited to join. If the
temple is wealthy or politically important, then its parades can be huge, with processions snaking
through the neighborhood for several kilometers.
The organization of these temple parades varies, but they almost always include the statue of
the deity being carried. The deity may be carried by hand, but increasingly, it is carried by a small
truck. The model for the parade is an Imperial Chinese government ofﬁcial’s tour, as was com-
mon in Taiwan under the Qing Dynasty (1683–1895). Thus, it shows the deity, in his palanquin,
accompanied by his assistants and escorts, traveling through the neighborhood to inspect and
bless his jurisdiction. The arrival and departure of the deity (and the Qing ofﬁcial) was marked
by a cacophony of martial music and ﬁrecrackers, which served to summon the villagers to the
side of the roads to see and be seen.
Although the deity/ofﬁcial was not military, his entourage was. Thus, the parade has deep
military and martial character. Martial parades are, at least in part, state theater, and as the
Chinese opera realized long ago, martial arts performances draw crowds. Even in this Internet
and video game era, people still come out of their houses to see a “living” Kuan Kung go through
a sword routine or to meet the Eight Generals in full armor.
Beyond this entertainment aspect, there are other reasons why these temple parades have a
decidedly martial slant. In premodern China (and especially in frontier regions, such as Taiwan),
villages, towns, and cities relied on local militias for protection. The Imperial army was usually
far away and from a village standpoint, unreliable. Consequently, local people pooled local
resources and established local militias.
In Taiwan, local militias were defended against various threats. Villages tended to be home to
a single ethnic group, which made them targets for other ethnic groups. Ethnic violence between
the different ethnic groups was common and bloody. On the frontier, there were ongoing battles
Taiwanese Street Performances
615
www.ebook3000.com

with the aboriginal inhabitants whom Chinese immigrants were pushing out of their traditional
lands. On the coast, Taiwan was a popular target for pirates. These pirates, who were a mixture of
Japanese, southern coastal Chinese, and Malays, found the rivers and mountains of Taiwan quite
to their liking, both as places to plunder and places to hide their plunder. Thus, villages and towns
needed trained militias.
From time to time, these local militias would march through the village, both to drill and to
show their force and skill. In addition, all the militia groups in the region would regularly
assemble at a central location (usually a temple) with all their armor and weapons, and then
parade through the entire neighborhood. At certain points, the militiamen would stop and
engage in mock combat, or go through part of a martial art training form. All this was
accompanied by ﬁreworks and drumming.
In modern terms, these parades represented training events for military reservists. Logistical
training was shown by the ability to organize, feed, and equip the forces. The skill of ofﬁcers, drill
instructors, and soldiers was demonstrated by how well the men marched and went through their
set performances. And, of course, parades established group solidarity within the village or town.
If you were marching with the militia, you were part of the “good guys” and “on the team.” Thus,
these processions helped to give a sense of community.
Military training is not the reason why modern Taiwanese parades still include swords and
martial arts forms. There is also a more religious and metaphysical reason. In traditional Chinese
culture, there is both the normal, everyday world and the unseen but nonetheless very real world
that is overlaid and intermixed with the normal physical world. This unseen world is full of
wandering ghosts, evil spirits, and demonic forces, and in traditional Chinese metaphysics, these
specters are the causes of diseases, plagues, and other pestilence.
One ﬁghts these demonic forces using both carrots and sticks. As in the mundane world,
one tries to buy off the malignant forces. Thus, people burn money and incense. And, as in
the real world, if bribes do not work, then one must resort to force. Martial players in the
temple parades work in league with friendly deities. Ideally, their simple presence would
frighten away evil forces. Again, as in the real world, sometimes a show of force is not
enough. In these cases, trained specialists are brought in to subdue the evil. Thus, in temple
parades, the various hand gestures, uniforms, weapons, and solo martial arts forms are all
directed at beating down invisible, but nonetheless quite real, supernatural opponents. While
normal people see only the human performer in the role of the “good guy,” ritual specialists
also see the demon or ghost, who remains invisible to the masses. To traditional-minded Tai-
wanese, these street battles are neither symbolic shows nor metaphors. Instead, they are real
battles, and their outcome will have a quite real impact on the health of the village. And,
whatever they may say in public, this traditional view is privately held by many, perhaps
most, modern Taiwanese, be they college professors or blue-collar workers.
Martial temple parades also serve as living history and as ethics lessons. Taiwanese par-
ents or older siblings carry out young children to see the parades. As the various characters
go by, the youngsters hear about how a certain deity saved a village, or how another deity,
while living, loved his parents or village so much that he did some mighty deed to protect
them from harm, or how some general was the epitome of courage and loyalty. Seeing the
deity in gigantic three dimensions impresses the ethics lesson far more than does a small
picture in a book.
616
Taiwanese Street Performances

MEGA-PUPPETS
Mega-puppets are my name for the larger-than-life ﬁgures used to represent various deities and
historical ﬁgures. Mega-puppets stand 2 to 4 meters (6 to 12 feet) in height, and even the most
modest temple parade normally features at least two of them.
Each puppet is manipulated by one person who looks out a little window in the god’s chest
or stomach area. The puppets’ heads and hands are made of wood while the torsos and arms are
made of a frame of bamboo. All this is covered with thick, expensive clothing.
There are a number of deities which are commonly featured as mega-puppets. The Seventh
and Eighth Lords are two of the most common. According to the legend, the Seventh and
Eighth Lords were generals, and they became deities because they were loyal, brave, and honest.
Thus, they represented what everyone wanted in a general (as opposed to what one usually got).
Small, yet meaningful, military symbols decorate these mega-puppets. For example, both the
Seventh and Eighth Lords usually wear large bagels (guangbing) around their necks. These bagels
are commonly called General Qi bread. The reference is to the famous Ming general Qi Jiguang
(1528-1588), who reportedly introduced these bagels as a durable staple for his troops during his
southern campaigns; thus, they represent a kind of Chinese hardtack.
Other common mega-puppets include the Eight Retainers (ba jia jing). The Eight Retainers
are the police of the invisible world. As the name implies, there are eight of these heroes. Their
movements are acrobatic, so in parades, they are always played by young men. In the parade, the
Eight Retainers are easy to spot. The faces have distinctive face paint, consisting of demonic
swirls, darkened eyes, and jutting fangs, which derives from the makeup used in Chinese opera.
Costumes include large headdresses, colorful embroidered jackets, and pants. Weapons include
swords, spiked clubs, and traditional Chinese manacles, all in keeping with the Eight Retainers’
position as police ofﬁcers. Each Retainer also carries a fanlike wooden device. The wooden
device is actually their badge; the Chinese characters painted on the wooden badge signify the
Retainers’ warrant and authority over demons.
LION AND DRAGON DANCES
Martial temple parades often feature Lion and Dragon dances. Dragon dances involve teams of
four to six (occasionally more) performers who manipulate the dragon’s head and body using
poles attached to the dragon’s frame. The frame is made of bamboo and cloth. Performers hold
the frame above them or at their sides, and through coordinated efforts, the dragon waves about
like a large banner. In contrast, Lion dance is done by two people: one carries the head while the
other takes the rump.
There are many different styles of both Lion and Dragon dancing, and both styles are
categorized in much the same way that martial arts systems are categorized. For example, there
are Northern and Southern forms of Lion dancing, and within those categories there are
different systems.
SUNG JIANG BATTLE ARRAYS
Sung Jiang Battle Arrays are a form of group martial arts performance unique to Taiwan. The
event is named after Sung Jiang, the leader of the 108 righteous bandits in the Ming dynasty
novel Water Margin.
Taiwanese Street Performances
617
www.ebook3000.com

In these arrays, individuals perform set routines, pairs engage in set practice duels with
traditional weapons, and the entire unit performs battle drills. The performers, who are normally
sponsored by a temple, all wear a common uniform, either black pants and either T-shirts with
the name of their village emblazoned across it or black pants and Qing-dynasty tops. Weapons
include tools used by pioneer farmers in Taiwan. Examples include metal rakes, sickles, pruning
hooks, rattan staffs and shields, and machetes. One odd weapon is the farmers’ umbrella. This is
a broad folding umbrella made of interlaced rattan that was used by farmers (and ofﬁcers) for
shade during breaks.
—Brian Kennedy and Elizabeth Nai-Jia Guo
See also: Belief Systems; Introduction; Belief Systems: China; Commodiﬁcation of Leisure;
Expressive Culture; Folklore; Invented Traditions; Globalization of Martial Arts; Film 
and the Martial Arts; and Television and the Martial Arts (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Boretz, Avron A. 2003. “Righteous Brothers and Demon Slayers: Subjectivities and Collective
Identities in Taiwanese Temple Processions,” in Religion and the Formation of Taiwanese Identities,
edited by Paul R. Katz and Murray A. Rubinstein, 219–251. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Jordan, David K. 1999. “Gods, Ghosts, & Ancestors: Folk Religion in a Taiwanese Village,” 3rd edition.
San Diego, CA: Department of Anthropology, UCSD, via http://anthro.ucsd.edu/~dkjordan,
accessed July 16, 2008.
618
Taiwanese Street Performances

Political Uses of the 
Martial Arts
The practice of martial arts is often associated with ethnic or national identity and the
cultural hegemony of a particular group, and so is frequently contested and often intrinsically
political.
Technological developments on the battleﬁeld long ago rendered apparent the strategic lim-
itations of close-quarter combative systems. However, ways of disciplining and training the body
through the practice of martial arts continue to be prized not only for their efﬁcacy as ﬁghting
systems but for their imputed value as elements of a common cultural heritage.
Social theorist Michel Foucault (1926–1984) noted the importance of the body to the uni-
tarian aims of the modern nation-state, and ways of disciplining and regulating the body provide
an ideal vehicle for the inculcation of nationalist values. Thus, nationalist projects have made
use of martial arts to promote historical narratives of nation and state. For example, in Nation-
alist China, during the 1920s and 1930s, Chinese martial arts (wushu) were promoted as national
art (guoshu). In Korea, the history of taekwondo is almost inseparable from the history of mod-
ern South Korean nationalism. In Japan, ideologies promoted through martial practice served to
disseminate the ethical code of Bushido, thereby serving as basis for pre–World War II Japanese
nationalism. In Indonesia, the practice and pedagogy of pencak silat has provided a medium for
the promotion of conceptions of Indonesian citizenship in line with the developmental ideals of
President Suharto’s (1921–2008) New Order regime (1965–1998).
Although the state can legislate and administrate the practice of a martial art, its hegemony
is never complete. The disciplinary practices and modes of knowledge that the state uses can
themselves be appropriated, and then used to challenge and undermine established authority.
Sometimes the knowledge is practical, but in other cases the knowledge is esoteric. An example
of esoteric knowledge is belief in the practice of invulnerability. Protection through the posses-
sion of talismanic objects or access to supernatural agents was a common theme. Tony Day
(2002, 160) has argued (speciﬁcally in reference to invulnerability practices in Southeast Asia,
but equally relevant to the knowledge of invulnerability in other sociopolitical contexts) that
esoteric knowledge forms the basis for communities of protected adherents. As such, it is a mode
of knowledge that lends itself to processes of state building. At the same time, knowledge of
invulnerability is not just an instrument of domination—the trained, disciplined, and allegedly
invulnerable body is the site of the contest between established authority and counter-
hegemonic practices. Thus, it is no coincidence that formalized systems of martial arts associated
with modernity and the developmental narratives of the nation-state often decry such
“superstitious” practices.
www.ebook3000.com

MARTIAL ARTS AND NATIONALISM
Although associated in the popular consciousness with antiquity, the formalized martial art sys-
tems that we know today can be traced to the rise in nationalist consciousness that developed
in Asia around the turn of the twentieth century. Common to these Asian nationalist projects
was the desire to articulate a sense of identity that had quite different trajectories from those of
the imperialist powers. Existing martial traditions provided a means of inculcating the values and
ideals of national unity, a sense of common identity, and loyalty to the state. Importantly, they
both signaled a break on the part of the modern state with previous traditional governments and
at the same time ensured continuity with traditional values. In China at the beginning of the
twentieth century, physical culture associations sprang up throughout the country. Chinese mar-
tial arts were actively promoted alongside foreign sports such as calisthenics, boxing, and tennis,
which were introduced through the activities of foreign groups such as the YMCA. Simpliﬁed
and codiﬁed for mass instruction, Chinese boxing, wrestling, staff, and sword drills were intro-
duced into national level police and military training programs. The traditional term for “mar-
tial arts,” wushu, was even changed to “national arts,” guoshu, in line with Nationalist
(Kuomintang) ideology (Henning 2003, 22).
In Japan, the Meiji restoration of 1868 ushered in the dismantling of the traditional class sys-
tem and represented a period of intense modernization in Japanese society. During the preced-
ing Tokugawa era (1603–1868), regular training in martial arts was restricted to the ruling elite,
the samurai, who monopolized the use of violence in Japanese society. During the Meiji era, mar-
tial arts were introduced into the public schools and taught to the masses, and the old term for
martial arts, bujutsu (“martial craft”) came to be replaced with the notion of budo, “martial way.”
Kano Jigoro (1860–1938), the founder of modern-day judo, was a major innovator in the devel-
opment of this interpretation of budo, and judo provided a model for the transformation of other
martial arts into martial ways. Kano introduced a ranking system and systematized techniques
and strove to base judo in modern scientiﬁc thinking on physiology and dynamics. Whereas
instruction had taken place previously through experience, observation, and imitation of the
teacher, Kano classiﬁed techniques so that they could be passed on verbally (Inoue 1998, 83).
Karate also caught the attention of early twentieth century Japanese administrators as a suitable
means of developing character and physique, and so it was incorporated into the Okinawan
school curriculum (Tan 2004, 182). The promotion of the principles of an idealized code of the
samurai (Bushido) as the ethical basis for the budo arts (as deﬁned by the state) fed nationalist
fervor in Japan during the Fifteen Years War of 1931–1945 (Patterson 2008).
During the 1920s and 1930s, karate was popularized in Japan, largely as a result of the efforts
of Okinawan educator Funakoshi Gichin (1868–1957), and it was in the Japanese university and
industrial karate clubs that many ethnic Koreans ﬁrst studied the arts that later became one of
the roots of taekwondo, the present-day national martial art of the Republic of Korea (Madis
2003, 187). In the Republic of Korea, taekwondo is linked in its ofﬁcial histories to older Korean
arts such as taekkyon, an initiative that appears to be driven, at least in part, by nationalist
imperatives for a coherent historical narrative—with Korea’s post–World War II independence
from Japan, it became important to the Korean government to distance the Korean martial art
from all Japanese connections. This resulted in the adoption of the name taekwondo and the
expunging of all references to karate; the process culminated in 1971 with the opening of the
620
Martial Arts and Nationalism

Korean Tae Kwon Do Association’s Central Gymnasium in Seoul, a center for the promotion of
taekwondo as a symbol of the Republic of Korea (Gillis 2008; Madis 2003, 204–205).
In Indonesia, efforts to encourage the development of a common cultural heritage were of
fundamental importance to the nationalist movement. Indonesian nationalists were directly
exposed to Japanese theories during the Japanese occupation during World War II, and in 1944,
the Japanese promised Indonesians independence at the end of the war. However, in 1945, when
the British took Indonesia from the Japanese, on the assumption that the Dutch would soon
return, the result was open rebellion.
During their occupation of Indonesia from 1942 to 1945, the Japanese administration did
much to encourage political mobilization in Indonesia through political indoctrination and the
creation of youth organizations. The most signiﬁcant of these organizations, the “Defenders of
the Fatherland,” or PETA (Pembela Tanah Air), was established in 1943. An Indonesian volun-
teer force, PETA was part of the Japanese strategy to create an Indonesian force capable of
defending the archipelago against Allied invasion. In the same way in which karate had been
used in Japan as a vehicle for the development of discipline and ardent nationalist values
amongst Japanese youth, pencak was similarly used in the PETA training program. Thus, PETA
and similar organizations played a signiﬁcant role in the fostering of “martial spirit” as a desir-
able national characteristic, and also introducing military discipline and organizational frame-
works into the practice of Silat (de Grave 2009; Lebra 1977).
Before power was ofﬁcially transferred from the Dutch to the Indonesians in 1949, Indonesian
nationalists turned their attention to the promotion of those elements of regional culture deemed
to be part of the national heritage. Educational reformists championed the art of pencak silat as
a product of Indonesian culture. Consequently, the Indonesian Pencak Silat Federation (IPSI)
was founded in 1948. As the name shows, the ethnic bias towards Javanese martial systems was
evident from the outset. The founder of IPSI, Wongsonegoro, was Javanese, and the ﬁrst word
chosen to name the Indonesian martial art (pencak) was taken from the Javanese language. The
ﬁrst meeting of the organization in December 1950, during which pencak silat was designated as
a national sport, was held in the cultural Javanese capital of Yogyakarta. At that meeting, sixteen
out of twenty-four participants were Javanese. The ﬁrst standardized technical forms were created
by Mohamad Djoemali, a Javanese, and the characteristically high stances typical of Javanese sys-
tems set the standard for subsequent Silat competition. Last but not least, during the ﬁfth con-
gress of IPSI held in 1973, IPSI leaders honored ten Pencak Silat organizations as “historical
schools.” No less than eight of these schools were Javanese. Other similar facts could be found,
but these are enough to let us understand that non-Javanese felt—and still often feel—excluded
by the Javanese. At the same time, however, this cultural hegemony of Javanese martial arts is in
accordance with the general Javanese domination of the political, demographic, economic, and
cultural situation in modern-day Indonesia.
In modern, formalized martial arts, there is a ﬂattening of differences between systems. The
idea is to shape uniform bodies and deﬁne common purpose through group practice. Institution-
ally, this is evident in the attempts made at the standardization of practice, the creation of ped-
agogical manuals, the development of simpliﬁed systems of instruction for national curricula, and
the establishment of ranking systems, formal etiquette, and attire in the training halls. However,
at the level of individual subjectivity, the valorization of martial practice is not a passive process.
For example, in the wrestling traditions of North India, the body itself became the medium for
Martial Arts and Nationalism
621
www.ebook3000.com

the expression of nationalist ideology. Through strict adherence to ascetic training regimes,
young men came to link their own sexual abstinence, physical health, and ﬁtness to conceptions
of duty, morality, and citizenship. Thus, the self-disciplined body became the site of struggle for
an ethical nationalism, an alternative to the public immorality and licentious and debilitating
seductions of contemporary society (Alter 1992). The body in this sense is far from docile but is
instead highly politicized and potentially the site of contesting and resisting competing values,
ideals, and identities. Thus, in 1910, as the movement for independence from British imperial-
ism began to gather pace, Indian wrestlers were sent to London, speciﬁcally to show the British
that Indians, using speciﬁcally Indian methods, were as good as anyone else (Noble 2003).
POLITICAL CONFLICT AND THE INVULNERABLE BODY
The political signiﬁcance of the body is readily apparent in the claims of invulnerability made
by martial arts practitioners in a variety of cultural contexts. The Portuguese traveler Tomé Pires
(ca. 1468–ca. 1540), in his account of Malacca, mentioned the cabaées, noblemen from the
regions of Linga, Brunei, and Pahang who were given to believe they could not die by the sword.
In the Philippines, amulets called anting-anting are worn to protect the wearer from blade and
bullet. The knowledge of invulnerability in Thailand is widespread. Turton and Tanabe (1984)
note the signiﬁcance of invulnerability practices within peasant rebellions throughout Southeast
Asia. In Java, local martial art champions, known as jago (literally “ﬁghting cock”), often led
uprisings against the Dutch colonial administration. The prowess of these champions was attrib-
uted to their possession of talismans that granted them invulnerability. They also claimed heir
association with the ancestral spirits said to reside in the grave sites where these groups met and
secretly trained (Kartodirdjo 1984, 18–19). Thus, social bandits, Silat groups, and even the
ancestors were co-opted into the revolutionary struggle against the Dutch colonialists.
The use of esoteric martial arts for the purpose of resisting political domination was a theme of
China’s Boxer Uprising of 1899–1901. During 1898, members of a secret society called Yi He Tuan
(Righteous Harmonious Fist) started a violent campaign against both modernization and foreign
inﬂuence in China. The Yi He Tuan claimed that their rites rendered them impervious to bullets.
Thousands of Boxers were eventually shot down by government and foreign troops. Susan Naquin,
in her 1976 analysis of the White Lotus sects of nineteenth-century China, reports earlier claims
of invulnerability to various weapons in Chinese sects that combined esoterica with boxing.
In Brazil there is also clear connection between esoteric martial arts, a dominated group,
and ethnic conﬂict. In attempting to determine the origins of capoeira, J. Lowell Lewis (1992)
cites a range of oral traditions tying its development to the African Brazilian slave population;
some commentators, in fact, posit an African origin for the ﬁghting techniques and terminol-
ogy. The early record (pre-1920) is sketchy and heavily dependent on folk history, but the rel-
evance of capoeira to the current issue is obvious. Oral tradition connects capoeira with the
fugitive slave “kingdom” of Palmares, which was located in the mountains near Pernambuco,
Brazil. The successful resistance movement by the Palmareans was attributed to the skills of
“King” Zumbi (died 1695), who was reputedly a capoeira master. Even as the art exists in the
twentieth century among the urban underclasses, there is a strong identiﬁcation with the slave
experience—even down to the typical attire of some modern practitioners, which is said to 
622
Political Conflict and the Invulnerable Body

be patterned on the dress of slaves during the colonial period. The esoterica noted for the other
arts emerges in the dedication of some capoeiristas to speciﬁc orixás (divinities) of the
Candomblé religion who aid and sometime even possess (“ride”) the ﬁghter. A contemporary
master, Mestre Nô (Norival Moreira de Oliveira, 1945–), speaks of a mystic leap he takes,
describing it as an attitude similar to the “no-mind” state of Asian Zen-based martial traditions.
A further, linguistic, connection is provided by the synonym for capoeirista, mandigueiro
(sorcerer). Capoeira tradition claims that invulnerability, labeled corpo fechado (closed body),
can be attained by practitioners who follow certain rituals. The practice of corpo fechado
continues to have nationalistic signiﬁcance, and, especially in the style called capoeira Angola,
its practice serves as a source of ethnic pride and a link to African heritage. Lewis notes the
power of this martial art as a means of both real and symbolic empowerment for economic and
political underclasses.
In Indonesia, martial arts play similar roles. Today, many religious, ethnic, and social organ-
izations maintain their own pencak silat schools. These schools and their masters even played a
role in events leading to the fall of President Suharto in May 1998. After Suharto resigned, dif-
ferent regions in Indonesia have been submitted to uncontrolled (but usually provoked) clashes.
That was the case for the Javanese region, where large parts of the cities of Solo and Kebumen
were burned. On this occasion, some groups of young delinquents and martial arts practitioners
were hired by troublemakers, while at the same time, local masters and their assistants did their
best to help contain the increasing violence. Similarly, in Bali, members of the Silat school Bakti
Negara took to the streets to preserve order while wearing T-shirts proclaiming their support for
reformasi and their aim to keep Bali safe.
The recent trend toward the privatization of security throughout the Indonesian archipelago
since the fall of Suharto’s New Order regime has resulted in martial arts groups taking a more
active civil security role. For instance, the largest Islamic organization in Indonesia, Nahdatul
Ulama (NU), has a paramilitary wing called Banser (Barisan Ansor Serbaguna, the “multipurpose
front”); members receive training in Pagar Nusa, a Silat system associated with NU. Agus
Maksum Djauhari established Pagar Nusa in 1986 at the Quranic school of Lirboyo in Kediri city.
Knowledge of invulnerability is an important part of the training of members of Pagar Nusa and
Banser, which is said to have some 400,000 members.
In other examples, informal political authority afforded through ability in martial arts and
alleged invulnerability is inseparable from more formal political authority and bureaucratic
ofﬁce. In Jakarta, the organization Forum Betawi Rempug (FBR) claims to represent the inter-
ests of the Betawi ethnic group. Founded on July 29, 2001, in Cakung, East Jakarta, under the
leadership of K. H. Fadloli El-Muhir (1961–2009), FBR’s self-proclaimed purpose is to preserve
Betawi identity in the face of outside inﬂuences, to promote prosperity and social justice, and to
uphold the law for the Betawi and other communities. While FBR maintains that it is a social
organization concerned with the affairs of the Betawi people, it places considerable emphasis
upon local security. All members of FBR are expected to be competent in pencak silat, and the
styles taught are associated with Betawi ethnicity. FBR maintains guard posts throughout the ter-
ritory that it controls in Eastern Jakarta. District commanders, referred to as jawara (“strong
man,” in reference to the idealized conception of the martial arts champion in Betawi folklore),
are responsible for teaching pencak silat to those under their command. Noteworthy here is that
the pencak silat practiced by members of FBR does not have any retreating steps. While FBR
Political Conflict and the Invulnerable Body
623
www.ebook3000.com

members claim they do not seek confrontation directly, they do not hesitate to defend their
rights should the need arise, as expressed by the motto, “You sell, I buy” (énté jual, ana beli). Many
members of FBR claim to possess supernatural powers such as invulnerability by virtue of their
training in pencak silat.
In the province of Banten, the organization Persatuan Persilatan Pendekar dan Seni Budaya
Banten Indonesia (PPPSBBI) plays a signiﬁcant role in local politics. During President Suharto’s
New Order regime (1965–1998), PPPSBBI was formed to consolidate and unite potential sites
of resistance to the authority of the state. With the formation of the organization, local strong-
men (jawara) were brought together in support of national sovereignty. Haji Tubagus Chasan
Sochib (1930–), a Bantenese jawara leader, was appointed to unite contested loyalties in sup-
port for the central leadership of the New Order regime. His authority rests largely upon his spir-
itual knowledge (ilmu batin), skill in penca, and alleged invulnerability.
PPPSBBI has the stated aim of preserving Bantenese culture, including its penca. Pencak
Silat schools that work with the PPPSBBI teach self-defense to its members and provide the
organization with bodyguards skilled in penca and the practice of invulnerability. According to
Chasan Sochib, the effort and hard work of the Bantenese will help the province to establish
itself as a model for Indonesia more generally. In this perspective, tradition, bravery, courage, and
honor are evoked as elements of Bantenese identity. Chasan Sochib claims a membership of
500,000 penca practitioners, led by 300 jawara who also coordinate enterprises in the domains
of tourism, industry, real estate, roads, and irrigation. Chasan Sochib played a signiﬁcant role in
getting the Banten region granted the status of province in 2000, and his daughter, Ratu Atut
Chosiyah (1962–), is the current governor of the province.
Other examples are easily found. Thus, it is clear that for many organizations and govern-
ments, disciplining the body through training in the martial arts is an inherently political act
that serves both as an index of the national sociopolitical landscape and as an indicator of the
tensions over conﬂicting claims to the hegemony of a particular people or group. Martial art thus
provides the means for both contesting and consolidating authority. The ideals and values of the
martial arts are not merely via overt confrontation, but also through the constitution of subjects
and subjectivities via sustained disciplinary practice.
—Lee Wilson, Gabriel Facal, Jean-Marc de Grave, and Thomas A. Green
See also: Capoeira; Korea: Taekkyon; Korea: Taekwondo; South Asian Martial Arts;
Indian Wrestling; Silat (in Volume I); Belief Systems; India; Belief Systems: Silat; Invented
Traditions; International Karate; American Judo, 1942–1945; Judo in Japan, 1931–1950; Kapap
and Krav Maga; Taiwanese Street Performances; Afrikan Martial Arts; Jujutsuffragettes; Political
Conﬂict and Aikido, 1931-1942; Women in Combat: The U.S. Military, 2001–Present; Secret
Societies and Fraternal Organizations; Plains Indian Warrior Societies; and Social Aspects of Kata
and Waza (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Alter, Joseph S. 1992. The Wrestler’s Body: Identity and Ideology in North India. Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press, via http://www.ucpress.edu/books/pages/2709.php,
accessed October 16, 2009.
624
Political Conflict and the Invulnerable Body

Day, Tony. 2002. Fluid Iron: State Formation in Southeast Asia. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i
Press.
de Grave, Jean-Marc. 2009. “Genèse du pencak silat moderne: Note de recherche sur la standardisa-
tion des arts martiaux indonésiens sous l’occupation japonaise et à l’époque de l’indépendance
(1942–1965) [Genesis of the Modern Pencak Silat: Research Note on the Standardization of
Indonesian Martial Arts under the Japanese Occupation and at the Time of Independence
(1942–1965)]. Actes de la recherche en sciences sociales, 179(4), 112–117, via http://www.cairn.info/
resume.php?ID_ARTICLE=ARSS_179_0112, accessed October 16, 2009.
Gillis, Alex. 2008. A Killing Art: The Untold History of Tae Kwon Do. Toronto: ECW Press.
Henning, Stanley E. 2003. “The Martial Arts in Chinese Physical Culture: 1865–1965,” in Martial
Arts in the Modern World, edited by Thomas A. Green and Joseph R. Svinth, 13–35. Westport, CT:
Praeger.
Inoue Shun. 1998. “‘Budo’: Invented Tradition in the Martial Arts,” in The Culture of Japan As Seen
through Its Leisure, edited by Sepp Linhart and Sabine Frühstück, 83–93. Albany: State University
of New York Press.
Kartodirdjo, Sartono. 1984. Modern Indonesia: Tradition and Transformation: A Socio-historical Perspec-
tive. Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada University Press.
Lebra, Joyce C. 1977. Japanese-Trained Armies in Southeast Asia. New York: Columbia University Press.
Lewis, J. Lowell. 1992. Ring of Liberation: Deceptive Discourse in Brazilian Capoeira. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press.
Madis, Eric. 2003. “The Evolution of Tae Kwon Do from Japanese Karate,” in Martial Arts in the Mod-
ern World, edited by Thomas A. Green and Joseph R. Svinth, 185–207. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Naquin, Susan. 1976. Millenarian Rebellion in China: The Eight Trigrams Uprising of 1813. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.
Noble, Graham. 2003. “‘The Lion of the Punjab’: Gama in England, 1910,” in Martial Arts in the Mod-
ern World, edited by Thomas A. Green and Joseph R. Svinth, 93–109. Westport, CT: Praeger.
O’ong, Maryono. 2002. Pencak Silat in the Indonesian Archipelago. Yogyakarta: Yayasan Galang.
Patterson, William R. 2008. “Bushido’s Role in the Growth of Pre-World War II Japanese National-
ism,” Journal of Asian Martial Arts 17, 8–21.
Tan, Kevin S. Y. 2004. “Constructing a Martial Tradition: Rethinking a Popular History of Karate-Do,”
Journal of Sports and Social Issues 28, 169–192, DOI: 10.1177/0193723504264772, via http://online
.sagepub.com/, accessed October 16, 2009.
Turton, Andrew, and Tanabe Shigeharu, editors. 1984. History and Peasant Consciousness in South East
Asia. (Senri Ethnological Studies No. 13). Osaka: National Museum of Ethnology.
Wilson, Lee. 2009. “Jurus and Jazz Riffs, and the Constitution of a National Martial Art in Indonesia,”
Body and Society 15(3), 93–119, DOI: 10.1177/1357034X09339103, via http://online.sagepub.com/,
accessed October 16, 2009.
AFRIKAN MARTIAL ARTS
In 1943, U.S. anthropologist Ralph Linton (1893–1953) coined the phrase “nativistic move-
ments” to describe social movements designed or used to revive and/or perpetuate elements
of a culture threatened with destruction by a dominant outside group. Nativistic movements
describe attempts to return to an earlier way of life (even if that life is largely imagined),
while rejecting a lifestyle imposed by outsiders. Such movements aim at bringing back a hap-
pier, easier time. Although originally conceived as part of a radical political agenda, the mar-
tial arts developed during the Black Power movement of the 1960s have evolved into an
example of revivalistic nativism, meaning an attempt to recover and resuscitate extinct ele-
ments of a culture. The qualiﬁer “revivalistic” is necessary. Although the indigenous cultures
Afrikan Martial Arts
625
www.ebook3000.com

of enslaved Africans were modiﬁed and compromised over the centuries, they were never
entirely obliterated.
INTRODUCTION
The use of the term “Afrikan” in the context of African American cultural nationalism is
generally attributed to the Black Governmental Conference held in Detroit, Michigan, in
March 1968. Inﬂuenced by Frantz Fanon (1925–1961), a French Caribbean psychiatrist and
philosopher who advocated using pan-African identity to confront European colonialism,
African American scholar Maulana Ron Karenga (born Ronald Everett, 1941–) expressed a
desire “to build a new society based on the best of our traditional Afrikan values” (Green
2003, 232). Besides Karenga, other well-known participants at the Detroit conference
included Malcolm X’s widow Betty Shabazz (1934–1997) and author Amiri Baraka (born
Everett Leroi Jones 1934–).
Language, dance, and martial art all played roles in establishing the new Afrikan identity,
and so, when these cultural nationalists decided to abandon their “slave names,” it is hardly sur-
prising that many of them turned to African languages such as Kiswahili, from which the spelling
Afrikan was taken.
Appropriating (and sometimes inventing) cultural artifacts to marshal ethnically based
nationalism is commonplace in nativistic movements. The inclusion of art forms and language
is typical of cultural revitalization, because art and language are cultural features that can be pre-
served despite changed geographic, economic, or social circumstances. In addition, art forms and
language provide a way of showing individual and cultural distinctiveness even under a domi-
nant political system.
In this context, martial behaviors were learned and taught for physical self-defense. For some
African Americans, this meant learning methods of passive resistance. Mid-twentieth-century
African American proponents of passive resistance included Rev. Martin Luther King
Jr. (1929–1968). Not everyone agreed. In 1967, Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin (1943–), then known
as H. Rap Brown, famously told an audience in Washington, DC, “Get you some guns” and “burn
this town down,” adding: “Violence is as American as cherry pie” (Franklin 1967).
Martial arts fell between these two extremes. During the 1960s, control of mainstream mar-
tial arts organizations was mostly in the hands of people who were not African American and
many of whom lived in Asia. This was hardly the state of affairs that Afrikan nationalists desired.
Therefore, martial artists with Afrikanist leanings began to develop eclectic systems over which
they had more complete control. In this way, the desire for self-determination was wedded to the
desire for a cultural connection.
The ideal situation, of course, would have involved access to actual African martial sys-
tems. For various reasons, this was not possible in North America until near the end of the
century. As a compromise, practitioners with Afrikanist leanings typically combined Asian
martial art techniques with African dance techniques and philosophical principles. Later, as
access to African arts improved, martial art practitioners and scholars began systematically
studying African and African-descended martial arts, and today, practitioners generally fall
into one of four categories: traditionalists, innovators, practitioners of African martial arts,
and purists.
626
Afrikan Martial Arts

TRADITIONALISTS
From 1940 until 1973, there was conscription in the United States, and from 1942 through
1944, schools across the country provided martial arts training to military-aged youths. This
training provided many mid-twentieth-century African-American men with their introduction
to traditional Asian martial arts. Some of these men were also involved in the political and cul-
tural activism of the 1960s.
George Coﬁeld (1934–2001), the founder of Brooklyn’s Tong Dojo, learned Shotokan karate
while serving in Japan with the U.S. Army during the mid-1950s. Upon returning to the United
States, Coﬁeld became a strong advocate of both Shotokan karate and African-American
empowerment. He served as mentor to many other African American martial arts pioneers, to
include Thomas LaPuppet (born Thomas Carroll, 1938–1999).
Another example is James Cheatham (1934–1966). Cheatham learned Chito Ryu karate
from Wallace Reumann (1931–2008). After service in the U.S. Army, Reumann started a chain
of karate schools in New Jersey, and Cheatham became a student at Reumann’s Trenton school
circa 1954–1955. By the early 1960s, Cheatham was known both as a ferocious tournament
ﬁghter and an advocate of the Nation of Islam (NOI), and his political activism eventually led
to tensions within the Chito Ryu community. As Cheatham’s student Mfundishi Maasi (born
William Nichols, 1941–) recalls: “He was very political about power for black people. . . . [A]ll
of his black top guns . . . were afﬁliated with the Nation of Islam” (Hinton and Rahming 1994).
Practitioners such as Coﬁeld, LaPuppet, and Cheatham are termed traditionalists because
what they were teaching was still openly acknowledged as Asian in origin. As individuals, they
simply had Afrikanist agendas.
ECLECTIC INNOVATORS
During the late 1960s, a group of African American martial art practitioners from a variety of
orthodox Asian systems cross-trained every Saturday at Van Ness Recreation Center in Los
Angeles. In 1969, four of these practitioners—Ron Chapél, Steve Sanders (later Steve
Muhammad), Jerry Smith, and Cliff Stewart—established the Black Karate Federation. In
1969, the use of “Black” in the name of any organization caused many observers to assume an
exclusively African American membership and a political agenda. Nonetheless, the BKF
maintained a policy of nondiscrimination, and Cliff Stewart (1947–) at one point had one
black student and twenty white students, all of whom joined the BKF. So, despite the name,
BKF was political only in the sense of martial art politics. There had been complaints that
biased ofﬁciating at tournaments had cost Steve Muhammad several national-level champi-
onships, and this in turn contributed to Muhammad, Stewart, and others from the Van Ness
group creating the BKF. The idea was solely to level the playing ﬁeld during tournaments
(Stewart, interview, 2003).
New York City’s African American martial pioneers were equally eclectic. For instance,
Charles Elmore (1915–1997), founder of Elmore-Aiki-Jitsu-Ryu, was teaching martial arts in
Brooklyn by 1956. Elmore’s system was a street-oriented system that combined elements of
(among other systems) judo and Hakko-Ryu jujutsu (Jacobs 2009).
Ronald Duncan (1937–) drew on an even wider range of inﬂuences. After serving in the U.S.
Marine Corps, where he studied judo, jujutsu, and knife ﬁghting with Ernie Cates (1933–) and
Afrikan Martial Arts
627
www.ebook3000.com

Isshin-ryu karate with Don Nagle (1938–), Duncan began teaching “Koga Ryu” in Brooklyn in
1959. Today, Duncan’s Web site calls him “the Father of American Ninjitsu” (Way of the Winds
[no date]).
Another New York City system, Sanuces Ryu, came to have a distinctly African American
perspective. Moses Powell (1941–2005) established what would become Sanuces Ryu in 1959.
From a technical standpoint, the roots of Sanuces Ryu include the World War II–era U.S.
Marine Corps combatives of Charles Nelson (1916–2003), the Filipino martial arts of Florendo
Vistacion (“Professor Vee,” 1910–1999), and the Japanese martial arts of Kiyose Nakae
(1883–1962). The name “Sanuces,” which Powell interpreted as meaning “eye-to-eye,” came to
him in a dream. Sanuces Ryu differed from most systems of the day in that it was never intended
to have a tournament division. Instead, it was presented as a practical method of street defense.
Sanuces Ryu also differed from Asian arts of the era because its teachers often supported Afrikan
agendas. Powell, for instance, trained the Nation of Islam’s military arm (the Fruit of Islam), and
these students in turn provided security for the Supreme Minister of the NOI, the Honorable
Elijah Muhammad (born Elijah Poole, 1897–1975) (interview with Darrell Sarjeant, 2003).
Some of Powell’s senior students, notably Lil’ John Davis (1949–), went on to develop eclectic
systems of their own.
AFRICAN-BASED SYSTEMS
Symbols are integral to both individual and group identities. Thus, the Black Karate Federation
used pan-Afrikan colors—red, green, black, yellow—in its patch. The uniforms adopted by
Anthony Muhammad’s United Schools of Survival and Lil’ John Davis’s Kumite Ryu were
inspired by dashiki. Darrell Sarjeant combined Kiswahili and Japanese words and concepts to
create his Kamau (“warrior”) Ryu system, which later evolved into Kamau Njia, which Serjeant
translates as “Warrior Way” (interview with Sargeant, 2003).
This happened, in part, because access to genuine African martial traditions was virtually
impossible to ﬁnd in the United States during the 1960s, whereas it was simple enough to ﬁnd
dance, drumming, movement, and philosophical traditions. Consequently, Afrikanist martial art
practitioners drew on resource persons such as African American dancer Chuck Davis (1937–)
and continental Africans such as Gambian dancer Baba Ishangi (1934–2003), Ghanaian drum-
mer Cornelius Kweku Ganyo (1937–2003), and South African healer/diviner Hodari Mqulu
(dates unknown). African components were then combined with techniques, uniforms, and rit-
uals borrowed from Asian arts in which the founders had ﬁrst trained.
Mfundishi Maasi began training in karate while serving in the U.S. Marine Corps between
1959 and 1962. Following his discharge, he returned home to New Jersey, where he began study-
ing karate with James Cheatham and “kung fu” with Alan Lee. In 1964, Lee mentioned in con-
versation that the roots of the Asian martial arts ultimately led to Egypt. During this time, Maasi
was providing security for Amiri Baraka (Maasi, interview, 2005). Thus, Lee’s comments were
reinforced by Baraka’s speeches about the contributions of Egypt and Ethiopia to world civiliza-
tion (Hinton and Rahming 1994, 92), and that in turn led Maasi to look to Africa for martial
inspiration.
A few years later (around 1966 or 1967), Maasi met Nganga Tolo-Naa (born Raymond
Cooper, 1946–). Although Tolo-Naa came from Chicago, James Cheatham had been one of his
628
Afrikan Martial Arts

role models, too. Speciﬁcally, Tolo-Naa had followed Cheatham’s career through a magazine
called Judo Digest, and in 1963, this led him to start studying Shuri-ryu karate under John
Keehan (1939–1975; after 1967, known as Count Dante).
In 1964, Tolo-Naa entered an open karate tournament in Washington, DC. His ﬁrst oppo-
nent was Shimabuku Tatsuo (1908–1975), the founder of Isshin-ryu karate. Shimabuku lost to
Tolo-Naa, but the head judge, Ed Parker (1931–1990), refused to award the victory to Tolo-Naa
until tournament organizer Jhoon Rhee (Jhoon Rhee Goo, 1932–) intervened. Episodes such as
this caused Tolo-Naa to become more political. Ultimately, he joined the Nation of Islam, and
later he was discharged from the U.S. Army for refusing to serve in Vietnam (Hinton and
Rahming 1994, 99–100).
After meeting each other, Tolo-Naa and Maasi decided to develop an Afrikan-centered art.
The name Kupigana Ngumi (Kiswahili, “ﬁst-ﬁghting”) was chosen because it embodied univer-
sal principles (Hinton and Rahming 1994, 94). In 2005, during an interview with the author of
this entry, Maasi said, “[I]n our zeal . . . to identify ourselves [as Africans] we referred to what we
did as African martial arts. . . . [W]e didn’t see a need to distinguish between continental
Africans and Africans of the Diaspora.”
Structurally, the original version of Kupigana Ngumi was inﬂuenced by the karate of Count
Dante and James Cheatham, the Yang-style taijiquan of Hou Chi Kwang, the qigong of Alan
Lee, and the American Bando of Maung Gyi (Hinton and Rahming 1994, 90–91, 108).
Nonetheless, Kupigana Ngumi’s emphasis on questioning authority (“do your research” is a com-
mon refrain) and learning via principles rather than rote is not standard Asian martial art peda-
gogy (Hinton and Rahming 1994, 94). Instead, it is prototypical Afrikan.
Regarding principles, Maasi characterizes his martial endeavors as turning to particular cul-
tural traditions and worldviews for the purpose of ﬁnding and extracting universal principles.
Like many of his generation, he notes how the writings of art historian Robert Farris Thompson
(1932–) shaped his worldview. For example (interview, 2005), he offers Thompson’s insights
into the Kongo cosmogram of the “four moments of the sun”—dawn, noon, sunset, midnight—
as representing the “circle of creativity” (Thompson 1984, 108–116; McDavid 1998).
Both Maasi and Tolo-Naa have moved on from their original collaboration, and today, teach-
ers afﬁliated with Kupigana Ngumi no longer publicly advocate any radical political positions.
Collectively, however, they still stress the importance of education, especially in African lan-
guages and culture and African American history.
Kilindi Iyi (1952–) has lived in Detroit, Michigan, for most of his life. Iyi’s ﬁrst teacher was
his father, a light-heavyweight professional boxer named Jimmy Jones. Around 1965, Iyi wit-
nessed a demonstration of Asian martial arts at the Michigan State Fair. This turned his focus
from boxing to Asian martial arts, and he soon became proﬁcient enough to become a profes-
sional kickboxer. He retired from competition in 1981.
During 1968 or 1969, Iyi became involved in the Afrikan consciousness movement. He rea-
soned that if Asians and Europeans had martial arts, Africans also must have had martial arts
(interview, 2004). Initially, he sought out African college students, businesspersons, musicians,
dancers, and healers; he also did research at New York Public Library’s Schomburg Center for
Research in Black Culture, which is the largest repository of African and African American his-
tory in the United States. In 1985, his research was published, in the ground-breaking (and con-
troversial) “African Roots in the Asian Martial Arts.” Later, Iyi traveled to Africa in order to
Afrikan Martial Arts
629
www.ebook3000.com

expand his knowledge base, and eventually, he blended the arts he acquired into the uniﬁed sys-
tem that he continues to teach at his Ta-Merrian Institute in Detroit.
Although purists have criticized Iyi’s blending of systems, they also acknowledge him for
encouraging the development and proliferation of African and African-derived systems. Most
recently, this encouragement has included annual conventions, martial art camps, and tour
groups to Africa.
Dennis Newsome (1947–) lives in San Diego, California, and frequently collaborates
with Iyi. Newsome is recognized as one of Southern California’s pioneers in the practice and
teaching of African and African-descended martial arts. Newsome is known primarily as a
master (mestre) of Capoeira Angola Sao Bento Grande, which is the lineage of Mestre Touro
(Antonio Oliveiro Benvindo, 1950–). However, he also practices an African American ﬁght-
ing style called Jailhouse Rock, a Caribbean stick ﬁghting system called kalinda, and an
Eritrean style called Riesy. Riesy, which is also known as testa (Italian and Spanish “head,”
Portuguese “forehead”), features vicious head-butts as a primary weapon. Newsome’s stated
pedagogical goals include honoring and perpetuating the cultural heritage of African
American communities.
PURISTS
Edward Powe (1941–) is a recognized pioneer in the ﬁeld of African martial research. In 1967,
he began his practical and academic study of African and Diaspora martial culture by studying
capoeira Angola in Brazil, and in 1972 he opened the ﬁrst capoeira academy in the United States
in Cheney, Washington. After completing his Ph.D. in African languages and literature at
Wisconsin in 1984, he launched a career of independent research and publication. He has
produced over seventy self-published works devoted to “the history and culture of Black people
[African, Australian Aboriginal, Melanesian, and Dravidian],” and over a dozen of these books
focus on martial arts topics (Powe 2006).
However, once a cultural revitalization has gained in size and momentum, its members (con-
sciously or otherwise) attempt to resist outside inﬂuence and enforce new social norms. In the
Afrikanist movement, this has sometimes taken the form of portraying outsiders as lackeys of the
white devils and in-group moderates as Uncle Toms. An example of this happened in the Afrikanist
group Amakhanda.
Amakhanda (plural for ikhanda, “barracks” in Zulu) was established in the United States in
2000. Original members included Miles Johnson, Richard Khamesse, Thomas Desch-Obi,
Kenneth House, Thomas Lomax, and Olayinka Fadahunsi. The idea was to research martial arts
that developed on the African continent and any of those arts that left Africa during the slavery
era. The focus was on the warrior tradition, as distinct from dance or theatrical traditions. The
group rejected as subjects of study “those arts with an Asian inﬂuence and those that were
invented by a person of color whose only background was Asian martial arts” (interview with
Lomax, 2008). Arguments led to friction between members of the group, and over the next few
years, some early members left for other projects. Around 2005–2006, the remaining members
transformed the organization, ﬁrst into Mukhanda Enterprise, and then into Mukhanda Inter-
national. At that time, Richard Khamesse was the public spokesperson for Mukhanda. During
2007, Khamesse promised he would soon be providing digital video discs (DVD) showing
630
Afrikan Martial Arts

authentic African martial arts, and he said these were to become available in April 2008. As of
July 2009, nothing was commercially available. On the other hand, Desch-Obi and Fadahunsi
have published historical discussions in traditional academic venues.
CONCLUSION
Since the 1950s, many African American martial artists have showed their rejection of Euro-
pean American culture by turning to non-European practices and belief systems. Martial arts are
among these practices and belief systems. Thus, throughout the 1960s, the Nation of Islam
encouraged its members to train in Asian martial arts. Despite the fact that this training was
alleged to be for self-defense, the training was more symbolic than practical. Later, as resources
became more widely available, African Americans who were not members of NOI began explor-
ing African and African-descended belief systems such as Santería, Candomblé, and Vodun, and
in some cases practicing martial arts such as capoeira that were rooted in these belief systems.
During the 1970s and 1980s, further adaptations occurred. Although karate and taekwondo
are viable self-defense systems, their physical embodiments tend to be linear and rigid, their
teaching methodologies militaristic and rote, and their governing bodies in Asia.
Consequently, as more decentralized and less rote Filipino and Indonesian systems started
becoming available, African Americans began turning to these arts instead, and in some cases,
borrowing elements from these arts for use in their own Afrikan-inspired martial arts. Arts such
as Kupigana Ngumi combine these two trends. That is, they (re)construct African-inspired
martial arts from the raw materials that characteristically accompany and develop martial skill
(dance, music, percussion, improvisation, etc.), and then use them to serve the ends of African
American cultural nationalism.
Along the way, the Afrikanist martial art philosophy changed. During the 1960s, the under-
current was politicized (“Black Power”), but by the early 2000s, the trend had turned toward cul-
turally centered activities. This change was due to a combination of factors, to include the
cooling of the civil rights climate and improved access to continental African, Caribbean, and
African American arts in the United States.
—Thomas A. Green
See also: 52 Hand Blocks/Jailhouse Rock; Canary Islands Stick Fighting and Wrestling;
Capoeira; Caribbean Martial Arts; Celtic Martial Arts (in Volume I);
Belief Systems: Africa; Sambo; American Judo, 1942–1945; Kapap and 
Krav Maga; Social and Cultural Evolution of Kendo; Political Uses of the
Martial Arts; and Secret Societies and Fraternal Organizations (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Desch Obi, Thomas J. 2008. Fighting for Honor: The History of African Martial Art Traditions in the
Atlantic World. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press.
Franklin, Ben A. 1967. “S.N.C.C. Head Advises Negroes in Washington to Get Guns; BURNING
CAPITAL URGED, IF NEEDED,” New York Times, July 28, 14, via http://news.google.com/
archivesearch, accessed October 18, 2009.
Afrikan Martial Arts
631
www.ebook3000.com

Green, Thomas A. 2003. “Freeing the Afrikan Mind: The Role of Martial Arts in Contemporary
African American Cultural Nationalism,” in Martial Arts in the Modern World, edited by Thomas
A. Green and Joseph R. Svinth, 229–248. Westport, CT: Greenwood.
Hinton, William, and D’Arcy Rahming. 1994. Men of Steel Discipline: The Ofﬁcial Oral History of Black
American Pioneers in the Martial Arts. Chicago: Modern Bu-Jutsu.
Iyi, Kilindi. 1985. “African Roots in Asian Martial Arts,” Journal of African Civilizations 7(1),
138–143.
Jacobs, Cleophas T. 2009. “The Philosophy of ‘Aki Elmore Jiu Jitsu, School of Self-Defense,”
http://aki-elmoreryu-jiujitsu.com/yahoo_site_admin/assets/docs/philosophy.45225732.pdf,
accessed July 7, 2009.
Khamesse, Richard. 2008. “Bakweri Traditional Wrestling Info Needed in London,” Eden, January 20,
http://ww.edennewspaper.com, via archive.
Linton, Ralph. 1943. “Nativistic Movements,” American Anthropologist 45(2), April–June, 230–240,
via http://www.jstor.org/stable/663272, accessed October 18, 2009.
Maasi, Shaha. No date. “Gongo (Long Stick Training),” http://www.shahamaasi.com/10.html,
accessed July 21, 2009.
McDavid, Carol. 1998. “Levi Jordan Plantation: Kongo Cosmogram,” Levi Jordan Plantation,
http://www.webarchaeology.com/html/kongocos.htm, accessed July 21, 2009.
Powe, Edward. 2006. “Black Languages, Arts, and Culture Foundation,” http://www.blacfoundation
.org, accessed July 21, 2009.
Ta-Merrian Institute. No date. “About Kilindi Iyi,” http://www.tamerrian.com/About%20Ahati.html,
accessed July 12, 2009.
Thompson, Robert Farris. 1984. Flash of the Spirit: African and Afro-American Art and Philosophy. New
York: Vintage Books.
Thompson, Robert Farris. 1998. “Tough Guys Do Dance,” Rolling Stone, March 24, 135–140, via
http://ejmas.com/jcs/jcsart_thompson_1001.htm, accessed July 18, 2009.
Way of the Winds. No date. “Biography Grandmaster Ronald Duncan,” http://www.wayofthewinds.com/
system.htm, accessed July 21, 2009.
JUJUTSUFFRAGETTES
The 1884 Reform Act signiﬁcantly enfranchised voters in Great Britain. Two thirds of the male
population in England and Wales, half the male population in Ireland, and three-ﬁfths of the
male population in Scotland were now able to vote. However, this landmark piece of legislation
did not extend the vote, or suffrage, to British women. Activist women who challenged these
gender-biased laws were labeled “suffragettes” by the press.
Because of a variety of factors relating to gender, violence, and the development of the city,
both the art and the philosophy of jujutsu became potently linked with the concerns of British
suffragette campaigners. Following a demonstration of jujutsu to suffrage campaigners in
London, the term Jujutsuffragette appears to have been coined by the popular periodical Health
and Strength during the spring of 1909.
The concept of the “separate spheres” of the lives of men and women pervaded late-Victorian
culture; it was widely believed that only men should venture into the dust and dirt of the city to
earn money. In this world view, wives (the “angels of the house”) were to be sheltered. At the
same time, however, unmarried adult females—a group that the Victorian novelist George
Gissing (1857–1903) termed “odd women” (as in “odd woman out”)—were left to rely on their
own scant resources.
632
Jujutsuffragettes

Problems arose from the interaction of male and female strangers “unsupervised.” During the
Victorian era, public violence was increasingly condemned; boxers were made to cover their ﬁsts
with gloves, and the British gentleman was deﬁned by his self-restraint. Yet, sexual threat was a
hot topic. As the suffragette jujitsu teacher Edith Garrud (1872–1971) argued in 1910 (101),
“Woman is exposed to many perils nowadays, because so many who call themselves men are not
worthy of that exalted title.”
Concerns surrounding female vulnerability, especially in cities, came to the fore in July 1885,
with the publication of journalist W. T. Stead’s (1849–1912) sensational exposé of the buying
and selling of virgins to lascivious gentlemen customers. Stead’s newspaper series on child pros-
titution called “The Maiden Tribute of Modern Babylon” (July 1885) sold more than 1.5 million
unauthorized copies, and his story sparked wider discussions about sexual danger in the city and
the problems of street etiquette. Thus, Laura Ormiston Chant (1848–1923), a social purity cam-
paigner and feminist, “linked street harassment with women’s civil disabilities” (Walkowitz
1998, 11), and suffragist Helena Swanwick (1864–1939) wrote in her memoir (1935, 183): “I
resented the idea that I could not be allowed out after dark, even in frequented thoroughfares.
When it was explained to me that a young girl by herself was liable to be insulted by men, I
became incoherent with rage at a society which shut up the girls instead of the men.”
Advice given in contemporary etiquette manuals emphasized passive forms of self-defense.
Examples included dressing in somber colors and proceeding down the street purposefully, like
“grey moths” (E.L.L.1862, 136), while ignoring “male pests” (Walkowitz 1998, 51).
The risks were not limited solely to pedestrians. Indeed, the dangers of solitary railway
and maritime travel were summed up in the sensational Valentine Baker case of 1875, in
which a lone female passenger (Rebecca Kate Dickinson, age 21) escaped sexual assault only
by crawling out the window of her ﬁrst-class railway compartment and then spending the rest
of the trip standing on the outside footboard of the moving train. Although the jury con-
victed the man (Colonel Valentine Baker, 1827–1887) of indecent assault, the story still
highlighted the dangers of solitary travel. Thus, methods had to be found for women who
needed to defend themselves at close range.
Boxing was one possibility. “The boxing girl is to have her day,” said an article that appeared
in New York Times on September 25, 1904. After all, boxing was good exercise. (“Before time is
called your blood will be racing through your veins, your breath will be chopping itself in inch
lengths about half way down your throat, and you will feel as though you had spent an hour in
the hot room of a Turkish bath.”) One problem was the effect of this sport on women’s beauty:
“What availeth a graceful body with a distorted face?”
Fencing was another potential resource. The enormous hats women wore at the beginning of
the twentieth century were afﬁxed with hatpins, and long hatpins made serviceable foils. Thus,
it was not long before British magistrates began declaring long hatpins to be dangerous weapons
(Longman and Loch 1911, 127). “‘A hatpin,’ Mr. Plowden [a London magistrate] said, ‘is as dan-
gerous a weapon in the hands of a woman as a revolver in the hands of man. I stated that hat-
pins ought to be licensed, but, as a matter of fact, I doubt if this would be actually practical’”
(New York Times 1911).
This left jujitsu. During the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–1905, the Japanese government
had touted the art as a method by which the small (that is, Japan) could defeat the large
(Russia). At the same time, Japanese wrestlers such as Yukio Tani (Tani Yukio, 1881–1950) and
Jujutsuffragettes
633
www.ebook3000.com

Taro Miyake (Miyake Taruji, ca. 1881–1935) were becoming popular in the British music halls.
The usual British wrestling card of the period required the smaller Japanese wrestler to face a
much larger European opponent—and, as Japan was then allied with Britain, the Japanese
wrestler was usually told to win, if he could. At least in the cases of Tani and Miyake, they usu-
ally could, and this led to much positive press for jujitsu. Finally, a qualiﬁed and sympathetic
female jujitsu instructor was available.
In Britain, the pioneer of commercial jujitsu instruction was Edward William Barton-Wright
(1860–1951). Barton-Wright was a railway engineer who had learned Shinden Fudo Ryu jujutsu
and Kodokan judo while working in Japan between 1893 and 1897. Upon relocating to London
in 1898, he established a training facility in Soho, the Bartitsu Club. He spent the next sev-
eral years promoting jujitsu and other martial arts, and he invited women to learn his brand of
self-defense. The teachers of his women’s classes included other women. For instance, “Miss
Sanderson” (the wife of Pierre Vigny, the founder of la canne, a mode of self-defense using a
walking-stick) gave demonstrations of fencing techniques. Fees were high, so self-help courses
were apparently also presented. An example of such a self-help book is Armand Cherpillod’s
Meine Selbsthilfe Jiu Jitsu für Damen (1901). Cherpillod (1880–?) was Swiss (the German title
translates as “Self-Help: Jiu Jitsu for Women”), but he had learned his jujitsu methods at Barton-
Wright’s academy. The relationship to Barton-Wright is remarked because other jujitsu titles of
the era directed toward women emphasized jujitsu as a method of physical training rather than
a method of practical self-defense. An example is H. Irving Hancock’s (1868–1922) Physical
Training for Women by Japanese Methods (Jiu-Jitsu) (1904).
The ﬁrst English-language book to emphasize women’s self-defense was probably Emily Diana
(Mrs. Roger) Watts’s The Fine Art of Jujutsu (1906). Watts (ca. 1865–?) had trained with
Sadakazu Uyenishi (1880–?), one of several jujutsu practitioners whom Barton-Wright had
brought to England in 1900, and his student William Garrud (dates unknown). And, at a time
when the ladylike qualities of sports such as tennis and ﬁeld hockey were still widely debated,
Watts’s book daringly described jujitsu as a close-combat sport that could be performed by both
genders together.
Shortly after Watts’s manual appeared, studio photos of actress Marie Studholme
(1872–1930) practicing jujitsu with professional wrestler Yukio Tani were featured in newspaper
supplements and cigarette cards. In the accompanying text, Studholme extolled the beautifying,
health-giving, and emancipating properties of jujitsu. According to Studholme’s ghostwriter in
The World of Women, “Any man or woman who masters this trick will become a veritable hooli-
gan’s terror” (Beere 1909, 414).
It was in this context that suffragettes began to use jujitsu as a political tool. The idea was partly
philosophical (that is, carefully rehearsed technique could overcome brute strength) and partly prac-
tical (for example, unescorted women could protect themselves, using force if necessary).
The process began in October 1903, after Emmeline Pankhurst (1858–1928), her daughter
Christabel Pankhurst (1880–1958), and several other women organized the Women’s Social and
Political Union (WSPU) in Manchester, England. The WSPU was a militant organization, and
over the next decade, its members were often arrested for interrupting meetings and picketing
events. The imprisoned suffragettes responded with hunger strikes, and the government
responded with forcible feedings. Toward preventing the forcible feedings, it became necessary
to avoid arrest altogether. Thus, Christabel Pankhurst (1913, 255) requested her readers to
634
Jujutsuffragettes

counter governmental violence by taking “to the noble art of self defense and to the defense of
their prisoner-champions.”
The cover of that particular issue of Suffragette (December 19, 1913) shows a woman
wrestling with a male attacker who is attempting to knock her down. She looks deﬁantly at her
taller male opponent, and waves a ﬂag bearing the word “justice.” In this context, jujitsu was
meant to remind readers that victory was not always enjoyed by “the strong in muscle” or “the
heavy in weight” (Pankhurst 1913, 225).
By December 1913, Pankhurst’s experience with jujitsu was practical as well as metaphorical.
The earliest references to the use of physical jujitsu as part of the suffrage campaign date to the
spring of 1909, when the Anglo-American press announced that twenty-ﬁve militant suffra-
gettes would receive training in the Japanese art, and by the summer of 1913, Sylvia Pankhurst
(1882–1960; sister of Christabel and daughter of Emmeline) was quoted as saying, “We have not
yet made ourselves a match for the police, and we have got to do it. The police know jiu-jitsu. I
advise you to learn jiu-jitsu. Women should practice it as well as the men” (New York Times
1913).
The WSPU jujitsu instructor was Edith Garrud. After Uyenishi returned to Japan in 1908,
Edith Garrud continued giving lessons to women and children while her husband taught the
men. Mrs. Garrud was also an active suffragette, belonging to both the WSPU and the more
democratically-run Women’s Freedom League. In 1908, she became a leader of the athletic
branch of the Women’s Freedom League.
In May 1909, the Garruds were asked to give a jujitsu demonstration for the WSPU. At the
last minute, William Garrud took ill, so Edith took over. The display was a success, and by July
1910, she was featured in a diverse collection of periodicals. Perhaps the most enduring image
appears in the Arthur Wallis Mills cartoon entitled “The Suffragette That Knew Jiu-jitsu: The
Arrest.” Published in Punch on July 6, 1910, the drawing shows a petite but feisty lady who ﬂexes
her muscles and dares a group of cowering police ofﬁcers to arrest her.
In that same month, Edith Garrud was also photographed in her dojo throwing a policeman
(or, at least, a man dressed as a policeman) for an article published in an up-market publication
called The Sketch, and in a separate article published in Health and Strength (“Damsel v
Desperado”), she demonstrated defensive techniques in speciﬁc scenarios. The scenes of Garrud’s
morality play, “Ju-Jutsu as a Husband-Tamer: A Suffragette Play with a Moral” appeared in
Health and Strength in 1911, and demonstrated how a wife could use jujitsu to subdue her drunken
and aggressive husband.
Between 1910 and 1913, Edith Garrud’s involvement with the suffragette movement deep-
ened, and eventually she became the trainer for Emmeline Pankhurst’s bodyguards. Pankhurst’s
bodyguard was formed in reaction to the “Cat and Mouse Act” of 1913—ofﬁcially, the Prisoners
(Temporary Discharge for Ill-Health) Act 1913—in which authorities released hunger-striking
suffragettes from prison only to rearrest them after they had recovered at home. The idea was to
prevent campaigners from becoming martyrs and to mitigate the unfavorable publicity resulting
from published accounts of forced feedings. Emmeline Pankhurst had been arrested and released
on numerous occasions, and it was the task of the bodyguards to prevent her and other speakers
from being rearrested. It is estimated that there were around twenty-ﬁve members of this body-
guard, to include Canadian-born Gertrude Harding (1878–1952), the English vegetarian and
Theosophist Leonora Cohen (1873–1978, alias “Pomona,” who was tried in 1913 for breaking the
Jujutsuffragettes
635
www.ebook3000.com

glass case that held Regalia of the Order of Merit in the Tower of London), the Scottish socialist
Helen Crawfurd (1877–1974), and the English hunger-striker Lillian Mary Dove-Wilcox
(1875–1963).
During these heady times, Garrud divided her time between teaching women and children
at her commercial martial art school and assisting with suffragette escapades. In an interview
conducted in the 1960s, she told Antonia Raeburn (1973, 167) how her Argyll Place school
offered a refuge for suffragettes who had been throwing stones against police:
They came back to the school because it was easy. They came straight in and turned those mats up.
I made them strip off their outside clothes and give me their bags with their stones and any other
missiles they had left. All went under the ﬂoor-boards and back went the mats.
They were all in their jiu-jitsu coats working on the mats, when bang, bang, bang on the door.
Six policemen! I looked very thunderstruck and wanted to know what was the matter. “Well, can’t
we come in?” said one of the policemen. I said: “No I’m sorry, but I’ve got six ladies here having a
jiu-jitsu lesson. I don’t expect gentlemen to come in here.” He said: “Are they pupils?” I said: “Yes,
pupils.” So, it ended up by one old man coming in and having a look around. He didn’t see any-
thing, only the girls busy working, and out he went again.
As the interview shows, Garrud subverted contemporary codes of etiquette for political purposes.
In her 1965 interview with Godfrey Winn, she recounted being told by a policeman that she was
creating an “obstruction” during a demonstration in a London street. Pretending, in a ladylike
gesture, to drop her handkerchief, she threw the policeman over her shoulder, and then slipped
into the crowd.
Suffragette literature, particularly Votes for Women, placed great emphasis on “daintiness,”
and stressed that campaigners dress in a feminine manner that was pleasing to the eye. This strat-
egy was not just to disarm policemen or garner support of middle-class British society; it was also
a symbol of emancipation. Jujitsu-suffragettes could express their femininity through their dress,
and did not need to walk the streets as grey moths, in fear of male pests: if pressed, they could
defend themselves.
The outbreak of world war in August 1914 put an end to militant suffragettes. Socially,
much changed in Britain during the Great War, and within weeks of the announcement of the
Armistice in November 1918, Parliament had granted the vote to unmarried property-owning
females over the age of 30. The British women’s rights movement also moved on, and after
British women achieved full emancipation in 1928, Garrud and the jujitsu-suffragettes became
simply another footnote in British history. Then, between 1999 and 2001, a series of articles
published on the Internet introduced Garrud and the jujitsu-suffragettes to a new generation.
Interest was rekindled, and early twenty-ﬁrst century literary depictions include The Perfect
Daughter by Gillian Linscott (2000), a crime thriller in which an Edwardian suffragette uses
jujitsu to help her solve a murder, and Peter Simon Hilton’s 2003 feminist play called Edith
Garrud’s Dojo.
—Emelyne Godfrey
See also: China: Martial Women (in Volume I); Expressive Culture; Globalization of Martial Arts;
Bartitsu; Women’s Freestyle Wrestling; Women’s Boxing, 1972-present; Political Uses of the Martial
636
Jujutsuffragettes

Arts; Women in Combat: The U.S. Military, 2001–Present; and Secret Societies and Fraternal
Organizations (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Beere, Ellice. 1909. “Why Not Ju-Jitsu for Women,” Penny Illustrated Paper and Illustrated Times,
December 18, 414, via http://newspapers.bl.uk/blcs/, accessed October 16, 2009.
“E.L.L.” (pseud. Eliza Lynn Linton). 1862. “Out Walking,” Temple Bar 5, 132–141.
Freundschuh, Aaron. 2006. “‘New Sport in the Street: Self-Defence, Security and Space in Belle
Epoque Paris,” French History 20, 424–441, DOI:10.1093/fh/crl026, via http://fh.oxfordjournals
.org/cgi/content/ abstract/crl026v1, accessed October 16, 2009.
Garrud, Edith. 1910. “Damsel v Desperado,” Health and Strength 7, July 23, 101–102, via
http://ejmas.com/jnc/jncart_garrud_1299.htm, accessed April 11, 2009.
Garrud, Edith. 1911. “Ju-Jutsu as a Husband-Tamer: A Suffragette Play with a Moral,” Health and Strength
8, April 8, via http://ejmas.com/jnc/jncart_healthstrength_0100.htm, accessed April 11, 2009.
Godfrey, Emelyne C. 2008. “The Self-Defense Scenario and Middle-Class Physical Prowess in Eng-
lish Literature, 1851–1914.” Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Birkbeck College, University of London.
Hancock, H. Irving. 1904. Physical Training for Women by Japanese Methods (Jiu-Jitsu). New York:
G. P. Putnam’s Sons, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Longman, Eleanor D., and Sophy Loch. 1911. Pins and Pincushions. New York, Bombay, and Calcutta:
Longmans, Green and Co., via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
New York Times. 1904. “And Now It’s the Boxing Girl; Six-Ounce Gloves the Thing, and She Knows
All About Feints, Clinches, and Side-Stepping—Woman’s Latest Fad and Its Advantages,”
September 25, Second Magazine Section, 34, via http://news.google.com/archivesearch, accessed
October 18, 2009.
New York Times. 1911. “Hatpin Peril in England; Magistrate Plowden Says Steps to Stop the Nuisance
Are Needed,” November 12, Cable News Wireless and Sporting Sections, C3, via
http://news.google.com/archivesearch, accessed October 18, 2009.
New York Times. 1913. “Jiu-Jitsu for Militants; Sylvia Pankhurst Also Wants Them Drilled and to
Carry Sticks,” August 20, 4, via http://news.google.com/archivesearch, accessed October 18,
2009.
Pankhurst, Christabel. 1913. “In Fear of Women,” Suffragette, December 19, 255 (Microﬁlm).
Punch. 1910. “The Suffragette that Knew Jiu-Jitsu,” July 6, 9, via http://www.punchcartoons
.com/More-Categories-history-&-politics-social-history-suffragettes/c200_32_33_104/p404/
Cartoon-Print:-Suffragette-that-Knew-Jiu-Jitsu/product_info.html, accessed April 11, 2009.
Raeburn, Antonia. 1973. The Militant Suffragettes. London: Michael Joseph.
Robins, Elizabeth. 1940. Both Sides of the Curtain. London: Heinemann.
Svinth, Joseph. 1999. “Women Who Would Not Be Sheep: Women’s Combative Sports in the Twen-
tieth Century,” InYo: Journal of Alternative Perspectives on the Martial Arts and Sciences,
http://ejmas.com/jalt/jaltart_svinth4_1199.htm, accessed April 11, 2009.
Svinth, Joseph. 2001. “The Evolution of Women’s Judo, 1900–1945,” InYo: The Journal of Alternative
Perspectives on the Martial Arts and Sciences, http://ejmas.com/jalt/jaltart_svinth_0201.htm,
accessed April 11, 2009.
Swanwick, Helena M. 1935. I Have Been Young. London: Victor Gollancz.
Walkowitz, Judith R. 1998. “Going Public: Shopping, Street Harassment, and Streetwalking in Late
Victorian London,” Representations 62, Spring, 1–30, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/2902937,
accessed October 16, 2009.
Winn, Godfrey. 1965. “Dear Mrs Garrud—I Wish I’d Known You Then . . .” Woman, June 19, 22–25.
Wolf, Tony, editor. 2005. The Bartitsu Compendium, Volume I: History and the Canonical Syllabus. Lulu:
http://www.lulu.com/content/138834.
Wolf, Tony, editor. 2008. The Bartitsu Compendium, Volume II: Antagonistics. Lulu: http://www.lulu
.com/content/3115394.
Jujutsuffragettes
637
www.ebook3000.com

POLITICAL CONFLICT AND AIKIDO, 1931–1942
Ueshiba Morihei (1883–1969) was the founder of aikido. His discourses published in English
have been heavily edited and, understandably, his pre–World War II connections with social-
ist radicals and right-wing fanatics have not been a prominent feature of his post–World War
II biographies. Instead, his editors and biographers have generally stressed Ueshiba’s dedica-
tion to world peace. What the edited versions do not say is that the world peace to which
Ueshiba was dedicated, namely the harmony of the three worlds (meaning the heavenly
world, the earthly world, and the spirit world), was based on the vision of the syncretistic
Omoto religion of the 1920s and 1930s. In the Omoto world view, especially after the reli-
gion was suppressed in 1921, Japan had a divine mission to enlighten the world and a key-
stone of that enlightenment included placing everyone in East Asia (to begin with) under
the benevolent dictatorship of the emperor. Understanding this public/hidden (omote/ura)
distinction is essential to understanding the culture of budo (Japanese martial arts) and helps
explain the circumstances of Ueshiba’s revolutionary contribution to post–World War II
Japanese martial arts.
Aikido received its current name in 1942, when the Dai Nippon Butokukai (Greater Japan
Martial Virtue Society), which had lost its relative independence and become a section of the
military government, added a general aikido section (Aikido-bu) to the other martial arts repre-
sented in the association. By this time, the Japanese martial arts were being taught and practiced
as an important contribution to Japan’s efforts for all-out world war. Of course, Ueshiba’s art had
been in existence several decades before 1942, but the “golden age” of his Kobukan Dojo, located
in the Ushigome district of Tokyo, lasted from its foundation in 1931 until late 1942, when
Ueshiba moved to Iwama, in Ibaraki Prefecture (to the north-east of Tokyo)—a period roughly
matching Japan’s Fifteen Years’ War of 1931–1945.
KOBUKAN AND THE MILITARY
The establishment of the Kobukan Dojo in 1931 was the result of major efforts on the part of
high-ranking naval ofﬁcers and political ﬁgures, and the list of Ueshiba’s friends and students
during this period reads like a roll call of Japan’s political and military establishment. Among his
students were Admiral Yamamoto Eisuke (1876–1962), Baron General Araki Sadao
(1877–1966), Lieutenant General Hata Shinji (1879–1950), Vice Admiral Takahashi Sankichi
(1882–1966), Baron Lieutenant General Maeda Toshinari (1885–1942), and Major General
Miura Saburo (1893–1974). When the Kobukan was established as a foundation in 1940, Prime
Minister Konoe Fumimaro (1891–1945) was a member of its governing body.
Ueshiba was ﬁrst urged to move to Tokyo by Admiral Takeshita Isamu (1869–1949), who
had heard about him from a fellow ofﬁcer. When Ueshiba arrived in Tokyo in 1927, Takeshita
introduced him to Count (and former admiral and prime minister) Yamamoto Gombei
(1852–1933), and helped arrange demonstrations for members of the imperial family, the
government, the armed forces, and the aristocracy. Ueshiba then taught his art in a succes-
sion of private houses (all belonging to aristocrats), and with their support he eventually
opened the Kobukan Dojo on land purchased from the aristocratic Ogasawara family.
Ueshiba’s senior students also arranged for him to teach at many military schools. Initially,
638
Political Conflict and Aikido, 1931–1942

these schools were naval schools, such as the Naval Engineering School at Yokosuka, the
Naval Finance School (Kaigun Kokai Gakko) at Tokyo, and the Naval Academy at Etajima.
Later, General Miura arranged for Ueshiba to teach army and Kempeitai (military police)
ofﬁcers, too. Thus, Ueshiba taught martial arts at the Toyama Military Academy (Rikugun
Toyama Gakko), the Army War College (where his student General Maeda was superintend-
ent from 1936–1937), the Military Police Academy (Kempei Gakko), and the Nakano School
(for army intelligence). This situation lasted until 1942, when Ueshiba moved to Iwama and
devoted himself to farming and private budo study—which for political reasons, ceased to be
called budo study after 1945.
OMOTE VERSUS URA
The omote/ura (public/hidden) distinctions mentioned above appear throughout this period.
According to the public (omote) version, which is heavily inﬂuenced by a perspective formed in
the wake of Japan’s defeat in World War II, Ueshiba Morihei was largely unaffected by the polit-
ical dramas unfolding around him, as he was single-mindedly dedicated to creating his revolu-
tionary new martial art. Of course, as a loyal Japanese citizen, he acceded to the wishes of
Admiral Takeshita and moved to Tokyo in 1927; he acceded to the wishes of Deguchi Onisaburo
(1871–1948, founder of the Omoto religion) and created a paramilitary budo group in 1932; and
he acceded to the wishes of General Miura and Admiral Yamamoto and taught at all the mili-
tary schools. However, from around 1940 onward he became increasingly disenchanted with the
politics of the warmongers in the military, and the subjugation of aikido to the Dai Nippon
Bukotukai, late in 1942, was the last straw.
According to the hidden (ura) version, it is not at all surprising that, given his place within the
military and political establishment, Ueshiba had close links with ultranationalists and radicals. An
appropriate analogy would be a vast spider’s web of interconnected “cells,” not all of which were
directly connected with each other or known to the spider in the center. The available evidence
does not show that Ueshiba was himself an active ultranationalist like Okawa Shumei
(1886–1957), but he certainly counted many ultranationalists among his friends and students.
According to Ueshiba’s son Kisshomaru (1921–1999), one of his father’s students (and “a close
acquaintance”) was General Araki Sadao, who from 1931 was Deputy Inspector-General of
Military Training and Minister for War. Araki believed strongly in the doctrine of the Kokutai
(Japan’s essence as a unique nation) and was a very popular ﬁgure in a number of secret societies
(“study groups”) formed by young ofﬁcers who had graduated from the military schools where
Ueshiba taught. Members of these secret societies wanted radical political change and were pre-
pared to go to extreme lengths to achieve this.
SECRET NETWORKS
For most of its recorded history, Japan has been governed by military autocracies. This type of
government reached both its apogee and its nadir in the Tokugawa period (1603–1868). During
the 1860s, the increasingly unworkable Tokugawa shogunate gave way to the Meiji Restoration,
which promised much, but by no means achieved all that it promised. In the years that followed
1868, Japan was transformed from a rural backwater into an industrialized nation, intent on
becoming a major power by means of territorial expansion.
Political Conflict and Aikido, 1931–1942
639
www.ebook3000.com

Unfortunately, Japan’s rising status as a world power was not matched by equally effective
government. The country was run by cabals formed in an atmosphere of uneasy relationships
among the Emperor’s court, the cabinet, the powerful bureaucracy, ﬂedgling political parties, and
both the Army and the Navy, the latter two playing an increasingly autocratic role in national
politics. Political attitudes left over from the feudal era, especially in the ﬁefs (han) that initiated
the Meiji Restoration, coupled with increasing pressure for change and the absence of one
accepted power center, spawned a complex network of civilian and military groups and factions
(hambatsu, gumbatsu), some secret, some more open, but all vying for effective power and all
embodiments of social interaction that can be understood in the established Japanese terms of
uchi/soto (inner/outer), tatemae/honne (official/unofficial), omote/ura (open/closed), and
sempai/kohai (senior/junior).
BLACK DRAGONS AND CHERRY BLOSSOMS
The Kokuryukai (Black Dragon Society/Amur River Society) and the Sakurakai (Cherry
Blossom Society) are two well-known examples of the vast number of radical secret societies that
arose in Japan between the Meiji Restoration and World War II, and both of them have direct
links to Ueshiba and aikido.
The Kokuryukai was created in 1901 by Uchida Ryohei (1873–1937), with the active sup-
port of another ultranationalist named Toyama Mitsuru (1855–1944). The name Kokuryukai,
which translates as Black Dragon Society, actually refers to the 4,300-kilometer (2,700-mile)-
long Amur River, which forms the natural boundary between the Russian Far East and China—
in Chinese script, the river’s name is Heilongjiang or Black Dragon River.
The Kokuryukai was an offshoot of an earlier secret society and was dedicated to the expansion
of Japan into China as far north as the Amur River and to the containment of Russia on the other
side. Among the members was Yoshida Kotaro (1859–1943), who trained in the martial arts and
became a disciple of Takeda Sokaku (1859–1943), the founder of Daito-ryu aiki-jujutsu. It was
Yoshida who introduced Ueshiba Morihei to Takeda Sokaku and as a result, Ueshiba trained hard
with Takeda in Hokkaido.
After 1921, Ueshiba also became a close disciple and conﬁdant of Deguchi Onisaburo, who
was the charismatic leader of the Omoto religion. The Omoto religion entered a “golden age”
after its ﬁrst suppression in 1921. Deguchi saw his Omoto mission being to create a “new heaven
and earth” under the benevolent rule of the Japanese emperor, and Omoto became an ardent
supporter of ultranationalist groups, to include the young ofﬁcers in the Kodo (Imperial Way)
faction of the Japanese military. These ofﬁcers took their inspiration from radical socialist Kita
Ikki (1883–1937), whose 1919 book, Nihon kaizo hoan taiko (Outline Plan for the Reorganiza-
tion of Japan), was banned by the authorities.
Kita had previously worked for the Kokuryukai in China and returned to Japan to work with
the ultranationalist Okawa Shumei. When a group of radical army ofﬁcers attempted a coup d’é-
tat in February 1936, Kita was accused of being the inspiration behind the attempt and was exe-
cuted. Until then, however, the military ofﬁcers, who looked on Kita’s book as a biblical text,
received much encouragement from General Araki Sadao, the student of Ueshiba mentioned
above. Araki, like Kita, believed that young military ofﬁcers were the best instruments for the
reform of the nation because of their youthful purity and selﬂess innocence. Like cherry blossoms
640
Political Conflict and Aikido, 1931–1942

(sakura, a powerful wartime symbol), dedicated ofﬁcers were the clearest expression of the mar-
tial spirit (Bushido) that Japan needed to win wars with China, the Soviet Union, and ulti-
mately, the United States and the British Commonwealth. Thus, militant groups within the
Japanese army supported Deguchi’s Omoto operations in Manchuria after 1931, as did Uchida
Ryohei and Toyama Mitsuru of the Kokuryukai. Indeed, their support for Omoto continued right
up to 1935, when the religion was suppressed for the second time. At that point, they dropped
Deguchi like a stone. In turn, Deguchi supported the radical ofﬁcers, and this support, in fact,
led to the suppression of his organization in 1935.
Several young ofﬁcers of the Imperial Way faction were also members of the Sakurakai
(Cherry Blossom Society), a separate ultranationalist secret society that was founded in
September 1930. The Sakurakai was dedicated to the abolition of party politics and the creation
of a totalitarian state under the rule of the emperor and the military. The Sakurakai planned two
coups d’état. The ﬁrst attempt was in March 1931 and failed because the details became known.
The ringleaders received very minor punishments and so planned a second coup, which was
intended to take place in October 1931 and to include the assassination of several prominent
politicians. This also failed, and as punishment, Sakurakai leader Lieutenant Colonel Hashimoto
Kingoro (1890–1957) was conﬁned to barracks for twenty days and the Sakurakai was dis-
banded. The punishment was so light because General Araki had argued that, though the plot-
ters had been rather reckless, their intentions were fundamentally pure, and therefore good.
Two points need to be noted here. One is that the young ofﬁcers enjoyed increasingly wide-
spread support from all sections of society: from the court, from eminent persons in the forces
such as Araki, and from the general population, who felt that the Meiji restoration had gone seri-
ously wrong. The second point is that for a brief period, from April 1931 until the end of the
year, when Sakurakai was disbanded, its meetings took place at Ueshiba Morihei’s Kobukan
Dojo, where some of the members trained in the arts that Ueshiba had learned from Takeda
Sokaku. These were still early days for the radical rightists, and after the Sakurakai was dis-
banded, its members continued their activities on a larger scale. There is no evidence that
Ueshiba was involved in any other such meetings or activities after 1931, but he continued to
associate with and teach in the schools of the military establishment right up until 1942.
Civilians were included in the Sakurakai, and several attended the meetings at Ueshiba’s
dojo. These civilians included Okawa Shumei, Inoue Nissho (1887–1967), and Tachibana
Kozaburo (1893–1974), all of whom were imprisoned in 1932 for their part in encouraging (or
actually carrying out) assassinations. Okawa was a pan-Asianist who was tried as a Class A war
criminal after World War II and subsequently spent some time in a mental hospital. He was
released from prison in 1948 and remained a lifelong friend of Ueshiba. Inoue, a one-time spy in
Manchuria for the Japanese army, was a self-styled Nichiren Buddhist preacher and the founder
of the “Temple of Righteous National Defense” (Rissho Gokokudo), which was a temple-based
youth training center in Ibaraki Prefecture. Initially dedicated to agrarian and social reform,
Inoue gradually turned to extreme ultranationalism, and the latter ideas eventually attracted the
interest of radical ofﬁcers at the Tsuchiura naval air station. Inoue met Okawa around 1929, and
after the Sakurakai’s failed coups d’état in 1931, Inoue founded another secret society called
“League of Blood” (Ketsumeidan) that actually carried out three assassinations. Like Inoue,
Tachibana was believer in a rural utopia of peasants, and in 1930, he founded the School for
Rural Patriotism (Aikyojuku), from which he organized agricultural communes in Ibaragi
Political Conflict and Aikido, 1931–1942
641
www.ebook3000.com

Prefecture. Before this, Tachibana had been an instructor at the Tsuchiura naval air station, and
he knew the radical ofﬁcers there. He also became involved in the Ketsumeidan plots. Thus,
both Inoue and Tachibana were imprisoned during the 1930s.
Both Inoue and Tachibana operated in Ibaraki Prefecture, where, by coincidence Ueshiba
Morihei had been accumulating extensive land-holdings since 1932, when, as head of Deguchi
Onisaburo’s paramilitary budo group, he opened a dojo there. Ueshiba’s interest in buying land
sprang from similar utopian ideas about restoring rural values. Deguchi took his cue from
Tokugawa-era nativists such as Hirata Atsutane (1776–1843), and preached the importance of
a return to traditional values, which included returning to working the land and growing rice.
Ueshiba espoused similar values but believed that one achieved greater completion through a life
of farming that was coupled with budo training. Both Deguchi and Ueshiba tapped into a very
powerful cultural tradition, one that had been under increasing threat since Japan’s rush to
industrialization and economic parity with the United States and Britain. Many of the young
ofﬁcers came from poorer rural families and saw at ﬁrst hand the grave damage that had been
done to this cultural tradition.
Following yet another failed coup attempt in February 1936, an opposing group within the
Japanese army curbed the Imperial Way faction. The opposing group, known as the Control
Faction (Tosei-ha), was dedicated to expansion into South Asia and, ultimately, to all-out war.
Members of the Control Faction also had direct links to Ueshiba Morihei. For example, Con-
trol Faction leader General Tojo Hideki (1884–1948), practiced aikido and ordered his ofﬁ-
cers to do so. Tojo, the prime minister of Japan from 1940 to 1944, was instrumental in having
Ueshiba (and his students Tomiki Kenji, 1900–1979, and Ohba Hideo, 1911–1986) teach
“aikibudo” at Kenkoku University in Shinkyo, Manchukuo (today Changchun City in China’s
Jilin Province), and nearby military installations. There is evidence that Ueshiba went to
Manchuria to add his support to Prime Minister Konoe’s attempts to end the war with China,
so that Tojo could invade South Asia without having to worry so much about China and the
Soviet Union.
The public (omote) version of the events of 1931–1942 keeps Ueshiba Morihei completely
insulated from the political events surrounding him, in keeping with the postwar vision of aikido
as an art dedicated to world peace. The hidden (ura) version places Ueshiba in a richer but more
politically problematic context in which the retreat to Iwama in 1942 is best viewed as a form of
ritual puriﬁcation (misogi), as described in Ueshiba’s later discourses about aikido training.
—Peter A. Goldsbury
See also: Japan: Jujutsu-based Systems; Japan: Kendo, Iaido, and 
Jodo; (in Volume I) Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion after 1968; Invented
Traditions; Asian Martial Arts in the United States and Canada; International Karate; Written
Texts: Japan; Judo in Japan, 1931-1950, Jukendo; Social and Cultural Evolution of Kendo; Secret
Societies and Fraternal Organizations; and Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Matsumoto Kenichi. 2004. Okawa Shumei (in Japanese). Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten.
Okawa Shumei. 1986. Okawa Shumei Nikki: Meiji 36 Nen–Showa 24 Nen [Diaries of Okawa Shumei:
1904-1959], edited by Okawa Shumei Kenshokai [Okawa Shumei Study Group]. Tokyo: Iwasaki
Gakujutsu Shuppansha.
642
Political Conflict and Aikido, 1931–1942

Okawa Shumei Kankei Bunsho Kankokai [Committee for Publishing Materials Relating to Okawa
Shumei]. 1998. Okawa Shumei Kankei Bunsho [Materials Relating to Okawa Shumei]. Tokyo: Fuyo
Shobo Shuppan.
Pranin, Stanley. 1979. “Interview with Morihiro Saito (2),” Aiki News 33, via http://www.aikidojournal
.com/article?articleID=139, accessed March 15, 2009.
Pranin, Stanley. 1983. “Interview with Shigenobu Okumura.” Aiki News 58, via http://www.aikidojournal
.com/article?articleID=531, accessed March 15, 2009.
Pranin, Stanley. 1990. “Interview with Ikkusai Iwata,” Aiki News 86, via http://www.aikidojournal.com/
article?articleID=412, accessed March 14, 2009.
Shillony, Ben-Ami. 1973. Revolt in Japan: The Young Ofﬁcers and the February 26, 1936 Incident.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Tankha, Brij. 2003. Kita Ikki and the Making of Modern Japan. Folkestone, UK: Global Oriental.
Ueshiba Kisshomaru. 2008. A Life in Aikido: The Biography of the Founder Morihei Ueshiba. Tokyo:
Kodansha International.
Victoria, Brian Daizen. 2003. Zen War Stories. London: Routledge Curzon.
Victoria, Brian Daizen. 2006. Zen at War, 2nd edition. Lanham: Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
WOMEN IN COMBAT:
THE U.S. MILITARY, 2001–PRESENT
Archaeological evidence of female warriors dates to antiquity. For instance, Ahhotep I of Egypt (ca.
1560–ca. 1530 BCE) was buried with military honors and weaponry testifying to her military
prowess. Additional literary and historical evidence abounds—think of the Amazons, Hua Mulan,
Nzinga Mbande (Ana Nzinga, ca. 1583–1663), and the Rani of Jhansi (Lakshmibai, 1828–1858).
There is plentiful multicultural evidence describing women who have successfully engaged in wars
and battles, sometimes directly, like the Afghan women in Rudyard Kipling’s poem The Young British
Soldier (1892), and more often indirectly, as with Red Cross founder Clara Barton (1821–1912) or
the “White Feather” militarist women of World War I (1914–1918). But, what is the status of U.S.
female soldiers serving in the Global War on Terror (2001 to present)?
As of this writing, only seven countries allow women to serve in the military without
restrictions on their participation: Canada, Denmark, Italy, Latvia, Norway, Spain, and
Sweden. All other countries either exclude women from certain assignments (typically
infantry, mechanized, and reconnaissance units) or prohibit them from joining the armed
forces altogether.
Although women have served in all U.S. wars, women did not get a permanent place in the
U.S. military until the Women’s Armed Services Integration Act of 1948 (Schuster et al. 1998,
1). This permanent place had some severe limitations, and for many years, women with depend-
ent children could not enlist. Women were not allowed into the National Guard until 1956,
admitted into military service academies until 1976, or allowed to serve on the Navy’s major sur-
face combatants until 1978.
In 1988, the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) adopted the Risk Rule, which let
women into more military occupational ﬁelds, but at the same time, required the armed serv-
ices to continue excluding women from positions of high risk of direct combat or capture.
This meant women were excluded from many aviation assignments, many warships (and all
submarines), and of course infantry, armor, and artillery units. The Risk Rule lasted until
Women in Combat: The U.S. Military, 2001–Present
643
www.ebook3000.com

1990, when in the buildup for Operation Desert Storm (August 1990–February 1991), the
U.S. military found that its supply, maintenance, and administrative units had trouble
deploying without violating the Risk Rule. Subsequently, DOD ordered the services to open
more assignments to women, and in January 1994, it rescinded the Risk Rule altogether
(Schuster et al. 1998, 2).
There continued to be signiﬁcant restrictions against the assignment of women into units
having a high risk of direct combat. Exactly what is meant by direct combat probability is a mat-
ter of debate, and in practice the answer usually tells us more about contemporary social values
than direct combat probability. For instance, until January 1, 1988, the U.S. Air Force did not
allow women to serve in mixed pairs in the underground stations that controlled its interconti-
nental ballistic missiles (Halloran 1987). Not allowing women to work with men inside under-
ground bunkers designed to survive near misses from nuclear devices clearly had nothing to do
with concerns about wartime safety.
A decade after Desert Storm, the United States entered its Global War on Terrorism
(October 2001 to present), and since then, an estimated 206,000 U.S. female military personnel
have served in the Middle East. At least 600 of these women have been wounded, and at least
104 have died (BBC News 2009). Thus, despite the current ground combat exclusion policy,
female military personnel are clearly exposed to the risks of combat.
Acknowledging this fact, the U.S. Army and Marine Corps gradually began providing their
female soldiers with additional training designed to prepare them for exposure to direct ground
combat. Two current programs are the Marine Corps Martial Arts Program (MCMAP) and the
Lioness Program.
MCMAP was formally adopted in October 2000. MCMAP was designed for all Marines, not
just females, and it combines martial arts instruction with weapons-based training. Training
ranges from assault ﬁre with automatic weapons to bayonet ﬁghting to methods of unarmed com-
bat and prisoner restraint.
MCMAP was designed with three separate components in mind: (1) mental discipline (to
include studying the art of war); (2) character development, thereby instilling high moral stan-
dards and personal integrity; (3) physical ﬁtness and discipline.
Physical methods of MCMAP include (1) martial art techniques (there is even a color belt
system that reﬂects training levels); (2) combat conditioning, which includes inducing simulated
stress to better prepare Marines for the mental and physical fatigue of ﬁghting; (3) practicing
competitive combative sports such as boxing, wrestling, and martial arts that include sparring
and/or weapons training.
In MCMAP, mixed-gender training is becoming more common. The reason is that it has
been found to increase unit cohesion. Female MCMAP instructors are also becoming more com-
monplace. For example, in September 2008, MCMAP instructors at Camp Fallujah, Iraq,
trained a class of ninety-ﬁve instructors, ten of whom were female (McGinty 2009).
The origins of the Lioness Program date to late 2003, the ﬁrst year the U.S. military was in
Iraq. “The men they sent charging into the city, often into private homes, made Iraqi women
uneasy,” explained U.S. Marine Sergeant Major Brian Jackson (Cruz 2006). Consequently, some
U.S. Army and Marine commanders began attaching female soldiers, often from attached sup-
port units, to the male units being sent out on nighttime raids. The women’s purpose was to
search Iraqi women and children. The U.S. Army never made this a formal policy, but starting
in the spring of 2004, some Marine units did.
644
Women in Combat: The U.S. Military, 2001–Present

The women assigned to the Marine Corps Lioness details were volunteers. Assignment to the
program was temporary, usually for a month. “There were 10 days of training to participate in the
program,” U.S. Marine Corporal Jennifer Uriostegui was quoted as saying (McKelvey 2008).
“We had to do MCMAP. We had classes on how to search Iraqis and how to take down unco-
operative people. We even got to ﬁre weapons like [machine guns], shotguns, pistols, and riﬂes.”
The women also received additional language and cultural sensitivity training.
The presence of female soldiers at checkpoints and raids reportedly eased cultural tensions.
“The women would come right up to us and communicate with us,” said Uriostegui (McKelvey
2008; see also: Minear 2007, 43). Thus, from a pragmatic standpoint, the program was success-
ful. The problematic aspect of the Lioness program was that its female personnel were engaging
in offensive ground operations. True, Lionesses went in a few paces behind the men, but as of
February 2007, three of the ﬁve female Marines killed in Iraq were killed while members of
Lioness details (Zimmerman 2007). As U.S. Army Major Kate Guttormsen stated in the ﬁlm
Lioness (Room 11 Productions, 2008), “Outside of the wire the enemy doesn’t care what gender
you are; everyone is at risk of ambush.”
That Lioness Programs operate in open contradiction of longstanding DOD policy regarding
ground combat exclusion indicates that the attitudes within DOD have shifted signiﬁcantly since
1988. For the current generation of U.S. military professionals, “Serious ambivalence remains
toward the integration of women into infantry, special operations, and armor/cavalry units,” accom-
panied by a growing belief that “obstacles to career development through other branches should be
removed—ability should be the measure of merit—period” (Putko and Johnson 2008, viii).
—Margie Serrato
See also: Reality-based Defense; Bayonet Training in the United States; and Military Unarmed
Fighting Systems in the United States (in this volume).
REFERENCES
BBC News. 2009. “Women at War Face Sexual Violence,” April 17, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/
americas/8005198.stm, accessed August 2, 2009.
Cruz, Raymie G. 2006. “Female Marines Train for Iraq Border Security,” Marine Corps News, August
14, http://www.military.com/features/0,15240,109917,00.html, accessed August 4, 2009.
De Pauw, Linda Grant. 1998. Battle Cries and Lullabies: Women in War from Prehistory to the Present.
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Goldstein, Joshua S. 2001. War and Gender: How Gender Shapes the War System and Vice Versa.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Jones, David E. 1997. Women Warriors: A History. Washington, DC: Brassey’s.
Halloran, Richard. 1987. “Some Missile Crews to Pair Men and Women,” New York Times, December
9, Late City Final Edition, A1, http://www.nytimes.com/1987/12/08/us/some-missile-crews-to-pair
-men-and-women.html, accessed October 8, 2009.
Holm, Jeanne. 1982. Women in the Military: An Unﬁnished Revolution. New York: Ballantine Books.
Holmstedt, Kirsten. 2007. Band of Sisters: American Women at War in Iraq. Mechanicsburg, PA:
Stackpole Books.
McGinty, Sean P. No date. “Marine Corps Martial Arts Program History Is Made on Camp Fallujah,”
http://www.iimefpublic.usmc.mil/MNF/mnfw_IM.nsf/ArticlesListingReadCurrent/50F24B633580
526F432574DB0063BC82, accessed August 2, 2009.
McKelvey, Charles E. 2008. “VMAQ-2 Marine Makes Mark in Iraq,” Marine Corps News, May 15,
http://www.military.com/news/article/marine-corps-news/vmaq2-marine-makes-mark-in-
iraq.html?col=1186032366495, accessed August 4, 2009.
Women in Combat: The U.S. Military, 2001–Present
645
www.ebook3000.com

Minear, Larry. 2007. The U.S. Citizen-Soldier and the Global War on Terror: The National Guard Expe-
rience. Medford, MA: Tufts University/Feinstein International Center.
Mosher, Mary A. 1993. Army Women in Combat: An Examination of Roles, Opportunities, Administra-
tion, and Social Acceptability. Unpublished D.P.A. thesis, University of Alabama.
Muir, Kate. 1992. Arms and the Woman. London: Sinclair-Stevenson.
Putko, Michele M., and Douglas V. Johnson II, editors. 2008. Women in Combat Compendium. Carlisle,
PA: Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College, http://www.dtic.mil/cgi-bin/GetTRDoc?AD
=ADA476126&Location=U2&doc=GetTRDoc.pdf, accessed August 2, 2009.
Schuster, Carol R., William E. Beusse, Colin L. Chambers, Carole F. Coffey, Julio A. Luna, and
Andrea D. Romrich. 1998. Gender Issues: Information on DOD’s Assignment Policy and Direct
Ground 
Combat 
Definition.
Washington, 
DC: 
US 
General 
Accounting 
Office,
http://www.gao.gov/archive/1999/ns99007.pdf, accessed August 2, 2009.
Skaine, Rosemarie. 1999. Women at War: Gender Issues of Americans in Combat. Jefferson, NC:
McFarland & Company.
Solaro, Erin. 2006. Women in the Line of Fire: What You Should Know About Women in the Military.
Emeryville, CA: Seal Press.
Walker, Karen M. 2009. “Women Leading Men,” Marine Corps Gazette 93(5), May, 41–44,
http://www.marinecorpsgazette-digital.com/marinecorpsgazette/200905/?pg=45, accessed August
2, 2009.
Wise Jr., James E., and Scott Baron. 2006. Women at War: Iraq, Afghanistan, and Other Conﬂicts.
Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press.
Zimmerman, Beth. 2007. “‘Lioness’ Killed by Bomb,” Marine Corps Times, February 26,
http://www.marinecorpstimes.com/news/2007/02/mclioness070223, accessed August 3, 2009.
646
Women in Combat: The U.S. Military, 2001–Present

Secret Societies and Fraternal
Organizations
Training in martial arts is, in part, a socialization process. One joins a group, and, over time,
internalizes the standards of the group. Because of this, training in martial arts almost always
serves social purposes. At a minimum, one is taught to dress and talk in certain ways, respond
certain ways in certain situations, and provide and receive introductions to like-minded people.
Consequently, martial art training is often associated in the popular imagination with secret soci-
eties and fraternal organizations.
SECRET SOCIETIES
A secret society is a group that restricts knowledge of its membership, afﬁliations, practices, or
beliefs to people who belong to that society. Any one of these restrictions sufﬁces to label the
entity a secret society. Associations are drawn between martial arts and secret societies for both
esoteric and exoteric reasons. Folklore around these associations exists because the folklore
serves a purpose, which is usually the esoteric purpose of deﬁning a group’s identity to itself or
the exoteric purpose of deﬁning a group’s identity to the rest of society.
Sometimes, the association between the secret society and martial arts develops due to direct
martial inﬂuences. The Boxer Uprising of 1899–1901 was so called because of the association
between martial art groups such as the Society of Right and Harmonious Fists (commonly called
“Boxers” in English) and the political movement to oust foreign inﬂuences from China. In Japan,
tengu (heavenly dogs) are mythological creatures that are associated both with Buddhism and
martial arts. These seemingly disparate practices come together via ascetic practices that derive
from Esoteric Buddhism, Taoism, shamanism, and Shinto. During the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries, the Black Dragon Society (Kokuryukai) and the Dark Ocean Society
(Genyosha) were Japanese ultranationalistic groups weaving traditional samurai ideologies with
comparable anti-European political agendas.
Such associations are not restricted to East Asia. Blending political intrigue, martial arts, and
secret fraternal relations, there is a story that Napoleon’s marshal Michel Ney (1769–1815) avoided
execution in France in 1815. Instead, with the help of Masonic friends, he escaped to America.
According to this story, Ney, now known as Peter Ney, subsequently taught school in North and
South Carolina, where he spent his free time amending the history of the Napoleonic Wars in the
margins of the books and teaching local fencing instructors lessons in humility (Gregory [undated]).
Similarly, the Chevalier d’Éon (Charles-Geneviève d’Éon de Beaumont, 1728–1810) was a member
of the Secret du Roi (French, King’s Secret), in which capacity he acted as a diplomat and spy for
Louis XV of France. He was also a Freemason until 1777, when an English court ruled that he was
a woman. (After his death, autopsy showed he was born male, so his agreement with the determi-
nation suggests some signiﬁcant transgender issues.) d’Éon’s association with Freemasonry ended
www.ebook3000.com

648
Secret Societies
with his claims of womanhood, but there is a painting in the Freemason’s Hall in London that
depicts a fencing engagement between d’Éon, dressed as a woman, and the Afro-Caribbean musician
and swordsman Joseph Boulogne, Chevalier de St. Georges (1739–1799).
Sometimes, religion is involved. For example, the Assassins of Syria and Iran were a group of
medieval Shi’a Muslims whose members committed some famous political assassinations using
daggers. One of the most notorious involved the murder of the newly elected King of Jerusalem,
Conrad de Montferrat (1140s–1192), in April 1192. In truth, Conrad’s murder was probably
arranged by Conrad’s rival, England’s Richard the Lionheart (1157–1199), rather than by
Muslims. The Shi’a sect’s name was also maligned. According to the traveler Marco Polo
(1254–1324), the name of the group, Assassins, derived from the Arabic hashishiyah, users of
hashish, but given the nature of Nizari Isma’ili Islam, the name more likely derived from al-’Asas,
“the foundation” (of the Islamic faith), or from “al-Hassan,” after the sect’s charismatic founder,
Hassan i-Sabbah (1034–1124). Elsewhere in the Muslim world, jihadists built fortiﬁed barracks
(ribat in Arabic, kervansaray in Turkish) at strategic points along frontiers and trade routes. Over
time, these military posts often became cities. Religious orders associated with military activities
along these frontiers include the Suﬁmarabouts of Morocco, the Bektashi dervishes of the
Ottoman Empire, and the Sanusiya of Libya and Sudan.
In Spain, members of the Society of Jesus (est. 1540) have been called the Soldiers of
Christ and the Foot Soldiers of the Pope. These appellations derive partly from the fact that
Saint Ignatius of Loyola (born Íñigo López de Loyola, 1491–1556), the founder of the order,
was a knight before becoming a priest and continued to use military metaphors to describe the
order, but mostly to the Jesuits’ zeal during the Catholic Counter-Reformation (1560–1648).
Today, the Jesuits no longer ﬁght Protestants with swords (if they ever did), but they continue
to be active as always in the areas of missionary work, human rights, social justice, and higher
education.
Associations between historical groups and modern groups are sometimes made to associate
the group (either positively or negatively) with the prestige (or infamy) of a historical group or
philosophy. This historical group may be military (or at least militant) in origin. For example,
the organization called the Masonic Knights Templar claims philosophical descent from the
historical Knights Templar. The latter was a military religious order that existed from
1118–1307, ostensibly for the purpose of protecting Christian pilgrims on their way to the holy
city of Jerusalem. Freemasons have also been accused of various machinations, ranging from a
Vatican banking scandal to hiding the lost bloodline of Jesus (ca. 4 BCE–ca. 30 CE). The latter
connection was proposed by Baigent et al. in their 1982 book Holy Blood, Holy Grail and
popularized by the Dan Brown novel The Da Vinci Code (2003).
Associations between historical groups and modern groups are sometimes made to further
political agendas. The story of the Chinese Heaven and Earth societies (Tiandihui) is told
elsewhere in this book. Other times, the associations are criminal in intent. In India, the
Thuggees (Hindi, thag, thief) were a group of brigands (dacoits) who ﬂourished from the thir-
teenth to nineteenth centuries. They killed travelers by garroting them, and then burying the
bodies. The Thuggees were reported to be followers of the Hindu goddess Kali, but this was
probably symbolic, because known members included Hindus, Sikhs, and Muslims. Before the
organization was destroyed by the British in the 1870s, the Thuggees became infamous (Brown
2002; Roy 1996).

Secret societies are not limited to male membership. American Indian societies such as the
Kiowa had female sodalities, and the West African Poro societies are balanced by their female
counterparts, the Sande. Celtic folklore identiﬁes the warrior witch, Scathach (“Shadowy”) as
the weapons instructor of the Irish hero, Cú Chulainn. Scathach herself was said to be an
Amazon, of that legendary warrior society that was composed only of women and who were
adopted into Greek and Roman mythology.
Although secret societies are generally gender speciﬁc, there are instances of women being
initiated into predominantly male societies. The West African Poro societies are mostly male,
but women do make up a percentage of their numbers (Dorjahn 1961; Thomas 2003). Similarly,
Skull and Bones, a secret society that began as a fraternity at Yale University in 1832 and whose
membership has included many American political, military, and economic leaders, recently
began admitting women (Leung 2004). Even in Freemasonry, in which membership is generally
restricted to males, there have been instances of women being initiated into the organization
under certain (unusual) circumstances (Mackey 1946).
FRATERNAL SOCIETIES
As the name implies, a fraternal society is an organization that restricts its membership to males.
Although fraternal societies often have appendix orders that allow females (usually the wives,
mothers, sisters or daughters of the members), these appendix orders operate under the
supervision of the fraternal bodies to which they are appended. The connection between fraternal
societies and martial arts is most often observed through the fraternal society sponsoring or sup-
porting martial art training or events. For example, from the 1920s through the 1950s, the Veter-
ans of Foreign Wars (established 1899) and the American Legion (established 1919) often
sponsored boxing smokers. Similarly, in Ontario, Canada, Finnish labor unions often sponsored
wrestling clubs. Rarely is the actual practice of a martial art a criterion for membership within the
fraternity. Instead, the connection is that the fraternal organization (“brotherhood”) has a large
space that it is willing to rent cheaply to members interested in organizing fund-raisers or who are
proposing to provide wholesome recreational activities for neighborhood youth.
Certain practices by fraternal bodies may excite nonmembers to imagine direct connections
between membership in fraternal organizations and martial arts. Indeed, the conspiratorial tri-
angle of secret/fraternal society–religious/political association–martial art/sport often gives cre-
dence to such associations. For example, the rituals of the Freemasonry order of Knights of Malta
(not to be confused with the Catholic Sovereign Military Order of Malta) include certain
“passes” that are quite literally sword technique. College fraternities often organize “ﬁght nights”
in which members engage in intramural boxing or wrestling matches. Even the Boy Scouts used
to have a Master-At-Arms merit badge that required the scout to become proﬁcient in two of
the following: single stick, quarterstaff, fencing, boxing, jujitsu, gymnastics, or wrestling. The
badge was retired in the United States in 1911 but remained part of the curriculum in Britain
for many years after (Boy Scouts Association, 1925).
In West Africa, Leopard Societies are organized to promote the welfare of the com-
munity (Burrows 1914; Lavenda and Schultz 2008; Leibe and Romano 1984). These
societies are often accused of encouraging (or even requiring) ritual murders (Bellers
Fraternal Societies
649
www.ebook3000.com

2008; Van der Kraaij 2008). Although ritual murders certainly have negative conno-
tations, they are hardly unique to West Africa. As in Woodland Indian warfare and
inner-city gang violence, the homicides provide prospective members with both
indoctrination into community hierarchies and initiation into manhood. Indeed,
entire states have been built around such notions. For instance, the Aztecs engaged in
warfare to supply themselves with victims for ritual sacrifice, while the Spanish Inqui-
sition is notorious for practicing judicial torture, as did most governments contempo-
rary with it. In such societies across the globe, martial skills were (and are) both
necessary and encouraged.
By their nature, fraternal orders and secret societies are structured in ways that
invite their use as political or military tools. The use of shibboleth (jargon, practices,
and rituals that indicate one’s social or group affiliations) provides a code that is
essentially unintelligible by outsiders and is therefore a useful cipher for subversive
movements. The Navajo Windtalkers and the Comanche Codetalkers, who used their
native languages to communicate military instructions during World War II, are
examples of this, as is the ritual language of the African Poro societes and the argots
of made members of the Sicilian Mafia and the Chinese Gowned Brotherhood (Wang
2008). While the goals (and natures) of the named groups are very different, their use
of ritual and symbolic language shows the potential for secret communication.
To summarize, within fraternal orders and secret societies, members learn what a secret is, the
socially appropriate time and manner of revealing secrets, and the consequences for revealing
secrets inappropriately. Thus, the relationship between the martial arts and secret societies is not
usually causal or direct. Instead, it is simply that martial arts and secret societies sometimes use,
present, and organize information in similar fashions.
—Ron Mottern
See also: China: Shaolin Temple Legends (in Volume I); Belief Systems: 
European Chivalry; Invented Traditions; Jujutsuffragettes; Plains Indian 
Warrior Societies; and Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Baigent, Michael, Richard Leigh, and Henry Lincoln. 1983. Holy Blood, Holy Grail. New York: Dell.
Bellers, Veronica. 2008. “What Mr. Sanders Really Did: Chapter 19: The Leopard Murders of Opobe,”
http://www.britishempire.co.uk/article/sanders/sanderschapter19.htm, accessed August 22, 2008.
Boy Scouts Association, London. 1925. Master-At-Arms Badge for Boy Scouts: How to Gain the Badge,
http://www.lulu.com/items/volume_63/2487000/2487450/3/print/Master_at_Arms_Badge.pdf,
accessed August 15, 2008.
Brown, Mark. 2002. “Crime, Governance and the Company Raj: The Discovery of Thuggee,” British
Journal of Criminology 42, 77–95, via http://bjc.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/42/1/77,
accessed October 17, 2009.
Burrows, D. 1914. “The Human Leopard Society of Sierra Leone,” Journal of the Royal African Society
13(50), 143–151, http://bjc.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/42/1/77, accessed October 17,
2009.
Dorjahn, Vernon R. 1961. “The Initiation of Temne Poro Ofﬁcials,” Man, 61(27), February, 36–40,
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2797671, accessed October 17, 2009.
Gregory, Thomas W. No date. “Peter Stuart Ney: Freemason, Marshal of Napoleon?” http://www
.blackmerlodge.org/PETER%20STUART%20NEY.pdf, accessed August 15, 2008.
650
Fraternal Societies

Hayes, Stephen K. 1986. Ninja Realms of Power: Spiritual Roots and Traditions of the Shadow Warrior.
New York: Contemporary.
Hitoshi Miyake. 1989. “Religious Rituals in Shugendo: A Summary,” Japanese Journal of Religious
Studies 16(3), 101–116, via http://www.nanzan-u.ac.jp/SHUBUNKEN/publications/jjrs/pdf/293
.pdf, accessed October 19, 2009.
Kraaij, Fred P. M. van der. 2008. “1900–1950: The Leopard Society in ‘Vai Country’, in Bassaland,”
http://www.liberiapastandpresent.org/RitualKillings1900_1950b.htm, accessed August 22, 2008.
Lavenda, Robert H., and Emily A. Schultz. 2008. “Secret Societies in Western Africa,”Anthropology:
What Does It Mean To Be Human? http://www.oup.com/us/companion.websites/9780195189766/
student_resources/Supp_chap_mats/Chapt07/Secret_Soc_West_Africa/?view=usa, accessed
January 19, 2009.
Leibe, Elliot, and Renee Romano. 1984. “Reign of the Leopard: Ngbe Ritual,” African Arts 18(1),
48–96, via http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.2307/3336097, accessed October 17, 2009.
Leung, Rebecca. 2004. “Skull and Bones: Secret Yale Society Includes America’s Power Elite,” CBS
News, June 13. http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2003/10/02/60minutes/main576332.shtml,
accessed January 22, 2009.
Mackey, Albert G., editor. 1946. Mackey’s Encyclopedia of Freemasonry. Chicago: Masonic History
Company.
Owenby, David. 1995. “The Heaven and Earth Society as Popular Religion,” Journal of Asian Studies
54(4), 1023–1046, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/2059958, accessed October 19, 2009.
Powers, Camilla. 2000. “Secret Language Use at Female Initiation: Bounding Gossiping
Communities,” in The Evolutionary Emergence of Language: Social Function and the Origin of
Linguistic Form, edited by Chris Knight, Michael Studdert-Kennedy, and James R. Hurford, 81–98.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University.
Roy, Parama. 1996. “Discovering India, Imagining Thuggee,” Yale Journal of Criticism 9(1), Spring,
121–145, via http://muse.jhu.edu/login?uri=/journals/yale_journal_of_criticism/v009/9.1roy.html,
accessed October 19, 2009.
Thomas, Northcote W. 2003. “Secret Societies: African,” in Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, Part
21, Volume 2: Secret Societies, edited by James Hastings and John A. Selbie, 287-303. Whiteﬁsh,
MT: Kessinger.
Wang Di. 2008. “Mysterious Communication, The Secret Language of the Gowned Brotherhood in
Nineteenth-Century Sichuan,” Late Imperial China 29(1) Supplement, June, 77–103, via
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/late_imperial_china/summary/v029/29.1S.di.html, accessed October
19, 2009.
Wilson, William S. 2006. The Demon’s Sermon on Martial Arts. New York: Kodansha.
Wood, Juliette. 1988. “The Old Man of the Mountain in Medieval Folklore,” Folklore 99(1), 78–87,
via http://www.jstor.org/stable/1259569, accessed October 19, 2009.
PLAINS INDIAN WARRIOR SOCIETIES
Voluntary fraternal organizations/societies were found throughout North America prior to the
arrival of the Europeans in the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries. Many of these organizations
were charged with responsibility for community religious rites, and such organizations were
generally more ceremonial than military. However, among the nomadic cultures of the Great
Plains, associations emerged that have been labeled military societies. These societies were not
exclusively military in nature, but served important functions for social life in general. Since
membership in the associations crossed lineages and drew from physically separated bands, the
associations served as tribal bonding mechanisms. While associations all served as mutual aid
societies, some of the societies focused on religious activities, while others provided a means of
Plains Indian Warrior Societies
651
www.ebook3000.com

establishing and enforcing public law. Warfare was so much an element of the Plains ethos that
it permeated the lifestyle of these cultures and their attendant societies (Lowie 1913, 150).
Therefore, although the societies’ roles were not limited to warfare, the societies are commonly
called “military.”
Two primary factors fostered the development of Plains warrior societies: competition for
territory and cultural heritage. The Great Plains is an area roughly encompassing the present-
day states of Montana, North and South Dakota, Minnesota, Wyoming, Nebraska, Kansas,
Colorado, and Oklahoma, plus the Texas panhandle. As late as the mid-sixteenth century, the
Plains apparently had a scanty population, and most of these people were nomadic hunters who
relied on dogs harnessed to pole-framed sledges as beasts of burden. The horses that had been
introduced to the Americas by Europeans during the sixteenth century gradually supplanted the
dogs as work animals, but dogs remained symbolically important enough to serve as the
namesake for warrior societies in many Plains cultures; thus, Dog-Men (Cheyenne), Crazy-Dogs-
Wishing-to-Die (Crow), and Big Dogs (Crow).
Over time, more people, both Native American and immigrant, were drawn to the Plains,
partly because of the area’s abundance, and partly because of the expansion of European and
American settlement in the East and South. Between 1800 and 1850, most Native Americans
living east of the Mississippi were pushed into the Plains. The process began earlier. During the
sixteenth century, indigenous groups began to be crowded out of the Eastern Woodlands by other
Native Americans with better access to ﬁrearms and iron. Examples of the latter group include
the Iroquois League, established during the late sixteenth century. The inﬂux of Europeans
during the seventeenth century led to an intensiﬁcation of the migrations of Eastern and Great
Lakes peoples into the Plains. The Iroquois, armed by their European and colonist fur trading
partners, also expanded their territory and grip on the fur trade via prolonged warfare against the
Algonkian tribes of the Great Lakes area.
By the 1690s, horses had reached the southern Plains, and by the 1790s, horses were avail-
able on the northern Plains. Thus, upon reaching the Plains, many refugees from the east became
equestrian bison hunters. As the Plains steadily became more crowded, competition for hunting
grounds became an issue, and warfare was a means for settling this issue. Horses, necessary both
for warfare and for hunting, became a medium of exchange. Warfare in the form of small, focused
raids became the primary means for access to this currency. The result was the conversion of the
Plains into an ideal context for the development of cadres of mounted soldiers, and in turn the
associations that developed into the Plains warrior societies.
The classic Plains cultures are strongly inﬂuenced by Algonkian culture from the Great Lakes
area. Before the Plains migrations, some Algonkians maintained men’s organizations that may
have been the forerunners of the Plains warrior societies (Callender 1994, 118–120). Such
organizations were important for regulating games, ceremonies, hunting areas, and camp police.
The groups competed with one another, too; competition generally characterized the Plains
warrior societies.
During wartime, the societies provided military leadership, and during the communal buf-
falo hunts and at the major ceremonies, they maintained order. Disciplinary power usually car-
ried over into the daily affairs in the camp. The punishment for breaches of order meted out
by the societies included corporal punishment, the conﬁscation or destruction of property, and
in the most extreme cases, death (Llewellyn and Hoebel 1941, 107). In addition, during most
652
Plains Indian Warrior Societies

civil disputes, the member of a warrior association could count on the support of other mem-
bers. Socializing, feasts, and dances were an important element of these societies.
RISE OF THE CHEYENNE DOG-MEN
The Cheyenne Dog-Men Society (often called the “Dog Soldiers” by outsiders) most clearly
fulﬁlled the image of warrior society held in the popular imagination. This elite corps of Native
American soldiers was the largest Cheyenne society, but it was not the ﬁrst society. Instead,
according to oral tradition, it was founded sometime after the original warrior societies
established by the mythic culture hero Sweet Medicine.
Tradition states that the Dog-Men Society was founded by a young man in response to a
dream. On announcing his intentions to establish the new society, no one wanted to join. Going
to the center of the camp, he sang songs that induced all dogs in the encampment to follow him
to an isolated area and transform into human shapes. When the rest of his band saw him with
his supernatural dog-men, members eagerly joined the new warrior association. Although this
account is presumably legendary, the attire, weapons, dances, and songs of the society imitated
the supernaturally transformed dog-men. The members labeled themselves the Dog-Men Society
and held the dog as sacred (Dorsey 1905, 22–23). Therefore, like the other societies, the Dog-
Men traced their origins back to a sacred event. Members of the fraternity ultimately shared
more than ﬁve hundred songs and dances. Due to their validation by the founder’s encounter
with his supernatural helpers, four songs were considered especially sacred, and so served a pro-
tective or empowering function for members.
Society members wore distinctive feathered headdresses fashioned to make the feathers
stand upright. This design was believed to provide supernatural protection during battle. Each
man was armed with a bow and arrows, and each wore an eagle bone whistle and a snake-
shaped rattle used during ceremonial dances. After 1850, men who could gain access to
ﬁrearms carried them as well. In practice, bows proved more dependable until the 1870s, by
which time revolvers, riﬂed muskets, and breech-loading riﬂes had become available through-
out North America.
Leadership roles fell to a principal leader and seven assistants. The four bravest members of the
society protected their brothers and were obliged to die in the pursuit of their duties if necessary.
These four soldiers wore the so-called “dog ropes.” Dog ropes were actually elaborately decorated
buffalo hide sashes that extended back over the shoulder of the wearer. In desperate situations, the
wearer of the dog rope pinned himself to the ground by means of the sash and fought until killed,
or the wooden pin used to hold the sash to the ground was removed by another tribal member and
the dog-man was driven to safety by being beaten by his liberator (Hyde 1968, 338–339). The
Arapaho (Dorsey 1905, 53), the Kiowas, and the Kiowa-Apaches shared the custom of using
the sash and pin in warfare (Grinnell 1972b, 70). A man wore the dog rope until he grew tired of
the obligation and let it be known that he wanted to pass it on to another. At one of the society’s
regular dances, the eight principal men of the sodality appointed a replacement.
By the 1830s, the Dog-Men and their families essentially formed a band within the tribe.
They camped together instead of residing scattered throughout the tribe, as did the other
societies, and answered primarily to their own leaders rather than to the Council of Forty-four,
which was in theory the supreme tribal authority (Llewellyn and Hoebel 1941, 100).
Plains Indian Warrior Societies
653
www.ebook3000.com

The new candidate was compelled to pay a high price for the honor of taking on the belt
and its obligations (Grinnell 1972a, 70–71). For example, traditional history maintains that
sometime around 1837, a party of the Cheyenne Bowstring Warriors Society was annihilated
by the Kiowa (Grinnell 1915, 46–47). The following year, Porcupine Bear, leader of the Dog-
Men, traveled among individual Cheyenne encampments to recruit warriors for a retaliatory
raid. In the course of a drunken evening at one of the camps, he joined in a ﬁght that ended
in murder (Hoig 1980, 48–49). During the brawl, Porcupine Bear was aided by six kinsmen.
As a result, not only was he banished from the Dog-Men society, but his six guilty relatives
were exiled, too. The leadership of the retaliatory raid thus passed from Porcupine Bear and
the Dog Soldiers to Little Wolf, leader of the Bowstring Soldiers. Though disgraced, the seven
exiles tagged along at a distance from the main body of Cheyenne warriors, and during the bat-
tle, they distinguished themselves by killing thirty Kiowa hunters (Llewellyn and Hoebel
1941, 148).
Despite Porcupine Bear’s violation of Cheyenne law, the military prowess of the seven exiles
allowed the Dog-Men to regain their prestige. Thus, when presented with the opportunity to
make peace with the Kiowa, Comanche, and Kiowa-Apache in 1840, the Cheyenne left the
decision not to the Council of Forty-four, but to the Dog-Men (Grinnell 1915, 62–68).
“GOLDEN AGE” OF THE DOG-MEN
Between 1840 and 1860, the ranks of the Dog-Men swelled to 100 lodges (Hoig 1980, 85) as
a result of a variety of factors. Young men eager to gain honors that could be won only in bat-
tle gravitated to the Dog-Men. In the wake of the cholera epidemic of 1849, which decimated
their band’s numbers, all the surviving male members of the Masikota Band joined the Dog-
Men society (Hyde 1968, 97). The ranks of the society were increased by authorizing the
recruiting of Sioux (Lakota) allies and men of mixed Cheyenne and Sioux heritage (Grinnell
1972a, 68). Because of the society’s size and the members’ martial prowess, its inﬂuence
extended beyond warfare to a greater extent than was usual for such societies. At its height,
the Dog-Men dominated the affairs of the tribe as well as serving as the raiders, the “shock
troops,” of the nation.
During this mid-nineteenth-century “golden age,” the Cheyenne roamed over the plains
between the Missouri and the Arkansas rivers, with the upper Platte River in Nebraska as their
headquarters (Dorsey 1905, 20). The tribe grew so large that it split into a Northern faction
(residing in Wyoming and South Dakota) and a Southern faction (in Colorado and New
Mexico). In 1851, the Cheyenne, along with other Plains tribes, ratiﬁed the Treaty of Fort
Laramie with Sioux, etc. (September 17, 1851, 11 Stats.), which made the Great Plains Indian
Territory. The treaty proceedings were attended by representatives of the Dog-Men, who
inﬂuenced ﬁnal decisions by the other Cheyenne bands. Facing heavy pressure from white
immigrants during the late 1850s, a process that accelerated dramatically after the Colorado
gold rush of 1859, the Dog-Men independently waged war in the southern territories, especially
in the Colorado and Kansas plains. Meanwhile, the Federal and Confederate governments
directed their attention to ﬁghting each other in the American Civil War (1861–1865). Local
retaliation was mostly from local militia units. An example is the Sand Creek Massacre of 1864,
654
Plains Indian Warrior Societies

perpetrated in Colorado by Federal militia under the leadership of Col. John M. Chivington
(1821–1892). This attack on an unsuspecting encampment was designed to crush the maraud-
ing Dog Soldiers, but only peacefully inclined Cheyenne and Arapaho were killed—the Dog-
Men were not in the camp.
Following the end of the Civil War in 1865, the victorious United States Army turned its
attention to the paciﬁcation of the Plains peoples. From a strategic standpoint, this included
the systematic destruction of the vast bison herds upon which Plains society depended. From
a tactical standpoint, the Dog-Men were a lightning rod for anti-Indian activities. Thus, in
July 1869, the encampment of Tall Bull (died 1869), considered the last great leader of the
Dog-Men, was attacked by members of the Fifth U.S. Cavalry and their Pawnee scouts. This
battle, which took place near modern Sterling, Colorado, was a victory for the cavalry, and the
Indian defeat, subsequently known as the Battle of Summit Springs, effectively broke the
power of the Dog-Men, as it split the previously uniﬁed Dog-Men Band, like the Cheyenne
tribe itself, into northern and southern factions (Brown 1970, 172–174). Nonetheless, Dog-
Men maintained a presence in the continuing campaigns on the northern Plains. For exam-
ple, Dog-Men allied with the Lakota and Arapaho participated in the Battle of the Little Big
Horn in 1876.
THE FINAL CAMPAIGNS
By 1875, the Southern Cheyenne bands were restricted, along with the Southern Arapaho, to a
reservation inside Indian Territory (modern Oklahoma). By this time, the buffalo were nearly
extinct, and the Southern Cheyenne had lost all capacity to go to war. On the reservation,
members of the Dog-Men continued to fulﬁll traditional roles. Thus, well into the 1880s, Dog-
Men under the leadership of Stone Calf (died 1885) called for the maintenance of traditional
patterns of life and the adherence to religious practices such as the annual Sun Dance (Moore
1974, 344). Dog-Men took prominent roles in the Sun Dances held by the Southern Arapaho
and Cheyenne in Oklahoma throughout the early twentieth century (Dorsey 1903), and in
1904, George Dorsey (1868–1931) wrote that half of the Cheyenne males above the age of four-
teen belonged to the Dog-Men Society (Dorsey 1905, 20). Yet, within another generation, the
autonomous Dog-Men had recombined into the general Southern Cheyenne population in
Oklahoma. There were other religions, other laws, and other ways of life for both young people
and community leaders to consider.
On the northern Plains, the U.S. government’s efforts to subdue the Northern Cheyenne and
their allies intensiﬁed after the Little Big Horn battle and continued until the conclusion of
hostilities in 1877. The surviving Northern Cheyenne were originally conﬁned along with their
southern kin to the Oklahoma reservation. In 1878, a group of Northern Cheyenne including
the Dog Soldier Tangle Hair (died ca. 1911) ﬂed this reservation to return to Montana; in 1953,
Mari Sandoz (1896–1966) memorialized that arduous trip in her historical novel Cheyenne
Autumn. Cheyenne persistence ultimately led to the U.S. government establishing a separate
Northern Cheyenne reservation in southeastern Montana in 1884. As late as 1921, the leaders
of the Dog-Men in Montana were reported to be autonomous and to avoid interaction with
white authorities (Moore 1974, 354).
Plains Indian Warrior Societies
655
www.ebook3000.com

CONTINUING IMPACT
Despite the best efforts of the Dog-Men, reservation life struck a fatal blow to the traditional
warrior societies. Subsequently, however, pan-tribal movements began arising, and these in turn
led to the rediscovery of the role that such societies play in preserving a culture. For example,
dance societies became popular during the 1890s, and by the 1920s, powwows (e.g., intertribal
gatherings that combined elements of county fairs with cultural displays) became increasingly
popular throughout North America. After World War II, Native American veterans groups were
also organized, and these groups often adopted traditional names. Thus, in 1957 the Kiowa Black
Legging society was revitalized during the annual American Indian Exposition held at
Anadarko, Oklahoma (Meadows 2003, 139–140). During the late 1980s, other veterans groups
began organizing in other communities, and in 2004, a National Native American Veterans
organization was incorporated in Oklahoma.
During the mid-1970s, some political and law enforcement entities tried to revive the nega-
tive image of the “Dog Soldiers” by claiming that a militant cadre of the American Indian Move-
ment (AIM) had adopted the name of the traditional warrior society. Moreover, they alleged
that this faction of AIM intended to employ the armed tactics of the Black Panther Party and,
according to some sources, even assassinate the governor of South Dakota. These allegations
were subsequently discredited (Churchill and Vanderwall 2002, 282–285).
In popular culture, Last of the Dogmen (HBO Films, 1995) is a recent commercial ﬁlm in
which Northern Cheyenne society is portrayed in a “lost tribe” motif. In contrast, the British
ﬁlm Dog Soldiers (Twentieth Century Fox, 2002) is a horror ﬁlm featuring a clash between British
soldiers and werewolves. A rock band from Ravenna, Italy, has also adopted the name “Dog Sol-
dier.” Thus, although for all practical purposes, the Cheyenne Dog-Men vanished during the
early twentieth century, the image of this warrior society continues to carry international
symbolic power.
—Thomas A. Green
See also: Zulu Stick Fighting; Celtic Martial Arts; Oceania (in Volume I); 
Belief Systems: Introduction; Expressive Culture; Invented Tradition; Taiwanese 
Street Performances; and Social Aspects of Kata and Waza (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Berthrong, Donald J. 1992. The Cheyenne and Arapaho Ordeal: Reservation and Agency Life in the Indian
Territory, 1875–1907. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Brown, Dee. 1970. Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee. New York: Bantam.
Callender, Charles. 1997. “Central Algonkian Moieties,” in North American Indian Anthropology:
Essays on Society and Culture, edited by Raymond J. DeMallie and Alfonso Ortiz, 118–124.
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Churchill, Ward, and Jim Vanderwall. 2002. Agents of Repression: The FBI’s Secret Wars against the
Black Panther Party and the American Indian Movement. Cambridge, MA: South End Press.
Dorsey, George A. 1903. The Arapaho Sun Dance: The Ceremony of Offerings Lodge. Chicago: Field
Columbian Museum, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Dorsey, George A. 1905. The Cheyenne. Chicago: Field Columbian Museum.
Grinnell, George Bird. 1915. The Fighting Cheyennes. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, via
http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
656
Plains Indian Warrior Societies

Grinnell, George Bird. 1928/1972a. The Cheyenne Indians: Their History and Ways of Life. Lincoln:
University of Nebraska Press.
Grinnell, George Bird. 1928/1972b. The Cheyenne Indians: War, Ceremonies and Religion. Lincoln:
University of Nebraska Press.
Hoebel, E. A. 1960. The Cheyennes: Indians of the Great Plains. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston.
Hoig, Stan. 1980. The Peace Chiefs of the Cheyenne. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Hunt, George T. 1940. Wars of the Iroquois: A Study in Intertribal Trade Relations. Madison: University
of Wisconsin Press.
Hyde, George E. 1968. The Life of George Bent: Written from His Letters, edited by Savoie Lottinville.
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Llewellyn, Karl N., and Edward A. Hoebel. 1941. The Cheyenne Way: Conﬂict and Case Law in
Primitive Jurisprudence. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Lowie, Robert H. 1913. Military Societies of the Crow, Hidatsa, and Mandan Indians. Anthropological
Papers of the American Museum of Natural History 11. New York: American Museum of Natural
History, via http://books.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Meadows, William C. 2003. Kiowa, Apache, and Comanche Military Societies: Enduring Veterans, 1800
to the Present. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Moore, John H. 1974. “Cheyenne Political History, 1820–1894,” Ethnohistory 21(4), Autumn,
329–359, via http://www.jstor.org/stable/481148, accessed October 19, 2009.
SOCIAL ASPECTS OF KATA AND WAZA
Karl Friday (1997) gives an account of the old-style (koryu) Japanese martial arts system known as
Kashima-Shinryu. Similarly, Robert Twigger (1997) recounts a year he spent training in an inten-
sive aikido course at the Yoshinkan headquarters in Tokyo. Both authors describe two aspects of the
respective arts. One aspect is the actual practice, the training of kata (traditional forms) in Kashima-
Shinryu and the training of waza (techniques) in aikido. There are differences, but at root both kata
and waza can be described as “living forms”: prescribed patterns established through experience and
designed to teach the technical skills and practical wisdom of the respective art. The other aspect is
the social side of the training: the changing relationships between the teacher (sensei) and the stu-
dents, between senior students and junior students, between junior students and beginners, and
among the students themselves. In Japanese terms, it is training in wa (peace and harmony). This
search for wa is said to lie at the very roots of Japanese culture and is what gave Japan its name, for
the old name Yamato is a reading of dai-wa (great peace and harmony).
Thus, the Japanese martial arts dojo (school) is a microcosm of wa, namely the general social
cohesion in which the Japanese take so much pride. Evidence of this can be seen everywhere in
Japan, but especially at any large airport or train station, where groups of tourists, suitably iden-
tiﬁed by the appropriate badge, hat, or even uniform, are herded around under the watchful eye
of a guide, who is sometimes waving a ﬂag to distinguish his—more usually, her—particular ﬂock
from the scores of others. Of course, a measure of social cohesion exists in any society; it is what
deﬁnes that society. However, Japanese social cohesion is believed by the Japanese themselves to
be “uniquely” unique and this is usually what is considered striking to foreign visitors. Scholars
such as Watanabe Shoichi (1989) attribute the development of this cohesion to the exigencies
of rice farming. History is not the main concern here, but in any event, Watanabe’s theory omits
a crucial aspect of this cohesion.
Social Aspects of Kata and Waza
657
www.ebook3000.com

Speciﬁcally, Japanese social cohesion is based on—and still closely tied to—a hierarchical
social structure. The rigidity of this structure has varied over the course of Japan’s history, but it
became especially rigid during the Tokugawa era (1603–1868). There was a caste system com-
prising four main groups, with warriors at the top, then farmers, then artisans, and merchants at
the bottom. (There were also two ranks of unclassiﬁed: the kuge, who were court nobles dwelling
“above the clouds” with the Emperor, and the hinin, or “nonhumans,” who were not deemed wor-
thy of classiﬁcation.) In theory, there was no vertical movement between these groups.
Tokugawa-era wa consisted in all the social classes doing what they were supposed to be doing
in perfect harmony. This harmonious performance of duty is expressed in Japanese by the term
gambaru (persevere). Since the Meiji Restoration of 1868, the hierarchical structure has loos-
ened (albeit with occasional lapses) to the point that today, most Japanese claim that their coun-
try is democratic. However, Japanese martial arts groups most certainly are not democratic,
except in the very limited sense that they have a legal structure, with a constitution, directors
and trustees, and so on. Instead, martial art groups are run by the soke or headmaster, who is the
all-powerful technical and spiritual head, and the inheritor of the traditions of the art. As iemoto,
the head is supported by all the other teachers.
One way of relating the social cohesion to the hierarchical structure is through another read-
ing of the Japanese term kata. The word means way, form, or especially, procedure. Accordingly,
one could state that this vertically structured social cohesion, founded on the central governing
concept of wa, is displayed in social terms as a complex series of kata which govern group activ-
ities at all levels. This can be further analyzed and expressed in a particularly exquisite fashion
by means of four pairs of concepts, all related: omote/ura; uchi/soto; tatemae/honne; and
sempai/kohai. In the particular expression of wa that is the Japanese martial arts dojo, not all of
these elements will be evident to the same degree, but it is likely that the activities of social
groups centered around any Japanese traditional (koryu) or modern martial art (gendai budo) can
be explained in terms of these concepts—and their existence is something that foreigners who
train in Japan ignore at their peril.
WHERE THERE IS A WAY, THERE IS A WILL
De Mente (2003) posits that kata, in the above sense of way or procedure, is the key to under-
standing and dealing with the Japanese. Like Hearn (1904) and Benedict (1946) before him, he
appears to believe that the entire culture can be subsumed under one or two basic concepts. This
is to oversimplify matters, and the term kata in his preferred sense is invariably attached as a suf-
ﬁx to other words, as in kaki-kata (way of writing), tsukuri-kata (way of making), tabe-kata (way
of eating), or kangae-kata (way of thinking).
De Mente’s thesis is that such terms as kaki-kata or kangae-kata represent a certain way of
doing or thinking that is the preferred way: the way that is acceptable, in preference to other
ways that are not. It is certainly true that kata in some sense underpin Japanese social
behavior. Evidence abounds of this preference for the preferred form. To give one important
example, all Japanese children are taught to write the joyo-kanji, the 1,945 essential
ideograms that are used to write everyday Japanese, according to exactly the same method,
throughout the entire country. The number and order in which the ideograms are to be
learned is prescribed for each school grade. Individuals might quietly grumble at the time
658
Social Aspects of Kata and Waza

and effort involved, but the way of learning kanji has been prescribed by people higher in
the social ranking who are in a position to do so and, since the method has been accepted
by everyone else, this is the way it is to be done. To those who might question this way and
wonder why it cannot be changed, the answer is simple: shikata ga nai: There is no way.
Another example is karaoke. Many Japanese people learn how to sing karaoke by first learn-
ing the correct kata (pattern or model)—perhaps with a teacher, and then internalizing this
form by repeated practice.
Other examples can be found in the world of the martial arts. In each university aikido
dojo, students follow a prescribed way of doing warming-up exercises, executing ukemi (ways
of receiving waza, meaning techniques such as rolls or break-falls), and also a prescribed way
of performing the actual waza, or techniques. In the dojo there is a “correct” way to attack
and a “correct” way to defend, each by means of a particular waza. The daily training pro-
gram follows an equally prescribed way, and this order is never questioned. That it has been
laid down by those who came before is a sufﬁciently compelling reason. The yearly training
program also follows a prescribed pattern that not coincidentally parallels the academic year.
New students enter the club in April and are taught the basics—all in the same way. The
annual residential summer and spring gasshuku (intensive training sessions) follow a similar
pattern, and graduating students submit to grueling training before leaving in March. The
governance of the club and the social life has a pattern, too, with new recruits making sure
that they sit in seiza when necessary (seiza means “sitting correctly”—i.e., according to the
prescribed way), that they wear the club uniform at the correct times, and that they know
enough polite Japanese to address their seniors in the prescribed way. This is not something
one sees only in aikido. Other Japanese martial arts, including judo, kendo, karate, and
Shorinji kempo, all follow this same basic pattern. Revolutions from below (gekokujo) in
Japanese university martial arts clubs are thus rare.
So, had she been asked the question, the Japanese tour guide certainly would have concurred
that in watching over her ﬂock, she was following a prescribed way of behaving. This prescribed
way of behaving, which regulates the working of Japanese social groups, is so wide a concept that
it can be called upon to regulate—and explain—the creation and dissemination of truth,
knowledge, and history, as well as group activities as diverse as guiding tours, running secret
societies, making automobiles, and training in Japanese martial arts.
FACE AND BACK; INNER AND OUTER
Friday (1997) devotes considerable space to describing the omote and ura of Kashima-Shinryu,
and it is clear from a technical manual that appeared in 1938 that there were omote waza and
ura waza in aikido (or Daito-ryu, as it was known then). These speciﬁc examples are evidence
of distinctions that are much more basic. Speciﬁcally, omote is the face, the front, what is in
front. Thus, omote describes that which can be seen by anyone. Meanwhile, ura is the rear, what
is behind, what is not seen. In other words, ura describes what is concealed. In Japan, the ele-
ments of this primary pair are so closely related that one cannot have one without the other.
They are primary because they are the foundation of the individual’s attitude to the group,
which, in turn, grounds that person’s sense of identity as an individual. It is not a mistake in
translation that the English title of the only signiﬁcant book on the subject (Omote to Ura in
Japanese) is The Anatomy of Self (Doi 1986).
Social Aspects of Kata and Waza
659
www.ebook3000.com

This yin and yang parallelism is reﬂected in the uchi/soto distinction. Uchi/soto is always
predicated in relation to a group. Uchi is inside the group, what is private to the group, whereas
soto is outside, what is public. At one level this is easy: a young high-school dropout might well
behave quite differently in the family and in the gangster group where he or she spends most
time. Both are uchi (inside a group), but the former is soto (the face presented to the world at
large). The average Japanese adult is a member of many social groups, each one requiring its own
awareness of speciﬁc group (uchi/soto) mores and each having its own expectations of appropri-
ate behavior. This complex web of interconnecting social relationships requires highly efﬁcient
social radar. In adults, this web usually starts to operate with an exchange of introductions. Thus,
a middle-aged Japanese man is likely to have several hundreds of business cards, each indicating
an uchi (inside) relationship of some kind.
A related concept is tatemae/honne. Here, the description applies to the way of thinking as
much as to the way of speaking. Tatemae is public, ofﬁcial, or expected. In other words, it is
what one is expected to say, in order to preserve the necessary group cohesion. Honne is private,
unofﬁcial, the display of one’s true thoughts or feelings. Both are necessary for preserving group
cohesion. Within a group, inside is uchi; one can display one’s ura and possibly speak in honne
mode. In other words, inside the work group, people can be reasonably frank and speak the
truth, as they see it, when it is necessary or appropriate to do so. However, outside is soto, where
one displays one’s omote and speaks in tatemae mode. In other words, in public, everyone smiles
and says that they agree fully with what the boss just said. Nonetheless, the paired distinctions
are more complex and subtle than this. Even inside the group, the omote/ura tatemae/honne
distinction still holds, and members are expected to behave accordingly. People who have
difﬁculty in grasping the subtleties of the tatemae/honne distinctions appropriate to a particular
group are thought to be socially maladjusted. Botchan, in Soseki’s novel of the same name
(1972), is such an example. Unlike Botchan, foreign members of Japanese martial arts groups
are not expected to appreciate or understand such subtleties. In fact, it takes much time and
energy for foreign members to escape from their semipermanent soto status and few succeed
completely. There are good and bad aspects to this: the good being that the foreign members
are free to get on with training without having to develop sophisticated social antenna, the bad
being that they are always outsiders.
An important corollary is that researching and recounting the history of the art is subject to
the same distinctions, especially for people who are within those traditions themselves. Thus,
the “ofﬁcial” sanctioned biographies of acknowledged martial experts such as aikido founder
Ueshiba Morihei (1883–1969) are ﬁrmly written in omote/tatemae (public face) mode, with very
little ura (negative or contrary information) allowed to appear. Any negative information (ura)
that does appear is part of the public face (omote), as the permitted warts and blemishes are
human failings that might apply to anyone. To give an example, if postwar aikido, resurrected
from the ashes of militarism to become something ﬁrmly proclaiming peace, is presented as omote
(as it usually is), then the role of aikido during the period from 1931 until around 1945 is equally
ﬁrmly ura (information best concealed behind smoke and mirrors). Efforts are constantly made
to present this particular ura in an omote way, meaning one that safeguards the “public face” or
tatemae. To continue with the previous example, calling militarism a “dark shadow that passed
over Japan” or a “black box that everyone unknowingly entered” is a convenient way of avoiding
the troubling questions that otherwise might be asked about individual responsibility.
660
Social Aspects of Kata and Waza

ABOVE AND BELOW
Most Japanese have sempai/kohai relationships that are nearly as important as blood relationships
and that last nearly as long. Sempai and kohai are age-set terms often used in school: sempai are
upperclassmen, while kohai are underclassmen. The distinction is based on uchi/soto (inside and
outside the group), and in terms of literal deﬁnition, sempai are people who entered the group
earlier than did kohai.
In the martial arts, some groups attach more importance to this distinction than do others.
Though who came ﬁrst will be obvious to all, the sempai relationship is usually less prominent in
a traditional koryu (old-style martial art) or a very small training group, because the organization
has relatively few members and everyone has access to personal instruction from the soke or
shihan (headmaster or chief instructor). By comparison, the judo or kendo club in a large
institution (such as a high school, university, industrial organization or business, or police
department) will have whole generations of sempai, each of which is itself kohai, and members
are expected to behave appropriately.
BANDS OF BROTHERS—AND SISTERS
University martial arts clubs are prime examples of Japanese fraternities and sororities:
social subgroups of which the archetype is the pre–World War II high school. The model
here is Tokyo’s First Higher School (Dai Ichi Gakko), established in 1873. The influence of
these prep schools, and their headmasters and graduates, on modern Japanese sport (and
culture in general) has been immense (Roden 1980). Present-day Japanese martial arts
clubs, especially those practicing judo, kendo, and aikido, still share values with these high
school fraternities.
The shared values include the great importance attached to self-government, which is meant
to teach the members the importance of responsible government. Thus, university martial arts
clubs operate largely independently from the university authorities. There is the same
importance attached to the maintenance of a wide gulf between uchi and soto, and the same
entrance rituals, rites of passage (including hazing), and arbitrary displays of group solidarity.
There is the same rigid interpretation of the sempai/kohai code, where, for example, kohai will be
expected to fold up or wash the training gear of the sempai—and be punished for not doing it to
their senior’s satisfaction. There is the same importance attached to the horizontal bonding
process: the sense of a distinct group having gone together through a whole series of shared trials.
There is the same value attached to athletic prowess, sometimes to absurd degrees. A corollary
of this is a shared disregard for danger, which sometimes leads to injury or even death. This
disregard for personal danger implies a corresponding shared emphasis on internal ethical codes,
appropriate to uchi, which might not be the same as those outside. Thus maintaining the uchi
tatemae of the club will normally be preferred to following a code appropriate to soto (in this case,
the likely wishes of the university administration or associated parental groups).
IF IN DOUBT, GAMBARU!
These concepts or “frames” can be seen underlying—and reinforcing—social practices in Japan
as a whole. They are present in everything from earthquake prevention drills to professors’
meetings, from mediating labor disputes to (and perhaps especially) the practice of Japanese
Social Aspects of Kata and Waza
661
www.ebook3000.com

martial arts. The operation of these “frames” is lubricated by another all-pervasive concept,
usually expressed by a verb: gambaru, typically in the imperative form, gambatte! This basically
means to do without question and to the utmost of one’s ability whatever one is supposed to be
doing. Thus, professors about to go and teach a class, soldiers ﬁghting a battle, earthquake
survivors who have taken refuge in a local school, and of course, anyone doing any kind of
sporting activity whatsoever, from wrestling to chess, are all urged, “Gambatte!” (usually
translated, rather feebly, as: “Do your best!”). Gambaru, of course, is something that the person
might not be aware of doing. It is very closely tied to kata, especially in the martial arts, for the
concept is a consequence of losing oneself and becoming “one” with the kata.
None of these concepts are subject to any imperatives based on Western notions of morality.
For example, a Japanese person is not necessarily lying or being dishonest, when uttering in
tatemae (public) mode something that the same person would never say in honne (private). The
concepts actually carry with them their own moral norms that govern action (or inaction) as is
appropriate in a particular situation.
Recognizing this is especially important when considering Japanese martial arts. Whether tradi-
tional or modern, a Japanese martial art is a complex social organism with many layers of omote and
ura, and what is taught by Japanese teachers in Australia, Europe, and the Americas to enthusiastic
practitioners is invariably the omote—and an omote lying right on the surface. The ura layers have
to be discovered by much training and study: that is why they are ura. Of course, the omote/ura
distinction applies not only to the waza (individual techniques) and kata (style-speciﬁc forms) that
distinguish an individual martial art; the omote/ura distinction applies equally to the martial art itself.
Thus, the social structure is itself a kind of kata and waza. Practitioners who approach the art entirely
in a honne mode (one in which they focus on learning what they want, in the manner that they want
to learn it) are liable to overlook these subtleties—if they have actually discerned them at all.
—Peter A. Goldsbury
See also: Japan: Jujutsu-based Systems; Japan: Kendo, Iaido, and Jodo; Japan: Kyudo; 
Japan: Naginata; Japan: Ninpo; Japan: Sumo; Japan: Shorinji Kempo (in Volume I); 
Belief Systems: Budo, Bujutsu, and Bugei; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion 
before 1868; Belief Systems: Japanese Martial Arts and Religion since 1868; Written 
Texts: Japan; Judo in Japan, 1931-1950; Jukendo; Social and Cultural Evolution of 
Kendo; and Political Conﬂict and Aikido, 1931-1942 (in this volume).
REFERENCES
Benedict, Ruth. 1946. The Chrysanthemum and the Sword. Tokyo: Tuttle.
Dale, Peter. 1986. The Myth of Japanese Uniqueness. London: Croom Helm.
De Mente, Boyé Lafayette. 2003. Kata: The Key to Understanding and Dealing with the Japanese! Tokyo:
Tuttle.
Doi Takeo. 1986. The Anatomy of Self: The Individual versus Society. Tokyo: Kodansha International.
Friday, Karl. 1997. Legacies of the Sword: The Kashima-Shinryu and Samurai Martial Culture. Honolulu:
University of Hawai‘i Press.
Hearn, Lafcadio. 1904. Japan: An Attempt at Interpretation. New York: Macmillan Co., via http://books
.google.com, accessed October 16, 2009.
Kelly, William H. 2002. “Training for Leisure: Karaoke and the Seriousness of Play in Japan,” in Japan
at Play: The Ludic and the Logic of Power, edited by Joy Hendry and Massimo Raveri, 152–168.
London: Routledge.
662
Social Aspects of Kata and Waza

Lebra, Takie Sugiyama. 2004. The Japanese Self in Cultural Logic. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i
Press.
Roden, Thomas. 1980. Schooldays in Imperial Japan: A Study in the Culture of a Student Elite. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Soseki Natsume. 1972/1906. Botchan, translated by Alan Turney. Tokyo: Tuttle.
Twigger, Robert. 1997. Angry White Pyjamas: An Oxford Poet Trains with the Tokyo Riot Police. London:
Indigo.
Watanabe Shoichi. 1989. The Peasant Soul of Japan. London: Macmillan.
Social Aspects of Kata and Waza
663
www.ebook3000.com

This page intentionally left blank 

Index
AAUC. See Amateur Athletic Union of Canada
(AAUC)
ABADÁ Capoeira, 458
Abrahams, Roger, 45
L’Academie d’Espee (Academy of the Sword)
(Thibault), 355
Achaemenian bow, 67
Acordeon, Mestre (Almeida, Ubirajara “Bira”),
41
Adab al-Harb va al-Shoja-e (The Customs of War
and Bravery) (Mobarak Shah), 68
Adams v. Baker (1996), 522
Afghanistan, 62–63
Africa, 1–24
belief systems, 332–337
See also individual nations
African martial arts in contemporary settings, 337
African American prison ﬁghting styles. See
Jailhouse Rock
Afrikan, term deﬁned, 626
Agrippa, Camillo, 250
Aikido, 422
Japanese, 132–138
non-violent martial art, 445
and political conﬂict, 638–642
schools, 431
See also Black Dragon Society; Ueshiba Morihei
AIM. See American Indian Movement (AIM)
Air Force Judo Association, 449
Aizawa Yasushi, 370
Akharas (gymnasiums), 359, 360
and Indian nationalism, 286
Indian wrestling, 291
Akiyama Shirobi, 122
Albert, Louis, 258
Alchemical practices, embryonic breathing and
spells, 375–376
Alexander the Great, King (Macedonia), 282
Alexios I Komnenos, Emperor (Byzantium),
348–349
Alﬁeri, Francesco, 251
Ali, Muhammad
and the draft, 468
poetry, 421
Alkidamas, 236. See also Greece, boxing
All-in Fighting (Fairbairn), 566
All Japan Judo Federation, 577
All Japan Jukendo Federation, 582
All-Japan Kendo Federation, 602
All Japan Men’s Naginata Championships, 162
All Men Are Brothers. See Outlaws of the Marsh
(Shuihuzhuan)
All-Russia Sambo Federation, 513
All-USSR Committee of Physical Culture and
Sports, election of All-USSR judo
committee, 509
Allah, 400
names of, 398
Amakhanda, 630
Amateur Athletic Union of Canada (AAUC),
462, 463
Amateur boxing
as international sport, 467
and World War I, 467
Amazons, 213–214, 643
American Freestyle Karate, 479
American Gladiators (television program,
2008–2009), 546. See also Carano, Gina
American Indian Movement (AIM), and the
negative image of the “Dog Soldiers,” 656
American Legion, sponsoring boxing smokers,
649
American Shaolin (Polly), 412, 413
American Wrestling Association (AWA), 494
Americas, 25–53. See also individual nations
Amulets, 355
Anapale, 605
The Anatomy of Self (Omote to Ura) (Doi), 659
Ancestral Spirits, 372–373
André, Emil, 219
www.ebook3000.com

Andre the Giant (Roussinoff, André), 495
Anglo-Norman professional swordsmen
(escrimeurs), 241
Angola, Capoeira and, 455, 458
Angry White Pyjamas (Twigger), 414
Animal sacriﬁce, Hawai‘i, 273–274
Animal symbolism in medieval literature,
353–354
Animal-modeling, 425
Animals
as allegorical ﬁgures, 354
cattle, 336
crocodile, 334
gorilla, 335
leopard, 335
and power, 334–336
and symbolism, 353–354
totem, 335
Anime, Japanese animation and kids’television,
543
ANKF. See Zen Nippon Kyudo Renmei (All
Nippon Kyudo Federation, or ANKF)
Aotearoa (New Zealand), 275–277
Arab Archery, 64
Arash the Archer, 366
Archery
Central Asian, 55–65
Chinese, 94, 115
composite bows, 57–58
continued use for hunting, 84
Iranian, 67–72
Japanese, 152–158
Mongolian, 79–80
New Guinean, 267
Ottoman, 82–84
self-bows, 57
South Asian, 283
Archery (kyujutsu), schools of, 599
Archery Traditions of China (Selby), 63
Aristophanes, 234
Armed Forces Judo Association, 449
Armor
close-quarter combat and, 243
full plate, 243
scale, 58–60
Arnis, 299
categories of practice, 300
club logos, 301
deﬁned, 299, 300
derived from Okinawan and Japanese karate,
304
I-2
Index
footwork, 303
history, 309
inﬂuence of European fencing on, 309
knowledge, 305
magical talismans and, 305–306
masters, 310
origins, 308
postures, 303–304
ranking system, 305
strategy, 302
talismans (Tagalog, “anting-anting”), 301,
305–306
teaching of, 302
techniques, 302, 304–305
unarmed methods, 304
uniform, 301
weapons, 300
Arrichion, 237. See also Greece, pankration
Art, and archery, 63. See also Expressive culture
The Art of French Boxing and Canne Fencing
(Charlemont), 219
The Art of Worldly Wisdom (Gracián), 478
Arthouse wuxia ﬁlms, 533
Arthur, King (mythical, England), 350
Asaf, Muhammad Hashim, 365
Asanas, 361. See also Yoga
Ascetic order and akharas, 360
A-Shan Shi, itinerant teacher, 409
Asia, Central and Southwest, 55–58. See also
individual nations
Asia, East, 89–211. See also individual nations
Asia Minor, Amazons, 231–214. See also individual
nations
Asia, South, 281–297. See also individual nations
Asia, Southeast, 299–330. See also individual
nations
Asian martial arts in the United States and
Canada, 442–450
Asians and immigration to North America,
442–443
Assassins, 648
Astrology
astrological charts, 355
magical amulets, 355
and Talhoffer, Hans, 355
and talismanic magic, 355–356
Atatürk, President Mustafa Kemal (Turkey)
preference for Western style sport organizations,
84
view on Ottoman practices, 86
See also Turkey, Republic of

Australia, 263–265
Aboriginal martial training, 264
boxing and Sydney Stadium rules, 468
boxing exhibitions, 466
ﬁrst demonstrations of judo, 575
martial arts tourism, 412
and Okinawan karate, 438
reality-based defense, 496
Tiwi ceremonial spears, 422
Authenticity
discarded as yardstick of legitimacy, 439
in ﬁlms, 530
The Avengers (television series), 531
Avesta, 67
AWA. See American Wrestling Association
(AWA)
Awa Kenzo, 156–157
Ayyaran
initiation ceremonies of, 365
principles of, 363–368
Ba To, 340
Babur, 61
Bachelor subculture
and Asian immigrants, 445–446
decline of, 447
and mail-order wives, 447
Badisches Landesmuseum Karlsruhe, 83
Baganda people, 334
Baguazhang
and Central Martial Arts Institute, 97
Kuomintang government, under, 102
Bali and traditional dance, 414
Balkan Wars (1912–1913) and success of bayonet
charges, 570
Bangladesh and cancellation of ﬁrst women’s
wrestling meet, 521
Banten (West Java), 399–400
Banyoro, 334
Barbados, stick-dancing (stick-licking), 47–48
Bare-knuckle pugilism
opposition to, in England, 465–466
Regina v. Young and others (1866), 465
Regulation of Railways Act of 1868, 465
Bartitsu
Barton-Wright, 451–454
and Conan Doyle, Sir Arthur, 452
and the Internet, 451, 452, 453
neo-Bartitsu, 454
revival of, 451
The Bartitsu Compendium (Wolf), 453
Index
I-3
Bartitsu School of Arms and Physical Culture,
452
Bartitsu Society
and historical martial arts reconstruction,
453–454
researching the life of Barton-Wright, 453–454
Barton-Wright, Edward William, and Bartitsu,
451–454
Baruzy, Count Pierre, 258
Bayonet, Imperial Japanese Army’s admiration of,
580
Bayonet techniques (jukenjutsu), 579
in China, 571
instruction in Japanese schools, 575
in Japan, 571
national competitions, 581
during World War II, 571
Bayonet training in the United States, 568–572
adoption of aggressive British and Canadian
methods, 571
and the American Civil War, 569
Army stopped training, 572
bayonets deﬁned, 568
decline after World War I, 571
effect of magazine-fed riﬂes in European battles,
570
during Korean War, 572
and purpose of U.S. military boxing, 589
training manuals, 569
Becker, Gavin de
intuitive radar, 500
thesis that fear is a gift, 500
Bee, Jon, 229
Behind the Rising Sun (RKO), 532
Beijing Opera, 607
Belgium
Fédération Internationale de Boxe Amateur,
467
ﬁrst female world wrestling gold medalist, 524
Belief systems
Africa, 332–337
China, 338–345
deﬁnition, 331
European chivalry, 345–351
European occult sciences, 352–356
India, 357–362
Iran, 363–368
Japanese budo, bujutsu, and bugei, 369–370
sacred themes, 332
Silat, 394–395
Belt color system, 431–432, 438
www.ebook3000.com

Benin, Republic of, 333, 336
Ewuare the Great, King (Benin) 336
Bhutan, modern archery, 64
Biaoju/Biaohang, (Protection Agencies), 96
“Big Broadsword Wang Number Five” (dadao
wangwu), 96
Bilbao World Capoeira Capu 2006, 458
Billy Jack (Warner Brothers), 532
Billy the Kid (Bonney, William), 535
Bimba, Mestre (Machado, Manuel dos Reis), 37,
38–40
Bissell, Stanley “Sonny,” 131
Black belt, 422
invention of, 431
Black Belt Jones (Warner Brothers), 532
Black Dragon Society (Kokuryukai),640
and traditional samurai ideologies, 647
and Ueshiba Morihei, 640
Black Karate Federation, 627
patches and uniforms, 628
Blanks, Billy, 436
Blaxploitation ﬁlms, and Kelly, Jim, 532
Bloodsport (Cannon Group), 532
Bodhidharma (patriarch of Chinese Chan [Zen]
Buddhism), 342
mythical story of, 344
Bollea, Terry (Hulk Hogan), 494
Bonetti, Rocco, 254
Bonney, William (Billy the Kid), 535
Book of Changes (ChineseYijing), 377
Book of Han (Han Shu), 93
Book of History (second century, BCE), 107
Book of Rites (Li Ji), 92
Book of the Courtier (Castiglione), 351
Boxer Uprising (1899–1901), 96, 108
martial artists as warriors, 407
secret societies and martial arts, 647
and use of esoteric martial arts, 622
Wang Zhengyi, 96
Boxers United in Righteousness, 96
Boxiana (Egan), 229
additional volume by Bee, Jon, 229
Boxing
and bare-knuckle pugilism, 465
Chinese, 92–93, 97, 107, 115
Chinese American boxers, 446
and Chinese American youth, 448
Chinese styles, 89–91
English, 228–233
ﬁght footage banned by U.S. government, 469
and Filipino American men, 448
I-4
Index
ﬁrst televised match, 469
French, 256–261
Greek, 235–236
Hong Kong, 100–101
international, 465–470
Kung Fu (television series), 444
and medicine, 336–337
movies, 469
popularity of, and television, 545
Queensberry’s rules, 466
Roman, 237
shaolin, in, 444
Tahitian, 273
Thai, 317–323
U.S. military rules, 589
Boxing, amateur, 466–467
and Christian youth organizations, 467
deﬁned, 466
Boxing, professional, 467–468
and cable television, 469
in popular culture, 468–470
and Prohibition, 467
Boxing, women’s, 514–520
British fairground boxing, 514
in Thailand, 322
and 2012 Olympics, 519
Boxing booths, 515
Boxing Classic: Essential Boxing Methods (also
under title Boxing Classic: Essentials of Boxing,
1784), 91, 96, 107
Boyd, John, and the OODA (Observation,
Orientation, Decision, and Action) Loop,
500
Brahmacharya
and celibacy, 358–359
and cosmology, 358
practice of, 358
rejuvenation, 359
Vedic model, 359
Brahmanic Hinduism, 357
Brazil, 32–34
beneﬁts of martial arts tourism, 415
European pilgrimages to, 457
globalization of capoeira, 437
Gracie family of, 486
invulnerability and political conﬂict, 622
kendo and Japanese immigrants, 602
martial arts tourism, 412
and MMA, 489
role of culture in capoeira marketing, 455
Vale Tudo (“anything goes”) matches in, 486

Brazil, jiu-jitsu
Asians and, 32–34
and cultural assimilation, 34
development, 32–35
Gracie family, 545
as inﬂuence in North America, 34–35
inﬂuences, 32–33
versus Japanese, 31, 33–34
and Japanese inﬂuence, 33–34
techniques, 35–36
and Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC),
545
World War II and, 33
Bref Instructions Vpõ My Pradoxes of Defence
(Silver), 255
Britain
and Bartitsu, 451–452
combat plays, 421
decline of bayonet training, 571
fairground boxing, 514
military unarmed ﬁghting systems, 588
mummers, 420
reality-based defense, 496
and sportsmanship, 384
and women’s boxing matches in music halls, 515
World War II and commando units, 589–590
British Academy of Dramatic Combat, 612
British Commonwealth, war with Japan, 641
Brittany, martial arts in, 224
Broken rhythm, Way of the Dragon, 484
Broughton, Jack, 228–229
Broughton Rules of 1743, 228–229
Buddha’s bliss, 374
Buddhism, 89, 120, 133, 156, 163, 164, 167, 168,
177, 183, 184, 325
dissociation from, 383
forms of, 373
Four Noble Truths, 167
and initiation documents, 558
Mahayana, 431
martial arts, 339–342
meditation, 378
mental training, 378
monasteries, 339
monks laicized, 383
New Buddhism, 383–384
scheme of ﬁve elements, 559
secret martial techniques, 374
temples dismantled, 383
and tengu (heavenly dogs), 647
vegetarianism, 339
Index
I-5
Buddhist temples
as clan shrines, 372–373
dismantling of, 383
Budo (the warrior’s way, martial ways), 369, 370
banned use of term, 390
deﬁned, 575
skills taught by Imperial Japanese Army, 581
Buffy the Vampire Slayer (television series),
543–544
Bugei (warrior arts), 369
Bujutsu (warrior skills), 369, 370
Bulgaria
bayonet charges in Balkan Wars, 570
Sambo teams from, 512
women’s Wrestling World Championship, 521
Bunseki, Fu Kiau, 44
Burckhardt, Jakob, 349
Bushido
and Christianity, 386–387
introduction to the Western world, 574
and Zen, 389
Bushido: The Soul of Japan (Nitobe), 387, 574
Butokukai, 157, 387–388, 576–577, 638
disbanded, 577
dissolved when Japan lost World War II, 601
formation of, 600
and jujutsu, 574
subjugation of aikido to, 639
Buttrick, Barbara, 515
Byzantine Empire, 348
Canada
allows women in the military without
restrictions, 643
and Asian martial arts, 442–450
boxing exhibitions, 466
decline of bayonet training, 571
and Finnish-Canadian wrestlers, 460–464
introduction of female wrestling, 522
and martial arts, 443
and MMA, 489
wrestling and ethnic Finns, 460–464
Canary Islands
Guanches and, 1, 3
martial arts in, 1, 3
origin of name, 1
Spanish conquest of, 3
stick ﬁghting (Juego del Palo) in, 3–5
wrestling (Lucha Canaria), 5–6
Canary Islands wrestling. See Lucha Canaria
(Canary Island wrestling)
www.ebook3000.com

Canboulay, 46–47
Canne de combat
change in attitude toward,
competition, 220
deﬁnition, 217
diplomas speciﬁc to, 218
ﬁrst European text about, 218
ﬁrst French Championship, 220
ﬁrst World Championship, 220
French Boxing clubs, 219
origins, 217–218
revival, 218–219
training, 219
Cannon Pounder (Pao Chui), 95
Capellanus, Andreas, 350
Capoeira
advertisements using, 456–457
Afro-Brazilian inﬂuence, 37, 39, 40, 41
Afro-Brazilian martial art, 411
appearance in Europe, 456
basics, 37
and Brazilianization process, 457
characteristics, 37–38
and claims of invulnerability, 623
closed body, 427
countercultural cachet, 440
developments, 39–42
differences in styles, 37–38
diffusion via the Internet, 458
essential aspects, 455
in Europe, 455–459
European adaptations, 459
European demand for, 457
globalization of, 437, 458–459
growth of, 41–42
marketing of, 456–457
in martial arts tourists, 413
music and, 37
and musical accompaniment, 455
networking of, 457–458
origins, 38
and professional success, 457
spectacular styles, 439
teaching in Europe, 456
types, 36–38
in video game Tekken 3, 457
Capoeira Angola, 455
revival of the tradition, 459
values of, 459
Capoferro, Ridolfo, 252
Carano, Gina, 546. See also American Gladiators
(television program, 2008–2009)
I-6
Index
Carolingian Empire, 346
Carambe Jarimi (Yahuza, Ibrahim), 9, 10
Caribbean martial arts
and African culture, 42–43, 47–48
African descended, 48
Barbados, 47–48 (see also Barbados, stick-
dancing)
Cuba, 44–45 (see also Cuba, stick ﬁghting, 44)
Haiti, 45 (see also Haiti, stick ﬁghting)
Trinidad, 46–47 (see also Trinidad, stick
ﬁghting)
Caroline Islands, 269–270
Carpentier, Georges, 258
Carradine, David, 540
Carranza, Jerónimo de, 254. See also La
Philosophia de las Armas (The Philosophy of
Arms) (Carranza), 254
Casillas, Graciela, 516–519
Casinos
Native American, 470
and professional boxing, 470
Casquelord, Malonga, 334, 336
Castiglione, Baldassare, 351
Castle, Egerton, 254
Catholic Youth Organization (CYO), and
amateur boxing, 467
CDKA (Central House of the Red Army), 504
Oshchepkov organized male and female groups,
505
Celibacy
akharas, 360
and Hanuman, 291
and Indian wrestling, 290–291
and martial arts in India, 360
relevance of control of desire, 358
as religious practice, 358–359
and wrestling in India, 290–291
Celtic martial arts
Brittany and Cornwall, 224
cutting events, 223
Iberian, 225–226
Irish, 223
Scottish, 221–223
Welsh, 225
Celtic myths, presentational forms, 418
Central and Southwest Asia, 55–58. See also
individual nations
Central Asia, archery, 55
Afghanistan and, 62–63
arrow points, 60
asymmetric bows, 59
Bronze Age, 57

China and, 62–63
composite bow, 57–58
“crab bow,” 61
depictions of, 63–64
Hunnic bow, 58–59
Hunza bow, 62
Indian archery, 61
literature about, 63–64
Mesolithic, 56
Neolithic, 56–57
obsolescence of, 64
quivers, 60
Scythians and, 58
Sind horn bows, 61
sources on, 56–57
Timurid bows, 61
Timurid period, 60–61
today, 64–65
trained women archers, 61
Turkestan and, 62–62
Turkic tribes and, 60
Central House of the Red Army. See CDKA
(Central House of the Red Army)
Central Java, role in development of pencak silat, 327
Chan, Jackie (Chan Kong Sang)
and actors from Hong Kong, 541
comedic star, 530
Rush Hour, 542
Chanbara, 528, 529
Chang Naizhou, 95, 106
Chang Shi Wuji Shu, 95
Chang’s Book of Martial Skills (Chang Shi Wuji
Shu), 95
Changquan, 97
Chardin, Sir John, 68, 73
Charlemagne, King/Emperor (Frankish and Holy
Roman Empire), 346
Charlemont, Joseph, 219, 258
Chaussﬁght, 261
Che style xingyiquan, 410
Cheatham, James
and Chito Ryu karate, 627
and Tolo-Naa, 628–629
Chen Pan Ling, 104
Cheng Man-Ching, 104
Cheng Zongyou, 95, 342
Cherry Blossoms
and aikido, 640
and Ueshiba Morihei, 640
Cheyenne Dog-Men. See Dog-Men Society
Chiang Kai-shek, 102
travel restrictions after his death, 104
Index
I-7
Chidaoba, martial arts style of Soviet Georgia, 507
Chin Genpin, 123
China, 62–63, 89–119, 357
archery, 62–63
Beijing Opera, 607
belief systems and martial arts, 338–345
cheap martial arts training manuals widely
available, 408
Cultural Revolution, 100
cultures, 89
development of stage combat, 607
ﬁve sacred mountains, 340
Han dynasty, 59
Heaven and Earth societies, 648
immigration to North America, 442–443, 445
Japan’s attempts to end the war with, 642
martial arts usage, 89
military expanded bayonet training, 571
and MMA, 489
population, 89
Qing era, 62–63
war with Japan, 641
China, boxing styles
blending, 89–90
Boxing Classics: Essentials of Boxing (1784), 91,
96, 107
documentation of, 90
proliferation of, 89
Sword Classic (Yu Dayou), 90–91
typology, 91
China, martial arts, 338–344
boxing, 92–93
Central Martial Arts Institute (Zhongyang
Guoshu Guan), 97, 343
Complete Book of Ten Thousand Treasures
(Wanbao Quanshu), 95
Elucidation of Shaolin Staff Methods (Cheng
Zongyou), 95
Encyclopedia of Military Preparedness (Wubei
Zhi), 95
Essentials from the Military Classics (Wujing
Zongyao), 94
“ﬁve weapons,” 93
Former Han period, 93
kung fu, 98
and Mao Zedong, 97
Martial Compendium (Tang Shunzhi), 94
military use, 93–94
Ming Dynasty, 94
Mongol (Yuan) rule, 94
New Book of Effective Discipline (Jixiao Xinshu),
94
www.ebook3000.com

China, martial arts (continued)
New Book of Military Preparedness, 95
Physical Culture and Sports Commission, 97
Qing Dynasty, 95
Revolution of 1911 and, 96–97
Rites of Zhou, 92
Shaolin Temple as example of commodiﬁcation,
436
Skills Beyond Farming (Cheng Zongyou), 95
Song period, 93–94, 341
Sword Classic (Yu Dayou), 90–91, 94
Taipings (Kingdom of Heavenly Peace), 96
China, martial theories
in Chinese military writings, 105
in Confucian society, 105
Maiden of Yue principles, 106
Martial Compendium (Tang Shunzhi), 107
negating oneself and accommodating others,
106
Qing Unofﬁcial Categorized Extract (Xu Ke), 106
stability, 106
Sword Classic (Yu Dayou), 106
True Narratives of the Meaning of Boxing (Sun
Lutang), 107
yinyang theory, 105–106
China, martial women of
Fu Hao, 108
Hua Mulan, 109
Maiden of Yue, 108
“On Watching a Sword Dance by Madam
Gongsun’s Disciple,” 108
Qing period, 109
Qing Unofﬁcial History Categorized Extracts, 109
Qiu Jin, 108
Song period, 109
Stone Studio Illustrated News, 109
Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio, 109
Widow Qi Number Two, 109
Woman Ding Number Seven, 109
Woman Number Four, 109
Wu Zetian (Empress), 108
Yongchun County Gazetteer, 109
China, Republic of, 407
China, Shaolin Temple legends
anti-Manchu sentiment, 112–113
Father-Mother Society, 111
Outlaws of the Marsh (Shuihuzhuan), 111
Qing period, 111
Romance of Three Kingdoms (Sanguo Yanyi), 111
Secrets of Shaolin Boxing, 112
Taiping wars, 112
I-8
Index
Three Principles of the People (Sun Yat-sen), 112
Tiandihui legends, 113
Tiandihui society, 111
Triads, 112
Xi Lu legend, 113
Yongzheng era, 111
China, weapons, 92–95, 115
China, wrestling
communism and, 118
Former Han period, 117
international following, 119
Manchus, 118
Mongols, 117–118
objective, 118
origins, 116
popularization of, 118
ranking system, 119
Record of Wrestling, 117
Song Dynasty, 117
Spring and Autumn Annals period, 116
tournaments, 117
training, 118–119
Chinatowns of North America, 408
Chinese Archery (Selby), 63
Chinese Civil War, 102
The Chinese Connection, 426
Chinese Cosmology, 375–378
Chinese Freemasons of Canada, 113
Chinese Martial Arts Boxing and Weapons List, 89
Chinese New Martial Arts, 96
Chivalry
as a code of conduct, 348
and the Crusades, 349
deﬁned, 347
European, 345–351
and knighthood, 346–347
and love, 349–350
and narratives, 350
and poetry, 350
precursor of, 346–347
way of life, 351
and western gunﬁghters, 537
Choi Hong-Hi, 184, 201
Choi Yong-Sul, 185
Chou Chan (Shaolin monk), 339–340
Chow, William Kwai Sun, 49
Chozan, Issai, 378
Christian karate teachers, 431
Christian pedagogical theory, 386
Christianity, 89
Taipings (quasi-Christian cult), 96

Chuuk martial art, Carolines, 269–270
Cimande
elders’ authority, 399
inﬂuence on schools of Southeast Asia,
326–327
rituals, 399–400
and Suﬁsm, 398
training techniques, 329
Cixi, Empress Dowager (Qing Dynasty, China),
109
Classic of the Planet of War (Taibai Yin Jing), 93
Clovis I, King (Frankish), 346
Club logos, arnis, 301
Club patches, 422
Code of conduct, 363–364
Chivalry as, 348
Iranian warriors’, 363–364
Laith’s code, 364
Cold War, 390
martial arts instruction during, 591
Collectanea (Monte), 246
Color symbolism, in Japanese martial arts, 432
Color-coded explanation, 431–432
Comanche Codetalkers, 650
Combat, literature of, 242
Combat Conditioning Manual: Jiu Jitsu Defense
(Hanley), 566
Combat Division, ﬁghting techniques, 508
Combat medley, 220
Combat plays, British, 421
Combat Sambo, 502
development of, 513
Combat Sambo Federation of Russia, 513
Comité National de Boxe Française (the
National Committee of French Boxing,
CNBF), 258
Commando training
American high school courses in, 566
and the Israeli Defense Force, 584–585
Commentary of Zuo (Zuo Zhuan), 92–93
Commodiﬁcation of martial arts, 435–436
Shaolin Temple and, 436
Commonwealth Games, women’s wrestling,
525
Communism, anti-communism and silat in
Southeast Asia, 314
Complete Book of Ten Thousand Treasures
(Wanbao Quanshu), 95
Composite bows, 57–58
Comprehensive Study of Documents, 96
Conan Doyle, Sir Arthur, 452
Index
I-9
Confucianism, 89, 93, 105, 120, 127, 130, 153,
163, 167, 183, 184, 185
ideals of, 377–378
inﬂuence on Japanese martial arts, 376
and mental cultivation, 378
serious-mindedness, 378
See also neo-Confucianism
Confucius, 92, 93, 153, 167, 406
Constantine I, Emperor (Rome), 239
Constantinople, 83. See also Istanbul; Ottoman
Empire
Cornish Wrestling Association, 224
Cornwall, martial arts in, 224
Cosmology
Chinese, 375
medieval, 355
Coubertin, Pierre de, 258
and the modern Olympiad, 385
Couch v. British Boxing Board of Control Ltd.
(1998), 516
Council of Forty-Four
and Dog-Men, 654
supreme tribal authority, 653
Courlander, Harold, 46
The Course of Self-Defense without Weapons—
“Sambo” (Volkov), 510
The Courtier (Castiglione), 226
Cousteau, Jacques, 546
Crane Boxing, 103
and martial arts tour stops, 409
Cribb, Tom, 230–231
Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (Columbia Tri-
Star), 533
Cruel jidaigeki, 528–529
and graphic violence, 529
nihilism of, 530
Crusade, First, 349
Cuba, stick ﬁghting, 44
Afro-Cuban dance forms and, 44
and Afro-Cuban religions, 45
dance (palo), 44
weapons, 45
Cuban martial culture, and rumba Columbia, 44
Cultural Revolution, 100
and lull in martial arts magazines, 408
Culture
expressed in presentational forms, 417
martial arts and, 417–432
Cumberland and Westmorland folk-style
wrestling, 471
CYO. See Catholic Youth Organization (CYO)
www.ebook3000.com

Dai Nippon Butokukai (Greater Japan Martial
Virtues Society). See Butokukai
Dai-Soke, 430
Dambe
contemporary, 8–9
future directions, 10
music and, 8
origins and history, 7–8
preparation, 9–10
Dance
Celtic martial arts and, 221, 223, 224
combative form of festive dancing, 419
and competitive play, 419
Cuban stick ﬁghting (palo), 44
and festivals, 418
haka Polynesian martial, 263
“Head Dance,” 418
Kenyan stick dance, 419
martial activities and, 334
and Mongolian wrestling, 78
Omani, 418–419
as representational genres, 418
sword and stick, 419, 420
symbiotic relationship with martial training and
performance, 605
Walking Stick Dance
in Yemen today, 418
Dao Xuan, 340
Dardi, Lippo di Bartolomeo, 246, 249
Dardi School, 249–250
Darius I, King (Persia), 67
De Arte Gladiatoria Dimicandi (Vadi), 246
De Arte Honeste Amandi (Capellanus), 350
De lo Schermo ovvero Scienza d’Armi (Of Fencing,
or the Science of Arms) (Fabris), 252
De Mente, Boyé Lafayette, 658
Death-dealing sword, 332
dei Liberi, Fiore, 218, 245, 248, 352, 354
Deities, Buddhist
Acalanatha (Fudo), 374, 375
Marici (Marishiten), 374, 375
Deities, Hindu
Hanuman, 359
Indra, 359
Sri Rama, 359
Vayu, 359
Dempsey, William H. (Jack), 468, 566, 590
Deng Zhan of Wei, General, 93
Denmark, allows women in the military without
restrictions, 643
Deracination, deﬁned, 436
I-10
Index
Dhanurveda, 64
Di Arte Gladiatoria Dimicandi (Book on the Art of
Fighting with Swords) (Vadi), 354
Dinnie, Donald, 221
Dio Cassius, 214
Direct lineage, discarded as yardstick of
legitimacy, 439
Disorderly Houses Act of 1752, 229
Divine king (Oba), 336
Divine Life Society, 358
Döbringer, Hanko, 218
DOD. See United States Department of Defense
(DOD)
Dog-Men Society
annual Sun Dance, 655
and anti-Indian activities, 655
Battle of the Little Big Horn, 655
golden age of, 654–655
leadership, 653
origins, 653
Plains Indian warrior societies, 653–656
reservation life, 656
restricted, 655
weapons, 653
Domitian, 214
Doyle, Sir Arthur Conan, 452
Draeger, Donn, 390–391, 402, 439, 450
Drama, and dance, 420
Drug abuse, Muay Thai community opposition to,
321
Du Bois, W. E. B., 43
Du Fu, 108
Duanda, 107
Duarte, King (Portugal), 243, 247
Dubois, Georges, 219
Dürer, Albrecht, 422
Dynamo, 504, 506
cultivated system known as Sambo, 506
Earp, Wyatt, 535
East Africa, 333. See also individual nations
East Asia, 89–211. See also individual nations
Easter Island, 394
Eastwood, Clint, 536
Eﬁk, 335
Egypt, tahtib (“wooden stick”), 419
Ekaku, Hakuin, 376–377
Eleanor of Aquitaine, Queen (Anglo-Norman),
350
Electronic Journals of Martial Arts and Sciences
(http://ejmas.com), 452

Elucidation of Shaolin Staff Methods (Cheng
Zongyou), 95, 342. See also Shaolin
monastery, Shaolin Staff
Embah Buyut, 398–399
Embah Kahir, 398–399
Embryonic breathing, 376, 380
Emperor Qian Long Visits the South, 342
Empty-hand techniques
arnis, 300, 304
and kuntao, 313
Encyclopedia of Indian Physical Culture, 357
Encyclopedia of Military Preparedness (Wubei Zhi),
95
England. See also Britain; United Kingdom
and bare-knuckle pugilism, 465
fencing, 254–255
origins of women’s boxing, 515
England, boxing
deaths and, 231–232
history, 229–232
origins, 228
prizeﬁghting, 231–232
prizeﬁghting, opposition to, 232–233
versus pugilism, 228
R v. Coney (English Crown Court of Reserved,
1882), 232
rules, Broughton, 228–229
rules, London Prize Ring, 231–232
rules, Marquess of Queensberry, 233
Enlightenment, the, 415
Enter the Dragon (Golden Harvest Productions),
441, 444
Enter the Ninja (Cannon Productions), 532
Epic of Manas, 64
Epitaph for Wang Zhengnan (Wang Zhengnan Muzhi
Ming) (Huang Zongxi), 90, 97–98, 342
Esfandiar the Invincible, 366
Eskrima
deﬁned, 300
globalization of, 437
Esoteric powers, beliefs in, 427
ESPN cable network, 518
Essentials from the Military Classics (Wujing
Zongyao), 94
Ethiopia, 336, 337
Ethnicity, in professional wrestling, 492
Etruscans, 238
Europe, 213–261
belief systems, chivalry, 345–351
belief systems, occult sciences, 352–356
heroic literatures, 606
Index
I-11
self-bows, 57
See also individual nations
Europe, Middle Ages (early), ﬁghting arts during,
240–241
Anglo-Norman professional swordsmen
(escrimeurs), 241
manuals of swordsmanship and wrestling, 241
mystery plays, 241
spread of paper-making technology, 241
teaching of swordsmanship, 241
Europe, Middle Ages (later), ﬁghting arts during
cognate martial arts, 242
English, 247
Iberian, 247
Italian, 245–246
joust, 243, 244
Liechtenauer tradition, 244–245
mock battles, 244
swordsmanship, 242
training, 243
wrestling, 242
Europe, occult sciences, 352–356
Europe, Renaissance, ﬁghting arts during
Bolognese, 249–250
fencing, 249, 250, 251, 254
German tradition, 253
rapier, 251
Spanish, 254
weapons, 249, 251
European Championship in Celtic Wrestling, 227
European Judo Union, 129, 577
Eustathius of Thessalonica, 236. See also Greece,
boxing
Ewuare the Great, King (Benin), 336
Explaining Taijiquan (Taijiquan Shiyi) (Yang
Chengfu), 100
Expressive culture
material forms, 422
presentational forms, 417–418
representational forms, 418–422
Extrahuman powers, 331
Fabris, Salvatore, 251, 252, 253
Fanon, Frantz, 626
FBI Academy and visiting jujitsu instructors, 595
FBR. See Forum Betawi Rempug (FBR)
FCWS. See Finnish-Canadian Workers Sports
Federation (FCWSF)
Fechtbuch (fencing manual, Kal), 354
Federación de Lucha del Garrote Canario
(FLGC), 4
www.ebook3000.com

Federación del Juego del Palo Canario (FJPC), 4
Fédération Française de Boxe Française, Savate et
Disciplines Assimilées (FFBFS&DA), 259
Fédération Internationale de Boxe Amateur,
administering Olympic boxing, 467
Fédération Internationale de Lutte Amateur
(FILA), See International Federation of
Amateur Wrestling (FILA)
Fédération Internationale de Luttes Celtiques
(International Federation of Celtic
Wrestling) (FILC), 226–227
Fédération Nationale de Boxe Française (FNBF),
258
Fédération Nationale de Savate Boxe Française,
258
Female college students, self-defense training,
499. See also Women
Feminist movement, and changes in women’s
boxing, 516
Fencing
Bolognese, 249–250
contests and melees, 244
English, 254–255
English versus continental masters, 247
European, inﬂuence on arnis, 309
German masters, 245
innovations, 250
Italian, 246
and Liechtenauer, Johannes, 244
literature, 253
rapier, 245, 246, 251–253
Renaissance, 249, 250, 251
Spanish, 254
Spanish system, 254
training, 243
See also Sword ﬁghting
Ferdinand II, King (Aragón [Spain]), 225
Festivals, martial arts and, 418–419
Feudalism, European, 347
FFBFS&DA. See Fédération Française de Boxe
Française, Savate et Disciplines Assimilées
(FFBFS&DA)
FIAS. See International Amateur Sambo
Federation (FIAS)
Fifteen Years War of 1931–1945 (Patterson), 620
52 hand blocks. See Jailhouse Rock (JHR)
Figg, James, 228
Fight Girls (television series, 2006–2007), 545
Fight Quest (television series, 2007–2009),
545–546
A Fighter’s Heart (Sheridan), 413, 414
I-12
Index
Fighting, Jailhouse Rock (JHR), 25–31
FILA. See Fédération Internationale de Lutte
Amateur (FILA); International Federation of
Amateur Wrestling (FILA)
FILC. See Fédération Internationale de Luttes
Celtiques (FILC); International Federation of
Celtic Wrestling (FILC)
Filipino-American War of 1898–1902, 446
Filipino martial arts (FMA). See Philippines
Films, martial arts
authenticity, 530
chanbara, 528–529
Chan, Jackie (Chan Kong Sang), 530, 541,
542
countercultural hero, 532
cruel jidaigiki, 528–529, 530
“Encounters with Asia,” ﬁlms about, 531
“Golden Age” of the chanbara, 528
and Hollywood, 531
Hong Kong, 532–533
Jet Li (Li Lianjie), 541
jidaigeki period, 527
ken-geki, 528
kung fu ﬁlms, 530
with Lee, Bruce, 530
Muay Thai action ﬁlms, 533
samurai ﬁlms 527
and Shaw Brothers Studio, 530
and Sino-Japanese connection, 531
wuda pian (ﬁghting ﬁlm), 528
wuxia movies, 530
wuxia pian (chivalry ﬁlm), 528
Finland
folk wrestling in, 461
immigration of Finns to Canada, 460–461
restricted immigration of Finns to the United
States, 463
Finnish Labour Temple (Finlandia Club), 461
Finnish-Canadian Workers Sports Federation
(FCWSF), 463–464
Fiore dei Liberi, 218, 245, 248, 352, 354
Fists of Fury (ﬁlm, Golden Harvest), 426
FITA. See International Archery Federation
(FITA, Federation Internationale de Tir a
L’Arc)
FJPC. See Federación del Juego del Palo Canario
(FJPC)
FLGC. See Federación de Lucha del Garrote
Canario (FLGC)
Flight shooting, 83
Flos Duellatorum (Flower of Battle) (Liberi), 218

Fludd, Robert, 356
FMA (Filipino martial arts). See Philippines
FNBF. See Fédération Nationale de Boxe
Française (FNBF)
Folk belief, 426–427
Folklore, 423–424
Folk-style wrestling, 471, 472
The Forbidden Kingdom (ﬁlm, Silver), 533
Forever Spring Boxing system, 103
Former Han period (206–208 BCE), 117
Forum Betawi Rempug (FBR)
invulnerability and pencak silat, 624
and pencak silat, 623
France
military advisors to Japan, 580
military doctrine, 580
military unarmed ﬁghting systems, 588
and successful bayonet charges, 569
See also Brittany, martial arts in
France staff fencing. See Canne de combat
France, boxing, 256–259
Chaussﬁght, 261
history, 257–259
versus jujitsu, 259
versus karate, 259–260
versus kickboxing, 260
versus nineteenth century English boxing,
259
origins, 257
participation, 261
popularity, 257
ranking, 260–261
rules of engagement, 260
styles, 257
techniques, 260
women and, 261
Francis I, King (France), 224
Franco-Prussian War (1870–1871), French boxing
and, 257
Franks, 346, 349
Franks, Gordon, 405–406
Fraternal societies, 649–650
Fraternities (college), and “ﬁght nights,” 649
Frazier, E. Franklin, 43
Free sparring, 477
Freestyle wrestling, women’s, 473, 520–525
changing perspectives, 532
funding inadequate, 524
impact on male participation, 521
roadblock, 524
and Title IX, 521
Index
I-13
tournaments, 523
and women’s liberation movement, 521
See also Adams v. Baker
French Boxing Federation, 256
Fu Hao, imperial consort (Shang Dynasty,
China), 108
Fudoshi shinmyoroku (Marvelous Power of
Immovable Wisdom) (Takuan), 377
Fuero Vidal Mayor (municipal code), 226
Fujian Buddha’s Disciples Boxing, 103
Fujian Sketches (Min Xiaoji) (Zhou Lianggong),
100
Funakoshi Gichin, 438, 441, 430–431
Further Biographies of Eminent Monks (Dao Xuan),
340
Gabon, 335
Gambling, and Muay Thai, 321
Game of Death (ﬁlm, Golden Harvest/Columbia),
484
Garrud, Edith
and contemporary codes of etiquette, 636
involvement with the suffragette movement,
635
as suffragette jujitsu teacher, 633, 635
Garshap-nama (Book of Garshap) (Asadi), 66
Gaumata, 67
GCAP. See Grupo de Capoeira Angola
Pelourihno (GCAP; Pelourinho Capoeira
Angola Group)
GCOLIFK, 506
judo program designed by Oshchepkov, 507
Oshchepkov, 505–506
See also State Central Institute of Physical
Culture
Ge Hong, 342
view on martial arts techniques, 105
Genghis Khan (Mongol great khan), 60. See also
Timur, Amir (“Tamerlane”)
Gengyu Shengji (Cheng Zongyou), 95
Geographia (Strabo of Amaseia), 225
Georgia, martial arts style, chidaoba, 507
Germania (Tacitus), 346
Germanic tribes, 346
Germany
and capoeira, 456
gymnastic societies, 384
reality-based defense, 496
Ghana, 333
Ghazan Khan (Mongol great khan, Iran), 66
Ghazi, Sifu, 28
www.ebook3000.com

Gidigbo
future directions, 14
as ritual theater, 12–13
rules, 11–12
training, tools, and related arts, 13
and worldview, 13–14
Giganti, Nicoletto, 251, 252
Gladiatrices
evidence for, 215–216
Great Dover Street Woman, 216
presence of, 214–215
social standing and, 215
Gladius Hispaniensis (Hispanic short sword), 225
Global War on Terrorism, and female military
personnel, 644
Globalization
deﬁnition, 435, 440
and demand for cultural authenticity, 458–459
ﬁlm successes of Lee, Bruce, 436 (see also Lee,
Bruce)
and homogenization, 458–459
and martial arts tourism, 411
and “globalkanization,” 440
Okinawan karate, 438
Globalization of martial arts, 435–525
Goju Ryu karate
and Miyagi Chojun, 476
and prewar and postwar versions of Sanchin,
476
Goju-Kai karate, 478
Goju-Shinto, 478
Golden Age of Wrestling, 494
Golden Gloves, 467, 518
Goldﬁnger (ﬁlm, Eon Productions), 450
Gongfu, 98
Gongfu pian, 98
Gongyang and Guliang Commentaries (Gongyang
Zhuan and Guliang Zhuang), 92–93
Gotch, Frank, 492
Gorin-no-sho (Five Elemental Spheres) (Musashi),
598
Gou Jian, King (China, Yue), 105, 108
Goushu, 97
Goushuguan, 97
Gracie, Carlos, 33, 39, 486
Gracie, Rorion, 34, 405, 486
Gracie family, 545
Gracie Jiu-Jitsu, 33–35
Brazilian origins, 486
Gracie’s Brazilian jiu-jitsu, 33, 39. See also Gracie
family; Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC)
I-14
Index
Gran Simulacro dell’Arte e dell’Uso della Scherma
(Great Representation of the Art and Use of
the Sword) (Capoferro), 252
Grand Emperor Boxing, 103
Grappling (jujutsu), schools of, 599
and numerology, 353
Great Achievement Boxing, 103
Great Avatar Shining over the East, 371
Greco-Roman wrestling, revival in North
America, 463
Greece
bayonet charges in Balkan Wars, 570
cultural performance and ﬁghting techniques,
605
heroic ethos, 606
Greece, boxing, 235–236
glove development, 236
Greece, pankration
deﬁnition, 237
story of Arrichion, 237
Greece, wrestling
aknoitei (“without touching the dust”), 235
martial virtues developed, 234
skamma (wrestling area), 234
training and, 234
Greek mythology, presentational form, 417
The Green Hornet (television series), 444
and a martial arts mini-craze, 539, 540
Grupo de Capoeira Angola Pelourihno (GCAP;
Pelourinho Capoeira Angola Group), 41
GTO (Gotov k Trudu i Oborone; “Ready for Labor
and Defense”), designed to prepare Soviet
citizens for military service, 505–506
Guam
talismans, 269
at time of Spanish conquest, 268
warrior training in, 269
weapons used, 268
Guanches people, 1, 3
Guinevere, Queen (legendary, England), 350
Gully, John, 230
The Gunﬁghter (ﬁlm, Twentieth Century Fox),
534–535
Gunﬁghters, Western, 534–539
versus Asian martial artists, 538
Bonney, William (Billy the Kid), 535
and chivalry, 537
Earp, Wyatt, 535
fast draw, 536
Hickok, James Butler (Wild Bill), 535
Hollywood version, 536

knight errant image, 537
mechanics of the gunﬁghter’s skill, 536
milieu, 535
mythic isolation, 535–536
mythology, 537
and nonwhites, 537
numbers of victims, importance of, 537
romanticized, 535
and spaghetti Westerns, 536
Guo Yunshen, 107
Gwaltney, John, 27
Gymnasium, akharas, 360
Gymnastic societies, 384
Hackenschmidt, George, 492
Hagana
Jewish community defense forces, 583
training in hand-to-hand combat, 584
Haiti, stick ﬁghting
and African spirituality, 46
basics, 45
and dance, 46
and supernatural, 45
Hakka, 102–103
Hakka boxing, 103
Han, Bong-soo, 51
Hand-to-hand combat, value of training in, 589
Han Dynasty (China), 108
Hanuman, Guru, 292
and absolute celibacy, 291
narrative of, 281
patron of gymnasiums, 359–360
popular Hindu deity, 359
See also Deities, Hindu
Hapkido, 444
Harris, Paul, 27
Hausa people, dambe combat sport among. See
Dambe
Hawai‘i, 273–275
martial arts classes, 448
martial law, 449
Heenan, John C., 232
Heiho Kadensho (Our Family’s Tradition of
Swordsmanship) (Yagyu), 598
Heiho michi shirube (Guide to the Way of Fencing)
(Shirai Toru Yoshinori), 376
Henry II, King (England), 350
Henry VIII, King (England), 224, 254
Herodotus, 283
Hero-genre
and ﬁlms of Lee, Bruce, 426
Index
I-15
King Zumbi, 426
yongchun, 425
Herrigel, Eugen, 156, 389–390
Herskovits, Melville J., 44
Hickok, James Butler (“Wild Bill”), 535
The Hidden Blade (ﬁlm, Shochiku), 529
Hinatsu Shigetaka, accounts of martial valor, 556
“Hindoo” wrestling, 493
Hinduism
and Indian wrestling, 290
martial culture, 281
Hisardut, 585. See also krav maga
HKCMAAL. See Hong Kong Chinese Martial
Arts Association Limited (HKCMAAL)
Hobsbawm, Eric, 428–429
Hogan, Hulk (Terry Bollea), 494
Hoklo, 102–103
Hollywood, role in globalization of martial arts,
438
Honcho bugei shoden (Hinatsu Shigetaka), 556
Hong ﬁst style, 342
Hong Kong, 99–101
cheap martial arts training manuals widely
available, 408
home of wuxia pian, 530
and martial arts movies, 441
second Shaolin temple, 436
source of 8-millimeter ﬁlms, 409
stunt work and choreography, 533
Hong Kong, martial arts, 408
boxing, 100–101
Lee’s Modiﬁed Tai Chi for Health (Lee Ying-
Arng), 100
Hong Kong Chinese Martial Arts Association
Limited (HKCMAAL), 100
Hong Kong kung fu, countercultural message,
541
Honne, 660, 662
Honorius, Emperor (Rome), 240
Horn bows, 283
Horse racing, Mongolian, 80–81
Horse Riding Stance, 107
Hospitallers, monasticism and chivalry, 349
How to Fight Tough (Dempsey), 566
Huang Zongxi, 90, 95, 97–98, 342
Huang-di, Emperor (legendary, China), 376
Hugh of Saint Victor, 241
Hui, the Chinese Islamic minority and their
martial arts practices, 343
Hulk Hogan (Bollea, Terry), 494
Hulkamania, 494
www.ebook3000.com

Human Weapon (television series, 2007–2008),
545–546
Hung I-Hsiang, 104
Hung, Sammo (Hung Kam Po), ﬁrst Chinese
male lead, 542
Hunnic bows, 58–59
Huns (Xiongnu), 58–59
Hwang Kee, 201–202
IAWF. See International Amateur Wrestling
Federation (IAWF)
Iberia
galhofa, 226
old-rooted martial arts, 226
stick ﬁghting, 226
wrestling styles, 226
Ifa (Orunmila), teachings of, 332–333
Ifa Chapters (Ifa), 332
Igbo people, 335
IKC. See International Karate Championship
(IKC)
Il Fior di Battaglia (Flower of Battle, Liberi), 245,
352–353
Imamura Yoshio, 122
Immigration, Asian, 442–443
British Indians to North America 1897–1915,
445
Chinese to North America 1848–1849, 445
Filipinos to North America 1902–1934, 446
Japanese to North America 1885–1907, 445
Immigration Act of 1924, 447
Imperial Way faction
failed coup attempt, 642
and Sakurakai, 641
India, 360
archery, 61
belief systems, 357–362
and British imperialism, 622
connection between martial and performing
arts, 607
overtly martial dance, 420
and Thuggees, 648
wrestling traditions of, 621–622
India, wrestling
celibacy, 290–291
freestyle, 289
and gurus, 292
history, 290
origins, 289
participants, 291
pomp and circumstance of, 293
I-16
Index
tournaments, 293
traditions of, 621–622
wrestling gymnasium, 291
Indochina (Vietnam), bamboo spear training, 581
Indonesia
bamboo spear training, 581
Japanese occupation of, 621
martial arts and common cultural heritage,
621
Indonesian Pencak Silat Federation (IPSI), 621
Initiation
Ayyaran, 365
boys, New Guinea, 267
boys and Maori war deity, 277
Caroline Islands, 270
ceremonies of, 365
documents, 374–375
Pusaka Medal, 399–400
silek, 397
stick ﬁghting, 337
and thang-ta, India, 296 
wrestling, 337
Zoroastrianism, 365
Initiation documents
and Buddhism, 558
key characteristic of, 558
secrecy of, 557
styles of, 557–558
Indonesia, 394, 401–402
cheap martial arts training manuals widely
available, 408
martial arts, civil and security role of, 623
pencak silat schools, 623
Indra, chariot of, 359
Inky Toy San Soy, 425
Inosanto, Dan, 480, 481
Inoue Nissho, Temple of Righteous National
Defense, 641
Inside Kung-Fu (magazine), 50
Instituto de Patrimônio Histórico Artístico
Nacional (IPHAN), 41
Instructions for Training for Hand-to-Hand Fighting
(Sagatelyan), 511
Internal School Boxing Methods (Huang Baijia),
95
International Amateur Sambo Federation (FIAS),
512
International Amateur Wrestling Federation
(IAWF), 472
International Archery Federation (FITA,
Federation Internationale de Tir a L’Arc), 84

International Boxing Club of New York (IBC), 469
inﬂuence on American television, 469
and organized crime, 469
International Federation of Amateur Wrestling
(FILA), 472, 520
recognition of Sambo, 512
women’s weight classes, 520
International Federation of Celtic Wrestling
(FILC), 224
International Federation of French Boxing, 259
International Judo Federation, 131
International Karate Championship (IKC), 51
International Krav Maga Federation, 586
International Olympics, 258. See also Olympic
Games
International Shuai-chiao Association, 119
International Taekwon-do Federation (ITF), 203
International Women’s Boxing Association
(IWBA), 517
Internet, and the martial arts, 549–554
for advertising, 551
archive of historical records, 552
blogs, 551
contentious issues online, 553
digital video, 551
discussion groups, 552
email, 550
ﬁrst martial art group on the Web, 550–551
increased access to information and source
material, 552–553
listservers, 550
online discussion groups, 553
for recruiting purposes, 551
social networking systems, 551
usenet newsgroups, 550
Web sites and, 550–551
World Wide Web, 550
Internment camps, and judo, 449
Invented traditions
belt color system, 431–432
black belt, 431–432
Dai-Soke, 430
deﬁned, 428–429
exclaiming “osu,” 430
karate “empty hand,” 430
lineage and authenticity, 429–430
linguistic, 430–431
title of “Soke,” 429–430
Invention of Tradition (Hobsbawm), 428
Invulnerability and political conﬂict, 619,
622–624
Index
I-17
IPHAN. See Instituto de Patrimônio Histórico
Artístico Nacional (IPHAN)
Iran
and the Assassins, 648
belief systems, 363–368
cultural inﬂuence on Abbasids, 68
epics, 66
history, 66–67
pre-Islamic, 367
language, 66
Muslim conquest of, 367
religion, 66
warrior tradition, 66
See also Persia
Iran, archery
Abbasids, 68
Achaemenian era, 67–68
ancient, 67
A Complete Guide in the Science of Shooting,
70–71
exercises, 68
Mongol horse archers, 68
moral code (jananmardi), 69–70
Parthian era, 67
principles of, 69
Safavid dynasty, 68
Sassanids, 67–68
swordsmanship, 71–72
technique, 69–71
Umayyad Caliphate, 68
Iran, martial arts, 66–75
archery, 67–72 (see also Iran, archery)
swordsmanship, 72–73 (see also Iran,
swordsmanship)
wrestling, 73–76. (see also Iran, wrestling)
Iran, swordsmanship
literary accounts, 72
techniques, 71
test-cutting exercises, 72
training, 71–72
types of attacks, 72–73
Iran, warriors, code of conduct for, 363–364
Iran, wrestling
equipment, 74–75
forms, 75–76
koshti, etymology of, 73–74
as pastime, 72
Qajar era, 73
Safavid-era wrestling, 73
techniques, 74
tradition, 72
www.ebook3000.com

Iran, wrestling (continued)
training places (zoorkhane), 74
Zand dynasty, 73
Ireland, martial arts, 223
Isabella, Queen (Castile [Spain]), 225
Iskandar, Qabus ibn, 364
Islam, 89, 364, 395
introduction in Iran, 365
in Malaysia, 396
and Silat, 395, 401
and silek, 397
Island Melanesia, 267–268
Ismail I, Shah (Safavid, Iran), 68
Israel, establishment of the state of, 583
Israeli Defense Force (IDF), 584
Istanbul, 83–84
Italy
and capoeira, 456
fencing, 245–246
women in the military, 643
ITF. See International Taekwon-do Federation
(ITF)
Ivanhoe (Scott), 351
IWBA. See International Women’s Boxing
Association (IWBA)
Iyi, Kilindi, 629–630
and the Afrikan consciousness movement, 629
Jackson, “Gentleman” John, 230
Jahn, Friedrich Ludwig, 384
Jailhouse Rock (JHR)
characteristics of, 28–29
ﬁghting styles, 27–28
history, 25–26
learning of, 29–30
as martial art, 30
Mother Dear method, 27–28
and Newsome, Dennis, 630
origins, controversy about, 26–28
revitalization and commoditization, 30–31
slaves and, 27
James, William, 388
Japan, 119–182, 357, 383, 474
and anime, 543
annexation of Manchuria, 580
army revised bayonet programs, 571
before 1868, 371–381
belief systems and martial arts in, overview,
369–370
boxing vs. judo matches in, 486
budo and mobilization of young men, 581
I-18
Index
Bushido and pre-World War II nationalism, 619
Christians, 386–387
decline of traditional martial arts, 600
divine mission to enlighten the world, 638
after 1868, 382–391
enthusiastic exporter of karate, 478
environment of militarism, 576
exercise as recreation, 560
hierarchical social structure, 658
immigration to North America, 442–443
Imperial Navy and judo, 575
invention of free sparring, 477
judo, 573–577
Kabuki theater and portrayal of samurai, 607
karate, judo and U.S. soldiers, 438
kendo in schools, 601, 603
martial arts dojo (school), 657
martial arts literature, 554
military occupation of, 438
and MMA, 489
and the Occupation, 576–577
omote and ura, 659
origins of MMA, 487
physical education curriculum for schools, 600
premodern, 374
Pure Land Buddhism, 372–373
Sambo teams from, 512
social cohesion, 657
social practices in, 661–662
submission wrestling, 487
Taiwan, arrival in, 101
and tengu (heavenly dogs), 647
university martial arts clubs, 661
warriors, 372
warriors who commit ritual suicide, 421
world’s largest kendo population, 602
Japan, aikido
expansion overseas, 136
as general martial art, 136–137
and military establishment, 134–134
and Omoto believers, 133
origins, 132
“peaceful” form, 135
training, 132–133
and Ueshiba Morihei, 133–134
variants of, 137–138
weapons, 133
Japan, iaido (technique of drawing the sword)
competitions, 146
origins, 144
governing bodies, 145–146

practice, 145
purpose, 145
weapons, 145
Japan, jo
history, 148–150
origins, 147
technique, 150–151
Japan, judo
expansion of, 128–130
foreign involvement in, 129–130
philosophy, 127
techniques and practice, 127–128
after World War II, 130–131
Japan, jujutsu
early systems, 121–122
after 1868, 123–124
instruction at public schools, 560
Kodokan judo, 123
modern jujutsu, 124–125
origins, 120–121
overseas transmission, 124
principles, 120
rank and grading, 125
Japan, kendo (sword ﬁghting)
contests, 141
early history, 139–140
equipment, 140
purposes, 143
samurai culture, 143
scoring, 142t
spirituality, 143
training, 141
way of the warrior, 141, 143
Japan, kyudo
bow, 152–153
contests, 155
modern, 156
preservation of, 155–156
as sport, 155
teaching of, 154–155
way of Bow and Horse, 153–154
Japan, martial arts
and religion before 1868, 371–380
religious inﬂuences on, 379
and Shintoism, 388
as spiritual education, 384
Japan, naginata
competition, modern, 161
as “concealed” activity, 159
deﬁnition, 158
examinations, 162
Index
I-19
as military weapon, 159
versus new naginata, 160
origins, 158
“Rhythm Naginata,” 162
in school curriculum, 159–160
teacher training for, 160
weapon, modern, 161
Japan, ninpo
deﬁnition, 162–163
forms, 165t
history, 163, 168–170
as military tradition, 163
in modern era, 170–171
techniques, ﬁghting, 164, 166
techniques, meditative and mind control, 164
traditions, 164
worldview, 166–168
Japan, Shorinji Kempo
deﬁnition, 172
movies and, 173
origins, 172
philosophy, 173–174
in school curriculum, 174
symbolic identity, 173
technique, 174
Japan, sumo wrestling
amateur, 181
commercial demands, 179
decorum, 176
development, 176–177
gambling on, 178–179
media image, 180–181
modernization of, 178
and nationalism, 177
origins, 175
product endorsements, 179
proﬁts from, 178
promotion of, 177–178
regulation of, 176
rules, 175
tournaments, 176
training, 180
and women, 181
Japan Sumo Association, 178
Japanese Budo Association, 391
Java, 398, 400–401
invulnerability and political conﬂict, 622
Javanmardi, principles of, 363–368
Jeet, 483
Jeet Kune Do, 478, 479–485
Bruce Lee stance, 481
www.ebook3000.com

Jeet Kune Do (continued)
concept rather than style, 481
controversial aspects of, 482–484
in ﬁlm, 484
“non-style” of, 483
popularized by Bruce Lee, 479
and postmodernism, 482
success and celebrity, 483
term coined, 480
two major factions of, 480
Jeet Kune Do Principles, 480
Jerusalem, 349
Ji Han-Jae, 184
Jiang Rong Chiao, 408
Jiangwu, 92
Jidaigeki (period ﬁlm), 527–528. See also Cruel
jidaigeki
Jie Xuan, 105
Jiji, 93
Jing Wu Tiyuhui
ﬁrst Chinese martial arts as recreation, 407
ﬁrst women’s program, 407
martial arts magazines, 408
Jiu-jitsu
Brazilian, 32–36
and Gracie, Rorion, 405
Japanese, 120–125
versus French boxing, 259–260
See also Japan, jujutsu; Jujitsu
Johnson, Jack, and knockout of Great White
Hope, 468
Johnson, Tom (Jackling, Thomas), 230
Jordan, Jackson, Jr., 27
Jousting, 348
Judo
experienced by American servicemen, 438
ﬁrst international tournaments, 503
hegemonic and ubiquitous, 440
high-performance, 131
Japan, 127–131
in Japan, 1931–1950, 573–577
Kodokan, 123, 508
modern, 385
and Olympics, 127, 130–131
and relocation centers and internment camps,
449
in Taiwan, practiced by Japanese ofﬁcials, 103
in Taiwan, under the Japanese, 101
Taiwanese, 101, 103
taught in U.S. Army camps, 447
in United States, after 1943, 591
I-20
Index
Judo, American
and American football, 566–567
and commando courses, 566
differences with Kano’s judo, 566
and U.S. military, 565–567
and U.S. military women, 567
women’s self-defense books, 567
Judo freestyle wrestling
combat division, 508
combination of wrestling styles within Soviet
Union, 507
differences from Kodokan judo, 508
Juego del Palo (Canary Islands stick ﬁghting)
history and development, 3–4
technique, 4–5
Jujitsu (unarmed combat), 385
and British suffragette campaigners, 632
in circus and vaudeville acts, 446
and Garrud, Edith, 635–636
instruction at Japanese public schools, 560
and Mao Zedong, 97
and Pankhurst, Christabel, 635
and the Russo-Japanese War, 633–634
taught in U.S. Army camps, 447
and U.S. military training, 589
and vaudeville circuits, 492
See also Japan, jujutsu; Jiu-jitsu
Jujutsuffragettes, 632–637
and Garrud, Edith, 635–636
and Pankhurst, Christabel, 634–635
and suffragette literature, 636
Jukendo, 578–582
Jukendo Promotion Association, 581
Jun Fan Gung Fu
method of nucleus, 480
sources for, 480
Juvenal, 215
Kabuki theater, portrayal of samurai in, 607
Kaidu, Khan (Mongol), 118
Kal, Paulus, 354
Kali, globalization of, 437
Kalinda, 630
Kalis, 300
Kangzi, Emperor (Qing Dynasty, China), 118
Kano Jigoro, 128, 385, 431, 620
and American judo, 566
and “black belt” system, 573
founder of Kodokan judo, 560–561
and Judo magazine, 574
and Kodokan judo, 574

and modern martial art textbooks, 561
and Olympics in Japan, 573
physical education curriculum for schools, 600
and Tokyo Summer Olympics (1940), 575
Kapaneos, 236. See also Greece, boxing
Kapap, 583–587
Karate
effect of Japanese militarism and, 476
elimination of Chinese inﬂuences, 476
empty-hand, 475, 430
experienced by American servicemen, 438
franchise clubs, 405
versus French boxing, 259–260
hegemonic and ubiquitous, 440
in Japan after World War II, 477–478
Kenpo, 49–52
no special uniform for, 475
origin of, 249
as paramilitary martial art, 478
psychological perspectives of, 477–478
schools, 431, 436
as a spiritual path, 478
U.S. military sponsored training, 478
and wa, 475
as a Way of Life, 478
Karate, international, 474–479
Karate, Okinawan
Chinese inﬂuences, 207–208
cultural perspectives, 474–475
di (hand), 206
as example of globalization, 438
instruction in, 208
versus Japanese, 474–475
Japanese inﬂuences, 207, 475–476
origins, 205–206
styles, 209
transformation of, 438
Karate clubs, community-based, 448–449
and Chinese martial art instruction, 448–449
The Karate Kid (ﬁlm, Columbia Pictures), 532
Karate teachers
Christian, 431
Funakoshi Gichin, 430–431
Kashima-Shinryu, 657
Kata
deﬁned, 375
and hierarchical social structure, 658
Japanese social behavior and, 658
Sanchin of Goju Ryu, 476
Kawaishi Mikonosuke, 129
Kelly, Jim, 532
Index
I-21
Kelly v. SEG Sports Corp. (1997), 488
Kendo
in circus and vaudeville acts, 446
social and cultural evolution of, 598–603
in Taiwan, practiced by Japanese ofﬁcials, 103
in Taiwan under the Japanese, 101
Taiwanese, 101, 103
world’s largest kendo population, 602
Kenjutsu
instruction at Japanese public schools, 560
Sakakibara Kenkichi, 600
schools of, 599
Kenpo karate
current systems, 52
origins, 49
popularization of, 52
techniques, 49–50
and Tracy brothers, 52
in United States, 49–53
Kenya, 336
combative form of festive dancing, 419
Kharlampiev, Anatoly, 511–512
Khayyam Neishaburi, 68
Kibuka (deiﬁed ancestor), 333–334. See also
Orisha (deiﬁed ancestor)
Kickboxing
development of, 477
versus French boxing, 260
and television, 546
women’s, 516
Kill Bill (ﬁlm, Miramax), 532
“Killer Kowalski” (Wladek “Walter” Kowaski),
494, 495
Kim Un Yong, 203
Kipp, Bill, 498
KMF. See Krav Maga Federation (KMF)
Knighthood
candidate for, 347
ceremony of, 347–349
and chivalry, 346–347
and Christianity, 348
precursor of, 346–347
Knights of Columbus, organizing ﬁght cards for
troops, 467
Knights Templar, 349
Kobukan Dojo, 638–639, 641
golden age of, 638
and Japan’s political and military establishment,
638
Kodokan judo, 123, 385
attack to vital points, 574–575
www.ebook3000.com

Kodokan judo (continued)
in England, 125
founder of, 431
introduction into the United States, 429
and the Los Angeles Police Department, 595
Oshchepkov as student of, 503
school of jujutsu, 385, 574
Kohai, 661
Kokuryukai
Black Dragon Society, 640
and traditional samurai ideologies, 647
Korea
as exporter of karate, 478
invention of free sparring, 477
kendo and Japanese colonialists, 602
sizable kendo population, 602
taekwondo and modern South Korean
nationalism, 619
taekwondo and national imperatives,
620–621
taekwondo and U.S. soldiers, 438
Korea, Hapkido
versus aikido, 185–185
versus Daito-ryu aiki-jujutsu, 185–186
deﬁned, 183
inﬂuences, 183–184
schools, 185
Korea, Kumdo
changes, 189–190
forms, 189
Haedong, 188
inﬂuences, 187–188
training, 188–189
Korea, ssireum
deﬁned, 190
etymology, 191
history, 190, 192
rules, 191
status, current, 194
Korea, taekkyon
associations, 198
competition, 198
deﬁnition, 195
development of, 197
footwork, 198
forms, 196
inﬂuence, conceptual, 197
learning, 196
origins, 195
and taekwondo, 197
training system, 197
Korea, taekwondo
international, 199
I-22
Index
and Japanese colonial rule, 199–200
versus karate, 203–204
as martial art, 202
military applications, 202
origins, 199–200
protective sparring gear, 201
systems, 200–201
Korean War (1950–1953), 390
Krav maga, 583–587
becomes international martial art, 585
civilian, 585
guiding principles, 586
and the Israeli Defense Force, 584
other principles of, 587
public perception of, 585
in public schools, 585
spread outside Israel, 585
technical description of, 586–587
three core ideas, 587
as a trademark, 586
use of the name, 584
Krav Maga Federation (KMF), 585–586
Kubota, Seion, 379
Kung fu
countercultural hero and paciﬁsm, 532
deﬁned, 98
ﬁlms, 530
hegemonic and ubiquitous, 440
schools, 436
Kung Fu: History, Philosophy, Traditions
(Spangler), 541
Kung Fu (television program), 444, 540–541
Lee, Bruce, failed audition for, 542
philosophical paciﬁsm, 540–541
popularization of the term “kung fu,” 98
Shibuya, Robert Kinji, in villain roles, 450
and Western frontier hero, 540
Kunst des Fechtens (Art of Fencing), 244. See also
Liechtenauer, Johannes
Kuntao, 299
deﬁnition, 312
divisions, 312–313
Indonesia and, 316–317
systems, hybrid, 314–314
systems, integrated, 315–316
systems, orthodox, 313–314
usage, generic, 313
Kuomintang government, 102, 103
Kupigana Ngumi, 629, 631
Kurosawa Akira, 528–529, 538
Lafond, Roger, 220
Laith’s code, 364

Lapulapu
ﬁght with Magellan, 307–308
as Filipino resistance hero, 307
The Last Samurai (ﬁlm, Radar Pictures/Warner
Brothers), 529
Latvia
ﬁrst international Sambo competition, 512
and women in the military, 643
The Leaf People (play; Viera and Machado), 41
LeBell, Gene, 426
Lecour, Hubert, 218
Lee, Ang, 533
Lee, Bruce (Lee Jun Fan), 408, 480, 414
authenticity to martial arts, in ﬁlms, 530
brand names, 410
effect on movie action choreography, 441
Enter the Dragon, 441, 444
Fists of Fury, 426
impact on Japan, 531
impact overstated, 483
and Jeet Kune Do, 479–484
and Parker, Ed, 51
popularity of “kung fu” (quanfa), 440
procedure, 481
stance, 481
teacher, 100
wisdom, packaging of, 482
Lee’s Modiﬁed Tai Chi for Health (Lee Ying-Arng),
100
Legitimacy
online contentious issues, 553
yardsticks of, 439
Lehto, Karl, 461–462
Leisure, martial arts and, 405–406
Leone, Sergio, 536
Leopard (Egbe) Society, 335
Leopard Societies
in Benin, 336
common duty, 335
Leopard (Egbe) Society, 335
OKonko, 335
of Sierra Leone, 335
in West Africa, 649–650
Les Compagnons (guilds of craftsmen), 218
Lethal Weapon (ﬁlm, Warner Brothers), 486
Lewis, Joe, 51
Li, Jet (Li Lianjie), 541
Li Gong, 95
Li Xiaolong. See Lee, Bruce
Libanda, 44–45
Liberi, Fiore dei, 245, 352, 354
Lichtenberg, Georg Christoph, 390
Lichtenfeld, Imrich “Imi,”and krav maga, 584–586
Index
I-23
Liechtenauer, Johannes, 244, 352
Life-dealing sword, 332
Lile, Emma, 225
Lin Shuang-wen, 112
Lineage and authenticity in martial arts, 429–430
Linguistic inventions, 430–431
Linton, Ralph, 625
The Lion King (ﬁlm, Disney), 441
Lioness programs
in open contradiction of Department of
Defense policy, 645
U.S. military in Iraq, 644–645
Lo Schermo (Fencing) (Montone), 250
Lochaber axe, 222
London Masters of Defense, 254
Longsword, 242–243
López de Legazpi, Miguel, 308
Louis VII, King (France), 350
Louis, Joe, rematch with Max Schmeling, 468
Louis William, Margrave (Baden), 82
Lu Xun, 97
Luca, Guido Antonio de, 249
Lucha Canaria (Canary Islands wrestling)
history and development, 5–6
technique, 6
Ludwig Wilhelm, Margrave (Baden), 82
Luo Zhenchang, 96
Lusitani, 225
Luther, Martin, 351
Ma Fengtu, 343
Ma Liang, General, 96, 343
Maasi, Mfundishi, 628–629
MacCannell, Dean, 412
Mace, Jem, 232
Madagascar, 15, 394
Maeda Mitsuyo (Mitsuyo Maeda), 32
Magellan, Ferdinand, and Lapulapu, 307–308
Magic
arnis and talismans, 305–306
martial, 337
spells written in Sanskrit, 374
talismans that give invulnerability, 622
The Magniﬁcent Seven (ﬁlm, United Artists), 538
Mahabharata, 357, 418, 420
Mahayana scriptures, Tantric rituals and, 374
Mahmud II, Sultan, 84
“Maiden of Yue” (story), 107
Mair, Paulus Hector, 253
Malay cultures, belief systems and martial arts,
394–395
Malaysia, 324–330, 394, 396
Mali, 334
www.ebook3000.com

Manchuria
annexed by Japan, 580
horn bows, 62
invention of free sparring, 477
jukendo taught in, 581
kendo and Japanese colonialists, 602
Manchus, 118
Mandala diagrams, 374
Mandarin Duck Feet, 96
Manipur, India, 294–297
Manorialism, 347
The Manual for Eclectic Gymnastics for All Ages (de
Bouffémont), 219
Manual of Training for Hand-to-Hand Fighting
(Galkovsky), 511
Manuscrit d’Ambras (Talhoffer), 218
Mao Zedong, 343, 482
advocated practice of jujutsu, 97
death of, 102
government of, and wuxia pian, 529
travel restrictions after his death, 104
Marine Corps, United States, martial arts
programs, 592
Marine Corps Martial Arts Program (MCMAP),
mixed-gender training in, 644
Martial arts
and African Americans, 626
and Afrikan identity, 626
animal models, 425
Banten, Cimande style, 399
books, 408
branding of, 440
Chinese, 338–344
and claims of vulnerability, 622
color-coded explanation, 431–432
commodiﬁcation of, 414, 435–436
in contemporary theater performance, 608
creation legends, 425
dan-kyu (“rank-step”) grades, 431
deﬁned, 331–333
dojo (school), 657
education in Japan, 384
empty-hand techniques, 300
and ethnic or national identity, 619
Filipino, 427
and folk beliefs, 426
and folklore studies, 424
franchise schools, 409
globalization of, 439–441
and the Hui (Islamic) minority, 343–344
impetus for development, 437
I-24
Index
in India, 357
intellectualization of, 598
institutionalization of, 438
and the Internet (see Internet, and the martial
arts)
and invented traditions, 428–429
Japanese, 369–370
lineage and authenticity, 429–430
and Malaysia, 396
and narrative, 424–426
and nationalism, 620–622
overt spiritualization of, 599
paciﬁcation of kenjutsu, 599
performers trained in, 532
and performing arts, 613
political uses of, 619–624
and popular religious Taoism, 342–343
postmodern development, 437
postmodern dissemination, 436–437
postmodern proliferation of, 437
and presentational forms, 417–418
preservation of, 418
and reality-based defense, 497
and representational genres, 418–421
ryuha (system), 598
secrecy and transmission of, 325
and secret societies and fraternal organizations,
647
in South Asia, 357
as sport, 384
in Taiwan, under the Japanese, 101
teaching of, 499
training in family, 379
and visual arts, 422
Martial arts, Afrikan (African), 625–631
African-based systems, 628–630
Amakhanda, 630
and the Black Power movement, 625
and eclectic innovators, 627–628
eclectic systems, 626
Kupigana Ngumi, 629
and Nation of Islam, 628
purists, 630–631
and Sanuces Ryu, 628
and traditionalists, 627
Martial arts business
and criminal justice problems, 410
franchise schools, 409
magazines, 408
selling of brand names, 409
selling of trade secrets, 409

seminars, 409
“teach yourself” books, 408
teachers, 408
teaching of martial arts, 407
tourism, 409
training ﬁlms, 408
training manuals, 408
videos, 409
Martial arts business, Chinese
con games, 410
exercise value of, 340
legitimacy of, 410
martial arts tourism, 409
myth about martial arts and money, 406
Martial arts, China
absorption of silat community, 315–316
boxing schools, 342
known as kuntao in Southeast Asia, 312
and Mao, 342
as a manual trade, 407
and money, 406–409
myth about martial arts and money, 406
as physical exercise, 407
as recreation, 407
and religion, 344
signiﬁcance in Southeast Asia, 313
in South Asia, 357
Taoism, 342
Yin-Yang school, 342
Martial arts, Filipino
amulets to protect from blade and bullet, 622
boxing vs. judo matches in, 486
bravery and Lapulapu, 307
globalization of kali and eskrima, 437
history, 306–309
immigrants and bachelor subculture, 446
immigration to North America and, 442–443
invulnerability and political conﬂict, 622
Lapulapu, hero of resistance, 307–308
sword usage, 302
“Thrilla in Manila,” 470
traditional folk dramas, 421
traditional healing and, 306
Martial arts ﬁlms, and Hollywood, 531–533
Martial arts initiation documents. See Initiation
documents
Martial arts, India, thang-ta, 294–297
Martial arts, Japan
budo (martial ways), 387
bujutsu (martial techniques), 387–388
Bushido (warrior ways), 386
Index
I-25
correct mental attitude, 388
“correct” way, 659
and democratic ideals, 390, 658
ideological content, 388
kendo, 390
national championship tournament, 388
as performance, 388
and prescribed way of behaving, 659
priests and, 374–375
public understanding of, 556
and religious symbols, 388
and spiritual development, 386
sufﬁx -do nomenclature, 388, 391
teaching of, 373
“training of the martial spirit,” 386
Martial arts, Java, 400–401
Martial arts literature of Japan
educational works, 560–561
Hinatsu Shigetaka, 556
initiation documents, 557–558
martial arts treatises, 558–560
military manuals, 556–557
Tokugawa period, 554–555
war tales, 555–556
warrior exploits, 556
Martial arts magazines, ﬁrst Chinese-language,
408
Martial arts movies, 444
Enter the Dragon, 441
Hong Kong, 441
See also Chan, Jackie; Jet Li (Li Lianje); Lee,
Bruce; Norris, Chuck (Carlos); Seagal,
Steven; Van Damme, Jean Claude; Yuen Wo-
ping (Yuan Heping)
Martial arts, Southeast Asia, and kuntao, 312
Martial arts, Sulawesi, 401–402
and Hindu inﬂuence, 402
and Islam, 402
and Muslims, 402
Martial arts systems, Chinese
brand names, 410
secrecy of, 410
Martial arts teachers
A-Shan Shi, 409
in Taiwan, 408
income of, 409
Sun Lu Tang, 409
Martial arts television series
Green Hornet, 444
Kung Fu, 444
Martial arts tour packages, 413
www.ebook3000.com

Martial arts tourism, 409
beneﬁts for the local community, 415
concerns about legitimacy and authenticity,
411–412
desire to tour, 411–412
globalization, 411
impulse to tour, 411
and ofﬁcial tourism Web sites, 414
reasons for, 412
Martial arts tourists
effects on, 413
intensiﬁed training regimen, 412
Martial arts training facilities
in China, 413
in Thailand, 413
Martial arts training ﬁlms, Jing Wu Association, 408
Martial arts videos, 409
Martial arts, West Java, spiritual mediation, 399
Martial arts, West Sumatra, and silek, 397
Martial belief systems, universal assumptions of, 331
Martial choreography, 547. See also Yuen Wo-ping
(Yuan Heping)
Martial Compendium (Tang Shunzhi), 94, 106, 107
Martial deities, 332–334
Eshu, 333
Ochosi, 333
Ogun, 333
Shango, 333
weapons of, 333
Martial Law (television program, 1998–2000)
borrowed from Rush Hour, 542
and Hu, Kelly, 544
Hung, Sammo, 542
Martial media, 527–563
and children’s television programming, 542–543
and ﬁlms with female ﬁghters, 544–545
ﬁrst Chinese male lead, 542
martial arts as a “Way,” 541
mystique of the ninja, 541
philosophical paciﬁsm, 540–541
place of women in, 543–545
and proliferation of cable television, 545
storytelling, East-West differences, 543
and super-powered mysticism, 542–543
and television, with female ﬁghters, 544
and westerns, 540, 542
See also Internet, the, and the martial arts
Martial temple parades, 615
as living history and ethics lessons, 616
Taiwan, 616
Martial traditions, and cultural performances, 606
I-26
Index
Martial way, 601, 620
Masonic Knights Templar, and historical Knights
Templar, 648
Masters-at-arms, medieval and renaissance, 352
Masterson, Bat (William Barclay), 538
Mathematics, fencing and, 254
The Matrix (ﬁlm, Miramax), 532, 541. See also
Yuen Wo-ping (Yuan Heping)
Matthey, Cyril G. R., 255
Mauldin, Bill, 405
MCMAP. See Marine Corps Martial Arts Program
(MCMAP)
Medicine
to invoke divine protection, 333
martial, 335, 336–337
war medicine, 336
Mehmet II, Sultan (Ottoman), 83
Meiji period, 370, 383–384
dismantling of the traditional class system, 620
fall and rise of kenjutsu, 599–600
hierarchical structure loosened, 658
radical secret societies, 639–640
restoration, 641
Shinto institutions, 383
Melanesia, 265–268
Mémoires de Vidocq (1828), 257
Menaguerra, Ponc de, 247
Mendoza, Daniel, 230
Merovingian dynasty, 346
Mexico, and mixed martial arts (MMA), 489
Meyer, Joachim, 245, 253
Michuan Duanda Fa, 90
Micronesia, 268–270, 394
Middle Ages, 350
The Mighty Morphin Power Rangers (television
program, 1993–1996), 543
Military calisthenics, 386
Military unarmed ﬁghting
amateur boxing in British military training
programs, 588–589
Cold War period (1945–1991), 591
deﬁned, 588
goals, 588
and physical ﬁtness programs, 591
and U.S. military, 590
U.S. military adoption of British commando
training model, 590
U.S. Navy military system, impact of, 591
and World War II British commandos, 589–590
See also Jukendo; Krav maga; Sambo;
Taekwondo

Miller, Rory, 497
Million Dollar Baby (ﬁlm, Warner Brothers), 516
Milne, William, 114
Min Xiaoji (Fujian Sketches) (Zhou Lianggong), 100
Minamoto no Yorimasa, 421
Minangkabau (West Sumatra), 397
Mirafuente, Buenaventura, 308–309
Mr. T, 494
Mixed Martial Arts (MMA), 35, 479, 485–489
and cable television, 489
and casinos, 488
competitions, 439
deﬁned, 485–486
homoerotic elements of, 490
and the Internet, 488
opposition to, 488
promotions, corporate, 489
resistance to female participation, 490
and U.S. military, 489–490
See also Combat medley
Miyagi Chojun, 476
Miyamoto Musashi (Yoshikawa), 556, 558–559
MMA. See Mixed Martial Arts (MMA)
Mochizuki Hiroo, 259
Model Mugging, 499–500
Modern Kapap, 586
Mokuju (“wooden riﬂe”), 579
Molyneux, Tom, 230
Monasteries, Buddhist
martial arts and, 339
Shaolin Monastery, 339
Mongolia, archery
bow construction, 79
bow usage, 79–80
design, 80
modern bows, 80
styles, 80
Mongolia, martial arts
archery, 80–81 (see also Mongolia, archery)
horse racing, 80–81
Sambo teams, 512
wrestling, 78–80 (see also Mongolia, wrestling)
Mongolia, wrestling
attire, 79–80
dance and, 78
rank, 78
rules, 78
Mongols, 60, 118, 341
bows, 60
Genghis Khan, 60
horse archers, 68
Index
I-27
Monkey Boxing, 341
Monkey Dance, the, 497
Monte, Pietro, 226, 246, 248
Montone, Angelo Viggiani dal, 250
Moore, Archie, 26
Moraingy
evolution of, 17–18
functions in society, 18–19
origins, 15–16
practice, 16
techniques, 16–17
Mount Song, 340
Mount Wudang, 342
Zixiao Gong (Purple Mist Palace), 343
Mozambique, combative form of festive dancing,
419
Muay Thai (Thai boxing), 299, 533–534
boxers, 319–320
boxers, perceptions of, 322
as cultural export, 323
deﬁnition, 317
depictions of, 321
female ﬁghters, 546
gambling and, 321
governing bodies, 323
history, 318
modernization, 318–319
Ong-Bak: The Thai Warrior (ﬁlm, Baa-Ram-
Ewe, 2003), 533
prizeﬁghts, 320
royal support for, 319
social dimensions, 319
and Thai nationalism, 318
training, 320
venues, 320–321
winnings, 320
women and, 322, 546
Muay Thai action ﬁlms, Ong-Bak, 533
Mughal Empire, 61, 282–283
Muhammad, Prophet, 82, 367, 400
Muhammadiyah, 401
Mummers, 420
Music
African inﬂuences in Carolinas, 43
Breton martial arts and, 224
capoeira and, 37
Caribbean martial arts and, 43–44, 45
Chinese martial arts and, 92
Chinese Six Arts and, 115
combat language and, 44
dambe and, 7, 8
www.ebook3000.com

Music (continued)
danced martial art, 44
Japanese naginata and, 162
kenpo karate and, 49
moraingy and, 17
Muay Thai and, 317
Roman gladiatorial games and, 239
Scottish martial arts and, 221
silat and, 328
ssireum and, 194
Muso Gonnosuke Katsuyoshi, 148
Muzumdar, D. C., 357
My Darling Clementine (Twentieth Century Fox),
535
Mysticism, Pythagorean, 355
Mythology, presentational form, 417
Naito Katsutoshi, 34
Nakabayashi Shinji, 598
Nango Jiro
resignation from the Kodokan, 577
successor to Kano, 575
Nanquan, 97
Napoleonic Wars, 384
Narratives, 424–426
chivalry and, 350–351
creation legends, 425
folk, 421
Hanuman, 281
hero-genre, 425
Hindu, 420
of Lapulapu, 307–308
martial folk, 424
origin, in martial arts systems, 424
origins of thang-ta, 294
Nation of Islam, 631
military arm trained by Powell, Moses, 628
National Collegiate Athletic Association
(NCAA)
boxing regulations and U.S. military rules, 589
boxing rules, 467
university wrestling rules, 472
National Wrestling Alliance (NWA), 494
National Wrestling Association, 492
National Wrestling Coaches Assoc. v. U.S.
Department of Educ. (2003), 522
Nationalism, in professional wrestling, 492
Nationalist China. See Taiwan
Nativistic movements, 625
Navajo Windtalkers, 650
Nero, 514
I-28
Index
Netherlands
and mixed martial arts (MMA), 489
oiled wrestling tournaments, 87
and Silat schools in Europe, 326
National Sporting Club (British), establishment
of weight classes in professional boxing, 468
NCAA. See National Collegiate Athletic
Association (NCAA)
neo-Confucianism, 376
and martial arts training, 558
and modern kendo, 559
Nettesheim, Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa von, 355
New Book of Effective Discipline (Jixiao Xinshu),
94
New Book of Military Preparedness, 95
New Buddhism, 383–384
New Guinea, 266–267
martial arts and preparation for warfare, 263
and supernatural weapons, 267
New Judo, 577
New Martial Arts (Xin Wushu), 343
A New Theory of the Art of Canne Fencing
(Larribeau), 219
New York Police Department
development of training program, 594
and training Tokyo police, 595
New York State Athletic Commission, and
Walker Law of 1920, 468
New Zealand
boxing exhibitions, 466
Maoris, 276
See also Aotearoa (New Zealand)
Newsome, Dennis, 25, 630
Nguni, 336
Niger
dambe combat sport. See Dambe
“Head Dance,” 418
Nigeria, 332–333, 334, 335, 337
dambe combat sport. See Dambe
Yoruba, 332–333
Nigeria Afromartial Club (Kano City, Nigeria), 9
Ninety-nine names of Allah, chanting of, 396
Nine-Word Spell, 375
Ninja, Hands of Death (Ashida Kim), 445
Ninjutsu, and Western action cinema, 532
Nitobe Inazo, 387
Noble Science, 218
Norris, Carlos (Chuck)
against Lee, Bruce, 542
and martial arts sub-genre, 541
and Parker, Ed, 51

Norway
allows women in the military without
restrictions, 643
ﬁrst FILA-sanctioned international tournament
for women, 524
Nowruz-nama (Book of Nowruz) (Khayyam
Neishaburi), 68
Nueva Ciencia y Filosofía de la Destreza de las
Armas, su Teoría y Práctica (New Science and
Philosophy of the Art of Weapons, Its Theory
and Practice) (Narváez), 254
Numerology
medieval, 352–353
quaternities, 352
triplicities, 352
NWA. See National Wrestling Alliance (NWA)
Observation, Orientation, Decision, and Action
(OODA) Loop. See OODA (Observation,
Orientation, Decision, and Action) Loop
Oceania, 263–278. See also individual nations
Oceania, martial arts
Australian, 263–265
Melanesian, 265–268
Micronesian, 268–270
Polynesian, 270–277
Occult sciences, European, 352–356
Odu Ifa. See Ifa Chapters (Odu Ifa)
Ogawa Ryuzo, 34
Ögodei, great Khan (Mongol), 118
Ogun (primary deity of war), 333
Oiu Jin, 108
Okinawa, 474
enthusiastic exporter of karate, 478
origin of karate, 429
original concept of karate, 477
as replica of seventh-century Japan, 438
Okinawa, karate
Chinese inﬂuences, 207–208
cultural perspectives, 474–475
di (hand), 206
as example of globalization, 438
instruction in, 208
versus Japanese, 474–475
Japanese inﬂuences, 207, 475–476
origins, 205–206
styles, 209
transformation of, 438
Okochi Tatsuo, 34
Okonko, 335
Oludamare, 333
Index
I-29
Olympic Games
54th, in 564 BCE, 237
1936, 109
1940, 575
1986, 385
1988, 203
2000, 199
2004, 104, 524
2008, 90, 97
boxing and, 235
as an exercise for war, 605
institution of women’s wrestling, 473
modern, 258
movement, 385
Indian wrestling and, 292, 293
judo, 127, 130–131
taekwondo, 104, 199, 202–203
universal rules for wrestling, 472
Oman, combative form of festive dancing,
418–419
Omori, Geo, 33
Omote, 659
Omote to Ura (Doi), 659
Omoto religion, 638
golden age of, 640
in Japan, 134
Ong-Bak: The Thai Warrior (Baa-Ram-Ewe, 2003)
533
On the Correct Handling of Contradictions among
the People (Mao), 482
Only the Strong (ﬁlm, Twentieth Century Fox),
456
OODA (Observation, Orientation, Decision, and
Action) Loop, 500
Opera Nova (New Work) (Manciolino), 250
Opera Nova (New Work) (Marozzo), 246, 250
Origin narratives, 424
creation legends, 425
Praying Mantis quanfa, 425
Original Jeet Kune Do, 480
Orisha (deiﬁed ancestor), 333. See also Kibuka
(deiﬁed ancestor)
Orunmila (Ifa), 333
Oshchepkov, Vasily Sergeevich
combat division and, 508
founder of Sambo, 502
GCOLIFK, 506
judo freestyle wrestling, 508
and Kodokan judo, 503
teaching judo at CDKA, 505
untimely death of, 509
www.ebook3000.com

Osman Bey, 81
Ottoman archery
competitions, 83
decline of, 84
early history, 82
ﬂight shooting, 83
guilds, 83
Karlsruhe collection, 82
military history, 82–83
mounted archery, 83
Ok Meydani (ﬁeld of the arrow), 83
rebirth of traditional, 84
training, 83
women and, 82
Ottoman Empire, 81–82
bayonet charges in Balkan Wars, 570
conquest of Istanbul (former Constantinople), 83
founder, 81
and Palestine, 583
Sultan Mahmud II, 84
Sultan Mehmet II, 83
wealth of, 81 (see also Silk Road)
Ottoman martial arts
archery, 82–84 (see also Ottoman archery)
history, 81–82
wrestling, 85–87 (see also Ottoman oiled wrestling)
Ottoman oiled wrestling
champions, 85
changes after 1923, 86–87
globalization, 87
Kirkpinar tournament, 86
at the local level, 86
purpose of oil, 85
rules, 85
secularization of, 86
and soccer, 87
tournaments, 86
urbanization and, 86–87
Ouro, Besouro Cordão de (Pereira, Manoel
Henrique), 39
Outlaws of the Marsh (Shuihuzhuan), 109, 111,
339, 409
Pacheco Narváez, Luis, 254
Palestine
Jewish population of, 583
use of walking stick for defense, 220
Palmach, 583
Pan-Am Games, women’s wrestling weight
classes, 525
Panembahan Senopati, 400
I-30
Index
Pankhurst, Christabel, 634–635
Pao Chui (Cannon Pounder), 95
Paradoxes of Defense (Silver), 255
Paris, and capoeira, 456
Parker, Edmund Kealoha, 49–52
awards, 52
books by, 51–52
celebrity students, 50
“The Father of American Karate,” 50
movie roles, 50
and Presley, Elvis, 51, 444
television experience, 540
“Parthian shot,” 67
Parthians, 67
Passive resistance, and African Americans, 626
Pastinha, Mestre (Vincente Ferreira), 37, 40
Passion plays (ta’ziyeh), 367–368
Paton, James, 221
Pauerenfeindt, 253
Pax Dei (Peace of God), 348
Penca Cimande, 399
Pencak, 400–401
Pencak silat, 623
origin of term, 324
as product of Indonesian culture, 621
role of central Java in development of, 327
schools, and practice of invulnerability, 624
Perdiguier, Agricol, 218
Performing arts
heroic display of ethos of a culture, 606
and living martial traditions, 606
and martial arts, 613
relationship between martial training, dance,
and performance, 605
and stage combat, 613
Persatuan Persilatan Pendekar dan Seni Budaya
Banten Indonesia (PPPSBBI), 624
Persia
culture, 365–366
reverence of warrior culture, 365–366
traditional literature, 363
See also Iran
Pestalozzi, Johann Heinrich, 385
Philip IV, King (Spain), 254
Philippe II Auguste, King (France), 217
Philippines, 306–310, 394
amulets to protect from blade and bullet, 622
boxing vs. judo matches in, 486
bravery and Lapulapu, 307
globalization of kali and eskrima, 437
history, 306–309

immigrants and bachelor subculture, 446
immigration to North America, 442–443
invulnerability and political conﬂict, 622
Lapulapu, hero of resistance, 307–308
sword usage, 302
“Thrilla in Manila,” 470
traditional folk dramas, 421
traditional healing, 306
La Philosophia de las Armas (The Philosophy of
Arms) (Carranza), 254
Philosophical systems, East Asian, 89. See also
speciﬁc systems
Pipes, Tom, 228
Pistoleers. See Gunﬁghters
Plains Indian warrior societies, 651–653
Big-Dogs (Crow), 652
Cheyenne Bowstring Warriors Society, 654
Crazy-Dogs-Wishing-to-Die (Crow), 652
Dog-Men (Cheyenne), 652
Dog-Men Society, 653
introduction of horses, 652
military leadership, 652
and paciﬁcation of the Plains peoples, 655
The Plainsman (ﬁlm, Paramount), 535
Platonic elements, 354
Plée, Henri, 259
Poem of Aqhat (West Semetic), 63
Poetry, 333
and chivalry, 350
of hunters, 335
Karlsruhe collection, 82
Khayyam Neishaburi, 68
and ritual suicide, 421
Skallagrimsson, Egill, 421
with physical displays, 421
Police defensive tactics, U.S.
deﬁnition, 593–594
historical programs, 594–596
Japanese martial arts instructors, 595–596
modern programs, 596–597
police jujitsu, 593
seminars on, 597
training, 596
weapons, 596
Police jujitsu, 593
Berkeley Police Department, 594
manuals speciﬁcally for police, 595
New York Police Department, 594–595
Political conﬂict and aikido, 638–642
omote versus ura, 639–640
Ueshiba Morihei, 638
Index
I-31
Political uses of the martial arts, 619–624
Polly, Matthew, 412, 414
Polynesia, 270–277, 394
Portugal
capoeira as a tool against colonialism, 458
introduction of muskets into Japan, 579
stick ﬁghting, 226
See also Iberia
Postmodern martial arts, 436–437
Powell, Moses
and Nation of Islam, 628
and Sanuces Ryu, 628
Powers, extrahuman, 331–332
PPPSBBI. See Persatuan Persilatan Pendekar dan
Seni Budaya Banten Indonesia (PPPSBBI)
Practical Taijiquan (Taijiquan Shiyongfa) (Tung Hu-
ling), 100
A Practical Theory on the Art of Savate Fighting,
called Chausson, and French Dexterity in the
Use of the Canne, 219
Prana (vital breath), 361
Pranayama (breathing exercises)
importance of, 361
yoga, 360–361
Praying Mantis quanfa technique, 425
Presentational forms, 417–418
Celtic myths, 418
Greek mythology, 417
mythology, 417
Presley, Elvis, 51
and karate, 444
and Parker, Ed, 51, 544
Principles of Psychology (Spencer), 380
Prishtabhanga, 418
Professional wrestling
Andre the Giant, 495
and gimmicks, 493
Gorgeous George, 494, 609
the Great Togo and Mr. Moto, 494
hand-to-hand combat instructors, 493
Hulk Hogan (Terry Bollea), 494
Killer Kowalski, 495
made for television, 494
similarities to the Golden Age of Television,
495
sumo, 178–179
and vaudeville, Wild West shows, and circuses,
493
Protection Agencies (Biaoju/Biaohang), 96
Provincial Wrestling Commission (Comisión
Provincial de Lucha), 226
www.ebook3000.com

Pugil stick ﬁghting, 572, 581, 592
Pugilism. See Boxing
Pure Land Buddhism, 371, 372
Pure Martial Athletic Association (Jing Wu
Tiyuhui), 407
Pwáán, 269–270
Pyrrhic, 605
Qabus-nama (Book of Qabus) (Qabus ibn
Iskandar), 364
Qajar period, 367
Qi, 93
Qianlong, Emperor (Qing Dynasty, China), 343
Qi Jiguang, General, 94
and “short hitting” techniques, 100
Qin Zong, Emperor (Song Dynasty, China), 341
Qing dynasty, 407
itinerant teachers, 409
martial arts emphasized as combat, 101–102
Qing period, 343
use of the term quanbang, 96
Qing Unofﬁcial Categorized Extracts (Xu Ke), 106,
109
Quan Jing Quanfa Beiyao (Boxing Classic: Essentials
of Boxing), 91, 96
Quanbang, 96
Queensberry’s rules, 466
Quran, 398
protective formulas from, 401
Raiders of the Lost Ark (ﬁlm, Lucasﬁlm), 441
Rama, 359
Ramayana, 357, 359
Randori, 129
Ranger, Terence, 428
Rara, 45–46
Rath, Richard Cullen, 44
Ratu Kidul, 400
Reality-based defense
and digital technologies, 501
ﬁrst commercial courses, 497
and intuitive radar, 500
phases of training, 498–499
techniques, 496–497
Recitations (naqqali), 366–367
Record of History (Shi Ji), 92
Record of the Arm (Shoubi Lu) (Wu Shu), 96
Record of Wrestling, 117
Red Army
and CDKA (Central House of the Red Army),
504
hand-to-hand combat system, 511
I-32
Index
implementation of Oshchepkov’s system, 505
and Japanese jujutsu, 504
judo combat techniques, 509
Red Sun (ﬁlm, Corona Films), 532
Red Turban uprising, 341
Regimento de las Armas (Regiment of Arms)
(Duarte), 247
Regole della Scherma (Rules of the Sword)
(Marcelli), 252
Religion
African, overview of, 332–336
and aikido, 133
in ancient China, 92
and the Assassins of Syria, 648
assumptions regarding belief systems, 331–332
Candomblé, 623
Daishadokyo, 156
deﬁnition, 382
East Asia, 89
folk beliefs, 426–427
in Iran, 66
in Japan, 372, 382
and jujutsu, 126
and Maní, 44
and martial arts, 372
Omoto, 133, 135, 638, 640, 641
and silek, 326, 394–395, 397
and temple security forces, 285
traditional Hawaiian, 275
traditional Yoruba, 12
Zen, 389
Zoroastrianism, 66
Relocation centers, judo, 449
Renaissance, European, 249–255
Renaud, Jean-Joseph, 219
Representational genres, 418–421
Republican Period, China (around 1911), 407
Return of the Dragon (ﬁlm, Golden Harvest), 51
Rhee, Jhoon, 405
Richard Humphreys, the Boxer (painting,
Hoppner), 230
Richard I, King (the Lion-Heart [Coeur de Lion];
Anglo-Norman), 60, 349
Richmond, Bill, 230
Riesy (Eritrean style stick ﬁghting with head-
butting), 630
Riﬂe and Light Infantry Tactics (Hardee), 569
Risk Rule, 643–644
Rites of Zhou (Zhouli), 92
Rituals
accession bathing, 402
combat, 419

communal ceremony, 400
meals, 399
purpose of, in Java, 400
RKKA (Workers and Peasants Red Army),
Oshchepkov and, 503
Roda, 455, 456
Roman Empire, 346
Romance of Three Kingdoms (Sanguo Yanyi), 111,
112
Rome, boxing, 237
Rome, gladiatorial games
awards, 239
end of, 239–240
ﬁghts to death rare, 238
history, 238
origins, 238
rules, 239
schools, 238
training, 238
women, 238
Ronin (masterless wanderers), 527
Roosevelt, President Theodore (United States)
and amateur boxing, 466
and Kodokan judo, 446, 429
Rostam, 366, 368
Rostam al-Tavarikh (Asaf), 365
Roussinoff, André (André the Giant), 495
Royal Armouries Ms. I.33 (German manuscript),
244
Rush Hour, 542. See also Chan, Jackie; Martial
Law (television program, 1998–2000)
Russo-Japanese War (1904–1905)
bayonet assaults, 580
exposure of Japanese martial arts, 446
Japanese bayonet charges, 570
SAC Judo Society, 449
Sacred geometry
and the art of memory, 355–356
and Thibault, Gerard, 355–356
Safavid period, 367
Sakakibara Kenkichi, 600
Sakan culture, 58
Sakata, Harold, 449–450. See also Wrestling,
Japanese American wrestlers
Sakurakai
Cherry Blossom Society, 641
disbanded, 641
and Ueshiba Morihei’s Kobukan Dojo, 641
Saladin, Sultan (Ayyubid), 349
Sambo, 502–513
Combat Sambo, 502
Index
I-33
ﬁrst international competition, 512
founder of, 502
and the international arena, 512
and Judo Freestyle Wrestling, 508
Russia’s national sport, 513
Soviet ofﬁcial recognition, 510
Sport Sambo, 502
and the Tokyo Olympics, 512
Sambo Wrestling (Kharlampiev), 511–512
Samnites, 225
Samurai, 371, 377, 599
as portrayed in Kabuki theater, 607
Samurai ﬁlms, 527
San da, 102
and Mixed Martial Arts competitions, 104
San shou. See San da
Sánchez de Carranza, Jerónimo, 254
Sannyas, 360
Sannyasi, 360
austerity, 360
Sanseverino, Galeazzo di, 226
Sanuces Ryu, 628
Saracen Archery, 64
Sarry, Maurice, 220
Sassanids, 67, 364
Savate duels, 257
Savate/French Boxing Federation, 220
Saviolo, Vincentio, 254–255
Sayers, Thomas, 232
La Scherma di Francesco Alﬁeri (The Fencng of
Francesco Alﬁeri) (Alﬁeri), 252
La Scherma Illustrata (Fencing Illlustrated)
(Pallavicini), 252
Scholasticism, 352
The Schoole of the Noble and Worthy Science of
Defense (Swetnam), 255
Scola overo Teatro (School or Theater [of Arms])
(Giganti), 252
Scotland,
broadsword training method, 222
Celtic martial arts in, 221–223
dancing, 221
Highland games, 222
martial arts, 221–223
pipers, 221
Stewart, David, of Garth, 222
training, 222
Scottish Highland Games (Webster), 222
Scriptures, Hindu, 359
Scythians
and composite bows, 58
term indicates culture and confederacy, 55
www.ebook3000.com

Seagal, Steven, 541
Secrecy, and transmission of martial arts, 325
The Secret Manual of Chinese and Foreign Magic
Tricks, 410
Secret societies
and female membership, 649
and fraternal organizations, 647–662
Secrets of Shaolin Temple Boxing (anonymous), 112,
441. See also Shaolin Temple, myths about
Secrets of Shaolin Temple Boxing (Smith), 441
Segno della Spada (Sign of the Sword; illustration),
354
Self-defense
and martial arts, 439
passive forms in British etiquette manuals for
women, 633
Seljuk Turks, 348
Sempai, 661
Seutonius, 214
Seven Samurai (Koho), 538
Shah-nama (Book of Kings) (Ferdowsi), 66,
365–366
heroes of, 366
recitations (naqqali), 366–367
subject matter in, 366
Shakti, concept of, 357
Shamanism, 89
Shango’s club, 333
Shaolin boxing, 95. See also Wudang boxing
Shaolin Gunfa Chanzong (Cheng Zongyou), 95
Shaolin Monastery, 339, 340–342
documentary evidence, lack of, 90
Elucidation of the Original Shaolin Staff Method,
342
established in 495, 340
exaggerated association with martial arts, 98
as example of commodiﬁcation, 436
ﬁghting monks of, 340, 341
and Hong Kong martial arts movies, 441
and martial art schools, 410
and misperception about origin of martial arts, 90
monkey boxing, 341
Red Turban uprising, 341
reopening of, 436
role of, 344
staff ﬁghting, 342
Tanzong, 340
Thirteen Staff Fighting Monks, 340, 341
as tourist destination, 441
See also Shaolin monks, Shaolin Staff; Shaolin
Temple
I-34
Index
Shaolin Monastery Short Hitting Body Technique
Combined Boxing Manual, 107
Shaolin monks
Bian Tun, 341
Tanzong, 340
Shaolin Staff, 341
Cheng Zongyou, 342
See also Elucidation of the Original Shaolin Staff
Method (Cheng Zongyou); Sword Classic (Yu
Dayou)
Shaolin Temple, 414, 530
and Kung Fu, 541
and marketing authenticity, 547
martial arts tour stops, 409
myths about, 441
tour packages, 413
The Shaolin Temple (ﬁlm, Chung Yuen Film
Production Co.), 530
Shaw Brothers Studio, 530
Shi Dakai, 96
Shibuya, Robert “Kinji,” 449–450. See also
Wrestling, Japanese American wrestlers
Shiite Muslims, 367
Shinto, 383–384
Shintoism, 89
Shirai Toru Yoshinori, 376
Shogun (television program, NBC), 532, 541
Shogun, teacher to the, 598
The Shootist (ﬁlm, Paramont), 538
Shootists. See Gunﬁghters, Western
Shorinji Kempo, 172
Shotokan karate, 440
Shoubi Lu (Record of the Arm) (Wu Shu), 96
Shoubo, 93
Shu, 97
Shuaijiao, 103, 119
Siddha (perfection), 362
Silat
aesthetics, 328
close ties with Islam, 395
and dance, 421
esoteric powers, 427
etymology, 324–325
and family, 326
globalization of, 437
indigenous blade techniques in Philippines, 313
indigenous to Malay cultures, 394
and Islam, 327, 401
organizations, 329–330
origins, 324, 325
origins, legendary, 327–328

practitioners and Indonesian independence,
427
practitioners of, 325
re-branding systems in Southeast Asia, 314
and religion, 326
and ritual, 325–326, 396
and royal courts, 327
and schools, 326
and social structure, 326
styles, regional, 326
styles associated with Sudanese culture, 398
in Sulawesi (eastern Indonesia), 402–403
techniques, 329
techniques, ritual, 329
techniques, therapeutic, 329
transmission of, 325
and West Java, 398
Silek, 397, 421
Silk Road, 55, 59, 61, 62, 81–82
Silver, George, 254, 255
Sin Han-sung, 197
Singapore, cheap martial arts training manuals
widely available, 408
Sinhozinho, Mestre (Ferreira, Agenor Moreira),
38, 40
Sino-Japanese War (1894–1895), 97
Sivananda, Swami, 358
Skallagrimsson, Egill, 421
Skills Beyond Farming (Cheng Zongyou), 95
“Slam Bang Western Style Wrestling,” 493
Smith, Robert W., 439, 441, 450
popularized Taiwanese martial arts, 104
Secrets of Shaolin Temple Boxing, 441
Snake in the Eagle’s Shadow (Seasonal Film),
441
Social aspects of kata and waza, 657–662
Soke, 429
Sombo. See Sambo
Song period (China), 93–94, 109
Song Tok-ki, 196–197
Soto, 660, 661
South Africa, 19
and hand-to-hand combat in Anglo-Boer Wars,
570
South Asia, 281–297. See also individual nations
history of medieval period, 361
immigration to North America, 442–443
South Asia, martial arts
and Hindu religious texts, 281
history, 281–283
kuntao and, 312
Index
I-35
and nationalists, 286
and robbers, 285
and Sikh religion, 285
in society, 284–285
South Celebes, 401–402
South Korea
and mixed martial arts (MMA), 489
modern archery, 64
propagation of taekwondo, 414
Southeast Asia, 299–330, 357
effect of anti-communism, 314
See also individual nations
Soviet Freestyle Wrestling, 510
Soviet Union
ﬁrst judo classes for elementary school children,
507
and Sambo, 502
Sambo teams from, 512
war with Japan, 641
wartime exclusion of judo, 509
La Spada Maestra (The Master Sword) (di Mazo),
252
“Spaghetti westerns,” 536
Spain
allows women in the military without
restrictions, 643
and Society of Jesus, 648
See also Iberia
Sparta, 605
Spartacus, 238
Speakman, Jeff, 51
Spearmanship (sojutsu), schools of, 599
Spiridonov, Viktor
conﬂict with Oshchepkov, 506–507
and Sambo, 506
Sport karate, and Japanese high schools and
colleges, 405
Sport Sambo, 502, 512
Sporting clubs, Finnish-Canadian, 461
Sportsmanship, 384–385
Spring and Autumn Annals (Chun Qiu), 92–93
Spring and Autumn Annals of Wu and Yue, 105
Stage combat
Elizabethan tradition, 611–614
as a performing art, 613
and safety, 613
taught in drama schools, 614
theatrical illusion of violence, 611
State Central Institute of Physical Culture. See
GCOLIFK
The Steps of Yu, 376
www.ebook3000.com

Stick-ﬁghting
in ancient Egypt, 422
Barbados (stick dancing, stick-licking), 47–48
Canary Islands (Juego del Palo), 3–5
Caribbean, 43–48
Caribbean system called kalinda, 630
Cuban, 44
Filipino, 300–301, 421
French, 217–220
Haitian, 45–46
Iberia, 226
Irish, 223
Japanese, 147–151
kalinda, 630
and krav maga, 586
Palestine, 583
taught by Hagana Kapap, 584
Trinidadian, 46–47
Zulu, 19–24 (see also Zulu stick ﬁghting)
Zulu festivals, 337
Zulu war preparation, 336
Stick-ﬁghting, Filipino, 421
Stone Studio Illustrated News, 109
Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio, 109
Stray dogs, 528
Street performances, Taiwan, 615–618
and Chinese metaphysics, 616
and lion and dragon dances, 617
and local militias, 616
and martial temple parades, 615–616
and mega-puppets, 617
Sung Jiang battle arrays, 617
Striking art, moraingy, 15–19
Sudan, wrestling tournaments, 422
Suﬁ, 396
knowledge, 396
practices, 396
SuﬁIslam, 333
Suﬁsm, abilities, 396
Sui dynasty, 340. See also Shaolin Monastery,
ﬁghting monks of
Sulawesi (South Celebes), 401–402
and Silat, 402–403
Sumo
in circus and vaudeville acts, 446
in Japan, 175–181
Sun Lu Tang
ﬁrst commercial successful author of manuals, 408
martial arts teacher, 107
Sunda (Java), and Silat, 398
Supernatural powers
and human sacriﬁce, Tahiti, 272
I-36
Index
and Indonesian independence, 427
Suzuki, D. T., 389
Swahili, combative form of festive dancing, 419
Sweden, allows women in the military without
restrictions, 643
Swetnam, Joseph, 255
Switzerland
and capoeira, 456
reality-based defense, 496
Sword Classic (Yu Dayou), 90–91, 94, 106, 107
Sword ﬁghting
Iberian, 225
Japanese, 139–144
Scottish, 222–223
Swordsmanship
European, middle ages, later, 242–244
Iranian, 72–73
Italian, 246
Japanese, 144–146, 370, 556
Korean Kumdo, 187–190
longsword, 242–243
no-sword style, 380
Tengu, 424–425
Symbiosis between martial training, dance, and
performance, 605
Syria, and the Assassins, 648
Tabarestan, 366
Tachibana Kozaburo, 641–642
Tacitus, 215
Tadashi Yamashita, 51
Tae Bo, Blank, Billy, 436
Taekwondo
adoption of the name, 620
experienced by American servicemen, 438
franchise clubs, 405
hegemonic and ubiquitous, 440
international propagation of, 414
Jhoon Rhee system, 405
and national imperatives of Korea, 620–621
spectacular styles, 439
Taiwan, increased focus in, 102
See also Korea
Tahiti, 271–273
boxing, 273
wrestling, 272–273
Tahtib, 419
Tai chi chuan. See Taijiquan
Taijiquan, 107
and Central Martial Arts Institute, 97
compared to changquan and nanquan, 97
and Kuomintang government, 102

mixture of systems, 89
non-violent martial art, 445
popularity in Indonesia, 316
in Southeast Asia, 313
“Yang style,” 410
and yoga and Pilates, 440
Zhang Sanfeng, inventor of, 343
Taijiquan Shiyi (Explaining Taijiquan) (Yang
Chengfu), 100
Taijiquan Shiyongfa (Practical Taijiquan) (Tung
Hu-ling), 100
Taijiquan Theory (Wang Zongyue), 95
Taipings (Kingdom of Heavenly Peace), 96
Taiwan, 101–104, 394
cheap martial arts training manuals widely
available, 408
Chinese martial arts as national art, 619
kendo and Japanese colonialists, 602
street performances, 615
See also China
Taiwan, martial arts
background, 101–102
Japanese inﬂuence, 101, 102–103
Japanese Period, 103
judo, 103, 104
kendo, 103, 104
Kuomintang Period, 103–104
modern developments, 104
Qing Dynasty, 102–103
taekwondo, 104
Takuan Soho, 558
inﬂuential treatise of, 559–560
Talhoffer, Hans, 355
Talismanic magic, amulets, 355
Talismans
ancestors’ skulls as, Guam, 269
and animal sacriﬁces, Hawai‘i, 273–274
arnis, 301, 305–306
human sacriﬁce and, Tahiti, 272
and Maoris of New Zealand, 276
supernatural weapons, New Guinea, 267
Tang, 340
Tang Dynasty, 108
Tang Hao, 97
Tang Shunzhi, 106, 107
Tantric rituals, 374
Tantrism, teachings of, 361
Tanzania, combative form of festive dancing, 419
Tanzong, 340
Taoism (Daoism), 89, 339, 360
alchemical practices, 375–376
breathing techniques, 376
Index
I-37
concentrating the mind (i.e., breath), 378
deity, Tenshin, 376
Ge Hong, 342
ideas used by Bruce Lee, 483
and martial arts, 342, 343
Zhang Sanfeng, 343
Tatemae, 660, 662
Teacher’s Manual for Gymnastics and Fencing, 219
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (children’s television
series, 1984 onward), 445
and arsenal of cartoon crime-ﬁghters, 543
Tekken 3 (video game), 457
Television, the martial arts and
in animation, 542–543
authenticity versus accessibility, 546–547
in fantasy, 541–542
Fight Quest, 545–546
Fight Science: Mixed Martial Arts (NGC), 546
Fight Science: Special Ops (NGC), 546
frontier hero, 540
heroines, cult status, 544
Human Weapon, 545–546
kickboxing, 546
tournaments, 545
and westerns, 539–540
women in, 543–544
Tengu, talent for swordsmanship, 424
Tenshin, 376
deﬁned by Shirai, 376
Teruga Dei (Truce of God), 348
Thailand, 537
invulnerability and political conﬂict, 622
martial arts tourism, 412, 414
Muay Thai action ﬁlms, 533
nationalism and Muay Thai, 318
and women’s boxing, 322
Thailand, boxing. See Muay Thai
Thang-ta (sword-spear)
combat, unarmed, 296
disciplinary regulations, 297
origins, 294
popularity, 295
spear dance, 295
swordplay, 295–296
training, 296
war customs, 294
Thibault, Gérard, 355–356
Thirteen Broadsword Methods (Shisan Daofa)
(Wang Yuyou), 95
Thirteen Staff Fighting Monks, 340, 341
Thomas, Matt, 499
Thompson, Robert Farris, 44
www.ebook3000.com

Thorough Descriptions of the Knightly Art of Fencing
(Meyer), 253
Three Principles of the People (Sun Yat-sen), 112
Three-Part Stance, 107
Tibet, modern archery, 64
Timur, Emir (Tamerlane)(Timurid dynasty;
Mongol), 60
Title IX, Educational Amendments of 1972, 516,
521–522
Tiwi ceremonial spears, 422
Togo, 333
Tokugawa period (Japan), 369, 370, 377–378
distinct trends in the martial arts, 598
hierarchical social structure, 658
Japan governed by military autocracies, 639
martial arts treatises, 378
martial arts warrior treatises, 554–555
publishing of martial arts treatises, 559
and the samurai, 620
specialization of ryuha, 599
Tokyo Kendo Club, 601
Tokyo Police Academy, guidelines for cadets, 600
Tolo-Naa, Nganga
and James Cheatham, 628–629
and Nation of Islam, 629
Totem animals, crocodile, 335
Tourism, and martial arts, 414
Toxophilus (Ascham), 64
Tracy brothers, 52
Traditionalists, Yamaoka Tesshu, 379–380
Traditions, Austronesia, 395
Training manuals, do-it-yourself, 408
Trattato di Scientia d’Arme con un Dialogo di
Filosoﬁa (Treatise on the Science of Arms
with a Dialogue of Philosophy) (Agrippa),
250
Travels of Lao Can, 441. See also Shaolin Temple,
myths about
Travels of Lao-ts’an (Liu E), 342
Le Tre Giornate (Pagano), 246
Treatise and Theory of Royal Canne (Humé and
Renkin), 219
Treuga Dei (Truce of God), 348
“Triad,” 114
Trinidad, stick-ﬁghting
basics, 46–47
masquerade, 47
origins, 46–47
rules, 47
weapons, 47
Tong (“meeting hall”), 114
I-38
Index
True Narratives of the Meaning of Boxing (Sun
Lutang), 107
Tsuboi Gendo, 560
Tung Hu-ling, 100
Tung Moli, 100
Tung Ying-chieh, 100
Turkestan, 61–62
archers of, 59
Turkey, Republic of
establishment of, 86
Istanbul, 83, 84
modern archery, 64
modernization of, 84
and Suﬁpractices, 84
Turkic culture, 60
Turkish Archery and the Composite Bow, 64
Tutelary Deities, 372–373
“24 feats” (Y pediar Camp ar Hugainyn), 225
The Twilight Samurai (Eisei Gekijo), 529
2004 Olympics in Athens, women’s freestyle
wrestling and, 520–521
Tyson, Mike, 26
Uchi, 660, 661
Uemura Masahisa, and Christianity, 386–387
Ueshiba Morihei, 642, 660
and Black Dragon Society (Kokuryukai), 640
founder of aikido, 638
Kobukan Dojo, 638
and omote versus ura, 639
and Omoto religion, 640
UFC. See Ultimate Fighting Championship
(UFC)
Uganda, 333, 336
Ukraine, and mixed martial arts (MMA), 489
Ultimate ﬁghter, and martial arts practices, 439
The Ultimate Fighter, 489, 545
Ultimate Fighting, 479
Ultimate Fighting Champions, rise of, 545–546
Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC), 34–35,
445, 486–487
and Gracie family, 545
opposition to, 488
Ultimate Fighting Competitions, and martial arts
practices, 439
Unforgiven (ﬁlm, Malpaso), 536
United Kingdom, and Okinawan karate, 438. See
also England; England, boxing
United States
Army Rangers and Brazilian jiu-jitsu, 592
and Asian martial arts, 442–450

bayonet training, 568–572
boxing exhibitions, 466
FBI Academy and visiting jujitsu instructors, 595
franchise karate and taekwondo clubs, 405
gunﬁghters, 534
judo, 565–567
Kenpo karate in 49–53
and martial arts, 443
Marine Corps, martial arts programs, 592
military unarmed ﬁghting systems, 588
and Okinawan karate, 438
police defensive tactics training, 593–597
and post-Civil War American West, 534
restricted Finnish immigration to, 463
resumption of bayonet training, 571
self-defense training for coeds, 499
servicemen and martial arts, 438
war with Japan, 641
United States Department of Defense (DOD)
and Lioness programs, 644–645
military as major patron of judo, karate, and
taekwondo, 449
and Risk Rule, 643
United States Judo Association (USJA), 449
United States Judo Federation (USJF), 449
University martial arts clubs, examples of
Japanese fraternities and sororities, 661
Unleashed (Rogue Pictures), 441
Ura, 659
Urban II, Pope, 349
Urquidez, Benny “The Jet,” 51
USA Amateur Boxing Federation, 518
USA Boxing, 518
USA Judo, 449
The Useful Science of Defence (Godfrey), 229
USJA. See United States Judo Association
(USJA)
USSR. See Soviet Union
Vadi, Filippo, 354
Vajrayana scriptures, Tantric rituals, 374
Van Damme, Jean Claude, 541
Vandals and Visigoths, 225
Vargas, President Getúlio (Brazil), 40
and cultural assimilation, 34
Vayu, 359
Vegetius, 243
La Verdadera Destreza (The True Skill)
(Carranza), 254
Veterans of Foreign Wars, and sponsoring boxing
smokers, 649
Index
I-39
Vietnam (formerly Indochina), bamboo spear
training, 581
Vigny, Pierre, 219
The Virginian (book and ﬁlm), 537, 538
Visual arts, 422
Wa (peace and harmony), 657
Wagner, Jim
ﬁrst commercial courses in reality-based
defense, 497
and reality-based defense, 496
Walking stick dance, 419
The Walking Stick Method of Self Defence (Lang),
220, 454
Wanbao Quanshu (Complete Book of Ten
Thousand Treasures), 95
Wang Shu Jin, 104
Wang Yuyou, 95
Wang Zhengnan Muzhi Ming (Epitaph for Wang
Zhengnan) (Huang Zongxi), 90, 342
Wang Zhengyi, 96
Wang Zongyue, 95
Wanted (ﬁlm, Universal), 544
War medicine, 336
War tales (gunki mono), 555–556
War trophies, 82
Ward, Jem, 231
Warrior families, 371
Wat Tyler Rebellion, 351
Water Margin. See Outlaws of the Marsh
(Shuihuzhuan)
Way of the Dragon, demonstration of broken
rhythm, 484
WBAN. See Women Boxing Archive Network
(WBAN, http//:www.womenboxing.com/)
WCW. See World Championship Wrestling (WCW)
Weapons
Chinese, 115
of martial (warrior) deities, 333–334
supernaturally charged, 333–334
See also speciﬁc weapons
Weapon skills, 92–95
WEC. See World Extreme Cage Fighting (WEC)
Weichi Jingde, General, 93
Wenxian Tongkao, 96
West Africa, 333, 334
Leopard Societies, 649–650
ritual murder, 650
West Indies, mummies, 420
West Java, 398
practice of silat in, 326
www.ebook3000.com

Western gunﬁghter
compared to Asian martial artist, 538
knight errant image, 537
When the Last Sword Is Drawn (Sochiku), 529
White Lotus sect, 339
Wilhelm, George, 354
William, Duke of Cumberland, 229
Wing chun, 483
martial arts tour stops, 409
nucleus for Jun Fan Gung Fu, 480
style, 483
Women
Amazons, 213–214
and boxing in Thailand, 322
Carano, Gina, 546
in Chinese martial arts, 108–110
Empress Wu Zetian, 108
female kickboxing show, 545
ﬁrst female match on network television, 546
French boxing and, 261
Fu Hao, 108
gladiatrices, 214–216
Hua Mulan, 109
Maiden of Yue, 108
military service during Global War on
Terrorism, 644
and MMA, 490
Model Mugging, 499
Ottoman archery and, 82
Qing period, 109
Qing Unofﬁcial History Categorized Extracts, 109
Qiu Jin, 108
secret society membership, 649
self-defense training for, in college, 499
Song period, 109
Stone Studio Illustrated News, 109
Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio, 109
television’s female ﬁghters, 544
“On Watching a Sword Dance by Madam
Gongsun’s Disciple,” 108
Widow Qi Number Two, 109
Woman Ding Number Seven, 109
Woman Number Four, 109
Yongchun County Gazetteer, 109
Young, Kaitlin, 546
Women Boxing Archive Network (WBAN,
http://www.womenboxing.com/), 519
Women in combat, and the U.S. military,
2001–present, 643–645
Lioness Programs, 644
Marine Corps Martial Arts Program, 644
I-40
Index
mixed-gender training, 644
Risk Rule rescinded, 643–644
Women’s Armed Services Integration Act of
1984, 643
Women’s boxing
in British music halls, 515
Casillas-Tortorelli, Graciela, 516
exhibition at the 1904 Summer Olympics, 515
ﬁrst all-women’s professional boxing
championship, 516
ﬁrst amateur women’s division, 518
promotion of, 517
and Sex Discrimination Acts, 516
in Thailand, 322
Women’s freestyle wrestling, 473, 520–525
changing perspectives, 532
funding inadequate, 524
impact on male participation, 521
roadblock, 524
and Title IX, 521
tournaments, 523
and women’s liberation movement, 521
See also Adams v. Baker
Women’s Social and Political Union (WSPU),
634
Women’s wrestling, 494
Won Hop Loong Chuan system, 425
Wong Ark-Yuey, 449
World Championship Wrestling (WCW), 495
World Extreme Cage Fighting (WEC), 489
World War II, and people of Japanese ancestry in
North America, 449
World Wide Wrestling Federation (WWWF),
494, 545
World Wrestling Entertainment. See World Wide
Wrestling Federation (WWWF)
Wrestling
in ancient Egypt, 422
Breton, 224
Celtic, 226–227
ceremonial, 337
Chinese, 116–119
in contemporary settings, 337
Cornish, 224
crocodile, 335
European folk traditions, 247
European middle ages, later, 242
and Finnish-Canadians, 460–464
four basic stances of, 352
gidigbo, 11–14
Greco-Roman, 472

Greek, 234–235
Hawaiian, 275
“Hindoo,” in the United States, 447
Iberian, 226
Indian, 289–293
international freestyle, 472–473
Irish, 223
Japanese, 175–181
Japanese American wrestlers, 446, 447, 449
Korean, 190–195
like a gorilla, 335
Lucha Canaria (Canary Islands wrestling), 5–6
male initiations, 337
Maori, 277
mat surface standardized, 473
medieval tradition, 247–248
modern, 247–248
Mongolian, 78–80
Nuba tournaments, 422
Ottoman, 85–87
South Asian, 283–284
Soviet freestyle, 509
sumo, as popular U.S. spectator sport, 448
sumo, in Japan, 176–181
Tahitian, 272–273
Welsh, 225
Wrestling, backhold, 471–472
Wrestling, Finnish-Canadian
during the Depression, 464
and ideological divisions, 462
and World War I, 462
Wrestling, folk, 471, 472
Finland, 461
Wrestling, Greco-Roman, 471–474
described, 472–473
history of name, 472
Wrestling, Indian, 290–293
Wrestling, International and Greco-Roman
differences, 473
length, 473
mat, 473
rules, 473
Wrestling, international freestyle, 471–474
Wrestling, professional, 491–495
and gender roles, 609
Golden Age of, 494
during the Great Depression, 493
and importance of novelty, 610
as live muscular theater, 491
prematch preparation, 610
scandals in North America, 492
Index
I-41
“Slam Bang Western Style Wrestling,” 493
and stereotyping, 609
storyline of the Caped Crusader, 609
training, 610
Wrestling, women’s freestyle. See Freestyle
wrestling, women’s
Wright, Archibald, 26
WSPU. See Women’s Social and Political Union
(WSPU)
Wu Gongyi, 100
Wu Gongzao, 100
Wu Jianquan, 100
Wu Mei legend, 425
Wu Quanyou, 100
Wu Shu, 96
Wu Yuxiang, 95, 106, 107
Wu Zetian, Empress (Tang Dynasty, China),
108
Wubei Xinshu (New Book of Military
Preparedness), 90
Wubei Zhi (Encyclopedia of Military
Preparedness), 95
Wuda pian (martial arts ﬁghting ﬁlm), 528
Wudang boxing, 95. See also Shaolin boxing
Wudang Mountains, martial arts tour stops, 409
Wujing Zongyao, 94
Wushu, 92, 97
Wuxia movies, from mainland China, 530
Wuxia pian (martial arts chivalry ﬁlm), 528, 529
WWWF. See World Wide Wrestling Federation
(WWWF)
Xiaowu, Emperor (Northern Wei, China), 340
Xingyiquan
and Central Martial Arts Institute, 97
Kuomintang government, under, 102
Xiongnu (Huns), 58–59
Xu Dong, 95
Xu Ke, 107
xuanji (profound opportunity), 107
Yagyu Munenori, 558–559
The Yakuza (Warner Brothers), 532
Yamaga Soko, and justiﬁcation for hereditary
warrior class, 557
Yamaoka, no-sword style, 379–380
Yambao, Placido, 308–309
Yan Yongchun, 425
Yan Yuan, 95
Yang Chengfu, 100
“Yang style” taijiquan, 410
www.ebook3000.com

Yasen kanna (Evening Chat on a Boat) (Hakuin),
375
Yasumaru Yoshio, 377
Yellow Emperor (Huang-di), 376
Yemen, dance, 418
Yi, 97
Yi He Tuan (Chinese secret society), 622
Yihetuan, 96
Yin and Yang, 432
parallelism in the uchi/soto distinction, 660
Yin-Yang School, 342
Yinyang theory, 105–106
Yip Man, 100
YMCA. See Young Men’s Christian Association
(YMCA)
YMHA. See Young Men’s Hebrew Association
(YMHA)
Yoga, 360
akharas, 360
asanas, 361
chakra, 361
deﬁned, 360
ida, 361
method for achieving siddha, 362
nadi physiology, 361
pingla, 361
pranayama (breathing exercises), 360–361
sushumna, 361
Yoga Sutra (Patanjali), 361
Yongchun boxing, 109, 426
categorized as Southern Boxing, 100
Yongchun County Gazetteer, 109
Yongzheng era, 111
Yoruba people, traditions of, 335–336
Young, Kaitlin, 546
Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA),
organizing ﬁght cards for troops, 467
Young Men’s Hebrew Association (YMHA), and
amateur boxing, 467
Yu Dayou, General, 107, 341
Yu Kwon Sool, 184
I-42
Index
Yuan period, 343
Yue Fei Boxing, 103
Yuen Wo-ping (Yuan Heping), 532, 541. See also
Martial arts ﬁlms, and Hollywood
Yugoslavia, Sambo teams from, 512
Yung Chen City, martial arts tour stops, 409
Zafar-nama (Book of Victories) (Mostawﬁ), 66
Zbyszko, Stanley, 492
Zen, 389
Zen and Japanese Culture (Suzuki), 389
Zen and the Art of Street Fighting (Sabat), 414
Zen Buddhism, 338–339, 372–373
Japanese, deﬁned, 389
nature of, 340
romanticized notions of, 383
and Shaolin Monastery, 340
Zen in the Art of Archery (Herrigel), 156, 390, 413
Zen Nippon Kyudo Renmei (All Nippon Kyudo
Federation, or ANKF), 157
Zhang Sanfeng, 342, 343. See also Taijiquan
Zhonghua xin wushu, 96
Zhongyang Guoshu Guan (Central Martial Arts
Institute), 97, 343
Zhou, 92–93
Zhou Lianggong, 100
Zoroastrianism, 365, 366
Avesta (holy book), 67
Zulu people, 19, 336
Zulu stick ﬁghting
historical background, 19–20
as preparation for warfare, 336
rules and protocol, 23
social practices, 20–21
structure of, 22–23
today, 23–24
war magic, 21–22
weapons, 21
Zumbi, King (semi-legendary, Brazil)
as capoeira master, 622
role in African Brazilian martial arts, 426

About the Editors
THOMAS A. GREEN is associate professor in anthropology at Texas A&M University. His
books include Folklore: An Encyclopedia of Beliefs, Customs, Tales, Music, and Art (1997), Martial
Arts of the World: An Encyclopedia (2001), and Martial Arts in the Modern World (2003). He has
practiced martial arts since 1972.
JOSEPH R. SVINTH is an editor for the Electronic Journals of Martial Arts and Sciences
(http://ejmas.com). His books include Getting a Grip: Judo in the Nikkei Communities of the Paciﬁc
Northwest, 1900–1950 (2003) and Martial Arts in the Modern World (2003). He has practiced
martial arts since 1980.
www.ebook3000.com

