
AN lARA 


AN lARA 
A Review of Man in Time and Space 
« 
« 
« 
Harry Martinson 
Translated from the Swedish by 
Stephen Klass and Leif Sjoberg 
STORY 
LINE 
PRESS 
' 
1999 

Copyright© 1999 by Stephen Klass and Leif Sjoberg. 
First American Printing 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by an 
electronic or mechanical means including information storage and retrieval systems 
without permission in writing from the publisher, except by a reviewer. 
Published by Story Line Press, Inc. 
Three Oaks Farm 
PO Box 1240 
Ashland OR 97520-0055 
This publication was made possible thanks in part to the generous support of the 
Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, the Charles Schwab Corporation Foundation, 
the Nicholas Roerich Museum, The Oregon Arts Commission, The San Francisco 
Foundation and our individual contributors. 
Book design by Paul Joseph Pope 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Martinson, Harry, 1904-1978 
[Aniara. English] 
Aniara: a review of man in time and space I Harry Martinson; translated 
from the Swedish by Stephen Klass and Leif Sjoberg. 
p.cm 
ISBN 1-885266-63-4 
I. Sjoberg, Leif. 
II. Klass, Stephen. 
Ill. Title. 
PT9875.M35A666213 
1998 
839.71'72-dc21 
CIP 

This translation is dedicated to the memory of 
Inger Sjoberg nee Wallervjk 
b. January 23,1931 in Goteborg 
d. June 17, 1988 in New York City 


The translators would like to express their deep appreciation to the 
Marianne and Marcus Wallenberg Foundation for the generous grant 
' 
which has made publication of this book possible. 


CO N TE N TS 
« 
« 
« 
Introduction 
11 
Translators' Note 
27 
The Poems 
33 
Notes 
151 
Works Consulted 
157 


Introduction 
The poet Artur Lundkvist recalls Harry Martinson for"the open heart 
of his naivete, ... his undamaged trust in life, which later would show 
itself more clearly and give him his supremacy, his power to over­
come all resistance as if it were a game and self-,evident." Martinson's 
joviality, as Lundkvist implies, rose out of desperate beginnings. His 
father dead, his mother fled to America, he and his sisters became 
wards of the parish in south Sweden, farmed out for their labor to 
the lowest bidder. At sixteen, after a decade of such abasement, he 
sought liberation and dignity on the sea, but found little of either. 
Down with black-lung disease, a common affliction of stokers, he 
came ashore for good in 1927. 
Once cured of his illness, he could find no work, but begged on 
the streets of Gothenburg in an unreformed Sweden murmuring with 
pre-revolutionary have-nots and causes enough to energize them. 
From among these Young Socialists and anarchists Martinson took 
a wife in 1929, and over the next decade the two established their 
reputations: Moa Martinson, through her radical political engage­
ment and her novels; Harry, in poems and books of travel whose fresh 
language made the natural world of his harsh experience a place 
of genius and joy. The disparity in their works, however, would even­
tually defeat their partnership. They were deeply dissimilar. 
When in August 1934 the Martinsons attended the All-Russian 
Writers' Congress in Moscow, he balked at its ubiquitous motto from 
Lenin: "The writer is the engineer of man's soul." The engineer's 
concern for right procedure and standardization was for Martinson 
no unalloyed virtue. Martinson looked for a renewal of man's 
spiritual force not in a new-patterning and new-furnishing of 
human life, but in a primitivist, Lawrentian empowerment of the good 
promptings long repressed which unite men with the natural world. 
A man devoted to the wholesomeness of liberty could not stay 
married long to a woman devoted to the wholesomeness of a statist 
order; in 1940 there was a divorce, a private grim event in the midst 
of worldwide calamity. 
' 
11 

In the winter of 1939-40 war flared along the Russian-Finnish 
border. Martinson had set off as one of the service personnel for the 
Swedish volunteers in the campaign, but conditions proved too harsh 
for his uncertain health, and his winter months in Finland would be 
followed by years of illness and silence, a time for observing and 
absorbing the dark new "world of outsized playthings" (Martinson, 
Verklighet till dads [Reality unto Death]3o) that the war, greedy for 
goods raw and manufactured, had inaugurated with its "great 
ultramaterialistic Christmas Eve" (35). 
With his volume of poems, Passad [Trade Wind] (1945), and his 
novel, Vitgen till Klockrike [The Road to Klockrike] (1948; tr., The Road, 
1951), Martinson rose to all the major literary prizes reserved for 
Swedes, and in 1949 he was elected to the Swedish Academy. In 
autumn 1953 the first poems of Aniara appeared in his volume 
entitled Cikada [Cicada], forming a section called "The Song of Doris 
and Mirna:· which culminates in the nuclear destruction of the city 
of Dorisburg as recounted by"the Detonee:· the last voice from Earth 
to reach the space ship ''Aniara:' 
As Johan Wrede points out in his exhaustive Sangen om Aniara 
[The Song of Aniara] (Stockholm 1965), there was much in 1953 to 
foster the somber contemplation of catastrophe. On August 8 the 
Soviet Union announced that it had a hydrogen bomb "wo times 
worse than the 'ordinary' atom bomb," as the national daily Svenska 
Dagbladet thought to feature it; and Dagens Nyheter quotes the 
American physicist ]. Robert Oppenheimer as having recently said, 
"The atomic clock is striking more and more quickly. We [the US 
and Soviet Union] can be compared to two scorpions in a jar, each 
with the opportunity to kill the other, but only at the risk of its own 
life." Four days later the Soviet Union detonated its H-bomb. Outer 
space had also been much in the news that summer. On the last day 
of the International Congress of Astronautical Federations, held in 
Zurich in early August, the astrophysicist Wernher von Braun revealed 
American advances in propellants able to send rockets into orbit 
for the construction of a space station. Further, Wrede notes 
an August 1 article in Dagens Nylzeter reporting observations that 
1 2  
ANIARA 

showed the Andromeda galaxy to be twice as far and thus twice 
as large as previously thought: 1,5oo,ooo light years from the Milky 
Way (27). Later that month Martinson turned his own home tele­
scope to the unusually clear heavens, finding Andromeda "shining 
more intensely than he had ever seen it before. 
I 
He even went and woke up his wife [Ingrid, whom he 
had married in 1942] for her to share the experience 
with him. This forceful experience of outer space 
turned his imagination in that direction, so that 
soon afterwards he began having the illusion of being 
located on a space ship. At first this feeling was 
chaotic and full of anxiety, but gradually the visions 
began to clarify themselves inside him . . .. (22) 
Great aircraft were also prominent that summer. On August 7 
came the American government announcement that the first non­
stop jet flight across the Pacific Ocean had been made on July 29, 
1952, from Alaska to Japan. And overnight on August 13-14, 1953, the 
world's largest plane, the US Air Force six-engine xc-99, made its 
first trans-Atlantic flight. With gigantic airships already capable of 
staying aloft over great distances, it is easy to imagine space shuttles 
like the "Aniara;' even more so when close to home the ultramodern 
Swedish superliner " Kungsholm;' launched in October 1952, was 
being readied for service from Gothenburg in October 1953. Small 
wonder that the earlier and ill-fated superliner "Titanic;' Martinson 
has stated, had much to do with his conception of the "Aniara"; in 
fact, in a letter to Wrede of July 4, 1962, Martinson called the space 
ship "that Titanic of outer space which my fancy one time launched" 
(Wrede 44). Out of the fears and wonders of 1953 alone Martinson 
had rich inspiration for his "The Song of Doris and Mirna;' a song of 
nuclear disaster, huge ships bearing refugees onto "cosmic seas" 
(Aniara 55), and disaster in those seas. The sad images of half of 
a century converge here, to expand still more in the 74 additional 
poems that make up the complete Aniara of 19561 
INTRODUCTION 
13 

The work went on sale on October 13, 1956, and became a 
cultural "phenomenon" for the next five years and more. The review­
ers were universally impressed; radio and television interviews, 
readings and discussions brought the enthusiasm to an even broader 
public. If sales were slumping by the end of 1958, they were soon 
revived by the Swedish Royal Opera premiere, on May 31, 1959, of 
Karl-Birger Blomdahl's operatic version, which was taken to the 
Edinburgh Festival later in the year and played at Covent Garden as 
well. Other stagings of the opera, especially the one done in German 
at the Hamburg Staatsoper, and translations of Martinson's poem 
spread the reputation of the original. Yet Martinson's small, even sour 
way of speaking of it in 1962 suggests that he was unhappy that a 
work so grand was now a standard by which his future works would 
be measured. In an interview in a Helsinki newspaper in January 29, 
1963, he complains, only somewhat humorously, that "to have 
written Aniara is like having done a large rya rug. After that you 
can only sit down and do little mats, and people say: 
Why doesn't he get a rya done instead of these lousy old mat-ends?" 
(q. in Wrede 50). 
Martinson was not imagining things. His 1960 volume of 
poems, Vagnen [The Wagon], received mixed reviews; and, despite a 
success with Tuvor [Tussocks], published in January 1973, Martinson 
was prevented from following it up. Only a week after its appearance, 
he was hospitalized for a long-postponed operation. Medically it was 
a success, but he had needed all his strength to sustain it physically. 
Not even the 1974 Nobel Prize shared with an old friend, the novelist 
Eyvind Johnson, could re-energize him. He died on February 11, 1978. 
In Aniara, not ten years after the publication of Passad, the in­
ward ecstatic journey anticipated there has turned into the exodus 
of great multitudes of refugees in some far-distant century when 
radiation has rendered much of the Earth uninhabitable. These new 
voyagers are being taken to labor camps on Mars or Venus until the 
planet can be detoxified, and this by now is an old story. But they will 
never reach the camps. The "Aniara" will become a ghost ship, 
14 
A4IARA 

knocked off course by an asteroid, its steering mechanism irrepara­
bly damaged. Passengers and crew, trapped inside the antiseptic craft, 
drift ever farther from Earth, or Dorisvale, the "cosmic Zanzibar" 
(Poem 17), the one spice island in the universe; and even as they float 
away from it, it too explodes, in the final nuclear war. 
We learn of these events through a speakʎr who, in Poem 1, is 
merely one among the masses registering for a probable evacuation. 
We know nothing about him, except that he has been smitten by the 
loveliness of this world as embodied in the woman whom he calls 
Doris and who alone sheds the light of her blandness upon the uni­
versal murk. Then, too, Doris speaks intelligently (though in the bland 
formulas of her instruction sheet) when everyone else sits in tense 
silence until the departures are announced, not in words, but in mere 
blasts of sound, "the take-off siren of a rocket ship" (1). These 
vestiges of what was once to be loved in the world-its light and its 
language-win the speaker's rapture. So little does he expect from 
"the utter nonsense of this way of living" (1) that even these meager 
gifts are thrilling. 
Not until Poem 6 are we informed that the speaker is the man 
who tends the Mirna, a miraculous accessor and transmitter of 
information from all over the universe. More than a mechanic, the 
Mimarobe is its confidant as well; for the machine has become 
a being, also to be stricken after a time by the physical and moral 
cataclysm to which man has brought the world. The Mimarobe, as 
Martinson's speaker, is to some degree Martinson himself; and his 
technical skill, like Martinson's, is at the service of a mind great in its 
powers to conceive and connect and driven by a passionate commit­
ment to knowing and showing the things of this Earth. It is "in the 
name of Things" that Mirna wishes peace from the destruction of 
even the most perdurable of them:"She had beheld the granite's white 
hot weeping/ when stone and ore vaporized to mist./ She had been 
much troubled by those stones' travail" (28). If Mirna is a reflection 
of Martinson's concerns and apprehensions, the Mimarobe's func­
tion as impresario of such shows is analogous to the poet's powers of 
conjuring and communicating "things in th9usands which no 
INTRODUCTION 
15 

human eye/ could ever dream of seeing" ( 6). 
The Mirna who "tells no lies" (3) and her Mimarobe faithfully 
transmit the signals, "her cosmic catch" (6), from all the intra­
galactic seas while almost all the rest on board practice denial and 
worship the Mima for validating that denial by the vividness and 
constancy of her transmission. If life this real makes its way on board, 
then they have not really left its sphere. Even when at the end of Poem 
6 the emigrants "have begun to comprehend ... that the only world/ 
which we are given is this world in Mirna:' they can still draw on 
their powers of self-deception to pursue "the usages of Dorisvale" 
(7). Or they can misuse Mirna by letting her divert them from bitter 
memories of Earth to visions from temporarily more intriguing plan­
ets:"For frequently the world that Mima shows us/ blots out the world 
remembered and abandoned" (7). Mirna is perverted into a ship­
board movie studio, manufacturing exciting travelogues that permit 
the viewers to think of themselves as the stay-at-homes, like the 
audiences at travelogues back on Earth, and to deny that they them­
selves are the travellers. 
There are other recourses for that vast majority that needs to 
deny its severance from "Sun and Earth ... and Dorisvale" (2). 
Daisy Doody, the shipboard dance queen, insists that the ultra­
modern dance rage, the yurg, is exactly like the yurg they do back 
home in Dorisburg; and for her "everything called yurg's magnifi­
cent" as she wriggles through its steps and "slings at Death's void 
the slang of Dorisburg" (12). The Mimarobe himself falls in with the 
sexual excitement, the positive charge, of this hedonist and her 
faddist's devotion to the tiny wedge of reality she can negotiate. 
He cannot speak to her of his desolation, nor can he even speak to 
her of hers ahead when the Earth itself is blown to bits and Daisy, 
"squirming hotly when the dance is done,/ knows not that she her­
self some hours ago/ was widowed of the town of Dorisburg" (27). 
The Mimarobe seeks out her animal comtorts after fuming at still 
other forms of denial, such as the bland reassurances of High Com­
mand "newspeak" that, as calamities go, this one is not so bad- in 
fact, this calamity is a lucky thing:"We are favored people. We've not 
16 
ASIARA 

crashed/ on any star or stellar satellite./ Instead we have our trek ahead 
of us,/ a lifelong journey onward to an end/ which would have come 
in any case, and comes" (11). At Poem 13 he flees from a lecture by 
the chief astronomer, whose still more sophisticated denial takes the 
form of depriving the ship and its journey of any significance what­
ever, both because there is no way the mind can know the importance 
of anything-"knowledge is a blue na"ivete/ which with its measured 
quantity of insight/ imagined that the Mystery had structure"-and 
because the "Aniara" is rightly understood as "a little bubble in the 
glass of Godhead": 
In any glass 
that stands untouched for a sufficient time, 
gradually a bubble in the glass will move 
infinitely slowly to a different point 
in the glazen form, and in a thousand years 
the bubble makes a voyage in its glass. 
Similarly, in a boundless space 
a gulf the depth of light years throws its arch 
round bubble Aniara on her march. 
Objectivity like this annihilates its object, and the Mimarobe goes 
to "beg a tryst" with Daisy in her "womb of hair/ where death's cold 
certitude does not exist" (13). Sexuality is at least urgent; there is 
nothing urgent about a bubble moving at an undetectable speed. 
Inhuman and unskilled in human evasions, Mirna, "a telegrator 
without pride" (9), begs to be delivered (28) from works and visions 
tolerable only to a mind aloof from humanity, "cast-iron" ( 16) 
and proof against all shocks and appeals. Though free from 
sin, the divine Mirna dies her willed and exemplary death and, 
Martinson dares to suggest, will revive "in myriads of years:' reborn 
under a new sun (24). 
With this exemplar of humility gone, the spaceship "Aniara" 
moves deeper into its woes. It is left to the imperious mystery of 
"the Cosmic Way" ( 82). This Tao-like mystery which transcends such 
I 
INTRODUCTION 
17 

dichotomies as mind/matter, life/ death, is travestied in the' figure of 
the dictator Chefone, "the fierce lord of our craft" (30), who appears 
at the start of the new (1956) Aniara poems with an appeal to the rule 
oflaw which is simply a device for the better satisfaction of his mind­
less sadism, a transparent expression of his malignity. His power 
derives from his Hitlerian inculcation of fear into the Aniarans' 
consciousness, a fear that without him they would all fare terribly in 
the Hell he claims they are going to-as if with him they would fare 
any better in any better place. Chefone, enraged by the breakdown of 
Mirna, unjustly persecutes the Mimarobe and other technicians for 
their alleged malfeasance. On a technicality the accused are set free; 
but, as pleasant as this news is to them, it is merely another instance 
of the lost cogency of scientific argument: 
Protesting we were innocent, we sought 
to reason without learned reference 
and in the language most of them were taught 
propound the barest modicum of sense. 
But this same language, meant to clear up all, 
grew murky for us too, a rigmarole 
of words avoiding words and playing blind 
amid the clarity of cosmic soul. (31) 
As positive as this clarity of cosmic soul might sound, it is in fact 
clear as a mirror is clear, only reflecting accurately the puzzled face 
that looks into it. The clarity is the cloak of the Mystery. "The Tao 
that is displayed is not the Tao;' writes Kwang-Tse. Before that 
Mystery, science and reason break down; and that is why Chefone, 
that "bullet-headed breaker of mankind" (92), who represents a 
parody of that impenetrable fact, stages his Fete for the Cosmic 
Way, the twentieth-anniversary celebration for the lift-off of the 
"Aniara" (82). The fiasco of this festival rite, however, foreshadows 
the breakdown of Chefone's rule: 
18 
ANIARA 

And many thousands were weeping 
and several hundreds said: 
This truly is Fate's way. 
Goldonder Aniara 
has carried on its journey 
for twenty years today. 
And many stood unspeaking. 
But suddenly someone said 
a light-year is a grave. 
' 
None of Chefone's concoctions bears up under scrutiny. His 
"flying plantations" (54), the pleasure grounds reserved for him and 
his cohorts, fabricates a land of faerie complete with ballad-heroine 
and ballad-dragon; and there, for a moment, the overwined 
Mimarobe is taken in by the allurements of this "spring everlasting." 
But the "beautiful wight" who has attractively composed herself 
beside "a tussock of grass hyssop-blue" turns out to be one of the 
annihilated citizens ofXinombra, which had gone up in obliterating 
atomic light, and she is among the screamers after vengeance on the 
likes of the poor Mimarobe, complicit as he is in the worldly results 
of advanced science. Eventually, Chefone himself breaks down, that 
hidebound hoodlum, into a kindly being who, before pining away 
and dying, "helped the sick and tried to warm the freezing" (93). 
Thus, even within the "thrasonical" (92) Chefone lies the reality of 
a persistent grace, working mysteriously and "exceeding fine" toward 
the looming of a new creation. 
The clearest presence of that persistent grace in the poem is not 
on board the ship. In the earlier section described as "hardly pretty,/ 
pale little Nobby, radiation-mangled" (15) and thus a sufferer like 
Doris and Mirna from the malignant energies overcoming the Earth, 
in the continuation, in the long recitation entitled '>The Space-hand's 
Tale" ( 40), Nob by or Nobia walks as both worshipper and guarantor 
INTRODUCTION 
19 

of a natural kindness scarcely recognizable in the transmogrified 
Nature of the "Martian spring." Its near-metallic willow-leaves 
"are from the spirit's wood;' writes Nobby, sending them back 
as keepsakes along with little notes to the space-hand. They are 
transformed by her grace into instances of beauty, just as the 
"Cockerel, gaunt and spare,/ became transformed into a bright 
Blue Bird." Martinson seems to be thinking here of the Blue Bird 
from Maurice Maeterlinck's 1908 symbolist drama of that name, a 
bird whose possession means a triumph over the refractoriness of 
the things of this world, like Nobia's feats of sympathetic loving kind­
ness in "this terrain of starkest, plainest forms." 
As Nobia transfigures the hard black willow leaves into leaves 
"from the spirit's wood;' so the blind Poetess performs "the visionary's 
play on weal and woe" in "Songs of Rind she made up in the dark" 
(48). Like Nobia too, the poetess also spent time on the Martian 
tundra camps. In her case, she returned to her desolated homeland 
of Rind only to find that it had become tundra too, "All plant life 
injured." She had gone back on a tour to raise money for a project 
called Save the Tundra, although the popular cynicism calls it "what 
none could do, but what all men desire." Now she sings to the 
captives on board the "Aniara;' given over to Chefone's senseless 
pomps, the pastimes of empty sexuality, Sandon the comic's vaude­
ville turns of vulgar self-mockery or songs of meretricious sentiment 
like "Little Bird out in the Rosewoods Yonder"-anything that 
mimics human power, like the song of make-believe invulnerability, 
'"The Cast-Iron Song' that every Gonder/ sings so often here in our 
goldonder" (49). In her special set at the end of Poem 49, however, 
she sings different songs: the first, against the fierce Chefone and his 
reign of sacrifice and sadism; the second, an aria celebrating a return 
to Earth, that most desired event for those on board, but here in the 
sense of burial and re-entry into the soil itself from which Adam was 
made in the image of a God who works in soil: 
With the limbs of their bodies ravaged into soil 
daily they celebrate their god gone blind 
20 
ANIARA 

who knows all things and has no need to sec 
those shapes of life whose raiment he assigned. 
The final song of the Poetess forecasts the return of"the soul of life;' 
as"unself-aware" as the currents of Nirvana which will range through 
the "Aniara" at the very end of the sequence. To rhese eschatological 
comforts, however, Martinson allows the Poetess's audience a last 
dismissive word: 
What lovely words she summoned to her aid. 
What lovely words she came upon in Rind. 
But merely words they are, and merely wind. 
These people, like the cosmos they inhabit, will not yield to grace. 
If the corrective to such waywardness can be found, it will be 
found in the work of Isagel, "our female pilot" (5), a kind of intellec­
tual emanation of Doris. But, unlike the Doris of Poem 1, Isagel is a 
deeply distraught victim of interplanetary disaster. Even before 
Mirna's breakdown, the general trouble was"seen most clearly in our 
female pilot", who would gladly have committed suicide there and 
then were it not for the Mirna's "fuel/ for spiritual light" in all that 
oceanic blackness the ship of man had blundered into. Isagel's 
homage to the Mirna leads to her "luck" being granted: an infant is 
born out of her own mind: 
She shrieked with gladness, hugging to her heart 
the vigorously kicking inspiration 
which, born of her, was joyously conceived 
in deep love for the Law of Aleph Numbers. (39) 
The child, however, while healthy in itself, stands for (or is) a truth 
that has no way to be implemented. It exists on board light-years away 
from the tangible Earth, where alone the truth has vehicles for its 
expressiOn: 
I 
INTRODUCTION 
21 

Here her breakthrough never could become 
in any manner fruitful, just a theorem 
which Isagel superbly formulated 
but which was doomed to join us going out 
ever farther to the Lyre and then to vanish. 
Isagel never recovers from this frustration of her genius by the brute 
circumstances of a post-terrestrial world. She cannot put her 
in-spiration to any use; her "baby" has been born in vain. 
As Isagel loses her faith in her scientific activity, she gains in 
warmth, becoming indeed a sister to that Libidel whose rites she had 
once attended. If, in the "Secret Dirge" for Libidel (73), the singer (with 
a typically Aniaran, i.e. human, belatedness about his solicitude) 
suggests to the dear"star"that"in Alpha Centauri's puzzle/ we'll shed 
hot tears and nuzzle;' in Poem 81 the Mimarobe and Isagel mirror 
that scene: 
Clasping my heroine to me, 
I could taste her warm tears as they poured. 
And she was the warmth of the living 
that still kept me company on board. 
For a while the Mimarobe can stanch her tears by invoking dura­
bit ity and resistance, "asbestos and silicon;' and the even distribution 
of stress which is the subject and goal of statics, "statical science:' and 
the hard knowledge that sins must be atoned for. But Isagel's mind, 
steeled even to a Chefone-like plan for mass extermination by head­
ing straight into "an unknown sun" (87), does break down (88), 
wounded by the brute universe: 
into my friend's soul a shard had slid, 
a fragment from all that we had met in space 
when we collided with the Leonid. 
She has grown self-accusatory, fceling"like Death." Longing for a new 
22 A:-.:IARA 

dispensation from the heart of things, "where the Aleph Numbers all 
are stored;' Isagel vanishes into a primordial Mind which, anterior to 
laws, is free to establish new ones bearing the unflattering name of 
Chance, "the world's new overlord." 
In her new phantasmal existence, awaiting her rebirth into form, 
she pays one final visit to the Mimarobe in a dreʏm, "illumining/ my 
heart in unimaginable beams" (90). For the Mimarobe it is an 
epiphany. Isagel stands revealed as "the mima's inmost self, . . .  Mirna's 
soul". The two are identical in that both combine within themselves 
the subtleties of pure mathematics and fastidious moral sensitivity 
of which latter they eventually"die." They are both, as Anna Torngren 
has noted, searchers. In Poems, Isagel's eyes are lit by"a hunger-fire 
searching after fuel/ for spiritual light"; in Poem 6 Mirna "searches, 
searches, searches" for the signs of life that can alleviate the distress 
of the disoriented passengers. The two of them use their powers of 
intellection, derived from material processes whether electrical or 
biochemical, to reestablish connection with the material world, with 
Things, for in the substance of the world is the active kindness that 
binds us to it. Matter is suffused with spirit; it is the home of worth. 
When the Things of the world go elsewhere, Mirna and Isagel will go 
to that primordial elsewhere until a new age can be inaugurated. 
The twentieth century was to have been such a new age, and yet 
its most marvelous advances in knowledge have in fact deprived 
"things" of their ultimate reality. In an ever more advanced techno­
logical world things "are simply vanishing;' and "only the poet still 
remains true to them" ( Gadamer, Philosophical Hermeneutics 71). The 
utter reliability of cosmic mechanics which classical or Newtonian 
physics had triumphantly demonstrated was undermined by the work 
of Planck, Heisenberg and others. Einstein's formulation in 1905 of 
the equivalency of matter and energy shattered the old idea of sturdy 
material substances. As a case in point, in Tord Hall's words: 
de Broglie's hypothesis on matter-waves further 
emphasize the fundamentally dreamlike character of 
the material world. A lump of lead is a weave of 
I 
INTRODUCTION 
23 

the same web as dreams. ( Vetenskap och Poesi [Science and 
Poetry] 84) 
A man like Martinson, who had expressed antipathy toward the cult 
of the machine and the Marxist notion of a poet as engineer of the 
soul, a facilitator of the mind's paces in becoming a mere tool 
for state and social good, leapt to the freedom which the foremost 
physicists had extended: 
For a poet this development in natural science has 
a negative and a positive side. The negative is 
of course the completely abstract character of 
the [new] world image, for the poet wishes to make 
things visible; he seeks images or visions. The 
positive element is the opportunity for the artist 
to free-shape things as he wishes, which is a 
consequence of the physicists' having renounced 
giving clear directives on how the world image is 
supposed to look. (84-85) 
The Taoist world view exhilarated Martinson the most. Indeed, 
Gunnar Tidestr6m says the number of articles Martinson wrote 
in the 194o's expressing his sympathy with it amounted to a kind of 
missionary work on its behalf. Taoism is, of course, the source of the 
concepts ofYin and Yang; however these opposites are specified: Yin 
as the dark, cold, female principle, and Yang as the principle of light, 
heat, masculinity; or Yin as the activity of earth and Yang as the 
activity of the stars and planets. The Tao itself, as the unity that 
requires and energizes these two opposites, is translatable as the Way, 
the Law. On the"Aniara:· the Earth, receding farther and farther into 
the confused lights of the galaxy (19), becomes what it had always 
been, a part of those heavens which have been called "God's spirit." 
The Earth-Yin and the Star-Yang are one and the same in this 
important instance of the fading-out of Doris which is also a fading­
in. So too arc they in Isagcl, both the subtle thinker and "the faithful 
24 ANIARA 

servant on the farm of numbers" (39). It is through this conflation of 
opposites that Isagel, introduced as the reserved and rational thinker, 
is also the alter ego of a pungent, humming, physically zealous Doris. 
This Doris, for Martinson still the Lawrentian primitivist, cannot be 
too closely attended to, too fully loved. Yet mankind has turned 
its back upon her, literally in the fictional flight of the "Aniara" and 
morally in the destruction being wrought whether by feats of war or 
feats of progress. 
The moral error of turning one's back on the Earth Paul Tillich 
has identified as the spiritual crisis of mid-century man-one which 
he sees concretized in projects for space exploration: 
One of the results of the flight into space 
and the possibility of looking down at the earth 
is a kind of estrangement between man and earth, 
and objectification of the earth for man, the 
depriving "her" of her "motherly" character, her 
power of giving birth, of nourishing, of embracing, 
of keeping for herself, of calling back to herself. 
She becomes a large, material body to be looked 
at and considered as totally calculable. ("Effects 
of Space Exploration" in The Future of Religions 45) 
Tillich foresees, as does Martinson, that the behavioral result of this 
loss of the Earth and the things of the Earth in a world befuddled by 
the abstract beauties of a brilliant physics will be the "indifference, 
cynicism, and despair" that blights the sad companions on 
Martinson's ship of death. 
Stephen Klass 
Professor of English 
Adelphi University 
Garden City, New York 
' 
INTRODUCTION 
25 


Translators' Note 
The contemporary reader may find it surprising that Harry Martin­
son, in the mid-1950's, should have written so many of the Aniara 
poems in regular meters and rhymed stanzaic forms. The choice was 
untypical for him, but at the same time it is indie'ative of his artistic 
integrity; for, in reverting to traditional poetic devices, 
he has made it difficult for translators to bring his work the 
recognition and admiration of a wider than Scandinavian reader­
ship. He made a principled decision, based upon the grandeur and 
the urgency of his theme, and in as many instances as honesty and 
ingenuity allowed we have felt obliged to honor it. 
Aniara is a book of prophecy, a panoramic view of mankind's 
possible doom; and if Martinson, in his guise as speaker and highly 
vocal lover of the victim planet Earth is to save the beloved, he has to 
speak in words and forms most people can take readily and seriously. 
Most people are most moved by the strong, recurrent stride of blank 
verse or by stanzaic forms with regular line-lengths and rhymes to 
attract the mind and focus it on thought that moves in deliberate 
stages, from line to line and from rhyme to rhyme. The reason that 
these poetic devices exist is to command attention; the theme of 
Aniara should command the most sincere and concerned attention 
from the greatest number of people. 
If traditional poetic devices offer reassurance to the broadest 
possible readership that something grave and also intriguing is 
being said, it needs to be reassured as well of a sincerity behind their 
use. They need to be understood as expressive of an urgency coming 
over a mind or minds unused to these rhetorical resources but 
embracing them as ways of adding point to ideas. For the reader to 
have such an understanding, Martinson must first establish the basic 
colloquial style from which he can then depart. What seems 
occasionally to be flatly journalistic in the English and Swedish is in 
fact a deliberate layer of the minimal language common to anxious 
and demoralized people. Thus, the chief speaker of the poems is not 
a philosopher or scientist but a Mimarobe, a mecl;anic in charge of 
27 

the Mirna's circuitry, who speaks initially in Poem 1 through 
unrhymed lines and, for someone who will soon be uttering some 
grand ideas in formal verse, remarkably prosaic phrases. Even the 
venerated Doris, Martinson's personification of Earth, is first seen 
mundanely making out cards and acting like any dead-pan govern­
mental functionary (12ff). The flat repetitious introductions to her 
remarks-"she says . . .. She says .... " -fix the low tonality of broken 
man. Rhetorically unprepossessing characters come and go in the 
pages of A11iara: the Space-hand with the lumpish opening to his Tale, 
"The transfer out to Tundra Three took up nine years/ Evacuation 
Gond took up ten years"; the blind poetess from Rind whose simple 
sentences at the start, "I started feeling cold./ It was in fall;' do not 
presage the "lovely words she summoned to her aid" by the time her 
lengthy poem ends. And diction can go very low indeed in Daisy 
Doody's slang from Dorisburg, in Libidella's song before her mirror, 
and in the Secret Threnody for her that parodies "Bicycle Built for 
Two" with a lubricious version of a love-death: "0 nuda you/ Pitch 
nudie woo/ In a moonwood of lutes for two:' We have been faithful 
to Martinson's deliberate inelegances, for they make more prominent 
and beautiful his eloquence when it lavishly comes. 
Equally daring in its challenge to critics and translators alike is 
Martinson's invention of a forbidding space terminology, so blandly 
knowing about celestial mysteries, so ugly in its words as to call in 
question the depth of its knowing ness. Wherever we could, we have 
left these terms unchanged. In most cases they are based on Latin 
and Greek roots familiar to English-speaking readers, and in these 
cases we have simply anglicized the "Swedish" originals­
"transpodes:' "transtomizers:· etc.-or left them untouched when 
they seemed to be deliberately whimsical and obfuscatory in the 
"Jabberwocky" style-"the indifferent tacis of the third webe;' for 
example, a pseudoscientific phrase as dark in its way as Daisy Doody's 
slangy confession that she is "wathed in taris:' Both levels of discourse 
elevate language above what it refers to, calling attention to their own 
syllables rather than clarifying what they purport to speak of; there­
fore they should be left as is, whatever blotches of static they produce 
28 
ANIAI{A 

in the text. Martinson needs them there as recurring splashes of noise 
to clash with and validate the thoughtful, authentic language which 
surrounds and, it is to be hoped, will someday supersede them. 
Other sorts of Martinsonian word-play require more trans­
lational risks, and we have attempted them with the "letting-go" 
that Walter Benjamin considers imperative: "tl'le language of a 
translation can-in fact, must-let itself go, so that it gives voice to 
the intention [the intended effect] of the original not as repro­
duction but as harmony, as a supplement to the language in which it 
[the original] expresses itself, as its [the translation's] own kind of 
intention" ("The Task of the Translator", in Hannah Arendt, ed., 
Illuminations, tr. Harry Zohn 79). Thus, when in Poem 29 Martinson 
has the last communicant from Earth identify himself as Den 
Sonderspriingde, literally "he who has been blown apart;' the black 
humor of this physical impossibility, of a man in bits "stammering 
and detonated," needs to be accounted for in the English. We 
thus came up with "the Detonee;' with its legal suffix implying 
sardonically the inclusion of so grotesque a status among the pre­
dictable features of a civilized society. The word renders the literal 
meaning while drawing on that current of pleasantry in Aniara that 
not only keeps its tale from being overbearing, but also provides 
reason to hope that the despair is premature. We have been 
especially desirous of retaining as much of Martinson's drollery as 
we could, particularly as he himself has so apportioned it that the 
poem's serious intent does not topple from the force of his essential 
good humor. The retention of jokes, however, does mean that some 
liberty must be taken with literal meaning. Thus, in Poem 59, the jingle 
of angersanger, songs of remorse which the speaker thinks little of, 
has been rendered as "recanting-chanting" in order to preserve the 
speaker's tone. Chefone's flowery taunt in Poem 56, hur hors sdngen 
av gok och trast i dr fran Dorisdalen, "What do the song of thrush and 
cuckoo sound like from Dorisdale this year? ;• is so awkward in literal 
translation that we have substituted the sarcastic "What do the bird­
ies say?" As a final example, we freely admit that the rhyme of 
"widow" /"kiddo" in Poem 73 does not exist in the ,Swedish, but the 
TRANSLATORS' NOTE 
29 

boozy nostalgic cajolery of this parody music-hall song seems to us 
to permit this stretch, particularly as the general meaning of the Swed­
ish lines is preserved. 
As full of sardonic whimsy as the technical and slang terms are, 
our chief duty was of course translating that strong Martinsonian 
voice, thoughtful and grand in its words, monumental in its gravity 
and import: 
And out toward the luminous Lyre 
drove the ship with its hull full of scars 
as mementos of those scalding meteors 
we had met in the suite of the stars. (Poem 81) 
This round confident tone comes to predominate as the sequence 
progresses, as, paradoxically, cause for confidence all but vanishes. 
The style becomes a control upon the content, and thus we have felt 
compelled to reproduce, wherever we could, the discipline of form 
and rhyme which Martinson employed to lower the volume, as it were, 
of the powerful message he was delivering. We are aware that for many 
this might make the poetry seem outdated (though not so deliber­
ately antiquated as Martinson's Poem 83, "The Song of Gond"); for 
others, however, it might help to do in English what Martinson did 
in Swedish-to draw these images and thoughts into a traditional 
form which can steady them, through its own equilibrium, into 
sources of comfort and strength. It is the Lyre, after all, for which the 
"Aniara" is headed, and it is Martinson's "lyre" that the tale of the ship 
has reached, the lyre of a poet whose devices can still bring pattern 
and intellectual pleasure in a still unfathomed world. 
This present version is a rev ision of the translation of Aniara 
published in Sweden (Vekerum forlag: Sodra Sandby, 1991) under 
the auspices of the Harry Martinson Society and its former and curent 
presidents, Dr. lngvar Holm, Lund University, and Mrs. Ingegerd 
Bodner Granberg. We are grateful to the late Mrs. Ingrid Martinson 
30 
ANI AI{ A 

and to Bonniers, Stockholm, for the rights to translate the work; to 
the estate of Mrs. Ingrid Martinson c/o Harriet Martinson, Jarna; to 
Eva Martinson, Alta, Sweden; to Sven-Arne Bergmann, Fil. Dr., 
London and Goteberg, for his many authoritative and constructive 
comments; to the late Tord Hall, Uppsala, for checking the accuracy 
of the scientific-technical wording of our translation; to Carl-Otto 
von Sydow, Curator of the Manuscript Division of the University Li­
brary, Uppsala; the librarians of the Rare Books and Manuscripts 
Division of the University Library, Goteborg, who located the cor­
rected third version of the page proofs to Aniara, important since no 
manuscript of Aniara has been found in spite of extensive efforts. We 
should also like to thank Lena Daun and the Swedish Institute, as 
well as Goran and Elisabet Backstrand, for their kind and constant 
support,and the President, Provost and Board of Trustees of Adelphi 
University for the sabbatical leave during which Professor Klass could 
perform his share in the work of research and translation . 
We wish also to express our great respect for Mrs. Elspeth Harley 
Schubert's version of Aniara (1963), undertaken with Hugh 
MacDiarmid, which for nearly thirty years offered those who 
could not read Swedish their only access to Martinson's extra­
ordinary poems. 
Stephen Klass 
Professor of English 
Adelphi University 
Garden City, New York 
Leif Sjoberg 
Professor of Scandinavian Studies 
the State University of New York 
at Stony Brook, New York 
I 
TRANSLATORS' NOTE 
31 


1 
My first meeting with my Doris beams 
with light to make the light itself more fair. 
But let me simply say about my first 
and just as simple meeting with my Doris 
that now it forms a picture all can see 
every day before them in all the halls 
sluicing refugees to lift-off zones 
for urgent excursions to the tundrasphere 
these present years, when Earth, become unclean 
with toxic radiation, is accorded 
a time of calm, repose and quarantine. 
She fills in cards, her five small nails a-glint 
like dim lamps through the concourse twilight. 
She says: Sign your name on this line here, 
where the light is pouring down from my blond hair. 
She says: You're asked to keep this card at hand, 
and should some danger of the kind that stand 
listed here on page two hundred eight 
threaten havoc to our time and state, 
then you come here and in the space assigned 
put down exactly what you have in mind. 
The part of Mars where you'd prefer to go, 
the tundra east or west, is checked off here. 
One jar of uncontaminated soil 
is owed by everyone, as stated there. 
At least three cubic feet, as sealed by me, 
will be recorded for each traveler's share. 
33 

She looks at me with the disdain that beauty 
so easily conceives when looking round 
at folk on twisted paragraphic crutches 
scrambling up and down the steps at lift-off ground. 
Off through the fire-exit, numbers more and more 
she watches disappear, to new worlds bound. 
The monumental foolishness of living 
is thus made obvious to one and all 
who'd spent years hunting for one crevice giving 
access for a gleam of hope to fall 
into that hall where processed emigrants 
start up each time they hear 
a rocket-siren squall. 
2 
Goldonder Aniara shuts, the siren gives the wail 
for field-egression by the known routine 
and then the gyrospinner sets in towing 
the goldonder upward to the zenith light, 
where magnetrinos blocking field-intensity 
soon signal level-zero and field-release occurs. 
And like a giant pupa without weight, 
vibrationless, Aniara gyrates clear 
and free of interference out from Earth. 
A purely routine start, no misadventures, 
a normal gyromatic field-release. 
Who could imagine that this very flight 
was doomed to be a space-flight like to none, 
which was to sever us from Sun and Earth, 
from Mars and Venus and from Dorisvale. 
34 

3 
A swerve to clear the Hondo asteroid 
(herewith proclaimed discovered) took us off our course. 
We came too wide of Mars, slipped from its orbit 
and, to avoid the field of Jupiter, 
1 
we settled on the curve of I.C.E.-twelve 
within the Magdalena Field's external ring; 
but, meeting with great swarms of leonids, 
we headed farther off to Y ko-nine. 
In the Field of Sari-sixteen we gave up attempts 
to turn around. 
As we held our curve, a ring of rocks 
echographically gave back a torus-image 
whose empty center we sought eagerly. 
We found it too, but at such dizzying angles 
that the passage to it led to breakdown 
of the Saba Unit, which was hit hard by space-stones 
and great swarms of space-pebbles. 
When the ring had moved off and space had cleared, 
turning back was possible no longer. 
We lay with nose-cone pointed at the Lyre 
nor could any change in course be thought of. 
We lay in dead space, but to our good fortune 
the gravitation-works were still in service, 
and heating elements as well as lighting 
were not disabled. 
Of other apparatus some was damaged 
and other parts less damaged could be mended. 
Our ill-fate now is irretrievable. 
But the mima will hold (we hope) until the end. 
/ 
35 

4 
That was how the solar system closed 
its vaulted gateway of the purest crystal 
and severed spaceship Aniara's company 
from all the bonds and pledges of the sun. 
Thus given over to the shock-stiff void 
we spread the call-sign Aniara wide 
in glass-clear boundlessness, but picked up nothing. 
Though space-vibrations faithfully bore round 
our proud Aniara's last communique 
on widening rings, in spheres and cupolas 
it moved through empty spaces, thrown away. 
In anguish sent by us in Aniara 
our call-sign faded till it failed: Aniara. 
5 
The pilots are more nonchalant than we 
and fatalists of that most recent stamp 
which only vacant spaces could have formed 
through seeming-changeless stars' hypnotic force 
on human souls agog for mysteries. 
And death fits altogether naturally 
into their scheme, a constant crystal-clear. 
But still one sees that after five years now 
they too look down the pinnacle of fear. 

At some unguarded moment, close-regarded 
by me who read the features of their faces, 
grief can shimmer like a phosphorescence 
from their observer-eyes. 
It's seen most clearly in our female pilot. 
She often sits and stares into the mima 
and afterward her lovely eyes are altered. 
They gather a mysterious sheen 
of nebulosity, the iris of the eye 
is filled with mournful fires, 
a hunger-fire searching after fuel 
for spiritual light, lest that light fail. 
A year or so ago she once remarked 
that, personally, she would be quite willing 
for us to polish off death's bitter pill, 
make that our farewell dinner and be gone. 
And many must have thought like her-but the passengers 
and all the naive emigrants on board 
who even now scarce know how waywardly we lie, 
to them the Cabin has its bounden duty 
and now that Cabin's duty is eternal. 
6 
The mima tuned us in to signs of life 
spread far and wide. 
But where, the mima gives no word of. 
We pull in traces, pictures, landscapes, scraps of language 
being spoken someplace, only where? 
Our faithful Mirna 
37 

does all she can and searches, searches, searches. 
And her electron-works haul in, 
electro-lenses give her screener-cells 
their coded programs and the focus-works collect 
the tacis of the third indifferent webe 
and sounds and scents and pictures emanate 
out of lavish fluxes. 
But where their sources lie she gives no word of. 
That lies outside and always far beyond 
a mima's technics and her powers of hauling in. 
She fishes metaphorically her fish 
in other seas than those we now traverse, 
netting metaphorically her cosmic catch 
from woods and dales in undiscovered realms. 
I tend the mima, calm the emigrants, 
cheering them with scenes from far-flung reaches 
of things in thousands which no human eye 
had ever dreamt of seeing, but the mima tells no lies. 
And most do understand: they know, a mima 
can't be bribed, she is all probity. 
They know that the mima's intellectual 
and selectronic sharpness in transmission 
is three thousand eighty times as great 
as mankind's could attain if it were Mirna. 
As before an altar they bow down 
whenever I come in to start the mima. 
And many times I've heard them whispering: 
Imagine, though, if one could be like Mirna. 

So it's to the good that the mima has no feelings, 
that pride has no place in the mima's insides, 
that as from habit she delivers images 
and tongues and scents from undiscovered countries 
and tends to this unmoved by blandishments, 
I 
secured by probity, unstirred by incense. 
She takes no notice that in this darkroom 
a sect of mima-worshippers bows down, 
fondling the mima's pedestal and praying 
the noble mima's counsel for the journey, 
which now has entered on its sixth long year. 
Then suddenly I see how all has changed. 
How all these people, all these emigrants 
are realizing that what once had been 
has been and gone. And that the only world 
which we are given is this world in Mirna. 
And while we voyage on toward certain death 
in spaces without land and without coasts, 
the mima gains the power to soothe all souls 
and settle them to quiet and composure 
before the final hour that man must always 
meet at last, wherever it be lodged. 
7 
We still pursue the customs formed on Earth 
and keep the usages of Dorisvale. 
Dividing time into a day and night, 
we feign the break of day, the dusk, the sunset. 
Though space around us is eternal night 
f 
39 

so starry-cold that those who still abide 
in Dorisvales have never seen its like, 
our hearts have joined with the chronometer 
in following the sunrise and the moonrise 
and both their settings viewed from Dorisvale. 
Now it is summer night, Midsummer night: 
the people stay awake hour after hour. 
In the great assembly-room they all are dancing 
save those on watch in the infinitude. 
They're dancing there until the sun comes up 
in Dorisvale. Then smack comes clarity, 
the horror that it never did come up, 
that life, a dream before in Doric vales, 
is even more a dream in Mirna's halls. 
And then this ballroom in infinitude 
fills with whimperings and human dreams 
and open weeping none hides anymore. 
Then the dancing stops, the music dies, 
the hall is emptied, al move to the mima. 
And for a while she can relieve the strain 
and rout the memories from the shores of Doris. 
For frequently the world that Mirna shows us 
blots out the world remembered and abandoned. 
If not, the mima never would have drawn us 
and not been worshipped as a holy being, 
and no ecstatic women would have stroked 
in trembling bliss the dais of the deity. 
40 

8 
Our soul is spent on dreams, we're ever rubbing 
dream on dream for want of something real, 
and each new mummery becomes a ladder 
I 
to the latest dream-beset vacuity. 
And everything far off becomes our home; 
indeed, beyond all pales lies our relief-
1 share with Dorisvale my every grief, 
and longing ceaselessly to sojourn there 
itself is health, is artful living here. 
Seldom do we take the slightest note 
of our majestic wonder of a boat, 
and only during sermons at a grave 
does this world dawn on us as all we have; 
then come a multitude of black thoughts flapping 
through these vaults that hold us bound 
filled with the echoes of a prior life 
and threading an outlandish void of sound. 
Then we scurry to the mima to beseech 
those comforts we may see but may not reach. 
Then thousands mill in an unending flock 
through every corridor to Mirna's hall. 
Then suddenly we might remember in a flash 
that this craft's length is sixteen thousand feet, 
its width three thousand and the population 
milling in its vaults eight thousand souls, 
that it was built for large-scale emigration, 
that this is only one ship out of thousands 
which all, of like dimensions, like design, 
41 

ply the placid routes to Mars and Venus, 
that we alone had canted off our course 
until one day the ranking astrolabe 
informed us that we were no longer lying 
in the inner field, but everything 
that could be done would certainly be done 
so life within the outer field would be 
a pioneering voyage and a probe, 
the farthest so far toward the field beyond. 
When afterwards it struck the High Command 
that there would never be a turning back 
and laws obtaining in the outer field 
were different from those in clear control 
of placid flight-routines in inner space, 
first panic set in, then came apathy 
laying between the tempests of despair 
its chilly doldrum-world of dead emotion 
till the mima, like a soothing friend in need 
and filled with specimens of life from other worlds, 
to soothe us all unlocked her vision chest. 
9 
There are in the mima certain features 
it had come up with and which function there 
in circuitry of such a kind 
as human thought has never traveled through. 
For example, take the third webe's action 
in the focus-works 
and the ninth protator's kinematic read-out 
in the flicker phase before the screener-cell 
42 

takes over everything, allots, combines. 
The inventor was himself completely dumbstruck 
the day he found that one half of the mima 
he'd invented lay beyond analysis. 
That the mima had invented half herself. 
,. 
Well, then, as everybody knows, he changed 
his title, had the modesty 
to realize that once she took full form 
she was the superior and he himself 
a secondary power, a mimator. 
The mimator died, the mima stays alive. 
The mimator died, the mima found her style, 
progressed in comprehension of herself, 
her possibilities, her limitations: 
a telegrator without pride, industrious, upright, 
a patient seeker, lucid and plain-dealing, 
a filter of truth, with no stains of her own. 
Who then can show surprise if I, the rigger 
and tender of the mima on Aniara, 
am moved to see how men and women, blissful 
in their faith, fall on their knees to her. 
And I pray too when they are at their prayer 
that it be true, all this that is occurring, 
and that the grace this mima is conferring 
is glimpses of the light of perfect grace 
that seeks us in the barren house of space. 
1 0  
The sterile void of space is terrifying. 
Glass-like is the stare encircling us 
and the systems of stars hang frozen and still 
I 
43 

in the round crystal windows of our ship. 
Then is the time to cherish visions in dreams 
from Dorisvales and preserve, here in the sea 
where no water, where no waves are moving, 
every dream and every rush of feeling. 
The smallest sigh is like a gentle wind, 
all weering a fountain, the ship itself a hind 
dashing in silence toward the starry Lyre 
which, all too far for any human mind 
to understand the distances or times, 
has not slid one small inch to either side. 
Everything looks as if solidified 
and frozen to the mount of Everlasting, 
like grains of diamond in a crystal sheath 
encompassing the very boundlessness 
in a massive, radiant hall of utter distance. 
But all the words that have been used to death, 
misused on mountains and on tracts of water 
and landscapes where they never did belong 
were drawn on in advances by a race 
with no thought that the words which they were wearing down 
might at some future date be sorely needed 
right where they suited best: right here, on board 
this space ship on its way out to the Lyre. 
vVhat has been left for us who most have need 
of every word answering to limitless 
immeasurably far-outlying Hades? 
We are compelled to seek out other words 
able to shrink and shrivel all to comfort us. 
44 

The word for Star has now become indecent, 
the low names high for loins and woman's breast. 
The brain is now a shameful body-part, 
for Hades harvests us at its behest. 
I 
1 1  
A man from High Command stands amid the people 
in the great assembly-halls abaft. 
He pleads with them not to despair, but view their fate 
in the clear light of science. He maintains 
that it is not the first time this has happened. 
Sixty years ago a large goldonder 
with fourteen thousand souls on board was lost, 
had instrument-failure heading for Orion 
and plunged with rapidly increasing speed 
toward Jupiter, got swallowed in its wastelands 
and buried in that giant star's dense husk, 
its evil death-quilt of gelid hydrogen 
which to a depth of near ten thousand miles 
armors that devil-star in helium and cold. 
It could have turned out just as badly here. 
But we are favored people. We've not crashed 
on any star or stellar satellite. 
Instead we have our trek ahead of us, 
a lifelong journey onward to an end 
which would have come in any case, and comes. 
12 
The orchestra plays fancies and we take the floor. 
The girl I lead about is hors concours. 
45 

Originally she's from Dorisburg, 
but though she's danced here now for several years 
in Aniara's ballroom she insists 
that, far as she's concerned, she hears 
no difference whatsoever in the yurg 
they dance here and the one in Dorisburg. 
And when we dance the yurg it's evident 
that everything called yurg's magnificent 
when Daisy Doody wriggles in a yurg 
and chatters in the slang of Dorisburg: 
You're gamming out and getting yile and snowzy. 
But do like me, I never sit and frowzy. 
I'm no sleeping chadwick, Daisy pouts, 
my pipes are working, I am flamm and gondel, 
my date's a gander and my fate's a ronde! 
and wathed in taris, gland in delt and yondel. 
And lusty swings the yurg, I'm tempest-tossed­
the grief I'm nursing threatens to be lost 
upon this womanchild who, filled with yurg, 
slings at Death's void the slang of Dorisburg. 
13 
In the sixth year Aniara fared 
with undiminished speed toward Lyra's stars. 
The chief astronomer gave the emigrants 
a lecture on the depth of outer space. 
In his hand he held a splendid bowl of glass: 

We're slowly coming to suspect that the space 
we're traveling through is of a different kind 
from what we thought whenever the word "space" 
was decked out by our fantasies on Earth. 
We're coming to suspect now that our ,drift 
is even deeper than we first believed, 
that knowledge is a blue naivete 
which with the insight needful to the purpose 
assumed the Mystery to have a structure. 
We now suspect that what we say is space 
and glassy-clear around Aniara's hull 
is spirit, everlasting and impalpable, 
that we are lost in spiritual seas. 
Our space-ship Aniara travels on 
in something that does not possess a brain-pan 
and does not even need the stuff of brains. 
She's traveling on in something that exists 
but does not need to take the path of thought. 
Through God and Death and Mystery we race 
on space-ship Aniara without goal or trace. 
0 would that we could turn back to our base 
now that we realize what our space-ship is: 
a little bubble in the glass of Godhead. 
I shall relate what I have heard of glass 
and then you'll understand. In any glass 
that stands untouched for a sufficient time, 
gradually a bubble in the glass will move 
infinitely slowly to a different point 
in the glazen form, and in a thousand years 
the bubble's made a voyage in its glass. 
47 

Similarly, in a boundless space 
a gulf the depth of light-years throws its arch 
round bubble Aniara on her march. 
For though the rate she travels at is great 
and much more rapid than the swiftest planet, 
her speed as measured by the scale of space 
exactly corresponds to that we know 
the bubble makes inside this bowl of glass. 
Chilled at such certitude, I take flight 
out of the mima-hall to the ruddy light 
filling the dance-hall and, finding Daisy there, 
I seek admission to her womb of hair, 
in her savior-arms I beg a tryst 
where death's cold certitude does not exist. 
There's where life remains in Mirna's room; 
the Doric valleys live in Daisy's womb 
as in ourselves, no cold or threat to hound us, 
we lose track of the spaces that surround us. 
14 
A sect that's called the Ticklers has sprung up. 
They gather to be tickled and to tickle. 
It's mostly women, but the chiefs are men 
and called the Tinkers, 
an old word from the pre-goldonder age. 
The word is cited in the Blue Archive 
and has to do somehow with feeding 
in the older manner, and with flames. 

More I do not know. 
As a child in school, of course I saw 
on some occasion natural fire. 
It was kindled, I remember, from a piece of wood 
which then was shown around, emittiog smoke 
and some heat too. 
When everyone had looked, the wood was dipped in water. 
The piquant little flame was quenched. 
Wood was a rare material. Had existed 
in pre-goldondic times, but later dwindled 
steadily through nuclear catastrophes. 
It rather moved us, I remember, watching 
in a circle as the wood-chunk gave out light. 
But that is long ago, ah me, so long. 
15 
I shut down the mima, walk one round and listen 
to the emigrants, the crewmen, 
and hear an old space-mariner tell ofNobby, 
doubtless the great love of his life: 
By normal standards she was hardly pretty, 
pale little Nobby, radiation-mangled. 
Three times she was branded and came very near 
to fluttering away, but was pulled back 
with help from gammosal and Tebe-rays. 
And after a year or more in dreary wards 
of barracks-hospitals on Tundra Two 
she took a bargain-fare goldonder home 
from Mars to Earth, resuming her assistance 
to refugees and regular collections 
for people needing help on Mars and Venus. 
I 
49 

All Marsfolk needed respite from the tundra-cold; 
the Venusfolk, safety from their swampy climate. 
Did she wear her health down? Rest assured. 
Nonetheless I held her very dear, 
my little Nobby, and cannot forget 
the scanty moments when we snatched our dreams 
on Tundra Two on my rare visits there. 
At that time I was just a volunteer 
aboard Goldonder Fifteen-name of Max, 
an old tramp off the Venus run, converted 
for shipping aid and exiles to the tundraball. 
The Thirty-second War had just then ended, 
Control Plan Three was being closely followed. 
You're all aware how all of that turned out: 
new Dick on top, hot times in the cellar 
for those who'd voted nay to Dick. The others, 
whipped to shape already, got their rucksacks 
and were sped on Prison Spacecraft Seven 
to three years' gathering peat on Tundra Nine, 
among the worst tundras you could run into 
on that slum planet. We went out there once. 
But enough of outsides. All the inward changes 
that followed with the punch-card age were worse. 
The heartlessly hard, the nonsensically gentle 
changed places on the punch-cards many times. 
With regularity the good in man 
was moved to a punch-card hole for cruelty. 
In this melancholy jungle of controls 
we have to admire the mima, who can order 
a chaos of numbers we wish we never knew. 
For everyone was playing at least four roles 
in political games of specters' peek-a-boo. 
so 

16 
Through doors that are forever whirling round 
like turnstiles for the torrents of mankind, 
some voices rise triumphant from th͹ hum 
that blends them all: despair, good faith, high mind. 
And there are scattered voices singing songs 
of burdens such as mystics might have sung 
in seeking incombustibility 
from vacant space and from the mima's visions: 
"Soon the time will come of cast-iron and balm 
when I may keep intact while fire and cold 
consume the forms of life around my calm. 
Soon the time will come of cast-iron and balm:' 
But on the humming swells, all seek the mima 
and cry aloud as at a wailing-wall, 
till from lost worlds the mima's comforts bring 
her illustrations of a far-off spring. 
The mima caught for us the blessed shore, 
shining for hours in full beatitude. 
But now the world of blessings is no more, 
hurled into a new infinitude. 
Among dark shades that splendor has been drowned, 
by torrents that no mima can turn round. 
And we again are shivering and unsound. 
I 
51 

17 
The spuriously deep descents you make 
to those supposed depths you'd gambled on 
are all without the slightest value here 
for here there are no depths to undertake. 
Here we can follow the descent you make 
and see how very far it is, how sheer. 
It's never stunning on the crystal screen 
where we can see how your maneuver turns 
spiraling back to where you dove before. 
Now we believe in your descents no more. 
The space-aware makes no dives as a rule, 
and if he does dive in the lucid pool 
he's quickly back and puts off happily 
what science gave of outdoor finery 
for shorter expeditions on this sea. 
His business merely was to cast an eye 
upon the only cloud in this cold sky, 
that long hard cloud made of a white alloy, 
luminously painted and standing there 
motionless, stiff and still, what though she fare 
at a velocity to curl the hair 
of those who don't know of the speeds we muster 
as Aniara moves on toward the Lyre cluster. 
Once I was sent outside for an inspection 
of Mirna's cell-works and, from this direction, 
almost eight thousand meters radially, 
our Aniara was a magnitude. 
52 

From that celestial ocean, stirred, I viewed 
our good old craft from Doris come so far 
approaching the Lyre from cosmic Zanzibar 
with cargo that the tooth of time had chewed. 
Ivory of that kind is heaviest of all 
, 
as, marked with hard names born of metaphor, 
from a hidden world of hostile force 
it cruelly bears down on Aniara's course. 
18 
Efforts at escape through flights of mind 
and slipping back and forth from dream to dream­
such methods were to hand. 
With one leg drowned beneath a surge of feeling 
the other braced by feeling dead and gone 
we'd often stand. 
Myself I questioned, but gave no reply. 
I dreamt myself a life, then lived a lie. 
I ranged the universe but passed it by­
for captive on Aniara here was I. 
19 
Our female pilot steps inside the mima­
chamber. Wordlessly she signals me 
to activate the mima. 
How grand she is, how unapproachable. 
She wounds you in the way that roses wound, 
though not, as has been often said, with thorns. 
A rose will always wound you with its rose 
and, though the sore may be a briar-scratch, 
' 
53 

still more often it may be a wound 
from utter beauty, utter burning beauty. 
The lovely Doris, in the sixth year now 
changed ever more into a distant star, 
a sun that like a cinder burns my eye 
and stabs its infinitely long gold pin 
into my heart across dizzying-bright spaces­
she burned more broadly when she was close by, 
but stings more deeply when she's far away. 
I start the mima, take a seat and wait 
to see in little time the features brighten 
with wondrous alteration on the face 
of our fair pilot, frostily withholding 
the subtlest modulation of her beauty. 
But the mima's running, making all things clear. 
The fair one's white cheeks brighten instantly 
and hotly blush: she fills with heavenly transport 
when the mima shows her everything there is 
of pleasure inaccessible in worlds of space. 
She smiles, she laughs, ecstatic and engrossed 
as though she suddenly were seized by gods. 
But just when she seems cleared for perfect bliss 
the third webe shifts the mima's focus-values 
and the world's other glimmering guises flood the mima. 
The fair one's face soon turns another shade. 
I close down the mima. It is there for comfort, 
not for making human beings shudder 
at worlds like-featured with the one they left. 
Pains and problems we were all enmeshed in 
54 

when we were stirring in the Dorisvales 
are nothing to exhibit to this woman. 
I stroke her softly when I close the mima, 
for the mima's truth is incorruptible, 
a frank display of everything created. '  
The fair one rises up and nods to me 
her sober thanks for closing down the mima. 
At the door she turns, asks me to call 
for her should the mima ever have received­
she doesn't say the word, but I can guess. 
The warming Doris and the kindly Doris, 
the distant Doris now a noble star 
to pine for. Now she is the star of stars. 
0 could I but know where she is gleaming 
in this sixth year, so inconspicuous 
among the suns of space I'll never find 
that star again. The noble star of Doris. 
20 
All that we had long dreamt of receiving­
distant views of torments gone before 
and joys exhausted long ago-we take 
in the mima from the troughs of waves of yore. 
The picture shifts in ripples far remote 
and in a cryptic echo-curve it's hurled 
labyrinthine round the endless world, 
and all the cosmic tidings reach us all. 
Through space the evil tidings ever stream; 
there are good tidings, but with tracks less clear, 
I 
55 

for goodness has no part in active life, 
its light is the same light 
this year and every year. 
2 1  
But doubt is an acid that corrodes more dreams 
than any dreamer ever could propose, 
and only through the mima can we see again 
the warmth and beauty of our dreaming-shows. 
For this reason I preserve what matters: 
what bears comfort's colors and resembles life. 
And on our ship, whenever anxiety patters 
and dread and unease play havoc with our nerves 
I serve up helpings of the mima's dream-preserves. 
22 
Meanwhile the doctor who observes our eyes 
and sees in them that lust for life is fading 
flinches at the lacus lacrimalis 
where no more does the crocodile go wading. 
Such flooding tears in halls where Mirna reigns 
are highest praise for Doris's green plains. 
And even so it is as if those tears 
for all their authenticity were cold 
insensate waters rising from the depths. 
Their fall is too transparently designed, 
like drops of rain too pure to touch the soil: 
our lucid tears in an Aniara of the mind. 

23 
The senior astrolobe came to our aid, 
expert in the blazes far stars made. 
But, without warning, reason's star went dead 
inside the senior astrolobe's own head. 
Forced to its death by bodings unallayed, 
his brain broke down and died, soul-deep afraid. 
24 
Impotence runs wild in its own way, 
blaspheming, execrating time and space. 
But many think that now we've come to face 
just punishment as toward the Lyre we pace. 
For we ourselves by space-law rigorous 
have locked us into this sarcophagus 
and honor our live burial on high 
till our vainglory puts its scepter by. 
In thousands or in myriads of years 
a distant sun shall capture and enfold 
a moth that flies toward it as toward the lamp 
when it was harvest time in Doriswold. 
Then we shall end our journey through these regions, 
then deep asleep shall lie Aniara's legions 
and all be swiftly changed in Mirna's hold. 
25 
We ride in our sarcophagus in silence, 
no longer offering the planet violence 
57 

or spreading deathly quiet on our kind. 
Here we can question freely, answer true 
while the vessel Aniara, gone askew 
in bleak tracts of space, leaves vile time behind. 
26 
The stone-dumb deaf man started to describe 
the worst sound he had heard. It was past hearing. 
Though just when his eardrums were exploding 
came a sound like the sough of sorrowing sedge, the last­
when the phototurb exploded Dorisburg. 
It was past hearing, so the deaf man ended. 
My ear could not keep up with it 
when my soul burst and scattered 
and body burst and shattered 
and ten square miles of city ground were wrung 
inside outside 
as the phototurb was bursting 
the mighty city once called Dorisburg. 
So he spoke, the deaf man, who was dead. 
But as, so it's been said, stones shall cry out, 
so the dead man did his speaking in a stone. 
From the stone he cried out: can you hear me? 
From the stone he cried out: don't you hear me? 
My native city once was Dorisburg. 
Then the blind man started his report 
upon the light horrifically intense 
that blinded him. 
He was unable to describe it. 
;8 

He mentioned only one detail: he saw by neck. 
His entire skull became an eye 
blinded by a brightness beyond ftashpoint 
lifted and sped off in blind reliance 
on the sleep of death. But no sleep carl).e. 
In this respect he is much like the deaf man. 
And as, so it's been said, stones shall cry out, 
so he cries out from stones as does the deaf man. 
So they cry out from stones one with the other. 
So they cry out from stones as did Cassandra. 
I rush in to the mima as though I could 
prevent the ghastly deed by my distress. 
But she shows all, candid and upright, 
unto the last projecting fire and death, 
and, turning to the others, I cry out 
my pain of pains beholding Doris's death: 
There is protection from near everything, 
from fire and damages by storm and frost, 
oh, add whichever blows may come to mind. 
But there is no protection from mankind. 
When there is need, none sees with clarity. 
No, only when the task is to beat down 
and desolate the heart's own treasury 
of dreams to live upon in cold and evil years. 
Then the mima's blinded by a bluish bolt 
and I am dumbstruck at events that pour 
on wretched Earth; out here their lightnings bore 
f 
59 

down through my heart as through an open sore. 
And I the mima's faithful priest in blue 
receive in blood run cold the evil news 
that Doris died in far-off Dorisburg. 
27 
My only comfort left I beg of Daisy. 
She is the only woman left who speaks 
that lovely Dorisburgian, while I'm 
the last man left who understands what Daisy 
with her splendid tongue, bright as a decoy-call, 
babbles in her lovely dialect. 
Come rock me loose and fancy, Daisy wheedles. 
Go dorm tremenzy and go row me dondel: 
my date's a gander, I am flamm and gondel 
and wathed in taris, gland in delt and yondel. 
And I who know that Dorisburg was razed 
to nothing ever after by the phototurb, 
I let Daisy be just what she is. 
What use is there in breaking the enchantment 
which only Daisy kept up, unawares, 
so well that she, now lying free of cares 
and squirming hotly when the dance is done, 
knows not that she herself some hours ago 
was widowed of the town of Dorisburg. 
6o 

She urges me to sing along, and I take up 
the ballad of cast-iron that I learned 
about the town of Gond that melted down in war. 
But Daisy babbles gladly, unawares, 
I 
and her entire existence was created 
to sing the praise of dance in whirling yurgs. 
What would I be? A brute, if I should break 
the spirited enchantment she has mined 
from out her breast, from her heart itching for joy. 
She babbles as in fever till she sleeps. 
Round where we lie Aniara's senses fade, 
but not to sleep. The clear mind is alert 
to Earth which here it has to do without. 
Only Daisy's heart beats safe and sound 
on Aniara, to its brightmare bound. 
28 
With Dorisburg molten, the mima ailed for days 
with heavy static from the phototurb, 
her third webe battling as against a cloud 
of distant compact shame. Upon the third day 
the mima begged deliverance from her vision. 
The fourth day she had some advice to give me 
on the scanner-transpodes in her cantor-works. 
Only on the fifth day did her calm return, 
upon transmissions from a better world, 
and once again her cell-works lit up brightly­
all her strength appeared to be reviving. 
61 

But on the seventh day there came a drone 
out of her cell-works I had never heard. 
Indifferent tacis of we be number three 
switched off, reporting they'd gone blind. 
And suddenly the mima called me forth 
to her inner barrier and, trembling, 
I went to stand before her awesomeness. 
And when I stood there, moved, cold with fright 
and filled with worry for her situation, 
all of a sudden her phonoglobe began 
talking to me in the dialect 
of higher ultramodern tensor-theory 
which commonly we'd use on working days. 
She bade me tell the High Command that she 
for some time had been just as nice of conscience 
as the stones were. She had heard them cry 
their stonely cries in distant Dorisvale. 
She had beheld the granite's white-hot weeping 
when stone and ore were vaporized to mist. 
She'd been much troubled by those stones' travail. 
Darkened in her cell-works by the cruelty 
man exhibits in his time of sin 
she came now to the long expected phase 
(which mimas reach) of finally decaying. 
The indifferent tacis of webe number three 
see a thousand things that no eyes see. 
Now, in the name of Things, she wanted peace. 
Now she would be done with her displays. 
62 

29 
But it was all too late: I could not stop 
the people crowding toward the mima hall. 
I cried, I screamed to them to turn abo,ut, 
but no one listened, for, although they all 
wished, horrified, to flee that mimadrome, 
they moved on, mad to watch what things would come. 
A bolt-blue light flashed from the mima's screens; 
across the Mirna's halls a rumbling rolled 
like booming thunder back in Doriswold. 
A jolt of terror pitched into our horde, 
and many emigrants were stomped to bits 
when Mirna perished on Aniara deep in space. 
The final word she broadcast was a message 
from one who called himself the Detonee. 
She had the Detonee himself bear witness 
and, stammering and detonated, tell 
how grim it always is, one's detonation, 
how time speeds up to win its prolongation. 
Upon life's outcry time does increase speed, 
prolongs the very second when you burst. 
How terror blasts inward, 
how horror blasts outward. 
How grim it always is, one's detonation. 
I 

3 0  
Now came a time of bitterest discontent 
and long I sat there silently to ponder 
in the Mirna hall where evil sent 
its storm of dark rays from the back of yonder. 
Frantically I sought to activate 
our hallowed Mirna's comfort-works and art 
and with the tensorides to operate 
the hub of marvels at her godly heart. 
The voice inside the phonoglobe was still, 
and what few calls the sensostat could find 
came from a Boeotian shade, so imbecile 
it fell below both god and humankind. 
And, further, I was pinned down by the pack 
hounding me and heaping me with scorn, 
while I was weighed down in my cul-de-sac 
by all my heart's calamities far-borne. 
And Chefone, the fierce lord of our craft, 
would enter every day to vilify me 
and, though his schadenfreude plainly showed, 
his threat was merely that a court would try me. 
He often sought through mystic rigmaroles 
to magnify his station in our caravel 
and uttered devil-dictums to our souls 
to make us think that we were bolJnd for Hell. 

By such means day by day he did quite well, 
and, buttressed by that specter-like infinity, 
he struck you as a man out to compel 
his people to decline and asininity. 
3 1  
Chefone now ordered persecutions, 
and I and many others were secreted 
I 
in shelters farthest down in the goldonder 
until the bowls of fury were depleted. 
There sat technicians trained in each pursuit 
involved in the Fourth Tensor repertory, 
whereas all those who ceaselessly pollute 
pure intellection wrapped themselves in glory. 
In endless muddle people sought to prove 
the mima's tragedy was our misdeed, 
for all our egos had defiled her screen 
with private thoughts which made her sights recede 
and dirtied comfort's flood with private dreams 
and dimmed her radiance, her cosmic streams. 
Protesting we were innocent, we sought 
to reason without learned reference 
and in the language most of them were taught 
propound the barest modicum of sense. 
But this same language, meant to clear up all, 
grew murky for us too, a blind-man's buff 
of words avoiding words and playing blind 
amid the clarity of cosmic mind. 

We then tried drawing for them as for brutes 
and savage tribesmen such as were, books say, 
alive in that great age which constitutes 
the lowest reach of time in spirit's day. 
We drew signs representing plants and trees, 
we sketched a many-tributaried flood, 
Building texts up by these strategies 
which, with the pictures' aid, they faintly understood. 
For us too these were alien inflections 
in language far from cybernetic land, 
so that we made small sense of the directions 
whereby we meant to lend a helping hand. 
The upshot was, this court of arbitration 
which might have freed us from the doom of space, 
was of a hundred minds in its opinion 
while the bridge between us stayed an empty place. 
32 
By systematic logostylic sounding 
of Mirna's language-cycles phase by phase, 
in two years' time I'd won so good a grounding 
in how to see through all things as through glass 
that three years from the very day I saw 
Mirna burst apart in Aniara's hall 
I plumbed the transtomizers for the law 
which predetermines what shall rise or fall. 
And, finding it, I went almost insane. 
A dreadful-drunken, deeply unreal glee 
66 

at once transformed my soul to space and eye 
within the dwelling of infinity. 
Then I was taken from the bottom jail 
-our female pilot too sat in those cellsr­
back into the holy mima's halls. 
And rumor ran. I heard the joyful yells. 
And all spoke of the treasure brought to light, 
and Mirna come back in the starry night. 
33 
Too quickly I rejoiced in Mirna's hall: 
on each solution a mystery waits to leap. 
I saw the key now, but as through a wall 
of space-clear glass and crystal sheaths miles deep. 
Without the mima, by whom I'd been sustained, 
in spirit undernourished, I was teetering, 
the mind's blood, in my shock, was being drained. 
Bereft of Mirna, I found petering 
and dying at her base a mirror-world. 
Slumped by her remains, as by charred brands, 
I gazed into her breast and saw a hearth grown cold. 
34 
Myself, I have no name. I am of Mirna 
and so am called no more than mimarobe. 
The oath I swore is called the goldondeva. 
The name I'd borne was cancelled at "last rounds" 
and had to be forgotten ever after. 
' 

As for Isagel, our female pilot, 
the matter of it is that her position 
establishes her name, which is a code word. 
The inmost name she bears and which she whispered 
close against my ear I may not breathe. 
In her eyes there is an inaccessible 
but yet a lovely glow of things unspoken: 
the radiance which enigma oftentimes possesses 
when it's the beauty of the mystery that impresses. 
She draws curved lines, her nails are glowing 
like feeble lamplights through the chamber's dusk. 
She tells me: Take a reading of this arc 
where the shadow of my sorrow sheds its dark. 
She rises then to leave her gopta-board, 
and over me her radiant thoughts are poured. 
And our eyes meet and lock, and soul to soul 
we stand, unspeaking. Isagel I love heartwhole. 
35 
But the rigors of space impel us into rites 
and altar-services we'd scarce performed 
since pre-goldondic times now half-forgot. 
And Aniara's four religious forms 
with priesthood, temple-bells and crucifixes, 
vagina-cult and shouting yurgher-girls 
and tickler-sectaries forever laughing 
appear in space, jostling one another 
for the eerie deserts of eternity. 
68 

And I in service as the mimarobe, 
responsible for all the burst illusions, 
must make room in Mirna's sanctuary 
and blend all spectacles and all their sounds 
when libidine dances with voluptuary , 
to ring in their god by orgiastic rounds. 
The women have made themselves a lovely sight 
-the pains that many had to take were slight. 
There Yaal's astir, a dormifid yurghine 
with amatory powers at their height, 
and there stands Libidel from Venus' green 
and ever-pullulating jungle spring. 
And up against Chebeba yurg-enamored, 
an ornament from Kandy on her thigh, 
stands dormi-juno Gena, round whom clamor 
the novice flock on whom she keeps an eye. 
For some time I was buoyed up by a plan: 
have a thousand mirrors put in place 
to give us everything that mirrors can 
by their reflections-falsely widened space 
which optically can stretch out every inch 
eight thousand inches' worth of false dimension. 
When twenty halls were furnished door to door 
with mirrors we had taken from fourscore 
the end result of this was so top-hole 
that I for four years by these looking-glasses 
wholly beguiled the shivering of soul. 

To train our eyes from our trajectory 
and on the multi-mirrored world of gaiety 
I turned so manv minds to the carouse 
I 
my mirrors offered in the mirror-house 
that even I myself took time to yurg 
with Daisy Doody out of Doris burg. 
But also with Chebeba and with Yaal 
my mirror-image swung in Mirna's hall. 
They come in flock by flock, I see them waken 
to yurgs and cults and I look on admiring 
where they, by yurgs among the mirrors shaken, 
are by octupled mirrors overtaken. 
From all sides where the yurghing circles round 
they view themselves as heaven's host in dance 
reflected in an eightfold radiance, 
for Chebeba eight times as for Yaal 
and Gena too in an octupled hall. 
There's Libidella with her expert hand 
stirring up a man from Dorisland. 
And there's Chebeba in a yurghic ring 
whirling toward the mirrors' Not-a-thing 
where dance eightfold Chebebas to and fro 
with breasts and feet repeatedly on show. 
Each object yields up all it can of show 
when mirror legs and mirror dances go 
and in the yurghing-hall those shows blaze trails 
to mirror canyons and to mirror vales. 
70 

37 
Desire and piety crowd into one place, 
in rolls the chariot drawn on by a brace 
composed of men and women of the cult. 
I 
The chilly stave held up by Isagel 
is lifted while with cultic lantern Libidel, 
augustly followed by eight libidines, 
assumes position, lying down to please. 
And when they have been warmed by pelvic fire, 
all lying happy, sleepily at ease, 
Isagel comes forth with lowered stave 
and touches with her lamp three times for luck 
our reliquary, blessed Mirna's grave. 
There comes a sough like river reeds when Yaal, 
her bosom peaceful, sated in her needs, 
pauses at the saintly vault and pleads 
in gentle whispers to the deity's bier. 
And what deep peace around her features plays 
when swells the holy hymn of"Day of Days;' 
and Isagel and Libidel and Heba 
form the graveside chorus with Chebeba. 
Behind the mima-hall fair Libidel sat 
one winter's evening, making herself up, 
wearing a thigh-bell and a buddha-cat: 
a mirrored brooch clamped by her navel-cup. 
A heart gleamed in the charm-pit of her breasts, 
which served to warm the precious mirror-gem; 
I 
71 

these had an inky field around their crests 
for when the thyrsus light would fall on them. 
Closing in on her in expectation, 
her secret rivals purred their panther hymn 
while poised to devastate her reputation 
and twist it till her charms had all grown dim. 
She still was fair of form and led the gambols 
in the Cult's den, but there would come days 
when her bikiniette more showed the shambles 
of her curves than sparked her devotes. 
Already she'd begun to hide from view 
prospects but an inch from sacred places 
and round-the-hip Xinombran fabric drew 
one's eyes away from physical disgraces. 
But many adepts, once her votaries, 
in secrecy were ripening their doubt, 
not crowding in as once to seek their ease 
upon her lap when she was leading the devout. 
A-tremble Libidel adjusts her hair. 
To her the navel-brooch feels like a wound 
but still she hopes her breasts, an ample pair, 
in fellowship with two alluring thighs 
will mean for her another year's survival 
at altar-height, though autumn prophesies 
already, with grim portents, its arrival. 
In sun-red sarathasm and plyelle 
the luscious Yaal is standing by her side-
72 

till her year comes she's young enough to bide, 
the year when she herself will be the belle 
one night of falling stars, succeeding Libidel. 
39 
I 
A breakthrough which had never been foreseen 
was made by Isagel, our female pilot. 
One morning she sat silent in the Gopta room 
where she was occupied with Jender curves. 
Thereupon she called me to the Jenderboard, 
where lightning-swift she'd stabilized her breakthrough 
provisionally in its final form. 
She shrieked with gladness, hugging to her heart 
the vigorously kicking inspiration 
which, born of her, was joyously conceived 
in deep love for the Law of Aleph Numbers. 
And, studying the child, I plainly saw 
that it was sound and had the model health 
which always had distinguished Isagel, 
the faithful servant on the farm of numbers. 
Such a breakthrough made in Doric valleys, 
had the Doric valleys still remained 
a passable abode for number artists, 
would at once have markedly expanded 
and changed profoundly all of Gopta science. 
But here where we were fated to the course 
dictated by the law of conic section, 
I 
73 

here her breakthrough never could become 
in any manner fruitful, just a theorem 
which Isagel superbly formulated 
but which was doomed to join us going out 
ever farther to the Lyre and then to vanish. 
And as we sat there speaking with each other 
about the possibilities that now stood open 
if only we weren't sitting here in space 
like captives to the void in which we fell, 
we both grew sorrovdul but kept as well 
the joy in pure ideas, the kind of pleasure 
which together we could share in quiet 
for the time still left to our existence. 
But Isagel at times burst into tears 
to think of the inscrutably great space 
with room for all to fall eternally-
as she herself now, with the unlocked mystery 
she'd neatly solved, but which was falling with her. 
40 
T H E  S PA C E - H A N D 'S TA L E  
The transfer out to Tundra Three took up nine years. 
EvKuation Gond took up ten years. 
I myself was on the eighth goldonder. 
We alternated with some other space-ships, 
Ben ares, Canton, Gond and others still. 
In five years we took something like three million 
frightened people to their current star. 
The memories still feel like tender wounds: 
mainly visions of the lift-off zone, 
74 

time after time the same unruly scene 
where tears and gnashing teeth mix merrily 
with cheerful songs from space-cadets, still green. 
When that day's group of Gondians, each one 
with punch-card passport and an I.D. pin, 
I 
are led forth to escape Earth's shame and sin, 
they still recoil at the departure time, 
but by their very numbers they're squeezed in 
ever nearer the goldonder's holding-pen, 
where several hardened Venus-going men, 
their eyes lit by that star, examine them 
and wisecrack: Welcome home, ahem, ahem, 
to Heaven's kingdom from Jerusalem. 
Fast talking brings disquiet under control 
until each punch-card matches with the soul 
identified by prior testing; in 
it goes to microrolls at rapid-spin 
which make a note of every loss and win. 
Then, lifted up into the cosmic field, 
they reach the tundra kingdom to be steeled. 
But others go to Venus' marshy shore. 
We know what both locations have in store. 
In murky mines they shut up all the nations 
used and misused like things without a soul 
till finally the rejects are expelled 
into the Chambers over at Y go!. 
Incomprehensible this cruelty. 
No image can conceivably describe it: 
with cold official headsmen serving daily 
I 
75 

at spigots, bolts, and circuit-switches. 
And glass-equipped surveilliance-ducts 
into the Chambers 
at whose outer walls the death-attendants, 
their blinking held in check and they unmoved, 
peer in with cold satanic eyes, following 
the captives' battles 
with the stonework wall. 
On, soul (too late to balk at memories), 
to Tundra Two, where stands the plexi-housing, 
where I with Nobby hoped to go out browsing 
in Martian spring, contamination-free. 
There proudly those black frigitulips grow, 
tempered to the planetary freeze, 
and through the tundra comes the Cock's hoarse crow 
to claim the tundra's few amenities. 
Widely worshipped, though sadly starved and gaunt, 
what doesn't that bird know of cold and want! 
Else, only arctic willows prosper there, 
-if we may pause now at the vegetation­
trailing camellia-like, hard as ironware, 
and blackened leaves well nigh inedible: 
fitly toughened for this frozen plain, 
digested only by the Cock whose craw 
employs a set of stomachs in a chain. 
When on such leaves as these he stuffs his gut 
it's as though you listened to the last bolt shut 
on life's capacity for pulling through. 

For all you see then is the endmost craw 
clicking like a lock, and, when it swallows, 
transfixed and shuddering the viewer follows, 
though in the same breath he'll be laughing too. 
To this terrain of starkest, plainest forms, 
Nob by yet was bound with all her soul, 
for bitter years of want bring other norms 
than those when nature is in full control. 
In these last rations of the Martian cold 
she found in sighing willows music greatly-souled. 
She walked the heaths and sang about the spring 
when the Cock was crowing and the thaw begun 
and round the tundras went the willows creeping 
in hungry stretches toward a half-size sun. 
She often sent off willow-leaves to Earth 
and wrote: These leaves are from the spirit's wood 
and on the soul's moors the winds of spring are blowing. 
My heart is filling; yes, you've understood. 
It was the evil time when Gond in the flame 
from the phototurb was twisted to a spiral, 
a swirling pillar made of torrid gases, 
a migrant city crossing Dorisvale. 
Compared to that the superchilled clear air 
of Tundra Two was much to be preferred, 
and the figure of the Cockerel, gaunt and spare, 
became transformed into a bright Bluebird. 
Nobby's pleasure in the Tundra's breath 
makes perfect sense against that land of death. 
77 

Indeed, this was a masterstroke of hers, 
that she got something out of all these things 
so quickly counted. I believe there were 
no more than ten life-forms the whole sphere over. 
Observe her walks among the prison barracks 
and the grimness of the men when in a grisly knot, 
wolfishly starved, uncovering the pot, 
they flocked to eat the Martian in its stock, 
the skinny and unstewably tough Cock 
no tundra-cook could tenderize one jot. 
But Nob by was a girl unlike the rest. 
She saw no point in rising to protest 
to men who'd shortly lie concealed in tundra-rind 
and just as shortly slip the bondsmen's mind. 
The life she lived appeared cartoonish, crude, 
in the mirror that displayed her days and ways, 
nor had she the style to seem less rude-
and scarcely bettered by the somber gaze 
each prisoner afraid and shaken would rest 
on that mirror where the truth must be confessed. 
I love to linger at the dear remembrance 
of such a woman who shared all things known 
back then as suffering and sacrifice, 
though now their names have a much colder tone. 
When altars grew too worn with blood collected 
the sacred fell away, so one suspected. 
It was the last spring nature was alive. 
That springt ime nature perished of a wind 

that plunged at typhoon strength among the mountains 
and with its thunder filled the land of Rind. 
A sunroar came, the lightnings ramified. 
I still hear the screams and screeches-Sombra! sombra!-
' 
from souls already blinded and afraid 
and rushing out to God in search of coolness. 
They did not know God too was in the fire 
of matter which, com busted and befouled, 
with flame primordial chastised Xinombra. 
The giant force of the external grew. 
The unimaginable years set in 
when all was inundation from without. 
Though souls were trying hard to hold their own 
with what inheritance they had within, 
the giant torrent took them one by one. 
The mental image of their destiny 
that torrent shattered and made meaningless; 
the drama that was them just previously 
was outflanked by a loose, but nonetheless 
unyielding deluge of enfeeblement. 
They shattered into cellules in a State 
which made claims on them as it used to do, 
no matter that it just had melted down 
the psychic structure held to be its due. 
So mankind knew, upon its sentencing 
to deportation out on Tundra Two, 
nought, nothing, of the nature of its crime 
' 
79 

but much more of the giant's cruel claim. 
And even more about the brutal time 
it went to serve within a quarry's jaws 
and in a towering transparent keep, 
with rational surveillance as its cause, 
spun round the edges of the cesium quarry 
at Antalex, in Penal Territory. 
God's Kingdom was not of a world that hard 
and grew still less so every passing year, 
and those who could ascended heavenward 
with bodies first, although their souls stayed here. 
You could observe how many muckamucks 
broke camp from Rindish vales when time grew late. 
And we had fistfights with some rowdy bucks 
and roughnecks crashing the goldonder gate. 
The pious should have stood up to those bucks, 
of course, and bared their teeth to make them cease. 
Their peacefulness was overdone; the roughnecks 
changed it very quickly to eternal peace. 
The unresisting souls on all our lands 
died complaisantly of those rough bands. 
The shyly fearful and the deeply tactful 
were left back in a gamma-lethal glen 
and made for Heaven in some other way. 
They never entered into Mirna's den. 
Of such things I as space-hand can report, 
who nearly thirty years have plied the spaces 
8o 

between Earth's ball and that bare pate of tundra. 
Such an occupation leaves its traces. 
With time we all have something to relate 
that doesn't come from daydreams in the skies. 
And without Nobby there to compensatͷ, 
would life be anything a man could prize? 
For Tundra captives she had cleaned and sewn 
and gone without, all for the love of man. 
And but for me you never would have known 
the tale of Nobia the Samaritan. 
41 
T H E  I N FA N T  
Chebeba was sitting in her finest year 
with boundless joy beside the little bier. 
Upon the bier there lay the buttercup 
she had protected against growing up 
in Aniara-town. 
In came Yaal then in her finest year. 
She saw the infant dead upon its bier 
and spoke up in a harsh and ringing voice: 
You're going home. But we stay, not by choice, 
in Aniara-town. 
And Gena came as well. And Gena said: 
To you, my child, in worship I am led. 
I don't dissemble. I have full respect 
for you who went to sleep without defect 
in Aniara-town. 
' 
81 

Yaal slipped away and Heba took her place. 
She could not speak, could only turn her face 
and on the poised and settled infant gaze, 
asleep, afloat into the day of days 
from Aniara-town. 
42 
L I B I D E L' S S O N G  AT T H E  M I R R O R  
My life is in a funny place. 
Come here and look and touch it too. 
And if you plead and give with grace 
my little life belongs to you. 
Your gallop under Lyre's cluster 
will make a memory when it's through. 
Life dwells in folds of silken luster, 
that little life that's best with you. 
Rider from the Lyre so wild, 
tap at my door for a rendezvous. 
With your seed I'll grow with child 
in that little life that's best with you. 
It's staring. Staring cold outside. 
Come in, I'll bring some warmth to you. 
Suppose that in our arms cold died, 
0, what hot thinking in the blue. 
Then Libidel would be admired, 
not smeared as now she is by swine. 
Behold my body, how desired 
it's been in words and in design. 
82 

43 
In Mirna's time we were arena ghouls, 
who all crowded around Mirna and elected 
to see and hear, risk-free, all she projected 
of pain and struggle upon Gondish ground 
and who, when our excitement found release 
and in our mouths we marked the taste of blood, 
made the mima-tender switch the channels, 
alter range, and make the next go-round 
show something else. And so our bill of fare 
proved a well-balanced diet, as an evening's death 
alternating with a joyful dawn 
dismissed the questions flung out in distress 
and torment by some far-off settlement. 
This equalizing factor then appeared 
as something to the good, and Gond was found 
a land which, having once seen better days, 
was ripe for evil now to have its round. 
Harnessing that eye of probity 
we felt ourselves Xinombrian sensations 
as we, amid our journeyings on high, 
converted others' pains to views and music. 
And although Mirna for Xinombra's ill 
no less than Dorisburg's was seen to quaver, 
we loved to trail those victims to the kill, 
hyenas granted the hyena-favor 
of risk-free presence when the lion springs 
and power to shrug off conscience when it stings. 
The number of butcheries we thus beheld, 
the number of see-saw battles we were in, 
I 

is legion. We would look upon the felled 
lying prone and still, but then rushed past 
to be in on it when the next wave swelled. 
The faithful mima relayed all of it 
with steadfast clarity and no redactions. 
And even if sometimes we might well sit 
rigid and repelled by many actions, 
still these actions were so very many 
that memory could preserve only the worst. 
These we named the Peaks, and put out of mind 
the gulfs to which the others were consigned. 
44 
In Chamber Seven are the files of Thinking. 
Very few visitors. Still, they have things there 
that merit being thought of times on end. 
There stands a gentleman called the Friend of Thought, 
giving everyone who's so inclined 
the fundamentals of the laws of mind. 
He points in sadness to a crowd of thoughts 
which might have saved us were they timely set 
to work upon the soul's development 
but which, since soul was not much evident, 
were hung up in oblivion's cabinet. 
But as our days of vacancy would drag 
someone always came here and besought 
a look at this or that old line of thought 
which, given a new twist, might briefly snag 
new interest until that too would flag. 

45 
The Calculator running all the time 
to calculate our minimum of hope 
outpaces all our flights of thought 
and pulverizes objects of our thought 
1 
so comically that on perfection's ice 
the very act of thinking takes a spill. 
Then the brain laughs out the way brains will, 
a snob exposed in slipperiness of mind, 
a mental brute now totally hemmed in 
by the quotients of the calculator-works. 
A shrug inherited from former days 
is all he's up to: mind's icy sneer 
of bitter barrenness, a world-grimace. 
We listen daily to the sonic coins 
provided every one of us and played 
through the Finger-singer worn on the left hand. 
We trade coins of diverse denominations: 
and all of them play all that they contain 
and though a dyma scarcely weighs one grain 
it plays out like a cricket on each hand 
blanching here in this distraction-land. 
Through the Finger-singers in our rings 
we keep some slight connectedness with things. 
And now the gaster-pieces play their rondies 
and now the rindel-pieces pipe their gondies. 
ss 

Her hand held tight against her lovely cheek 
and Finger-singer pressing her ear's tip, 
Heba listens to a dyma-coin, 
but flinches suddenly and switches dreams 
upon her Finger-singer: sudden streams 
of yurghing pleasure captivate her ear. 
I asked her, after finishing my round, 
\͸Vhy did you flinch? And she replied: 
I picked up calls for help and pleas for mercy. 
This coin is carrying a scream from Gond. 
47 
A number-group philosopher and mystic 
of the aleph-number school comes often 
with filled-in query-card to feed the Gopta-works, 
bows silently to Isagel the bright 
and tiptoes down Aniara out of sight. 
And Isagel, who finds the questions reasoned, 
takes in his flock of formulas and codes them 
for the Gopta-board's third thought-position. 
And when she has transformed the number-sets 
and gopted carefully the tensor modes 
she takes them over to the Gopta-cart 
to which she hitches space-assistant Robert, 
our brains-trust's loyal dray for number-loads. 
When our numerosopher returns 
Isagel must tell him how the land lies: 
despite all Robert's unremitting tries, 
86 

on what he asked no Gopta can advise. 
The question dealt with "rate of miracle" 
in the Cosmos mathematically conceived. 
It seems to coincide so much with chance 
that chance and miracle must have one source; 
one answer seems to do for either force. 1 
And Dr. Quantity (we use that phrase) 
makes a silent bow, resigned to grief, 
and tiptoes down Aniara's passageways. 
A poetess arose within our world 
with songs so beautiful they lifted us 
beyond ourselves, on high to spirit's day. 
She blazoned our confinement gold with fire 
and sent the heavens to the heart's abode, 
changing every word from smoke to splendor. 
She was a native of the land of Rind, 
and Rindi myths enveloping her life 
collectively became a sacred wine. 
She herself was blind. From birth, a child 
of nights in thousands with no glimpse of day, 
but those blind eyes of hers appeared to be 
a dark well's floor, the pupil of all song. 
The miracle that she had brought with her 
was human soul play on the soul of words, 
the visionary's play on weal and woe. 

And we were silenced by the holiness 
and we were blinded by the loveliness 
in spaces bottomless where we would hark 
to Songs of Rind she made up in the dark. 
49 
T H E  B L I N D  WO M A N  
The lengthy way I've traveled here 
from Rind to these environs 
is night in color like the way 
I took in Rind. 
Dark as before. As always. 
But the dark turned cooler. 
That was where the change lay. 
All tolerable dark abandoned me 
and to my temples 
and to my bosom, kindred to the spring, 
cold darkness came and settled in 
forever. 
A dismal rushing in the Rindic aspen 
rattled in the night. I started shivering. 
It was autumn. They talked of the maples ablaze, 
the sunset in a valley not far distant. 
It was described as red 
with gleaming spokes and evening-purple. 
And facing it the forest stood, they said, 
flaring against the night. 
They mentioned too the shade beneath the trees 
ever whiter with the coming of the frost 
as if its grass had been the summer's hair 
quickly aging. 
88 

This is how it was described to me: 
a backdrop of a fresh-frost white on gold 
that flamed up when the summer paid in full 
its debt to the collection-agent, cold. 
And autumn's grand excesses were described: 
all golden things cast into summer's gra"'e. 
The splendor spread before us, so they said, 
was like a funeral in gypsy style: 
its mustering of red and yellow cloths 
and golden banderoles from Ispahan. 
But I stood cold and silent in that dark, 
only hearing everything I loved 
vanish in a dark and icy wind 
and the aspens' final rattling told 
that soon the summer would lie dead in Rind. 
The wind then shifted round 
and in the night 
came the black and terrifying heat. 
I fell into the arms of someone 
running toward me. 
And this someone frightened me. 
How could I know in that hot darkness 
who it was 
that caught me as I fell, embraced me. 
If it was a devil or a person. 
Because the roaring grew, the hot wind swelled 
into a hurricane, 
and he who held me cried out ever louder, 

yet in a voice that seemed so far away: 
Shield your eyes. It's coming. You'll be blinded. 
Then I made my voice as piercing as I could 
and shrieked in answer: I am blind 
and therefore shielded. I have never seen, 
but always only felt the land of Rind. 
Then he released me, running for his life, 
where I don't know, in the dark's hot roar 
outvoiced only by a sudden burst 
of fearsome thunderclaps from far away 
rolling in my direction, and I blind. 
Then down I fell again and set off creeping. 
I crept the forests of the land of Rind. 
I succeeded in reaching a hollow in the rocks 
where the trees weren't falling, the heat was not intense. 
There I lay, happy almost, amid rocks 
and prayed god Rind for help and for my soul's defense. 
And someone from the roar entered the hollow 
(0 miracle) 
and bore me to a van with closed compartments 
and someone transported me all through the night 
to Rindon airfield 
where a refugee-agent, silenced 
by a voice shout-shattered, hoarsely wheezed 
my number and my name and bade me join 
the current bound for the goldonder-sluice. 
The years that followed were my destiny. 
On the Martian tundra I learned how, 
like an envoy sent from Rind, to move the guard 
90 

with sad songs for a destiny so hard. 
I learned to read the braille of mighty screams 
in faces which I felt of with my hand. 
It was as songstress for"Reclaim the Tundra" 
that later I would go back to my land. 
It was cold there now, all plantlife injured. 
But stubborn wills persisted in their plan 
to save the soil by means of a new substance 
science had discovered: geosan. 
How that would come about I can't explain, 
and many said the idea would misfire. 
"What none could do, but everyone's desire" 
the plan was called in common conversation. 
So I up and left my home and inspiration 
for my songs about the land of Rind and sought 
the post of singer, serving Chamber Three. 
I'm there now, singing ''Ah the Dale, ah me!" 
and "Little Bird out in the Rosewoods Yonder." 
But also "The Cast-Iron Song" a Gonder 
sings so often here in our goldonder. 
All struggling for heaven is a struggling for joy 
and the aim of every heart is paradise. 
How baleful, then, if shady powers should lead 
and gather those consumed with wrath and greed 
into that struggle, darkening its advance 
with flags of vengeance, hate, intolerance. 
How hard for mankind to perceive the true 
as a natural desire that can be realized. 
How hard to know one's way so early on. 
91 

How hard to stand there droning at the altar, 
appealing to a god about whose laws 
the only thing we know is that he suffers 
from all that does not wholly serve his cause. 
How hard to fit belief to daily living. 
How hard to grasp a god of sacrifice. 
How hard not to be thinking in our silence: 
must still more sacrificial blood be let 
and why have executioners not vanished yet? 
How hard not to be thinking in our silence. 
And practices of grace, how hard to grasp 
for one who's never spoken with the dead 
and never found an answer from those graves 
to which no fairies steal with magic staves, 
for from death's bonds only one has come 
to meet his god when all the others, dumb 
and blind among the miseries of decay, 
must lie there till all time has passed away. 
How hard to keep one's faith in life to come. 
How right to have the wish for life to come. 
It witnesses to a delight in living 
and an urge to see its loveliness once more, 
not simply die like dragonflies on shore. 
92 

How right to witness a delight in living. 
How right to set one's life above one's death. 
How hard the squirming in a grave-deep crevice. 
How easy to believe in life to come. 
Sunk in earth the generations lie 
' 
in stark-blind fields beneath the springtime wind 
and as one choir they raise their voices high 
in blindmen's anthems to the land of Rind. 
With the limbs of their bodies ravaged into soil 
daily they celebrate their god gone blind 
who knows all things and has no need to see 
those shapes of life whose raiment he assigned. 
The tender elements will rot away, 
the solid elements are meant to hold; 
but time does pass and soon there comes a day 
when solid elements decay to mould. 
And soon with ease their chorus is delivered 
to the tops of trees, and every leaf is breathing 
to any breeze that may be passing by 
that death, lapped in summer, makes a joyful seething. 
As selflessly as lovely summers do, 
so the soul of life goes, as ungraspable 
as lovely summers which have gone away 
and every year come visiting anew. 
« 
« 
« 
93 

Enthralled, we listen to the sightless maid. 
Then several speak from where they stand, tight-lipped: 
What lovely words she summoned to her aid. 
What lovely words she came upon in Rind. 
But merely words they are, and merely wind. 
5 0  
T H E  A R C H - C O M I C  S A N D O N  
The arch-comic Sandon was living in space and delighted 
each woman and man whom sensations of light-years united. 
When the sun had averted its blaze from the bands of deported, 
at our nightmare paresis the arch-comic Sandon cavorted. 
If delight dropped to zero from suns glaring out from afar, 
the arch-comic Sandon gave voice to a screech called a Blahr. 
We howled when he entered on stage with his three-legged car. 
Our thanks was a howl and he answered right back with a blahr. 
But everything falls to the grave, which adores jeux d'esprit. 
The arch-comic Sandon was lost in the vast cosmic sea. 
Used up and worn down by the burdensome fortunes of man, 
the arch-comic gave up his blahr, filling out his life-span. 
5 1  
A lady of the world, a beautiful gold leaf 
upon a choice branch of the Yedis nobles, 
exquisite of shape, her hair divided 
on the left side blue, the right side black 
and with a splendid stone comb 
94 

of rarest Yabian fire-agate 
in a finely upswept bun, the height of hairstyle, 
is describing to another Yedis lady 
how, in her palanquin, she once looked out 
from Geining Highland to the Setokaidi Sea, 
where the moon rose like a perfect lantefn 
with the sated glow of autumn. 
I find both of these ladies 
on a day when I am sorting mima shards 
and playing them in shock and solitude. 
Once the mima captured their attractions, 
the wonder of their beauty, Yedis-eyed. 
And the language they had spoken at one time 
by the Setokaidi Sea. 
To think that Mirna is no longer with us. 
To think that Our Superior is dead. 
I cannot grasp it. Nothing now makes sense. 
The goddess dead of grief. And we condemned. 
52 
S H A R D S  F R O M  M I M A  
Look at her, the one wound tight 
in the latest fashions, walking in her casing 
like a mannequin. 
Ah me, she is forever worthy by the sea 
that curves from Teb to Cape Atlantis 
in aphroditic surreality 
to be preserved forever uncorroded 
by time and salt. 
' 
95 

Don't believe it. 
That woman has lain moldering 
four million years, and nobody, 
not even the mighty culture 
that bore her, has left the faintest trace. 
0, what a beauty. 
Lord God, how can you? 
And what lovely and modern clothing. 
Heba, do you see 
that marvelous belt 
and the cut of the waistline, 
what attention 
to the possibility of women living 
a garment's life 
in time, season by season 
but all the same 
so deeply merged with art and beauty 
that its proper backdrop is the sea 
at Cape Atlantis. 
God, how can you? 
Where is pain the greatest? 
In you who garner all? 
In us who see and know 
how all is garnered? 
Your omnipotence-our impotence. 
Switch off. We'll go and yurg. 
Did you see? 
That outfit can be partially co-ordinated 
with the Tany line, with Yibb and Sesi-Yedis 
and other styles of cut 
from Dorisburg. 

53 
T H E  S P E A R  
I n  our eleventh year we saw a vision, 
the narrowest and meagerest of visions: 
a spear that traveled through the Universe. 
I 
We both had come out of the same direction 
and it did not veer off, but held its course. 
Its rate of speed exceeded the goldonder's 
so that the spear 
moved promptly off beyond us. 
But afterwards we sat in groups for hours, 
speaking excitedly with one another 
about the spear, about its path and origin. 
But no one knew, and nobody could know. 
Some tried to guess, but nobody believed. 
In some sense, it was not to be believed, 
lacked meaning as an object of belief. 
It was simply flying through the Universe. 
The Void-spear moved along its pointless course. 
But nonetheless this vision had 
the power to alter many people's brains: 
Three went mad, one was a suicide. 
And still another started up a sect, 
a shrill, dry, tediously ascetic crew 
from whom Aniara long had much ado. 
So we were all struck by the spear, head on. 
54 
C H E F O N E ,S G A R D E N  
Intending to keep i n  close touch with the Researcher Corps, 
the High Command gave them a dinner in "Spring Evermore:' 
97 

the sort of a greenhouse goldonders have always in place, 
in folk humor known as "the flying plantations of space." 
The best part of man there keeps watch over all that is born. 
They are miniature Edens where nothing is ragged and torn, 
where from nights of the clear staring spaces and glinting machinery, 
mankind can be back and at home among soft living greenery. 
Our High Command sat now alongside the Researcher Corps, 
and the question was: how to protect our own "Spring Evermore"? 
How act to preserve ever more of the life of the race, 
how safeguard our heirloom of" flying plantations of space"? 
They cast their eyes first on the beautiful park all around, 
encircled by arches that vanished in grass-mantled ground. 
Picture-perfect it was: the glowing spring heavens, the Edenic hedge 
with a circular streamlet contrived along its inner edge. 
Up to the sky, which the eye looked on last, a dove flew. 
A woman unclothed was sitting in grass hyssop-blue. 
Ample of bosom and posed for her beauty's enhancing, 
she seemed to me wondrously fair, for the dusk was advancing. 
Why, to her very eyebrows the woman's great beauty held bright, 
and that was the cause for my stepping so close to the sight. 
But in spite of the drinks I had lately got under my belt, 
seldom had beauty dealt pain like the pain this one dealt. 

I kept rubbing my eyes, not believing that I was awake: 
for this was the Maid of the Mount whom a Dragon did take. 
That hackneyed old ballad which no one could tolerate singing 
was reality here in the seas where goldonders were swinging. 
I 
They dismiss the adventure, and see just the woman undressed. 
Will the Mount be dismissed? Will the Dragon too be dispossessed? 
But I, though the High Command's guest, nonetheless wanted fact 
about how dragons order their lives, how they manage and act. 
I asked her: How is it, my beauty, so charming, so bare, 
could this park where you dwell serve the Dragon perchance as his lair? 
She answered: I'm one of the folk in the fire crying Sombra 
and you're of the folk who cremated all life in Xinombra. 
My hate for your people's as hard as my loving embrace 
of each tree, of each plant in "the flying plantations of space." 
Then Chefone's chamber grew dark as I entered, astounded, 
and by blackening shame my abundant distress was compounded. 
I had to recoil at the look that the slave maid conferred, 
and I no more found meaning in anything else that occurred. 
In silence I bowed to her nakedness, then walked away 
as up to the heavens all manner of birds raised their lay. 
And with Chefone hardly concerned that I stay in my place, 
I slipped off unobserved from "the flying plantations of space." 
99 

But long did I think of that woman so lovely and bare. 
And long did I feel that the Dragon and I were a pair. 
55 
At the Planetarium deck, which is protected 
by a bright transparent plexi-bowl, 
the lifts are emptied of whoever wish 
to use the star-deck for a quiet stroll 
and see approaching us a nova's flare 
from out the coils of Berenice's hair. 
The astronomer-made humble by his trade­
tells us how a universe is gaming 
in distant galaxies with novas flaming 
and, tired of gifts forever being made 
the photophage, with unimaginable ire 
suddenly breaks down and flings the fire 
of an exhausted love's concluding blaze 
into the photophage's thankless rays. 
A cheeky space snob listens with contempt 
and in a stock tone of the Late Goldondian 
wherein one instantly perceives the Gondian 
disgustedly he hones a phrase and down 
it sinks into a whisper of derision 
level with his weary, deep-space frown. 
This caused the ship's astronomer to freeze 
and close with apologies that evening's show 
of points of interest in the cosmic seas. 
100 

One day I met Chefone in the passageway 
leading into Gopta Chamber Three. 
With scorn he asked: "What do the birdies say 
this year, your Doris-thrush and chicka'dee? 
Is the mima now recovered from her smart? 
I saw you hunting long and feverishly 
beneath her bosom for what ailed her heart. 
Perhaps you found the wee locality:' 
I blurt a scared goldonder-salutation, 
reporting to him that she died of grief. 
Although clairvoyant, she saw no salvation 
for people caged within this demon-fief. 
Then Chefone guffaws as though he saw 
the funniest of sights in Mirna's dens, 
and I want to collapse in mute despair, 
remembering my home in Doric glens. 
But Chefone, bored senseless by all tears, 
walks on and leaves me standing stiff and cold, 
minded when springtimes of a thousand years 
turned winter without end in Mirna's hold. 
Is our redemption ever to be won 
in Aniara after that event? 
I look in every corner but find nothing, 
worrying every wish and argument. 
101 

5 7  
The collapse o f  fair Libidel came 
with the drug she had placed on her tongue. 
\Ve sang by her grave where the flame 
caught hold of her, no longer young. 
Our shuddering conscience was blocked 
in cynical regions ice-crusted. 
The rustproof sepulchral vaults locked 
in zones where, instead, love had rusted. 
5 8 
A rival religion to the Cult arose 
which the strain and torment of the dark inspire. 
They worship Light as concept and as flame: 
the goddess of this new cult is a fire. 
Their chosen priestess was the maid from Rind. 
And the chorus wells up like a stormy wind 
when such a songstress, her eyes gone dark, 
rises at the altar like a kindled spark. 
She chants her songs about the god of Light 
and witnesses to how in Rind she lay 
beholding light, with skin her means of sight. 
The vision burned her. This is what it is 
to be blinded in the skin by a god of light. 
The ecstasy is on her. None hears well 
what she is say i ng, but a mighty swell 
102 

of choric voices raises her on high. 
And, saintly-blind, amid a thousand candles, 
in fireproof cloak of kieselguhr wrapped round, 
she's pushed off to the photophage's wall 
to cry out after light for Rindish ground. 
I 
Not seldom would I wander to that hall 
where this sect met; on me it left its mark 
and on many others in this sea of dark. 
59 
In the Memory Hall there are recanters' fetes 
and those immersed the deepest in recanting 
have gathered, ashes strewn upon their pates, 
torturing themselves with their recanting-chanting. 
"Stand up and confess. The walls of grievous rages 
are closing on the fate we engineered. 
Our doom is mirror-image to the cages 
at which from outside we ourselves once jeered. 
When good excuses end their counterfeits 
the mirror makes a Hades all its own 
and the mirror's hot, be careful of your mitts. 
It mirrors what was spoken, what was done. 
Day in, day out from gray fakirs of rue 
I listen to the hideous anthems rise 
and I'm appalled. Could anyone outdo 
the tramp lings of the self enacted here? 
103 

For me, to find a cure is more the issue, 
a cure to rouse the mima's broken breath 
and to refashion the celestial tissue 
burst by the breakers from the land of death. 
6 o  
With all the high-strung thousands here on board 
it's good to hear the placid intonation 
of our astronomer when he reports 
on pre-goldondic times and glaciation. 
He notes how meaningless it is to speak 
about a cosmic time-clock for fatality 
when cosmic rhythmics show another pace 
than does a culture based on time's centrality. 
Those generations meant for such a doom 
will have reposed a thousand years in sand 
when space brings down its hyperborean whip 
with one late wallop from an ice-age hand. 
In easy images he tells at ease 
the course of the most recent glaciation, 
when Twenty-third-century pre-goldynasties 
slid off their thrones in that refrigeration. 
The thousand-year empire was about to see the light 
when by the dark of war its dawn was scattered, 
and they were just about to dig another site 
when humane projects were forever shattered. 
104 

The friginebula of Golmos met the sun, 
and the sun began a transit through the long 
night of Golmos with shadow-play that racked 
our world with ice-age winds' unsparing song. 
The cap expanded circumpolarly 
I 
along the Earth. And ever larger surfaces 
were cased in ice-sheets kilometers thick. 
It was not arctic snow alone that settled 
-a paralytic orbit's hexagons-
but cosmic snowfall from the nebula 
compounding winter seasons into eons. 
An ice-shield came to lie all over Europe, 
which, hidden under its gigantic cake, 
was bedded down for sixteen thousand winters 
upon which not a ray of sun could break; 
and countrymen from Europe's many nations 
carried south their technical expertness 
and held out for a while, but then declined, 
chilled through in the barbarian inertness. 
People for twelve thousand years were savages 
with odds and ends of science left behind, 
waiting for the sun to mend the ravages 
in nature's forests and the realms of mind. 
For generations working in their mills 
among the wheels and wires of crude machines, 
they had to be retrained for brutal fates 
and well-acclimated to ice-age scenes. 
105 

The friginebula now left the sun, 
but mankind of the pre-goldondic ilk 
for fifteen centuries saw it as a crape 
and a titanic cloth of coal-black silk 
rising every evening in the skies of night 
dark with its widow's veil that hid the galaxy. 
And yet the black cloth did keep moving off, 
diminishing against the sky's expanse; 
and gradually receding in the distance, 
it lost the look of a funereal crape. 
And after scarce eleven thousand years 
from the ages when the sun abandoned Golmos, 
moving forward in full radiance, 
this carbon-speck had almost wholly left 
the new-lit backdrop of the sky's tableau. 
The ice by then had melted: new generations 
had the favor of new springs in Gond. 
61 
Despite grave difficulties I devised 
a screen consisting of two kinds of beams. 
I learned how seemingly to fix the screen 
in space a few miles out from the goldonder. 
Against this beam-screen I would then transmit 
a third beam which became the video wave. 
In this way I could organize in space, 
through images that seemed to form a wall, 
a sort of picture-curtain in the void. 
I made these pictures teem with woodland scenes 
and moonlit lakes, or mountainsides and cities. 
Sometimes I had a large and mighty force 
106 

of men march off with flags of triumph flying, 
all to gather a mirage from walls 
that shut out an intolerable space. 
Soon I had another wall laid out 
in space, but this one on the other side, 
and in between these walls prolific 
of mirages the goldonder moved ahead, 
screened off from those unthinkable abysses 
which were unable now to stare at us 
as they'd been doing for the last nine years 
with shafts that stung and needles' piercing lights. 
But even tapestries of fantasy 
have need of some support from human will: 
a little offering from within of dreams 
from those who just demanded, giving nothing 
to us but their blankness, like a hole 
to fill with pretty pictures by the roll. 
Now this blankness has been turned on me. 
I'm driven to the spacecraft's worst recesses 
and given death threats if I don't at once 
account for why the blankness still oppresses. 
I tell them how it is and how it was: 
one's private blankness no one can conceal. 
Like Humpty Dumpty who fell down and spattered, 
against time's waves the soul of Mirna shattered; 
and Humpty Dumpty nobody can heal, 
still less am I the person who can heal you. 
Your blankness is appalling, that I feel. 
107 

I do my level best with magic arts 
in truth not worth the spirit I expend, 
but you contribute nothing from your hearts. 
So those fine pictures came to no good end. 
62 
\Ve try the wheel of a routine. I lecture 
to space cadets upon the Gopta theory. 
Through the vista-window suns peer in at us, 
looking calm of eye, although we know 
their thunderous roars amid the roentgens blasting, 
their ftailings in the gorge of Everlasting. 
And while inside my head I hear them booming 
like fearful drumbeats in the war which light 
forever wages on the fierce dark's might, 
I hear my own voice answer, pussyfooting, 
the Gopta questions I had just been putting. 
"With this new age's re-evaluations 
and new expansions of the tensor doctrine 
the way was opened for the possibility 
of finding the proportioned symmetry 
which by the Gopta formula through qwi 
was simplified and proved the right approach 
for every longer run in heaven's coach." 
The space cadets rise to their feet and leave 
in model files for the adjacent hall, 
where their next master, calm and cool Twelander, 
will lecture on constructing a Goldonder. 

A Gondian woman who is widowed now 
came often with her husband to the vista-room. 
For many years they'd sit there with their bundles 
ready, as if waiting for a landing. 
I 
And although many looked with irony 
-increasingly space-cold-upon that pair, 
the two preserved their touching expectations, 
gazing with confidence toward Lyreland. 
Inside their reverential brains there stirred 
a scent of thyme from meadows they had known 
and the bread she had been baking in the oven 
that they had left back in the land of Gond. 
How many thousand times they sat and read 
in Heaven's prospect, huddling close together, 
no mortal knows in years of cosmic space 
coldly elapsing without other trace 
save that the two of them turned gray at last 
and she became alone, sat left alone 
thinking silently of days now flown 
when he was still alive as in times past 
in Gond, until they heard the siren blast 
signalling"Last couple, step inside" 
to start the exodus from far and wide. 
At Goldon's lift-off zone, huddled close, 
they bade a grave farewell to Dorisvale 
and then with a departing prayer they left 
their exile problem in the hands of fate. 
109 

Over many years I have observed 
the widow sitting lonesome, mute and bent, 
while we who, high beyond the firmament, 
ingeniously administered Fate's hand 
grew more despairing of the Promised Land. 
Hear us who from Xinombra 
harrow you with memories. 
We dead ones wise too late 
harrow you with visions. 
In silence over years and years there fell 
a snow of Xinombra's ashen column. 
Each time you wake we rush at you full tilt 
with our seared arms, 
drawing out your guilt. 
Xinombra's ashen pillar drifted 
on through Rind. 
It reached the coastline on the fifth day 
and Cape Atlantis on the seventh day. 
There wasn't any hope for refugees 
not even in the open sea 
where medusas were seen dying 
and octopi were floating upwards from the deeps. 
Xinombra's ashen column lay like waterbloom 
of death across the oceans. 
110 

The demons floated round with water-angels 
and all of them were dead. 
Religions were tangled on the lines of thought 
in gulfstreams of death. 
I 
The stone of wisdom 
wrapped in the slaughter-mask of genius 
was shot to the heart of Xinombra City, 
which died a third time. 
Oh, that jewel. 
We rigged up a curtain for dreams. 
And between us and our memory of Xinombra 
came a grand forgetting 
filled with its own life. 
Magnified and modified 
our senses flew 
transformed 
into adventures deep in the dimensions. 
An insufferable point of pain dissolved. 
We clearly felt the point 
breaking up 
and welling out 
toward nameless blessedness 
where there was no Aniara 
where Chefone was dead, no one knew how 
and no one asked about it. 
Ill 

A lightness lifted all with equal ease 
and Isagel among them. 
Libidel along with all the libidines 
and dormifids slipped in 
transfigured by the drug 
as by the dews of dawn 
in flawless groves. 
6 6  
Ever deeper each among the doomed 
has found the Eden I must herewith name. 
But once our opium is all consumed 
and paradisal visions are dispersed, 
in the shrieking Xinombranos burst, 
swearing eternal vengeance for Xinombra's shame. 
I'm wakened by a scream. It is Chebeba. 
She gazes at me with her pupils fading, 
losing their luster, slowly dying down. 
She cries out: God, I don't want to live in here 
where joy and comfort can be found no more. 
My memory of Xinombra, how grim, how clear. 
From every side came drought 
whose culmination 
soberly prepared for in dry formulae 
was the phototurb, 
converting every wind 
to oven-torrid air. 
1 1 2  

The season was autumn. 
Refugees would tell us tales 
of chilly lakes where people to the end 
tried to sink themselves. 
Now it is over. 
And no one's left to blame. 
The men in charge? All dead. 
The instigators fled in time. 
The tools of power that maintained 
the whole thing 
with fireproof hand 
turned glaze and ashes. 
I 
Everything that could burn turned to ash. 
And stones were vitrified 
down to a four-inch depth. 
In certain regions it went deeper: 
a molten foot or more 
of granite surface boiled. 
But no one had to look. 
All had whirled off earlier, round and round 
as floated ash. 
What occurred inside the houses? 
Practically nothing. 
It went too rapidly to really happen. 
Imagine an alarm clock on a nightstand 
set to measure out the time in seconds 
is caught offguard by its own liquefaction 
113 

and then boils up and whirls away as gas 
and all this in a millionth of a second. 
And she, asleep in bed and unaware, 
wakened seconds earlier by chilly air. 
Oh, spare us this, I hear you crying now. 
From penitential shades come cries for sombra 
like the folk who shouted sombra in Xinombra. 
6 8  
We felt a pull out of our course 
and started to hope the conclusion 
was well on its way in the void. 
For the old it was like a transfusion 
to feel the ship toss in her track. 
From all who had wearied of pain 
and now pined away for nirvana 
the cry came: she's tossing, the beauty, 
she gave a bad toss in her track. 
The unspoken hope turned explicit 
and no ridicule was exchanged 
when doctrines and world-wide religions 
convened in the halls, where they ranged 
their emblems and banners and crosses, 
and prayer-slips and lotus-motifs. 
Her tosses came hard as she flew 
and hope was unbalanced by terror 
but lifted its banner anew. 
1 1 4 

We entered something not unlike a fog-bank 
thickening with every day that passed, 
until on the fifth day it began incandescing 
off the goldonder's bow. Thick and fast" 
thereafter came doings of great oddity: 
a rainbow-shimmering but cloudlike mantle 
wove around the ship fantastically. 
Its play of colors was beyond compare-
a vast and unexampled show of fireworks 
dazed Aniara's kingdom with its blinding glare. 
This quasi-festival did not last long: 
we met resistance of an unknown kind, 
and a typhoon of incandescent particles 
gave rise to deathly terror and to dread 
that seized at once upon the general mind. 
We thought we must be foundering and dying. 
The many-thousand people occupying 
the full four-thousand rooms in the goldonder 
thronged the passageways in utter panic. 
A good one hundred passengers from Gond 
were trampled down in the assembly halls 
and several thousand injured otherwise. 
Dislocated gravity, 
spreading all over, discharged chaos waves 
through our souls 
with thousands of vibrations, as in smash-ups 
on hard mountains, setting each heart quaking 
in such dread that nothing on our journey 
115 

matched the ghastly anguish that soon filled 
with howls of horror halls and passageways 
where the crush 
was murderous: 
a human mill, 
by human terror driven, 
in maddened maelstroms pulverized itself. 
Like a spiral drill, as driven by the Titans, 
the goldonder bored into a cosmic sand-cloud 
which, blazing, blinding, burst into extinction 
against the shocked metals of the fuselage. 
And like a top spinning in fire, refulgent 
as from a nearby sun, our spacecraft ground 
in the thunderous uproar of the substance 
ever deeper into it. 
And later 
as abruptly as it started 
it all was over, the goldonder dove 
along the loxodrome 
to which in her fall she clove. 
What could it have been? came the question. 
In spite of all our dead that's what came first. 
It was in some strange way of greater weight 
in that fantastic world where dread pursued 
its now-familiar passage toward the Lyre. 
And in the middle of the dead and trampled 
the High Command pronounced what it believed 
and what it looked upon as probable: 
a cloud of cosmic granules or of ice 
of some material, cosmic powder-firn 
1 1 6  

floating for eons-an everlasting snow 
floating around for several billion years 
and searching for its mount 
to settle on, 
to settle on in peace. 
I 
And the people were pleased with this communication 
and, bending down, they lifted up the dead 
whose souls had now a peaceful habitation, 
composed and cool as snow 
settled at last 
on spirit's mount. 
« 
« 
« 
But many were the changes in the life 
we led in the world that had become our own. 
The hall of mirrors which for four years running 
prolonged our illusion 
lay smashed and shattered 
and fragments in the hundred thousands covered 
in heaping drifts the floor that we had danced on. 
And among the jagged fragments, cut to pieces, 
lay many a beauty halted in the yurg 
the cloud had just been dancing with our ship. 
With trinkets high up on her thighs lay Heba; 
and Daisy, lovely still, as well as Yaal, 
lay dead beside the badly hurt Chebeba. 
All of this befell us in our twelfth year 
of travel, reckoning from Dorisvale. 
117 

70 
Once more we drifted in a workaday way 
and as before in Ghazilnut we lay, 
the name for that lobule of our galaxy 
in line with man's star-terminology. 
But this is not to say that Ghazilnut 
is bridgeable or recedes 
into a frame no larger than life needs; 
no, Ghazilnut signifies, the way things stand, 
a smaller lobule of four galactaves. 
A galactave is fifteen light-years wide. 
In astronautics they are wont to put 
the total area of the Milky Way 
at eight hundred thousand galactaves. 
No, what good are measures in explaining this­
Aniara swallowed up in the abyss. 
To show how Aniara's swallowed in the void. 
7 1  
T H E  S PA C E - H A N D :  
Each time I search my recollections well 
I think that I can trace back Nobia 
to Tlaloctitl i 
a little ill-ville in the Dorafma Highlands. 
It is a town that no one sees 
with hospitals set deep inside the mountain. 
An old abandoned mine was given over 
some time past for putting up that town, which 
-after some essential propping-up 
and alteration of the mountain's innards­
was laid out at a depth 
of fifteen hundred feet from valley-level. 
118 

I travel more and more now 
in thought to that locale, 
where from collection-boxes the Samaritans 
have bought up everything and settled in. 
They say it cost 
-I've heard the figure of three million dymas-
-in Gondian coin five hundred thousand gondi-
-in Rindian sound-coin five million rindi-
Eleven years they begged alms for their town 
and then they built far down, for safety's sake, 
a mission-station in Dorafma's mountain. 
« 
« 
« 
When one has long resided among demons 
such goodness seems like an exotic land 
bearing the fruit by which it may be known 
and where the joy of simple things peals clear 
as a cuckoo in the valley of the heart. 
72 
T H E  S O N G  O F  K A R E L I A  
Time passed and years went over to the frigid, bitter spaces. 
Life grew less and less time-bounded for the many as they sat there 
peering through the massive windows, waiting for a star to shake 
loose 
from the others, heading this way, always narrowing the distance. 
Growing up, the children played upon the tundras of the interned, 
on the worn floors of the ballrooms pitted more and more and 
rougher. 
Changing times bring changing manners. Yurghing had been long 
forgotten 
119 

and the dance-besotted Daisy slept forever in her helix 
in the vault where none but adepts of the dance were laid to slumber. 
But I myself sat still and thought of glorious Karelia, 
where I had my life once, where I kept for some men's lifetime, 
stayed for more than thirty winters and for nine-and-twenty 
summers 
till once more I came to hazard other countries, other fortunes on 
my torpid transmigration. 
The recollection comes in flashes. Nothing blocks it in these spaces, 
beams of every age converge here, and I glean from sundry nations 
fragments from my long migration. 
Fairest far among fair glimpses comes the vision of Karelia, 
like a lake agleam through branches, like a lustrous lake in summer 
in the June-illumined season when no sooner evening darkens 
than the cuckoo fluting clear sends the tender Aino summons, 
bids her take her misty mantle, rise above the June-eve waters, 
hasten toward the risen vapors, meet the cuckoo in his capers 
i n  the rustlings of Karelia. 
How, alas, can one take counsel, 
counsel wise from bygone ages 
whose commandments have no force now 
and whose fields time set afire. 
Sit down here in Mima's chambers. 
͵lindful that we were alive once 
in another life, receiving 
wisdom from the simple breadloaf. 
1 20 

Sit down here. Where is my mother? 
Sit down here. Where is my darling? 
In a better world than this one. 
Was the knife I used the reason 
that I do not win my dearest? 
Plunged it in my guardian's bosom 
when he swaggered from the sauna 
took my love's breast in his fingers . . .  
Where on earth? Oh yes, I have it. 
There's the meadow, there's the forest 
in Karelia of the rune-songs. 
I sit here beside these others 
talking big about their own worlds. 
' 
How they thrived there, how they lived life 
lushly on their Star Majestic. 
But ninety centuries past, one evening 
I sat silent in the fallow 
with my love, before it happened 
and the Chief Judge sent me outlawed 
from Karelia of the fallows. 
Good that sometimes we forget things. 
Good that only for brief moments 
are we served up with our memories. 
Good not always to be mindful 
of our torpid transmigration. 
121 

Best to look while saying nothing. 
Gods may have their watchmen sitting 
here and listening. What do we know? 
If I'm quiet, if I suffer, 
if I feel remorse in silence, 
maybe then I shall one evening 
see the finish of my memories, 
finish out my transmigration 
and, scrubbed clean and marked as worthy 
of the lovely Star Majestic, 
settle deep the way a bird would 
in Karelia of the fallows. 
73 
L I B IDELLA (Secret Dirge) 
Does my dog nose where your nightwood grows 
Libidella? 
Does my little sly cat pretend to doze 
my purring Libidella?. 
Is my ear whispering its own soft calls 
Libidella? 
Do I have a home in another man's walls 
listening Libidella? 
Lib i della 
pass me your Isthmus vase. 
Now let stella 
kindle her alpha-blaze. 
In Alpha Centauri's puzzle 
we'll shed hot tears and nuzzle, 
122 

0 nuda you 
pitch nudie woo 
in a moonwood of lutes for two. 
Libidella 
let's head for the Dog Star's rays. 
Let it swell a-
gain, dear, your Isthmus vase. 
The merry old widow is slinking 
and setting the others to thinking. 
0 nuda you 
pitch nudie woo 
in a moonwood of lutes for two. 
Libidella 
naked in nudinell 
raise to stella 
moonwhite your nudibell. 
In Alpha Centauri's beaming 
we'll toast with teardrops streaming. 
0 nuda you 
pitch nudie woo 
in a moonwood of lutes for two. 
74 
In spaces all too clear stares the horror 
and, thinking nothing, sees into it all. 
Gratuitous, this space-death glassy-clear. 
Gratuitous, the emptiness enabling 
the pellucidity of the absurd. 
123 

Gratuitous, the horror star-like blinking. 
My friend, you know too much for having done no thinking. 
You slept, and by the boundless clarity 
of cosmic seas your daydreams all were razed 
and like a sun the light of horror blazed. 
75 
A prize is promised of ten million gondi 
-a sum to make the competition bold­
to anybody who can rotate our goldonder 
and aim her nose-cone straight for Doriswold. 
But now the years have passed, the contest now 
involves the Comfortress in Mirna's hold. 
Who'll penetrate the mima's mysteries? 
Who'll give the fairy back her fairy-wand? 
That is our cry in the oceans of beyond. 
My calculations on my lap, I sit 
in silence, while the space historian lectures 
about the pioneers in these sea-regions 
which, conquered now, were once the grave of legions. 
In olden times the lift was steeper. (Witness Icarus.) 
Yes, there actually were people who believed 
that we, with proper purchase, could be shot 
from rocket-rig rotundas and still clear 
1 24 

the curving-vectors and the flexure fields. 
When that naive idea came to naught 
-and many victims did it cost the nations (witness Thanatos)­
came Period 1\vo, the so-called Age of Heaven Ladders, 
when by a series of ascension-boosts 
their vessels throbbed ahead beyond the fields 
-a quite good method in and of itself, 
but cost-inefficient and not without its risks. 
The curve of mishaps as we here observe 
speaks for itself as to the way things stood 
back when space was still a maidenhood. 
Gauged against the curve of present times 
and gauged against our numbers' new sum total, 
the curve of former times looks far less good. 
In fact, we're right to say that it was brutal." 
77 
At the telescope we shrink to see 
a coal-black sun extinguished namelessly, 
a black-draped sun in cosmic burial ground, 
both blackened corpse and solar funeral mound 
that first in firestorms blazed along time's Cape 
and shot flames where the jaws of darkness gape 
till in good time and by entropic law 
sucked down whole in the photophage's maw, 
which left no more than slag and scale to mark 
its grave in barren valleys of the dark. 
One of the many thousand dark-hued mounds 
that no one sees, but in their darkness stand 
an endless night in cosmic burial grounds. 
125 

It reflects no light, but rather strikes the eye 
as an eclipsing of a group of stars 
which no more than a month ago were seen 
exactlv where the sun of darkness now 
' 
appears as sharp-edged as a coal-black coin. 
Now in coal-dark majesty it plants 
its rounded profile on the gas-bright nebula. 
It is a dark and globe-round giant mountain 
deep in whose dismal cave the genie of the lamp 
died very long ago in the dark's embrace 
and, hemmed in by the coal-black slag, is frozen 
nameless in light's grave and without trace. 
Our Chief Engineer 
a man from Upper Gond 
a brilliant expert on the yessertubes 
departed this life 
on fifteen November which was Wednesday. 
In recognition of his years of service 
and major contributions to goldondery 
his wish was granted to be laid to rest 
within a rescue-module 
then to be shot out 
on course for Rigel. 
A numerous throng accompanied him 
to the exit room 
with the rescue-capsule on the catafalque 
and the people singing in farewell 
"Rroad the Rreast and Far the Harbor." 
126 

And then they all withdrew; 
the exit room was closed. 
One only heard the rumbling 
from the units. 
The death-capsule was channeled through 
to its light-year grave. 
79 
We came from Earth, from Dorisland, 
the jewel in our solar system, 
the only orb where Life obtained 
a land of milk and honey. 
Describe the landscapes we found there, 
the days their dawns could breed. 
Describe the creature fine and fair 
who sewed the shrouds for his own seed 
till God and Satan hand in hand 
through a deranged and poisoned land 
took flight uphill and down 
from man: a king with ashen crown. 
So 
In the midst of the blazing sun 
there is a pupil, a core 
that with its curious whirling 
makes it the star of love. 
Whenever it looks upon Earth 
a meadow arises and flowers 
day after day, sending seed 
gaily through glad summer hours. 
127 

The flowers hoist from the ground 
their bunting that lives and stirs. 
Butterflies dance there with yellow 
veils round the thistle burrs. 
Bumblebees hum in the grass 
that the shade of the blades cross-hatches. 
Coolly the summer wind plays 
in quivering poppy patches. 
Gladness is fleeting-a moment's 
windfall of fair-weather luck. 
Far from all folly and ruck 
shines in the summery wood 
the summer-star of love, 
the flower of midsummer seasons. 
What could have offered more reasons 
for us to be happy and good? 
8 1  
The dark in our minds neared its worst 
after nineteen years in space. 
I sat with my pencil, immersed 
in goptistics regarding the trace 
of increased radiation from Lyre 
suggesting one thing or another. 
So we sat in the twentieth spring 
and studied the Lyre-star's blaze 
and Isagel read through a string 
of beta and gamma rays. 
128 

And ironical winds of the soul 
alternating with cold gusting fears 
accompanied Isagel's breath 
in the ebb and flow of her tears. 
And all the romantic heart-achings 
once mocked for their tears beyond measure 
now counted as sober essentials 
in darkness so distant from pleasure. 
Clasping my heroine to me, 
I could taste her warm tears as they poured. 
And she was the warmth of the living 
that still kept me company on board. 
And out toward the luminous Lyre 
drove the ship with its hull full of scars, 
mementos of those scalding meteors 
we had met in the suite of the stars. 
And Isagel wished nothing sung. 
But I was insistent upon 
addressing my hardening tongue 
to asbestos and silicon. 
A song out of statical science 
I sang my disconsolate bride, 
sang of man's honor set at defiance 
and irreparable deicide. 
And Isagel ended her weeping 
-though perhaps there are other things worse. 
129 

In the twentieth year this befell us 
on a journey that had our hearts' curse. 
82 
An event you might well call outre 
has been heralded and much feted 
in space upon this day. 
The High Command had us dress up 
in our very finest clothing 
to fete the Cosmic Way. 
We used a hundred staircases. 
All four thousand rooms, 
two hundred thirty meeting-halls, 
they emptied right away. 
In the massive central mall 
that holds a good ten thousand 
(called the Light-Year Hall) 
we met up, you and I. 
Then only did we notice 
how hard the years had been 
on all both low and high, 
when under chandelier-lights 
we were placed in that sea of people 
that are all called "you and I:' 
It was as if all the souls 
had come up from the Earth 
and gathered today on high. 
130 

And the songs of angel choirs 
and speeches of goldondiers 
one after the other sped by. 
The Chief Goldondier gave a lecture 
on the moment's great import, 
on this great holiday. 
How tremendous outer space is, 
how huge its mystery, 
how small a part I play. 
And you heard the chorus swelling 
in the Light-Year Hall's abyss 
and the crowd of people thrilling 
at the infinite precipice. 
And many thousands were weeping 
and several hundreds said: 
This truly is Fate's way: 
Goldonder Aniara 
has carried on its journey 
for twenty years today. 
And many stood unspeaking. 
But suddenly someone said 
a light-year is a grave. 
Those twenty years of journey 
are sixteen hours of light-path 
on the sea of the light-year grave. 
Then none of us were laughing. 
131 

Near all of us were weeping. 
A light year is a grave. 
The Goldondier-in-Chief made a flourish 
at all of us with his stave. 
And we climbed up the hundred staircases, 
ending our conclave. 
And everyone walked in silence. 
A light-year is a grave. 
83 
T H E  S O N G  O F  E R O S I O N  
The legions of atoms that overlay Nineveh's blocks 
decamped in the end and departed the seats of the great. 
The moldering shows in each stone as its fissures and pocks. 
Off march the moldered lions and priests in high state. 
0 pitted stone, hold them back, let them not disappear. 
See how time has been lapping and lapping the lion's fine mane 
as the manhood that once lapped at woman in ancient Assyr 
as the tower of Han was dissolved by the spittle of rain. 
To their unending sins of erosion the seasons have plodded, 
for its orgies at graveside corruption is joined by the rose. 
With their covetous tongues the degenerate grasses have prodded. 
The lupus of caverns has altered the stony wolf's nose. 
As the stones are eroded, so men sink their teeth into right. 
Each hypocrite well knows the clandestine smell of decay. 
The things insight permeates all are revealed in its light 
as hollows burnt dry in the lava from ruin's great bay. 
132 

Listen to the shattered trombones. Here a splintering zither 
plays songs of the sphinx in the sand-barrens, leprosy-chewed, 
to solace the nations who witnessed their decencies wither 
like stones at the teeth of the ages, gnawing and lewd. 
The Chief Astronomer shows us the image 
of a galaxy that lies out very far. 
And many people sink down to their knees 
and start to pray: Lord, closer, here we are! 
They're members of the galactave religion. 
And when I see them praying I recall 
how Sister Nobia had once described 
the massive tableland of Dorafma 
where the neighbor-galaxy in Andromeda 
on cloudless nights ingeniously enlarged 
-so as to be seen from rooftops in eight cities­
seemed gleaming out from miles-wide giant mirrors, 
like a goldfish for the folk of Doraima. 
85 
The galaxy swings around 
like a wheel of lighted smoke, 
and the smoke is made of stars. 
It is sunsmoke. 
For lack of other words we call it sunsmoke, 
do you see. 
I don't feel languages are equal 
to what that vision comprehends. 
133 

The richest of the languages we know, 
Xinombric, has three million words, 
but then the galaxy you're gazing into now 
has more than ninety billion suns. 
Has there ever been a brain that mastered all the words 
in the Xinombric language? 
Not a one. 
Now you see. 
And do not see. 
8 6  
S O N G  F R O M  G O N D  
A god of the roses draws nigh, 
for nigh are the days of the roses. 
And the goddess of lilies is here. 
What joy when the eye of man closes. 
See, curious fairies pass by, 
in caskets the tints are a-making. 
The violet god wishes dye. 
The days of the violets are breaking. 
We droop in the deities' bowers, 
turn humus and pistil and ray. 
And the gods are soon tinting the flowers 
by dint of our bodies' decay. 
As more of us cease to exist 
the less shall the gods do of keening. 
Our lives, like the snow, turn to mist 
when the summers of gods begin greening. 
134 

And time went by, the changes came about 
like worn spots in upholstery and seating. 
The apathetic mind and forfeit soul 
would sit incapable, reduced and listless 
in cosmic ease which had seen better days 
but dwindled through the world's en tropic ways. 
Ennui, that limit to the life of ease, 
had long ago been reached and now was crossed 
and souls again sought cures in injuries 
and sufferings by which our times were tossed. 
And modish words and modish dances rushed 
swiftly past, and each in turn disdained, 
and on time's vapid stream which merely flushed 
its musty waters deathward to be drained. 
The idle brain became a burden to itself 
and splendid minds, unread upon the shelf, 
cold-shouldered all whom torpor had made fat 
and no one's thinking ever could get at. 
The strangest omens would be seen in space 
but, since they were unsuited to the program 
of our day, they promptly were forgotten. 
We came, to give one instance, rather near 
an unknown sun, a half-extinguished neighbor 
of the one that finely shone in Dorisdale, 
and Isagel came in to me and said: 
How shall we, dearest? Should we? Yes or no? 
135 

I answered that the time was surely ripe 
but space was still an open-ended game. 
We therefore might be wise to keep the moth 
some distance for the moment from the flame 
now offering itself as our cremator. 
And Isagel left everything at that, 
but yet her eyes appeared to phosphoresce 
in anger, which at such an hour was holy. 
Behind the backs of our benumbed cohort, 
she spared Aniara from that last resort. 
8 8  
The splendid mind of Is agel broke down: 
a fevered demon rose into her eyes. 
The pupil dilated to the wellspring of her soul. 
She heard appeals and echoes from far skies. 
She spoke to me about a voice that hailed 
her by a name that she had never heard 
and often its appeal had wailed and wailed 
in Mirna's chambers since this first occurred. 
It came from Mirna's grave, and while all slept 
one night she listened to that voice exhort 
and to the tiles that marked that grave she crept­
there sat a herald from the Eternal Court. 
I feign belief, because I know her case, 
how into my friend's soul a shard had slid, 
a fragment from all that we had met in space 
when we collided with the Leonid. 

Now it is not only cosmic barrens 
and psychic emptiness through which we fare, 
but also many a secret fate whose marks 
on fortitude are deep and hard to bear. 
Seated in thought, she let slip the remark 
that she not seldom felt like Death, who waits 
on Aniara flying in the dark 
and keeps account of life's ungenerous fates. 
I thought it first a jest, mere spleen in wastes 
that held no rescue for their astronauts. 
But, seeing where it was that she was tending, 
I tried to win her soul to other thoughts. 
« 
« 
« 
Stay of our spirit, sovereign of pure thought, 
she was preparing for the realm of glory 
and in her heart knew more than cosmic wastes 
had instruments to register the story. 
Unseen by us, she slipped away to where 
the Laws of Aleph Numbers al are stored: 
there infinite reserves are to be opened 
when Chance approves, the world's new overlord. 
When someone you have loved has reached death's door 
space stands harder and more brutal than before. 
137 

We're more and more weighed down, we're devastated 
and never will our souls be liberated 
out of the clutches of demonic space. 
And from the Picture Archive I unease 
my gleanings from the days of Mirna's grace. 
The mima hall is now a cave dose-packed 
where splinters from the Mirna scenes refract 
as afterglow in Aniara-town, 
a cavalcade, a red sun going down. 
9 0  
With Chefone I once fell out of grace 
and, sought out by his goons, I am escorted 
to the lowest cellar room, a space 
where only men of violence were deported. 
I still thought: there are bound to come those days 
when Chefone, though much to his disgust, 
must free whoever knows the gopta's ways. 
That day I shall resume my former trust. 
And, almost as an answer to my thoughts, 
through the ship a violent shock was felt. 
It was like greetings sent by Isagel 
from that enshrouded kingdom where she dwelt. 
And after lock-up on that very night 
Isagel drew near to me in dreams 
of supernatural light illumining 
my heart with unimaginable beams. 
1)8 

And with the practice I had had in reading 
signs and then examining their code 
for what could be of use for new ideas 
appropriate for Mima's language-mode, 
now tremblingly I could identify 
who she was, my I sage!, and why she still 
at all my questions faithfully stood by 
to give me, when the need arose, reply. 
And it was plain to me that lsagel 
my mind's magnificent and dazzling bride 
in cosmic space beyond the God of life 
was the mima's inmost self, 
was Mirna's soul. 
Aniara's aerial-fitted gopta vaults 
still shook with Isagel's anxiety, 
as did Chefone. I, at his command 
but much against his will, was led back, free. 
In layman's terms (a Dorian legacy) 
this shaking meant our gold-dense gravity 
was close to losing equilibrium. 
And, loosed from chains to locate the defect, 
I was returned to Mirna's gallery. 
91 
We were in the abyss. It sounds a fairy-tale 
written in panic fear in all our eyes. 
But unanimity was quick to galvanize. 
The mass psychosis was of ample scale. 
139 

An undetermined fault in the gravity-works 
gave sinking feelings and the strong illusion 
that we, no matter what, would still keep falling 
like a plumb-line, downward through a space 
no more with rounded sides and convex crown, 
but altered to a well sloped sharply down. 
My goptatory served us in good stead 
and seldom were there people seen so glad 
as when by means of goptical fifth Tadd 
I lifted in three hours the load of dread 
and deadweight off the brain and breast. 
Among the stars that day was of the best. 
Where are you, Isagel? Now comes the glory, 
a patent triumph for the goptatory. 
9 2  
All the fire that in us had burned 
took its light, its soul from Mirna's beam. 
Nevermore to us would be returned 
what we saw when huddled in her gleam. 
It grew very hard for us to keep alive 
the faith that time had gnawed at past the core 
and we, in emptiness, prized all the more. 
Ceaselessly practising their threnody, 
the supplicants all stood in Mirna's hall. 
Swollen mouths sucked blood from their divinity. 
140 

Human sacrifice became respected, 
though custom had worn down its holiness 
with pledges streaming numberless 
and, soon as made, neglected. 
Soon these offerings were in style no more 
among our circle, for whom no force lay 
in laxly conjured sacrificial gore 
that doubt let dribble pointlessly away. 
People trained on phototurbic form 
and Gondian Xinombra's bloody days 
found slaughters here ironically lukewarm 
remembering Xinombra set a-blaze. 
Recollections too from Mirna's times 
did their part. And shamefaced they inclined 
in attitudes of prayer, mere pantomimes 
of rites they'd practised once with purer mind. 
To the Cultic priests, whose souls were frozen through, 
the flow of sacrificial blood seemed cold. 
By what was left of Mirna, who loved the true, 
they knew their deficiencies were thousandfold. 
So they refused their services canonical 
for the rite that Chefone designed. 
What a crushing blow for that thrasonical 
bullet-headed breaker of mankind. 
141 

93 
Few sacrifice-resisters could be found 
once Chefone struck back ferociously: 
between four liquidator-magnets ground, 
each rebel died in nameless agony. 
From that day on none visited the rooms 
where Mirna slept and where the Cult went dead, 
where hope was slight against such glooms, 
that even Chefone succumbed to dread. 
In lightscript on his screen he offered ways 
meant to alleviate our final days. 
He gave his goons Samaritan costume 
and urged them ease the manner of our doom. 
And with a new deportment, strange to tell, 
he played with ointments and was very pleasing 
and, what is more, as though beneath a spell 
he helped the sick and tried to warm the freezing. 
94 
D E AT H  C E RT I F I C AT E  
A n  ill-willed hateful self-devourer 
a froth-mouthed feeder self-absorbed by his travail 
sat a while here in Mirna's hall. 
He'd rooted out a nation over by Y gol. 
Now he was Chief to us of Dorisdale. 
Having eaten himself up well 
leaving only bits 
142 

entirely unable to devour themselves, 
he vanished. 
The floor he had been sitting on rejoiced. 
His name was Chefone of Xaxacal. 
95 
I no longer set the tone of things 
in this crevasse between to seem and be. 
And no one came requesting an illusion. 
We all had seen through what there was to see. 
As if within a giant crystal tomb 
they all, or nearly all, saw where they sped; 
all things were windows on the hall of dread 
where words of comfort found no welcome room. 
Apart from stars millions of miles away, 
nothing was there to watch our tomb proceed 
in space with Dorisvale's distinguished breed. 
And, clappers in a glassy mourning bell, 
in dread ecstatic all souls raised their knell 
of rounds that rang on the transparent wall. 
We gathered together in the mima-hall 
and I was wedged inside with all the others 
and dread expunged all thought of Doric plains. 
I joined the rest of them in present pains. 
The High Command could no more keep concealed 
the swift approach of cataclysmic days, 
143 

and yet wrapped every fact inside a shield 
of formulae from tensor law, fifth phase. 
I was shown out of the Computer Block 
and of the room where they prognosticate. 
But anyone who's learned to read a clock 
can forecast when the time will be too late. 
I went to Mirna's grave and there a-sprawl 
I lay at prayer, who knows to which divinity. 
I n  my despair, I begged in that cold hall 
a miracle from that dead circuitry. 
And then, although no outward sign I spied, 
I heard that circuitry in silence utter 
a mystery deep and mutely magnified 
by the lights of mima's grave, about to gutter. 
97 
In the beginning of our twenty-fourth year 
thought broke down and fantasy died out. 
Overwhelmed by the perpetual enigmas 
of star-strewn galaxies without an end. 
Our every dream submitted and acknowledged 
its lowly rank in Lobule Ghazilnut. 
The darkening pervaded many souls: 
they roamed the halls, reality blown apart, 
and questioned one another on the road 
to home, on distant things known to the heart. 
They flocked about the lamps as moths abound 
in autumn over distant Doric ground. 
144 

As former conjuror in Mirna's hold 
I invoke the devastator of all cold. 
I pray the seraphim that they stand neͶr. 
I pray the visions that they reappear. 
I pray that in this chamber Isagel 
rise unharmed from her ossuary shell. 
From ashen death, 0 Isagel, ascend, 
0 Isagel, assist me at my end. 
99 
I paced the halls and it was very late, 
paced Mirna's hall one night and I was cold. 
Still colder, far from all things temperate 
roared memory in my soul for Doriswold. 
With ever more savagery time's tooth bored 
to every nook our dreams had thought to save 
and like the sand of time the filings poured 
on floors and tables in our space-enclave. 
Aniara traveled in year twenty-four 
with undiminished speed to Lyre's figure, 
the star of Doris was commingled now 
among the thousands in a starry horde 
which seemed forgathered as in company 
but which in actuality were hung 
so sparsely scattered in eternal cold 
that every sun was martyr to the void. 
145 

Ever more mute and numb lay Aniara's ship: 
once proud goldonder, now sarcophagus 
which, lacking its own power, through empty space was.flung 
in line with the loxodrome 
to which in her fall she clung. 
The pilots' cabin had been empty for some time, 
and those who had watched here in the hall of marvels 
now lay where Daisy Doody slept for many years: 
the queen of yurg surrounded 
by her maids and cavaliers. 
A hush had fallen on the halls, but somewhere 
from the vastnesses within the giant hull came sounds. 
If you walked in their direction several thousand steps 
you came to the mima's chamber where a crowd 
of cosmic emigrants sat shivering yet. 
Playing the infinite in mortal chess, 
there they fiddled with their deathly problems, 
and one of them who quietly went mad 
stepped up magniloquent on verbal ladders 
to lecture on the human race's travels, 
on Punt and Tyre, on Vinland and da Gama. 
But in his mouth the rhetoric congealed. 
This last of speakers closed his mouth again 
and, shivering, looked around in Mirna's den 
where the journey of life had now gone farther 
than any place once dreamt of in Tagus' glen. 
And only death's echoes were heard answering 

the talk he gave the dead as they increased 
and now, stiff-frozen and with glass-dear eyes, 
looked to the Lyre from Aniara of the spaces. 
100 
There were no longer any lights to light. 
At Mirna's grave burned one lamp of devotion 
where now the last, helpless in their plight, 
had met to turn their backs upon death's ocean. 
The last hours of the era of mankind 
addressed the flame with questions in their eyes. 
So too on Earth had many sat confined 
beside their last lamp's light and seen its flame 
and heard the firing squad dressing its line 
outside where hard stone walls reflected back 
the muzzle flashes of the rifles' crack. 
For the fierceness of space does not exceed mankind's. 
No, human cruelty stands up more than well. 
In the desolation of a death-camp cell 
space made of stone enclosed the souls of men, 
and the silence of the cold stones met the ear: 
Here mankind rules. Aniara's ship is here. 
1 0 1  
It was our final night in Mirna's hall. 
Self after self broke down and disappeared; 
but before the self had wholly ceased to be 
the soul's will rose more clearly into view, 
147 

extricating time at last from space 
and lulling fast asleep the Doric race. 
102 
I had meant to make them an Edenic place, 
but since we left the one we had destroyed 
our only home became the night of space 
where no god heard us in the endless void. 
The firmament's eternal mystery 
and wondrous physics of the constellations 
are law, but they are not the gospel truth. 
Compassion flourishes at life's foundations. 
We crashed into the Law's precise command, 
and found our empty death in Mirna's dens. 
The god whom we had hoped for to the end 
sat wounded and profaned in Doric glens. 
103 
I turn the lamp down and appeal for peace. 
Our tragedy is done. Occasionally 
I've used my envoy's warrant to release 
scenes of our fate through the galactic sea. 
With undiminished speed to Lyre's figure 
for fifteen thousand years the spacecraft drove 
like a museum filled with things and bones 
and desiccated plants from Dorisgrove. 

In our immense sarcophagus we lay 
as on into the empty seas we passed 
where cosmic night, forever cleft from day, 
around our grave a glass-clear silence cast. 
Around the mima's grave we sprawled in rings, 
fallen and to guiltless ashes changed, 
delivered from the stars' embittered stings. 
And through us all Nirvana's current ranged. 
149 


Notes 
Doris: The Earth, to which Harry Martinson gives the name of a 
district of ancient Greece lying just to the north of Mount 
Parnassus; the name would thus express both the natural and in­
tellectual beauty found upon Earth. Only rn Poem I is the name 
applied to a person (Poem 1). 
the tundra globe: Mars. 
Goldonder Aniara: The name for the type of spacecraft most likely 
derives from the Swedish gondol, "gondola." One possible 
derivation for the name "Aniara" may be the Greek aniaros, 
"in distress" (2). 
gyrospin, gyromatic: Martinson indulges here as elsewhere in 
spirited play with scientific and quasi-scientific terms descriptive 
of the processes within the computer-console of the mima. 
the Lyre: The constellation Lyra (3). 
the mima: A wondrous electronic console processing signals from 
all over the universe into sounds and images so captivating that 
the passengers have made it into a goddess (on this account the 
name is often capitalized). 
the Blue Archive: Presumably an encyclopedia keeping, and keep­
ing faith with, the human past. It may be noted that the major work 
of Tibetan religious history bears the name of The Blue Treasury 
of Records (14). 
cosmic Zanzibar: Earth, the one spice island of sensuous beauty in 
all the wastes of space (17). 
stones shall cry out: Cf. Habbakuk 2:u (26). 
151 

priest gone blue: He is blue because of the blue light of the ex­
plosion. 
in the name of Things: I.e., as opposed to the abstractions, theories, 
surmises and wild guesses which have brought the world to this 
self-immolation (28). 
a Boeotian shade: The ancient Greek district Boeotia was prover­
bial for the folly of its inhabitants (30). 
goldondeva: Deva is Sanskrit for"divinity."The oath, then, would be 
named for its invocation of the "goldonder divinity" (34). 
Isagel: The name suggests Isis, the Egyptian goddess associated with 
the cosmic order. 
gopta-board: Martinson has invented the equipment of an applied 
science for the gopta (Sanskrit, "occult") mystagogy. 
Chebeba . . .  a jewel of Can dian fashioning: Perhaps the woman's 
name derives from Cybebe, a variant of Cybele, the Phrygian 
fertility goddess. The city of Kandy in present-day Sri Lanka was 
renowned for its gemstones. 
thyrsus light: The thyrsus was the phallic staff waved by the female 
celebrants in the rites of Bacchic worship. 
Xinombra: Martinson has invented this Central American city, 
destroyed by a still earlier holocaust. 
sarathasm and plyellc: " . . .  in the epic of Wigalois these two splen­
did fabrics were woven by salamanders on a mountain in central 
Asia and had the distinction of being fireproof" (Holm 368, n.p. 
291; trans. Klass). 
152 Al'IAHA 

aleph numbers: The first of the transfinite numbers of modern set 
theory (39). 
Gond: The historical Gondwana, or Land of the Gond, was a 
supremely civilized highland kingdom of <;entral India from the 
12th to the 18th century, until the pressure of a Mahratta invasion 
scattered the Gond into cultural decline (40). 
the chambers over by Y gol: Reminiscent of the gas chambers of 
Hitler's Europe. 
Bluebird: Perhaps Maurice Maeterlinck's Blue Bird, from his drama 
(1908) of that name, a bird which, if captured, will tell man all there 
is to know. 
Rind: Martinson has said that he gave this German word for "tree 
bark" to the country of the blind poetess because of his memory 
of a young woman in South America who was blind with trachoma, 
a disease which covers over the eye as with a bark (Tidestrom us). 
sombra: Spanish, "shadow." 
Antalex: Anta, Sanskrit, "end, completion"; thus, the name could 
mean "the completion of the law:· the law in question being the 
strict logic of the cosmos over against which Martinson posits in 
Poem 102 compassion and "the gospel truth:' 
numerosopher: I.e., the philosopher of number sets ( 47). 
Yedic, Yedis: Forms ofYedo, the former name of Tokyo (51). 
the Maid of the Mount: A figure from Scandinavian ballad (54). 
Berenice's Hair: The constellation Coma Berenices (ss). 
153 

kieselguhr: A friable chalky earth used to absorb the nitroglycerin 
during the manufacture of dynamite (58). 
loxodrome: A directional line (69). 
Ghazilnut: Nut is the Egyptian sky-goddess. We have not yet been 
able to identify Ghazil (70 ) . 
Tlaloctitli: Tlaloc is the Aztec god of rain (71). 
Doraima Highlands: To associate it with Doris, Martinson has re­
named the real Rorafma Plateau in the Amazonian jungle. 
Karelia: Formerly an eastern district of Finland, but now partially 
incorporated into Russia. As the scene of the Finnish national epic, 
Kaleva/a, and imbued with an exoticism deriving from Russian 
and Byzantine sources, Karelia stands for an irrecoverable, para­
disiac heartland (72). 
Aino: In Rune IV of Kaleva/a the disconsolate maiden Aino drowns 
herself in a lake rather than marry the bardic demiurge 
Vainamoinen. At news of this, the tears of her mother form rivers 
whose waters carve out mountains, and on the treetops of those 
mountains sit golden cuckoos whose gay songs plague her forever. 
Martinson is here proposing Aino's resurrection, an event which 
does not occur in Kaleva/a. 
my wielding of the knife-blade: No specific circumstance can be 
traced here, but it seems that the speaker is casting about for some 
reason for why he (standing for the human race itself) should have 
brought about such a calamity as the loss of paradise. 
rune-songs: The cantos of Kaleva/a are called runes. 
1 54 
A N I A R A  

Libidella: To the tune of" Daisy Bell" (''A Bicycle Built for Two") (73). 
your Isthmus jar: Presumably her breast, though no satisfactory ex­
planation for "Isthmus" has yet been found. 
the Comfortress: Mirna (75). 
Icarus: In Greek myth, the son of Daedalus who, attempting to 
emulate his father, flew too close to the sun; its heat melted the wax 
which held his wings fast to his arms, and he fell into the sea and 
drowned (76). 
the lantern's genie: Cf. Aladdin and his lamp (77). 
statical science: The study of stress and strain, of forces in 
equilibrium (81). 
the tower of Han: An allusion to the Chinese Han dynasty (106 B.C.-
220 A.D.), though no particular tower can be identified (83). 
Andromeda: The galaxy nearest our own (84). 
goptatory: The body of gopta doctrine (91). 
thrasonical: Vainglorious (92). 
Punt, Tyre, Vinland, da Gama: Punt, a country south of Egypt, from 
which the ancient Egyptians bought spices, ebony, ivory, etc.; Tyre, 
the chief city of the ancient Phoenicians; Vinland, the Viking name 
for a portion of North America; Vasco da Gama, the Portuguese 
explorer (99). 
Tagus' glen: Lisbon lies at the mouth of the Tagus River. 
155 


Works Consulted 
Hall, To rd. Naturvetenskap och Poesi [Natural Science and Poetry]. 
Stockholm: Bonniers, 1981. 
Holm, Ingvar. Harry Martinson: Myter, Malningar, Motiv [Harry 
Martinson: Myths, Paintings, Motifs]. Stockholm: Aldus/Bonniers, 
196). 
Lagerroth, Erland. Aniara-en dirkt av sin tid. Sodra Sanby: 
Verkerum, 1991. 
Tidestrom, Gunnar. Ombord pa Aniara: En stu die i Harry Martinsons 
rymdepos [ On board ''Aniara": A Study of Harry Martinson's Space 
Epic]. Stockholm: Aldus, 1975. 
Torngren, Anna. "Isagel. En gesalt i Aniara" [Isagel. A figure in 
Aniara]. ELM 28 (1959): 409ff. 
Wrede, Johan. Sangen om Aniara: Studier i Harry Martinsons 
tankeviirld [The Song of Aniara: Studies of Harry Martinson's Intel­
lectual World]. Stockholm: Bonniers, 1965. (Summary in English.) 
157 

