Physics
Gravity and Mass
Second Edition
Robert P. Masse
F = - G mM
r2

Also by Robert P. Masse 
Physics: Nature of Physical Fields and Forces 
Physics: Light Waves 
Electromagnetism 
Quantum Mechanics
Physics: Where It Went Wrong 
Mercury’s Perihelion Advance 
Michelson-Morley Experiment 
Vectors and Tensors of Physical Fields 
Number Theory 
Complex Variables 
Laplace Transforms 
Matrices and Determinants
by Robert P. Masse and Kay E. Masse
Physics: Principle of Least Action
Copyright © 2023 Robert P. Masse
All rights reserved.
Second Edition
ISBN: 979-8-9881770-2-9
Masse, Robert P
Physics
Gravity and Mass

Dedication
This book is dedicated to my beloved wife 
Kay
whose loving and insightful support made 
it possible

Preface
"It’s a terrible mix-up, and you might say it's a hopeless 
mess physics has got itself worked into. ”
Richard P. Feynman
QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter
iii

What is gravity? What is mass? Although the motion of a 
body under the action of gravity is well understood, at the same 
time and on a more fundamental level, much about the true 
nature of the physical force known as gravity has remained a 
deep mystery. Similarly, no clear definition of mass has 
emerged despite years of study. It is the purpose of this book to 
explore the natures of gravity and of mass.
The research that forms the basis of this book could not 
have been accomplished without the outstanding interlibrary 
loan system of Florida.
Robert P. Masse
First Edition - March 7, 2023
Second Edition - April 16, 2023
Contents
1 
Newton’s Force Law of Gravity
1.1 
Laws of Physics
1.2 
Mathematical Expression
1.3 
Physical Interpretation
1.4 
Physical Cause of Gravity
1.5 
Summary
2 
Poisson’s Field Equation of Gravity
2.1 
Physical Fields
2.2 
Gravitational Field
2.3 
Mathematical Expression
2.4 
Physical Interpretation
2.5 
Vector Field Sources and Sinks
2.6 
Matter as a Field Flow Sink for Aether
2.7 
Aether Properties
2.8 
Physical Cause of Gravity
2.9 
Summary
iv

3 
Einstein’s General Theory of Relativity
3.1 
Equivalence Principle
3.2 
Gravitational Field in General Curvilinear
Coordinates
3.3 
Mathematical Expression
3.4 
Physical Interpretation
3.5 
Physical Cause of Gravity
3.6 
The Schwarzschild Solution
3.7 
Summary
4 
Aether Field Equation of Gravity
4.1 
Mathematical Expression
4.2 
Physical Interpretation
4.3 
Continuity of Aether Density in a Vacuum
4.4 
Force Density of Flowing Aether
4.5 
Physical Cause of Gravity
4.6 
Nature of Mechanical Force
4.7 
Nature of Gravitational Force
4.8 
Nonexistent Gravitons
4.9 
Antigravity
4.10 Conservation of Energy
4.11 Summary
5 
Advance of Mercury’s Perihelion
5.1 
An Anomaly Discovered
5.2 
Gerber’s Anomalous Perihelion Advance Solution
5.3 
Einstein’s Anomalous Perihelion Advance Solution
5.4 
Anomalous Perihelion Advance of a Planetary Orbit
5.5 
Agreement with Observations
5.6 
Summary
6 
The Nature of Mass
6.1 
Classical Concepts of Mass
6.2 
Nature of Mass
6.3 
Mass Types
6.4 
Nonexistent Higgs Particles
6.5 
Summary
7 
The Nature of Inertia
7.1 
Derivation of Newton’s Laws of Motion
7.2 
Galileo’s Law of Inertia
7.3 
Derivation of Galileo’s Law of Inertia
7.4 
Mach’s Principle
7.5 
Absolute Motions and Galilean Relativity
7.6 
Inertial Forces
7.7 
Summary
v

8 
Equation of Motion for Flowing Aether
8.1 
Equation of Motion
8.2 
Gravitational Energy Density
8.3 
Gravitational Energy Density Flux within a Vacuum
8.4 
Irrotational Flow of Aether in a Gravitational Field
8.5 
Vorticity
8.6 
Circulation
8.7 
Helmholtz’s Vortex Theorems
8.8 
Generation of Vorticity in Aether
8.9 
Summary
9 
Dark Matter
9.1 
Galaxy Rotational Velocity
9.2 
Proposed Solutions to the Undetected Matter 
Problem
9.3 
Nonexistent Dark Matter
9.4 
Applicability of Newton’s Law of Gravity
9.5 
Dark Energy
9.6 
Summary
Appendix A Vector Field Operations
A.1 Source/Sink Points and Field Points
A.2 Dirac Delta Function
Appendix B The Greek Alphabet
Appendix C Vector Identities
Appendix D Helmholtz’s Vortex Theorems
D.1 Helmholtz Vortex Theorem I
D.2 Helmholtz Vortex Theorem II
D.3 Helmholtz Vortex Theorem III
Appendix E Physical Constants
References
vi

Chapter 1
Newton’s Force Law of 
Gravity
“But hitherto I have not been able to discover the cause 
of those properties of gravity from phenomena, and I 
frame no hypotheses; . . . And to us it is enough that 
gravity does really exist, and act according to the laws 
which we have explained, and abundantly serves to 
account for all the motions of the celestial bodies, and of 
our sea.”
Isaac Newton
Principia
7

The search for an understanding of the physical force 
known as gravity has occupied philosophers and scientists for 
many centuries. Early concepts of force and matter developed 
in antiquity by Aristotle and other philosophers have come 
down through the ages and influenced the work of scientists 
such as Kepler, Galileo, Huygens, and Newton (see Jammer, 
1957, 1961). Advancement in science is, after all, an incremental 
process with new discoveries resting on the foundation of 
previous work.
In this chapter we will examine the gravitational force law 
of Isaac Newton. His great Philosophiae Naturalis Principia 
Mathematica (known as Principia) was first published in 1687. 
In this work Newton derived mathematical expressions for 
gravitational forces based upon his studies of pendulums, 
falling bodies, the orbits of planets, and the orbits of their 
moons. He found, for example, “that the forces by which the 
primary planets are continually drawn off from rectilinear motions, 
and retained in their proper orbits, tend to the Sun" and that these 
forces "are reciprocally as the squares of the distances of the places of 
those planets from the Sun's center." He also found that: “there is a 
power of gravity tending to all bodies, proportional to the several 
quantities of matter which they contain."
Newton had discovered the force law of gravity now 
known as Newton’s law of universal gravitation. Moreover, he 
had discovered that the force law of gravity applies not only to 
objects on Earth, but also to objects in the heavens. For 
example, he found that the Earth’s gravitational force keeps the 
moon orbiting the Earth rather than flying off into deep space.
1.1 
Laws of Physics
A law in physics is a relation between physical entities 
that has been abstracted from empirical observations of these 
entities. In formulating laws of physics, the assumption is made 
that the existence of identical physical circumstances will 
always result in the occurrence of identical phenomena 
(Poincare, 1905b). A law in physics then denotes neither a 
requirement nor a prohibition, but only an observed pattern. In 
other words, a law in physics does not govern nature; it only 
describes nature. A law in physics, therefore, is perhaps better 
considered an effect rather than a cause.
1.2 
Mathematical Expression
Bodies containing matter are, by definition, material 
bodies. Newton (1687) defined mass to be a measure of the 
quantity of matter in a material body. Newton thus introduced 
the concept of mass into physics (Cohen, 2002). Note that 
Newton did not state that mass is the same thing as matter, but 
only that mass is a measure of the quantity of matter.
8

Matter is the only entity in our Universe that possesses 
gravity. Mass, being only a measure of the quantity of matter, 
cannot possess gravity.
Newton’s force law of gravity for two material bodies of 
masses m and M can be expressed in the form:
F = - GmM 
(1.2-1)
r 2
where F is the gravitational attractive force between the 
bodies, r is the distance between the bodies, and G is the 
gravitational constant of proportionality. The constant G was 
first measured implicitly by Cavendish (1798) using a torsion 
balance to determine the density of the Earth by weighing the 
world. He did not calculate a numerical value for G, however 
(see Clotfelter, 1987; and Falconer, 1987, 1999). The first estimate 
of a numerical value for G was made almost one hundred 
years later by Boys (1894a, b, c, and d) using empirical 
procedures developed by Cavendish. Since then many 
measurements of G have been made. The current estimate of G 
is:
G = 6.67430 x 10-8cm3 sec-2 gm-1 
(1.2-2)
Considering the force F on a material body of mass m 
resulting from the gravitational pull of a material body of mass 
M, we can rewrite equation (1.2-1) as:
F_ mM 
m r2
In vector form, this can be written as:
F 
m
Gr2 r
(1.2-3)
(1.2-4)
where r is a unit line vector that has its coordinate origin at the 
center of the body of mass M, and that is directed along the 
line from this body to the body of mass m (see Figure 1.2-1).
Figure 1.2-1 Gravitational force F on a material body of mass 
m due to a material body of mass M.
9

The minus sign in equation (1.2-4) indicates that the force 
F acting on the body of mass m is in the opposite direction of 
r and so is directed towards the body of mass M.
1.3 
Physical Interpretation
Newton’s force law of gravity given in equation (1.2-1) can 
be interpreted physically to imply that some sort of action-at-a- 
distance is occurring as each of the two material bodies exerts 
an attractive force on the other; that is, the two material bodies 
will tend to accelerate towards each other. Action-at-a-distance 
is defined here to mean that two bodies separated in space and 
having no intervening medium exert a physical effect on each 
other across the empty space between them.
Since time is not a parameter in equation (1.2-1), time does 
not enter into Newton’s force law of gravity. We then have the 
additional implication that the action-at-a-distance of gravity 
occurs instantaneously. Therefore gravitational force appears to 
propagate with infinite speed according to Newton’s force law 
of gravity.
On the basis of our everyday experience, this physical 
interpretation of gravity does not appear plausible. As Dolbear 
(1897) stated "every body moves because it is pushed, and the 
mechanical antecedent of every kind of phenomena is to be looked for 
in some adjacent body possessing energy; that is, the ability to push or 
produce pressure." It is hard to imagine how a force could act 
over some large distance without an intervening medium. It is 
even harder to believe that this action could be instantaneous. 
We must conclude, therefore, that Newton’s force law of 
gravity expressed in the form of equation (1.2-1) does not lend 
itself to a direct physical interpretation as to the cause of 
gravity. This prompts us to ask what Newton thought about the 
relation he had discovered for gravitational forces.
Newton stated very clearly in his Principia that he 
purposed “only to give a mathematical representation of those forces, 
without considering their physical causes and seats.” Newton also 
noted that he used “the words attraction, impulse or propensity of 
any sort towards a center, interchangeably, one for another; 
considering those forces not physically, but mathematically.” He was 
not attempting “to define the kind or the manner of any action, the 
causes or the physical reason thereof,” nor was he attributing 
“forces, in a true and physical sense, to certain centers (which are 
only mathematical points)” when he referred to "centers as 
attracting, or as endued with attractive powers.” Moreover, Newton 
(1693b) wrote that the very thought that “one body may act upon 
another at a distance through a vacuum without the mediation of any 
thing else by and through which their action or force may be conveyed 
from one to another is to me so great an absurdity that I believe no 
man who has in philosophical matters any competent faculty of 
10

thinking can ever fall into it.” Newton clearly did not believe in 
action-at-a-distance. He felt the need for a medium that serves 
to transmit force (Jourdain, 1915c). Newton’s theory of gravity, 
therefore, clearly does not postulate instantaneous action-at-a- 
distance.
Newton realized that he was not defining the “physical 
qualities of forces, but investigating the quantities and mathematical 
proportions of them” in his Principia. We see, therefore, that 
Newton considered his force law of gravity to be useful for 
mathematically calculating gravitational forces, but not for 
determining their physical causes.
1.4 
Physical Cause of Gravity
Newton did, however, attempt to find the cause of gravity. 
He was certain that gravity “must proceed from a cause that 
penetrates to the very centers of the Sun and planets, without 
suffering the least diminution of its force; that operates not according 
to the quantity of the surfaces of the particles upon which it acts (as 
mechanical causes do), but according to the quantity of solid matter 
which they contain, and that propagates in all directions to immense 
distances, decreasing always by the square of the distances.” He 
suspected that the ultimate cause of gravity was to be found in 
"an ethereal medium”, a physical nonmaterial medium thought 
to permeate all space (Newton, 1730; and Jammer, 1957). He 
thought that gravity was the result of this ethereal medium 
flowing with accelerated motion into material bodies and 
then collecting within these bodies (Aiton, 1969). Newton 
thought the ethereal medium to be composed of distinct 
particles and to be mechanical in nature (see Hall and Hall, 
1960).
Nevertheless, Newton could not verify the cause of 
gravity, and he was not prepared to hypothesize on its physical 
cause in his Principia. He concluded that the "cause of gravity is 
what I do not pretend to know, and therefore would take more time to 
consider of it” (Newton, 1693a).
1.5 
SUMMARY
The first mathematical expressions for gravitational force 
were derived by Newton and published in 1687 in his Principia. 
Newton’s approach to the study of gravity was to use “the 
phenomena of motions to investigate the forces of nature, and then 
from these forces to demonstrate other phenomena.” From various 
observations and experiments, Newton succeeded in 
determining particular propositions that: "are inferred from the 
phenomena and afterwards rendered general by induction.” This type 
of methodology works well in physics.
11

Chapter 2
Poisson’s Field Equation of 
Gravity
“A ‘field’ is any physical quantity which takes on different 
values at different points in space."
Richard P. Feynman et al.
The Feynman Lectures on Physics Volume II
12

In 1813, more than one hundred years after Newton’s 
Principia was first published, Simeon Denis Poisson derived an 
equation that can be used to describe the acceleration due to the 
gravitational force of a material body. The equation describing 
gravitational force developed by Poisson is of a type know as a 
field equation. Using vector analysis methods, we will now 
show that Poisson’s field equation of gravity can be obtained 
from Newton’s force law of gravity, and so the two laws are 
compatible. Subsequently we will consider the physical 
interpretation of Poisson’s field equation. We will begin with a 
brief discussion of the concept of a physical field.
2.1 
Physical Fields
The concept of a physical field was developed first by 
Euler in the 1750s during his studies of the kinematics of fluids 
(see Truesdell, 1954; Hesse, 1961, and McMullin, 2002). It was 
James Clerk Maxwell, however, who more generally introduced 
the field concept into physics in the 1860s. Maxwell derived his 
field concept from the magnetic lines of force that Michael 
Faraday had proposed to explain magnetic force patterns in 
space (Faraday, 1844, 1847, 1855). Faraday employed the term 
magnetic field to denote the distribution of magnetic forces in a 
region (see Gooding, 1980).
A magnetic line of force is a line having the direction of the 
magnetic force at each point along the line. The concentration 
of such lines in a given region indicates the intensity of the 
force in the region. Faraday surmised that these lines of force 
exert an influence upon each other by transferring their action 
from particle to contiguous particle of a physical medium.
Considering these lines of force, Maxwell (1861a) stated 
"we cannot help thinking that in every place where we find these lines 
of force, some physical state or action must exist in sufficient energy 
to produce the actual phenomena." Maxwell proceeded to "examine 
magnetic phenomena from a mechanical point of view" based upon 
an interpretation of Faraday's concept of a physical medium of 
contiguous particles (Maxwell, 1861a, b).
2.1.1 Contiguous Particles
Contiguous particles are simply particles packed so 
closely together that there is essentially no space between them. 
Faraday (1844) envisaged contiguous particles as being next to 
each other, but not touching each other. He did not consider the 
contiguous particles of his physical medium to be matter. He 
noted that: “matter is not essential to the physical lines of magnetic 
force any more than to a ray of light or heat.” Faraday’s ideas were 
used by Maxwell to formulate the concept of a continuous 
physical field in which all actions occur only between
13

contiguous particles. We will designate these contiguous 
particles as field particles.
A disturbance resulting from a change in the motion of a 
field particle can then propagate to a distance only by a 
succession of actions between contiguous particles. Action-at-a- 
distance is thereby reduced to actions between particles that are 
contiguous. Some time duration is required for all these actions 
to occur, and so field disturbances can only propagate with a 
velocity that is finite. This finite propagation velocity of a field 
disturbance is an intrinsic property of a physical field.
We see then that the existence of a continuous physical 
field in a region requires the existence of a real physical 
medium consisting of contiguous particles. We will designate 
this real physical medium as the field medium. The particles of 
the field medium must be small enough so that a large number 
of these field particles are contained within a volume element 
that is considered infinitesimal relative to the volume of the 
entire region.
These contiguous field particles can then be used to form a 
continuous mathematical entity known as a continuum. This 
continuum is obtained by abstracting the field particles of the 
field medium to point particles, thereby allowing the field 
medium to be treated as a mathematical continuum filling a 
region of space with no gaps between the points. The result is a 
one-to-one correspondence between point particles of the 
continuum and geometrical points assigned to the field 
particles in the region of space occupied by the field medium. 
The mathematical continuum of abstracted physical particles 
provides justification for using the limiting process of the 
calculus on physical problems involving fields, and for using 
differential equations to describe changes in the fields.
Each point particle of the continuum always retains its 
individual identity as well as all the physical properties 
(including the kinematical and dynamical properties) of its 
corresponding field particle except for volume and extension (a 
point particle has neither). Nevertheless the same density and 
pressure are assumed to exist in the continuum as in the field 
medium.
A physical field can never have an existence independent 
of the field particles that constitute the field medium. While a 
physical field requires contiguous field particles capable of 
being abstracted to form a mathematical continuum, this is not 
what defines a physical field. Rather, a physical field is some 
specific attribute associated with each of the field particles 
being abstracted to form the mathematical continuum. A 
physical field is not a physical medium then, but is some 
attribute of the contiguous field particles that form the real 
physical medium. A physical field is more, therefore, than 
14

simply a mathematical device used to solve a physical problem. 
Physical fields are always real attributes of a real medium.
2.1.2 
Types of Physical Fields
Depending upon properties of the field particle attribute 
that is the physical field, several different types of physical 
fields can be identified. When the field particle attribute is a 
scalar quantity so that a scalar quantity is associated with each 
point of the mathematical continuum, these quantities together 
form a scalar field. Similarly, when the field particle attribute is 
a vector quantity or a tensor quantity so that a vector quantity 
or a tensor quantity is associated with each point of the 
mathematical continuum, these quantities form a vector field or 
a tensor field, respectively (in this book we will use the term 
tensor to refer to tensors of order two or higher). The 
temperature in the Earth’s atmosphere is an example of a 
physical scalar field, and the wind velocity in the atmosphere is 
an example of a physical vector field. The real medium that is 
abstracted to a mathematical continuum in both these cases is 
air, and the field particles are extremely small air parcels.
A field that does not vary with time (is independent of 
time) is termed a stationary field or a steady-state field. A field 
that does vary with time is termed non-stationary.
2.1.3 
Types of Vectors
Since vector fields can, by definition, vary from point to 
point, the vectors associated with a vector field are known as 
point vectors. They are defined for and occupy only a single 
point. Point vectors and line vectors are not the same then since 
all nonzero line vectors occupy more than a single point and 
can be slid over many points. The magnitude of a point vector, 
therefore, cannot be equated with the length of the vector, 
unlike the magnitude of a line vector. Finally, since the 
addition of two or more point vectors at any given point is 
always mathematically valid, the superposition of different 
vector fields representing the same type of physical entity is 
always possible.
2.2 
Gravitational Field
We will now once again consider the two material bodies 
of masses M and m shown in Figure 1.2-1. We will define a 
material point particle to be a material body that has been 
abstracted to an infinitesimal size so that: “the distances between 
its different parts may be neglected” as Maxwell (1877) suggested. 
A material point particle can then be considered to have no 
volume or extension, and so it will occupy a single point in 
space. We will assume, nevertheless, that a material point 
15

particle has density and that this density is constant. We will let 
the material body of mass m be a material point particle. 
Newton formulated his gravitational theory in terms of such 
material point particles. We will specify the location of this 
particle in space by the line position vector r that has its 
coordinate system origin in the center of the body of mass M .
In order to avoid the action-at-a-distance concept of force, 
we will now consider that, at all points in space surrounding 
the material body of mass M, a gravitational acceleration field 
due to the matter in this body exists. This gravitational 
acceleration field of the material body of mass M exists in 
space whether or not any material point particle is present at a 
particular point in space to experience the acceleration.
The vector quantity F/m in equation (1.2-4) has the 
dimensions of acceleration and represents the gravitational 
acceleration existing around the material body of mass M. We 
will define F/m to be the gravitational field intensity or 
gravitational field j. A vector quantity j can be associated, 
therefore, with each point of space surrounding the material 
body of mass M.
The vector j is the acceleration that a material point 
particle of mass m will experience due to the gravitational 
attraction of the matter of mass M if the point particle is placed 
at a point in space specified by the line position vector r (see
Figure 2.2-1). Since j is a real physical vector quantity that can 
be measured, we can conclude that the vector field j 
surrounding the body of mass M is a real physical vector field.
Figure 2.2-1 Line position vector r from the material body of 
mass M to a body of mass m.
Using Newton’s law of gravity as given in equation 
(1.2-4), we can then determine F/m (and so j) for all points in 
space about the body of mass M :
F 
m
g = - Gr2 r
(2.2-1)
16

where the unit vector r is given by: 
. r r
r = rj = - 
(2.2-2)
r r
Equation (2.2-1) shows that the acceleration g of a body of mass 
m due to the gravitational pull of a material body of mass M is 
a function of M, but is independent of m.
If the material body of mass M is stationary, its 
gravitational field g will also be stationary. A material point 
particle of mass m placed within such a stationary field will 
instantaneously experience the gravitational acceleration F/m 
of the field. We see now that the reason gravitational force 
appears to propagate with infinite speed according to Newton’s 
force law of gravity is that this law effectively assumes the 
gravitational field is stationary, and so gravitational force 
already exists at all points within the field. The gravitational 
force that is associated with a stationary gravitational field will 
always be constant (not a function of time) at any given point 
within the field. It is then not correct to state that Newton’s law 
of gravity assumes that gravitational force propagates with an 
infinite speed.
2.3 
Mathematical Expression
The density of a substance is defined as the quantity of 
the substance per unit volume. If p is matter density and Qm 
is quantity of matter, then matter density must be Qm per unit 
volume, and so for a material body:
Qm = JJ£ PdV 
(2.3-1)
where V is the volume of the material body. It is important to 
notice that matter density p is not defined in terms of mass. 
Since, for a material body, mass has been found to be a measure 
of the quantity of matter, we have:
Qm = UJvPdV “ M
(2.3-2)
where M is the mass of the material body. In fact, mass "serves 
for measuring a portion of matter so well that matter and mass appear 
to be synonyms” as noted by Rougier (1921). However, mass and 
matter are not the same type of thing (see Section 6.2). For 
example, electrons and positrons do not contain matter but still 
have mass (see Masse, 2022, Section 5.4.6).
Instead of considering the entire material body of mass 
M, we will now consider only a single very small volume 
element AV of this body. The matter density p of this volume 
17

element can be taken as constant since the dimensions of AV 
are taken to be very small. The mass AM of the matter 
contained within AV is then given by:
A M = I7f pdV = p fff dV = pAV
A V 
A V
(2.3-3)
To obtain the gravitational field g at a point r in space 
due to the gravitational pull of only the matter of mass A M 
contained within a spherical volume element A V, we can use 
equations (2.2-1) and (2.3-3) to express the gravitational field g 
as:
g = - G p JJJ 
v r dv
(2.3-4)
The factor r/r2 is under the integral sign since the coordinate 
origin of the position vector r is taken to be in the volume 
element AV. The divergence of the gravitational field g is then 
determined by the relation:
V• g = -GpV• Jjj -r_dV = -Gp JJJ V• -L dV (2.3-5)
as is shown in Appendix A (the matter density p is constant). 
From vector analysis we have:
! r
V • — = 4 n$( r) 
(2.3-6)
where 8( r) is the Dirac delta function (see Appendix A), and so 
we can rewrite equation (2.3-5) as:
GP fff 4n$(r)dV
A V
(2.3-7)
!
V • g =
We then have finally:
__
V • g = - 4 nG p
(2.3-8)
This equation, which is known as Gauss's law of gravity or as 
Gauss's flux theorem of gravity, describes the gravitational 
field g due to matter of mass AM and density p contained 
within a very small spherical volume element AV .
Integrating equation (2.3-8) over the volume element AV, 
we have:
fff V• gdV =
A V
4nG fff pdV
A V
(2.3-9)
Using equation (2.3-3) and the divergence theorem given 
Appendix C, we obtain: 
17 g • dS = - 4nG AM
A S
(2.3-10)
where A S is the surface area of the spherical volume element 
AV. The gravitational field g is normal to the surface A S. For a 
stationary gravitational field we can write equation (2.3-10) as:
18

or
g 17 dS = 4nr2g = -4nGAM 
A S
(2.3-11)
A M 
y = G----
r
We then have:
(2.3-13)
g = - rM M
G—
(2.3-12)
V^ = — G A M
(2.3-14)
which is the scalar form of equation (2.2-1).
The law of gravitation defined by Newton’s force law of 
gravity is linear. Therefore, the gravitational field g due to each 
volume element of a material body can be calculated 
individually using Newton’s force law of gravity, and then a 
vector summation can be performed to determine the total 
gravitational field of the entire material body. In other words, 
the gravitational field at a point r due to a body of mass M can 
be obtained by summation of g at the point r for all the 
volume elements AV in the body of mass M. If this body is 
located far from the point r, it is possible to use equation 
(2.3-8) directly for the entire mass M with p representing the 
average density of the body.
For a stationary gravitational field resulting from matter of 
mass AM contained in a volume element AV, we can define 
the Newtonian stationary gravitational potential p at a point 
r by:
and so, for matter of mass AM contained in a volume element 
AV, we can use equations (2.2-1) and (2.3-14) to write the 
stationary gravitational field g in the form:
! ^MM- v
g = - g —r = v°
(2.3-15)
We see, therefore, that it is possible to express a stationary 
gravitational field g in terms of the gradient of a scalar 
potential function y. From equations (2.3-8) and (2.3-15) we 
have: 
v•g=V•Vp=-4nGp
(2.3-16)
or
V • g = V2^ = - 4 nG p
(2.3-17)
which is Poisson’s field equation of gravity for matter of mass 
AM and density p contained within a volume element AV .
Poisson’s field equation describes the gravitational field 
existing around a material body of matter density p.
19

Mathematically we must obtain the same results from Poisson’s 
field equation of gravity (2.3-17) as from Newton’s force law of 
gravity (1.2-1) since, as just shown, Newton’s force law can be 
used to derive Poisson’s gravitational field equation. Moreover, 
since Newton’s force law of gravity is not a function of time, 
Poisson’s field equation of gravity (2.3-17) only applies to 
gravitational fields that are stationary. Therefore, Poisson’s field 
equation of gravity and Newton’s force law of gravity must be 
mathematically equivalent for a stationary gravitational field.
2.4 
Physical Interpretation
The physical interpretation of Poisson’s field equation of 
gravity (2.3-17) is, however, very different from the physical 
interpretation of Newton’s force law of gravity (1.2-1). Rather 
than the action-at-a-distance interpretation of gravity obtained 
from Newton’s force law of gravity, Poisson’s field equation is 
based upon and must be interpreted in terms of the existence 
about any material body of a physical medium consisting of 
contiguous particles.
Since j is a physical field, j must be an attribute of real 
field particles of a real field medium. Since j is a vector 
acceleration field, this attribute of the particles must be 
acceleration. We can conclude then that, at each point of a 
gravitational field, real particles must be in accelerated motion.
We can also conclude, therefore, that a real physical medium 
must exist in space and that some flowing motion must be 
occurring within this medium to produce the observed 
gravitational acceleration.
This is analogous to observing the effects of wind velocity, 
which is a vector velocity field, and concluding that a real 
physical medium (air) must exist and must be in motion. For 
example, when we observe through a closed window the 
autumn leaves blowing about, we know that air is in motion 
although we cannot directly see the air.
The real physical medium whose flowing motion 
produces the gravitational field must be consistent with 
Poisson’s field equation (2.3-17). We will refer to this real field 
medium as aether for historical reasons to be discussed in 
Section 2.7. Aether particles are then the field particles of 
gravitational fields. The mathematical continuum for the 
gravitational acceleration field is abstracted from aether 
particles with each aether particle corresponding to a point in 
the gravitational field. The acceleration of aether particles is the 
attribute of the field particles that is the gravitational field. 
Since the gravitational field is a real physical acceleration field, 
we can conclude that the field medium, aether, is real.
20

2.5 
Vector Field Sources and Sinks
A physical vector field consists of some vector attribute 
associated with the field particles of a real field medium as was 
noted in Section 2.1.1. If within the region of the vector field 
there exists an entity that produces a discontinuity in the 
particular particle attribute that is the vector field, then such an 
entity is known as a source or a sink for the field (see Kellogg, 
1929). Only vector fields have field sources and sinks. From 
vector analysis, we know that a vector equation in the form of 
! 
! ! !\ 
! 
< 
! 
^!
equation (2.3-8) can always be written for a vector field Y 
having a source or a sink. We have then: 
' ! !
V • Y = ± 4 nK p 
(2.5-1)
where the left side of this equation is the divergence of a vector 
field Y (vector attribute of field particles), and where the right 
side of this equation has a positive sign for a source and a 
negative sign for a sink. The parameter K is a constant required 
to make the units consistent. The density p is a scalar that is 
the strength of the source or sink per unit volume, and so is a 
measure of the effect the source or the sink has on the vector 
!
field Y.
For the special case where the attribute that constitutes the 
vector field is a kinematic flow property (flow velocity or flow 
acceleration) of the field medium, sources and sinks of the 
vector field can be interpreted as places where this real physical 
field medium is being continuously created and continuously 
destroyed, respectively (Lamb, 1879; and Granger, 1985). For 
such cases, we will designate any source as a field flow source 
and any sink as a field flow sink. When the rate at which a 
source continuously creates a field medium (or a sink 
continuously destroys a field medium) is constant, the source 
(or sink) is referred to as steady.
If the vector field does not consist of a kinematic flow 
attribute of the field medium, then the source and sink will not 
represent places where the field medium is being, respectively, 
created and destroyed. That is, they will not represent a field 
flow source or a field flow sink. Rather, both source and sink 
will produce the attribute constituting the vector field. The only 
constraint is: when a source and a sink of this type and of equal 
strength come together, they can nullify each other. We will 
designate this type of source as a field non-flow source and the 
corresponding sink as a field non-flow sink. Since a field non­
flow sink is really just another kind of source, we will also 
designate a field non-flow source to be a field positive source 
and a field non-flow sink to be a field negative source 
(recognizing that non-flow sources and sinks can nullify each 
other). Such non-flow sources and sinks are discussed in Masse
21

(2022, Sections 4.10 and 5.4.4). We can summarize by noting 
that two types of vector field sources and, correspondingly, two 
types of vector field sinks exist:
1. Field flow sources and field flow sinks.
2. Field non-flow sources and field non-flow sinks 
(field positive sources and field negative sources).
2.6 
Matter as a Field Flow Sink for
Aether
From equations (2.3-17) and (2.5-1), we see that since the 
density of a material body is p > 0 and since the sign is 
negative on the right side of equation (2.3-17), p must represent 
the density of a sink for the gravitational field. Since p is the 
density of matter within the volume element AV of a material 
body, the sink for the gravitational field is matter. The field 
medium for a gravitational field is aether, and the attribute of 
aether that is the gravitational field is the acceleration of aether 
particles. Gravitational acceleration is then a kinematic flow 
property of aether: flow acceleration. Therefore, matter is a 
field flow sink for aether. Poisson’s field equation (2.3-17) for 
the gravitational field is an equation describing the accelerating 
flow of aether into matter.
While matter is a field flow sink for a gravitational field, 
there is no known entity that is a field flow source for a 
gravitational field. Other fields such as electromagnetic fields 
do have both source and sink entities. It has sometimes been 
thought that material particles are inconsistent with field theory 
(e.g., Einstein, 1950). We now see, however, that material 
particles simply represent discontinuities (sinks) in the field 
medium (aether), and so are consistent with field theory.
2.7 
Aether Properties
The concept of a real physical medium called aether (or 
ether) is not new. The origins of aether as a metaphysical 
concept can be traced back to antiquity. The word ‘aether’ is 
from a Greek word meaning ‘the upper purer air’. Aether was 
considered by Aristotle (c. 384 BCE to 322 BCE) to be the 
“primary” substance of the Universe and the substance that fills 
up all empty parts of space. He made aether his quintessence 
(fifth essence) of the Universe, completing the essences of air, 
water, fire and earth.
The scientific concept of aether has existed for almost four 
hundred years, beginning in the seventeenth century with 
Kepler (1620) and Descartes (1637, 1638, 1644). Kepler thought 
that the space between planets is filled with aether, whereas 
Descartes thought that aether permeates the entire Universe, 
22

filling all voids where matter does not exist. Descartes believed 
that particles of aether form a continuum, everywhere pressing 
upon other particles of aether except in the very few places 
where ordinary matter exists. He conceived of aether as a 
medium that can move very rapidly towards Earth. He thought 
that aether is capable of transmitting force so that all action-at­
a-distance can be explained as the result of forces acting 
between contiguous aether particles. He also considered that 
aether provided the means by which light is propagated. 
Following Descartes, Huygens (1690a, b) postulated aether as 
the nonmaterial physical medium in which light waves 
propagate. Newton (1693b) thought that: “It is inconceivable, that 
inanimate brute matter should, without the mediation of something 
else, which is not material, operate upon and affect other matter 
without mutual contact,...” He considered aether to be the cause 
of gravity and of certain wavelike properties evident in the 
reflection and refraction of light.
Since then many scientists have supported the concept of a 
physical nonmaterial medium called aether. The basis for this 
support was often one of the following: to avoid the action-at-a- 
distance explanation of physical forces (such as gravitational, 
electrical, and magnetic forces), or to provide a real medium for 
light waves to propagate in. These are the historical reasons we 
are calling the physical medium introduced in the previous 
section ‘aether’.
After the existence of aether as a physical medium was 
first proposed, numerous aether theories were developed to 
explain various physical phenomena. Nevertheless the physical 
properties and the functions of aether remained unclear and, 
for most of the twentieth century, the very existence of aether 
was doubted (see Section 2.7.12). Using our interpretation of 
Poisson’s field equation of gravity as describing the 
accelerating flow of aether into matter, we are now able to 
determine some of the physical properties of aether.
2.7.1 Definition of a Fluid
Before considering the nature of aether, we need to 
provide a definition of a fluid. A fluid can be defined as a 
physical medium that can flow (a fluid cannot sustain shear 
stress without moving). A solid can be defined as a physical 
medium that maintains a definite shape and volume due to 
large cohesive internal forces. A solid is the frozen state of a 
fluid. All material media can flow at some temperature, and so 
all material media have a fluid state. If a fluid has no internal 
friction, it is considered to be capable of ideal flow.
Viscosity of a fluid is a measure of its internal resistance 
to gradual deformation by shear stress (resistance to flow).
23

This internal resistance to gradual deformation is due to 
internal cohesion. A fluid having no viscosity is known as an 
inviscid fluid, and the flow of such a fluid is known as inviscid 
flow.
2.7.2 
Aether is a Fluid
For aether to be the physical medium whose motion 
results in the observed gravitational field, aether must be able 
to flow rapidly. Therefore aether is a fluid.
2.7.3 
Aether is Ubiquitous and Continuous
A gravitational field is always associated with matter, and 
so the field medium of gravity (aether) must exist wherever 
there is matter. Moreover, aether must be continuous down to 
some very small dimension since the gravitational field appears 
to be continuous. We can conclude, therefore, that aether must 
be ubiquitous and continuous in our Universe. Only at 
dimensions approaching the size of the aether particles is the 
aether discontinuous. We will designate an aether particle as an 
aetheron.
As J. J. Thomson (1909) noted, matter occupies “but an 
insignificant fraction of the universe, it forms but minute islands in 
the great ocean of the ether, the substance with which the whole 
universe is filled.” Lodge (1925a) also noted: “The first thing to 
realise about the ether is its absolute continuity.” Some scientists 
around the beginning of the twentieth century thought that 
aether was not discontinuous at any dimension (see Doran, 
1975), but aether actually consists of extremely small physical 
particles.
2.7.4 Aether is Homogeneous
Since matter, which is a field flow sink for aether, exists in 
the form of nucleons (protons and neutrons), aether must 
appear continuous at the dimensions of nucleons. This requires 
particles of aether to have dimensions that are orders of 
magnitude smaller than nucleons. Moreover, since all protons 
are identical and all neutrons are identical, aether must also be 
homogeneous in composition. As Dalton (1808) noted, “the 
ultimate particles of all homogeneous bodies are perfectly alike.” If 
aether were not homogeneous, we would expect variations to 
be observed in both protons and neutrons since they are field 
flow sinks for aether.
2.7.5 
Nucleons are Steady Sinks for Aether
Since nucleons do not vary with time, they must constitute 
steady sinks for the field medium, aether. Therefore aether 
must flow continuously and uniformly into matter.
24

2.7.6 
Aether has High Density
Given the continuity of aether and the very small size of 
aetherons, we can conclude that the density of aether must be 
extremely high. In comparison, the density of any material 
body is very low. The distances between the nuclei of atoms in 
a material body are very great relative to the dimensions of 
aetherons. Moreover, wherever there are nucleons, the aether 
flows into these nucleons. This explains how aether can be very 
dense and yet flow through material bodies without any 
apparent resistance. We recall Newton's words for the cause of 
gravity: it “penetrates to the very centers of the Sun and planets, 
without suffering the least diminution of its force“ (see Section 1.4).
2.7.7 
Aether is Nearly Incompressible
Since aether consists of extremely small contiguous 
particles and so is an extremely dense medium, aether is nearly 
incompressible. The compressibility of a physical substance is 
a measure of the relative change in volume that occurs in the 
substance as a result of an applied force. The physical 
properties of aether causing it to be nearly incompressible 
generally lead to the flow of aether being incompressible. In 
fluid dynamics, incompressibility describes fluid flow in which 
no change in fluid volume occurs. When the flow of a fluid is 
incompressible, the fluid’s density remains constant.
2.7.8 
Aether is Nonmaterial
We can also conclude that aether must be entirely different 
from matter since matter is a field flow sink for aether. The 
existence of aether must then be independent of matter. We see, 
therefore, that aether is not a material medium; aether is 
nonmaterial. Nevertheless, aether is a real physical medium. 
Because aether is nonmaterial, it has no material particles that 
can be in motion, and so it cannot possess temperature; aether 
is perfectly cold.
2.7.9 
Aether has Rigidity
While aether has the flow properties of a fluid, it also has 
the elastic properties of an elastic solid. This is evident since 
light waves, which are transverse elastic waves, propagate in 
aether. Transverse waves can only propagate in a medium that 
has rigidity (which is defined as resistance to relative motion 
between particles of the medium). Therefore, aether must 
have rigidity.
The rigidity of material solid bodies is due to the force of 
electromagnetism binding atoms together (while their nuclei 
remain widely separated by a vacuum). This binding force 
25

generally prevents material solid bodies from flowing (it 
provides the mechanism whereby material bodies can exist in 
the frozen state known as solid).
For aether to possess a frozen state would require that a 
binding force exist between aether particles. Since aether is 
perfectly elastic (see Section 2.7.11) and flows easily, no binding 
forces can exist between aether particles. Without such binding 
forces aether cannot have a frozen state, and so aether does not 
exist as a solid.
The rigidity of aether, therefore, is not due to aether being 
in a frozen state. Rather, the rigidity of aether must be due to its 
extremely high density whereby all aether particles are 
contiguous with other aether particles. Any given aether 
particle has almost no room to move relative to other aether 
particles since very little void space exists between aether 
particles. Aetherons are held in place then, not by 
electromagnetic forces, but by neighboring aetherons that are 
contiguous.
We see, therefore, that the mere possession of rigidity by a 
medium is not a sufficient criterion to indicate whether the 
medium is a fluid or a solid. The physical cause of the rigidity 
must also be considered. When this is done we see that, 
although aether has rigidity (a property previously thought to 
characterize only solids), aether is a fluid and not a solid.
Material fluids do not possess rigidity, but the nonmaterial 
fluid, aether, does. This explains why it is that when relative 
displacements of contiguous aether particles occur, the fluid 
aether acts as an elastic solid. The rigidity of aether causes 
elastic restoring forces to result when any displacement of the 
aether from an equilibrium position occurs. The flow of aether 
particles into a neutron can be visualized as the flow of sand 
grains in an hourglass, although the analogy is far from perfect.
2.7.10 Aether is an Inviscid Fluid
Given the cause of aether rigidity, clearly no internal 
resistance exists for the flowing motion of aether (since there is 
then no relative motion between contiguous aetherons). Aether, 
therefore, has zero viscosity and so aether is inviscid. 
Moreover, aether has no internal friction, and so the flow of 
aether is frictionless or ideal. When there exists a void into 
which aether particles can flow without any relative motion 
occurring between contiguous aether particles, aether will flow 
freely (uniformly) from a region of high pressure to a region of 
low pressure. Because the flow of aether is always inviscid, if it 
is also incompressible, then aether will act as a perfect fluid. No 
deformation will occur, and so no stresses resulting from elastic 
restoring forces will be present.
26

2.7.11 Aether is Perfectly Elastic
The aether that exists in the vacuum of space is 
homogeneous, isotropic, and has no sinks nor sources. For light 
waves to be able to propagate in this aether, the aether must be 
elastic. Maxwell (1665) thought that the medium for light 
waves “must be capable of a certain kind of elastic yielding, since the 
communication of motion is not instantaneous, but occupies time.” 
Since observations of spectral lines of stellar light exhibit no 
increase in blurring with distance to the star, we know that light 
waves can propagate across the vast distances of space without 
any attenuation except that due to geometrical spreading. 
Therefore, aether must be perfectly elastic. As Lodge (1925a) 
noted, “No law of dissipation applies to the ether, . . . Ether fritters 
away no energy, it preserves all: it is perfectly transparent; it 
transmits light from the most distant stars without waste or loss of 
any kind.”
2.7.12 Nineteenth Century Clouds
As the nineteenth century was ending, scientists were 
aware of a couple of perplexing problems that existed in 
physics. The British physicist Lord Kelvin (1901) referred to 
these problems as two “nineteenth century clouds” over physics.
The first “nineteenth century cloud” that concerned Kelvin 
was how matter can move through aether if aether is an elastic 
solid. We see now that this cloud disappears once we realize 
that aether is a fluid.
The second “nineteenth century cloud” that concerned 
Kelvin was how aether can act as a fluid for a solid body 
moving through it, but act as a solid for light propagating in it. 
We see now that this cloud also disappears once we realize that 
aether is a fluid that has rigidity.
These two clouds contributed to the existence of aether 
being doubted in the twentieth century. A third source of doubt 
about the existence of aether were results obtained from the 
famous Michelson-Morley experiments conducted in the 1880s. 
These results are inconsistent with any aether motion parallel to 
the Earth’s surface, and yet a stationary aether at the Earth’s 
surface (resulting from the Earth’s atmosphere dragging the 
aether) was ruled out by other experiments. It was not realized 
in the twentieth century that, while aether is in motion at the 
Earth’s surface, all this motion is vertical to the Earth as aether 
flows into the matter of the Earth. Aether flowing vertically into 
the Earth is entirely consistent with results from the Michelson- 
Morley experiments (see Masse, 2022).
27

2.8 
Physical Cause of Gravity
Gravitational acceleration is the acceleration of aether 
flowing into matter. Matter is required for the generation of a 
gravitational field. Since matter is a gravitational field flow 
sink, matter is a sink into which the gravitational field medium 
(aether) is actually flowing. For a spherical material body, the 
direction of aether flow into the body is vertical across the 
entire surface of the body. Aether does not flow out of matter 
because matter is not a field flow source for aether. Aether, 
therefore, must be consumed at a steady rate by any nucleon.
Since aether has extremely high density and is nearly 
incompressible, the density of aether can be expected to remain 
constant during the flow of aether into matter, except in 
proximity to nucleons where the density of aether will increase. 
The flow of aether will then be incompressible when not in 
proximity to nucleons, and nearly incompressible when in 
proximity to nucleons.
As the flow of aether converges into a nucleon, the near 
incompressibility of aether causes an increase in the flow 
velocity of aether so that the quantity of aether flowing per unit 
time can remain constant. It is just this increasing flow rate of 
aether as it approaches matter that creates the observed 
gravitational acceleration field (see the discussion in Section 
4.3.4 on the continuity of aether flow).
We can conclude then that the gravitational acceleration 
field of a material body is caused by three factors:
1 . Aether being ubiquitous in our Universe.
2 . Matter being a field flow sink for aether.
3 . Aether being nearly incompressible.
If we once again consider the material body of mass M 
shown in Figure 1.2-1, we can conclude that aether must flow 
continuously into the body from all directions. This aether flow 
will draw towards the body of mass M the aether that exists in 
the surrounding region. A negative pressure gradient in the 
aether will result (see Section 4.4), and this negative pressure 
gradient will cause a continuous flow of aether into the region 
surrounding the body of mass M to replace the aether 
constantly disappearing into the body.
If a second material body of mass m is within this region 
as shown in Figure 1.2-1, the aether flow into both the body of 
mass M and the body of mass m will draw towards the bodies 
the aether that exists between them; as a result a negative 
pressure gradient will be created in the aether. Since no aether 
flows out of the material bodies, the flow of aether into the two 
28

bodies will cause the bodies to be pushed closer together. 
Moreover, the converging flow of aether into each body will 
result in an increase in velocity of the aether, and so also of the 
two material bodies. In other words, the acceleration of aether 
towards the material bodies results in the acceleration of the 
two material bodies towards each other. This is gravitational 
attraction. The force of gravity, therefore, is the action of 
contiguous particles of aether, and is not some action-at-a- 
distance. Lodge (1908) was correct when he stated: “Matter acts 
on matter only through the ether."
We also see that two material bodies do not directly 
attract each other; the apparent attraction is due to the flow of 
aether into matter creating a pressure differential. As Lodge 
(1908) noted, “when the mechanism of attraction is understood, it 
will be found that a body really only moves because it is pushed by 
something from behind." Without the physical medium aether, 
gravitational force would not exist. Flowing aether carries with 
it any material body within the flow. This answers the age-old 
question of how matter can appear to act where it is not. Matter 
acts through the aether it disturbs.
From Poisson’s field equation (2.3-17), we see that the flow 
of aether into a material body of mass M is proportional to the 
matter density p of the body. Matter density is the field flow 
sink strength for the field medium aether. Obviously the greater 
the matter density of a body, the greater will be the acceleration 
in the flow of aether into the body.
Since mass is a measure of the quantity of matter in a 
material body, mass is a measure of field flow sink strength. 
The acceleration of aether flowing into a body of mass M can 
then be expressed as a function of M. We also see that the 
acceleration of a body of mass m resulting from the body being 
drawn along by aether flowing into a body of mass M will be 
dependent on the mass M, but not on the mass m. The 
acceleration of the body of mass m is due entirely to (and is 
equal to) the acceleration of the aether flowing towards the 
body of mass M.
2 .8.1 
Galileo’s Falling Body Experiments
Aether flow very simply explains, therefore, what is 
perhaps the most fundamental property of gravity: why the 
acceleration experienced by a body in a gravitational field is not 
a function of the quantity of matter in the body. In other words, 
the flow of aether explains the results of Galileo Galilei’s 
famous experiments with free falling bodies from which he 
determined that the gravitational acceleration of a body is 
independent of the body’s mass and composition. From his 
experiments, Galileo came to the conclusion “that in a medium 
29

totally devoid of resistance all bodies would fall with the same 
speed” (Galilei, 1638).
Because the gravitational acceleration g experienced by all 
bodies is independent of their mass, we see from equation 
(2.2-1) that gravitational force F will always be proportional to 
the mass m of the body on which it acts. Since matter is a field 
flow sink and not a field flow source for aether, the 
gravitational acceleration field associated with a material body 
is always directed towards and never away from the body. 
Therefore gravitational force F will always be attractive.
The aether flow into a material body of mass M can be 
visualized as a liquid flowing towards a drain. The motion of a 
material body of mass m towards the body of mass M is in 
some ways similar to a cork floating in the liquid, and being 
drawn towards the drain. Obviously the motion of the cork will 
be independent of the cork’s mass. The increase in fluid speed 
as it approaches the drain will cause the floating cork to 
accelerate towards the drain. This analogy is not perfect since 
the body of mass M is entirely surrounded in all directions by 
aether flowing into it. Moreover, a material body of mass m 
remains a field flow sink itself as it moves toward the field flow 
sink of mass M.
2 .8.2 Matter is a Sink for Aether
The aether that flows continually into matter is consumed 
and does not flow out. Aether flowing into matter must then 
replace lost energy since matter is in equilibrium with the flow 
of aether into it (we know from observation that the quantity of 
matter in a material body does not increase nor decrease with 
time if the body is left undisturbed).
We can conclude, therefore, that matter by simply existing 
expends energy continuously. For matter to exist in the form of 
nucleons, a continuous and steady flow of aether into matter 
must be required. This can also be inferred from the fact that 
matter can be defined as a field flow sink for aether. We see 
then that gravitation reveals some aspects of the essence of 
matter. Without aether no material bodies could exist in our 
Universe.
2 .8.3 Historical Aether Theories of 
Gravity
A physical cause of gravity involving sinks or sources of 
aether has previously been suggested in a number of studies 
[for example, Newton, 1730; Riemann, 1853; Thomson, 1870 (as 
discussed by Ball, 1892); Pearson, 1891; and Ellis, 1973, 1974]. 
Riemann was aware that gravity could be explained by the 
30

continuous flow of aether into every material particle, and that 
this requires material particles to be aether flow sinks. Pearson 
showed that an inverse distance-squared law of attraction 
could be obtained by simply considering ‘negative’ matter to be 
a field flow sink for aether, and matter to be a field flow source 
of aether (see Kragh, 2002). Also Kirkwood (1953, 1954) noted 
that the acceleration field of gravity is “strongly suggestive of the 
flow of a fluid medium,” and he considered this fluid medium to 
be aether.
2.9 
Summary
Using Newton’s force law of gravity, Poisson’s field 
equation of gravity can be derived. From Poisson’s equation we 
find that a real physical field medium, aether, must exist and be 
ubiquitous in space, and that some motion must be occurring 
within this medium to produce the observed gravitational 
fields. With vector analysis we then determined that matter is a 
field flow sink for aether. The accelerating flow of aether into 
matter is manifest as gravitational acceleration. This provides a 
very simple physical cause for gravity. The flow of aether into 
matter completely explains Galileo’s observation that the 
gravitational acceleration of a body is independent of the 
body’s mass and composition.
Since gravitational acceleration is real, the field medium, 
aether, and the field flow sink for aether, matter, must both also 
be real. We see too that the laws of fluid dynamics as applied to 
an inviscid fluid are appropriate for describing the mechanism 
of gravitation.
31

Chapter 3
Einstein’s General Theory of 
Relativity
“In constructing our theories of gravitation, we should be 
wary about accepting too glibly many of the prejudices 
of the present scientific thinking. ”
Richard P. Feynman et al.
Feynman Lectures on Gravitation
32

In 1915, more than one hundred years after Poisson 
derived his field equation, Einstein published his equation of 
gravity (Einstein, 1915a, b, c, d). He obtained his equation of 
gravity as a result of his ingenious efforts to extend his special 
theory of relativity so that it would also encompass gravity. 
Einstein referred to his work on gravity as the general theory 
of relativity.
3.1 
Equivalence Principle
The general theory of relativity is based upon the 
assumption that a uniform acceleration field and a spatially 
uniform gravitational field have an equivalent effect (force) on 
a material body (Einstein, 1907a). That is:
(inertial mass)(acceleration) = (gravitational mass)(g) (3.1-1) 
where:
acceleration = g 
(3.1-2)
This assumption is known as the equivalence principle. By 
making this assumption, Einstein was in effect assuming that 
the inertial mass and the gravitational mass of material bodies 
must be numerically equal.
The motion of a body under gravity is described in 
general relativity theory by modifying the frame of reference 
for the accelerating body. Based upon the principle of 
equivalence, Einstein found he could replace gravity locally 
(essentially at each point) by a uniformly accelerating frame of 
reference. Each different point r in the gravitational field g will 
generally require a differently accelerating reference frame to 
eliminate gravity. The acceleration of these reference frames is 
such that the reference frames are freely falling and so will 
experience no gravitational force (since a freely falling body is 
weightless). By transforming to such freely falling reference 
frames (which are essentially infinitesimal parts of the 
gravitational field itself), the gravitational force at each point is 
eliminated. A theory of gravitation can then be developed 
based upon the geometric structure of reference frames as 
revealed in the transformation properties of the coordinate 
systems used to represent these reference frames.
3.2 
Gravitational Field in General 
CURVILINEAR COORDINATES
We will now briefly consider some results that can be 
obtained by using a general curvilinear coordinate system 
(x1, x2, x3) to represent the gravitational field g of a material 
body of mass M. This review will be useful in the following 
discussions.
First we note that point vectors and tensors are invariant 
under coordinate system transformation for all coordinate 
33

systems not in motion relative to each other. This invariance is 
assured since point vectors and tensors are defined so as to 
remain unchanged under a rotation of coordinate axes. When a 
change in coordinate system is made, the components of the 
vectors and tensors change in such a way as to leave the vectors 
and tensors invariant. As a result, any point vector or tensor 
equation valid in one coordinate system will also be valid after 
transformation to any other coordinate system not moving 
relative to the first.
Although the choice of a general curvilinear coordinate 
system to represent the vector gravitational field g is arbitrary, 
in practice this choice is usually made so as to simplify the form 
of the resulting equations for the given field. For example, the 
spherical coordinate system is a logical choice for the case of the 
two material bodies shown in Figure 1.2-1.
3.2.1 
Reference Frames
Spatial position and motion can only be defined relative to 
some real physical entity. Such a physical entity is known as a 
reference frame or a frame of reference. Coordinate systems 
are geometrical definitions or concepts that are extremely 
useful mathematical constructions for describing physical 
entities. Coordinate systems are not physical entities in 
themselves, however. A coordinate system cannot then be a 
reference frame. Moreover, a coordinate system cannot interact 
with physical fields and forces. A coordinate system can, of 
course, be placed within a frame of reference for use in 
describing parameters of the physical entities interacting with 
the reference frame.
3.2.2 
Metric Tensors
The metric tensor gij provides information concerning 
properties of any given general curvilinear coordinate system. 
The metric tensor also provides the necessary information for 
translating measurements from one coordinate system to 
another. It does this by relating an invariant differential 
distance ds (which describes an invariant physical quantity) to 
differentials dxl along the coordinate curves:
(ds)2 = dr • dr = gij dxl dxj 
(3.2-1)
where dr is the differential of the position vector r, and where 
the Roman indices i and j assume values of 1, 2, and 3. We are 
using the Einstein summation convention (Einstein, 1916a) 
which specifies that any index appearing twice in a term is 
summed over its entire range unless otherwise noted. Since a 
scalar product is invariant to coordinate transformation, we see 
from equation (3.2-1) that (ds )2 is invariant as expected. The 
differential dr is a point vector given by:
34

dr = dX—dxi = dX-i dx1 + dr dx2 + dX-3 dx3 
(3.2-2)
The metric tensor can be used to define coordinate space. 
For example, Riemannian space (R)N is a coordinate space 
specified by N real coordinates and by the fundamental metric 
form given by equation (3.2-1). Euclidean coordinate space is 
that part of Riemannian space containing the Cartesian 
coordinate system. For orthogonal coordinate systems, we 
have:
gij = 0 
(i * j) 
(3.2-3)
For the rectangular Cartesian (Euclidean) coordinate system, 
we have:
g ij 
^ij
(3.2-4)
~ ! d! i i d r j j d r d r . j , 
.•
dr • dr = d^^dx • d—dxJ = d— • d—dx dxJ = gij dx dxJ
(3.2-7)
The metric tensor gij can be written, therefore, as a function of 
the position vector r :
_ d! d! _ d! d! _ 
gij = dx?* dj = dj dx?=gji
(3.2-8)
and so the metric tensor is symmetrical.
3.2.3 
Metric Tensor in Terms of the
Gravitational Field
The gravitational field g is, of course, also a function of 
the position vector r . From equations (2.3-15) and (2.2-2), we 
can write for a material body of mass M :
where dij is the Kronecker delta defined as:
g = V^ = - G — r = - G -3 r
(3.2-9)
0 for i ^ j
1 for i = j
(3.2-5)
and so
Equation (3.2-1) then becomes:
(ds )2 = 8ijdxldxj = dx1 dx1 = (dx1) + (dx2) + (dx3) 
(3.2-6)
r 3 v^
r = -
g =
GM
GM
(3.2-10)
From equations (3.2-10) and (3.2-8) we therefore obtain:
From equations (3.2-1) and (3.2-2) we can write:
gij
1 
d [ r 3 g
[ GM ] 2 d xi
d r3 g 
• -=—?- 
d x1
(3.2-11)
35

Information concerning the gravitational field g has been 
introduced into equation (3.2-8) resulting in equation (3.2-11). 
Equations (3.2-8) and (3.2-11) must then be equivalent. This 
shows that, for any coordinate system being used to describe a 
gravitational field g, it is possible to express the metric tensor 
gij at any point in terms of the gravitational field g at the same 
point. The field g is determined using Newton’s force law of 
gravity in the form of equation (2.2-1).
Obviously, it is also possible to express the metric tensor 
gij in terms of any other vector field (such as an electro­
magnetic field). The gravitational field, therefore, is not unique 
in its ability to specify components of the metric tensor. Any 
physical vector field can be represented in terms of geometry, 
but coordinates alone cannot act upon a physical entity.
Using equation (3.2-9), we can write equation (3.2-11) in 
terms of the gravitational potential y:
gij
1 dr3 V^ 
[ GM ]2 d x
d " r3\q
• -t-----
d x1
(3.2-12)
In general curvilinear coordinates, V^ is given by:
V y = d‘Pk ek 
(3.2-13)
d x
where e k is a reciprocal base vector. From equations (3.2-12) 
and (3.2-13), we see that the metric tensor gij can be expressed 
as a function of the first and second derivatives of the 
gravitational potential y.
3.3 
Mathematical Expression
The special theory of relativity is founded on two 
postulates (assumptions):
1. 
There is no preferred non-accelerating reference 
frame, and so physical laws described with 
respect to one non-accelerating reference frame 
will have the same form when described using 
any other non-accelerating reference frame.
2. 
The speed of light in vacuum is a constant 
independent of the state of motion of its source.
Because the gravitational field at each point is effectively 
transformed away in general relativity, the special theory of 
relativity should be valid within each very small freely falling 
reference frame. According to the theory of general relativity 
then, the speed of light is constant only within vanishingly 
small non-accelerating reference frames. For more realistic 
physical reference frames, the speed of light is no longer a 
constant (Einstein, 1916b; and Cook, 1994), and light no longer 
must travel in a straight line. In a very real sense, therefore, the 
theories of special relativity and general relativity are not 
compatible. As Pauli (1921) noted, “the special theory of relativity 
36

can only be correct in the absence of gravitational fields.” Dingle 
(1972) observed that: “Einstein's general theory does not include the 
second postulate of the special theory but depends only on a 
generalization of the first postulate.”
In an effort to incorporate the assumptions of special 
relativity into his general theory of relativity, Einstein (1916b) 
followed Minkowski (1908, 1909) in expressing the space-time 
differential ds using four-dimensional coordinates in the form: 
ds2 = dx2 + dy2 + dz2 - c2 dt2 
(3.3-1) 
where c is the speed of light in a vacuum and dt is the time 
differential. The constraint that the speed of light in a vacuum 
is a constant is included in equation (3.3-1) in the form of a 
fourth dimension. For a light ray we must have:
ds = 0
(3.3-2)
since
c 2 =f dx 12 + f dy 12 + f dz 12 = d! • d! 
dt dt
f dr 12 
k dt j
f ds 12 
k dt j
(3.3-3)
^ dt J
^ dt J
^ dt J
To obtain equation (3.3-1) in quasi-Euclidean form, 
Minkowski (and then Einstein) made the replacement:
cdt ^ icdt 
(3.3-4)
where i2 = -1 so that equation (3.3-1) becomes:
ds 2 = dx2 + dy2 + dz2 + c2 dt12
(3.3-5)
Equation (3.3-1) can then be written in the form of a four­
dimensional quasi-Euclidean coordinate system:
(ds )2 = (dx1) + (dx2) + (dx3) + (dx4) 
(3.3-6)
where
dx4 = icdt
(3.3-7)
The term dx4 now acts like a spatial coordinate (although it 
remains a different type of entity).
To transform to a quasi-Euclidean coordinate system 
(associated with a freely falling reference frame) from a general 
curvilinear coordinate system (associated with a reference 
frame in which gravitational forces are acting), (ds )2 can be 
written in the form:
(ds)2 = gap dx" dx
(3.3-8)
where the Greek indices a and ft assume values of 1, 2, 3, and 
4. As a result of this transformation, space and time dimensions 
become intertwined as space-time and are no longer separate 
for many curvilinear coordinate systems. Coordinates therefore 
lose their expected geometric and temporal interpretation.
To obtain the mathematical equations that reflect a change 
from a reference frame in which gravity is acting to a freely 
37

falling reference frame in which gravity is not acting, an 
appropriate coordinate system must first be selected and 
associated with the gravitational field. Then the corresponding 
transformation relations can be developed. Einstein (1916a) 
stated that the metric tensor components gap are “to be regarded 
from the physical standpoint as the quantities which describe the 
gravitational field in relation to the chosen system of reference." The 
equivalent statement for Poisson’s field equation of gravity is 
given by equation (3.2-11).
Einstein knew that if an analog of Poisson’s equation 
exists for the general theory of relativity, then this equation 
could be written in terms of both the metric tensor gap and the 
gravitational potential. He assumed that the metric tensor 
would, in fact, play the role of the gravitational potential in his 
general theory of relativity. This assumption led him to select 
the Riemann tensor R^pY as the differential part of Poisson’s 
equation since the Riemann tensor contains second derivatives 
of the metric tensor. For the sink/source term of Poisson’s 
equation, Einstein chose the stress-energy tensor Tap which 
includes not only gravitational energy, but also electromagnetic 
energy. Based partly upon symmetry considerations, Einstein 
then decided that the stress-energy tensor Ta^ must be related 
to Rap, a contracted form of the Riemann tensor R^pY, by the 
equation:
Rap - 2gap R = -KTaP
(3.3-9)
where R is the Ricci curvature and k is a constant. This 
equation states that variations in the geometry of space-time are 
proportional to the stress-energy of the source of the variations. 
By constraining equation (3.3-9) to be identical to Poisson’s 
equation in the limit of a weak gravitational field, k is found to 
be given by:
8 nG
K ~
(3.3-10)
and so equation (1.3-9) becomes:
Rap - 2 gap R =-- C^~ Tap
(3.3-11)
Equation (3.3-11) is Einstein’s equation of gravity from 
the general theory of relativity (see Einstein, 1916b; de Sitter, 
1921; Eddington, 1921b; McVittie, 1956; Synge, 1960; Bergmann, 
1962b; Adler et al., 1965; Rindler, 1969; Ehlers, 1973; Kilmister, 
1973; Atwater, 1974; Dirac, 1975; Geroch, 1978; Clarke, 1979; 
Bose, 1980; Jones, 1981; Wald, 1984; Schutz, 1985; Martin, 1988b; 
Hughston and Tod, 1990; Kenyon, 1990; Foster and Nightingale, 
1995; Kriele, 1999; Ludvigsen, 1999; Callahan, 2000; Hartle, 
2003; Carroll, 2004; Capria, 2005; Dalarsson and Dalarsson, 
2005; Khriplovich, 2005; Hobson et al., 2006; Plebanski and
38

Krasinski, 2006; Ferraro, 2007; Gr0n and Hervik,2007; Walecka, 
2007; Woodhouse, 2007; Chow, 2008; Lieber, 2008; Choquet- 
Bruhat, 2009; Ryder, 2009; and Ni, 2015).
Finally, we note that before any results obtained using 
equation (3.3-11) can be interpreted, it is necessary to transform 
the differential icdt back using:
icdt ^ cdt 
(3.3-12)
We also note that (ds )2 given by equation (3.3-1) in four­
dimensional coordinates is not the result of a scalar product as 
is (ds )2 given by equations (3.2-6) and (3.2-1) in three­
dimensional coordinates. This can be seen by writing equation 
(3.3-1) in the form:
(ds)2 = dr • dr - c2dt2 
(3.3-13)
Therefore, (ds )2 in four-dimensional coordinates will generally 
not be invariant to coordinate transformation. In fact, only for 
coordinate transformations of the type known as Lorentz 
transformations will (ds )2 be invariant.
3.4 
Physical Interpretation
The physical interpretation proposed by Einstein for his 
field equation (3.3-11) is that the existing distribution of matter 
and energy in our Universe influences the geometry of space­
time. In other words, the existence of a relation between the 
gravitational field g and the metric tensor gap is taken to 
indicate that space and time are being modified (warped) by 
the presence of matter and energy. The nature of space-time in a 
given region is then determined by the presence of matter and 
the type of physical processes occurring in the vicinity.
3.5 
Physical Cause of Gravity
In the general theory of relativity, gravitational force is 
eliminated and gravitational effects are explained in terms of 
the curvature of space-time. Gravity is then not really a force at 
all. The path a body follows in a gravitational field is 
determined by the space-time geometry through which a 
material body moves. Gravitational acceleration results then 
not from force, but by space-time changing in a nonlinear 
manner. A force-free material point particle responds to the 
curvature of space-time by moving along a geodesic of space­
time. The shape of space-time, therefore, affects the path of 
material point particles in a gravitational field. Or, as Misner et 
al. (1970) state, “space acts on matter, telling it how to move. In 
turn, matter reacts back on space, telling it how to curve.” A material 
point particle that moves along a geodesic is free of any force. 
Force is only required to cause a particle to deviate from a 
geodesic.
39

The general theory of relativity provides a description of 
the path followed by a material point particle in a gravitational 
field, but does not provide a physical cause of gravity. The force 
that warps space is undefined. In the theory of general 
relativity, the gravitational field is not a true physical field; that 
is, it does not represent some attribute of real particles of a 
physical medium. A reference frame must be real physical 
entity, and cannot be empty space which is void of any physical 
properties.
3.6 
The Schwarzschild Solution
No general solution to Einstein’s field equation of gravity 
has ever been found, and such a solution may, in fact, not even 
exist (Torretti, 1983). Immediately after Einstein published his 
equations of general relativity in 1915, Schwarzschild, from the 
battlefield of World War I, was able to determine an exact 
solution to the field equation for the special case of a stationary 
gravitational field surrounding a large spherical material body 
in a vacuum. Einstein was surprised that such an exact solution 
of his field equation could be formulated.
Schwarzschild (1916a, b) knew that the solution for this 
case must have spherical symmetry, and so only time and 
radial distance will be modified by gravity. Moreover, he knew 
that the solution of Einstein’s field equation of gravity must 
provide the line element of space-time ds which, in turn, 
provides the space-time curvature that determine the path of a 
material point particle under gravity. At great distances from all 
matter, a material point particle is thought to move in a straight 
line; at infinity the metric must then become Euclidean. 
Schwarzschild assumed, therefore, that the solution in spherical 
coordinates to Einstein’s field equation of gravity has the form:
ds2 = A(r) dr2 + r2 d02 + r2 sin2 0 dfy2 - B(r) c2 dt2 
(3.6-1)
where the functions A (r) and B (r) depend only upon the 
radial coordinate r. He used the field equation of general 
relativity to obtain the two radial functions A (r) and B (r). The 
solution Schwarzschild (1916a, b) derived can be written in 
spherical coordinates as:
1
ds 2
GM
dr2 + r2 d02 + r2 sin2 0 dty2 -
GM c2 dt2
1 - 2 c2 r
1 - 2 c2 r
(3.6-2)
where M is the mass of the large spherical material body that is 
the source of the gravitational field. The differential ds given by 
equation (3.6-2) is known as the Schwarzschild solution or the 
Schwarzschild metric.
Birkhoff (1923) showed that the Schwarzschild solution 
(3.6-2) of the general relativity field equation (3.3-11) is the most
40

general solution having spherical symmetry. Adler et al. (1965) 
noted that the Schwarzschild solution “must be considered to be 
the main achievement of general relativity theory in the field of 
celestial mechanics; it is an exact solution, which corresponds 
historically to Newton's treatment of the 1 r2 force law of classical 
gravitational theory.”
3.7 
Summary
In the general theory of relativity, the special theory of 
relativity is used as a constraint by employing four-dimensional 
space-time with the speed of light held constant. Changes 
thereby made to the metric tensor correspond to a curvature of 
space-time. By constraining equation (3.3-9) to be identical to 
Poisson’s equation in the limit of a weak gravitational field, 
Einstein in effect made his gravitational equation of motion an 
approximation to Poisson’s field equation of motion.
The general theory of relativity does not have a field 
medium. Moreover the general theory of relativity does not 
include gravitational force, nor can it provide a physical cause 
for gravity. The theory only describes the motion of a particle in 
the gravitational field created by a material body.
41

Chapter 4
Aether Field Equation of 
Gravity
“Now, as we know that the whole space which separates 
the heavenly bodies is filled with a subtile matter called 
aether, it seems more reasonable to ascribe the mutual 
attraction of bodies to an action which the aether 
exercises upon them, though its manner of acting may 
be unknown to us, rather than to have recourse to an 
unintelligible property."
Leonhard Euler
Letters to a German Princess, 
on Different Subjects of Physics and of Philosophy
42

With the insight into the physical cause of gravity 
obtained from Poisson’s field equation of gravity, we will now 
develop a new gravitational field equation. This field equation, 
based upon the concept of flowing aether, provides more 
detailed information concerning the physical processes that 
produce gravitational fields. We will also provide definitions of 
mechanical and gravitational forces, and we will determine the 
law of conservation of energy.
4.1 Mathematical Expression
We will define a fluid point particle to be a very small 
fluid parcel that has been abstracted to an infinitesimal size so 
that its dimensions can be neglected. A fluid particle can then 
be considered to have no volume or extension. Unlike a 
material point particle, however, the density of a fluid point 
particle is not necessarily constant.
We will now consider matter of mass AM and density p 
contained within a very small spherical volume element A V. 
We will take the matter in AV to be the reference frame. We will 
consider aether that is flowing continuously towards the matter 
within AV from outside of AV.
We will focus on a very small parcel of the aether flowing 
towards the matter within AV. We will denote the aether flow 
velocity of the parcel by u which is a function of r, the parcel 
position vector whose origin is centered in the matter within 
A V. We will abstract this very small parcel of aether to an 
infinitesimal size, making it a fluid point particle.
Note that a fluid point particle of aether is not an aetheron, 
but is an abstraction of many aetherons. Since in this section we 
will be describing fluid flow by tracing the dynamical history of 
a single fluid point particle of fixed identity in its trajectory, we 
will be using a Lagrangian specification of the flow.
We will define aether density Z as the quantity of aether 
per unit volume. Aether density Z is then analogous to matter 
density p (see Section 2.3). Therefore, aether momentum per 
unit volume or aether momentum density ZU is analogous to 
the momentum density of matter. The change with time in 
aether momentum density for a fluid point particle of aether as 
it flows along is d(Z U)/dt.
Since the gravitational force due to matter within AV is 
proportional to A M, the time derivative of the momentum 
density of aether flowing through the surface area A S of AV 
must also be proportional to A M. This is consistent with the 
following facts:
1. 
Matter within AV is a field flow sink for aether.
2. Nearly incompressible inviscid flow of aether 
towards this sink causes fluid point particles of 
aether to accelerate as they approach the sink.
43

Their momentum will change with time in 
proportion to the strength of the sink.
3. Mass AM is a measure of the quantity of matter 
(strength of the sink) within A V.
We can therefore write:
-JJ.. dZ)
• n dS = 4 nGk . M
(4.1-1)
where n is the outward directed unit normal vector to the 
spherical volume element AV which has surface area A S. The 
constant of proportionality in this equation is taken to be 
4nGk where G is the gravitational constant of proportionality 
from Newton’s force law of gravity given in equation (2.2-1), 
and k is an undetermined constant.
Using equation (2.3-3), we can also write equation (4.1-1) 
as:
-[[ A (ZU) • n dS = 4 nGk [[[ pdV (4.1-2) 
A S d t 
A V
From Gauss’s theorem given in equation (C-59) of Appendix C, 
we can rewrite the left side of equation (4.1-2) as:
-ff., I «■'!) •n dS =
—III. V! • I,Zu)dV
(4.1-3)
JJJ V• d(ZU)dV = -4nGk fjf
A V d t 
A V
Since AV is arbitrary, we must have:
V • A (Zv) = - 4 nGk p
d t
Taking the time derivative, we obtain:
V • za+dZ,
-4nGkp
pdV
(4.1-4)
(4.1-5)
(4.1-6)
where a is the time variation d^D/dt of the aether flow velocity. 
Using the vector identity given in equation (C-16) of Appendix 
C, this equation can also be written as:
ZN • a!+a! • vz+v •
-4nGkp
(4.1-7)
To determine the constant k, we will now assume that the 
gravitational field is stationary. We will consider a point r that 
is not in proximity to nucleons and that is on the flow trajectory 
(pathline or particle path) of a given fluid point particle of 
aether. As was noted in Section 2.8, the flow of aether in a 
gravitational field is incompressible when not in proximity to 
nucleons. Therefore, the density of aether in such a flow will be 
constant:
and so equation (4.1-2) becomes:
44

Z = 0 
(4.1-8)
d t
V Z = 0 
(4.1-9)
Equation (4.1-7) can then be written as:
!
Z V • a = - 4 nGk p 
(4.1-10)
Using equation (2.3-8), equation (4.1-10) becomes:
Z v • a! = k v • g 
(4.1-11)
At any point r not in proximity to nucleons, the aether 
flow acceleration toward the matter of mass AM will simply 
equal a because of the relations given in equations (4.1-8) and 
(4.1-9). Since the gravitational acceleration g is just the aether 
flow acceleration as noted in Section 2-8, we must therefore 
have:
a = g 
(4.1-12)
and so the constant k is:
k = Z 
(4.1-13)
Equations (4.1-5) and (4.1-6) can then be written as:
1 V • A (Zu) = - 4 nG p 
(4.1-14)
Z 
d t
1 -
Z v • za+dtuu
- 4 nG p
(4.1-15)
Z
Using equation (2.3-8), we can also write equations (4.1-14) and 
(4.1-15) as:
1V • A (ZU!) = V • g 
(4.1-16)
Z 
d t
Zv • F+fu ]=v • g
d t
(4.1-17)
Equations (4.1-16) and (4.1-17) describe the gravitational field g 
at a point r completely in terms of properties of the aether at 
this point. Since equations (4.1-14) through (4.1-17) are simply 
different forms of the same equation, each of these equations 
can be considered to be the aether field equation of gravity.
Equation (4.1-4) can now be written as:
JJJA. I(’' 
dV= -4nGZ fff pdV (4.1-18)
A V
where we have interchanged the time and space differential 
operations and have used the equality k = Z .
The volume flux of an entity is defined to be a scalar that 
specifies the quantity of the entity flowing per unit time into a 
unit volume. In equation (4.1-18), the term V • (Zu) is the
45

aether flux (quantity of aether flowing per unit time into a unit 
volume). The aether field equations of gravity (4.1-14) and 
(4.1-16) can be written in terms of aether flux:
1 _d
Z d t v • (Zu) ]=-4 nG p
(4.1-19)
1 [v • (Zu)]=v • g
(4.1-20)
The units of G are cm3 sec-2 gm-1 as given in equation (1.2-2). 
These units can be seen to be correct and perhaps more 
intuitive from equation (4.1-19) than from equation (1.2-1).
The flux vector of an entity is defined to be a vector 
representing the momentum density of the entity (the entity 
density multiplied by the entity velocity), and so is the 
quantity of the entity flowing per unit time through a unit 
! 
! !
area. The gravitational flux vector AG is then the quantity of 
aether flowing per unit time through a unit area and is given 
by:
A G = ZU! 
(4.1-21)
Equations (4.1-19) and (4.1-20) can be written as:
1 3 r,! !
Z 3ti [v •A G
- 4 nG p
(4.1-22)
1 3 r! ! “i .! !
Z 3tt tv •A G ] = •g
(4.1-23)
Bridgman (1941) stated that the need in physics for a 
gravitational flux vector is imperative.
4.2 
Physical Interpretation
The aether field equation of gravity can be interpreted 
physically as describing the flow acceleration of a real physical 
medium, aether, into matter. The same physical interpretation 
pertains to Poisson’s field equation of gravity. This agreement 
in interpretation is to be expected since the aether field 
equation of gravity is based upon knowledge obtained from 
Poisson’s field equation of gravity.
The gravitational field g at a point r is completely 
determined by properties of the aether at this point as can be 
seen from equations (4.1-16) and (4.1-20). The energy of 
gravitational fields must then reside entirely within the aether.
4.3 
Continuity of Aether Density
in a Vacuum
We will now consider the flow of aether in a region of 
space having no field flow sinks for aether. Such a region of 
space is a vacuum since matter is the only field flow sink for 
46

aether, and absence of matter defines a vacuum. We will 
describe the aether flow in the vacuum of this region of space 
by considering a very small volume element AV of vacuum. 
We will let the volume element AV itself remain constant with 
time, although aether can flow freely through the surface of the 
element. Such a volume element is known as a control volume 
in fluid mechanics (see Granger, 1985), and the open surface of 
the control volume is known as the control surface.
The quantity of aether Q in the volume element AV of 
vacuum is:
the rate of influx of aether through the surface area A S 
bounding A V: 
Qt- = -JJ. SZU • n dS = -JJ. Szu •dS
(4.3-3)
where n is the outward directed unit normal vector to the 
surface area A S, and u is the velocity of aether flowing into 
AV. Invoking Gauss’s theorem given in equation (C-59) of 
Appendix C, we can rewrite the relation for dQ/dt given in 
equation (4.3-3) as:
Q =
(4.3-1)
? ■ -Jit..’ • 'zu)dV
(4.3-4)
where Z is the aether density. This equation can be compared 
with equation (2.3-1). Because the volume element AV itself is 
not a function of time, the rate of any increase of the total 
quantity of aether Q within the volume element AV is given 
by:
dQ = fff ItdV 
(4.3-2)
d t a v d t
Since we are considering a region of space that has no field flow 
sinks for aether, and since no field flow sources of aether are 
known to exist in our Universe, there will be no sinks or 
sources for aether flow within AV. Therefore dQdt must equal
From equations (4.3-2) and (4.3-4) we then have:
111,V [f+’ •(f0']dV=0
(4.3-5)
Since the volume element AV is arbitrary within the vacuum, 
we obtain the equation of continuity for aether density:
dZ + V • (Zu) = 0 
(4.3-6)
d t
From this equation of continuity for aether density, we see 
that the rate at which the density of aether Z increases within a 
very small volume element AV will equal the convergence of 
flux of aether into AV (assuming no sinks or sources for aether 
47

are present within AV). In fact, this equation can be interpreted 
as stating that no sinks or sources for aether exist within AV. 
Similar continuity equations apply for any physical density 
entity that has no sinks or sources within AV (and so the 
physical density entity cannot be destroyed or created within 
AV).
4.3.1 
The Substantive Derivative
Expanding equation (4.3-6) using the vector identity given 
in equation (C-16) of Appendix C, we have for any point within 
a small constant volume element AV moving with a velocity u:
dZ + v • V Z + Z V • V = 0 
(4.3-7)
d t
The first two terms of equation (4.3-7) can be defined to be:
DZ = ^Z + u • V Z 
(4.3-8)
Dt d t
where DZDt is the total rate of change or total derivative of 
aether density Z within the constant volume element AV.
The derivative D/Dt is defined as:
— -A + u • V 
(4.3-9)
Dt d t
When applied to some physical quantity, the derivative D/Dt is 
known as the substantive derivative, substantial derivative, 
total derivative, or material derivative of the physical quantity. 
This derivative is calculated with respect to a coordinate system 
attached to a constant volume element AV moving with 
velocity v. Because the derivative D/Dt is a scalar operator, it 
can be applied to scalars, vectors, and tensors.
The substantive derivative consists of two operator terms: 
the term d/dt is the temporal rate of change and is known as 
the local time derivative or the Eulerian derivative; the term 
__
u • V is the spatial rate of change and is known as the 
convective derivative. The local time derivative represents the 
change of the physical quantity with respect to time, and the 
convective derivative represents the change of the physical 
quantity with respect to spatial position within the flow. The 
spatial rate of change results from the convection of the 
constant volume element AV from one position within the 
medium (where the physical quantity has one value) to a 
different position within the medium (where the physical 
quantity may have another value).
For a steady-state medium, the local time derivative will 
always be zero. If no convection is occurring or if the medium 
is homogeneous, the convective derivative will always be zero.
48

4.3.2 
Incompressible Flow of Aether in a
Vacuum
From equations (4.3-7) and (4.3-8) we obtain:
DDZ+£V • U = 0 
(4.3-10)
When flowing aether is not in proximity to a nucleon, no 
compression of the aether will occur, and so aether density will 
be constant. From equations (4.1-8), (4.1-9), and (4.3-8), we 
obtain the equation for the incompressible flow of aether:
DZ = 0 
(4.3-11)
Dt
This equation can be considered to be the definition of 
incompressible flow for a fluid of density Z and flow velocity 
u (Kellogg, 1929). For such a flow, we have from equations 
(4.3-11) and (4.3-10):
^V • u = 0 
(4.3-12)
and so the incompressible flow of aether is solenoidal. 
Equation (4.3-12) will always be true for any fluid whose flow is 
incompressible. While aether is not completely incompressible, 
the flow of aether is incompressible except in proximity to 
nucleons.
When the flow of aether is incompressible, the aether 
density Z remains constant by definition. Equation (4.3-2) can 
then be written as:
dQ = HI Z dV = 0 
(4.3-13)
d Z 
a v d t
and so from equations (4.3-3) and (4.3-4), we have:
dQ = -Z [[ U• dS = -Z [[[ V• UdV = 0 (4.3-14) 
d t 
A S 
A V
where we once again obtain equation (4.3-12). Therefore, the 
quantity of aether within any constant volume element AV (not 
containing field flow sinks or sources) remains constant for the 
incompressible flow of aether.
4.3.3 
Streamlines of Aether Flow in a
Vacuum
Aether flow is described in terms of a velocity field. We 
will now consider incompressible aether flow in a vacuum 
along a line in the flow known as a streamline in fluid 
dynamics. If at any given instant in a flowing fluid, the tangent 
to a line is in the direction of the velocity vector u of the fluid at 
each of the points of the line, then the line is defined as a 
streamline of the flow. Streamlines will then always indicate 
instantaneous fluid flow direction. By definition, therefore, no 
49

flow can cross a streamline, and streamlines can never cross one 
another. The collection of all streamlines in a region at a given 
instant constitutes the instantaneous flow pattern. Note that a 
streamline describes the velocity field pattern at a given instant 
of time while a fluid point particle trajectory describes the flow 
pattern over some finite period of time.
If the flow is steady (does not vary with time), the flow 
velocity u of fluid point particles will be constant so that at 
each point di!/ d t = 0. Streamlines will then coincide with fluid 
point particle trajectories. If the flow is unsteady (varies with 
time), the flow velocity u of fluid point particles will not be 
constant at each point. Streamlines will then vary with time, 
and will not coincide with fluid point particle trajectories.
4.3.4 
Continuity of Aether Flow in a
Vacuum
A surface enclosing a portion of a fluid’s streamlines will 
have the shape of a tube and is known as a stream tube. 
Maxwell (1855) noted that for stream tubes: “Since this surface is 
generated by lines in the direction of fluid motion no part of the fluid 
can flow across it, so that this imaginary surface is as impermeable to 
the fluid as a real tube.” The boundary of a stream tube consists 
of streamlines.
If a volume element AV is taken to be a section of a stream 
tube of incompressible aether flow in a vacuum, then from 
equation (4.3-14) we obtain:
[[ U• dS = 0
A S
(4.3-15)
where AS is the surface area of this section of stream tube. 
From equations (4.3-14) and (4.3-12) we see that fluid flow 
described by equation (4.3-15) is solenoidal.
If A S1 and A S2 are the cross-sectional surface areas of the 
stream tube section as shown in Figure 4.3-1, equation (4.3-15) 
can be written as:
! 
! 
!
I I U! • dS = 0 = I I U! • dS + I I U! • dS
A S 
A Sx 
A S 2
(4.3-16)
An integral over the sides of the tube is not included on 
the right side of equation (4.3-16) since u is orthogonal to dS 
on the sides of the tube (by definition of a streamline), and so 
no flow occurs through the sides. We then have:
u1 A S1 = u2 AS2 
(4.3-17)
where V1 is the speed of aether flowing through A S1, and u2 is 
the speed of aether flowing through A S2. Note that u and dS 
are in opposite directions for A S1, but are in the same direction 
for A S2.
50

Figure 4.3-1 Incompressible fluid flow through a section of a 
stream tube.
If the stream tube contracts so that A S1 > A S2, we must 
then have u2 > U1. Aether must accelerate, therefore, within the 
stream tube section between the surface areas A S1 and A S2. 
This is exactly the cause of gravitational acceleration since 
aether converges into a nucleon.
4.4 
Force Density of Flowing
Aether
We will now consider a small volume element AV of 
aether upon which a force density f (force per unit volume) of 
steady flowing aether is acting. When the aether in a region is 
flowing in a steady manner, no shear stresses will be acting. 
Therefore, the force density f must result from normal forces 
acting upon the surface area AS of the volume element AV. 
Such normal forces can be expressed in terms of the scalar 
hydrodynamic pressure P:
Equation (4.3-17) is the equation of continuity of 
incompressible flow, and is valid for any stream tube of aether 
flow in a vacuum not in proximity to a nucleon. From this 
equation we see that the volume of flowing aether through area 
A S1 per unit time is the same as the volume of aether flowing 
through area AS2 per unit time. As Maxwell (1855) stated “The 
quantity of fluid which in unit time crosses any fixed section of the 
tube is the same at whatever part of the tube the section be taken.”
fff !dV = -17 PdS
A V 
A S
(4.4-1)
where the area element vector is taken as positive in the 
outward direction. Using the gradient theorem given in 
equation (C-62) of Appendix C, we can rewrite equation (4.4-1) 
as:
51

CCC !dV = -|7f vPdV
A V 
A V
(4.4-2)
Since AV is arbitrary, the force density f of flowing aether in 
terms of the hydrodynamic pressure P of aether is given by:
f = -V P 
(4.4-3)
A pressure differential in aether is, therefore, a force density 
that, if unbalanced, will cause aether acceleration.
Since gravitational force results from the steady flow of 
aether into matter, gravitational force density f can be 
expressed in terms of the gradient of the hydrodynamic 
pressure P of aether using equation (4.4-3). Gravitational force 
density f is, therefore, the negative pressure gradient resulting 
from the steady flow of aether into matter.
4.5 
Physical Cause of Gravity
Gravitational acceleration is caused by aether flow that is 
accelerating towards matter. As we have seen, this accelerating 
flow of aether results from matter being a field flow sink for the 
nearly incompressible aether. We will designate all aether flow 
(incompressible and nearly incompressible) resulting from 
aether flowing into matter as gravitational aether flow.
Matter has an associated gravitational acceleration field 
only because there is an accelerated flow of aether into matter 
resulting from matter being a field flow sink for aether. The 
field particles for gravitational fields are aetherons, and the 
flow acceleration of aetherons is the attribute of the field 
particles that is the gravitational field. Finally, we note that the 
aether field equation of gravity is completely consistent with 
both Newton’s force law of gravity and Poisson’s field equation 
of gravity. Moreover the aether field equation of gravity shows 
us that the gravitational field is linear.
For a large material body such as the Earth, the flow of 
aether from outside the body into the body will always be 
vertical. There is then no aether flow tangential to the surface 
of the Earth.
If the acceleration of aether is not being caused by the 
presence of matter, an acceleration field will still exist. We will 
denote such a field as an aether acceleration field, and we will 
reserve use of the term gravitational acceleration field for 
accelerations due to gravitational aether flow.
4.6 
Nature of Mechanical Force
In his Principia, Newton defines an impressed force as "an 
action exerted upon a body, in order to change its state, either of rest, 
or of uniform motion in a straight line.” Generalizing from this 
definition, we will define (unbalanced) force to be any action 
on a body that causes the body to accelerate.
52

Galileo Galilei (1638) first discovered that a force exerted 
upon a body causes the body to accelerate rather than to move 
with constant velocity. Application of a nonzero resultant force 
upon a body will always cause a sudden discontinuous change 
in the acceleration of the body. Any resulting changes in the 
velocity and position of the body will not be discontinuous, but 
will represent the integration over time of the acceleration.
Any pushing action that occurs directly through physical 
contact of contiguous real particles and causes a body to 
accelerate is known as mechanical force. Mechanical force is, 
therefore, contact force involving a push action between 
contiguous real particles. Material particles are, however, never 
in physical contact with each other, but are always surrounded 
by aether (see Masse, 2022, Chapter 5). “All pieces of matter and 
all particles are connected together by the ether and by nothing else,” 
as Lodge (1925a) noted. Therefore, mechanical force defined as 
contact push action between real particles exists only because 
aether particles can be in physical contact both with other 
aether particles and with material particles. Material particles 
act upon each other only through (by means of) the aether. 
When contiguous aether particles that are accelerating cause 
other aether particles or a material particle to accelerate, this 
action is mechanical force.
In twentieth century physics, the concept of force was 
generally regarded as merely an artificial invention since force 
often appears to serve only as an “intermediate term” between 
two motions (Jammer, 1957). Nevertheless, the changing 
momentum of aether is an action that can cause the acceleration 
of a body. Defined as an action that causes acceleration, force 
certainly can be considered to be as real as is any motion.
If a force appears to be acting-at-a-distance, the force is 
really acting through contiguous aether particles as Descartes 
proposed. Action-at-a-distance force does not exist. The concept 
of action-at-a-distance is counterintuitive and has no physical 
validity.
Finally, we note that the nonexistence of any force that 
acts-at-a-distance has a very important implication: there can be 
no such thing as a true attractive force. In physics this term 
should not then be taken to mean force acting-at-a-distance. In 
this book we will follow Newton (1687) by taking attractive 
force as indicating only the relative direction in which forces 
are acting. When we say that an attractive force exists between 
two bodies, we will mean, therefore, only that some mechanical 
forces are pushing the two bodies closer together.
53

4.7 
Nature of Gravitational Force
Gravitational force is the direct result of material particles 
(nucleons) being field flow sinks for the nearly incompressible 
aether. The accelerating flow of aether into a nucleon produces 
a negative pressure gradient in the aether surrounding the 
nucleon. This negative pressure gradient is gravitational force. 
We see then that gravitational force both results from and 
causes the acceleration of aether. Gravitational force can be 
characterized, therefore, as an action occurring through the 
physical contact of contiguous aetherons. We can conclude that 
gravitational force is a mechanical force.
Since aether particles act only upon neighboring particles, 
individual particles of aether do not act over any measurable 
distance. The long-range force known as gravity is produced by 
a flow motion involving a series of contiguous aether particles. 
The flow of the fluid aether into matter is evident to us through 
the resulting gravitational pull. Gravitational force is an 
attractive force. Finally, we note that gravitational force is not 
action-at-a-distance.
We will designate any force produced by the flowing 
motion of a fluid as a flow force. All other forces will be 
designated as non-flow forces. Gravitational force is then a
flow force. Flow forces are distinguished from non-flow forces 
by the following:
1. 
If a non-flow force is accelerating you, it is 
possible for you to detect this acceleration 
without reference to any other material bodies. 
We will reserve the designation impressed force 
for non-flow forces.
2. 
If a flow force is uniformly accelerating you, it is 
impossible for you to detect this acceleration 
without reference to other material bodies that 
are not being so accelerated. You would seem to 
be weightless. Examples of flow forces acting on 
a body are:
a. A material body in free fall in a uniform 
gravitational field.
b. A material body floating beneath the 
surface of a river whose flow is uniformly 
accelerating.
Because gravitational force results from the action of 
aether particles, such force will penetrate through the surface of 
any body composed of atoms and will affect the entirety of the 
body. A force such as gravity that can act directly upon not only 
the surface, but also the interior parts of a material body is 
known as a body force.
54

4.8 
Nonexistent Gravitons
Gravitons are hypothetical particles proposed under a 
theory that assumes the force of gravity is transmitted by some 
sort of particle that mediates or transmits the force over a 
measurable distance through an exchange of these hypothetical 
particles between material bodies. Since the transmission of 
gravitational force is by mechanical contact of contiguous 
aether particles, however, there is no particle that is exchanged 
between material bodies to transmit in some unknown manner 
the gravitational force. Moreover, material bodies do not emit 
aether particles since they are field flow sinks and not field flow 
sources for aether. The hypothetical gravitons, therefore, cannot 
be aether particles. Gravitons have not been discovered nor do 
we expect they ever will be; gravitons simply do not exist. The 
only particles involved in the transmission of gravitational 
force are nonmaterial aether particles.
4.9 
Antigravity
Since matter is a field flow sink for aether, but is not a field 
flow source for aether, the gravitational flow of aether must 
always be towards and never away from matter. Therefore, the 
traditional concept of antigravity as a gravitational force 
directed away from matter is not possible. Aether flow in space 
far from matter may not be gravitational aether flow, however. 
If the aether flow is not gravitational aether flow, the flow can 
be in any direction. Any acceleration field in space resulting 
from such non-gravitational aether flow can then appear to be a 
type of antigravity (see Glanz, 1998).
4.10 
Conservation of Energy
! !
When there exists a force field F ■£ 0 that is derivable from 
a scalar potential V so that:
F = -V V 
(4.10-1)
!
the force F is known as a conservative force if F does not 
depend on time. If F is acting along some path C, we have:
f F • dr = -F VV • dr = -F dV 
(4.10-2)
c 
c 
C
Using Newton’s second law of motion for a material point 
particle of mass m, we can rewrite equation (4.10-2) as:
f d (mv) • d^dt = — f dV 
(4.10-3)
c dt dt 
c
or
— • ! dt = _ F dv 
(410-4)
Jc dt Jc 
4)
Therefore we have:
55

— m d (v • v) = - dV
2 c 
c
(4.10-5)
where V is a function of position and time: V = V(r, t). We can 
rewrite this equation using equation (4.10-6):
Letting
K =1 mv2 
2
(4.10-6)
or
dE ! dv dV dr dV 
— = mv • +—! +  
dt dt d! dt d t
(4.10-11)
We can rewrite equation (4.10-5) as:
[ dK = -[ dV
Cc 
C
(4.10-7)
where K is defined as the kinetic energy and V is defined as 
the potential energy of the point particle.
Letting E = K + V, from equation (4.10-7) we have:
dE = d (K + V) = 0 
dt dt
(4.10-8)
or
K + V = constant 
(4.10-9)
which is known as the law of conservation of energy.
If the force is a function of time so that the force is not 
conservative, then energy will not be conserved. We can show 
this using E = K + V:
dE ! ^ 
^ dV
— = F • v + V V • v + — 
dt 
d t
Using equation (4.10-1):
dE ! ! ! ! dV dV a
— = F • v - F • v +---- = — ^ 0
dt 
d t 
d t
(4.10-12)
(4.10-13)
and so energy is not conserved.
The potential energy V in equation (4.10-1) should not be 
confused with the gravitational potential p, which was defined 
in equation (2.3-13); potential energy and gravitational 
potential have different physical dimensions and refer to 
different entities. Gravitational potential p characterizes a 
gravitational field while gravitational potential energy V refers 
to the energy a given body has by being in a certain position 
within a gravitational field. From equations (2.2-1) and (2.3-15) 
we have for a material point particle of mass m:
dE = dK + dV 
dt dt dt
(4.10-10)
F = mg = m V^
Using equation (4.10-1), we can write:
(4.10-14)
56

-V V = m Vq 
(4.10-15)
or
V = - m? 
(4.10-16)
where p is the gravitational potential of a gravitational field 
and V is the gravitational potential energy of a material point 
particle having mass m.
4.11 
Summary
Newton’s force law of gravity, Poisson’s field equation of 
gravity, and the aether field equation of gravity are all mutually 
consistent, and are all valid for the gravitational field 
surrounding any quantity of matter. It is particularly interesting 
to note that Newton’s force law of gravity is valid for a 
stationary gravitational field of any strength, weak or strong 
(contrary to an opinion formed after the publication of 
Einstein’s general theory of relativity).
57

Chapter 5
Advance of Mercury’s 
Perihelion
“I cannot imagine the exertion of mechanical force 
across empty space . ..; a continuous medium seems to 
me essential."
Sir Oliver Lodge
Continuity: the Presidential Address 
to the British Association for 1913
58

In this chapter we will consider the perihelion of Mercury. 
The perihelion of a planet is the point on the planet’s elliptical 
orbit that is nearest to the Sun. The perihelion is not a 
stationary point in space relative to the Sun, but changes 
(advances) with time primarily due to the gravitational effects 
of other planets in our solar system (see Figure 5-1). The 
elliptical orbit of a planet, therefore, rotates in its plane about 
the Sun in the same sense as the planet’s orbital motion.
5.1 
An Anomaly Discovered
In 1859 the French astronomer Le Verrier discovered that 
part of the advance in the perihelion of Mercury was 
anomalous; that is, the total perihelion shift was about 38 arc­
seconds per century greater than could be accounted for by the 
known gravitational effects of all the other planets in our solar 
system using Newton’s law of gravity. Le Verrier’s discovery 
was verified through the careful work of Newcomb (1882). 
Explaining this anomaly became a test for gravitational 
theories.
The observed value of the anomalous advance in 
Mercury’s perihelion is now measured to be about 43 arc­
seconds per century out of a total advance of about 575 arc­
seconds per century. This means that the total perihelion shift 
of Mercury during each orbit is about 1.38 arc-seconds. Of this 
amount, 1.28 arc-seconds can be accounted for by the known 
gravitational effects of other planets. The remaining shift of 0.10 
arc-seconds during each orbit of Mercury is unexplained and so 
is anomalous (see Treschman, 1914b).
Figure 5-1 
Mercury’s orbit showing precession due to the
perihelion shift (shift is very greatly exaggerated 
as shown).
Various theories have been proposed over the years in an 
attempt to explain the anomalous advance in Mercury’s 
59

perihelion. Le Verrier (1859) suggested that an undiscovered 
planet or a number of smaller bodies may be orbiting the Sun 
between Mercury and the Sun (see Seeliger, 1895, 1896, 1906; 
Smart, 1921; Fontenrose, 1973; and Baum and Sheehan, 1997). 
Sufficient matter to cause the anomalous perihelion advance 
would be clearly visible, however, and no such matter has ever 
been found.
The correct equation for the advance of Mercury‘s 
perihelion was first published by Gerber (1898) based upon a 
consideration of the time required for gravitational force to 
propagate from the Sun to Mercury. About seventeen years 
later, Einstein (1915c) used his general theory of relativity to 
derive an equation identical to Gerber’s equation for the 
anomalous advance of Mercury’s orbit.
5.2 
Gerber’s Anomalous Perihelion
Advance Solution
Gerber (1898) postulated that the Sun’s gravitational 
potential y for the planet Mercury has the form:
p = G
2
(5.2-1)
r
c
where r is the radial distance from the center of the Sun to 
Mercury, r = dr/dt, M is the mass of the Sun, and c is the speed 
of gravitational force (not initially assumed to be the speed of 
light). Gerber based this assumed potential on the propagation 
time r/c required for gravitational force to travel from the Sun 
to Mercury. Using equation (5.2-1), we can write:
9 = GM 1 + 2 ! + 3 4 
r c c
r
(5.2-2)
From celestial mechanics, we know that, if the gravitational 
potential ty of the Sun is given by:
y = G — 
r
(5.2-3)
then the Sun’s gravitational field must be stationary, and its 
planets will have orbits that are closed ellipses. If the Sun’s 
gravitational potential y is given by:
V = GMM [1 + ^] 
(5.2-4)
where 3 is a dimensionless number, then its planets will have 
orbits that are open ellipses which advance. Even if 6 is very 
small, the axis of each planetary orbit ellipse will slowly rotate 
in space about the Sun.
60

To derive the equation of motion for Mercury, Gerber used 
a Lagrange equation of motion in polar coordinates (r, 0) for a 
conservative system:
d d L d L 
~dt ar ~lr
(5.2-5)
In deriving equation (5.2-9) from equations (5.2-7) and 
(5.2-2), all terms obtained from the term 2 r/c in equation (5.2-2) 
cancel out. Therefore, the Sun’s gravitational potential y for the 
determination of a planet’s orbit and the advance of its 
perihelion is effectively:
where L = K - V is the Lagrangian for the orbiting planet, K is 
its kinetic energy, and V is its gravitational potential energy. We 
then have:
9 = GM 1 + 3 4 
r c
r
(5.2-10)
d
dt
dK
dr
dK
dr
d 
dt
dV 
dr
dV 
dr
(5.2-6)
From equation (4.10-16) we have V = - mp, and so we can 
write:
£ d_ dK __1 dK_dy_ d_ dy
m dt dr m dr 
dr dt dr
(5.2-7)
rather than equation (5.2-2). Equations (5.2-10), (5.2-2), and 
(5.2-1) are then equivalent for determining a planet’s orbit 
around the Sun.
From equation (5.2-9), Gerber was able to obtain, after 
considerable mathematics, the advance per orbit AO as:
An 
24 n a 2
A^ c2 T 2 (1 - e2)
(5.2-11)
where m is Mercury’s mass. Using equations (5.2-7) and (5.2-2), 
we then obtain:
1 d dK 1 dK 
------—-----------  
m dt dr m dr
2
—-6 — 
c c
GM 
r 2
1 + 2 - + 3 ry - 2 - + 6 r 
c 
c2
c
(5.2-8)
or
1 d_I"dKL1 dK _ GM 
m dt dr m dr r2
• •
6 r “
c 2
1 - 3 r2+ 
c 2
(5.2-9)
where a is the semi-major axis of the orbit ellipse of Mercury, T 
is the orbital period of revolution, and e is the eccentricity of 
the orbit.
The mathematics of the derivation of equation (5.2-11) is 
explained in detail by Gerber (1898, 1917) and by Beckmann 
(1987). Using the measured value of AO, Gerber found that the 
speed c is approximately equal to the speed of light.
Assuming now that c in equation (5.2-11) is equal to the 
speed of light, the value of AO obtained from this equation then 
61

provides excellent agreement with the observed anomalous 
perihelion advance for Mercury as noted by Zenneck (1903), 
and as will be discussed in Section 5.5. Equation (5.2-11) was 
obtained by Gerber using his postulated gravitational potential 
given in equation (5.2-1).
The theoretical rational for assuming the gravitational 
potential form given in equation (5.2-1) has, however, never 
been established as was noted by Pauli (1921) and Wells (2011). 
Therefore, no “coherent physical foundation for Gerber's theory” 
has existed as pointed out by Earman and Janssen (1993).
5.3 
Einstein’s Anomalous
Perihelion Advance Solution
Using perturbation theory applied to his general theory of 
relativity, Einstein (1915c) obtained an equation for Mercury’s 
perihelion advance. This equation can also be derived using the 
Schwarzschild solution for general relativity to first obtain a 
Lagrange equation of motion in polar coordinates (r, 0) for a 
particle orbiting the Sun (Eddington, 1923; Tolman, 1934; 
Lawden, 1962; Longair, 2003; Hobson et al., 2006; and Choquet- 
Bruhat, 2009):
d 2 u 
dfi2
GM 
h 2
u =
GM 2
—u
c 2
(5.3-1)
where u = 1 r and h = r2 . Solving this differential equation, 
the advance per orbit from Einstein’s general theory of 
relativity is:
Ae = 24 n 3 a2
c2 T2 (1 - e2)
(5.3-2)
This equation can be seen to be identical to the equation for A0 
first derived by Gerber (1898), and given in equation (5.2-11). 
The theoretical rational for the advance determined using 
Einstein’s general theory of relativity is usually attributed to a 
'relativistic correction' (e.g., see Foster and Nightingale, 1995).
Einstein proposed that equation (5.3-2) be used as a check 
of the validity of the general theory of relativity. His theory 
soon gained acceptance over all other existing theories. Born 
(1924) noted that, “the anomaly of the perihelion of Mercury is so far 
the only confirmation of the general theory of relativity in the domain 
of mechanics.” Schiff (1960c) and d’Inverno (1992) consider 
planetary orbit precession to provide the only direct test of the 
validity of the general theory of relativity.
The physical source of the 'relativistic correction' obtained 
from Einstein’s general theory of relativity has been variously 
assigned to the inertia of the gravitational field (Rougier, 1921), 
to the rotation of the Sun (Gibilisco, 1983), to the angular 
momentum of the Sun (Shapiro, 1980b), to a nonlinear 
62

gravitational field (Sciami, 1969; and Carroll, 2004), to 
relativistic velocity effects due to the orbital motion of Mercury 
(Will, 1986; and Talcott, 2005), to slight changes of space-time 
metrics near large masses (Hentschel, 2005), to the curvature of 
space-time in the immediate vicinity of the Sun (d'Abro, 1927; 
Fitzpatrick, 2012; and Moore, 2013), and to the combined effect 
of space-time curvature and the increase in mass of Mercury 
with velocity (Adams, 1997). We can conclude, therefore, that 
the physical source of the 'relativistic correction' has never been 
clearly identified. In fact, most presentations of the general 
theory of relativity do not even attempt to identify the physical 
source of the 'relativistic correction'.
The physical foundation for the perihelion advance given 
by equations (5.2-11) and (5.3-2) remains unclear therefore. 
Neither Gerber nor Einstein has provided the cause of 
Mercury’s anomalous perihelion advance; they have only 
computed the amount of this advance.
The Newtonian equation for orbiting motion that 
corresponds to equation (5.3-1) is, as given by Ramsey (1929), 
Lawden (1986), Longair (2003), Hobson et al. (2006), and Moore 
(2013):
If we assume that the time t and distance r variables of space­
time in general relativity theory are essentially the same as the 
corresponding Newtonian variables (a true assumption at some 
distance from the Sun), the parameter h in equations (5.3-1) 
and (5.3-3) will be identical (Tolman, 1934; Lawden, 1962; and 
Kilmister, 1973). The relativistic equation (5.3-1) will then differ 
from the classical equation (5.3-3) only by having the additional 
term (3G^c2) u2. Sommerfeld (1942c) observed that this term 
“has no appreciable influence on the size or shape of the orbit, but 
affects merely the position of the perihelion.”
Equation (5.3-1) for the motion of a particle orbiting the 
Sun (obtained using the Schwarzschild solution for the field 
equation of general relativity) is equivalent to a Newtonian 
orbit equation for a gravitational field specified by:
Gr2
1 + 3 r2
c 2
(5.3-4)
g
r
(see Rothman, 1972; and Fitzpatrick, 2012). From equation 
(2.3-15), the gravitational potential for this field is then:
9 = GM 1 + 3 4 
r c
r
(5.3-5)
d 2 u 
dfi2
GM
(5.3-3)
The gravitational potentials given by equations (5.2-10) 
and (5.3-5) are identical, and so both Gerber and Einstein
u =
h 2
63

effectively base their derivation of Mercury’s anomalous 
perihelion advance on the very same gravitational potential:
9 = G r ^ -.2 
(5.3-6)
. r 
r I?- ~c
thus making their methods mathematically equivalent. Einstein 
probably did not realize this when he was so disparaging of 
Gerber's method (see Capria, 1999). Neither method provides a 
physical rational for the gravitational potential given in 
equation (5.3-6), however. Nevertheless, the true cause for the 
anomalous perihelion advance of Mercury’s orbit must be the 
gravitational field corresponding to the gravitational potential 
which Gerber had first postulated. We will now show that this 
is indeed the case.
5.4 
Anomalous Perihelion Advance
of a Planetary Orbit
When a small material body of mass m is orbiting a large 
material body of mass M, the two bodies are actually revolving 
around their center of gravity. While the planets of our solar 
system are orbiting the Sun, the Sun and the planets are then 
revolving around the center of gravity of the solar system. Since 
the center of gravity of our solar system has no acceleration 
relative to the solar system, it defines an inertial reference frame 
for the entire solar system. The Sun, therefore, is accelerating 
relative to an inertial reference frame, and so the Sun’s 
gravitational acceleration field g at any point in our solar 
system is varying with time. For a planet such as Mercury, this 
means that at any point on its orbit about the Sun, the 
gravitational field of the Sun will be non-stationary.
Changes in the Sun’s gravitational field are not 
communicated instantaneously to distant points but propagate 
with a speed c from the Sun (action-at-a-distance does not 
exist). In polar coordinates, the line position vector from the 
Sun to Mercury is given by ! = rr, where r is a unit vector. We 
will define the delayed time t as:
t = t - c 
(5.4-1)
where t is time, and r/c corresponds to the time required for a 
change in the Sun’s gravitational field to travel the distance r 
from the Sun to Mercury. We do not need to assume that c is 
the speed of light.
As Mercury moves along its orbit from a point !0 to an 
adjacent point ! with an initial orbital velocity r0 through the 
non-stationary gravitational field g of the Sun, the new point ! 
on the orbital path can be obtained from classical kinematics:
64

! 1 ! 2 ! , !
r = 2 gT + ro t + ro
(5.4-2)
d 2 r 
dt2
G~rr
(5.4-7)
where g is a function of the delayed time t , and where we are 
considering only the effect of the Sun’s gravitational field on 
the motion of Mercury. We then have:
dr _ 1 dg dT 
2 ! dT "
dt 
2 dT dt g dt 
0
(5.4-3)
and
Since both equations (5.4-7) and (5.4-6) are correct for time 
t = rjc, we have:
r
G1! !
—r=g
1 - c
(5.4-8)
The non-stationary gravitational field of the Sun along 
Mercury’s orbit is given therefore by the equation:
j2! 1 j2! F 2 _ ”12 1 j! j2 - 
dr=1 dg di T2+1 dgdT 
dt 2 2 dT2 dt 2 dT dt2
T 2 + 2 dg 
dT
dT
dt
T
g = - G
2
(5.4-9)
r2
+ g
From equation (5.4-1) we obtain:
dT=1 - r
dT "I2 ! d2T 
tt + gT dr
(5.4-4)
(5.4-5)
c
The non-stationary gravitational field g of the Sun experienced 
by Mercury can be written as the gradient of a gravitational 
potential <p. From equations (2.3-15) and (5.4-9), the 
gravitational potential for this field is:
At a time t = r/c equation (5.4-1) gives t = 0, and so equation 
(5.4-4) at a time t = rjc becomes:
p = G-
r
2
(5.4-10)
c
d 2 ! ^ 
~tr ~g
dT 
dt
c
2
(5.4-6)
At a point ! on Mercury’s orbit at time t = r/c, the acceleration 
will be identical to that of a stationary gravitational field as 
given by Newton’s law of gravity:
where p is the Newtonian gravitational potential for the non- 
stationary gravitational field of a material body of mass M. 
The fact that the gravitational field of a material body in motion 
does not change instantaneously is consistent with Newtonian 
gravitational theory.
65

The gravitational potential p we have obtained in equation 
(5.4-10) is identical to the potential given in equation (5.2-1) 
postulated by Gerber (1898), and to the potential given in 
equation (5.3-6) implicitly used by Einstein. By the same 
process employed by Gerber, we then can derive the identical 
equation for Mercury’s perihelion advance as derived by 
Gerber and given in equation (5.3-2):
An = 24 n a a
AV c2 T 2 (1 - e2)
(5.4-11)
Using the measured value of A3, the speed c then is found to 
be approximately equal to the speed of light as Gerber found.
We can conclude, therefore, that the true cause of the 
anomalous advance of Mercury’s perihelion is that the Sun’s 
gravitational field is non-stationary. This is the theoretical 
rational that was missing in Gerber’s work and that provides a 
valid physical foundation for Gerber’s theory. We see now that 
Gerber's determination of the anomalous advance of Mercury’s 
perihelion was actually more insightful than was Einstein's. 
Moreover Newton’s force theory of gravity completely explains 
the anomalous advance in Mercury’s perihelion. Gerber was 
correct in assuming that the gravitational potential is a function 
of the propagation time rc required for gravitational force to 
travel from the Sun to Mercury.
Newton derived his law of gravity for a stationary 
gravitational field (which is why his force law of gravity is not a 
function of time, and so appears to imply an infinite 
propagation speed for gravitational force (see Section 2.2). 
Nevertheless, when the appropriate travel time for changes in 
the gravitational field is taken into account, Newton’s force law 
of gravity also applies for a non-stationary gravitational field. 
Newton’s force law of gravity (without any refinements) then 
provides the correct result for the anomalous advance of 
Mercury’s perihelion. Therefore, the aether field theory of 
gravity also provides the correct answer. The presence of an 
anomalous advance of the perihelion of any planet’s orbit can 
now be seen to be an indication that the Sun’s gravitational 
field is non-stationary.
Finally, we note that a propagating change in a 
gravitational field is a gravitational wave. Just as the movement 
of the Earth in its orbit around the Sun is expected to produce 
gravitational waves (Hawking, 1988), so the movement of the 
Sun in its orbit around the center of gravity of our solar system 
should produce gravitational waves. Therefore, the anomalous 
perihelion advance of Mercury really represents the first 
observational evidence (although unrecognized as such) for 
gravitational waves. Moreover, the observed perihelion 
advance of Mercury provides the first direct measurement 
66

showing that the speed of gravitational waves is equal to the 
speed of light. This, of course, argues in favor of aether being 
the propagation medium of gravitational waves, and as Mach 
(1901) noted, speaks “in favor of the ether as the medium of 
gravitation/' This also confirms our expectation that changes in 
the force of gravity are not transmitted instantaneously, but are 
transmitted by gravitational waves propagating with the speed 
of light.
5.5 
Agreement with Observations
The theoretical advance of Mercury’s perihelion predicted 
by Gerber’s original equation (5.1-11) with c equal to the speed 
of light is approximately 42.98 arc-seconds per century (Nobili 
and Will, 1986). The identical estimate is obtained, of course, 
from the general theory of relativity and from the aether theory 
of gravity as is shown above, assuming that c is equal to the 
speed of light. The theoretical estimate of 42.98 arc-seconds per 
century can be compared with the observed data listed in Table 
5.5-1 (see Morton, 1956).
The agreement between theory and observation appears to 
be very good. Some uncertainty in the quadrupole moment of 
the Sun exists, however, and since this moment can affect 
Mercury’s perihelion advance, the actual uncertainty may be 
somewhat greater than is indicated in Table 5.5-1 (see Hill et al.,
1974, 1982; Gough, 1982; Campbell et al., 1983; Dicke et al., 
1987; and Pireaux and Rozelot, 2003).
Table 5.5-1 Observed anomalous perihelion advances for 
Mercury in arc-seconds. Compare to theoretical 
value of 42.98 arc-seconds per century.
67

In any case, clearly the aether theory of gravity and the 
general theory of relativity perform equally well for this test of 
gravitation theory. The general theory of relativity, however, 
has not provided a clear physical rational for the observed 
anomalous perihelion advance of Mercury.
5.6 
Summary
The anomalous advance of planetary orbits is found to be 
due to the non-stationarity of the Sun’s gravitational field. This 
is not a relativistic effect, but is completely accounted for by 
Newton’s force law of gravity. Newton’s gravitational theory 
has not been disproved by the anomalous advance of Mercury’s 
orbit.
68

Chapter 6
The Nature of Mass
“One has to admit that in spite of the concerted effort of 
physicists and philosophers, mathematicians and 
logicians, no final clarification of the concept of mass 
has been reached."
Max Jammer
Concepts of Mass in Classical and Modern Physics
69

The scientific concept of mass has existed for over four 
hundred years. During that time there have been countless 
studies of mass and numerous revisions in how mass is viewed 
in physics. Nevertheless, in all that time no clear definition of 
mass has emerged. This prompted Brown (1960) to state: 
“Nothing in the history of science is perhaps so extraordinary as the 
doubt and confusion surrounding the definition of mass.” The 
concept of mass has only become more complex through the 
years: for bodies in motion, mass has appeared to depend on 
certain kinematic properties of the bodies; for all material 
bodies, mass has been considered equivalent to energy. The 
physical reality of mass has even been questioned (Roche, 
2005).
In this chapter, we will briefly review classical concepts of 
mass. We will then determine the definition and nature of mass. 
We will show how this new definition of mass explains both 
gravitational mass and inertial mass.
6.1 
Classical Concepts of Mass
The concept of mass originated from quantitas materiae or 
quantity of matter, a metaphysical idea developed in the Middle 
Ages (Jammer, 1961). In the seventeenth century, Kepler 
introduced the concept of force to provide a cause for planetary 
motions and the concept of inertia of matter to describe the 
resistance of matter to impressed force (see Barbour, 1989). 
Newton then proposed that inertia is a material body’s 
resistance to a change in motion and that mass is a measure of 
inertia. He also found that the gravitational force or weight of a 
body is proportional to its quantity of matter and that mass is a 
measure of the quantity of matter. Kepler and Newton thereby 
began the process of creating the scientific concept of mass.
During most of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, 
mass was generally viewed as real and substantial. All objects 
were thought to consist of mass, and conservation of mass 
became a principle of physics. By the twentieth century, 
however, the concept of mass in physics had changed greatly. 
Mass was no longer regarded as substantial, but only as a 
proportionality factor, inertial factor, or a form of energy. Mass 
was often defined then as the quotient of force and acceleration 
(Huntington, 1918). Of course, this definition was not without 
its own problems since force as a concept in physics was also 
being questioned in the twentieth century (Jammer, 1957).
6.2 
Nature of Mass
To derive a definition of mass, we will consider matter 
having mass AM and density p contained within a very small 
volume element AV of a material body. From equation (4.1-18) 
we have:
70

- 4nGZ JJJ.,dtF•z)]dV=JJJ.,.p 
(6.2-1'
Using equation (2.3-3), we then obtain:
aM=-^-r nr i?• (zu!)] dV 
(6.2-2)
4 nGZ J J J a v d t L
Equation (6.2-2) provides us with a definition of mass from 
which we can determine the nature of mass. From this equation 
we see that the mass within a given volume element AV is a 
measure of the variation with time of the flux of aether in the 
volume element. Therefore, mass is a measure of the variation 
with time of the flux of aether. Mass cannot exist without 
aether. If the time variation of aether flux within AV is zero, 
then the mass within the volume element AV is zero.
As Brown (1960) noted, mass is not an entity that can be 
measured; mass is a measure. The fact that mass is not an entity 
itself, but is a measure, may have contributed to the difficulty 
of determining the nature of mass. Jackson (1959) stated, “there 
is no experiment in which mass reveals itself directly.”
According to equation (6.2-2), mass exists within a given 
volume element whenever there is a time variation in the flux 
of aether flowing in the volume element, whether matter is 
present or not. Equation (6.2-2) is also valid for a volume 
element AV that contains only aether. Therefore, mass can exist 
without matter. It is evident then that mass is not the same 
thing as matter. This can also be seen from the fact that matter 
is a field flow sink for aether whereas mass is not. It is matter, 
not mass, that is the cause of gravitational fields. Gravitation is 
not a property of mass, and so mass is not a source of 
gravitational force. Finally, it is not correct to state that matter 
alone is endowed with mass.
For aether flowing into a sink (matter), the time variation 
of the aether flux (mass) is proportional to the strength of the 
sink. The strength of the sink is, in turn, proportional to the 
quantity of matter. It is for this reason that mass is a measure of 
the quantity of matter in a body as Newton (1687) proposed. 
Newton’s definition of mass as a measure has puzzled scientists 
for a long time (e.g., see Roche, 1988), but we see now that he 
was correct. Newton never said that mass is the same thing as 
matter.
If A S is the surface area of the volume element AV, we 
can use Gauss’s theorem given in equation (C-59) of Appendix 
C to rewrite equation (6.2-2) as:
aM = ~T^r ff I(Zu)•dS 
(6.2-3)
4nGZ 
as dt
This equation shows that the mass within a given volume 
element is a measure of the variation with time of the 
71

momentum density of aether flowing through the surface of the 
volume element. Note that this is just equation (4.1-1) with 
k = Z. From equation (6.2-3) we see that mass is a scalar which 
can be uniquely specified since it is defined relative to a unique 
reference frame, aether (see Section 7.5). We also see that mass 
is always positive (since U and dS are oppositely directed).
The definition of mass given in equation (6.2-2) can be 
written in the form:
AM=fff 1^• (Za)+^• (¥*! 11dV (6.2-4)
4 nGZ J J J AV L 
V d t J_
where a is du/dt (the time variation of the aether flow velocity 
U! at a point ! ). We then have:
A M = -/-- fff [<V•&+a• VZ + V• fd^vY|dV (6.2-5) 
4nGZJ J A a v L 
\dt J _
Since aether flow is incompressible when not in proximity to 
nucleons, the density of aether is then constant:
Z = 0 
(6.2-6)
d t
—! _!
NZ = 0
(6.2-7)
and so the definition of mass given in equations (6.2-3) and 
(6.2-5) can be rewritten as:
A M =-----1 a • dS
4 nG 
a s
A M =---- 1 
V! • a dV
4 nG 
a v
(6.2-8)
(6.2-9)
Because of the relations given in equations (6.2-6) and 
(6.2-7), a! represents the acceleration of gravitational aether 
flow when not in proximity to nucleons. Therefore, a! = g as 
given in equation (4.1-12), and we can write equation (6.2-9) as:
AM = ~T^r fff V• gdV 
(6.2-10)
4 nG 
a v
Using equation (2.3-8) we then have:
AM = -4n1GJJJ [-4nGp]dV = JJJ pdV 
(6.2-11) 
which is equation (2.3-3).
6.3 
Mass Types
The nature of mass is completely specified by the 
definition of mass given in equation (6.2-2), and so all mass 
must be consistent with this definition. Therefore, only one 
kind of mass exists. While different mass types have been 
previously identified, we will now show that the designation of 
a mass type is based, not upon differences in the nature of mass 
72

itself, but upon differences in the nature or situation of entities 
possessing the mass. We will also see that not all entities are 
capable of possessing all types of mass; some entities having 
mass are not such that the mass they possess can ever be 
designated active gravitational mass.
We will examine three different types of mass that have 
been identified in the scientific literature: active gravitational 
mass, passive gravitational mass, and inertial mass. To do this, 
we will again consider two bodies of mass M and m, 
respectively (see Figure 1.2-1). In this case, however, we will 
require only the body of mass M to be material, while the body 
of mass m can be either material or nonmaterial. An example of 
a nonmaterial body is the electron (see Masse, 2022, Chapter 5). 
We will begin by specifying the location in space of the body of 
mass m by the line position vector ! that has its coordinate 
system origin at the center of the stationary body of mass M.
6.3.1 
Active Gravitational Mass
If g is the gravitational field resulting from aether flowing 
into the material body of mass M shown in Figure 1.2-1, 
equation (2.2-1) applies and we have:
g = - GM r 
(6.3-1)
r
The mass M of the material body responsible for the 
gravitational field g is designated as the active gravitational 
mass for this field. Active gravitational mass is then a measure 
of the quantity of matter (the strength of the sink) that is 
producing the gravitational field. The strength of a sink within 
a given volume element AV is, in turn, proportional to the 
variation with time of the flux of aether in AV as can be seen 
from equation (6.2-2). Active gravitational mass, therefore, is 
consistent with the definition of mass given in equations (6.2-2) 
and (6.2-3).
For a body to have mass that is designated as active 
gravitational mass, it must contain matter since only matter can 
create a gravitational field. Gravity is a property of matter, not 
of mass. The mass of electrons, for example, cannot be 
designated as active gravitational mass since electrons do not 
possess matter. Electrons then do not possess a gravitational 
field. The designation of mass as active gravitational mass 
arises simply from a consideration of the source of the variation 
with time of the flux of aether that is mass.
6.3.2 
Passive Gravitational Mass
The body of mass m shown in Figure 1.2-1 will experience 
acceleration due to the gravitational field g of the material 
body of mass M. From equation (1.2-1) we have:
73

g = F = - GM r 
(6.3-2)
m r
where F is the gravitational force on the body of mass m. 
Regardless of whether the body of mass m is a material body or 
a nonmaterial body, it will experience the same gravitational 
acceleration g since the gravitational field of the body of mass 
M is independent of both the composition and mass of the 
body of mass m. When the body of mass m is experiencing a 
gravitational force due to the gravitational field g of the 
material body of mass M, the mass m is designated as passive 
gravitational mass. The designation of passive gravitational 
mass for mass m does not arise then from a consideration of the 
source of the mass m but only from the fact that the body of 
mass m lies within a gravitational field of some other body.
The mass m is a measure of the variation with time of the 
flux of aether in the body of mass m. If the body of mass m is 
material, for example, the actual source of the mass m is the 
quantity of matter in the body of mass m . Therefore its mass m 
can be designated as both active and passive gravitational 
mass. Both the mass M and the mass m are then defined by 
equations (6.2-2) and (6.2-3). The designation of passive 
gravitational mass arises simply from a consideration of the 
situation within which the body possessing the mass m exists.
6.3.3 
Equality of Active and Passive
Gravitational Mass
Since active gravitational mass and passive gravitational 
mass are both defined by equations (6.2-2) and (6.2-3), the 
active and passive gravitational mass of any given material 
body must not only be equal but identical. Experiments by 
Kreuzer (1968) and by Bartlett and Van Buren (1986) have 
indeed found the active and passive gravitational mass of a 
material body to be equal.
For a nonmaterial body, passive gravitational mass is also 
defined by equation (6.2-2). A nonmaterial body can never have 
mass that is designated active gravitational mass, however, 
since such a body does not contain matter. If a nonmaterial 
body has mass that is designated passive gravitational mass, 
the source of this mass must be other than matter (see Masse, 
2022, Section 5.4.6).
6.3.4 
Inertial Mass
We will now consider a material body with gravitational 
mass m. Using equation (2.2-1), we can rewrite the aether field 
equation of gravity (4.1-20) for this mass in the form:
1 |[V • (Zu)]=V •
Z d tL 
J
F
m
(6.3-3)
74

This is basically a field equation describing the relation between 
the motion of aether and the acceleration F/m. Whenever 
aether is being accelerated, equation (6.3-3) must apply.
Taking the time derivative in equation (6.3-3), we have:
1 -
1 r 
dz 1 
r f 1
- V • Za + - u = V • -
(6.3-4)
d t
-
There is nothing in equation (6.3-3) restricting F to be only a 
flow force, such as gravitational force. The force F can also be a 
non-flow force, which is impressed force, and equation (6.3-3) 
must remain valid. This is evident since impressed force acting 
on a body involves the acceleration of aether.
If F is an unbalanced impressed force acting on the body 
of gravitational mass m, then this force will cause aether to 
accelerate as given by equation (6.3-3). The accelerating aether 
will in turn cause the body of mass m to accelerate.
Since the aether is being accelerated by an impressed force 
rather than by flowing into a nucleon, aether density will 
remain constant. Both equations (6.2-6) and (6.2-7) will then 
always hold. Therefore, the term containing the aether flow 
velocity u in equation (6.3-4) will always be zero (even if u ^ 0) 
because d£/ d t = 0, and we will have:
_! 
_!
v • a! = v • F 
m
(6.3-5)
and so:
! !
ma = F 
(6.3-6)
Due to the impressed force F, the aether will have an 
acceleration a. The accelerating aether will cause the material 
body of gravitational mass m to acquire an acceleration a 
where c/ = a. Equation (6.3-6) can then be written:
!F = ma 
(6.3-7)
The body still has its gravitational mass m. This mass is 
constant since motion of the body will not change the quantity 
of matter in the body. Therefore the variation with time of the 
flux of aether in the body does not change. Because the body is 
being accelerated by an impressed force, however, the 
gravitational mass m is now designated as inertial mass.
6.3.5 
Equality of Inertial Mass and Passive
Gravitational Mass
Clearly gravitational mass and inertial mass are not only 
equal, but identical. The equality of gravitational mass and 
inertial mass is not some incredible coincidence, but follows 
directly from the aether field equation of gravity. It is then not 
necessary to assume the equality of passive gravitational mass 
and inertial mass as has been done in the weak equivalence 
principle of general relativity. We can conclude that, for a 
75

material body, active gravitational mass, passive gravitational 
mass, and inertial mass are all equal since they are all simply 
different designations for the same mass. For a nonmaterial 
body, passive gravitational mass and inertial mass are equal. A 
nonmaterial body cannot have mass that is designated as active 
gravitational mass.
6.3.6 
Tests of the Equality of Passive
Gravitational Mass and Inertial 
Mass
Observations of bodies experiencing both a gravitational 
force and an inertial force can be used to determine if the ratio 
of inertial mass to passive gravitational mass is dependent 
upon the composition of the body. We will now consider both 
pendulum experiments and torsion balance experiments for 
bodies composed of different materials. These are classic tests 
in physics.
6.3.6.1 Pendulum Experiments
The equality of passive gravitational mass and inertial 
mass for material bodies was first determined experimentally 
by Newton (1687), and later by Bessel (1832), Southerns (1910), 
and Potter (1923) using observations of the period (swing time) 
of pendulums made of different materials.
A simple pendulum consisting of a bob of mass m at the 
end of a string of length L is shown in Figure 6.3-1. The angle 
the pendulum string makes with the vertical is given by 3, and 
the arc length from the vertical equilibrium position is given by 
5.
Figure 6.3-1 Simple pendulum of length L .
Using Newton’s second law of motion, we can write an 
equation for forces acting upon the pendulum bob:
76

mI d 2 s ~ 
d-S T 
dt2
- mGg sinOT
(6.3-8)
L 
gg
T = 2 n
(6.3-14)
where mI is the inertial mass of the pendulum bob, mG is the 
passive gravitational mass of the pendulum bob, g is the 
magnitude of gravitational acceleration, and T is a unit vector 
tangent to the swing arc. We also have:
•* = L 6 
(6.3-9)
and so equation (6.3-8) can be written as:
mi Ldt^ = - mGg sin# 
(6.3-10)
or
d 20 + g mG 
dt2 L mI sin 0 = 0
(6.3-11)
The acceleration of gravity g experienced by a body is 
independent of the body’s weight and composition as was first 
determined by Galileo.
In this experiment two equal-length pendulums are found 
to always have the same period even when their pendulum 
bobs are made of different substances. Since the observed 
period of a pendulum does not depend upon the mass of the 
pendulum bob, mI and mG must then be equal (within the 
measurement error). It was determined, therefore, that passive 
gravitational mass and inertial mass must be equal to within 
five parts in 106.
For small oscillations this becomes:
d-+gmG- e=0
dt2 L mI
(6.3-12)
and so:
0 = A cos
t + A sin
t
(6.3-13)
The period T of the pendulum is then given by:
6.3.6.2 Torsion Balance Experiments
The equality of passive gravitational mass and inertial 
mass has been tested to greater precision by torsion balance 
experiments. All these experiments are patterned after the 
original torsion balance experiment conducted by von Eotvos 
(1890). In this type of experiment, two material bodies A and B 
are suspended from the ends of a beam that is, in turn, 
suspended at its center by a fine wire (see Figure 6.3-2).
77

The compositions and weights of bodies A and B are 
different (although their weights are usually nearly equal). We 
will denote the passive gravitational mass and inertial mass of 
body A by mGA and mIA, respectively, and the passive 
gravitational mass and inertial mass of body B by mGB and mIB, 
respectively.
Figure 6.3-2 Experiment of von Eotvos type.
Acting on each body are two forces: gravitational force 
and centrifugal force. The gravitational force is directed 
vertically down into the Earth. The centrifugal force is due to 
the rotation of the Earth and is not vertical at the location of 
Budapest where von Eotvos conducted his experiments (see 
Figure 6.3-3).
Figure 6.3-3 
Gravitational acceleration g and centrifugal
acceleration a of a body on the surface of the 
rotating Earth.
For body A, we will denote the gravitational force as 
mGAg and the centrifugal force as mIAa with vertically and
78

horizontally resolved forces of mIA aZ and mIA aH, respectively. 
For body B, similar notation applies. We can then write the 
equation for equilibrium of the beam under vertical torque 
about the beam center as:
LA mGAg - mlAaZ = LB mGBg - mIBaZ
(6.3-15)
where LA and LB are the beam lengths from the center of the 
beam to where the bodies A and B are suspended, respectively. 
From equation (6.3-15) we have:
m _m mGAg - mlAaZ 
LB = LA
mGB g - mIB aZ
(6.3-16)
The horizontal torque about the wire suspending the beam 
at its center is given by:
horizontal torque = LA mIA aH - LB miBaH 
(6.3-17)
Using equation (6.3-16), we have:
horizontal torque = LA
or
mIAaH
mGA g - mIA aZ 
mGB g - mIB aZ
mIBaH
(6.3-18)
horizontal torque = LA mIA aH
mGA g - mIA aZ mIB
mGB g - mIB aZ mIA
(6.3-19)
This can be rewritten as:
horizontal torque = LA mGA aH
miAmiB aZ
mIB 
Z
mIA 
mGA 
g
(6.3-20)
mGA 
mGB - m^
l_ 
g J
Since g >> aZ, we then have:
horizontal torque = LA mGA aH
mIA - mIB
mGA 
mGB
(6.3-21)
Therefore, any inequality in the ratios of inertial mass to 
passive gravitational mass for the bodies A and B will produce 
a horizontal torque.
Since no horizontal torque is observed when bodies A and 
B have different compositions and weights, the ratio of inertial 
mass to passive gravitational mass remains the same to within 
one part in 109. This ratio must then equal a constant (which 
can be chosen to be one) since it is the same for bodies of 
different compositions and weights. That is, within the limits of 
the resolution of this experiment, passive gravitational mass 
must always equal inertial mass. Torsion balance experiments 
by von Eotvos (1890) and von Eotvos et al. (1922) together with 
the more recent torsion balance experiments of Dicke (1961a), 
Roll et al. (1964), Braginsky and Panov (1972), Heckel et al.
79

(1989), Adelberger et al. (1990), and Touboul et al. (2017) show 
that the passive gravitational mass and inertial mass are equal 
to within several parts in 1015 (see Cook, 1988).
6.4 
Nonexistent Higgs Particles
Higgs particles are hypothetical particles that were 
proposed as part of a theory advanced by Higgs (1964) and 
others. This theory postulates the existence throughout our 
Universe of a special scalar field known as a Higgs field from 
which some particles acquire mass. The mass acquired by these 
particles would depend upon how well the particles couple 
with the Higgs field. Particles such as neutrons and protons 
were postulated by the theory not to acquire their mass from 
the Higgs field. The Higgs field, therefore, cannot account for 
gravitational mass.
A Higgs particle can never be directly detected. It is 
thought to exist for only about 10 -22 second. The existence of 
Higgs particles can only be inferred from indirect evidence. 
This inferential process involves examining the decay products 
of high energy particle collisions that occur within a particle 
accelerator in a search for a certain decay pattern that has been 
predicted for Higgs particles. Because of the massive amount of 
data produced in these high energy collisions, extensive data 
filtering is performed before any search for decay patterns even 
begins. Statistical methods are then used to detect Higgs 
particles based on a theoretical model known as the Standard 
Model of particle physics. If more decay patterns are found 
having the expected Higgs decay pattern than predicted by the 
Standard Model assuming Higgs particles do not exist, then the 
existence of Higgs particles is inferred.
In 2013 the existence of Higgs particles was inferred based 
upon such indirect evidence. Clearly the validity of this 
inference depends not only on the functioning of the extreme 
amount of computer filtering necessary to obtain a meaningful 
signal from the immense collision-created noise background, 
but also on the validity of the Standard Model (see Unzicker, 
2013).
The Standard Model has many problems, however, and is 
almost certainly wrong. Ironically, the inferred existence of the 
Higgs particle is now being used to argue for the validity of the 
Standard Model.
From the nature of mass as determined using equation 
(2.2-2), we can now see that there is no Higgs field, and Higgs 
particles do not exist. Moreover, the mass that all entities have 
originates from aether processes described by equation (2.2-2).
80

6.5 
Summary
Mass can be defined as a measure of the time variation of 
the flux of aether. All mass is consistent with this definition. 
There is only one kind of mass. Active gravitational mass, 
passive gravitational mass, and inertial mass are designations 
based, not upon differences in the nature of mass itself, but 
upon differences pertaining to the source of the mass or to the 
situation of an entity possessing the mass.
A material body can have mass that is designated as active 
gravitational mass, passive gravitational mass, or inertial mass. 
A nonmaterial body can only have mass that is designated as 
passive gravitational mass or inertial mass. Higgs particles do 
not exist.
81

Chapter 7
The Nature of Inertia
“The reason why things coast forever has never been 
found out. The law of inertia has no known origin. ”
Richard P. Feynman
The Character of Physical Law
82

A question that has puzzled scientists since the time of 
Kepler is the source of inertia. Because the source of inertia 
could not be found, some scientists have even appealed to the 
far distant stars for a mechanism to explain inertia. In this 
chapter, we will determine the source of inertia and the nature 
of inertial forces. We will begin by deriving Newton’s laws of 
motion.
7.1 
Derivation of Newton’s Laws of
Motion
Newton’s three laws of motion describe how the motion of 
a body changes when the body is acted upon by a force. 
Newton’s laws of motion, therefore, are laws pertaining to 
acceleration.
Newton’s laws of motion appeared for the first time in 
definitive form in his Principia. These laws were developed by 
Newton from empirical observations. They are the foundation 
for the entire field of mechanics. Newton formulated his laws of 
motion for material point particles. Newtonian mechanics is 
based, therefore, upon the theoretical concept of material 
particles abstracted to material point particles (which have no 
volume but do have constant density). Newton’s laws of 
motion can all be derived directly from the aether field 
equation of gravity.
7.1.1 
Newton’s First Law of Motion
Newton’s first law of motion known as the principle of 
inertia is:
Every body remains in its state of rest or of uniform 
motion in a straight line unless it is compelled to 
change that state by forces impressed upon it.
Newton’s first law of motion states that a body can remain 
in some given state only if it is not being accelerated by an 
impressed force. Newton’s first law of motion can be obtained 
directly from equation (6.3-7) which was derived using the 
aether field equation of gravity. We will now consider a 
material point particle of mass m located at a point !. From 
equation (6.3-7) we then have: 
! 
!
F = ma 
(7.1-1)
We will let the force F in equation (7.1-1) be an impressed (non­
flow) force acting on the material point particle at point ! .
If F = 0 so that no impressed force is acting on the point 
particle of mass m, we have from equation (7.1-1):
!
a = 0 
(7.1-2)
Therefore, if no force is impressed on the material point 
particle, the particle is not being accelerated and so will remain 
in a state of rest or of uniform rectilinear motion.
83

If an impressed force F ■£ 0 is acting on the point particle 
of mass m, we will have from equation (7.1-1):
!
a * 0 
(7.1-3)
If a force is impressed on a material point particle, therefore, the 
particle will accelerate and so will be compelled to change its 
state of motion.
By considering the two cases of impressed force F = 0 and 
F ^ 0, we have obtained Newton’s first law of motion from 
equation (6.3-7). We have shown, therefore, that Newton’s first 
law of motion can be derived from the aether field equation of 
gravity. Newton’s first law of motion provides the qualitative 
definition of force (Jammer, 1957).
If there are several forces acting on the material point 
particle at the same time, the above discussions will remain 
valid providing that F is taken to be the resultant force (the 
vector sum of all forces acting). If the resultant force F = 0, the 
forces acting on the material point particle are balanced and are 
then in equilibrium. The particle, therefore, will remain in its 
state of rest or of uniform motion in a straight line. The concept 
of balanced forces is fundamental to the field of statics in 
mechanics. If the resultant force F ^ 0, the forces acting on the 
material point particle are unbalanced, and the particle will be 
compelled to change its state of motion (accelerate).
7.1.2 
Newton’s Second Law of Motion
Newton’s second law of motion, which is known as the 
fundamental principle of dynamics, is:
The change in momentum of a body is proportional to 
the force impressed upon it and is in the direction of 
the straight line in which that force is impressed.
Newton considered the momentum of a body to change in 
a series of velocity jumps resulting from force impulses. Today, 
however, his second law of motion is generally written in terms 
of either acceleration or the time derivative of momentum.
Newton’s second law of motion can be obtained directly 
from the aether field equation of gravity. To show this, we will 
again consider a material point particle of mass m (as Newton 
did) located at a point ! . We can then use equation (7.1-1) in the 
form:
F = ma =
dv 
m— 
dt 
(7.1-4)
where ! is the velocity of the material point particle. Since the 
density of a material point particle is constant, its mass will be 
constant. We can therefore rewrite equation (7.1-4) as:
F = d [ mv ] 
(7.1-5)
Equation (7.1-5) is Newton’s second law of motion.
84

We see, therefore, that Newton’s second law of motion can 
be derived from the aether field equation of gravity. The 
derivation of equation (7.1-5) given above is consistent with 
Newton’s concept of “the accelerative action of force as a series of 
successive actions that imparts to the moving object successive 
increments of velocity,” as stated by Jammer (1957). In his second 
law of motion, therefore, Newton gave a relation for impulsive 
forces, not for continuous forces (Brackenridge, 1995; Cohen, 
2002). From this derivation follows the definition: The total 
impulse of external forces on a body in a given small time interval is 
equal to the change in linear momentum of the body in the same time 
interval:
F k t = k (mv) 
(7.1-6)
7.1.3 
Newton’s Third Law of Motion
Newton’s third law of motion is:
To every action there is always opposed an equal 
reaction; or the mutual actions of two bodies upon 
each other are always equal and oppositely directed.
Newton’s third law of motion can be obtained directly 
from Newton’s second law of motion. If we consider a physical 
system consisting of two material point particles having masses 
m1 and m2 and velocities v1 and !2, respectively, and if no
resultant external force is acting upon this system, we can use 
equation (7.1-5) to write for the system:
0 = d [ ml ”' + m 2 v2- ]
(7.1-7)
or
d[ ml !1]=
d 
dt [ m 2 !2 ]
(7.1-8)
Using equation (7.1-5) again, we see from equation (7.1-8) that 
the force one material point particle of the system exerts on the 
other material point particle of the system is given by:
—! 
—!
Fi = — F2 
(7.1-9)
which is Newton’s third law of motion for two material point 
particles interacting with each other. Therefore, Newton’s third 
law of motion follows from the aether field equation of gravity. 
Note that F1 and F2 do not act on the same point particle but on 
two different point particles. Also note that both forces must be 
acting simultaneously for this law to be valid.
The proportionality of active and passive gravitational 
mass is easily demonstrated from Newton’s third law of 
motion. We will consider two material bodies that are 
stationary relative to each other. We will let mA 1 and mP 1 be the 
active and passive gravitational masses, respectively, of body 1 
and mA2 and mP2 be the active and passive gravitational
85

masses, respectively, of body 2. From Newton’s force law of 
gravity as given in equation (1.2-4) we then have:
F12 = - G
mA 1 mP 2 .
-----— r 
r
(7.1-10)
for the gravitational force on body 2 exerted by body 1 and
F21 = G
mA 2 mP 1 .
-----— r 
r
(7.1-11)
for the gravitational force on body 1 exerted by body 2 (where 
we are using the same unit vector r in both equations). From 
Newton’s third law of motion we can write:
F12 = - G
mA 1 mP 2 
r 2
! 
_
r = - F21 = - G mA 2 mP 1 .
-----— r 
r
(7.1-12)
and so:
mA 1 = mA 2 
mp 1 mp2
(7.1-13)
which must hold for any two material bodies regardless of 
composition. These ratios must then equal a constant (which 
can be chosen to be one) since they are the same for bodies of 
different compositions and weights.
7.1.4 
Origin of Newton’s Laws of Motion
To summarize, Newton’s laws of motion are all contained 
in and can be derived from the aether field equation of gravity. 
The origin of Newton’s three laws of motion can all be found 
then in the motion of aether. This means that the foundation of 
classical mechanics is to be found in aether field theory. 
Newton’s laws of motion are valid only because of the 
existence and properties of aether. Moreover, Newton’s laws 
of motion are valid only with respect to inertial frames of 
reference (see Section 7.5).
7.2 
Galileo’s Law of Inertia
From his study of spherical bodies moving on inclined 
planes, Galileo Galilei (1638) determined that: “any velocity once 
imparted to a moving body will be rigidly maintained as long as the 
external causes of acceleration or retardation are removed.” Galileo 
thought, however, that the velocity would remain constant only 
for horizontal motion along the Earth’s surface (where gravity 
could not provide horizontal acceleration). Descartes (1644) 
stated that: “each thing, as far as is in its power, always remains in 
the same state; and that consequently, when it is once moved, it 
always continues to move,” and that: “all movement is, of itself, 
along straight lines.” Descartes was the first to realize the more
86

general law: a body will remain in a state of rest or of uniform 
rectilinear motion unless acted upon by an external force. This 
law is known today as Galileo’s law of inertia.
Newton defined inertia to be a measure of the resistance of 
a body to any change being made in its state of motion. A 
change in the state of motion is, of course, acceleration. A body 
in a state of rest or of uniform rectilinear motion will then not 
have inertia since the body is not changing its state of motion 
(accelerating). Because a body cannot be accelerated without a 
force acting on the body, a body will possess inertia only if a 
force is acting on the body. Moreover, since resistance is 
involved for inertia to be present, the force must be a non-flow 
force. Such a force will then be an impressed force. Inertia can 
be defined, therefore, as a measure of the resistance of a body 
to any change in its state of motion due to an impressed force. 
The concept of inertia is obviously associated with Newton’s 
laws of motion and, in particular, with Newton’s first law of 
motion (which is also referred to as Newton’s principle of 
inertia).
Inertia is a fundamental concept in physics. Nevertheless 
the source of inertia has remained a mystery ever since Kepler 
(1620) first associated inertia with matter almost four centuries 
ago. As Pais (1982) stated, “It must also be said that the origin of 
inertia is and remains the most obscure subject in the theory of 
particles and fields. ”
7.3 
Derivation of Galileo’s Law of
Inertia
It is possible to derive Galileo’s law of inertia from the 
aether field equation of gravity. From the definition of inertia 
we see that a body of mass m located at a point ! will possess 
inertia only if a nonzero impressed force:
F * ! 
(7.3-1)
is acting to accelerate this body by causing the aether to 
accelerate so that:
F * !
m
(7.3-2)
For equation (7.3-2) to be true in general, we see from 
equation (6.3-3) that we must have:
1 |l? • (Zu)]=v •
Z d t1- J
F 
m * 0
(7.3-3)
Equation (7.3-3) is the necessary condition for a body to possess 
inertia. Taking the time derivative we have:
z». za+*u *0
(7.3-4)
87

or
Z! dZ ! „
Za + dLu * 0 
(7.3-5)
t
From equation (7.3-5) we see that the necessary condition 
for a body at any point ! to possess inertia can be expressed 
completely in terms of properties of the aether at this same 
point !. The origin of inertia must then be found in the 
physical properties of aether. This explains how it is that inertia 
can be present instantaneously wherever an impressed force 
acts on a body. Aether is ubiquitous in our Universe.
From equation (7.3-5) we also see that a body can have 
inertia only if at least one of the two terms of this equation is 
nonzero. Since the density of aether Z is constant for aether 
flow not in proximity to nucleons, we have d£/ d t = 0, and so, 
for aether motion resulting from an impressed force, the second 
term will always be zero regardless of the value of u :
dZU = 0 
(7.3-6)
d t
For inertia to exist, therefore, we must have a ■£ 0. Any 
body at rest or moving at a constant velocity (so that a = 0) will 
not have inertia since both terms of equation (7.3-5) will then be 
zero. An impressed force must be acting to accelerate a body for 
the body to have inertia.
We can now understand why a body moving at a constant 
velocity does not have inertia, but an accelerating body does. 
We can also see why uniform motion through space does not 
produce observable effects, while accelerated motion does.
We have found that Galileo’s law of inertia can be derived 
from the aether field equation of gravity. For the first time we 
have an explanation why it is that, for inertia to be present in a 
body, the body must be accelerated. A fundamental distinction 
then exists between accelerated and unaccelerated motion for 
inertia.
7.4 
Mach’s Principle
Mach (1883) thought that a material body has inertia only 
because it interacts physically in some manner with all the 
other material bodies in the Universe. Mach regarded "all 
masses as related to each other.” Mach’s principle (as named by 
Einstein, 1918b) proposes that all matter is coupled together so 
that inertia has its physical origin in the totality of the matter of 
the Universe. Since most matter is located in far distant 'fixed 
stars', Mach concluded that the accelerated motion of a body 
relative to the far distant stars must be the primary cause of the 
inertia of the body. Why this might be so has never been 
explained.
88

Mach’s principle has the serious problem of requiring 
instantaneous action-at-a-distance between a material body and 
the far distant stars. Furthermore as Bondi (1952) noted, it has 
not been possible to express Mach’s principle in mathematical 
form, nor has it been possible to verify it experimentally. 
Mach’s principle predicts that the inertia of any given material 
body will increase as the amount of matter in proximity to the 
body increases. No such increase in inertia has ever been 
observed, however (see Hughes et al., 1960; and Drever, 1960).
From equation (7.3-5) we see that Mach’s principle cannot 
be correct. The inertia of a body is not directly dependent upon 
any other body.
7.5 
Absolute Motions and 
Galilean Relativity
Motion can only be defined relative to a reference frame, 
and the reference frame must be a physical entity (see Section 
3.2.1). Galileo Galilei (1632) investigated the relativity of bodies 
in motion in an attempt to explain why the rotation of the Earth 
had not been detected by observations on Earth (in his day). He 
determined that, “motion, in so far as it is and acts as motion, to 
that extent exists relatively to things that lack it; and among things 
which all share equally in any motion, it does not act, and is as if it 
did not exist.” Galileo found that the velocity of a material body 
is always relative to the velocity of the reference frame chosen. 
The velocity of a material body is not uniquely specified until 
the frame of reference is also specified. This frame of reference 
can be any other physical entity.
The acceleration of a material body must also be relative to 
a reference frame since acceleration is motion. The acceleration 
of a material body is found to be absolute, however. A 
kinematic absolute designates a kinematic entity that is the 
same for all observers everywhere, and so a kinematic absolute 
must always be relative to a unique reference frame. A single 
reference frame must then exist for all accelerated motion.
A unique reference frame for any given motion is 
considered an absolute reference frame for that motion. We see 
then that the designation of absolute or relative for motion is 
based upon the existence or nonexistence of a unique frame of 
reference.
A material reference frame that is at rest or is moving with 
a uniform rectilinear motion is referred to as an inertial 
reference frame (Lange, 1886). In other words, a material 
reference frame that is not accelerating is an inertial reference 
frame. Therefore, an accelerating or rotating material body 
cannot be an inertial reference frame.
Newton’s laws of motion contain only accelerations, not 
velocities. In fact, “Newton's laws of motion are statements about 
89

acceleration," as Clotfelter (1970) observed. Newton’s laws of 
motion, therefore, are true relative to the absolute reference 
frame for accelerations, or to any inertial frame. This is the 
reason all inertial reference frames are equivalent in Newtonian 
mechanics. The fact that acceleration of a material body is 
absolute, while velocity of a material body is relative is known 
as Galilean relativity or Newtonian relativity.
By considering the transformation laws that allow us to 
pass from a coordinate system within one material reference 
frame to a coordinate system within a second material reference 
frame that is moving relative to the first reference frame, we can 
demonstrate Galilean relativity. We will now consider two such 
material reference frames S and S’ indicated by the xt and x‘ 
coordinate systems, respectively, in Figure 7.5-1.
We will assume that the two reference frames S and S’ 
were colocated and had identical coordinate system origins and 
orientations at time t = 0. The reference frame S’ is now moving 
with a constant velocity U with respect to the reference frame 
S, which is at rest relative to the absolute reference frame for 
accelerations. Both reference frames S and S’ are therefore 
inertial. A material particle of mass m is referred to both 
reference frames. The position of the material particle of mass 
m is given by line position vector ! with respect to the 
reference frame S, and by line position vector !‘ with respect to 
the reference frame S’, where:
!‘ = ! - Ut
(7.5-1)
Figure 7.5-1 A reference frame S’ is moving with a constant 
velocity U relative to an inertial reference frame S.
The three component equations represented by the vector 
equation (7.5-1) are known as Galilean transformations. In 
Galilean transformations, time intervals are taken to be 
90

absolute. Therefore, time is the same in reference frames S and 
S’. Galilean transformations are valid between inertial reference 
frames.
From equation (7.5-1), the velocity of the particle is:
d! _ dr 
dt dt
(7.5-2)
This equation is known as the Galileo addition theorem for 
velocities. From equation (7.5-2), the acceleration of the 
material particle is:
d2!‘ = d 2 ! 
dt2 dt2
(7.5-3)
We see from equation (7.5-3) that accelerations with 
respect to the inertial reference frames S and S’ are equal, and 
so acceleration is absolute. If acceleration were not absolute, 
then a body could accelerate without the application of a force 
(by simply changing the reference frame). If a non-flow force is 
accelerating a material body, it is possible to detect this 
acceleration without any consideration of the body’s motion 
relative to other material bodies.
We also see from equation (7.5-2) that velocities of material 
particles with respect to the inertial reference frames S and S’ 
are not equal, and so velocity is not absolute, but relative to 
the velocity of the reference frame. We then cannot determine 
an absolute velocity for a material particle. As Davies and 
Gribbin (1992) noted, “The contrast between uniform and 
nonuniform motion is deep.”
Similarly, we see from equation (7.5-1) that position is not 
absolute, but relative to the position of the reference frame. 
We then cannot determine an absolute position for a material 
particle.
Since the acceleration of a material body is absolute, 
implicit in Newton’s laws of motion is the assumption that an 
absolute reference frame exists relative to which these laws are 
valid. In fact, Newton’s laws of motion are only valid relative 
to the absolute reference frame or to inertial reference frames.
Newton’s laws of motion are invariant with respect to 
Galilean transformations, therefore. This means that a law in 
mechanics that is valid for one inertial reference frame is also 
valid for any other reference frame moving with constant 
velocity relative to the first frame. Relative to inertial reference 
frames, laws of mechanics take the form of Newton's laws of 
motion.
Newton’s laws of motion also require the concept of 
absolute time as was noted by Hawking (1987). There certainly 
are no kinematic reasons for assuming that time is in any way 
dependent on motion. Moreover the fact that acceleration is 
91

absolute for all inertial reference frames argues against any 
dependence of time on motion.
Newton struggled with the problem of absolute versus 
relative motion, and he tried to find the absolute reference 
frame for accelerations. He knew that: “True motion is neither 
generated nor altered, but by some force impressed upon the body 
moved; but relative motion may be generated or altered without any 
force impressed upon the body." Newton realized that no material 
body may really be at rest and that: “the true and absolute motion 
of a body cannot be determined by the translation of it from those 
which only seem to rest.” Therefore, he sought an absolute 
reference frame for acceleration that was nonmaterial. He 
thought that empty space might provide this absolute reference 
frame. Empty space has no physical properties, however, and 
so cannot be a reference frame.
The nonmaterial absolute reference frame for accelerations 
has to be a physical entity with physical properties so that the 
motion of material bodies relative to this reference frame can be 
determined. Aether is a real physical entity that is nonmaterial 
but, nevertheless, has real physical properties. It is the 
ubiquitous aether filling space in our Universe that is the 
unique absolute reference frame that Newton sought. As noted 
by Jammer (1954), “If the ether as an absolute reference system could 
be demonstrated, the notion of absolute space could be saved.”
=’ •m
(7.5-4)
We will now show that aether does indeed serve as the 
absolute reference frame for accelerations. The aether field 
equation of gravity written in the form of equation (6.3-4) is:
Zv • 
+1u
where we will now consider F to be a non-flow (impressed) 
force. We then have d£/ d t = 0 since the aether not in proximity 
to nucleons is incompressible, and so equation (7.5-4) will hold 
true for any value of u but for only one value of a. We now see 
how a reference frame can exist that is absolute for acceleration, 
but is not absolute for velocity. The absolute reference frame for 
acceleration must be aether. This is confirmed by the fact that 
Newton’s three laws of motion (which pertain to the 
acceleration of bodies) can all be derived from a consideration 
of the motion of aether (see Section 7.1). Since there is no 
absolute reference frame for velocity, the velocity of a body will 
be relative to any given inertial reference frame (that is, any 
reference frame that is not accelerating relative to aether).
We can now understand why inertial reference frames are 
distinguishable from accelerating material reference frames. 
Aether is the special, preferential, or privileged reference frame 
for accelerating bodies. Aether is the absolute reference frame 
relative to which Newton’s laws of motion are valid. If aether 
92

did not exist, no absolute reference frame for accelerations 
would exist.
Finally, the fact that someone in free fall in a uniform 
gravitational field does not sense acceleration can now be 
explained. Gravitational force is a flow force (see Section 4.7). 
The aether surrounding a person in free fall is also being 
accelerated (causing the gravitational field), and so there exists 
no acceleration of the person relative to the absolute reference 
frame that immediately surrounds the person. Note that in 
general relativity the seeming elimination of gravitational force 
in free fall is taken as an assumption in the form of a postulate 
known as the equivalence principle.
7.6 
Inertial Forces
Aether is the unique reference frame for the acceleration of 
a material body. Any non-inertial frame will be accelerating 
with respect to the absolute reference frame for accelerations.
When the reference frame used to describe the acceleration 
of a material body is a non-inertial frame of reference, a force 
known as an inertial force will act on the body. This inertial 
force will be in a direction opposite to the force causing the 
acceleration of the body. Inertial forces are often referred to as 
fictitious forces or pseudo forces because no physical source 
capable of producing these forces is apparent when referred to 
the non-inertial reference frame.
There are four inertial forces that have been identified: the 
g-force, centrifugal force, Coriolis force, and Euler force. 
Material bodies that are speeding up or slowing down 
represent a non-inertial reference frame and experience g- 
forces. Centrifugal forces, Coriolis forces, and Euler forces are 
all inertial forces that can be experienced by rotating material 
bodies (which are also non-inertial reference frames).
As an example of a g-force, we will consider the force on a 
passenger of a car that is accelerating forward. The passenger’s 
seat will become compressed against the passenger’s back as 
the car accelerates.
With respect to an inertial reference frame, the seat is 
compressed because the seat must accelerate with the car, and 
so must exert force on the passenger so that the passenger 
accelerates with it. Since the passenger will then be accelerating 
relative to an inertial reference frame, the total force on the 
passenger will be unbalanced. The passenger (and the car) will 
move forward.
With respect to the non-inertial reference frame of the car, 
the seat will appear to be compressed because a fictitious g- 
force is pushing the passenger back against the seat. The force 
of the compressed seat will balance the g-force and so the force 
93

on the passenger will be balanced. The passenger will therefore 
be stationary with respect to the non-inertial reference frame of 
the accelerating car. The source of the g-force will not be 
apparent to the passenger.
Since aether is the unique reference frame for 
accelerations, only with respect to an inertial reference frame 
can an accurate description of the true force producing 
accelerated motion be realized. When a non-inertial reference 
frame is used to describe accelerated motion, fictitious forces 
must be postulated to explain the observations.
7.6.1 
Newton’s Laws of Motion for
Non-Inertial Reference Frames
Newton’s laws of motion pertain to accelerations and so 
are based upon inertial frames of reference. With respect to 
non-inertial reference frames, Newton’s laws of motion are not 
valid without some modification since such non-inertial frames 
are not the absolute reference frame for acceleration.
For example, if the reference frame S’ is non-inertial, and if 
S’ is being accelerated with a constant acceleration a with 
respect to the inertial reference frame S, then in place of 
equation (7.5-3) we have:
d 2 !‘ d 2 ! 
^
—2" = —2— a 
dt 2 dt
(7.6-1)
Newton’s second law of motion in the non-inertial reference 
frame S’ must then be modified to include all the forces acting:
m d2!‘ ! 
!
—= = F - ma 
dt 2
(7.6-2)
! 
!
where F is reduced by the force ma, which is a fictitious 
inertial force. The acceleration due to any inertial force is 
proportional to the mass of the material body being accelerated.
7.6.2 
Inertial Forces and Mach’s Principle
Inertial forces are obviously independent of the local 
distribution of material bodies since these forces always follow 
the same laws for all observed distributions of matter. Mach’s 
principle is sometimes invoked to explain the origin of inertial 
forces as due to the accelerating motion of a body relative to the 
far distant ‘fixed’ stars. In other words, Mach’s principle is 
equivalent to the assumption that far distant ‘fixed’ stars 
provide the absolute reference frame for the accelerations 
associated with inertial forces. For example, Mach (1883) 
thought that centrifugal forces are produced only when a 
material body rotates relative to the fixed stars; when a material 
body rotates relative to some other material body, but not 
94

relative to the fixed stars, centrifugal forces are not produced. 
Mach’s principle is not valid, however, as we have seen in 
Section 7.4.
Aether, not distant matter, provides the absolute reference 
frame for the acceleration of a material body. Einstein 
attempted to include Mach’s principle in his general theory of 
relativity. As Whitehead (1922) noted, however, “The Einstein 
theory in explaining gravitation has made rotation an entire 
mystery.”
7.6.3 
Newton’s Bucket Experiment
Centuries ago Newton determined empirically that 
centrifugal force is not caused by rotation relative to other 
material bodies, but is due to an absolute rotation. Newton’s 
famous experiment on rotational motion can be visualized by 
considering a bucket filled with water and suspended by a long 
cord that has been strongly twisted. The experiment consists of 
four stages.
1. 
The bucket is held at rest. There is no relative motion 
between the bucket and the water. During this time 
period the surface of the water will remain flat.
2. 
The bucket is then suddenly whirled about in the 
direction that will unwind the cord. At first the bucket 
will rotate but the water will not. Relative motion 
exists between the bucket and the water. During this 
time period the surface of the water will continue to 
remain flat although the bucket is rotating.
3. 
Soon the motion of the bucket will be communicated 
to the water, and the water will begin to rotate. 
Centrifugal force on the water will then cause the 
water to begin ascending the sides of the bucket, 
forming a concave water surface as bucket and water 
rotate together. There is still relative motion between 
the bucket and the water.
4. 
When the bucket and the water are finally rotating at 
the same speed so that no relative motion exists 
between them, the surface of the water will show its 
greatest deviation from a flat surface.
Relative motion between the water and the bucket clearly 
does not produce the same effect on the water’s surface as 
rotation of the water. The effect on the water’s surface is 
greatest when the relative motion between the bucket and the 
water is essentially zero. The shape of the water’s surface then 
indicates absolute (not relative) motion.
Newton’s bucket experiment shows that the centrifugal 
force on the water depends only upon the absolute rotation of 
the water and not upon the relative rotation between the bucket 
and the water. In other words, centrifugal force depends only
95

upon absolute rotation, and not upon rotation relative to any 
material body.
Newton concluded, therefore, that absolute motion exists 
in the form of "the true and absolute circular motion of the water." 
A unique reference frame for accelerations must then exist. The 
unique reference frame for accelerations is aether as we have 
seen. This explains why it is possible to determine if a material 
body is rotating (or not) without reference to any other material 
body. The same does not apply for determining if a material 
body is moving with a constant velocity or is at rest, since 
velocities are relative, not absolute. Mach attempted to explain 
Newton’s bucket experiment with his principle (see Earman, 
1989), but as we have shown Mach’s principle is not correct.
7.7 
Summary
The inertia of a material body is independent of any other 
material body. Mach’s principle is not correct.
Aether is the absolute reference frame for all accelerating 
bodies. Fictitious forces in the form of inertial forces must be 
postulated to explain observations only when a non-inertial 
reference frame is used to describe accelerated motion.
96

Chapter 8
Equation of Motion for 
Flowing Aether
“. .. all mass is mass of the ether, all momentum, 
momentum of the ether, and all kinetic energy, kinetic 
energy of the ether. ”
J. J. Thomson
Electricity and Matter
97

In this chapter we will determine equations of motion for 
flowing aether. We will also present relations for the energy 
density flux of aether.
U = 0 
d t
(8.1-4) 
and so equation (8.1-3) becomes for the steady flow of aether:
8.1 
Equation of Motion
We can obtain the general equation of motion for flowing 
aether (where both time and position can vary) by calculating 
the aether flow acceleration using the substantive derivative of 
aether flow velocity u. Using the substantive derivative given 
in equation (4.3-9) we obtain:
DU 
~Dt
du
Hl4 (v • V )v
(8.1-1)
With the vector identity in equation (C-46) of Appendix C, 
equation (8.1-1) becomes:
—— 
— 
— 
— — X
DU dU (~ ^ dU e ( U^ U) ^ fa ^\ xo-nx 
---- = — + (v^V)v = — + V   -ux(Vxv) (8.1-2)
Dt 
d t ' d d t L 2 ) k j
DU 
~Dt
^ U2 ^
! ! U
= (v V )v = V —
< 2 J
U X (Vx U)
(8.1-5)
Equation (8.1-5) is the general equation of motion for the 
steady flow of aether.
The force density f of the flowing aether at a given point 
on a streamline is given by the product of aether density and 
aether acceleration, and so can be written using equation (4.4-3) 
as:
f = Z DU
Dt
(8.1-6)
or
f = -V P=z[du + (1! • V )v 
d t ' 
'
(8.1-7)
or
! 
~X ! 
”X ! 
2 2 \
Du 
du (~ 
! du ! U ! fa A fo.
■DT = 
+(w*v )u=¥+vlrJ u x (Vx u) 
( 
)
At any given point in a region of space in which a steady 
aether flow exists, we will have:
This equation can be considered Euler’s equation of motion for 
the flow of aether.
For the steady flow of aether, the force density f of the 
steady flow of aether at a given point on a streamline can be 
expressed using equation (8.1-5) as:
98

( U2
! ! l ! \ 
! U
f=-VP=zU• V)U=z V -
k 2 J
- !! X ( V X !! )
(8.1-8)
This equation can be considered Euler’s equation of motion for 
the steady flow of aether. This equation is nonlinear. Note that 
in equations (8.1-7) and (8.1-8) f is not necessarily gravitational 
force density.
8.2 Gravitational Energy Density
Since the gravitational acceleration g is the aether flow 
acceleration, we have:
DU
(8.2-1)
where u is the aether flow velocity. The gravitational force 
^
density f can be defined as:
f = Zg = z
DU 
~Dt
(8.2-2)
For a stationary gravitational field, the gravitational aether flow 
is steady, and so we can rewrite equation (8.2-2) using equation 
(8.1-8):
f = Zg = Z ! ( u2 A
V —
u
l2)
- u X ( Vx u)
(8.2-3)
If dr is an element of length along a streamline, we have:
!f • dr = z V f — | • dr - U x
I 2 J
(Vx a) • dr
(8.2-4)
Using the vector identity given in equation (C-3) of Appendix 
C, we can write:
_!f •dr = z V [ UT J * dr + U X dr • (Vx U)
(8.2-5)
Since u is parallel to dr by definition of a streamline, the 
equation of a streamline is given by: 
^
v x dr = 0 
(8.2-6)
For incompressible flow Z is constant, and so we have:
f • dr = zVfu I• dr = df1 zU2
V2 
- = dQ K
(8.2-7)
12)
where QK is flow kinetic energy density for the incompressible 
flow of aether and is given by:
Q K = 2 ZU1
(8.2-8)
Because gravitational acceleration in a stationary gravitational 
field can be written in terms of the gradient of a scalar potential 
as given in equation (2.3-15), we will now let:
99

f = Zg = Z V^ = -VQ y 
(8.2-9)
where QV is flow potential energy density of aether. Equation 
(8.2-7) can then be rewritten as:
From equation (8.2-7) we also have for gravitational force 
density:
f=Zv f u2 A
2
(8.2-13)
or
-VQV • dr = - dQV = dQK
(8.2-10)
Using equation (8.2-2), we can write equation (8.2-13) as:
d (Q K + Q V) = 0
(8.2-11)
V P • dr + Z V f u2
< >
• dr = 0
(8.2-14)
We now can see that, for the incompressible flow of aether 
due to a stationary gravitational field, any change in the aether 
flow kinetic energy density between two points of a streamline 
is equal to the negative of the change in the gravitational 
potential energy density between the same two points. 
Gravitational energy density is therefore conserved for the 
incompressible flow of aether along a streamline. From 
equation (8.2-11) we have:
d , 
.
d (Q K + Q V) = 0 
(8.2-12)
which agrees with the empirical observation that energy is 
conserved in a stationary gravitational field. Gravitational 
energy can be considered as negative energy that resides in the 
aether.
For the incompressible flow of aether we have:
dP + d f1 Zu21 = 0
I 2 
)
(8.2-15)
where P is hydrodynamic pressure. Integrating, we obtain:
P + 2 Zu2 = P + Q K = constant
(8.2-16)
for steady flow along a streamline. Equation (8.2-16) is a 
Bernoulli equation for the steady frictionless incompressible 
flow of aether in a stationary gravitational field when not in 
proximity to a nucleon. For such a flow the integration constant 
will remain the same for any given streamline, but can be 
different for different streamlines.
100

8.3 
Gravitational Energy Density 
Flux within a Vacuum
If we denote gravitational energy density as QG, we then 
can write:
Q G = Q K + Q V
(8.3-1)
The gravitational energy density QG is a physical density 
entity. Since within a vacuum there can be no sinks or sources 
of Q G, we know that within a vacuum the gravitational energy 
density QG must satisfy the equation of continuity:
^G + V • (Q G U) = 0 
d t
(8.3-2)
where u is the flow velocity of aether due to gravity. The 
gravitational energy flux vector SG (momentum density of 
gravitational energy) is given by:
SG = Q G u 
(8.3-3)
The gravitational energy flux (quantity of gravitational energy 
flowing per unit time per unit volume) is then:
! ! 
!
V • SG = V • (Q G U_) 
(8.3-4)
From equations (8.3-4) and (8.3-2) we obtain for a vacuum:
dQrG 
~dT ! !
+ v • SG = 0
(8.3-5)
We will designate SG as the gravitational Poynting vector.
For a stationary gravitational field in a vacuum, the 
gravitational energy density QG must not change with time:
dQ
—^=0 
d t
From equation (8.3-5) we must then also have:
! !
V • SG = 0
(8.3-6)
(8.3-7)
Heaviside (1912) postulated the existence of this equation.
Finally, we note that since gravitational energy density can 
exist in the aether in a vacuum, it is obvious that an entity can 
possess energy density without containing matter. In Einstein’s 
general theory of relativity, the gravitational Poynting vector 
does not exist (Narlikar, 2010).
8.4 
IRROTATIONAL FLOW OF AETHER IN
a Gravitational Field
We will now consider the gravitational aether flow 
associated with a stationary gravitational field. At any point r 
of the gravitational field g, the aether flow is characterized by a
101

flow velocity u and a flow acceleration Dv/Dt. From equation 
(8.2-1) we have:
-! 
_!
Vxg=0= -Vx u_x (Vx U_)
(8.4-6)
DU 
~Dt = g
(8.4-1)
When not in proximity to nucleons, the aether flow will be 
incompressible and so we will have from equation (4.3-12):
__
V • U_ = 0
(8.4-2)
Using equation (2.3-15), we can express the stationary 
gravitational field g in terms of the gradient of a scalar 
potential function q:
DU 
~Dt = g = x'v
(8.4-3)
Since the gravitational field is stationary, we can use equation 
(8.1-5) to write:
! 
! ! \ 
! ( U 2 ^
= g = Vt> = (i! • v )v = v —
k 2 J
! 
!
- u x (Vx v)
(8.4-4)
Taking the curl of this equation, we have:
! 
! ! 
! ! ^ U 2 ^ ! r 
/!
Vxg = VxVp = VxV — -Vx ux(Vxu) 
(8.4-5)
I 2 )
Using the vector identity given in equation (C-29) of Appendix 
C, we obtain:
We see that the gravitational field g is an irrotational vector 
field. For equation (8.4-6) to be true for any u, we must have:
V x u = 0 
(8.4-7)
This can be verified by expanding equation (6.4-6) using the 
vector identity given in equation (C-41) of Appendix C and 
using equation (8.4-2). Gravitational aether flow, therefore, is 
irrotational.
That gravitational aether flow is now determined to be 
irrotational could be expected since the gravitational field 
resulting from this flow is irrotational. More fundamentally, it 
could be expected since aether flow is frictionless, and the 
aether flow of a stationary gravitational field has no curvature. 
In fact, it is for these reasons that the Newtonian gravitational 
potential p exists for a stationary gravitational field.
This can be seen by using equation (8.4-7) to rewrite 
equation (8.4-4):
g = V p = V f UU-
\ 2 7
(8.4-8)
From equations (8.4-8) and (2.3-13) we have:
102

? = U- = G — 
2 r
(8.4-9)
for the Newtonian stationary gravitational potential y at a 
point r from a material body having mass AM. The speed u of 
aether flowing toward the material body of mass AM is 
therefore given by:
u2 = 2 G — 
(8.4-10)
From equation (8.4-7) we see that aether flow velocity U! 
can be expressed as the gradient of a scalar velocity potential 
0: 
!
u = Vo 
(8.4-11)
and so the irrotational flow of frictionless aether associated 
with a gravitational field can be termed potential flow. A 
velocity potential, therefore, exists for gravitational aether flow.
From equation (8.4-2) we then have:
v • u = V • Vo = V 20 = 0 
(8.4-12)
when not in proximity to nucleons. This Laplace’s equation can 
be considered to be the equation of continuity for 
incompressible potential flow (see Malvern, 1969).
When not in proximity to nucleons, gravitational aether 
flow is incompressible and is both solenoidal and irrotational, 
as can be seen from equations (8.4-2) and (8.4-7):
^V • v = 0 
(8.4-13)
V x v = 0 
(8.4-14)
These equations generally characterize gravitational fields.
8.5 
Vorticity
A vortex is a circular or near-circular flow about a 
common axis. The vorticity Z of a fluid flow having a flow 
velocity field u is defined as:
^
/ = Vx u 
(8.5-1)
and represents the rotation of the individual fluid point 
particles as they flow with velocity u about a common axis. If a 
fluid flow has vorticity, each point of the fluid will have a 
vorticity vector associated with it, thereby creating a field of 
vorticity vectors known as a vorticity field. Any line in the fluid 
that is everywhere tangent to a vorticity vector at a given time 
is known as a vortex line.
From the definition in equation (8.5-1) and using equation 
(C-37) of Appendix C, we see that the vorticity field is 
solenoidal:
103

^ 
^ ^
v • / = V • (Vx v) = 0
(8.5-2)
If the fluid particles have a constant angular velocity co, we will 
have:
0) = 1 -
Vx u
2
and so:
y = 2 0)
(8.5-3)
(8.5-4)
At any point along a vortex line, the axis of the rotation 
vector O will be parallel to the vortex line. From equations 
(8.4-7) and (8.5-1) we see that for irrotational flow (such as 
gravitational aether flow) the vorticity y is:
y = 0 
(8.5-5)
and so no vorticity exists for gravitational aether flow.
For the general flow of aether, the force density equation 
can be written using equations (8.1-6) and (8.1-3):
) ( u2 ^
+Vk J
) = Z D± = z
Dt
dv
Ht
(8.5-6)
(! 
!
Vx u) = -V P
Taking the curl of this equation and using the definition of 
vorticity given in equation (8.5-1), we have:
3^ v ! /! ^x 
VxVP 
, _
-d^ + V x V |^y j - V x (v x ^) =-----z— 
(8.5-7)
With the vector identity given in equation (C-29) of Appendix 
C, we obtain:
^-V X (v X y) = 0 
(8.5-8)
d t
We can rewrite this equation using the vector identity given in 
equation (C-41) of Appendix C:
,/
0y n ^ — n ^ — — n — — 
— o
—-- - (V • yju + (V • u)y - (y • V )u + (v* V )y = 0 
(8.5-9)
ty *
Using equation (8.5-2) we then obtain:
^ , ^ 
, 
^ 
, ^
d^P 
^ ^ 
^ 
^ 
^
+(- + (V • u)y — (y • V )u + (v* V )y = 0 
(8.5-10)
t
From the definition of the substantive derivative given in 
equation (4.3-9) we have the Helmholtz vorticity equation:
r. 
t,
D" = ''■' + (v • V W 
(8.5-11)
Dt d t
Comparing equations (8.5-10) and (8.5-11), we can rewrite 
equation (8.5-10) in the form:
Dw - 
^
D^ + (V • U) W - (y/ • V )v = 0 
(8.5-12)
Dt
104

For incompressible flow V • u = 0 as given by equation 
(8.4-2) and so equation (8.5-12) becomes the Helmholtz 
vorticity equation for an incompressible fluid:
D- = (fr • V )u 
(8.5-13)
This is the equation of motion for the incompressible flow of 
aether in terms of vorticity. This equation shows how vorticity 
is transported in the flowing aether, and so it can be considered 
the vorticity transport equation for the incompressible flow of 
aether. We also have using equation (C-43) of Appendix C: 
! 
! 
! 
! !
Vx y = Vx (Vx u) = V (V • u) -V 2U 
(8.5-14)
^^
For incompressible flow V • u = 0 and so this equation becomes:
V x ys = -V 2U 
(8.5-15)
In cases where the flow of aether can be considered to be 
essentially two-dimensional, the vorticity vector y will be 
orthogonal to and independent of the velocity vector u. From 
equation (8.5-8) we then have:
= 0 
(8.5-16)
3t
We also have:
(t! • V )<^ = 0 
(8.5-17) 
since y/ is orthogonal to u (this can be seen by choosing a 
coordinate system such that u is in the x-y plain and y has 
only a component in the z direction). From equation (8.5-11) we 
therefore obtain:
Dv=0
Dt
(8.5-18)
when the flow of aether is two-dimensional.
8.6 
Circulation
If we consider aether flowing around a closed simply- 
connected curve C with a flow velocity u, the circulation r of 
the aether flow is defined by:
r = " U dr
(8.6-1)
where dr is an infinitesimal distance element tangent to the 
curve C. The circulation r, therefore, is the line integral of the 
tangential (linear) velocity component to the curve C. Invoking 
Stokes theorem given in equation (C-63) of Appendix C, we can 
rewrite equation (8.6-1) as:
r =jj (V x v) • d!
(8.6-2)
where S is the surface area enclosed by the curve C . From the 
definition of vorticity / given in equation (8.5-1) we have:
105

r =jj \jf • dS = jj V • n dS
(8.6-3)
and so the circulation r represents the normal component of 
the vorticity yz over the surface area S. If u is irrotational, the 
vorticity is y° = 0 and so we have r = 0.
The vortex lines passing through the closed simply- 
connected curve C that bounds the surface area S form another 
surface known as a vorticity tube. The circulation r provides a 
measure of the strength of the vorticity (fluid rotation) within 
the vorticity tube. A vorticity tube surrounded by a fluid flow 
that is irrotational is known as a vortex tube. The circular flow 
bounded by a vortex tube is then a vortex. The vortex that 
exists within a vortex tube is known as a vortex filament.
The rate of change of the circulation can be calculated 
using equation (8.6-1):
— = $ D(U • dr) 
(8.6-4)
Dt C Dt
or
— = $ —• dr + (£ v• — (dr) 
(8.6-5)
Dt C Dt C 
Dty ’
Letting the flow velocity at a point ! of the closed curve C be 
u, the flow velocity at a point ! + dr will be:
! 
! D ! ! Dr D ! ! D !
u + du = — (r + dr) = D + — (dr) = u + — (dr) 
(8.6-6)
where we used equation (C-24) of Appendix C. We then have:
du = — (dr) 
DD 7
(8.6-7)
Using equation (8.6-7), equation (8.6-5) can now be written:
Dt = " DU • dr + !
C Dt 
C
) U du
(8.6-8)
or
Dt =";D'dr+!.
ld ( T
C < 2 J
(8.6-9)
Since the second term on the right side of this equation is an 
exact differential, the rate of change of circulation around a 
closed curve C is given by:
d r
DT
DU
• ---- • dr
c Dt
(8.6-10)
This equation is known as Kelvin’s circulation theorem.
8.7 
Helmholtz’s V ortex Theorems
Three important vortex theorems were established by 
Helmholtz (1858):
106

1. The circulation on any closed curve C around a 
vortex tube is constant all along the tube.
2. A vortex tube cannot end in a fluid; a vortex tube 
must close on itself becoming a vortex ring, or it 
must terminate at a fluid boundary
3. For an inviscid fluid of an incompressible fluid 
the circulation or strength of a vortex tube is 
invariant, and the vortex tube can exist forever.
These vortex laws are all derived in Appendix D. From 
Helmholtz’s third theorem we have for a vortex tube in a 
frictionless fluid:
r = constant 
(8.7-1)
independent of the cross-sectional area S of the vortex tube. 
Using equations (8.6-2) and (8.6-3), we then have:
8.8 
Generation of Vorticity in 
Aether
Generation of vorticity in aether flow can occur whenever 
there is an abrupt change in pressure or density in the aether. 
Such changes are most likely to occur at physical boundaries of 
the aether flow, but can also occur as a result of sudden 
insertion of an object into the flow.
8.9 
Summary
Equations describing the flowing motion of aether have 
been determined. Irrotational flow, vorticity, and circulation of 
aether are described. The gravitational energy density flux is 
also presented.
r =jj (V x v) • dS = jj y • dS = constant
(8.7-2)
This means that, for a frictionless fluid, the vorticity is 
constant within a vortex tube, and the vortex tube always 
contains the same fluid particles. Once a vortex ring of 
frictionless fluid is created, therefore, the motion of the fluid 
within the ring cannot be changed by any external force as long 
as the ring exists.
107

Chapter 9
Dark Matter
“. .. when an entire fluid body moves simultaneously in 
some direction, it must necessarily carry along with it 
any solid body which is immersed in it. ”
Rene Descartes
Principles of Philosophy
108

One of the outstanding mysteries of modern cosmology is 
the nature of dark matter. This postulated matter is thought to 
be the predominant form of matter in our Universe, and yet it 
has never been detected; its presence has only been inferred. In 
this chapter we will determine if dark matter really exists.
9.1 
Galaxy Rotational Velocity
Ever since 1932 when Oort made the first measurements of 
the rotational velocity of our spiral galaxy, the Milky Way, a 
problem with the amount of matter in our galaxy has been 
recognized. There appears to be too little matter in our galaxy. 
The outward directed centrifugal force on the stars and clouds 
of gas in our galaxy due to galaxy rotation has always been 
assumed to be balanced by the inward directed gravitational 
force resulting from the matter in our galaxy. From Newton’s 
law of gravity we know that this gravitational force is 
proportional to the quantity of matter in our galaxy, and 
inversely proportional to the distance squared from this matter. 
Since the luminous matter of a spiral galaxy decreases rapidly 
with distance from the bright center region of the galaxy, the 
gravitational force is also expected to decrease with radial 
distance. In order for the balance between gravitational force 
and centrifugal force to be maintained at greater radial 
distances, the centrifugal force (and rotational velocity) of our 
galaxy must then also decrease.
Studies by Oort (1932, 1960), Babcock (1939); Bahcall 
(1984a, b, c, 1987), and Carney and Latham (1987) have found, 
however, that the rotational (tangential) velocity of our galaxy 
does not decrease with radial distance. Moreover, Freeman 
(1970), Rubin and Ford (1970), Rogstad (1971), Rogstad and 
Shostak (1972), Ostriker and Peebles (1973), Roberts and Rots 
(1973), Roberts (1976), Faber and Gallagher (1979), Rubin (1979, 
1983a, b, 1987), and Rubin et al. (1980, 1985) have discovered 
that it is not only our spiral galaxy that exhibits this rotational 
velocity problem, but also all spiral galaxies examined 
regardless of their size (see Sanders, 2010). It has become 
obvious that a serious problem exists in our understanding of 
galaxy structure and perhaps of physics.
A typical rotational velocity curve measured for a spiral 
galaxy is shown in Figure 9.1-1. In the bright center region of a 
galaxy, the rotational velocity increases linearly with radial 
distance from the galactic center. This type of rotational motion 
is generally associated with a rotating solid body. The 
explanation usually given for this observed rotational velocity 
increase with radial distance is that, because matter is so tightly 
packed in the bright center region of any galaxy, all this matter 
behaves as one solid body.
109

Figure 9.1-1 A typical rotational (tangential) velocity curve for 
a spiral galaxy.
At greater radial distances, the rotational velocity becomes 
constant (independent of radial distance) and remains constant 
to great distances. In fact, the rotational velocity of galaxies is 
almost never observed to decrease with radial distance in the 
galaxy. Moreover this rotational velocity is simply too large in 
the outer regions of spiral galaxies for the centrifugal force to be 
balanced by gravitational force (calculated on the basis of the 
amount of luminous matter in the galaxy). Stars in the outer 
regions of the galaxy should fly off into deep space, and yet 
they don’t. The conclusion usually made then is that the 
gravitational force in the galaxy must be stronger than 
estimated, suggesting that there may exist more matter in spiral 
galaxies than the radiating matter that we can detect.
Studies by Zwicky (1933, 1937c), Smith (1936), Aaronson 
(1983), Fabricant and Gorensten (1983), Faber and Lin (1983), 
Aaronson and Olszewski (1987), and Kormendy (1987) show 
that not only spiral galaxies but also all types of galaxies and 
even certain clusters of galaxies (that appear not to be 
dispersing when it seems they should be) have a similar 
undetected matter problem. It is no exaggeration to say that 
astronomy has reached a crisis because of the undetected 
matter problem.
9.2 
Proposed Solutions to the 
Undetected Matter Problem
Two solutions to the undetected matter problem have been 
considered previously. They are:
1. 
The matter contained in galaxies is much greater 
than is apparent from luminous matter radiating 
at any wavelength.
2. 
Some modification of Newton’s force law of 
gravity is required.
110

9.2.1 
Dark Matter
For the first proposed solution, at least 90% more matter in 
the form of undetected dark matter is required to provide the 
necessary additional gravitational force. The designation dark 
matter indicates that this undetected matter is non-luminous 
and does not emit or reflect detectable electromagnetic 
radiation at any wavelength. Also this dark matter must be 
transparent and electrically neutral. Otherwise the presence of 
this matter would have been detected by now.
To provide the necessary gravitational force, dark matter 
must possess mass that is designated as active gravitational 
mass. Moreover dark matter must be distributed in a huge 
cloud that pervades the galaxy and extends well beyond the 
visible disk of luminous matter (a factor of four or five times 
farther). The dark matter must then be distributed quite 
differently from the luminous matter (see Trimble, 1987). As 
van Albade and Sancisi (1986) noted, “Luminous matter and dark 
matter seem 'to conspire' to produce the flat observed rotation curves 
in the outer region.”
To date the search for possible dark matter candidates has 
been unsuccessful, as all known types of matter have been 
eliminated, and no new type of matter has been discovered 
(Bergstrom, 2000; and Cline, 2003). Dark matter, if it exists, 
must consist of a type of elementary particle as yet unknown. 
The failure to discover dark matter has occurred despite the 
fact that dark matter, if it exists, must also be present right here 
on Earth. Moreover, if dark matter exists and is by far the 
predominant form of matter in our Universe, it is really 
incredible that we have no direct laboratory evidence for this 
dark matter. In any case, as Krauss (2000) noted: “Requiring an 
entirely new form of matter in the universe is a radical concept that 
must not be taken lightly.”
9.2.2 
Modified Law of Gravity
For the second proposed solution, modifications of the 
distance dependence in Newton’s force law of gravity have 
been proposed by Finzi (1963), Tohline (1983), and Sanders 
(1984). Other modifications to Newton’s force law of gravity 
have been proposed for the case of small accelerations by 
Milgrom (1983a, b, c, 1989, 2002a, b), Bekenstein and Milgrom 
(1984), Milgrom and Bekenstein (1987), Bekenstein (1992, 2004, 
2010), and Sanders and McGaugh (2002). All of these 
modifications to Newton’s force law of gravity are, however, 
inconsistent with the physical cause of gravity (see Sections 1.4 
and 2.8).
111

9.3 
Nonexistent Dark Matter
Despite the difficulties encountered with previously 
proposed solutions, we are now able to resolve the undetected 
matter problem. As noted in Section 2.8, flowing aether can 
carry with it any material body within the flow. The aether flow 
in a region of space influences the motion of all matter within 
the flow. Matter is carried along by the flow of aether just as 
floating material is carried along by a current (Very, 1919). 
Freeman and McNamara (2006) noted that stars and galaxies 
behave as if they are “mere flotsam on a cosmic sea.” Matter is, 
however, not floating in aether, but is carried with it. Descartes 
(1644) observed: “when an entire fluid body moves simultaneously 
in some direction, it must necessarily carry along with it any solid 
body which is immersed in it.”
For a region of space defined by the boundaries of a 
galaxy, a large circular flow or vortex of aether can produce all 
the observed motions of luminous matter as we will now 
demonstrate. The idea that some type of celestial vortices of 
aether may exist was originally proposed by Descartes in 1644, 
and was an important concept in European physics for several 
centuries thereafter (see Burtt, 1924; and Aiton, 1972).
We will begin by noting that the whirlpool appearance of 
many galaxies (see Figure 9.3-1) certainly suggests that some 
real physical medium is in circular motion about the central 
axis of each galaxy. Based upon the typical rotational velocity 
distribution for galaxies shown in Figure 9.1-1, we can conclude 
that for any given galaxy the circular flow of aether around the 
galactic axis must consist of two distinct vortices, with each 
vortex having a different rotational (tangential) velocity.
Figure 9.3-1 Galaxy M81 (Photo credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech)
The inner vortex occupies the bright central region of the 
galaxy and has a rotational velocity proportional to radial
112

distance. The outer vortex occupies the galactic region outside 
the bright central region and has a rotational velocity that is 
constant. These two aether flows circle the galactic axis much as 
hurricane winds circle the central axis of a hurricane. Matter 
within the flows will be carried along at the observed rotational 
velocity of each flow.
Writing the aether flow velocity u around a galaxy in 
cylindrical coordinates, we have:
u = ur er + uQ ee + uz ez
(9.3-1)
From Figure 9.1-1, we see that the aether flow velocity V1 of the 
inner vortex of the galaxy is a tangential (linear) velocity given 
by:
i!i = K ree = ue1 ee 
(9.3-2)
and so:
uQi = Ki r
(9.3-3)
where K1 is a constant. The aether flow velocity u2 of the outer 
vortex of the galaxy is a tangential (linear) velocity given by:
U = K2 ee = u2 ee 
(9.3-4)
and so:
U 2 = K2 
(9.3-5)
where K2 is a constant.
Denoting the radial distance at which the boundary 
between the two concentric flows is located by rB, then for 
continuity of the aether flow in the vortices we must have at 
r = rB :
U!i = U!2 = K1 rB ee = K2 ee 
(9.3-6)
and so:
K2 = Ki rB 
(9.3-7)
The inner vortex flow has the characteristics known as 
wheel flow in fluid mechanics. The circulating aether flow in 
this bright central region of the galaxy has the same motion as a 
rigid body rotating with a constant angular velocity d 1 as can 
easily be shown:
o! 1 = ^1 
(9.3-8)
u1 = &1 x ! = &1 ez x r er = &1 r ee = K1 r ee = ue ee 
(9.3-9)
where we have used equation (9.3-2). We then have:
n1 = K1 = ^L 
r
(9.3-10)
and so the angular speed of circulation co1 of the inner vortex 
flow is constant (time independent). Such rotary motion is 
known as rigid-body rotation.
113

Since flowing aether carries along any matter within the 
flow, no assumptions concerning dark matter are necessary in 
order to obtain the observed rotation of luminous matter within 
the bright central region of the galaxy. The type of vortex 
defined by equation (9.3-9) is known as a forced vortex. A 
hurricane is a vortex with a central core that has a similar rigid- 
body rotation. Obviously tightly packed matter need not be 
present to cause this rigid-body rotation (see Figure 9.3-2).
Figure 9.3-2 Hurricane Isabel 2003 (Photo Credit NASA).
Using the aether flow velocity given by equation (9.3-4), 
we can write for the outer vortex flow:
a 2 = ^2 ez
(9.3-11)
U = 0)2_ x r = or ez x re r = ro2 r ee = K 2 ee = ue 2 e(l 
(9.3-12)
where <!! 2 is the angular velocity of circulating aether in the 
outer vortex. We then have:
& 2 r = K2
(9.3-13)
or
® 2 = — = — 
(9.3-14)
r r
and so the angular speed of circulation o.)2 of the outer vortex 
flow is inversely proportional to the distance from the axis of 
rotation. Since flowing aether carries along any matter within 
the flow, no assumptions concerning dark matter are necessary 
in order to obtain the observed rotation of luminous matter 
within the outer vortex of the galaxy.
We will now examine the aether flow velocities of the two 
types of vortices found in galaxies to determine if they are 
consistent with known properties of aether. Since aether flow is 
incompressible when not in proximity to nucleons, we expect 
the two aether flows in a galaxy to be incompressible. We then 
should have:
__
V • V = 0
(9.3-15) 
114

as given by equation (8.4-2) for the two aether flows. We 
actually have:
! 
1 d( K1 r)
v • * = 7 de = 0 
(9.3-16)
_!
V • u
1 d( K2) 
r de
= 0
(9.3-17)
and so both flows are incompressible as expected.
Assuming that the vortex flows in a galaxy are steady, the 
accelerations of the inner and outer vortex aether flows are 
given by equations (8.1-5), (9.3-2), and (9.3-4):
DU. = , [Ki 
Dt 2
- K1 r ee x 2 K1 ez
(9.3-18)
Du !
—2 = V
Dt
K- 1
2
(9.3-19)
K2 ee X 
ez
r
Using equations (9.3-3) and (9.3-5), the aether flow accelerations 
of the inner and outer vortices of a galaxy are:
uj t'l ~ 
--- er 
r
DUl = K re. 
Dt 1 
1
1 , er -2 K2rer = -K2rer =
(9.3-20)
DU2 
Dt
K 2
u
_A e 
r 
er
r r
(9.3-21)
The centrifugal accelerations a1 and a2 of matter within the 
inner and outer vortices of a galaxy are given by:
!i = — er = - DUl 
(9.3-22)
r Dt
„.2
! Ue 2 . DU2
a2 = ~T er = ~~Dt 
(9.3-23)
where we have used equations (9.3-20) and (9.3-21). The aether 
flow accelerations DUJDt and DU2/Dt of the inner and outer 
vortices, respectively, of a galaxy are then exactly equal and 
oppositely directed to the corresponding centrifugal 
accelerations a1 and a2 of matter in the galaxy. Therefore, no 
unbalanced forces exist in galaxies, and so no exotic dark 
matter is required to balance these forces. Galaxies are not 
held together by gravitational forces alone. Galaxies primarily 
consist of two large concentric aether vortices.
For any galaxy, the vorticities v!1 and \jf2 of the inner and 
outer vortices, respectively, can be calculated to determine if the 
vortices are rotational or irrotational. We have:
! 
!
V1 = v x V1 = 2 K1 ez = 2 ez ^ 0 
(9.3-24)
V2 = V x U2 = — ez = ^ ez * 0 
(9.3-25)
r
115

Therefore, both the inner vortex and the outer vortex have 
vorticities and are rotational. This type of composite vortex 
structure consisting of concentric cylinders (see Figure 9.3-3) is 
similar to a Rankine vortex (see Robertson, 1965).
Figure 9.3-3 Side view of vortex structure of a galaxy.
The total rate of change in the vorticities i!!1 and /!2 can be 
determined using equation (8.5-12):
DM 
!X
—— = - (v • W1 W + (^ • v )W1 
(9.3-26)
Dt
DM2 
! ! ! ! ! . !
D^~ = - (V • u 2) W2+ (V2 • V )v2
(9.3-27)
From equations (9.3-16) and (9.3-17) we have:
= (fl • V )C| 
(9.3-28)
D^2- = (V!2 • v )’!2
Dt 2)2
Using equations (9.3-24) and (9.3-25) we obtain:
DW1 
d dU1 d d(re9) !
= 2 M} 
= 2 (0, K 
= 0
Dt 
1 dz 
11 dz
(9.3-29)
(9.3-30)
DV- „
----- = M2
Dt
U=a - K- d(M=0
(9.3-31)
Therefore, the vorticities v!1 and /!2 are constant. From 
equation (8.5-18) we see that this is consistent both with the 
flow of aether in galaxies being essentially two-dimensional 
and with the known stability of galaxies.
Since the requirement for dark matter within galaxies or 
within clusters of galaxies does not exist, we can conclude that 
dark matter does not exist. This explains why dark matter does 
not appear to be present in our solar system (no effects are 
observed), and why dark matter remains unidentified in our 
Universe. We can also conclude that gravitational forces are not 
acting alone to hold galaxies together.
116

Within the inner vortex, in the very center or eye of a 
spiral galaxy, there is a region into which aether flows from 
both above and below the galaxy. It is possible that this region 
consists of a black hole. In fact, a black hole may exist at the 
very center of all galaxies. The vertical inflow of aether may be 
one reason the rotation of the inner vortex is of the rigid body 
type.
9.4 
Applicability of Newton’s Law
of Gravity
Newton (1730) posed the problem: “what hinders the fix'd 
stars from falling upon one another?” as a direct result of their 
gravitational pull. Another problem was noted by Seeliger 
(1895, 1896, 1909): if our Universe is infinite and has uniform 
matter distribution, the gravitational force exerted on any 
material point particle by all the other matter in our Universe 
would appear to be infinite (see Norton, 1999). This can be seen 
by using equations (2.3-13) and (2.3-3) to write the gravitational 
potential y for all the matter in our Universe:
<p = fff GP dv = f2 M fn sin^ r GP r 2 dr 
r 
0 
0 r
Unier^^^rn 
wo 
0 
RK 
(9.2-1)
where p is the mean density of matter in our Universe. We then 
have:
V =
"
4nGp I r dr
R
(9.2-2)
Therefore, as r ^^, the gravitational potential also becomes 
infinite.
The resolution of both these problems in gravitational 
physics is obtained by recognizing that Newton’s law of gravity 
does not control the acceleration fields existing throughout 
much of space. Wherever aether is accelerating, a force field 
will exist. If an accelerating flow of aether is due to the presence 
of matter, which is a field flow sink for aether, the resulting 
force field will be a gravitational field and will always follow 
Newton’s law of gravity. If an accelerating flow of aether is not 
due to the presence of matter, the resulting force field generally 
will not follow Newton’s law of gravity. Since accelerating 
flows of aether exist that are not gravitational aether flows (as 
evidenced by the structure of spiral galaxies), and since matter 
does not directly attract matter, the resultant gravitational force 
on any given single material point particle is not simply due to 
all matter in our Universe.
A local gravitational field can exist within an extended 
non-gravitational acceleration field. In other words, there can 
be some local variation in aether flow within a large regional 
flow. In terms of vector flow velocities, this can be represented 
117

as the sum of two vector fields. For example, while Newton’s 
law of gravity represents the gravitational acceleration field 
that we observe within the relatively small region of space 
encompassed by our solar system, it does not represent the 
non-gravitational acceleration field that extends over the much 
larger region of space encompassed by the entire Milky Way 
galaxy. Since the non-gravitational acceleration field is not 
observed within our solar system, it must be approximately 
constant in this region. This is consistent with Corollary VI of 
Newton’s laws of motion: “If bodies, moved in any manner among 
themselves, are urged in the direction of parallel lines by equal 
accelerative forces, they will all continue to move among themselves, 
after the manner as if they had not been urged by those forces.” It is 
for this reason the presence of dark matter has been postulated 
to balance forces for our galaxy, but not for our solar system. 
The flow of aether in galaxies is not controlled just by the 
presence of matter.
Nevertheless, it should be mentioned that Newton’s law 
of gravity always correctly describes the acceleration of aether 
into matter, irrespective of where in our Universe that matter 
exists. Therefore, Newton can be said to have provided the first 
unification of physical forces, showing that the terrestrial and 
the celestial laws of gravity are one and the same.
9.5 
Dark Energy
Any region of space having an observed acceleration field 
that is not consistent with Newton’s law of gravity has an 
aether flow that is not totally controlled by the presence of 
matter. From our knowledge of spiral galaxy rotational 
velocities and the velocities of galaxies within clusters, we can 
conclude that aether flow in our Universe is not totally 
controlled by the presence of matter. Therefore, gravity does 
not totally control the structure of our Universe.
On an even larger scale, considering that our Universe 
exists within an ocean of aether, it is not surprising that 
immense currents of aether could exist within this ocean. Any 
acceleration of this intergalactic aether will appear as a 
variation in the expansion rate of our Universe. The existence of 
such a variation has recently been proposed (Perlmutter et al., 
1997). The expansion of our Universe appears to be in a recent 
acceleration phase. Some type of dark energy has been 
suggested to explain this variation in the expansion rate (see 
Riess et al., 1998; Bahcall et al., 1999; Perlmutter, 2003; Carroll, 
2005; Turner and Huterer, 2007; Polarski, 2011; Ruiz-Lapuente, 
2010; and Uzan, 2010).
118

9.6 Summary
The motion of matter in galaxies is controlled by huge 
vortices of aether, and not by gravity. Centrifugal acceleration 
within these galaxies is exactly balanced by aether flow 
acceleration. Galaxies having an aether vortex structure 
completely eliminates the need for any illusive dark matter. 
This is a very strong argument for the existence of aether. 
Dark matter does not exist. Variation in the apparent expansion 
rate of our Universe is the result of large streams if aether 
moving in the ocean of aether of our Universe.
119

Appendix A
VECTOR FIELD OPERATIONS
"One geometry cannot be more true than another; it 
can only be more convenient."
Henri Poincare
Science and Hypothesis
In this appendix, we will derive some vector relations that 
are useful for the development of certain equations in this book. 
We will do this by considering vector fields in terms of source/ 
sink points and field points. We will also develop some 
relations for the Dirac delta function.
A.1 
Source/Sink Points and Field
Points
A source/sink point for a vector field is a point at which is 
located a source or a sink of the vector field (see Figure A.1-1). 
A field point is any point in the vector field at which a source or 
a sink of the field does not exist. The field that exists at a field 
point, which may be located some distance from the source/ 
sink point, is a direct result of the existence of the source or sink 
at the source/sink point.
Vector operations at the field point will now be calculated 
using two different coordinate systems: One coordinate system 
will have its origin at the field point, and the other coordinate 
system will have its origin at the source/sink point. The 
subscript on a term will indicate which of the coordinate 
systems the term is with respect to. For example, gradient 
operations at the field point with respect to the field 
coordinates will be written using the operator V^ , while 
gradient operations at the field point with respect to the 
source/sink coordinates will be written using the operator V5 .
If ! is the line position vector of the field point with 
respect to the source/sink coordinates, at the field point we 
then have:
120

f = \r
(A.1-1)
since the gradient of r is independent of coordinate system. For 
a scalar field y, we can then use equation (A.1-1) and equation 
(C-12) of Appendix C to write:
! 
d@ ! 
d@ 
!
Vf V = ^T f = ^T Vsr = Vsv 
(A.1-2)
j 
d r J 
d r
V • A = ~ • Vo 
(a.1-3)
Equation (A.1-2) then gives:
v, • A!=—• v, p=—• vs p=vs • A 
(A.1-4)
f 
dp 
f 
dp 
s
From equations (A.1-4) and (A.1-2) we can write:
vz • vz p = Vs • Vf p = Vs • Vs p 
(A.1-5)
or
! !
VfV = vs V 
(A.1-6)
Using equation (A.1-4), we will now write equation (2.3-5) 
from Section 2.3 as:
or
__
vs • g =
G ' • JJI Jr dV
(A.1-7)
Figure A.1-1 Field point and source/sink point. The line 
position vector ! is with respect to source/sink 
coordinates.
vs • g=-g p jj£vf • r dVs
(A.1-8)
If A(p) is a vector field that is a function of the scalar field 
p, using the vector relation given in equation (C-25) of 
Appendix C we have:
Equation (A.1-8) is valid since V^ operates on field coordinates, 
and so this operator commutes with integration over all 
source/sink coordinates. We now can use equation (A.1-4) to 
rewrite equation (A.1-8) as:
121

V • g = - G p fff V, • r dVs
A V
(A.1-9)
where the surface S is taken to be a small sphere surrounding 
the point r = 0. Integrating over the sphere and using the 
gradient operator for spherical coordinates:
or
’ •!=-g p W ■ r -
(A.1-10)
JI * [ J ]
• erdS = - f f -12r2sin0dHdo
0 
0 r
(A.2-4)
which is equation (2.3-5).
or
A.2 
Dirac Delta Function
II ’ [ r ]
• er dS = - 4 n
(A.2-5)
We will now examine the integral:
If we now define the Dirac delta function 6 to have the 
JJI ’2 [1 ]'
following characteristics:
(A.2-1)
If r ± 0, we have the vector relation given in equation (C-51) of 
Appendix C:
V 2
1
r
= V • ,1. 0
(A.2-2)
and
JJI>) dV ■1
(r = 0 somewhere in V) (A.2-6)
J|J ?(r) S(r- ro) dV = p(ro)
(A.2-7)
To evaluate equation (A.2-1) when r = 0, we use Gauss’s 
theorem given in equation (C-58) of Appendix C to obtain:
we then have from equations (A.2-3), (A.2-5), and (A.2-6):
1
r
V 2
- 4nd(r)
(A.2-8)
iii. ’ • ’ [I] d. = J-!. ’ [' ]
!
• dS
(A.2-3)
Using equation (C-11) of Appendix C, we can also write:
1
V 2 r
! ! 1 
^
=V • V-=V •
7=V •
r 2
(A.2-9)
122

and so from equations (A.2-9) and (A.2-8):
V • r = V • rL = 4 nS( r r
(A.2-10)
r
This equation is used as equation (2.3-6) in Section 2.3.
123

Appendix B
Iota 
Kappa 
Lambda 
Mu
i
K
A
p
I
K
A
M
Nu
V
N
Xi
$
M 
1-^
Omicron
o
o
Pi
n
n
Rho
P
p
THE GREEK ALPHABET
Sigma
o
E
Tau
T
T
Upsilon
U
T
Alpha 
a 
A
Phi
& V
O
Beta 
P 
B
Chi
X
X
Gamma 
y 
r
Psi
W
T
Delta 
8 
\
Omega
m
Q
Epsilon 
e 
E
Zeta 
Z 
Z
Eta 
n 
H
Theta 
d 
6
124

Appendix C
VECTOR IDENTITIES
In this appendix are listed some vector identities and 
relations that are useful for physics. The following notation is 
used: A, B, and C are arbitrary vectors; ax , ay, and az are 
rectangular components of the A vector; f and g are arbitrary 
scalar functions; and m is an integer. The vector ! is the line 
? - c
position vector. The vectors i, j, and k are unit vectors along 
the x, y, and z rectangular coordinate axes, respectively, and n 
is a unit normal vector.
A x (B + C) = A x B + A x C
A • B x C = A x B • C = B • C x A = B x C • A
= C • A x B = C x A • B
—! —! —! —! —! —! —! —! ——
A x (B x C) = (A • C) B - (A • B) C
! 
! ! 
! ! 
!
A x (B x C) ^ (A x B) x C 
! ! 
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
4 x B) x C = (A • C) B - (B • C) A 
! 
! ! 
! 
! ! 
! 
! !
A x (B x C) + B x (C x A) + C x (A x B) = 0
f = Vf • m
dn
V (fg)=f v g+g Vf
^!rm = mrm-1Vr = mrm-1 r = mrm—2 !
v f1 ^=-4=-4
V r J r r
Vf (r)=df(r) V r = fr) ! = f) r 
d r d r r 
d r
(C-2)
(C-3)
(C-4)
(C-5)
(C-6)
(C-7)
(C-8)
(C-9)
(C-10)
(C-11)
(C-12)
JA X B = ( ay b, - az by ) i + ( azbx - ax bz ) j + ( ax by - ay bx ) k (£-1)
125

V g (f) = 77 Vf
v. B=+ d-f + d-f
d x d y d z
! — —! —! \ ! —! ! —!
V • (A + B) = V • A + V • B
V • (fA) = A • Vf + f V • A
V • (f V g) = f V2 g + Vf • V g
V • r = 3
r 2
V • r = — r
V • (rmr) = (m + 3) rm
(dr • V) f = df
(A • V) f = A • Vf
(A • V) B = ax d B d B d B 
aX+a ay+a dk
(A • V)! = A
(C-13)
(C-14)
(C-15)
(C-16)
(C-17)
(C-18)
(C-19)
(C-20)
(C-21)
(C-22)
(C-23)
(C-24)
V • A (f) = f . Vf
d y 
d z
db dbr
__y  
x 
dx d y
H
(C-25)
(C-26)
Vx (A + B) = Vx A + Vx B 
(C-27)
V x (fA) = Vf x A + f V x A 
(C-28)
—! —! —!
v X Vf = 0 
(C-29)
V x (f V g) = Vf xV g 
(C-30)
X! X (f Vf) = 0 
(C-31)
V • (vf xV g) = 0 
(C-32)
! 
—!
V x — = 0 
(C-33)
V x (f (r) r) = 0 
(C-34)
(/! xV) f = /X xVf 
(C-35)
- !, . - dA
Vx A (f) = Vf x — 
(C-36)
dJ
126

V • Vx A = 0 
(C-37)
! 
! ! 
! ! 
! 
! 
! 
!
V • (A x B) = B • (Vx A) - A • (Vx B) 
(C-38)
! 
! ! ! ! ! 
! 
! 
! 
!
Vx A) • B = V • (A x B) + A • (Vx B) 
(C-39)
! 
! ! 
! ! !
V • (f Vx A) = (Vx A) • Vf 
(C-40)
! ! 
! ! ! 
! ! ! 
! ! ! 
! ! !
Vx (A x B) = (V • B) A - (V • A) B + (B • V) A - (A • V) B (C-41) 
! ! ! 
! ! ! ' _ ! ! !
V (A • B) = (A • V) B + (B • V) A 
! 
! ! 
- 
! ^
+A x (Vx B) + B x (Vx A) (C-42) 
! 
! ! 
! ! ! ! ! ! 
!
Vx (Vx A) = VxVx A = V (V • A)-V2A 
(C-43)
! i —! / —! —! \ \ / —! —! \ — ! ! \ / —! —! \ — ! ! \ 
V • (A x (B x C )) = (A • C) (V • B) - (A • B) (V • C)
+S • V (A • C) - C • V (A • B) (C-44)
! ! 
! ! ! ! ^ 1 !
Vx A) x A = (A • V) A ^-VA2 
(C-45)
! ! ! 
1 ! n / ! ! !
A x (V x A) 
VA2 - (A • V) A 
(C-46)
-! -! 
! 1 -! 
! / -! -*- \
A xV) x A 
V A2 - A (V • A) 
(C-47)
’ 
2
V 2,=+122+
X x 3 y Z z
V • Vf = V2f
V 2 rm = m (m +1) rm - 2
/1 ^
V2 1 = 0
V r )
V 2 r2 = 6
! ! ! ! ! ! !\
V 2A = V (v • A)-Vx (Vx A)
V 2 (Vf) = V (V2f)
V • (v2) = V2 (v • A)
V 2 (/! • r) = 2 ^7 • A + r • V 2/A
V 2( fg) = g V2f + 2 Vf • V g + f V2g
Divergence theorem (Gauss’s theorem):
! ff! ^ 
VV • Bdv = J^B • ds
(C-48)
(C-49)
(C-50)
(C-51)
(C-52)
(C-53)
(C-54)
(C-55)
(C-56)
(C-57)
(C-58)
127

Jjj V • B dV = JJ B • ri dS
(C-59)
Curl theorem:
! ^ 
^
JJJ VxBdV = JJ fixBdS
(C-60)
! - 
! !
JJJ VxBdV = -JJ BxdS
(C-61)
Gradient theorem:
ffjv f.,V = fj>
(C-62)
Stokes’s theorem:
Green’s first theorem:
JJJ(f V 28 + ^f • V 8) dV = JIf ^ g * dS 
(C-65)
Green’s second theorem:
fff (f V 2g - g V-f) dV = ff f fdg - gd-1 dS (C-66) 
JJJv 
y JJS L dn & dn J 
(C )
JJJ (f V2s—8 V2f)dV=JI (f v8—g Vf) * ndS (c-67)
Reynolds’ transport theorem:
-D fff padV = fff p Da dv 
(c-68)
Dt v 
v Dt
" B • dr
jjv x B • dS =
(C-63)
-fivf x dS =
where D/Dt is the substantive derivative, p is the 
density of the medium having no sink or source in 
volume V, and a is some property of the medium.
(C-64)
" fdr
128

Appendix D
HELMHOLTZ’S VORTEX 
THEOREMS
In this appendix, we will derive the three Helmholtz 
vortex theorems.
D.1 
Helmholtz Vortex Theorem I
The circulation on any closed curve C around 
a vortex tube is constant all along the tube.
The vorticity !! of a fluid flow having a velocity field u is 
defined as:
(D.1-1)
y = Vx u
We then have:
! 
! !
v •v" = V • (Vx u) = 0 
(D.1-2)
Therefore, using Gauss’s theorem given in equation (C-59) of 
Appendix C, we can write:
JJJ v •<"" dV = jj ^ • n dS = 0 
(D.1-3)
We can apply equation (D.1-3) to an arbitrary section of a 
vortex tube such as shown in Figure D.1-1, where V is the 
volume of the tube section, and S is the entire surface area of 
the tube section. The surface area S can be divided into three 
parts so that:
S = S1 + S2 + S3 
(D.1-4)
The surface areas S1 and S2 are the ends of the tube section, and 
the surface area S3 is the sidewall of the tube section (see Figure 
D.1-1). From the definition of vortex lines, we must have:
V! • *3 = 0 
(D.1-5)
on S3 where n3 is a unit normal vector to the surface area S3. 
Therefore, we can use equation (D.1-3) to write:
129

jj / • n1 dS + IT / • ni2 ds = 0
S2
(D.1-6)
or since y! has the same direction as ni dS at one end of the 
vortex tube section, and the opposite direction at the other end 
of the vortex tube section, we have:
JJ |v! • nJ dS =
S1
J£ |y! • dS
(D.1-7)
Figure D.1-1 Section of a vortex tube.
From the definition of circulation as given in equation 
(8.6-3) we then have:
ri = r2 
(d.1-8)
Using equation (8.6-1) we obtain:
" u • dr = " u • dr 
(D.1-9)
C1 
c 2
where C 1 encloses S1, and C2 encloses S2. Equation (D.1-9) is 
the first Helmholtz vortex theorem: The circulation on any 
closed curve C around a vortex tube is constant all along the 
tube. This vortex theorem applies to all fluids (Marshall, 2001).
D.2 
Helmholtz Vortex Theorem II
A vortex tube cannot end in a fluid; a vortex 
tube must close on itself becoming a vortex 
ring, or it must terminate at a fluid boundary.
If a vortex tube were to terminate within a fluid, then the 
circulation of the vortex tube would change at its termination 
point. Yet from the first Helmholtz vortex theorem we know 
that the circulation r on a closed curve C around a vortex tube 
is constant all along the tube. We therefore obtain the second 
Helmholtz vortex theorem: A vortex tube cannot end unless 
that end coincides with a fluid boundary. This means all 
130

vortex tubes must close on themselves, forming vortex rings, or 
they must terminate at a fluid boundary. This vortex theorem 
applies only to inviscid fluids (Marshall, 2001).
D.3 
Helmholtz Vortex Theorem III
For an inviscid fluid of an incompressible fluid 
the circulation or strength of a vortex tube is 
invariant, and the vortex tube can exist forever.
From equation (8.6-10) we have:
= " DU • dr 
(D.3-1)
Dt C Dt
The fluid flow of an inviscid fluid is frictionless. For a 
conservative force, we can use equations (8.1-6) and (D.3-1) to 
write:
D- = - " 1 •• P• d, = — 
(D.3-2)
where VP need not correspond to gravitational force, and 
where Z is the fluid density. If the fluid density Z is constant, 
we have after one complete circuit around the closed curve C :
Dr = -1! dP = 0 
(D.3-3)
Dt Z C
We then obtain the third Helmholtz vortex theorem: For 
inviscid flow of an incompressible fluid, the circulation or 
strength of a vortex tube is invariant. This means the vortex 
tube can exist forever. Equation (D.3-3) is also known as 
Kelvin’s theorem. As noted above, this vortex theorem applies 
only to inviscid fluids where the fluid density is constant.
131

Appendix E
Positron Mass
Proton Charge
Proton Mass
Speed of Light
9.10938215 x 10- 28 gm
+ 4.80320440 x 10-10Fr
1.672621923 x 10- 24 gm
2.99792458 x 1010cm/sec
PHYSICAL CONSTANTS
Electron Charge
Electron Mass
Gravitational Constant
Neutron Mass
Neutron Radius
Planck’s Constant
Planck’s Constant/ 2 n
Positron Charge
- 4.80320440 x 10- 10Fr 
9.10938370 x 10- 28 gm 
6.67430 x 10-8 cm3 sec-2 gm-1 
1.674927498 x 10-24 gm 
1.2 x 10-13cm 
6.62607015 x 10-27 erg sec 
1.054571628 x 10- 27 erg sec 
+ 4.80320440 x 10-10Fr
132

References
These references include all materials that were reviewed 
in the preparation of this book. When two publication dates are 
listed for a reference, the first is the date of the first edition, 
while the second (in parentheses) is the date of a later edition or 
printing that was actually consulted.
Aaronson, M., 1983, Accurate radial velocities for carbon stars 
in Draco and Ursa Minor: the first hint of a dwarf 
spheroidal mass-to-light ratio, The Astrophysical Journal, 
Volume 266, pages L11-L15.
Aaronson, M., and E. Olszewski, 1987, The search for dark 
matter in Draco and Ursa Minor: a three year program 
report, in Dark Matter in the Universe, edited by J.
Kormendy and G. R. Knapp, pages 153-160, D. Reidel 
Publishing Company, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Abraham, M., 1912, Zur Theorie der Gravitation, Physikalische 
Zeitschrift, Volume 13, pages 1-4; Correction, page 176 (see 
English translation in The Genesis of General Relativity, 
Volume 3, Gravitation in the Twilight of Classical Physics: 
between Mechanics, Field Theory, and Astronomy, edited 
by J. Renn and M. Schemmel, pages 331-335, Springer, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2007).
Adams, S., 1997, Relativity: an introduction to space-time 
physics, Taylor & Frances, London.
Adelberger, E. G., 1990, Experimental tests of the universality of 
free fall and of the inverse square law, in General 
Relativity and Gravitation, 1989, Proceedings of the 12th 
International Conference on General Relativity and 
Gravitation, edited by N. Ashby, D. F. Bartlett, and W. 
Wyss, pages 273-294, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge.
Adelberger, E. G., C. W. Stubbs, B. R. Heckel, Y. Su, H. E. 
Swanson, G. Smith, J. H. Gundlach, and W. F. Rogers, 
1990, Testing the equivalence principle in the field of the 
Earth: particle physics at masses below 1 jueV ?, Physical 
Review D, Volume 42, pages 3267-3292.
Adler, C. G., and B. L. Coulter, 1978, Galileo and the tower of 
Pisa experiment, American Journal of Physics, Volume 46, 
pages 199-201.
133

Adler, C. G., 1987, Does mass really depend on velocity, dad?, 
American Journal of Physics, Volume 55, pages 739-743.
Adler, R., M. Bazin, and M. Schiffer, 1965, Introduction to 
general relativity, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New 
York.
Afshordi, N., 2012, Where will Einstein fail? Lessons for gravity 
and cosmology, Bulletin of the Astronomical Society of 
India, Volume 40, pages 1-20.
Aiton, E. J., 1969, Newton’s aether-stream hypothesis and the 
inverse square law of gravitation, Annals of Science, 
Volume 25, pages 225-260.
Aiton, E. J., 1972, The vortex theory of planetary motions, 
American Elsevier, New York.
Amaldi, G., 1961 (1966), The nature of matter: physical theory 
from Thales to Fermi, The University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago.
Anderson, A., 1920, On the advance of the perihelion of a 
planet, and the path of a ray of light in the gravitational 
field of the Sun, The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin 
Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, Series 6, 
Volume 39, pages 626-628.
Anderson, C., and C. Greengard, 1985, On vortex methods, 
SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis, Volume 22, pages 
413-440.
Anderson, J. D., J. K. Campbell, R. F. Jurgens, E. L. Lau, X. X. 
Newhall, M. A. Slade III, and E. M. Standish, Jr., 1992, 
Recent developments in solar-system tests of general 
relativity, in Proceedings of the Sixth Marcel Grossmann 
Meeting on Recent Developments in Theoretical and 
Experimental General Relativity, Gravitation and 
Relativistic Field Theories, Kyoto, Japan, June 1991, edited 
by H. Sato and T. Nakamura, pages 353-355, World 
Scientific Publishing Company, Singapore.
Aris, R., 1962 (1989), Vectors, tensors, and the basic equations of 
fluid mechanics, Dover Publications, New York.
Arnowitt, R., S. Deser, and C. W. Misner, 1962, The dynamics of 
general relativity, in Gravitation: an Introduction to 
Current Research, edited by L. Witten, pages 227-265, John 
Wiley & Sons, New York.
Aspden, H., 1986b, The mystery of Mercury’s perihelion, The 
Toth-Maatian Review, Volume 5, pages 2475-2481.
Atwater, H. A., 1974, Introduction to general relativity, 
Pergamon Press, Oxford.
134

Augenstein, B. W., 1978, The relativistic perihelion shift of an 
artificial planet, revisited, The Rand Corporation, Santa 
Monica, California.
Baggott, J.,2017, Mass: the quest to understand matter from 
Greek atoms to quantum fields, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford.
Babcock, H. W., 1939, The rotation of the Andromeda nebula, 
Lick Observatory Bulletin, Number 498.
Bahcall, J. N., 1984a, The distribution of stars perpendicular to 
the galactic disk, The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 276, 
pages 156-168.
Bahcall, J. N., 1984b, Self-consistent determinations of the total 
amount of matter near the Sun, The Astrophysical Journal, 
Volume 276, pages 169-181.
Bahcall, J. N., 1984c, K giants and the total amount of matter 
near the Sun, The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 287, 
pages 926-944.
Bahcall, J. N., 1987, Dark matter in the galactic disk, in Dark 
Matter in the Universe, edited by J. Kormendy and G. R. 
Knapp, pages 17-31, D. Reidel Publishing Company, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Bahcall, J. N., 1995, Dark matter in clusters and the mass­
density of the Universe, in Proceedings of the 1st 
International Symposium on Sources of Dark Matter in the 
Universe, 16-18 February 1994, Bel Air, California, edited 
by D. B. Cline, pages 41-56, World Scientific Publishing 
Company, Singapore.
Bahcall, N. A., J. P. Ostriker, S. Perlmutter, and P. J. Steinhardt, 
1999, The cosmic triangle: revealing the state of the 
Universe, Science, Volume 284, pages 1481-1488.
Ball, W. W. R., 1891, A hypothesis relating to the nature of the 
ether and gravity, Messenger of Mathematics, Volume 21, 
pages 20-24.
Ball, W. W. R., 1892 (1917), Matter and ether theories, in 
Mathematical Recreations and Essays, 7th Edition, 
Macmillan and Company, London, pages 459-481.
Ball, W. W. R., 1893, An essay on Newton’s “Principia”, 
Macmillan and Company, London.
Barbour, J. B., 1989, Absolute or relative motion? A study from a 
Machian point of view of the discovery and the structure 
of dynamical theories, Volume 1, The discovery of 
dynamics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
135

Barbour, J. B., 1995, General relativity as a perfectly Machian 
theory, in Mach’s Principle: from Newton’s Bucket to 
Quantum Gravity, edited by J. B. Barbour and H. Pfister, 
pages 214-236, Birkhauser, Boston.
Barbour, J. B., 2007, Einstein and Mach’s principle, in The 
Genesis of General Relativity, Volume 3, Gravitation in the 
Twilight of Classical Physics: between Mechanics, Field 
Theory, and Astronomy, edited by J. Renn and M. 
Schemmel, pages 569-604, Springer, Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands.
Barrow, J. D., 2001, The book of nothing, Vintage, London.
Bartlett, D. F., and D. Van Buren, 1986, Equivalence of active 
and passive gravitational mass using the moon, Physical 
Review Letters, Volume 57, pages 21-24.
Barton, V. P., 1946, The presentation of mass to the 
undergraduate, American Journal of Physics, Volume 14, 
pages 328-331.
Bartusiak, M., 1993, Through a Universe darkly: a cosmic tale of 
ancient ethers, dark matter, and the fate of the Universe, 
HarperCollins Publishers, New York.
Basset, A. B., 1888 (1961), A treatise on hydrodynamics: with 
numerous examples, 2 Volumes, Dover Publications, New 
York.
Batchelor, G. K., 1967 (1988), An introduction to fluid dynamics, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Bateman, H., 1922, The form of the ether, Publications of the 
Astronomical Society of the Pacific, Volume 34, pages 
94-107.
Baum, R., and W. Sheehan, 1997, In search of planet Vulcan: the 
ghost in Newton’s clockwork universe, Plenum Trade, 
New York.
Beckmann, P., 1987, Einstein plus two, The Golem Press, 
Boulder, Colorado.
Bekenstein, J. D., and M. Milgrom, 1984, Does the missing mass 
problem signal the breakdown of Newtonian gravity?, The 
Astrophysical Journal, Volume 286, pages 7-14.
Bekenstein, J. D., 1992, New gravitational theories as 
alternatives to dark matter, in Proceedings of the Sixth 
Marcel Grossmann Meeting on Recent Developments in 
Theoretical and Experimental General Relativity, 
Gravitation and Relativistic Field Theories, Kyoto, Japan, 
June 1991, edited by H. Sato and T. Nakamura, pages 
905-924, World Scientific Publishing Company, Singapore.
Bekenstein, J. D., 2004, Relativistic gravitation theory for the 
modified Newtonian dynamics paradigm, Physical 
Review D, Volume 70, pages 083509-083537.
136

Bekenstein, J. D., 2010, Alternatives to dark matter: modified 
gravity as an alternative to dark matter, in Particle Dark 
Matter: Observations, Models and Searches, edited by G. 
Bertone, pages 95-114, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, arXiv:1001.3876.
Bergmann, P. G., 1942 (1976), Introduction to the theory of 
relativity, Dover Publications, New York.
Bergmann, P G., 1962a, The special theory of relativity, in 
Handbuch der Physik, Volume IV, Principles of 
Electrodynamics and Relativity, edited by S. Flugge, pages 
109-202, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Bergmann, P G., 1962b, The general theory of relativity, in 
Handbuch der Physik, Volume IV, Principles of 
Electrodynamics and Relativity, edited by S. Flugge, pages 
203-272, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Bergmann, P G., 1968 (1992), The riddle of gravitation, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Bergmann, P G., 1971, Foundations problems in general 
relativity, in Problems in the Foundations of Physics, 
edited by M. Bunge, pages 49-55, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Bergstrom, L., 2000, Non-baryonic dark matter: observational 
evidence and detection methods, arXiv:hep-ph/0002126v1 
11 Feb 2000.
Bertone, G., D. Hooper, and J. Silk, 2005, Particle dark matter: 
evidence, candidates and constraints, Physics Reports, 
Volume 405, pages 279-390.
Bertotti, B., D. Brill, and R. Krotkov, 1962, Experiments on 
gravitation, in Gravitation: an Introduction to Current 
Research, edited by L. Witten, pages 1-48, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York.
Bessel, F. W., 1832, Versuche uber die kraft mit welcher die Erde 
korper von verschiedene Beschaffenheit anzieht, Annalen 
der Physik und Chemie, Volume 25, pages 401-417.
Birkhoff, G. D., 1923, Relativity and modern physics, Harvard 
University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Birkhoff, G. D., 1925, The origin, nature, and influence of 
relativity, The Macmillan Company, New York.
Birkhoff, G. D., 1943, Matter, electricity and gravitation in flat 
space-time, Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, Volume 29, pages 
231-239.
Bondi, H., 1952 (1968), Cosmology, 2nd Edition, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Born, M., 1924 (1965), Einstein’s theory of relativity, Dover 
Publications, New York.
137

Bose, S. K., 1980, An introduction to general relativity, John 
Wiley & Sons, New York.
Bowler, M. G., 1976, Gravitation and relativity, Pergamon Press, 
Oxford.
Boys, C. V., 1894a, On the Newtonian constant of gravitation, I., 
Nature, Volume 50, pages 330-334.
Boys, C. V., 1894b, On the Newtonian constant of gravitation, 
II., Nature, Volume 50, pages 366-368.
Boys, C. V., 1894c, On the Newtonian constant of gravitation, 
III., Nature, Volume 50, pages 417-419.
Boys, C. V., 1894d, The Newtonian constant of gravitation, 
Nature, Volume 50, page 571.
Brace, D. B., 1906, The ether and moving matter, Congress of 
Arts and Sciences, Universal Exposition, St. Louis 1904, 
Volume 4, pages 105-117.
Braginsky, V. B., and V. I. Panov, 1972, Verification of the 
equivalence of inertial and gravitational mass, Soviet 
Physics JETP, Volume 34, pages 463-466.
Braginsky, V. B., 1974, The detection of small accelerations, 
gravitational antennae, verification of the principle of 
equivalence, in Experimental Gravitation, edited by B. 
Bertotti, pages 235-262, Academic Press, New York.
Brackenridge, J. B., 1995, The key to Newton’s dynamics: the 
Kepler problem and the Principia, University of California 
Press, Berkeley.
Brans, C., and R. H. Dicke, 1961, Mach’s principle and a 
relativistic theory of gravitation, The Physical Review, 
Volume 124, pages 925-935.
Brans, C., 1962, Mach’s principle and the locally measured 
gravitational constant in general relativity, The Physical 
Review, Volume 125, pages 388-396.
Bridgman, P. W., 1941 (1961), The nature of thermodynamics, 
Harper & Brothers, New York.
Bridgman, P. W., 1961, Significance of the Mach principle, 
American Journal of Physics, Volume 29, pages 32-36.
Brill, D. R., 1973, Observational contacts of general relativity, in 
Relativity, Astrophysics and Cosmology, edited by W. 
Isreal, pages 127-152, D. Reidel Publishing Company, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Brown, G. B., 1960, Gravitational and inertial mass, American 
Journal of Physics, Volume 28, pages 475-483.
Burns, J. O., 1984, Dark matter in the Universe, Sky & 
Telescope, Volume 68, November, pages 396-399.
138

Burtt, E. A., 1924 (1932), The metaphysical foundations of 
modern physical science, Doubleday & Company, Garden 
City, New York.
Caldwell, R. R., 2001, An introduction to quintessence, in 
Sources and Detection of Dark Matter and Dark Energy in 
the Universe, Fourth International Symposium held at 
Marina del Rey, California, February 23-25, 2000, edited by 
D. B. Cline, pages 74-91, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Callahan, J., 2000, The geometry of spacetime: an introduction 
to special and general relativity, Springer-Verlag, New 
York.
Callaway, J., 1954, Mach’s principle and unified field theory, 
The Physical Review, Volume 96, pages 778-780.
Campbell, L., J. C. McDow, J. W. Moffat, and D. Vincent, 1983, 
The Sun’s quadrupole moment and perihelion precession 
of Mercury, Nature, Volume 305, pages 508-510.
Campbell, N., 1910, The aether, The London, Edinburgh, and 
Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, 
Series 6, Volume 19, pages 181-191.
Cantor, G., 1970, The changing role of Young’s ether, The British 
Journal for the History of Science, Volume 5, pages 44-62.
Cantor, G. N., and M. J. S. Hodge, 1981, Major themes in the 
development of ether theories from the ancients to 1900, in 
Conception of Ether: studies in the history of ether 
theories 1740-1900, pages 1-60, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge.
Canuto, V. M., I. Goldman, and I. I. Shapiro, 1984, Testing the 
strong equivalence principle by radio ranging, The 
Astrophysical Journal, Volume 276, pages 1-3.
Capria, M. M., 1999, Common sense, the history, and the theory 
of relativity, Acta Scientiarum, Volume 21, pages 779-788.
Capria, M. M., 2005, General relativity: gravitation as geometry 
and the Machian programme, in Physics Before and After 
Einstein, edited by M. M. Capria, pages 93-128, IOS Press, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Carrelli, A., 1959, On Mach’s principle, Il Nuovo Cimento, 
Volume 13, pages 853-856.
Carrington, H., 1913, Earlier theories of gravity, The Monist, 
Volume 23, pages 445-458.
Carroll, S., 2004, Spacetime and geometry: an introduction to 
general relativity, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 
San Francisco.
Carroll, S., 2005, Dark energy & the preposterous Universe, Sky 
& Telescope, March, pages 32-39.
139

Casertano, S., and T. S. van Albada, 1990, Systematic properties 
of rotation curves and dark matter, in Baryonic Dark 
Matter, edited by D. Lynden-Bell and G. Gilmore, pages 
159-177, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands.
Cavendish, H., 1798, Experiments to determine the density of 
the Earth, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
of London, Volume 88, pages 469-526.
Chadwick, P., 1976 (1999), Continuum mechanics: concise 
theory and problems, 2nd Edition, Dover Publications, 
New York.
Chandrasekhar, S., 1980, The role of general relativity in 
astronomy: retrospect and prospect, Journal of 
Astrophysics and Astronomy, Volume 1, pages 33-45.
Chandrasekhar, S., 1995, Newton’s Principia for the common 
reader, Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Cheng, T.-P., 2005, Relativity, gravitation, and cosmology: a 
basic introduction, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Choquet-Bruhat, Y., 2009, General relativity and the Einstein 
equations, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Chow, T. L., 2008, Gravity, black holes, and the very early 
Universe: an introduction to general relativity and 
cosmology, Springer, New York.
Ciufolini, I., and J. A. Wheeler, 1995, Gravitation and inertia, 
Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Clarke, C., 1979, Elementary general relativity, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York.
Clemence, G. M., 1943, The motion of Mercury, 1765-1937, 
Astronomical Papers of the American Ephemeris Nautical 
Almanac, Volume 11, pages 1-221, U.S. Government 
Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Clemence, G. M., 1947, The relativity effect in planetary 
motions, Reviews of Modern Physics, Volume 19, pages 
361-364.
Cline, D. B., 2003, The search for dark matter, Scientific 
American, Volume 288, March, pages 50-59.
Clotfelter, B. E., 1970, Reference systems and inertia: the nature 
of space, The Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa.
Clotfelter, B. E., 1987, The Cavendish experiment as Cavendish 
knew it, American Journal of Physics, Volume 55, pages 
210-213.
Cloud, J. W., 1928, Castles in the ether, Charles Francis Press, 
New York.
Cohen, I. B., 1967, Newton’s second law and the concept of 
force in the Principia, The Texas Quarterly, Volume 10, 
Autumn, pages 127-157.
140

Cohen, I. B., 1981, Newton’s discovery of gravity, Scientific 
American, Volume 244, March, pages 166-179.
Cohen, I. B., 1987, Newton’s third law and universal gravity, 
Journal of the History of Ideas, Volume 48, pages 571-593.
Cohen, I. B., 2002, Newton’s concepts of force and mass, with 
notes on the laws of motion, in The Cambridge 
Companion to Newton, edited by I. B. Cohen and G. E. 
Smith, pages 57-84, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge.
Coleman, R. A., and H. Korte, 1984, Constraints on the nature 
of inertial motion arising from the universality of free fall 
and the conformal causal structure of space-time, Journal 
of Mathematical Physics, Volume 25, pages 3513-3526.
Coleman, S., and J. H. Van Vleck, 1968, Origin of “hidden 
momentum forces” on magnets, The Physical Review, 
Volume 171, pages 1370-1375.
Combridge, J. T., 1926, On the advance of perihelion of 
Mercury, Proceedings of the Physical Society of London, 
Volume 38, pages 161-167.
Comstock, D. F., 1907, Reasons for believing in an ether, 
Science, Volume 25, pages 432-433.
Cook, A. H., 1987, Experiments on gravitation, in Three 
Hundred Years of Gravitation, edited by S. W. Hawking 
and W. Israel, pages 50-79, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge.
Cook, A. H., 1988, Experiments on gravitation, Reports on 
Progress in Physics, Volume 51, pages 707-757.
Cook, A. H., 1994, The observational foundations of physics, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Cunningham, E., 1907, The structure of the ether, Nature, 
Volume 76, page 222.
Currie, I. G., 1974 (1993), Fundamental mechanics of fluids, 2nd 
Edition, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Cushing, J. T., 1982, Kepler’s laws and univerisal gravitation in 
Newton’s Principia, American Journal of Physics, Volume 
50, pages 617-628.
Dabbs, J. W. T., J. A. Harvey, D. Paya, and H. Horstmann, 1965, 
Gravitational acceleration of free neutrons, Physical 
Review B, Volume 139, pages 756-760.
d’Abro, A., 1927 (1950), The evolution of scientific thought: 
from Newton to Einstein, 2nd Edition, Dover Publications, 
New York.
141

d’Abro, A., 1939 (1952), The rise of the new physics: its 
mathematical and physical theories (originally titled ‘The 
decline of mechanism’), Volumes 1 and 2, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Dalarsson, M., and N. Dalarsson, 2005, Tensor calculus, 
relativity, and cosmology: a first course, Elsevier Academic 
Press, Burlington, Massachusetts.
Dalton, J., 1808, (1964), A new system of chemical philosophy, 
Volume 1, Part 1, S. Russell, Manchester.
Damour, T., 1987, The problem of motion in Newtonian and 
Einsteinian gravity, in Three Hundred Years of 
Gravitation, edited by S. W. Hawking and W. Israel, pages 
128-198, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Damour, T., 1994, General relativity today, arXiv:0704.0754v1 
[gr-qc] 5 Apr 2007.
Damour, T., 2007, General relativity and experiment, arXiv: gr- 
qc/9412024v1 8 Dec 1994.
Darling, D., 2006, Gravity’s arc: the story of gravity, from 
Aristotle to Einstein and beyond, John Wiley & Sons, 
Hoboken, New Jersey.
Darwin, C., 1959, The gravity field of a particle, Proceedings of 
the Royal Society of London, Series A, Mathematical and 
Physical Sciences, Volume 249, pages 180-194.
Darwin, C., 1961, The gravity field of a particle, II, Proceedings 
of the Royal Society of London, Series A, Mathematical 
and Physical Sciences, Volume 263, pages 39-50.
Das, A., 1957, On the perihelion shift in conformally flat space­
time, Il Nuovo Cimento, Volume 6, pages 1489-1490.
Davidson, W., 1957, General relativity and Mach’s principle, 
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 
Volume 117, pages 212-224.
Davies, P. C. W., and J. Gribbin, 1992, The matter myth: 
dramatic discoveries that challenge our understanding of 
physical reality, Simon & Schuster, New York.
Davis, M., 1987, Evidence for dark matter in galactic systems, in 
Dark Matter in the Universe, edited by J. Kormendy and 
G. R. Knapp, pages 97-110, D. Reidel Publishing Company, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Debono, I., and G. F. Smoot, 2016, General relativity and 
cosmology: unsolved questions and future directions, 
Universe, Volume 2, pages 23-104.
Decaen, C. A., 2004, Aristotle’s aether and contemporary 
science, The Thomist, Volume 68, pages 375-429.
de Sabbata, V., and M. Gasperini, 1985, Introduction to 
gravitation, World Scientific Publishing Company, 
Singapore.
142

Descartes, R., 1637, La Dioptrique, Leyden.
Descartes, R., 1638, Les Meteores, Leyden.
Descartes, R., 1644, Principia Philosophiae, Elzevier, 
Amsterdam.
Descartes, R., 1644 (1965), Les principes de la philosophie, H. le 
Gras, Paris.
Descartes, R., 1644 (1983), Principles of philosophy, translated 
by V. R. Miller and R. P Miller, D. Reidel Publishing 
Company, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Deser, S., 1980, From gravity to supergravity, in General 
Relativity and Gravitation: One Hundred Years after the 
Birth of Albert Einstein, edited by A. Held, Volume 1, 
pages 357-392, Plenum Press, New York.
de Sitter, W., 1911, On the bearing of the principle of relativity 
on gravitational astronomy, Monthly Notices of the Royal 
Astronomical Society, Volume 71, pages 388-415.
de Sitter, W., 1916a, Einstein’s theory of gravitation, and its 
astronomical consequences, Monthly Notices of the Royal 
Astronomical Society, Volume 76, pages 699-728.
de Sitter, W., 1916b, On Einstein’s theory of gravitation, and its 
astronomical consequences, Monthly Notices of the Royal 
Astronomical Society, Volume 77, pages 155-184.
de Sitter, W., 1917a, On Einstein’s theory of gravitation, and its 
astronomical consequences, Monthly Notices of the Royal 
Astronomical Society, Volume 78, pages 3-28.
de Sitter, W., 1917b, On the relativity of inertia. Remarks 
concerning Einstein’s latest hypothesis, Koninklijke 
Akademie van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam 
(Proceedings of the Royal Academy of Amsterdam), 
Volume 19, pages 1217-1225.
de Sitter, W., 1921, Space, time and gravitation: an outline of 
Einstein's theory of general relativity, in Einstein's 
Theories of Relativity and Gravitation, edited by J. M. 
Bird, pages 206-217, Scientific American Publishing 
Company, Munn & Company, New York.
de Swart, J., G. Bertone, and J. Van Dongen, 2017, How dark 
matter came to matter, arXiv: 1703.00013v2 [astro-ph.CO] 
16 May 2017.
Dicke, R. H., 1958, Gravitation an enigma, Journal of the 
Washington Academy of Science, Volume 48, pages 
213-223.
Dicke, R. H., 1959, New research on old gravitation, Science, 
Volume 129, pages 621-624.
Dicke, R. H., 1960, Eotvos experiment and the gravitational red 
shift, American Journal of Physics, Volume 28, pages 
344-347.
143

Dicke, R. H., 1961a, The Eotvos experiment, Scientific 
American, Volume 205, December, pages 84-94.
Dicke, R. H., 1961b, Dirac’s cosmology and Mach’s principle, 
Nature, Volume 192, pages 440-441.
Dicke, R. H., 1961c, Experimental tests of Mach’s principle, 
Physical Review Letters, Volume 7, pages 359-360.
Dicke, R. H., 1962a, Mach’s principle and equivalence, in 
Evidence for Gravitational Theories, edited by C. M0ller, 
pages 1-49, Academic Press, New York.
Dicke, R. H., 1962b, Mach’s principle and invariance under 
transformation of units, The Physical Review, Volume 125, 
pages 2163-2167.
Dicke, R. H., 1964a, The Sun’s rotation and relativity, Nature, 
Volume 202, pages 432-435.
Dicke, R. H., 1964b, The theoretical significance of experimental 
relativity, Gordon and Breach, Science Publishers, New 
York.
Dicke, R. H., 1964c, Experimental relativity, in Relativity, 
Groups and Topology, edited by C. DeWitt and B. S. 
DeWitt, pages 163-313, Gordon and Breach, Science 
Publishers, New York.
Dicke, R. H., 1964d, Remarks on the observational basis of 
general relativity, in Gravitation and Relativity, edited by 
H.-Y. Chiu and W. F. Hoffmann, pages 1-16, W. A. 
Benjamin, New York.
Dicke, R. H., 1964e, The many faces of Mach, in Gravitation and 
Relativity, edited by H.-Y. Chiu and W. F. Hoffmann, pages 
121-141, W. A. Benjamin, New York.
Dicke, R. H., 1964f, The significance for the solar system of 
time-varying gravitation, in Gravitation and Relativity, 
edited by H.-Y. Chiu and W. F. Hoffmann, pages 142-174, 
W. A. Benjamin, New York.
Dicke, R. H., 1964g, Possible effects on the solar system of 0 
waves if they exist, in Gravitation and Relativity, edited by 
H.-Y. Chiu and W. F. Hoffmann, pages 241-257, W. A. 
Benjamin, New York.
Dicke, R. H., 1967, Gravitational theory and observation, 
Physics Today, Volume 20, January, pages 55-70.
Dicke, R. H., and H. M. Goldenberg, 1967, Solar oblateness and 
general relativity, Physical Review Letters, Volume 18, 
pages 313-316.
Dicke, R. H., 1969 (1970), Gravitation and the Universe, 
American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia.
144

Dicke, R. H., 1974a, Relativity and the solar oblateness, in 
Experimental Gravitation, edited by B. Bertotti, pages 
200-234, Academic Press, New York.
Dicke, R. H., 1974b, The oblateness of the Sun and relativity, 
Science, Volume 184, pages 419-429.
Dicke, R. H., and H. M. Goldenberg, 1974, The oblateness of the 
Sun, The Astrophysical Journal, Supplement Series, 
Volume 27, pages 131-182.
Dicke, R. H., J. R. Kuhn, and K. G. Libbrecht, 1987, Is the solar 
oblateness variable? Measurements of 1985, The 
Astrophysical Journal, Volume 318, pages 451-458.
Dijksterhuis, E. J., 1959 (1986), The mechanization of the world 
picture: Pythagoras to Newton, Princeton University 
Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Dingle, H., 1972, Science at the crossroads, Martin Brian & 
O’Keeffe, London.
d’Inverno, R., 1992, Introducing Einstein’s relativity, Oxford 
University Press, Oxford.
Dirac, P. A. M., 1975 (1996), General theory of relativity, 
Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Dolbear, A. E., 1897, Modes of motion: or mechanical 
conceptions of physical phenomena, Lee and Shepard 
Publishers, Boston.
Doran, B. G., 1975, Origins and consolidation of field theory in 
nineteenth-century Britain: from the mechanical to the 
electromagnetic view of nature, Historical Studies in the 
Physical Sciences, Volume 6, pages 133-260.
Drever, R. W. P., 1960, A search for anisotropy of inertial mass 
using a free precession technique, Philosophical Magzine, 
Volume 6, pages 683-687.
Duff, M. J., 1974, On the significance of perihelion shift 
calculations, Journal of General Relativity and Gravitation, 
Volume 5, pages 441-452.
Duncombe, R. L., 1956, Relativity effects for the three inner 
planets, The Astronomical Journal, Volume 61, pages 
174-175.
Dutton, J. A., 1976 (1986), The ceaseless wind: an introduction 
to the theory of atmospheric motion, Dover Publications, 
New York.
Dutton, J. A., 1986 (1995), Dynamics of atmospheric motion, 
Dover Publications, New York.
Earman, J., and M. Friedman, 1973, The meaning and status of 
Newton’s law of inertia and the nature of gravitational 
forces, Philosophy of Science, Volume 40, pages 329-359.
145

Earman, J., 1989, World enough and space-time: absolute versus 
relational theories of space and time, The M.I.T. Press, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Earman, J., and M. Janssen, 1993, Einstein’s explanation of the 
motion of Mercury’s perihelion, in The Attraction of 
Gravitation: New Studies in the History of General 
Relativity, edited by J. Earman, M. Janssen, and J. D. 
Norton, pages 129-172, Birkhauser, Basel.
Eddington, A. S., 1918, Report on the relativity theory of 
gravitation, The Physical Society of London.
Eddington, A. S., 1921a, Discussion on the theory of relativity, 
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 
Volume 80, pages 96-118.
Eddington, A. S., 1921b (1959), Space, time and gravitation: an 
outline of the general relativity theory, Harper & Row, 
New York.
Eddington, A. S., 1923 (1960), The mathematical theory of 
relativity, 2nd Edition, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge.
Ehlers, J., and W. Kundt, 1962, Exact solutions of the 
gravitational field equations, in Gravitation: an 
Introduction to Current Research, edited by L. Witten, 
pages 49-101, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Ehlers, J., F. A. E. Pirani, and A. Schild, 1972, The geometry of 
free fall and light propagation, in General Relativity: 
Papers in Honour of J. L Synge, edited by L.
O’Raifeartaigh, pages 63-84, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford.
Ehlers, J., 1973, Survey of general relativity theory, in Relativity, 
Astrophysics and Cosmology, edited by W. Isreal, pages 
1-125, D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands.
Einstein, A., 1907a, Uber das Relativitatsprinzip und die aus 
demselben gezogenen Folgerungen, Jahrbuch fur 
Radioaktivitat und Elektronik, Volume 4, pages 411-462.
Einstein, A., 1907b, Uber die Moglichkeit einer neuen Prufung 
des Relativitatsprinzips, Annalen der Physik, Volume 23, 
pages 197-198.
Einstein, A., 1914, Zum Relativitatproblem, Scientia, Volume 15, 
pages 337-348 (see English translation in The Genesis of 
General Relativity, Volume 3, Gravitation in the Twilight 
of Classical Physics: between Mechanics, Field Theory, and 
Astronomy, edited by J. Renn and M. Schemmel, pages 
605-612, Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2007).
Einstein, A., 1915a, Zur allgemeinen Relativitatstheorie, 
Sitzungsberichte der Koniglich Preufiischen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften zu Berlin, pages 778-786.
146

Einstein, A., 1915b, Zur allgemeinen Relativitatstheorie 
(Nachtrag), Sitzungsberichte der Koniglich Preufiischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, pages 799-801.
Einstein, A., 1915c, Erklarung der Perihelbewegung des Merkur 
aus der allgemeinen Relativitatstheorie, Sitzungsberichte 
der Koniglich Preufiischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 
zu Berlin, Volume 47, pages 831-839.
Einstein, A., 1915d, Die Feldgleichungen der Gravitation, 
Sitzungsberichte der Koniglich Preufiischen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften zu Berlin, pages 844-847.
Einstein, A., 1916a, Die Grundlage der allgemeinen 
Relativitatstheorie, Annalen der Physik, Volume 49, pages 
769-822 (see English translation in Lorentz et al., 1923, 
pages 111-164).
Einstein, A., 1916b (1961), Relativity: the special and the general 
theory, 15th Edition, Crown Trade Paperbacks, New York.
Einstein, A., 1918a, Uber Gravitationswellen, Sitzungsberichte 
der Koniglich Preufiischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 
zu Berlin, pages 154-167.
Einstein, A., 1918b, Prinzipielles zur allgemeinen 
Relativitatstheorie, Annalen der Physik, Volume 55, pages 
241-244.
Einstein, A., 1922a (1956), The meaning of relativity, 5th Edition, 
MJF Books, New York.
Einstein, A., 1922b (1983), Sidelights on relativity, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Einstein, A., 1922c (1982), How I created the theory of relativity, 
Lecture at Kyoto University, December 14, 1922, Physics 
Today, Volume 25, August, pages 45-47.
Einstein, A., 1924, Uber den Ather, Schweizerische 
naturforschende Gesellschaft, Verhanflungen, Volume 105, 
pages 85-93 (see English translation in The Philosophy of 
Vacuum, edited by S. Saunders and H. R. Brown, pages 
13-20, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1991).
Einstein, A., 1929, Field theories, old and new, Section 9, 
February 3, New York Times, New York.
Einstein, A., 1935, Elementary derivation of the equivalence of 
mass and energy, Bulletin of the American Mathematical 
Society, Volume 41, pages 223-230.
Einstein, A., and N. Rosen, 1937, On gravitational waves, 
Journal of the Franklin Institute, Volume 223, pages 43-54.
Einstein, A., and L. Infeld, 1938 (1966), The evolution of 
physics: from early concepts to relativity and quanta, 
Simon & Schuster, New York.
Einstein, A., L. Infeld, and B. Hoffman, 1938, The gravitational 
equations and the problem of motion, Annals of 
Mathematics, Volume 39, pages 65-100.
147

Einstein, A., 1950, On the generalized theory of gravitation, 
Scientific American, Volume 182, April, pages 13-17.
Eisenbud, L. P., 1958, On the classical laws of motion, American 
Journal of Physics, Volume 26, pages 144-159.
Einstein, A., 1982, How I created the theory of relativity, Physics 
Today, Volume 35, pages 45-47.
Eisenhart, L. P., 1920, The permanent gravitational field in the 
Einstein theory, Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, Volume 6, pages 
678-682.
Ellis, B. D., 1965, The origin and nature of Newton’s laws of 
motion, in Beyond the Edge of Certainty: Essays in 
Contemporary Science and Philosophy, edited by R. G. 
Colodny, pages 29-68, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 
New Jersey.
Ellis, B. D., 1976, The existence of forces, Studies in History and 
Philosophy of Science, Volume 7, pages 171-185.
Ellis, H. G., 1973, Ether flow through a drainhole: a particle 
model in general relativity, Journal of Mathematical 
Physics, Volume 14, pages 104-118.
Ellis, H. G., 1974, Ether flow through a drainhole: a particle 
model in general relativity (correction), Journal of 
Mathematical Physics, Volume 15, page 520.
Eskinazi, S., 1962 (1968), Principles of fluid mechanics, 2nd 
Edition, Allyn and Bacon, Boston.
Estermann, I., O. C. Simpson, and O. Stern, 1938, The free fall of 
molecules, The Physical Review, Volume 53, pages 
947-948.
Estermann, I., O. C. Simpson, and O. Stern, 1947, The free fall of 
atoms and the measurement of the velocity distribution in 
a molecular beam of cesium atoms, The Physical Review, 
Volume 71, pages 238-249.
Euler, L., 1768, 1772, Lettres a une Princesse d’Allemagne sur 
quelques sujets de Physique et de Philosophie, 3 Volumes, 
St. Petersburg.
Faber, S. M., and J. S. Gallagher, 1979, Masses and mass-to-light 
ratios of galaxies, Annual Review of Astronomy and 
Astrophysics, Volume 17, pages 135-187.
Faber, S. M., and D. N. C. Lin, 1983, Is there nonluminous 
matter in dwarf spheroidal galaxies?, The Astrophysical 
Journal, Volume 266, pages L17-L20.
Faber, S. M., 1987, Dark matter: key issues, in Dark Matter in 
the Universe, edited by J. Kormendy and G. R. Knapp, 
pages 1-16, D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands.
Faber, S., 1994, Gravity’s secret signals, New Scientist, Volume 
144, November, page 40.
148

Faber, T. E., 1995, Fluid dynamics for physicists, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Fabricant, D., and P Gorenstein, 1983, Further evidence for 
M87’s massive, dark halo, The Astrophysical Journal, 
Volume 267, pages 535-546.
Falconer, I., 1987, Corpuscles, electrons and cathode rays: J. J. 
Thomson and the 'discovery of the electron', British 
Journal for the History of Science, Volume 20, pages 
241-276.
Falconer, I., 1999, Henry Cavendish: the man and the 
measurement, Measurement Science and Technology, 
Volume 10, pages 470-477.
Faraday, M., 1844 (1952), Experimental researches in electricity: 
Volume 1, in Great Books of the Western World, Volume 
45, edited by R. M. Hutchins, Encyclopedia Britannica, 
London.
Faraday, M., 1847 (1952), Experimental researches in electricity: 
Volume 2, in Great Books of the Western World, Volume 
45, edited by R. M. Hutchins, Encyclopedia Britannica, 
London.
Faraday, M., 1852, On the physical character of the lines of 
magnetic force, The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin 
Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, Series 4, 
Volume 3, pages 401-427.
Faraday, M., 1855 (1952), Experimental researches in electricity: 
Volume 3, in Great Books of the Western World, Volume 
45, edited by R. M. Hutchins, Encyclopedia Britannica, 
London.
Faraday, M., 1859-1860 (1961), On the various forces of nature, 
Thomas Y. Crowell Company, Binghamton, New York.
Feenberg, E., 1960, Inertia of energy, American Journal of 
Physics, Volume 28, pages 565-566.
Felten, J. E., 1984, Milgrom’s revision of Newton’s laws: 
dynamical and cosmological consequences, The 
Astrophysical Journal, Volume 286, pages 3-6.
Feng, J., and M. Trodden, 2010, Dark worlds, Scientific 
American, Volume 303, November, pages 38-45.
Ferraro, R., 2007, Einstein’s space-time: an introduction to 
special and general relativity, Springer, New York.
Ferreira, P G., and G. D. Starkman, 2009, Einstein’s theory of 
gravity and the problem of missing mass, Science, New 
Series, Volume 326, pages 812-815.
Fetter, A. L., and J. D. Walecka, 1980, Theoretical mechanics of 
particles and continua, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New 
York.
149

Feynman, R. P., R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, 1963 (1977), The 
Feynman lectures on physics, Volume I, Mainly 
mechanics, radiation and heat, Addison-Wesley 
Publishing Company, Reading, Massachusetts.
Feynman, R. P., R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, 1964 (1977), The 
Feynman lectures on physics, Volume II, Mainly 
electromagnetism and matter, Addison-Wesley Publishing 
Company, Reading, Massachusetts.
Feynman, R. P., 1965 (1994), The character of physical law, The 
M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Feynman, R. P., 1985 (1988), QED: the strange theory of light 
and matter, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New 
Jersey.
Feynman, R. P., F. B. Morinigo, and W. G. Wagner, 1995, 
Feynman lectures on gravitation, Addison-Wesley 
Publishing Company, Reading, Massachusetts.
Finkbeiner, A. K., 1985, Cold dark matter and the origin of 
galaxies, Astronomy, April, pages 67-71.
Finzi, A., 1963, On the validity of Newton’s law at a long 
distance, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical 
Society, Volume 127, pages 21-30.
Fischbach, E., and C. Talmadge, 1992, Present status of searches 
for non-Newtonian gravity, in Proceedings of the Sixth 
Marcel Grossmann Meeting on Recent Developments in 
Theoretical and Experimental General Relativity, 
Gravitation and Relativistic Field Theories, Kyoto, Japan, 
June 1991, edited by H. Sato and T. Nakamura, pages 
1122-1132, World Scientific Publishing Company, 
Singapore.
Fitzpatrick, R., 2012, An introduction to celestial mechanics, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Fontenrose, R., 1973, In search of Vulcan, Journal for the 
History of Astronomy, Volume 4, pages 145-158.
Foster, J., and J. D. Nightingale, 1995, A short course in general 
relativity, 2nd Edition, Springer-Verlag, New York.
Fox, R. W., and A. T. McDonald, 1973 (1998), Introduction to 
fluid mechanics, 5th Edition, John Wiley & Sons, New 
York.
Frankel, T., 1979, Gravitational curvature: an introduction to 
Einstein’s theory, W. H. Freeman and Company, San 
Francisco.
Freeman, K., and G. McNamara, 2006, In search of dark matter, 
Springer, Berlin.
150

Galilei, G., 1632 (1953), Dialogue concerning the two chief 
world systems - Ptolemaic & Copernican, University of 
California Press, Berkeley.
Galilei, G., 1638 (1954), Dialogues concerning two new sciences, 
Dover Publications, New York.
Gamow, G., 1961a, Gravity, Scientific American, Volume 204, 
March, pages 94-106.
Gamow, G., 1962 (2002), Gravity, Dover Publications, New 
York.
Gamow, G., 1967, Electricity, gravity, and cosmology, Physical 
Review Letters, Volume 19, pages 759-761.
Gates, E., 2009, Einstein’s telescope: the hunt for dark matter 
and dark energy in the Universe, W. W. Norton & 
Company, New York.
Gerber, P., 1898, Die raumliche und zeitliche Ausbreitung der 
Gravitation, Zeitschrift fur Mathematik und Physik, 
Volume 43, pages 93-104.
Gerber, P., 1917, Die Fortpflanzungsgeschwindigkeit der 
Gravitation, Annalen der Physik, Volume 52, pages 
415-444.
Geroch, R., 1978, General relativity from A to B, University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Gibilisco, S., 1983 (1991), Understanding Einstein’s theories of 
relativity: man’s new perspective on the cosmos, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Gillies, G. T., 1990, Resource letter MNG-1: measurements of 
Newtonian gravitation, American Journal of Physics, 
Volume 58, pages 525-534.
Gilmore, G., and G. Tausch-Pebody, 2021, The 1919 eclipse 
results that verified general relativity and their later 
detractors: a story re-told, Notes and Records: The Royal 
Society Journal of the History of Science, Volume 76, pages 
155-180.
Glanz, J., 1998, Astronomers see a cosmic antigravity force at 
work, Science, Volume 279, pages 1298-1299.
Goldberg, J. N., 1962, The equations of motion, in Gravitation: 
an Introduction to Current Research, edited by L. Witten, 
pages 102-129, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Gondhalekar, P., 2001, The grip of gravity: the quest to 
understand the laws of motion and gravitation, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Gooding, D., 1980, Faraday, Thomson, and the concept of the 
magnetic field, The British Journal for the History of 
Science, Volume 13, pages 91-120.
151

Gough, D. O., 1982, Internal rotation and gravitational 
quadrupole moment of the Sun, Nature, Volume 298, 
pages 334-339.
Graneau, P., and N. Graneau, 2006, In the grip of the distant 
Universe: the science of inertia, World Scientific, New 
Jersey.
Granger, R. A., 1985 (1995), Fluid mechanics, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Gribbin, J., 1984a, The bishop, the bucket, Newton and the 
Universe, New Scientist, Volume 104, December, pages 
12-15.
Gribbin, J., and M. Rees, 1989, Cosmic coincidences: dark 
matter, mankind, and anthropic cosmology, Bantam 
Books, New York.
Gr0n, 0., and S. Hervik, 2007, Einstein's general theory of 
relativity: with applications in cosmology, Springer-Verlag, 
New York.
Gupta, S. N., 1954, Gravitation and electromagnetism, The 
Physical Review, Volume 96, pages 1683-1685.
Hakim, R., 1999, An introduction to relativistic gravitation, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Hall, A. R., and M. B. Hall, 1960, Newton's theory of matter, 
Isis, Volume 51, pages 131-144.
Hanson, N. R., 1965, Newton’s first law: a philosopher’s door 
into natural philosophy, in Beyond the Edge of Certainty: 
Essays in Contemporary Science and Philosophy, edited 
by R. G. Colodny, pages 6-28, Prentice-Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs, New Jersey.
Harman, P M., 1982, Energy, force, and matter: the conceptual 
development of nineteenth-century physics, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Harper, W., 2002, Newton’s argument for universal gravitation, 
in The Cambridge Companion to Newton, edited by I. B. 
Cohen and G. E. Smith, pages 174-201, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Harper, W., 2007, Newton’s methodology and Mercury’s 
perihelion before and after Einstein, Philosophy of 
Science, Volume 74, pages 932-942.
Hartle, J. B., 2003, Gravity: an introduction to Einstein’s general 
relativity, Addison-Wesley, San Francisco.
Haugan, M. P, and C. M. Will, 1977, Principles of equivalence, 
Eotvos experiments, and gravitational red-shift 
experiments: the free fall of electromagnetic systems to 
post-post-Coulombian order, Physical Review D, Volume 
15, pages 2711-2720.
152

Hawes, J. L., 1968, Newton’s revival of the aether hypothesis 
and the explanation of gravitational attraction, Notes and 
Records of the Royal Society of London, Volume 23, pages 
200-212.
Hawking, S. W., 1987, Newton’s Principia, in Three Hundred 
Years of Gravitation, edited by S. W. Hawking and W. 
Israel, pages 1-4, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Hawking, S. W., 1988, A brief history of time: from the Big Bang 
to black holes, Bantam Books, London.
Heaviside, O., 1912 (1971), Electromagnetic theory, 3rd Edition, 
Volume III, Chelsea Publishing Company, New York.
Hecht, E., 2006, There is really no good definition of mass, The 
Physics Teacher, Volume 44, pages 40-45.
Heckel, B. R., E. G. Adelberger, C. W. Stubbs, Y. Su, H. E. 
Swanson, G. Smith, and W. F. Rogers, 1989, Experimental 
bounds on interactions mediated by ultralow-mass 
bosons, Physical Review Letters, Volume 63, pages 
2705-2708.
Heimann, P M., and J. E. McGuire, 1971, Newtonian forces and 
Lockean powers: concepts of matter in eighteenth-century 
thought, Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences, 
Volume 3, pages 233-306.
Heimann, P M., 1981, Ether and imponderables, in Conceptions 
of Ether: Studies in the History of Ether Theories 
1740-1900, edited by G. N. Cantor and M. J. S. Hodge, 
pages 61-83, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Helmholtz, H., 1858, Uber Integrale der hydrodynamischen 
Gleichungen, welche den Wirbelbewegungen entsprechen, 
Journal fur die reine und angewandte Mathematik 
(Crelle’s Journal), Volume 55, pages 25-55 (see English 
translation in Tait, 1867).
Helms, L. L., 1969, Introduction to potential theory, Wiley- 
Interscience, New York.
Henriksen, R. N., 2011, Practical relativity: from first principles 
to the theory of gravity, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, 
England.
Hentschel, K., 2005, Testing relativity, in Physics Before and 
After Einstein, edited by M. M. Capria, pages 163-182, IOS 
Press, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Herivel, J. W., 1955, The derivation of the equations of motion 
of an ideal fluid by Hamilton’s principle, Proceedings of 
the Cambridge Philosophical Society, Volume 51, pages 
344-349.
Hernquist, L., and P J. Quinn, 1987, Shell galaxies and 
alternatives to the dark matter hypothesis, The 
Astrophysical Journal, Volume 312, pages 17-21.
153

Hesse, M. B., 1955, Action at a distance in classical physics, Isis, 
Volume 46, pages 337-353.
Hesse, M. B., 1961, Forces and fields: the concept of action at a 
distance in the history of physics, Thomas Nelson and 
Sons, London.
Heyl, P. R., 1907, Reasons for believing in an ether, Science, 
Volume 25, page 870.
Heyl, P R., 1954, Gravitation - still a mystery, The Scientific 
Monthly, Volume 78, May, pages 303-306.
Higgs, P W., 1964, Broken symmetries and the masses of gauge 
bosons, Physical Review Letters, Volume 13, pages 
508-509.
Hill, H. A., R. J. Bos, and P R. Goode, 1982, Preliminary 
determination of the Sun’s gravitational quadrupole 
moment from rotational splitting of global oscillations and 
its relevance to tests of general relativity, Physical Review 
Letters, Volume 49, pages 1794-1797.
Hills, J. G., 1986, Limitations on the masses of objects 
constituting the missing mass in the galactic disk and the 
galactic halo, The Astronomical Journal, Volume 92, pages 
595-599.
Hirosige, T., 1976, The ether problem, the mechanistic 
worldview, and the origins of the theory of relativity, 
Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences, Volume 7, 
pages 3-82.
Hobson, M. P, G. P Efstathiou, and A. N. Lasenby, 2006, 
General relativity: an introduction for physicists, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Hoefer, C., 1994, Einstein’s struggle for a Machian gravitation 
theory, Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, Part 
B, Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 
Volume 25, pages 287-335.
Hoefer, C., 1995, Einstein’s formulations of Mach’s principle, in 
Mach’s Principle: from Newton’s Bucket to Quantum 
Gravity, edited by J. B. Barbour and H. Pfister, pages 67-90, 
Birkhauser, Boston.
Holden, A., 1965 (1992), The nature of solids, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Holton, G., 1968, Mach, Einstein, and the search for reality, 
Daedalus, Volume 97, pages 636-673.
Home, R. W., 1968, The third law in Newton’s mechanics, The 
British Journal for the History of Science, Volume 4, pages 
39-51.
154

Hooper, D., 2006, Dark cosmos: in search of our Universe’s 
missing mass and energy, HarperCollins Publishers, New 
York.
Hooper, W. G., 1903, Aether and gravitation, Chapman and 
Hall, London.
Hoyle, F., and J. V. Narlikar, 1974, Action at a distance in 
physics and cosmology, W. H. Freeman and Company, San 
Francisco.
Hughes, R. J., 1993, The equivalence principle, Contemporary 
Physics, Volume 34, pages 177-191.
Hughes, V. W., H. G. Robinson, and V. Beltran-Lopez, 1960, 
Upper limit for the anisotropy of inertial mass from 
nuclear resonance experiments, Physical Review Letters, 
Volume 4, pages 342-344.
Hughes, V. W., 1964, Mach’s principle and experiments on mass 
anisotropy, in Gravitation and Relativity, edited by H-Y. 
Chiu and W. F. Hoffmann, pages 106-120, W. A. Benjamin, 
New York.
Hughes, W. F., and J. A. Brighton, 1967 (1999), Theory and 
problems of fluid dynamics, 3rd Edition, Schaum’s 
Outline Series, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Hughston, L. P., and K. P Tod, 1990, An introduction to general 
relativity, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Hunt, J. N., 1964, Incompressible fluid dynamics, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York.
Huntington, E. V., 1918, Bibliographical note on the use of the 
word mass in current textbooks, American Mathematical 
Monthly, Volume 25, pages 1-15.
Huygens, C., 1690a, Traite de la lumiere ou sont expliquees les 
causes de ce qui luy arrive dans la reflexion et dans la 
refraction. Et particulierement dans l’etrange refraction du 
cristal d’Islande, Leyden.
Huygens, C., 1690b (1952), Treatise on light, in Great Books of 
the Western World, Volume 34, edited by R. M. Hutchins, 
pages 545-619, Encyclopedia Britannica, London.
Huygens, C., 1690c, Discours sur la cause de la pesanteur, 
Leyden.
Israel, W., 1987, Dark stars: the evolution of an idea, in Three 
Hundred Years of Gravitation, edited by S. W. Hawking 
and W. Israel, pages 199-276, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge.
Jackson, H. L., 1959, Presentation of the concept of mass to 
beginning physics students, American Journal of Physics, 
Volume 27, pages 278-280.
Jammer, M., 1957 (1999), Concepts of force: a study in the 
foundations of dynamics, Dover Publications, New York.
155

Jammer, M., 1961 (1997), Concepts of mass: in classical and 
modern physics, Dover Publications, New York.
Janssen, M., J. Renn, T. Sauer, J. D. Norton, and J. Stachel, 2007, 
A commentary on the notes on gravity in the Zurich 
notebook, in The Genesis of General Relativity, Volume 2, 
Einstein’s Zurich Notebook: Commentary and Essays, 
edited by M. Janssen, J. D. Norton, J. Renn, T. Sauer, and J. 
Stachel, pages 489-714, Springer, Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands.
Janssen, M., and J. Renn, 2021, Einstein and the perihelion 
motion of Mercury, arXiv: 2111.11238.
Jeffreys, H., 1919, On the crucial test of Einstein’s theory of 
gravitation, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical 
Society, Volume 80, pages 138-154.
Jones, R., 1981, The special and general principles of relativity, 
in After Einstein: Proceedings of the Einstein Centennial 
Celebration at Memphis State University, 14-16 March 
1979, edited by P. Barker and C. G. Shugart, pages 159-173, 
Memphis State University Press, Memphis.
Jourdain, P E. B., 1915a, Newton’s hypotheses of ether and of 
gravitation from 1672 to 1679, The Monist, Volume 25, 
pages 79-106.
Jourdain, P E. B., 1915b, Newton’s hypotheses of ether and of 
gravitation from 1679 to 1693, The Monist, Volume 25, 
pages 234-254.
Jourdain, P E. B., 1915c, Newton’s hypotheses of ether and of 
gravitation from 1693 to 1726, The Monist, Volume 25, 
pages 418-440.
Kampffer, F. A., 1958, On possible realizations of Mach’s 
program, Canadian Journal of Physics, Volume 36, pages 
151-159.
Kane, G. L., 2005, The mysteries of mass, Scientific American, 
Volume 293, July, pages 40-48.
Keiser, G. M., and J. E. Faller, 1979, A new approach to the 
Eotvos experiment, Bulletin of the American Physical 
Society, Volume 24, page 579.
Kellogg, O. D., 1929 (1953), Foundations of potential theory, 
Dover Publications, New York.
Kenyon, I. R., 1990, General relativity, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford.
Kepler, J., 1619 (1952), The harmonies of the world, Book V, in 
Great Books of the Western World, Volume 16, edited by R. 
M. Hutchins, pages 1009-1085, Encyclopedia Britannica, 
London.
156

Kepler, J., 1620 (1952), Epitome of Copernican astronomy, Books 
IV and V, in Great Books of the Western World, Volume 16, 
edited by R. M. Hutchins, pages 843-1004, Encyclopedia 
Britannica, London.
Khriplovich, I. B., 2005, General relativity, Springer, New York.
Kilmister, C. W., 1973, General theory of relativity, Pergamon 
Press, Oxford.
Kirkwood, R. L., 1953, The physical basis of gravitation, The 
Physical Review, Volume 92, pages 1557-1562.
Kirkwood, R. L., 1954, Gravitational field equations, The 
Physical Review, Volume 95, pages 1051-1056.
Klein, M. J., 1973, Mechanical explanation at the end of the 
nineteenth century, Centaurus, Volume 17, pages 58-82.
Koester, L., 1976, Verification of the equivalence of gravitational 
and inertial mass for the neutron, Physical Review D, 
Volume 14, pages 907-909.
Kormendy, J., 1987, Dark matter in dwarf galaxies, in Dark 
Matter in the Universe, edited by J. Kormendy and G. R. 
Knapp, pages 139-152, D. Reidel Publishing Company, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Kostro, L., 2000, Einstein and the ether, Apeiron, Montreal.
Koyre, A., 1968, Newtonian studies, University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago.
Krafft, C. F., 1945, Ether and matter, The Dietz Printing 
Company, Richmond, Virginia.
Kragh, H., 1989, The aether in late nineteenth century 
chemistry, Ambix, Volume 36, pages 49-65.
Kragh, H., 2002, The vortex atom: a Victorian theory of 
everything, Centaurus, Volume 44, pages 32-114.
Krauss, L. M., 1986, Dark matter in the Universe, Scientific 
American, Volume 255, November, pages 58-68.
Krauss, L. M., M. Srednicki, and F. Wilczek, 1986, Solar system 
constraints and signatures for dark-matter candidates, 
Physical Review D, Volume 33, pages 2079-2083.
Krauss, L. M., 1999, The new cosmology and dark matter, in 
The Identification of Dark Matter, edited by N. J. C. 
Spooner and V. Kudryavtsev, pages 1-12, World Scientific, 
Singapore.
Krauss, L. M., 2000, Quintessence: the mystery of the missing 
mass in the Universe, BasicBooks, New York.
Kreuzer, L. B., 1968, Experimental measurement of the 
equivalence of active and passive gravitational mass, The 
Physical Review, Volume 169, pages 1007-1012.
157

Kriele, M., 1999, Spacetime: foundations of general relativity 
and differential geometry, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Kuroda, K., and H. Hirakawa, 1985, Experimental test of the 
law of gravitation, Physical Review D, Volume 32, pages 
342-346.
Lamb, H., 1879 (1945), Hydrodynamics, 6th Edition, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Lambourne, R. J. A., 2010, Relativity, gravitation and 
cosmology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Lange, L., 1886, Die geschichtliche Entwicklung des 
Bewegungsbegriff und ihr vorausschich-liches 
Endergebnis, W. Engelmann, Leipzig.
Larmor, J., 1920a (1991), The relativity of the forces of nature, in 
Matter and Motion, by J. C. Maxwell, Appendix I, pages 
137-144, Dover Publications, New York.
Larmer, J., 1920b, Gravitation and light, Proceedings of the 
Cambridge Philosophical Society, Volume 19, pages 
324-344.
Lawden, D. F., 1962 (1986), An introduction to tensor calculus, 
relativity and cosmology, 3rd Edition, John Wiley & Sons, 
New York.
Le Verrier, U.-J. J., 1859a, Theorie du mouvement de Mercure, 
Annales de l’ Observatoire Imperial de Paris, Volume 5, 
pages 1-196.
Le Verrier, U. J. J., 1859b, Lettre de M. Le Verrier a M. Faye sur 
la theorie de Mercure et sur le mouvement du perihelie de 
cette planete, Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des 
Seances de l’Academie des Sciences, Volume 49, pages 
379-383.
Li, W.-H., and S.-H. Lam, 1964, Principles of fluid mechanics, 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, 
Massachusetts.
Lichnerowicz, A., 1955, Theories relativistes de la gravitation et 
de l’electromagnetisme: relativite generale et theories 
unitaires, Masson & Cie., Paris.
Lichtenegger, H., and B. Mashhoon, 2008, Mach's principle, 
arXiv:physics/0407078v2 [physics.hist-ph] 31 Mar 2008, 20 
pages.
Lieber, L. R., 2008, The Einstein theory of relativity: a trip to the 
fourth dimension, Paul Dry Books, Philadelphia.
158

Lightman, A. P., 1981, The equivalence principle as a 
foundation for gravitation theories, in After Einstein: 
Proceedings of the Einstein Centennial Celebration at 
Memphis State University, 14-16 March 1979, edited by P 
Barker and C. G. Shugart, pages 57-65, Memphis State 
University Press, Memphis.
Lo, K.-H., K. Young, and B. Y. P Lee, 2013, Advance of 
perihelion, American Journal of Physics, Volume 81, pages 
695-702.
Lodge, O., 1889a, Mass and inertia, Nature, Volume 39, pages 
270-271.
Lodge, O., 1898, On the question of absolute velocity and on the 
mechanical function of an aether, with some remarks on 
the pressure of radiation, The London, Edinburgh, and 
Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, 
Series 5, Volume 46, pages 414-426.
Lodge, O., 1907a, The structure of the ether, Nature, Volume 76, 
page 126.
Lodge, O., 1907b, Modern views of the ether, Nature, Volume 
75, pages 519-522.
Lodge, O., 1907c, The density of the aether, The London, 
Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and 
Journal of Science, Series 6, Volume 13, pages 488-506.
Lodge, O., 1907d, The density of the aether, Science, Volume 26, 
pages 482-483.
Lodge, O., 1908, The ether of space, Address to the Royal 
Institution of Great Britain on February 21, 1908, The 
North American Review, Volume 187, pages 724-736.
Lodge, O., 1909, The ether of space, Harper & Brothers, 
London.
Lodge, O., 1914, Continuity: the Presidential Address to the 
British Association for 1913, G. P Putnam’s Sons, New 
York.
Lodge, O., 1919a, Aether and matter: being remarks on inertia, 
and on radiation, and on the possible structure of atoms, 
Part I. — Inertia, Nature, Volume 104, pages 15-19.
Lodge, O., 1919b, Aether and matter: being remarks on inertia, 
and on radiation, and on the possible structure of atoms, 
Part II. — The possible structure of atoms and their 
radiation, Nature, Volume 104, pages 82-87.
Lodge, O., 1919d, On a possible means of determining the two 
characteristic constants of the aether of space, The London, 
Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and 
Journal of Science, Series 6, Volume 37, pages 465-471.
Lodge, O., 1920, Note on a possible structure for the ether, The 
London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine 
and Journal of Science, Series 6, Volume 39, pages 170-174.
159

Lodge, O., 1925a, Ether & reality: a series of discourses on the 
many functions of the ether of space, George H. Doran 
Company, New York.
Lodge, O., 1925b, Hypothesis about push or contact force, 
Nature, Volume 116, pages 869-871.
Lodge, O., 1928, The nature of matter, and its relation to the 
ether of space, Science Progress in the Twentieth Century, 
Volume 22, pages 435-443.
Longair, M. S., 2003, Theoretical concepts in physics: an 
alternative view of theoretical reasoning in physics, 2nd 
Edition, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Lorentz, H. A., 1917, On Einstein's theory of gravitation, I, 
Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam 
(Proceedings of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts 
and Sciences of Amsterdam), Volume 19, pages 1341-1354.
Ludvigsen, M., 1999, General relativity: a geometric approach, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Mach, E., 1883, 1901 (1974), The science of mechanics: a critical 
and historical account of its development, 9th Edition, The 
Open Court Publishing Company, La Salle, Illinois.
Magnan, C., 2007, Complete calculations of the perihelion 
precession of Mercury and the deflection of light by the 
Sun in general relativity, arXiv:0712.3709v1 [gr-qc] 21 Dec 
2007.
Malvern, L. E., 1969, Introduction to the mechanics of a 
continuous medium, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 
New Jersey.
Marshall, J. S., 2001, Inviscid incompressible flow, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York.
Martin, J. L., 1988a, General relativity: a guide to its 
consequences for gravity and cosmology, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York.
Martin, J. L., 1988b (1996), General relativity: a first course for 
physicists, Prentice-Hall, London.
Martinez, A. A., 2005, Conventions and inertial reference 
frames, American Journal of Physics, Volume 73, pages 
452-454.
Marzke, R. F., and J. A. Wheeler, 1964, Gravitation as geometry: 
I. The geometry of space-time and the geometrodynamical 
standard meter, in Gravitation and Relativity, edited by H- 
Y. Chiu and W. F. Hoffmann, pages 40-64, W. A. Benjamin, 
New York.
Masse, R. P., 2022, Physics: nature of physical fields and forces, 
15th Edition, Kindle, Retrieved from Amazon.com.
160

Maxwell, J. C., 1855, On Faraday’s lines of force, Transactions of 
the Cambridge Philosophical Society, Volume 10, pages 
27-83.
Maxwell, J. C., 1861a, On physical lines of force: Part I, The 
theory of molecular vortices applied to magnetic 
phenomena, The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin 
Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, Series 4, 
Volume 21, pages 161-175.
Maxwell, J. C., 1861b, On physical lines of force: Part II, The 
theory of molecular vortices applied to electric currents, 
The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical 
Magazine and Journal of Science, Series 4, Volume 21, 
pages 281-291.
Maxwell, J. C., 1877 (1991), Matter and motion, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Maxwell, J. C., 1878, Ether, in Encyclopaedia Britannica, 9th 
Edition, Volume 8, pages 568-572, London.
Mazilu, P., 1992, Missing link in the theory of gravity 
interaction, in Proceedings of the Sixth Marcel Grossmann 
Meeting on Recent Developments in Theoretical and 
Experimental General Relativity, Gravitation and 
Relativistic Field Theories, Kyoto, Japan, June 1991, edited 
by H. Sato and T. Nakamura, pages 730-732, World 
Scientific Publishing Company, Singapore.
McCrea, W. H., 1971, Doubts about Mach’s principle, Nature, 
Volume 230, pages 95-97.
McLaren, S. B., 1913, A theory of gravity, The London, 
Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and 
Journal of Science, Series 6, Volume 26, pages 636-673.
McMullin, E., 2002, The origins of the field concept in physics, 
Physics in Perspective, Volume 4, pages 13-39.
McVittie, G. C., 1956 (1965), General relativity and cosmology, 
2nd Edition, The University of Illinois Press, Urbana.
Milgrom, M., 1983a, A modification of the Newtonian dynamics 
as a possible alternative to the hidden mass hypothesis, 
The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 270, pages 365-370.
Milgrom, M., 1983b, A modification of the Newtonian 
dynamics: implications for galaxies, The Astrophysical 
Journal, Volume 270, pages 371-383.
Milgrom, M., 1983c, A modification of Newtonian dynamics: 
implications for galactic systems, The Astrophysical 
Journal, Volume 270, pages 384-389.
Milgrom, M., and J. Bekenstein, 1987, The modified Newtonian 
dynamics as an alternative to hidden matter, in Dark 
Matter in the Universe, edited by J. Kormendy and G. R. 
Knapp, pages 319-333, D. Reidel Publishing Company, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
161

Milgrom, M., 1989, Alternatives to dark matter, Comments on 
Astrophysics and Space Physics, Volume 13, pages 
215-230.
Milgrom, M., 2002a, Does dark matter really exist?, Scientific 
American, Volume 287, August, pages 42-52.
Milgrom, M., 2002b, MOND - theoretical aspects, New 
Astronomy Review, Volume 46, pages 741-753.
Minkowski, H., 1908, Space and time, Address delivered at the 
80th Assembly of German Natural Scientists and 
Physicians, at Cologne, 21 September 1908, (see English 
translation in Lorentz et al., 1923, pages 75-91).
Minkowski, H., 1909, Raum und Zeit, Physikalische Zeitschrift, 
Volume 10, pages 104-111.
Misner, C. W., K. S. Thorne, and J. A. Wheeler, 1970 (1973), 
Gravitation, W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
Moon, P., and D. E. Spencer, 1959, Mach’s principle, Philosophy 
of Science, Volume 26, pages 125-134.
Moore, T. A., 2013, A general relativity workbook, University 
Science Books, Mill Valley, California.
Morris, R., 1993, Cosmic questions: galactic halos, cold dark 
matter and the end of time, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Morrison, D., and H. A. Hill, 1973, Current uncertainty in the 
ratio of active-to-passive gravitational mass, Physical 
Review D, Volume 8, pages 2731-2733.
Morton, D. C., 1956, Notes and Queries - Relativistic advances 
of perihelion, Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society of 
Canada, Volume 50, page 223.
Munson, B. R., D. F. Young, and T. H. Okiishi, 1990 (1998), 
Fundamentals of fluid mechanics, 3rd Edition, John Wiley 
& Sons, New York.
Murnaghan F. D., 1921b, The quest of the absolute: modern 
developments in theoretical physics, and the climax 
supplied by Einstein, in Einstein's Theories of Relativity 
and Gravitation, edited by J. M. Bird, pages 276-286, 
Scientific American Publishing Company, Munn & 
Company, New York.
Narlikar, J. V., 1979, Lectures on general relativity and 
cosmology, The Macmillan Press, London.
Narlikar, J. V., 1982, The lighter side of gravity, W. H. Freeman 
and Company, San Francisco.
Narlikar, J. V., and N. C. Rana, 1985, Newtonian N-body 
calculations of the advance of Mercury’s perihelion, 
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 
Volume 213, pages 657-663.
162

Narlikar, J. V., 2010, An introduction to relativity, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Narlikar, V. V., 1939, The concept and determination of mass in 
Newtonian mechanics, The London, Edinburgh, and 
Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, 
Series 7, Volume 27, pages 33-36.
Navarro, J., 2021, Killed by its own obituaries: explaining the 
demise of the ether, Science in Context, Volume 34, Pages 
209-225.
Nercessian, N. J., 1985, Faraday's field concept, in Faraday 
rediscovered: essays on the life and work of Michael 
Faraday, 1791-1867, edited by D. Gooding and F. A. J. L. 
James, pages 174-187, Stockton Press, New York.
Newcomb, S., 1882, Discussion and results of observations on 
transits of Mercury from 1677 to 1881, Astronomical 
Papers of the American Ephemeris Nautical Almanac, 
Volume 1, pages 367-487, U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, D.C.
Newton, I., 1687, Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica, 
1st Edition, Streater, London.
Newton, I., 1726 (1995), The principia, 3rd Edition, Prometheus 
Books, Amherst, New York.
Newton, I., 1687 (1952), Mathematical principles of natural 
philosophy, in Great Books of the Western World, Volume 
34, edited by R. M. Hutchins, pages 1-372, Encyclopedia 
Britannica, London.
Newton, I., 1693a (1961), Letter from Newton to chaplain 
Richard Bentley, 17 January 1693, in The Correspondence 
of Isaac Newton, Volume III, pages 238-241, edited by H. 
W. Turnbull, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Newton, I., 1693b (1961), Letter from Newton to chaplain 
Richard Bentley, 25 February 1693, in The Correspondence 
of Isaac Newton, Volume III, pages 253-256, edited by H. 
W. Turnbull, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Newton, I., 1730 (1979), Opticks or a treatise of the reflections, 
refractions, inflections & colours of light, 4th Edition, 
Dover Publications, New York.
Newton, I., 1730 (1952), Optics, in Great Books of the Western 
World, Volume 34, edited by R. M. Hutchins, pages 
373-544, Encyclopedia Britannica, London.
Ni, W.-T., 2015, A genesis of general relativity - a concise 
exposition, in One Hundred Years of General Relativity: 
from Genesis and Empirical Foundations to Gravitational 
Waves, Cosmology and Quantum Gravity, Volume 1, 
pages 85-108, edited by W.-T. Ni, World Scientific, 
Singapore.
163

Nieto, M. M., and T. Goldman, 1991, The arguments against 
“antigravity” and the gravitational acceleration of 
antimatter, Physics Reports, Volume 205, pages 221-281.
Nipher, F. E., 1891, The ether, Science, Volume 18, pages 
119-122.
Nobili, A. M., and C. M. Will, 1986, The real value of Mercury’s 
perhelion advance, Nature, Volume 320, pages 39-41.
Noll, W., 1957, On the rotation of an incompressible continuous 
medium in plane motion, Quarterly of Applied 
Mathematics, Volume 15, pages 317-319.
Nordstrom, G., 1912, Relativitataprinzip und Gravitation, 
Physikalische Zeitschrift, Volume 13, pages 1126-1129.
Nordtvedt, K., Jr., 1970, Solar system Eotvos experiments, 
Icarus, Volume 12, pages 91-100.
North, R. D., 1994, Mercury’s perihelion precession, precisely, 
Physics Today, Volume 47, May, page 13.
Norton, J. D., 1989, What was Einstein’s principle of 
equivalence?, in Einstein and the History of General 
Relativity, edited by D. Howard and J. Stachel, pages 5-47, 
Birkhauser, Boston.
Norton, J. D., 1995, Mach’s principle before Einstein, in Mach’s 
Principle: from Newton’s Bucket to Quantum Gravity, 
edited by J. B. Barbour and H. Pfister, pages 9-57, 
Birkhauser, Boston.
Norton, J. D., 1999, The cosmological woes of Newtonian 
gravitation theory, in The Expanding Worlds of General 
Relativity, edited by H. Goenner, J. Renn, J. Ritter, and T. 
Sauer, pages 271-323, Birkhauser, Berlin.
Ockendon, H., and A. B. Tayler, 1983, Inviscid Fluid Flows, 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Ogawa, Y., K. Tsubono, and H. Hirakawa, 1982, Experimental 
test of the law of gravitation, Physical Review D, Volume 
26, pages 729-734.
Ohanion, H. C., and R. Ruffini, 1976 (1994), Gravitation and 
spacetime, 2nd Edition, W. W. Norton & Company, New 
York.
Ohanian, H. C., 1977, What is the principle of equivalence?, 
American Journal of Physics, Volume 45, pages 903-909.
Okun, L. B., 1989, The concept of mass, Physics Today, Volume 
42, June, pages 31-36.
Oort, J. H., 1932, The force exerted by the stellar system in the 
direction perpendicular to the galactic plane and some 
related problems, Bulletin of the Astronomical Institutes of 
the Netherlands, Volume 6, pages 249-287.
164

Ostriker, J. P., P J. E. Peebles, and A. Yahil, 1974, The size and 
mass of galaxies and the mass of the Universe, The 
Astrophysical Journal, Volume 193, pages L1-L4.
Ostriker, J. P, and S. Mitton, 2013, Heart of darkness: 
unraveling the mysteries of the invisible Universe, 
Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Padmanabhan, T., 2010, Gravitation: foundations and frontiers, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Pais, A., 1982 (1983), ‘Subtle is the Lord . . . ’: the science and the 
life of Albert Einstein, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Pais, A., 1986, Inward bound: of matter and forces in the 
physical world, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Panek, R., 2011, The 4 percent Universe: dark matter, dark 
energy, and the race to discover the rest of reality, 
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, Boston.
Panton, R. L., 1984, Incompressible flow, John Wiley & Sons, 
New York.
Papapetrou, A., 1974, Lectures on general relativity, D. Reidel 
Publishing Company, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Park, R. S., W. M. Folkner, A. S. Konopliv, J. G. Williams, D. E. 
Smith, and M. T. Zuber, 2017, Precession of Mercury’s 
perihelion from ranging to the MESSENGER spacecraft, 
The Astronomical Journal 153:121, 7 pages.
Parker, B., 1989, Invisible matter and the fate of the Universe, 
Plenum Press, New York.
Pathria, R. K., 1963 (2003), The theory of relativity, 2nd Edition, 
Dover Publications, New York.
Pauli, W., 1920, Relativitatstheorie, in Encyklopadie der 
Mathematischen Wissenschaften mit Einschluss ihrer 
Anwendungen, Volume 5, edited by A. Sommerfeld, pages 
543-775.
Pauli, W., 1921 (1981), Theory of relativity, Dover Publications, 
New York.
Pearson, K., 1891, Ether squirts, American Journal of 
mathematics, Volume 13, pages 309-362.
Pendse, C. G., 1937, A note on the definition and determination 
of mass in Newtonian mechanics, The London, Edinburgh, 
and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of 
Science, Series 7, Volume 24, pages 1012-1022.
Pendse, C. G., 1939, A further note on the definition and 
determination of mass in Newtonian mechanics, The 
London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine 
and Journal of Science, Series 7, Volume 27, pages 51-61.
Pendse, C. G., 1940, On mass and force in Newtonian 
mechanics - addendum to “mass I” and “mass II”, The 
London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine 
and Journal of Science, Series 7, Volume 29, pages 477-484.
165

Perlmutter, S., S. Gabi, G. Goldhaber, A. Goobar, D. E. Groom, I. 
M. Hook, A. G. Kim, M. Y. Kim, J. C. Lee, R. Pain, C. R. 
Pennypacker, I. A. Small, R. S. Ellis, R. G. McMahon, B. J. 
Boyle, P S. Bunclark, D. Carter, M. J. Irwin, K. Glazebrook, 
H. J. M. Newberg, A. V. Filippenko, T. Matheson, M. 
Dopita, and W. J. Couch, 1997, Measurements of the 
cosmological parameters Q and A from the first seven 
supernovae at z > 0.35, The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 
483, pages 565-581.
Perlmutter, S., 2003, Dark energy: recent observations and 
future prospects, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society A, Volume 361, pages 2469-2478.
Perrin, J., 1941, Relativite, Hermann and Company, Paris.
Pirani, F. A. E., 1955, On the perihelion motion according to 
Littlewood’s equations, Proceedings of the Cambridge 
Philosophical Society, Volume 51, pages 535-537.
Pirani, F. A. E., 1956, On the definition of inertial systems in 
general relativity, in Jubilee of Relativity Theory, Bern, 
11-16 July 1955, edited by A. Mercier and M. Kervaire, 
pages 198-203, Birkhauser Verlag, Basel.
Pireaux, S., and J.-P Rozelot, 2003, Solar quadrupole moment 
and purely relativistic gravitation contributions to 
Mercury’s perihelion advance, Astrophysics and Space 
Science, Volume 284, pages 1159-1194.
Pitjeva, E. V., 2005, Relativistic effects and solar oblateness from 
radar observations of planets and spacecraft, Astronomy 
Letters, Volume 31, pages 340-349.
Plebanski, J., and A. Krasinski, 2006, An introduction to general 
relativity and cosmology, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge.
Poincare, H., 1905a, Sur la dynamique de l’electron, Comptes 
Rendus Hebdomadaires des Seances de l’Academie des 
Sciences, Volume 140, pages 1504-1508.
Poincare, H., 1905b (1952), Science and hypothesis, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Poisson, S. D., 1813, Remarques sur une equation qui se 
presente dans la theorie de l’attraction des spheroides, 
Nouveau Bulletin par la Societe philomathique de Paris, 
Volume 3, pages 388-392.
Polarski, D., 2011, Dark energy, Journal of Physics: Conference 
Series, Volume 283, 012029.
Potter, H. H., 1923, Some experiments on the proportionality of 
mass and weight, Proceedings of the Royal Society of 
London, Series A, Containing Papers of a Mathematical 
and Physical Character, Volume 104, pages 588-610.
Prescod-Weinstein, C., 2021, The disordered cosmos: a journey 
into dark matter, spacetime, and dreams deferred, Bold 
Type, New York.
166

Preston, S. T., 1875, Physics of the ether, E. & F. N. Spon, 
London.
Ramsey, A. S., 1929 (1946), Dynamics, Part 1, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Ramsey, A. S., 1940 (1964), An introduction to the theory of 
Newtonian attraction, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge.
Rana, N. C., 1987, An investigation of the motions of the node 
and perihelion of Mercury, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 
Volume 181, pages 195-202.
Rasmussen, E., 1958, Matter and gravity: logic applied to 
physics in a common-sense approach to the classical ether 
theory, Exposition Press, New York.
Rastall, P., 1991, Gravitation for physicists and astronomers, 
World Scientific Publishing Company, Singapore.
Rees, M. J., 1986, What is the dark matter in galactic halos and 
clusters?, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
of London, Series A, Volume 320, pages 573-583.
Rees, M. J., and P Natarajan, 2003, A field guide to the invisible 
Universe, Discover, Volume 24, December, pages 42-49.
Richard, J.-P, 1975, Tests of theories of gravity in the solar 
system, in General Relativity and Gravitation: Proceedings 
of the Seventh International Conference (GR7), Tel-Aviv 
University, June 23-28, 1974, edited by G. Shaviv and J. 
Rosen, pages 169-188, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Riemann, B., 1853 (1953), Neue mathematische Prinzipien der 
Naturphilosophie, in Gesammelte mathematische Werke, 
2nd Edition, edited by H. Weber, pages 526-538, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Riess, A. G., A. V. Filippenko, P Challis, A. Clocchiatti, A. 
Diercks, P M. Garnavich, R. L. Gilliland, C. J. Hogan, S. 
Jha, R. P Kirshner, B. Leibundgut, M. M. Philips, D. Reiss, 
B. P Schmidt, R. A. Schommer, R. C. Smith, J. Spyromilio, 
C. Stubbs, N. B. Suntzeff, and J. Tonry, 1998, Observational 
evidence from supernovae for an accelerating Universe 
and a cosmological constant, The Astronomical Journal, 
Volume 116, pages 1009-1038.
Rindler, W., 1969 (1977), Essential relativity: special, general, 
and cosmological, 2nd Edition, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Rindler, W., 2001, Relativity: special, general, and cosmological, 
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Riordan, M., and D. N. Schramm, 1991, The shadows of 
creation: dark matter and the structure of the Universe, W. 
H. Freeman and Company, New York.
167

Roberts, M. S., and A. H. Rots, 1973, Comparison of rotation 
curves of different galaxy types, Astronomy and 
Astrophysics, Volume 26, pages 483-485.
Roberts, M. S., 1976, The rotation curves of galaxies, Comments 
on Astrophysics and Space Physics, Volume 6, pages 
105-111.
Robertson, J. M., 1965, Hydrodynamics in theory and 
application, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Roche, J., 1988, Newton’s Principia, in Let Newton be!, edited 
by J. Fauvel, R. Flood, M. Shortland, and R. Wilson, pages 
42-61, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Roche, J., 2005, What is mass?, European Journal of Physics, 
Volume 26, pages 225-242.
Rogstad, D. H., 1971, Aperture synthesis study of neutral 
hydrogen in the galaxy M 101, Astronomy and 
Astrophysics, Volume 13, pages 108-115.
Rogstad, D. H., and G. S. Shostak, 1972, Gross properties of five 
Scd galaxies as determined from 21 centimeter 
observations, The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 176, 
pages 315-321.
Roll, P. G., R. Krotkov, and R. H. Dicke, 1964, The equivalence 
of inertial and passive gravitational mass, Annals of 
Physics (New York), Volume 26, pages 442-517.
Rosenfeld, L., 1969, Newton’s views on aether and gravitation, 
Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Volume 6, pages 
29-37.
Roseveare, N. T., 1982, Mercury’s perihelion: from Le Verrier to 
Einstein, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Rothman, M. A., 1972 (1989), Discovering the natural laws: the 
experimental basis of physics, Dover Publications, New 
York.
Rougier, L., 1921, Philosophy and the new physics: an essay on 
the relativity theory and the theory of quanta, P. 
Blakiston’s Son & Company, Philadelphia.
Rubin, V. C., and W. K. Ford, 1970, Rotation of the Andromeda 
nebula from a spectroscopic survey of emission regions, 
The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 159, pages 379-403.
Rubin, V. C., 1979, Extended optical-rotation curves of spiral 
galaxies, Comments on Astrophysics and Space Physics, 
Volume 8, pages 79-88.
Rubin, V. C., W. K. Ford, Jr., and N. Thonnard, 1980, Rotational 
properties of 21 Sc galaxies with a large range of 
luminosities and radii, from NGC 4605 (R=4 kpc) to UGC 
2885 (R=122 kpc), The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 238, 
pages 471-487.
168

Rubin, V. C., 1983a, Dark matter in spiral galaxies, Scientific 
American, Volume 248, June, pages 96-108.
Rubin, V. C., 1983b, The rotation of spiral galaxies, Science, 
Volume 220, pages 1339-1344.
Rubin, V. C., D. Burstein, W. K. Ford, Jr., and N. Thonnard, 
1985, Rotation velocities of 16 Sa galaxies and a 
comparison of Sa, Sb, and Sc rotation properties, The 
Astrophysical Journal, Volume 289, pages 81-104.
Rubin, V. C., 1987, Constraints on dark matter properties from 
optical rotation curves, in Dark Matter in the Universe, 
edited by J. Kormendy and G. R. Knapp, pages 51-65, D. 
Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Rucker, R. von B., 1977, Geometry, relativity and the fourth 
dimension, Dover Publications, New York.
Ruiz-Lapuente, P., 2010, Dark energy and supernovae, in Dark 
energy: observational and theoretical approaches, edited 
by P Ruiz-Lapuente, pages 177-201, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge.
Ryder, L. H., 2009, Introduction to general relativity, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Rynasiewicz, R., 2000, On the distinction between absolute and 
relative motion, Philosophy of Science, Volume 67, pages 
70-93.
Sachs, M., 1971, The search for a theory of matter, McGraw-Hill 
Book Company, New York.
Sachs, R. K., and H. Wu, 1977, General relativity and 
cosmology, Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 
Volume 83, pages 1101-1164.
Sampson, R. A., 1920, On gravitation and relativity, Oxford 
University Press, Oxford.
Sancisi, R., and T. S. van Albada, 1987, HI rotation curves of 
galaxies, in Dark Matter in the Universe, edited by J. 
Kormendy and G. R. Knapp, pages 67-81, D. Reidel 
Publishing Company, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Sanders, R. H., 1984, Anti-gravity and galaxy rotation curves, 
Astronomy and Astrophysics, Volume 136, pages L21-L23.
Sanders, R. H., 1991, Mass discrepancies in galaxies: dark 
matter and alternatives, The Astronomy and Astrophysics 
Review, Volume 2, pages 1-28.
Sanders, R. H., and S. S. McGaugh, 2002, Modified Newtonian 
dynamics as an alternative to dark matter, Annual Review 
of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Volume 40, pages 
263-317.
Sanders, R. H., 2010, The dark matter problem: a historical 
perspective, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
169

Saunders, S, and H. R. Brown, 1991, Reflections on ether, in The 
Philosophy of Vacuum, edited by S. Saunders and H. R. 
Brown, pages 27-63, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Schaffner, K. F., 1972, Nineteenth-century aether theories, 
Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Schiff, L. I., 1960a, Motion of a gyroscope according to 
Einstein’s theory of gravitation, Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, Volume 46, pages 871-882.
Schiff, L. I., 1960b, Possible new experimental test of general 
relativity theory, Physical Review Letters, Volume 4, pages 
215-217.
Schiff, L. I., 1960c, On experimental tests of the general theory 
of relativity, American Journal of Physics, Volume 28, 
pages 340-343.
Schild, A., 1962b, The principle of equivalence, The Monist, 
Volume 47, pages 20-39.
Schild, A., 1967, Lectures on general relativity theory, in 
Relativity Theory and Astrophysics: 1. Relativity and 
Cosmology, edited by J. Ehlers, pages 1-104, American 
Mathematical Society, Providence, Rhode Island.
Schmiedmayer, J., 1989, The equivalence of the gravitational 
and inertial mass of the neutron, Nuclear Instruments and 
Methods in Physics Research, Volume A284, pages 59-62.
Schutz, B. F., 1985 (2009), A first course in general relativity, 2nd 
Edition, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Schutz, B., 2003, Gravity from the ground up, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Schwarzschild, K., 1916a, Uber das Gravitationsfeld eines 
Massenpunktes nach der Einsteinschen Theorie, 
Sitzungsberichte der Koniglich Preufiischen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften zu Berlin, Volume 1, pages 189-196.
Schwarzschild, K., 1916b, Uber das Gravitationsfeld einer 
Kugel aus inkompressibler Flussigkeit nach der 
Einsteinschen Theorie, Sitzungsberichte der Koniglich 
Preufiischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, 
pages 424-434.
Schwebel, S. L., 1970, Mach’s principle and Newtonian 
mechanics, International Journal of Theoretical Physics, 
Volume 3, pages 145-152.
Sciama, D. W., 1953, On the origin of inertia, Monthly Notices 
of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 113, pages 
34-42.
Sciama, D. W., 1957, Inertia, Scientific American, Volume 196, 
February, pages 99-109.
170

Sciama, D. W., 1969, The physical foundations of general 
relativity, Doubleday & Company, Garden City, New York.
Sciama, D. W., 1993, Modern cosmology and the dark matter 
problem, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Sears, V. F., 1982, On the verification of the universality of free 
fall by neutron gravity refractometry, Physical Review D, 
Volume 25, pages 2023-2029.
Seeliger, H., 1895, Ueber das Newton’sche Gravitationsgesetz, 
Astronomische Nachrichten, Volume 137, pages 129-136.
Seeliger, H., 1896, Uber das Newton’sche Gravitationsgesetz, 
Sitzungsberichte der Mathematisch-Physikalischen Classe 
der Konglich Bayrischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu 
Munchen, Volume 26, pages 373-400.
Seeliger, H., 1906, Das Zodiakallicht und die empirischen 
Gleider in der Bewegung der innern Planeten, 
Sitzungsberichte der Mathematisch- 
naturwissenschaftlichen Klasse der Bayerischen Akademie 
der Wissenschaften zu Munichen, Volume 36, pages 
595-622.
Seeliger, H., 1909, Sur d’application des lors de la nature a 
l’univers, Scientia, Volume 6, Supplement, pages 89-107.
Seeliger, H., 1915, Uber die Anomalien in der Bewegung der 
innern Planeten, Astronomische Nachrichten, Volume 201, 
273-280.
Segel, L. A., 1977 (1987), Mathematics applied to continuum 
mechanics, Dover Publications, New York.
Shakeshaft, J. R., 1979, Astronomical tests of general relativity, 
The Observatory, Volume 99, pages 122-123.
Shames, I. H., 1962, Mechanics of fluids, McGraw-Hill Book 
Company, New York.
Shapiro, I. I., G. H. Pettingill, M. E. Ash, R. P. Ingalls, D. B. 
Campbell, and R. B. Dyce, 1972, Mercury’s perihelion 
advance: determination by radar, Physical Review Letters, 
Volume 28, pages 1594-1597.
Shapiro, I. I., C. C. Counselman III, and R. W. King, 1976, 
Verification of the principle of equivalence for massive 
bodies, Physical Review Letters, Volume 36, pages 
555-558.
Shapiro, I. I., 1980a, Experimental tests of the general theory of 
relativity, in General Relativity and Gravitation: One 
Hundred Years after the Birth of Albert Einstein, edited by 
A. Held, Volume 2, pages 469-489, Plenum Press, New 
York.
171

Shapiro, I. I., 1980b, Experimental challenges posed by the 
general theory of relativity, in Some Strangeness in the 
Proportion: a Centennial Symposium to Celebrate the 
Achievements of Albert Einstein, edited by H. Woolf, 
pages 115-136, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 
Reading, Massachusetts.
Shapiro, I. I., 1990, Solar system tests of general relativity: 
recent results and present plans, in General Relativity and 
Gravitation, 1989, Proceedings of the 12th International 
Conference on General Relativity and Gravitation, edited 
by N. Ashby, D. F. Bartlett, and W. Wyss, pages 313-330, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Siegel, D. M., 1981, Thomson, Maxwell, and the universal ether 
in Victorian physics, in Conceptions of Ether: Studies in 
the History of Ether Theories 1740-1900, edited by G. N. 
Cantor and M. J. S. Hodge, pages 239-268, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Silberstein, L., 1922, The theory of general relativity and 
gravitation, D. Van Nostrand Company, New York.
Smart, J. J. C., 1952, The concept of force, The Australian Journal 
of Philosophy, Volume 30, pages 124-130.
Smart, W. M., 1921, On the motion of the perihelion of Mercury, 
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 
Volume 82, pages 12-19.
Smith, S., 1936, The mass of the Virgo cluster, The Astrophysical 
Journal, Volume 83, pages 23-30.
Snow, A. J., 1926 (1975), Matter and gravity in Newton’s 
physical philosophy: a study in the natural philosophy of 
Newton’s time, Arno Press, New York.
Sommerfeld, A., 1942a (1964), Mechanics: lectures on theoretical 
physics, Volume I, Academic Press, New York.
Sommerfeld, A., 1942b (1964), Mechanics of deformable bodies: 
lectures on theoretical physics, Volume II, Academic Press, 
New York.
Sommerfeld, A., 1942c (1964), Electrodynamics: lectures on 
theoretical physics, Volume III, Academic Press, New 
York.
Sommerfeld, A., 1942d (1964), Optics: lectures on theoretical 
physics, Volume IV, Academic Press, New York.
Southerns, L., 1910, A determination of the ratio of mass to 
weight for a radioactive substance, Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of London, Series A, Containing Papers of a 
Mathematical and Physical Character, Volume 84, pages 
325-344.
Spolter, P., 1993, Gravitational force of the Sun, Orb Publishing 
Company, Granada Hills, California.
172

Stacey, F. D., and G. J. Tuck, 1981, Geophysical evidence for 
non-Newtonian gravity, Nature, Volume 292, pages 
230-232.
Stephani, H., 1977 (1990), General relativity: an introduction to 
the theory of the gravitational field, 2nd Edition, edited by 
J. Stewart, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Stephani, H., 1990, General relativity: an introduction to the 
theory of the gravitational field, 2nd Edition, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Stephani, H., 2004, Relativity: an introduction to special and 
general relativity, 3rd Edition, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge.
Stewart, J., 1990, Advanced general relativity, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Stewart, M. G., 2005, Precession of the perihelion of Mercury's 
orbit, American Journal of Physics, Volume 73, pages 
730-734.
Straumann, N., 1984, General relativity and relativistic 
astrophysics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Straumann, N., 2004, General relativity: with applications to 
astrophysics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Street, R. L., G. Z. Watters, and J. K. Vennard, 1940 (1996), 
Elementary fluid mechanics, 7th Edition, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York.
Streeter, V. L., and E. B. Wylie, 1985, Fluid Mechanics, 8th 
Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
Su, Y., B. R. Heckel, E. G. Adelberger, J. H. Gundlach, M. Harris, 
G. L. Smith, and H. E. Swanson, 1994, New tests of the 
universality of free fall, Physical Review D, Volume 50, 
pages 3614-3636.
Suppes, P., 1954, Descartes and the problem of action at a 
distance, Journal of the History of Ideas, Volume 15, pages 
146-152.
Synge, J. L., 1949, Gravitational field of a particle, Nature, 
Volume 164, pages 148-149.
Synge, J. L., 1960 (1964), Relativity: the general theory, North- 
Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam.
Synge, J. L., 1964, Introduction to general relativity, in 
Relativity, Groups and Topology, edited by C. DeWitt and 
B. S. DeWitt, pages 1-88, Gordon and Breach, Science 
Publishers, New York.
Talcott, R., 2005, Newton and Einstein: Mercury’s odd motion, 
in Relativity’s Infinite Beauty by J. Trefil, Astronomy, 
Volume 33, pages 46-53.
173

Taylor, A., 2008, The dark Universe, in On Space and Time, 
edited by S. Majid, pages 1-55, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge.
Thomson, J. J., 1884, On the law of inertia; the principle of 
chronometry; and the principle of absolute clinural rest, 
and of absolute rotation, Proceedings of the Royal Society 
of Edinburgh, Volume 12, pages 568-578.
Thomson, J. J., 1904, Electricity and matter, Yale University 
Press, New Haven, Connecticut.
Thomson, J. J., 1909, President’s address, Report of the British 
Association for the Advancement of Science, pages 3-29.
Thomson, W. (Lord Kelvin), 1901, Nineteenth century clouds 
over the dynamical theory of heat and light, The London, 
Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and 
Journal of Science, Series 6, Volume 2, pages 1-40.
Tohline, J. E., 1983, Stabilizing a cold disk with a 1/r force law, 
in Internal Kinematics and Dynamics of Galaxies, edited 
by E. Athanassoula, pages 205-206, D. Reidel Publishing 
Company, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Tokaty, G. A., 1971 (1994), A history and philosophy of fluid 
mechanics, Dover Publications, New York.
Tolman, R. C., 1917, The theory of the relativity of motion, 
University of California Press, Berkeley.
Tolman, R. C., 1934 (1987), Relativity, thermodynamics, and 
cosmology, Dover Publications, New York.
Torretti, R., 1983 (1996), Relativity and geometry, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Touboul, P, G. Metris, M. Rodrigues, Y. Andre, Q. Baghi, J. 
Berge, D. Boulanger, S. Bremer, P Carle, R. Chhun, B. 
Christophe, V. Cipolla, T. Damour, P Danto, H. Dittus, P 
Fayet, B. Foulon, C. Gageant, P.-Y. Guidotti, D. Hagedorn, 
E. Hardy, P.-A. Huynh, H. Inchauspe, P Kayser, S. Lala, C. 
Lammerzahl, L. Claus, V. Lebat, P Leseur, and F. Liorzou, 
2017, MICROSCOPE Mission; first results of space test of 
the equivalence principle, Physical Review Letters, 
Volume 119, 231101.
Tourrenc, P, 1992 (1997), Relativity and gravitation, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Trautman, A., 1964, Foundations and current problems of 
general relativity, in Lectures on General Relativity, 
Volume 1, edited by S. Deser and K. W. Ford, pages 1-248, 
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Treder, H.-J., 2002, Gravitational ether and Riemann’s theory of 
gravity, in Pushing Gravity: New Perspectives on Le 
Sage’s Theory of Gravitation, edited by M. R. Edwards, 
pages 279-283, Apeiron, Montreal.
174

Trefil, J., 1988, The dark side of the Universe: a scientist explores 
the mysteries of the cosmos, Charles Scribner’s Sons, New 
York.
Trefil, J., 1993, Dark matter, Smithsonian, Volume 24, June, 
pages 26-35.
Tremaine, S., 1987, A historical perspective on dark matter, in 
Dark Matter in the Universe, edited by J. Kormendy and 
G. R. Knapp, pages 547-549, D. Reidel Publishing 
Company, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Treschman, K. J., 2014a, Early astronomical tests of general 
relativity: the gravitational deflection of light, Asian 
Journal of Physics, Volume 23, pages 145-170.
Treschman, K. J., 2014b, Early astronomical tests of general 
relativity: the anomalous advance in the perihelion of 
Mercury and gravitational redshift, Asian Journal of 
Physics, Volume 23, pages 171-188.
Treschman, K. J., 2015, Recent astronomical tests of general 
relativity, International Journal of Physical Sciences, 
Volume 10, pages 90-105.
Trimble, V., 1987, Existence and nature of dark matter in the 
Universe, Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics, 
Volume 25, pages 425-472.
Trimble, V., 1988, Our cosmic horizons: the search for dark 
matter, Part II, Astronomy, March, pages 18-23.
Truesdell, C., 1954, The kinematics of vorticity, Indiana 
University Publications Science Series No. 19, Indiana 
University Press, Bloomington, Indiana.
Tsuboi, C., 1979 (1983), Gravity, George Allen & Unwin, 
London.
Tucker, W., and K. Tucker, 1988, The dark matter: contemporary 
science’s quest for the mass hidden in our Universe, 
William Morrow and Company, New York.
Turner, M. S., and D. Huterer, 2007, Cosmic acceleration, dark 
energy, and fundamental physics, Journal of the Physical 
Society of Japan, Volume 76, 111015.
Unzicker, A., 2013, The Higgs fake: how particle physicists 
fooled the Nobel committee, Kindle, Retrieved from 
Amazon.com.
Uzan, J.-P., and B. Leclercq, 2005 (2008), The natural laws of the 
Universe: understanding fundamental constants, 
Springer/Praxis Publishing, Chichester, England.
Uzan, J.-P., 2010, Dark energy, gravitation and the Copernician 
principle, in Dark energy: observational and theoretical 
approaches, edited by P Ruiz-Lapuente, pages 3-47, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
175

van Albada, T. S., and R. Sancisi, 1986, Dark matter in spiral 
galaxies, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London, Series A, Volume 320, pages 447-464.
Vankov, A. A., 2010, General relativity problem of Mercury’s 
advance revisited, arXiv:1008.1811v1 [physics.gen-ph] 10 
Aug 2010.
Veltman, M. J. G., 1986, The Higgs boson, Scientific American, 
Volume 255, November, pages 76-84.
Vennard, J. K., and R. L. Street, 1940 (1982), Elementary fluid 
mechanics, 6th Edition, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Very, F. W., 1919, The luminiferous ether: I. Its relation to the 
electron and to a universal interstellar medium; II. Its 
relation to the atom, The Four Seas Company, Boston.
Vessot, R. F. C., 1984, Tests of gravitation and relativity, 
Contemporary Physics, Volume 25, pages 355-380.
Vizgin, V. P., and Ya. A. Smorodinskii, 1979, From the 
equivalence principle to the equations of gravitation, 
Soviet Physics Uspekhi, Volume 22, pages 489-513.
von Borzeszkowski, H.-H., and R. Wahsner, 1995, Mach’s 
criticism of Newton and Einstein’s reading of Mach: the 
stimulating role of two misunderstandings, in Mach’s 
Principle: from Newton’s Bucket to Quantum Gravity, 
edited by J. B. Barbour and H. Pfister, pages 58-66, 
Birkhauser, Boston.
von Eotvos, R., 1890, Uber die Anziehung der Erde auf 
verschiedene Substanzen, Mathematische und 
naturwissenschaftliche Berichte aus Ungarn, Volume 8, 
pages 65-103.
von Eotvos, R., D. Pekar, and E. Fekete, 1922, Beitrage zum 
Gesetze der Proportionalitat von Tragheit und Gravitat, 
Annalen der Physik, Volume 68, pages 11-66.
Wald, R. M., 1977 (1992), Space, time and gravity: the theory of 
the Big Bang and black holes, 2nd Edition, The University 
of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Wald, R. M., 1984, General relativity, The University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago.
Walecka, J. D., 2007, Introduction to general relativity, World 
Scientific Publishing Company, Singapore.
Walshaw, A. C., and D. A. Jobson, 1972 (1979), Mechanics of 
fluids, 3rd Edition, Longman, London.
Wambsganss, J., 2001, Gravity’s kaleidoscope, Scientific 
American, Volume 285, November, pages 65-71.
Warburton, R. J., and J. M. Goodkind, 1976, Search for evidence 
of a preferred reference frame, The Astrophysical Journal, 
Volume 208, pages 881-886.
176

Weinberg, S., 1972, Gravitation and cosmology: principles and 
applications of the general theory of relativity, John Wiley 
& Sons., New York.
Weinstock, R., 1961, Laws of classical motion: what’s F ? what’s 
m ? what’s a ?, American Journal of Physics, Volume 29, 
pages 698-702.
Wells, J. D., 2011, When effective theories predict: the 
inevitability of Mercury's anomalous perihelion 
precession, arXiv: 1106.1568v1 [physics.hist-ph] 8 Jun 2011.
Westfall, R. S., 1971, Force in Newton’s physics: the science of 
dynamics in the seventeenth century, American Elsevier, 
New York.
Westfall, R. S., 1986, Newton and the acceleration of gravity, 
Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Volume 35, pages 
255-272.
Wheeler, J. A., 1964a, Gravitation as geometry - II, in 
Gravitation and Relativity, edited by H-Y. Chiu and W. F. 
Hoffmann, pages 65-89, W. A. Benjamin, New York.
Wheeler, J. A., 1964b, Mach’s principle as boundary condition 
for Einstein’s equations, in Gravitation and Relativity, 
edited by H-Y. Chiu and W. F. Hoffmann, pages 303-349, 
W. A. Benjamin, New York.
Wheeler, J. A., 1990, A journey into gravity and spacetime, 
Scientific American Library, New York.
Wheeler, J. A., 2011, The present position of classical relativity 
theory and some of its problems, in The Role of 
Gravitation in Physics: Report from the 1957 Chapel Hill 
Conference, edited by C. M. DeWitt and D. Rickles, 
Edition Open Access, pages 43-49.
White, F. M., 1979 (1986), Fluid mechanics, 2nd Edition, 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
Whittaker, E. T., 1910, A history of the theories of aether and 
electricity: the age of Descartes to the close of the 
nineteenth century, Hodges, Figgis, & Company, Dublin.
Whittaker, E. T., 1926 (1960), A history of the theories of aether 
and electricity: Volume II, The modern theories, 1900-1926, 
Harper & Brothers, New York.
Whittaker, E. T., 1943, The aether: past and present, Endeavour, 
Volume 2, pages 117-120.
Wilczek, F., 1999a, The persistence of ether, Physics Today, 
Volume 52, January, pages 11-13.
Wilczek, F., 1999b, Mass without mass, I: Most of matter, 
Physics Today, Volume 52, November, pages 11-13.
Wilczek, F., 2000, Mass without mass, II: The medium is the 
mass-age, Physics Today, Volume 53, January, pages 13-14.
177

Wilczek, F., 2004, Whence the force of F=ma? I: Culture shock, 
Physics Today, Volume 57, October, pages 11-12.
Wilczek, F., 2004, Whence the force of F=ma? II: 
Rationalizations, Physics Today, Volume 57, December, 
pages 10-11.
Wilczek, F., 2005a, Whence the force of F = ma ? III: Culture 
diversity, Physics Today, Volume 58, July, pages 10-11.
Wilczek, F., 2008, The lightness of being: mass, ether, and the 
unification of forces, Basic Books, New York.
Will, C. M., 1974a, Gravitation theory, Scientific American, 
Volume 231, November, pages 25-33.
Will, C. M., 1979, The confrontation between gravitation theory 
and experiment, in General Relativity: an Einstein 
Centenary Survey, edited by S. W. Hawking and W. Israel, 
pages 24-89, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Will, C. M., 1981 (1993), Theory and experiment in gravitational 
physics, 2nd Edition, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge.
Will, C. M., 1986 (1993), Was Einstein right?: putting general 
relativity to the test, 2nd Edition, BasicBooks, New York.
Will, C. M., 1987, Experimental gravitation from Newton’s 
Principia to Einstein’s general relativity, in Three Hundred 
Years of Gravitation, edited by S. W. Hawking and W. 
Israel, pages 80-127, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge.
Will, C. M., 1990, General relativity at 75: how right was 
Einstein?, Science, Volume 250, pages 770-776.
Will, C. M., 2010, Resource letter PTG-1: precision tests of 
gravity, American Journal of Physics, Volume 78, pages 
1240-1247.
Wise, M. N., 1981, German concepts of force, energy, and the 
electromagnetic ether: 1845-1880, in Conceptions of Ether: 
Studies in the History of Ether Theories 1740-1900, edited 
by G. N. Cantor and M. J. S. Hodge, pages 269-307, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Witteborn, F. C., and W. M. Fairbank, 1967, Experimental 
comparison of the gravitational force on freely falling 
electrons and metallic electrons, Physical Review Letters, 
Volume 19, pages 1049-1052.
Woodhouse, N. M. J., 2007, General relativity, Springer-Verlag, 
Berlin.
Woodward, J. F., 2001, Gravity, inertia, and quantum vacuum 
zero point fields, Foundations of Physics, Volume 31, 
pages 819-835.
178

Worden, P W., Jr., and C. W. F. Everitt, 1982, Research letter 
GI-1: gravity and inertia, American Journal of Physics, 
Volume 50, pages 494-500.
Wright, K., 2001, Very dark energy, Discover, March, pages 
70-76.
Zee, A., 2008, Gravity and its mysteries: some thoughts and 
speculations, Association of Asia Pacific Physical Societies 
Bulletin, Volume 18, August, pages 32-38.
Zee, A., 2013, Einstein gravity in a nutshell, Princeton 
University Press, Princeton.
Zee, A., 2018, On gravity: a brief tour of a weighty subject, 
Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Zenneck, J., 1903, Gravitation, in Encyklopadie der 
mathematischen Wissenschaften, Volume 5: Physics, 
edited by A. Sommerfeld, pages 25-67, B. G. Teuber, 
Leiizig 1903-1921 (see English translation in The Genesis 
of General Relativity, Volume 3, Gravitation in the 
Twilight of Classical Physics: between Mechanics, Field 
Theory, and Astronomy, edited by J. Renn and M. 
Schemmel, pages 77-112, Springer, Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands, 2007).
Zwicky, F., 1937a, Nebulae as gravitational lenses, The Physical 
Review, Volume 51, page 290.
Zwicky, F., 1937b, On the probability on detecting nebulae 
which act as gravitational lenses, The Physical Review, 
Volume 51, page 679.
Zwicky, F., 1937c, On the masses of nebulae and of clusters of 
nebulae, The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 86, pages 
217-246.
Zwicky, F., 1933, Die Rotverschiebung von extragalaktischen
Nebeln, Helvetica Physica Acta, Volume 6, pages 110-127.
179

