Electromagnetism
Second Edition
Robert P. Masse

Also by Robert P. Masse 
Physics: Nature of Physical Fields and Forces 
Physics: Gravity and Mass 
Physics: Light Waves 
Quantum Mechanics
Physics: Where It Went Wrong 
Mercury’s Perihelion Advance 
Michelson-Morley Experiment 
Vectors and Tensors of Physical Fields 
Number Theory 
Complex Variables 
Laplace Transforms 
Matrices and Determinants
by Robert P. Masse and Kay E. Masse
Physics: Principle of Least Action
Copyright © 2023 Robert P. Masse
All rights reserved.
Second Edition
ISBN: 979-8-9881770-0-5
Masse, Robert P
Electromagnetism

Dedication
This book is dedicated to my beloved wife 
Kay
whose loving and insightful support made 
it possible

Preface
“It appears therefore that certain phenomena in 
electricity and magnetism lead to the same conclusion 
as those of optics, namely, that there is an aethereal 
medium pervading all bodies, and modified only in 
degree by their presence;. ..”
James Clerk Maxwell 
A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field
iii

Electromagnetism is defined in physics as an interaction 
between electrically charged particles. This interaction is an 
electromagnetic force occurring via an electromagnetic field. 
Electricity is defined as a property of matter that causes matter 
to experience an electromagnetic force. These definitions 
actually provides very little information about the nature of 
electricity, electromagnetic forces, or electromagnetic fields.
It is the purpose of this book to explore the nature of 
electricity, electromagnetic forces, and electromagnetic fields. 
The research that forms the basis of this book could not have 
been accomplished without the outstanding interlibrary loan 
system of Florida.
Robert P. Masse
April 17, 2023
Contents
1 
Physical Fields
1.1 
Definition of a Physical Field
1.2 
Electromagnetic Field Medium
1.3 
Properties of Aether
1.4 
Aether within Free Space
1.5 
Elastic Properties of Aether within Free Space
1.6 
Summary
2 
Elastic Energy Density of Waves in Aether
2.1 
Elastic Wave Equations for Aether within Free Space
2.2 
Elastic Energy Density of Aether within Free Space
2.3 
Continuity of Elastic Energy Density of Transverse 
Elastic Waves in Aether
2.4 
Poynting Vector for Light Waves
2.5 
Summary
3 
Maxwell’s Field Equations
3.1 
Maxwell’s Field Equations for Transverse Elastic 
Waves in Aether within Free Space
iv

3.2 
Nature of Electromagnetic Fields
3.3 
Maxwell’s Field Equations for Free Space
3.4 
Electromagnetic Energy Density within Free Space
3.5 
Derivation of Maxwell’s Field Equations for Material 
Media
3.6 
Summary
4 
Electric Charge and Current
4.1 
Nature of Charge and Current
4.2 
Historical Distinction between Electric and Magnetic 
Field Intensities
4.3 
Electromagnetic Energy Density within Material 
Media
4.4 
Force Density and Momentum Density of Light 
Waves
4.5 
Lorentz Force Density
4.6 
Polarization Vector and Magnetization Vector
4.7 
Integral Form of Maxwell’s Field Equations for 
Material Media
4.8 
The Trouton-Noble Experiment
4.9 
Summary
5 
Electromagnetic Laws
5.1 
Scalar and Vector Potentials for Electromagnetic 
Fields
5.2 
Basic Laws of Electricity and Magnetism
5.3 
Electromagnetic Circuit Parameters
5.4 
Summary
6 
Electromagnetic Radiation
6.1 
Reflection and Refraction of Electromagnetic Waves
6.2 
Electromagnetic Radiation
6.3 
Summary
Appendix A Reynold’s Transport Theorem for Aether 
in Free Space
Appendix B The Greek Alphabet
Appendix C Vector Identities
Appendix D Physical Constants
References
v

Chapter 1
Physical Fields
6

The ancient Greeks and Romans were aware that amber 
and lodestones possess mysterious properties whereby they can 
attract certain materials. In 1269 Peregrinus discovered that 
magnets have polarity; they contain two centers of attraction 
that he named poles (see Baigrie, 2007). Gilbert studied the 
properties of magnets in 1600 and found that distinctly 
different phenomena are involved in the attractive capabilities 
of amber and lodestone. He also determined that the Earth 
itself is a large magnet.
Both electric and magnetic forces were recognized to exist 
in the eighteenth century, and the first laws describing their 
actions were discovered. In 1734 du Fay identified two types of 
electrical charge which he named vitreous electricity and 
resinous electricity. The inverse square law for the force that 
exists between two electrically charged bodies was inferred by 
Priestley in 1767. Soon thereafter Coulomb (1785a, b) verified 
by means of a torsion balance that the force between two 
electrically charged bodies is proportional to the product of 
their charges, and inversely proportional to the square of the 
distance between them. Coulomb also found that the force 
between two magnetic poles is proportional to the product of 
their pole strengths, and inversely proportional to the square of 
the distance between them.
In the nineteenth century significant progress was made in 
understanding the relations between electric and magnetic 
forces by Oersted, Ampere, Faraday, Gauss, and many others. 
From the relations and concepts of electricity and magnetism 
developed over the years by these scientists (particularly 
Faraday), Maxwell was able to formulate his electromagnetic 
field theory in the early 1860s.
Faraday had postulated that electric forces are transmitted 
by actions between contiguous particles of a physical medium, 
and he had developed the concept of 'lines of force' to represent 
magnetic forces in space. This concept inspired Maxwell to 
"examine magnetic phenomena from a mechanical point of view" 
based upon an interpretation of Faraday's concept of a physical 
medium of contiguous particles (Maxwell, 1861a, b). Maxwell 
proceeded to create a field theory of electromagnetism.
Electromagnetic forces act by means of electromagnetic 
fields. In this chapter we will determine the nature of the 
physical fields that are electromagnetic fields. We will begin 
with a discussion of the concept of a physical field.
1.1 Definition of a Physical Field
A physical field requires a physical medium of contiguous 
particles. Contiguous particles are simply particles packed so 
closely together that there is essentially no space between them.
7

Faraday (1844) envisaged contiguous particles as being next to 
each other, but not touching each other. He did not consider the 
contiguous particles of his physical medium to be matter. He 
noted that: “matter is not essential to the physical lines of magnetic 
force any more than to a ray of light or heat.” Faraday’s ideas were 
used by Maxwell to formulate the concept of a continuous 
physical field in which all actions occur only between 
contiguous particles. We will designate these contiguous 
particles as field particles.
A disturbance resulting from a change in the motion of a 
field particle can then propagate to a distance only by a 
succession of actions between contiguous particles. Action-at-a- 
distance is thereby reduced to actions between particles that are 
contiguous. Some time duration is required for all these actions 
to occur, and so field disturbances can only propagate with a 
velocity that is finite. This finite propagation velocity of a field 
disturbance is an intrinsic property of a physical field.
We see then that the existence of a continuous physical 
field in a region requires the existence of a real physical 
medium consisting of contiguous particles. We will designate 
this real physical medium as the field medium. The particles of 
the field medium must be small enough so that a large number 
of these field particles are contained within a volume element 
that is considered infinitesimal relative to the volume of the 
entire region.
These contiguous field particles can then be used to form a 
continuous mathematical entity known as a continuum. This 
continuum is obtained by abstracting the field particles of the 
field medium to point particles, thereby allowing the field 
medium to be treated as a mathematical continuum filling a 
region of space with no gaps between the points. The result is a 
one-to-one correspondence between point particles of the 
continuum and geometrical points assigned to the field 
particles in the region of space occupied by the field medium. 
The mathematical continuum of abstracted physical particles 
provides justification for using the limiting process of the 
calculus on physical problems involving fields, and for using 
differential equations to describe changes in the fields.
Each point particle of the continuum always retains its 
individual identity as well as all the physical properties 
(including the kinematical and dynamical properties) of its 
corresponding field particle except for volume and extension (a 
point particle has neither). Nevertheless the same density and 
pressure are assumed to exist in the continuum as in the field 
medium.
A physical field can never have an existence independent 
of the field particles that constitute the field medium. While a 
8

physical field requires contiguous field particles capable of 
being abstracted to form a mathematical continuum, this is not 
what defines a physical field. Rather, a physical field is some 
specific attribute associated with each of the field particles 
being abstracted to form the mathematical continuum. A 
physical field is not a physical medium then, but is some 
attribute of the contiguous field particles that form the real 
physical medium. A physical field is more, therefore, than 
simply a mathematical device used to solve a physical problem. 
Physical fields are always real attributes of a real medium.
1.1.1 
Types of Physical Fields
Depending upon properties of the field particle attribute 
that is the physical field, several different types of physical 
fields can be identified. When the field particle attribute is a 
scalar quantity so that a scalar quantity is associated with each 
point of the mathematical continuum, these quantities together 
form a scalar field. Similarly, when the field particle attribute is 
a vector quantity or a tensor quantity so that a vector quantity 
or a tensor quantity is associated with each point of the 
mathematical continuum, these quantities form a vector field or 
a tensor field, respectively (in this book we will use the term 
tensor to refer to tensors of order two or higher). The 
temperature in the Earth’s atmosphere is an example of a 
physical scalar field, and the wind velocity in the atmosphere is 
an example of a physical vector field. The real medium that is 
abstracted to a mathematical continuum in both these cases is 
air, and the field particles are extremely small air parcels.
A field that does not vary with time (is independent of 
time) is termed a stationary field or a steady-state field. A field 
that does vary with time is termed non-stationary.
1.1.2 Vector Field Sources and Sinks
If there exists an entity that produces a discontinuity in the 
particular particle attribute that is a vector field, then such an 
entity is known as a source or a sink for the field (see Kellogg, 
1929). Only vector fields have field sources and sinks. From 
vector analysis, we know that a vector equation of the form:
V • A = ± 4 nK p 
(1.1-1)
can always be written for a vector field A having a source or a 
sink. The left side of this equation is the divergence of a vector 
field A (vector attribute of field particles), and the right side of 
this equation has a positive sign for a source and a negative 
sign for a sink. The parameter K is a positive constant required 
to make the units consistent. The density p is a scalar that is 
the strength of the source or sink per unit volume, and so is a 
9

measure of the effect the source or the sink has on the vector
!
field A.
For the special case where the attribute that constitutes the 
vector field is a kinematic flow property (flow velocity or flow 
acceleration) of the field medium, sources and sinks of the 
vector field can be interpreted as places where this real physical 
field medium is being continuously created and continuously 
destroyed, respectively (Lamb, 1879; and Granger, 1985). For 
such cases, we will designate any source as a field flow source 
and any sink as a field flow sink. When the rate at which a 
source continuously creates a field medium (or a sink 
continuously destroys a field medium) is constant, the source 
(or sink) is referred to as steady.
If the vector field does not consist of a kinematic flow 
attribute of the field medium, then the source and sink will not 
represent places where the field medium is being, respectively, 
created and destroyed. That is, they will not represent a field 
flow source or a field flow sink. Rather, both source and sink 
will produce the attribute constituting the vector field. The only 
constraint is: when a source and a sink of this type and of equal 
strength come together, they can nullify each other. We will 
designate this type of source as a field non-flow source and the 
corresponding sink as a field non-flow sink. Since a field non­
flow sink is really just another kind of source, we will also 
designate a field non-flow source to be a field positive source 
and a field non-flow sink to be a field negative source 
(recognizing that non-flow sources and sinks can nullify each 
other). Electromagnetic fields have such non-flow sources and 
sinks (electrons and positrons) as will be discussed in Sections 
3.3.2 and 4.1.1.
1.2 Electromagnetic Field Medium
The field medium for electromagnetic fields must be such 
that electromagnetic waves (light) can propagate in the 
medium. We will use the term ‘light’ in this book to mean not 
just visible radiation, but any electromagnetic radiation. There 
is no question that light exhibits definite wave characteristics 
such as those of constructive and destructive interference. To 
produce these observed physical effects, light must propagate 
as waves, not corpuscles.
To understand the nature of light, it is first necessary to 
understand what a wave is. A wave is really a descriptive term 
for a particular type of disturbed state that can occur within 
physical media. As Leighton (1959) noted, "all wave motion with 
which we are familiar possesses a medium for its propagation.” In 
fact, a wave is a propagating disturbance in and of a physical 
medium; therefore a wave can only exist in a physical medium.
10

The type of propagating disturbance known as a wave is 
formed by physical medium particles moving in an organized 
way. A wave requires that:
1. 
A physical medium exists in which a disturbance 
occurs when some of the physical particles of the 
medium are displaced from their equilibrium 
positions.
2. 
Displacement of physical particles of the medium 
from their equilibrium positions must result in 
restoring forces that cause the displaced particles 
to attempt to return to their equilibrium 
positions.
3. 
Inertia of the displaced particles causes them to 
overshoot their equilibrium positions and so to 
oscillate about their equilibrium positions.
4. 
A disturbance at any point in the physical 
medium must produce a similar disturbance at a 
neighboring point at a slightly later time, 
resulting in propagation of the disturbance.
Therefore only in a physical medium having restoring 
forces can the vibratory motions intrinsic to a wave exist and 
propagate. The physical disturbance that constitutes a wave is 
clearly a mechanical phenomenon. All physical waves are 
mechanical waves. As Lodge (1909) noted, “Waves we cannot 
have, unless they be waves in something.” Waves consist then of 
the oscillatory motion about their equilibrium positions of real 
particles of a physical medium. If there is nothing to oscillate, 
then waves cannot exist. This is why “one cannot really think of 
waves without some substantial medium for their conveyance,” as 
Lodge (1922b) said.
Waves involve the transportation over distance of energy, 
but not the transportation over distance of the physical 
medium in which the waves are propagating. Therefore, it is 
only a change in the state of the medium that is propagated. 
Particles of the medium simply oscillate in place about their 
equilibrium positions. This oscillation is often visualized as a 
cork on water: the cork moves up and down as a wave passes, 
then returns to its former position. “The essential characteristic of 
wave motion is that a periodic disturbance is handed on successively 
from one portion of a medium to another,” noted Preston (1890). In 
this manner energy flows through the medium during wave 
propagation.
For all real waves, elasticity is the restoring force causing 
particles of a physical medium to oscillate about their 
equilibrium positions, resulting in wave motion. Light waves 
must then be associated with the elastic oscillations of particles 
of a physical medium. This physical medium must be pervasive 
in our Universe, filling all empty space, in order to account for 
11

the ability of stellar light to travel across the vastness of space 
allowing us to see stars.
Huygens (1690a, b) thought that the propagation of light 
waves requires a medium that possesses "springiness." He 
knew, therefore, that some type of elastic medium must exist in 
which particles vibrate as light propagates. He thought these 
vibrations to be analogous to the longitudinal vibrations of air 
(a material medium) that produce sound. Light, however, can 
propagate through a vacuum within a glass vessel while sound 
cannot. This was demonstrated by von Guericke in 1654 by 
showing that a ringing bell inside an evacuated glass jar can be 
seen, but not heard. Huygens concluded that, since a vacuum is 
devoid of matter, the elastic medium in which light waves 
propagate must be nonmaterial, and so the propagation 
medium for light waves must be an elastic aether. This aether 
was referred to as luminiferous aether in order to distinguish it 
from any other type of aether that might exist.
By the mid-eighteenth century, a number of different types 
of aether were thought to exist with each type of aether 
mediating a different physical entity, such as electricity or 
magnetism. More than one hundred years later, following the 
development by Maxwell of his electromagnetic field equations 
from which he determined that light waves are electromagnetic 
waves, it became clear that the luminiferous aether, radiant heat 
aether, electric aether, and magnetic aether are all one and the 
same aether. Maxwell (1873a) noted that, “By considering them as 
the same, we avoid at least the reproach of filling space twice over with 
different kinds of aether." Electromagnetic forces then act through 
an aetherial medium rather than through some action-at-a- 
distance. A unified theory of optics and electromagnetics was 
achieved by Maxwell based upon a mechanical field theory of 
aether.
Gravitational fields also require a field medium. From 
Poisson’s field equation of gravity it has been possible to 
determine many of the properties of the field medium for 
gravity (Masse, 2022, 2023). In particular, it has been 
determined that the gravitational field medium is nonmaterial. 
For this reason the gravitational field medium has been 
identified as an aether.
Since a ubiquitous aether must also exist to provide the 
physical cause of gravity, it is very unlikely, if not impossible, 
for two different types of aether to be simultaneously 
ubiquitous in our Universe. It is reasonable to conclude then 
that the gravitational aether and the luminiferous aether are 
one and the same aether. Therefore, light waves must consist of 
vibrations of this aether, and so light must consist of elastic 
waves propagating in this aether.
12

Since the aether of gravity and the luminiferous aether are 
the same aether, we will now refer to this aetherial medium 
simply as aether. When discussing aether we will use the 
spelling ‘aetherial’ rather than ‘ethereal’ since aether “is dealt 
with not as a rarefied essence but as a substance with ascertainable 
physical properties,” as Lodge (1925a) noted. The only exceptions 
will be where the spelling ‘ethereal’ has been used in a quoted 
reference or book title. The idea that light, electricity, and 
gravity can all be explained with a single aether was first 
proposed by Euler (1768, 1772).
1.3 
Properties of Aether
Using Poisson’s field equation of gravity, aether has been 
found to have the following properties:
Aether is nonmaterial.
Aether is ubiquitous and continuous in our Universe.
Aether is a fluid.
Aether is homogeneous.
Aether has very high density compared to matter density.
The flow of aether into matter (an aether sink) is steady.
Matter is the only sink of aether in our Universe.
No source of aether exists in our Universe.
Aether is nearly incompressible.
The flow of aether is incompressible only when not near 
matter.
Since light waves are transverse waves, they can only 
propagate in a medium that has rigidity, which is defined as 
resistance to relative motion between particles of the 
medium. Therefore, aether must have rigidity.
The rigidity of material solid bodies is due to the force of 
electromagnetism binding atoms together (while their nuclei 
remain widely separated by a vacuum). This binding force 
generally prevents material solid bodies from flowing.
For aether to possess a solid state would require that a 
binding force exist between aether particles. Since aether flows 
easily creating gravitational fields, no binding forces can exist 
between aether particles. Without such binding forces aether 
cannot have a solid state, and so aether does not exist as a 
solid.
The rigidity of aether, therefore, is not due to aether being 
in a solid state. Rather, the rigidity of aether must be due to its 
extremely high density whereby all aether particles are 
contiguous with other aether particles. Any given aether 
13

particle has almost no room to move relative to other aether 
particles since very little void space exists between aether 
particles. Aether particles are held in place then, not by 
electromagnetic forces, but by neighboring aether particles that 
are contiguous.
We see, therefore, that the mere possession of rigidity by a 
medium is not a sufficient criterion to indicate whether the 
medium is a fluid or a solid. The physical cause of the rigidity 
must also be considered. When this is done we see that, 
although aether has rigidity (a property previously thought to 
characterize only solids), aether is a fluid and not a solid. 
Material fluids do not possess rigidity, but the nonmaterial 
fluid, aether, does. This explains why it is that when relative 
displacements of contiguous aether particles occur, the fluid 
aether acts as a perfectly elastic solid. The rigidity of aether 
causes elastic restoring forces to result when any displacement 
of an aether particle from its equilibrium position occurs.
1.4 Aether within Free Space
Relative to the medium in which waves are propagating, 
wave speed depends only upon intrinsic physical properties of 
the propagation medium. Therefore, the velocity of the wave 
source or of a wave receiver can have no effect on the wave 
speed. For example, the speed of sound waves does not change 
according to whether the sound source is approaching or 
receding relative to the material propagation medium.
Since aether is the medium in which light waves 
propagate, the speed of light waves is likewise determined 
entirely by physical properties of the nonmaterial aether. 
Therefore the velocity of the light source or of the light receiver 
can have no effect on the speed of light. The speed of light 
waves must then always be independent of source velocity and 
receiver velocity. Consequently, the velocity of light ! cannot be 
combined with the velocity of a source or receiver of light to 
obtain their relative motion.
In other words, Galilean relativity does not apply to the 
velocity of light. Aether is an absolute reference frame for the 
laws of electromagnetism. This means that, while a relativity 
principle exists for mechanics (Galilean relativity), no relativity 
principle exists for electromagnetism. It is for this reason that 
the speed of light appears as a constant in Maxwell’s field 
equations (see Chapter 3).
We will now define a vacuum as a region of space in 
which there is no matter, but in which aether is ubiquitous and 
homogeneous. A vacuum is then a region of space having no 
sinks for aether since matter is the only sink for aether. 
However, a vacuum is not a void (empty space); a vacuum is a 
region of space entirely filled with aether (and nothing else).
14

Nevertheless a vacuum can contain sources and sinks of 
electromagnetic fields since such sources and sinks are 
electrons and positrons which are nonmaterial (see Masse 
2022). We will define free space for electromagnetic fields as a 
vacuum with no sources or sinks of electromagnetic fields.
1.5 Elastic Properties of Aether
within Free Space
We will now examine the physical properties of aether 
that make it possible for elastic waves to exist and propagate in 
aether. We will then review the concepts of stress and strain 
that are employed to develop the light wave equation.
For light waves to be able to propagate in aether, it must 
be elastic. Maxwell (1865) thought that the medium for light 
waves “must be capable of a certain kind of elastic yielding, since the 
communication of motion is not instantaneous, but occupies time.” 
Since observations of spectral lines of stellar light exhibit no 
increase in blurring with distance to the star, we know that light 
waves can propagate across the vast distances of space without 
any attenuation except that due to geometrical spreading. 
Therefore, aether must be perfectly elastic. As Lodge (1925a) 
noted, “No law of dissipation applies to the ether, . . . Ether fritters 
away no energy, it preserves all: it is perfectly transparent; it 
transmits light from the most distant stars without waste or loss of 
any kind.”
The particles of aether constitute a physical medium of 
extremely high density £. Within this medium the particles of 
aether are contiguous and are in equilibrium subject to mutual 
forces that are exhibited as the rigidity of the aether. Any 
motion in and of the perfectly elastic aether that causes a 
displacement of one particle of aether relative to the contiguous 
particles of aether will then be resisted by the contiguous 
particles of aether. This will result in:
1. 
A restoring force that is oppositely directed to the 
displacement of the aether particle.
2. 
A force per unit area that is proportional to the 
relative displacement of the aether particle.
The fundamental cause of the elasticity of aether is the 
extremely high density of aether whereby all aether particles 
are contiguous with other aether particles. A propagating 
elastic wave will exist when a disturbance of one aether particle 
produces a similar disturbance of a neighboring aether particle 
an infinitesimally short time later.
A very small volume element AV of free space will 
contain only a high density of aether particles. Motion of this 
volume element can result when volume elements contiguous 
15

to AV are in motion. As was shown by Helmholtz (1858), any 
displacement of a volume element AV can be represented as 
the sum of three motions: a translation, a rotation, and a 
deformation. The translation and rotation of AV are rigid body 
motions, and so do not result in any restoring forces within AV . 
Deformation of AV, however, will result in restoring forces 
within AV causing elastic vibrations to occur. Therefore, only 
motion that deforms (strains) the volume element AV can 
accompany elastic wave propagation in aether. Since AV in free 
space contains only aether, it is the aether that is actually being 
deformed during the straining of AV.
1.5.1 
Strain in Aether
Deformation of the aether within a very small volume 
element AV of free space will result when particles of aether 
within AV are in motion relative to each other. This 
deformation is known as strain and consists of the relative 
displacement of aether within AV. This deformation can take 
the form of both a change of volume and a change of shape of 
AV.
To describe the deformation of aether within AV 
associated with the vibrational motion of elastic waves 
propagating in the aether, we will use a rectangular Cartesian 
coordinate system (x1, x 2, x 3) having its origin at a point P0 
within AV (see Figure 1.5-1).
Figure 1.5-1 Solid dots show the equilibrium positions of two 
aether particles located at points P and Q within 
a very small volume element AV. Open dots 
show the strained positions of the two particles 
after deformation of the aether within AV.
We will denote the displacement of aether particles from 
their equilibrium positions by ! (!, t), where ! is a function of 
16

position ! and time t. We will let P and Q be two neighboring 
points in the aether within AV. These points are located at ! 
and ! + 8r, respectively, when the aether within AV is in 
equilibrium. The magnitude of 8r is very small compared to 
that of !.
When the aether within the volume element AV 
undergoes deformation from its equilibrium state, the aether 
particle at P is displaced by ! (!, t) from its equilibrium position 
to point P’, and the aether particle at Q is displaced by 
! (! + 8r, t) from its equilibrium position to point Q’. The 
separation 8r between points P and Q then changes by 8e :
! ! ! ! ! ! ! _ ! !
8e = e (r + 8r, t) - e (r, t) 
(1.5-1)
where the magnitude of 8e is very small compared to that of ! .
The components of 8e are given by the linear relations:
_ 
d e _
8ei = -i- 8x, 
(1.5-2)
i d xj 
j
The linearity expressed by equation (1.5-2) is required 
since aether is perfectly elastic, and so recovery from all 
deformations must be single-valued and complete. We are 
using the Einstein summation convention where any index 
appearing twice in an equation term, as does j in equation 
(1.5-2), is summed over its range.
We can write detJdXj in the form:
1
2
d ei
d ei d ej 
— 
d Xj d xi +1 %+a 
j i =mij+£ij
where mfj is the rank two rotation tensor given by:
_1 d ei 
d ej
*■ = — — ~--- ~-
ij 2 dx, 
dxi
J J i
(1.5-3)
(1.5-4)
and where £ij is the rank two strain tensor given by:
.-2 
+i
(1.5-5)
The quantities mij are components of infinitesimal rigid 
rotation. The quantities £ij are components of infinitesimal 
strain. Note that the components of the rank two tensor mij 
given in equation (1.5-4) are equal to components of 1V x ! and 
that V x ! is a measure of rotation of the aether.
The components of 8e given in equation (1.5-2) can now 
be rewritten as:
8ei = rnij 8xj + £ij 8xj 
(1.5-6)
Using these components, the vector 8e can be rewritten in 
terms of two vector displacements:
8e = 8w + 8q 
(1.5-7)
17

The components of 8w are:
8wi = wij 8xj 
(1.5-8)
and so &w represents rigid body rotation of the aether within 
AV. For motion of AV due entirely to elastic wave propagation 
through the aether, we must have 8w = 0 since rigid body 
rotation is not elastic motion.
The components of 8q are:
8qi = £ij 8xj 
(1.5-9)
and so 8q represents relative displacement (deformation) of 
the aether within AV due to elastic wave propagation. This 
deformation is expressed in terms of the strain tensor £ij which 
represents relative displacement per unit length. At a given 
point P in a continuous medium, the strain tensor £ij 
completely specifies the state of strain.
Since ^i! = 0 we now have 6e = 6q, which is to be 
expected for motion of the aether within AV due entirely to 
elastic wave propagation. The components of 8e are then:
8ei = £ij 8xj 
(1.5-10)
From equation (1.5-4) we see that the rotation tensor is anti­
symmetric:
wij = - aji 
(1.5-11) 
and from equation (1.5-5) we see that the strain tensor is 
symmetric:
£ij = £ji
(1.5-12)
Because of these symmetries, there are then only three 
independent components of rotation and six independent 
components of strain. The strain tensor components £11, £22, 
and £33 correspond to extensional deformation of AV along 
the 1, 2, and 3 coordinate directions, respectively. The other 
strain tensor components correspond to shear deformation of 
AV. The strain tensor £ij is a measure of deformation and is a 
rank two tensor.
After straining, the volume element AV becomes AV', 
where A V' is given by: 
1 +
(1.5-13)
A V' = Ax 1
or to first order:
i
A V' = A V
1 + d X1
d e 2
d x 2
d e3
d x 3
Therefore
A V '-A V d e1 d e2 d e3
= 1 + 
+ -
A V 
d x1 d x 2 d x 3
(1.5-14)
(1.5-15)
18

Letting
~ d e1 d e 2 
d e 3
6 = ^-1+T-2-+ V 
(1.5-16)
d x1 d x 2 d x 3
then 0 represents the fractional volume change (change in 
volume per unit volume) due to strain. For this reason © is 
known as the cubical dilatation or simply dilation. We also see 
using the Einstein summation convention that:
_ d e1 d e 2 d e3 ! ^
© = 5^ + 5-2- + 5^ = V • e = £11 + £22 + £33 = £u 
(1.5-17)
d x1 d x 2 d x 3
and so © is an invariant of the strain tensor. A relative decrease 
in volume (cubical compression) yields a negative value for ©.
1.5.2 
Stress in Aether
When an elastic wave is propagating in the aether within 
some volume V of vacuum, the forces associated with the wave 
will produce displacements in the aether in V. These forces are 
exerted on each other by contiguous particles of aether. The 
force acting per unit area in known as the stress. For a very 
small volume element AV of V, displacement of the aether will 
cause deformation of the aether within AV. The forces that 
produce these displacements must be proportional to the 
displacements since aether is perfectly elastic.
For example, within AV the displacement ! (!, t) of the 
aether particle at point P shown in Figure 1.5-1 is caused by a 
force proportional to and in the same direction as the 
displacement ! (!, t). This force can be specified as acting upon 
a very small area element A A containing the point P.
We can construct a very small tetrahedron having A A as 
one side, and having three equal orthogonal area elements A A1, 
A A 2, and A A 3 as the other sides (see Figure 1.5-2). When we let 
all four area elements approach zero in size, all the area 
elements will then contain only the point P The force per unit 
area acting on A A at point P is defined as the stress vector or 
traction ! on A A at point P
The components of the stress vector ! along coordinate 
directions k can be written in terms of the components of the 
stress tensor okl at point P:
tk = w 
(1.5-18)
where nl are the components of the unit normal vector ni to the 
area element A Al upon which the stress vector ! is acting (see 
Figure 1.5-2). The stress tensor okl is a rank two tensor whose 
components depend on the directions of two vectors: the stress 
vector ! and the outward directed normal vector n to area 
element A Al.
19

Figure 1.5-2 The stress vector t acts on area element A A at 
point P
Since the stress tensor represents force per unit area, for a 
complete specification of the stress tensor acting at a point P, it 
is necessary to know the stress vector acting upon all area 
elements containing P Fortunately, however, the stress tensor at 
point P can be completely specified if the stress vector is known 
for three mutually perpendicular area elements that contain P 
(see Love, 1892; and Malvern, 1969). The nine stress tensor 
components will then be determined for a Cartesian coordinate 
system. At a given point P in a continuous medium, the stress 
tensor okl completely specifies the state of stress.
The stress tensor associated with elastic wave propagation 
is symmetric:
°ki = °ik 
(1.5-19)
This equation follows from the law of conservation of angular 
momentum (see Malvern, 1969; and Mase et al., 1992). If the 
stress tensor were not symmetric, a force associated with elastic 
wave propagation would produce a rigid body rotation of AV 
so that we would have 6w ^ 0 in equation (1.5-7). The motion 
of AV when an elastic wave propagates in the aether would 
then no longer consist entirely of elastic vibrations.
1.5.3 
Hooke’s Law for Aether
We know that the superposition principle applies to light 
waves, and that light waves propagate unattenuated through 
an elastic aether. These facts provide confirmation that aether is 
perfectly elastic. Therefore, aether strained by propagating light 
waves recovers completely after the light waves pass. Energy 
expended on deforming the aether must then be transformed 
into potential energy that is stored in the strained aether. This 
energy is known as strain energy.
20

Since aether is perfectly elastic, any displacement of an 
aether particle relative to the contiguous aether particles must 
be proportional to the force producing the displacement. A 
linear relation between the force per unit area (stress) and the 
relative displacement per unit length (strain) is then dictated 
(see Cannon, 1967). This means that the stress tensor okl in a 
very small volume element AV in free space will be related 
linearly to the strain tensor eij in AV:
°ki = ckiij £ij 
(1.5-20)
where the 81 coefficients cklij are the elastic moduli of aether 
and are components of a rank four Cartesian tensor (since 
they relate components of two rank two tensors).
The proportionality of force to the resulting displacement 
from equilibrium of an elastic body is a law discovered by 
Hooke (1678): “the rule or law of nature in every springing body is, 
that the force or power thereof to restore it self to its natural position 
is always proportionate to the distance or space it is removed 
therefrom,” (see Todhunter and Pearson, 1886). Equation (1.5-20) 
can be considered to represent a generalized form of Hooke’s 
law for aether.
Since aether is homogeneous in composition, we can 
expect the elastic properties of aether to be identical at all 
points in free space. The elastic moduli of aether in free space 
are then simple constants, independent of both position and 
time. Moreover, the elastic properties of aether in free space do 
not have a preferred direction in space, but are the same in all 
directions. Light travels in stationary aether in free space with 
the same speed in any direction. Therefore, aether is elastically 
isotropic.
We can now show that of the 81 elastic moduli of aether, 
only two elastic constants are independent. We begin by noting 
that, since aether is elastically isotropic, the rank four Cartesian 
tensor of elastic moduli must be an isotropic tensor. This simply 
means that we expect the elastic moduli cklij to be the same in 
all directions, and so have components that do not change upon 
transformation (through an arbitrary rotation about the origin) 
to any other rectangular Cartesian coordinate system. From 
tensor analysis we know that all isotropic Cartesian tensors cklij 
of rank four must have the form:
Cklij = 
Sij + aS 5ij + il<\ Slt 
(1.5-21)
where A, a, and P are some scalars, and where 8ij is the 
Kronecker delta defined in equation (C-70) of Appendix C.
Letting a = n + Y and P = n - Y where n and y are scalars, 
we can rewrite equation (1.5-21) as:
cklij = 'a>St)+ n(SkiSij + 8kj 8U)+ Y (Sktsij -8 8ii) (1.5-22)
21

From the symmetry of the strain and stress tensors we have:
cklij = clkij = cklji = clkji 
(1.5-23)
and so equation (1.5-22) becomes:
Cklij = 
Sij + 2nS Sl} 
(1.5-24)
From equations (1.5-20) and (1.5-24) we then have for Hooke’s 
law:
au = 
Sij eij + 2q8u Sij eij
Hooke’s law for aether is therefore:
ou=Mu 0+2 mki
(1.5-25)
(1.5-26)
where 0 is the cubical dilatation given in equation (1.5-17).
From the form of equation (1.5-26), we see that the scalars 
A and n are Lame constants or Lame moduli of aether, and 
that n is the shear modulus or rigidity of aether. These 
constants represent physical properties of aether.
From equation (1.5-26) with l = k we also have:
Hydrostatic pressure P is given by:
- P = an = ^22 = ^33 = 3 &kk 
(1.5-29)
and so P is an invariant of the stress tensor. Hydrostatic 
pressure will result in a fractional volume change:
- P = 3 ou = | (3 A + 2 n) 0 = K 0 
(1.5-30)
and so:
K = ~ = *■ +1 n 
(1.5-31)
where K is the bulk modulus of elasticity or modulus of 
compression, and represents the ratio of applied hydrostatic 
pressure to resulting fractional decrease in volume. Therefore, 
K is the ratio of invariants of the stress and strain tensors for a 
aether.
The Lame constant A of aether can be expressed in terms 
of K:
okk = 3 A© + 2 nzkk = 3 A© + 2 n©
(1.5-27)
a=k - 2 n
(1.5-32)
or
ou = (3 A + 2 n) ©
(1.5-28)
Finally, we note that although the relation between stress 
and strain in material fluids can be expressed in terms of one 
elastic constant, two elastic constants are required to express 
22

such a relation for the fluid, aether. This is because aether has 
rigidity similar to material solids.
1.6 Summary
The field medium for electromagnetic fields is aether, 
which is ubiquitous and continuous in our Universe. Aether is 
nonmaterial, perfectly elastic, and has rigidity although it is a 
fluid.
23

Chapter 2
Elastic Energy Density of
Waves in Aether
24

In this chapter we will determine the elastic wave 
equation for light waves in free space. We will also determine 
the elastic energy density associated with light waves in free 
space, and the Poynting vector for these waves.
2.1 Elastic Wave Equations for
Aether within Free Space
An elastic wave propagating in aether will act as a stress 
wave causing aether particles to change momentum. We will 
consider a very small volume element AV of this aether in free 
space. We will also take this volume element to be a control 
volume; it will remain constant with time although aether can 
flow freely through the surface AS of AV. The total force of the 
stress vector ! produced by the propagating elastic wave acting 
upon the surface AS of AV must equal the time rate of change 
of the momentum of the aether within AV at any instant. This 
is just Newton’s second law of motion as applied to aether 
within AV. Using equation (1.5-18), we have for the kth 
component of Newton’s second law of motion:
JJ. S“d = JJ. s"“ nd ■ D JILfvd' 
<2.1-1>
where Z is the density of aether within AV, and where vk is the 
kth component of the aether vibrational velocity !:
! de
v = — 
dt
(2.1-2)
The substantive derivative D/Dt given in equation (2.1-1) 
accounts for changes in Zvk within AV not only with time, but 
also with the position of AV in space.
Using Reynold’s transport theorem for aether in free space 
(see Appendix A), we can rewrite equation (2.1-1) in the form:
17 <wdS = fff ZDV-dV 
(2.1-3)
A S 
A V Dt
From Gauss’s theorem given in equation (C-59) of Appendix C 
and using equation (C-69) of Appendix C, we can then write:
Iff ^dV=Iff z
A V X xl 
A V
'+ui 
d t 
d xl
dV
(2.1-4)
where dokl jdxl is the kth component of force per unit volume 
due to elastic wave vibration in aether, and where ul is the lth 
component of aether flow velocity u. The term on the left of 
this equation represents the force associated with the elastic 
wave acting upon the aether within AV. The first term on the 
right of this equation represents the resulting momentum 
change with time of the aether within AV. The second term on 
the right of this equation represents the resulting momentum 
change with position of the aether within AV due to convection 
25

of the aether. This second term will always be equal to zero for 
elastic waves since they do not result in the flow of the physical 
medium in which they are propagating, and so U = 0 . Only for 
gravitational waves (which are non-elastic waves) will U ^ 0. 
Equation (2.1-4) then becomes:
. ^dv=flb > 
->
and since AV is arbitrary we obtain:
%=z it=z if 
(2.1-6)
where we have used equation (2.1-2) to change from vibrational 
velocity components vk to displacement components ek.
Using Hooke’s law for aether given in equation (1.5-26), 
we can write equation (2.1-6) in the form:
g ‘ -’ %=zF
(2.1-7)
or
d© 
dekl 
d2 ek
A — + 2 q — = £—/ 
d xk 
d xl 
d t2
(2.1-8)
From the definition of the strain tensor given in equation (1.5-5) 
we have:
A de + 
a2 ek + d2 e,
dxk* 
dx,d x* dxidxk
, dh. 
d d t2
(2.1-9)
In vector form equation (2.1-9) can be written:
! 
! 
^ 
d2!
avo+nF e+nve=$-2- 
(2.1-10)
d t
or from equation (1.5-17):
! ! 
d e
(A + n)v(V• e) + nV e = f-y 
(2.1-11)
d t
This equation can be considered to be the Cauchy 
equation for elastic waves propagating in aether. Using this 
equation, the elastic wave equations for compressional and 
transverse waves in aether can be obtained (see Sections 2.1.1, 
2.1.2, and 2.1.3).
2.1.1 
Decomposition of Elastic
Displacement Field
From Helmholtz’s decomposition theorem (Helmholtz, 
1858) we know that any vector field can be written as the sum 
of an irrotational vector field and a solenoidal vector field 
provided that these two fields vanish sufficiently rapidly at 
infinity (which will generally be true for any physical field). 
Therefore, we can write the displacement field ! as:
26

e = ei + es 
(2.1-12)
where !z is the irrotational component vector, and !s is the 
solenoidal component vector. The vector displacement field ! 
is uniquely determined by ! and !s .
For the irrotational component vector !I we must have:
V x ! = 0 
(2.1-13)
and for the solenoidal component vector !s we must have: 
!V • !s = 0 
(2.1-14)
The two vector components ! and !s are independent.
Both displacement components must then separately 
satisfy Cauchy’s equation for elastic waves given in equation 
(2.1-11):
! ! 
d e
(A + n)V(V• et) + nV et = ^-2- 
(2.1-15)
d t
! ! 
d e?
(X + n) V (v • es) + nV 2 es = (—f 
(2.1-16)
d t
From equations (2.1-12), (2.1-13), and (2.1-14) we also have:
V y ! — V ! ! A-\/ ! ! 
— V Y ! 
(i 1 1 r7\
e e e — e e ej + e e eg — e e eg 
(2.1-1/)
—! 
—! 
—! 
—!
V • — = 0 = V • — + V • es = V • — 
(21-18)
I 
S 
I 
\^~*
and so the irrotational component vector !j does not contribute 
to V x!, and the solenoidal component vector !s does not 
_!
contribute to V • _ = © .
2.1.2 
COMPRESSIONAL ELASTIC WAVES IN
Aether within Free Space
Considering the irrotational component vector !I of the 
displacement vector field !, we can use the vector identity 
given in equation (C-43) of Appendix C and equation (2.1-13) to 
write:
! ! 
! ! 
!
Vx(Vx !r) = V(V• eI)-V2!r = 0 
(21-19)
I 
I 
\^-.
and so:
! !
V (V • e,) = V2 e, 
(2.1—20)
Equation (2.1-15) can then be written in the form:
, 
' . 
d2!
(A + 2 n) v2 = $—± 
(2.1—21)
d t
or
i 1 d2 !j
V 2! = C12 ~t^ 
(2.1-22)
where, from equations (2.1-21), (2.1-22), and (1.5-32), the wave 
speed C is given by:
27

a+2 n 
~T~
k+3 n
(2.1-23)
Z
The wave speed C is a function of the bulk modulus of 
elasticity K, the shear modulus of elasticity (rigidity) n, and 
the density Z of aether. Taking the divergence of equation 
(2.1-22), we have: 
V2 (V • e,) =
1 d2 (V • e!i)
C 2 d t2
(2.1-24)
and using equation (2.1-18), we obtain the scalar wave 
equation:
V 20 = 712 d0 
(2.1-25)
C d t
We see that equations (2.1-25) and (2.1-22) are wave equations 
for compressional elastic waves propagating in aether with a 
speed C.
The speed C is with respect to the propagation medium, 
aether. Compressional waves vibrate only along the direction of 
wave propagation with a corresponding periodic increase and 
decrease of volume, and, therefore, of the density of aether. 
Compressional waves are also known as dilatational waves or 
longitudinal waves.
Compressional waves in aether may not exist in our 
Universe. If compressional waves do exist in aether, why have 
they not been detected? The answer rests in the fact that matter 
is a field flow sink for aether. The vibrational motion of such 
compressional waves impinging upon matter will be along a 
streamline of aether flowing into matter. Therefore, any 
compressional motion of the aether will be compensated for 
instantly by variations in the acceleration of aether towards 
matter. This is particularly true since any actual compressional 
vibrational motion must be very small compared to the 
displacement of aether resulting from its flow into matter. 
Compressional vibrations of aether cannot then be detected 
directly by any material body, and so compressional waves in 
aether will be invisible to any detector constituted of matter.
2.1.3 
Transverse Elastic Waves in Aether
within Free Space
Considering the solenoidal component vector eS of the 
displacement vector field !, we can use equations (2.1-16) and 
(2.1-14) to write:
„,! 
_ d2!S
nv !s = C-r-2- 
(2.1-26)
d t
or
28

V 2! = — d2-I
S 
C 2 d t2
(2.1-27)
where, from equations (2.1-26) and (2.1-27), the wave speed c is 
given by:
c = jZn 
(2.1-28)
and so the speed of light is directly proportional to the square 
root of the rigidity of aether n, and inversely proportional to 
the square root of the density of aether Z. The rigidity controls 
how fast an aether particle will snap back after being moved 
from its equilibrium position. The restoring forces of aether 
must be very strong since both the density of aether and the 
speed of light in aether are so great.
Taking the curl of equation (2.1-27) we have:
direction of wave propagation. The speed c is a function of the 
rigidity n and the density Z of aether. Transverse elastic waves 
are also known as equivoluminal waves since no change in 
volume occurs as a result of their propagation. Therefore, no 
variation in aether density occurs during the propagation of 
transverse elastic waves in aether. Deformation occurring 
within a medium without any change in medium volume is 
known as isochoric deformation.
We conclude then that both compressional and transverse 
elastic waves can exist in aether. Aether is similar in this regard 
to elastic material solids for which Poisson (1829a, b) showed 
that both compressional and transverse waves can exist. We can 
also conclude that mechanical waves in aether result from the 
deformation of an elastic aether.
From equation (1.5-26) with k ^ l so that 8kl = 0, we have:
V 2 (Vx es) =
1 d 2(Vx es)
C2 dt2
(2.1-29)
1 °ki
n =----------
2 ?ki
( k ^ l and no sum) (2.1-30)
We see that equations (2.1-29) and (2.1-27) are vector wave 
equations for transverse elastic waves (shear waves) 
propagating in aether with a speed c.
Transverse elastic waves in aether are light waves. The 
speed c is with respect to the propagation medium, aether. 
Transverse waves vibrate in a plane that is orthogonal to the
We can then rewrite equation (2.1-28) in the form:
1 °ki
( k ± l and no sum) (2.1-31)
Therefore, the propagation speed c of transverse waves in 
aether is proportional to the square root of the ratio of stress to 
29

resulting strain. The constant speed of light is a consequence 
then of the linearity of stress and strain in aether (Whittaker, 
1910). As Huygens (1690a, b) noted, “by supposing springiness in 
the ethereal matter, its particles will have the property of equally rapid 
restitution whether they are pushed strongly or feebly; and thus the 
propagation of light will always go on with an equal velocity.”
Since transverse waves vibrate in a plane orthogonal to 
the direction of wave propagation, the vibrational displacement 
vector !s within this plane can be resolved into two orthogonal 
component displacement vectors !E and !H which will, of 
course, be linearly independent as Fresnel (1821b) determined:
e ! ! + !
eS = eE + eH 
(2.1-32)
The subscripts of the orthogonal displacement vectors !E and 
!H are designated as E and H in anticipation of discussions of 
Maxwell’s field equations to follow in Chapter 3. Equation 
(2.1-27) can then be written in terms of !E and !H as two 
independent vector wave equations:
1 d2 !E
V 2 !e = ' E 
(2.1-33)
c 2 d t
V 2 eH =
1 d 2 !H
(2.1-34)
C 2 d t2
Since eS is a solenoidal displacement field as given by equation 
(2.1-14), and since !E and eH are independent, we also must 
have: 
! 
'
v • eE = 0 
(2.1-35)
! v • !h = 0 
(2.1-36)
From equations (2.1-2) and (2.1-32) we can write: 
! ! !
vs = Ve + Vh 
(2.1-37)
where vS is the transverse vibrational velocity vector, and 
where vE and vH are orthogonal component velocity vectors of 
vS. Therefore, the vectors vE and vH are linearly independent. 
Taking the derivative with respect to time of the two vector 
wave equations (2.1-33) and (2.1-34), we have:
1 d2vE
V2Ve = j -tE- 
(2.1-38)
- 
1 d2vH
V 2 Vh = ~2 -vH- 
(2.1-39)
2.2 Elastic Energy Density of Aether 
within Free Space
We will now consider an elastic wave propagating in the 
aether of free space, and we will let AV be a very small volume 
30

element of this aether. An elastic wave carries energy with it as 
it propagates in the aether. This energy is of two types: kinetic 
energy (vibrations of aether particles) and potential energy 
(elastic strain of aether). Since aether is perfectly elastic, there 
are no energy losses in aether due to friction. The rate at which 
the elastic energy of the aether within AV increases due to a 
propagating elastic wave must equal the rate at which work is 
done by the wave’s stress vector ! (force per unit area) on the 
surface AS bounding the volume element AV.
Letting QE be the elastic energy density of aether within 
free space, we can write:
fff d^T dV = IT tkVkdS 
(2.2-1)
A V d t 
A S
where vk is the kth component of aether vibrational velocity !, 
and where the integral on the right side of this equation is the 
total work done per unit time on the surface AS by the 
propagating elastic wave. Remember that repeated indices in 
any term are summed over unless otherwise noted. Using 
equation (1.5-18), we can rewrite equation (2.2-1) as:
[[[ — dV = (T Okin^dS 
(2.2-2)
JJJav dt 
JJas
From Gauss’s theorem given in equation (C-59) of Appendix C, 
we can then write:
d(aklvk) dV
CCC^ dV = ffC
A V d t 
A V d xl
(2.2-3)
Therefore we have:
JJJ.,=JJi.,
dV 
i J
(2.2-4)
d°ki 
dvk
■3— vk + &ki y 
_ d xl 
d xt
From equations (2.2-4), (2.1-6), and (2.1-2), the change with 
time of the energy density of aether 
propagating elastic waves is given by:
within AV due to the
fflVV = 1.VV
Iff., <
d vk
IT vk+°kl
dV
(2.2-5)
d ( d ek ^ 
d t [ d xl )
Using equation (1.5-3), we can write: 
.^‘V =
JIT.V [ 1 z ™
dt + „„± («,+ e„) dV
(2.2-6)
or in terms of the vector aether vibrational velocity v:
01, 
=
fff 1Z d( av) + aki (mk‘ + eki) dV 
(2.2-7)
JJJav 2 
dt 
dt'
31

From equations (1.5-11) and (1.5-19), we know that a)kl is an 
antisymmetric rank two tensor and that okl is a symmetric rank 
two tensor. In equation (2.2-7) we have, therefore, the 
contraction of a symmetric rank two tensor and an anti­
symmetric rank two tensor; such contractions are always zero:
d®kl 
A
^ 
>Z = 0
(2.2-8)
Equation (1.6-7) therefore becomes:
JJJ dV = JTf [1Z 
+ 2 ,^ 1 dV
JJJav dt 
JJJaV |_ 2 
dt 
dt
(k * l) 
(2.2-11)
where VS is the transverse vibrational velocity. Since the 
density, rigidity, and volume of any medium remain constant 
during the propagation of transverse waves in the medium, we 
then have:
Iff. V [ 1 z
tkl
&k/
d t 
d t
dV 
(2.2-9)
MV^dV = O [1 «* ^ Vs) + — ] dV
(k * l) (2.2-12)
We will now consider only the elastic energy density Q of 
aether within free space due to a transverse elastic wave. Since 
a wave is only a descriptive term for a type of propagating 
disturbance in a physical medium, the elastic energy density Q 
must reside in the aether. For transverse elastic waves, k ^ l in 
equation (2.2-9), and so we can use equation (1.5-26) in the 
form:
We now obtain:
fff Q dV =
A V
JJIV [ 2 Z(... •.)+ n £ki £ki
Using equation (2.2-10) again, we can write:
dV
(k * l) 
(2.2-13)
(2.2-10)
Jlf.“ dV = JJJ.V [ 1ZZv • ^) + 2 °ki £ki
dV
since dkl = 0 when k ^ l. With equation (2.2-10), equation (2.2-9) 
can be rewritten as:
(k * l) 
(2.2-14)
From this equation we can identify the first term on the right 
side, 1/2 Z(vS • vS), as the elastic kinetic energy density of the
O-=
cu=2 n^ki
(k * i)
32

aether associated with a transverse elastic wave. Therefore, the 
second term on the right side, 1/2 okl ekl, must be the elastic 
potential energy density of the aether associated with a 
transverse elastic wave.
We will now replace the product £kl £kl in equation 
(2.2-13). First, we will use equations (1.5-3) and (1.5-11) to write:
We can use this equation to replace the product £kl £kl in 
equation (2.2-13):
m
Q dV = fff 1 Z( vS • VS) + neL^r- + wkl ®kl dV
aV 
JJJav L2 
S 
dxl dxk 
1 kl kl J
(k * l) 
(2.2-20)
d ek
£ki = 3----^ki
d xi
£ik =
d el 
d xk +®kl
(2.2-15)
Therefore, from equation (1.5-12) we have:
£ki £ki = £ki £ik =
k 
— —
d xl
®ki
ei
—+^ki 
d xk
(2.2-16)
The middle term on the right side of this equation is a second 
order infinitesimal that can be transformed into a surface 
integral that will not contribute anything to the integral over 
the volume AV of the elastic energy density Q of aether, as was 
noted by William Thomson (1888) and by Love (1892, p. 165). 
We can, therefore, rewrite equation (2.2-20) as:
or
_ 
_ 
l l . .V „
£kl £kl = □ 
□ 
+ 3 ®kl
d xl d xk d xl
k
k
el
®ki A 
®ki ®ki
d xk
fff QdV=
A V
JJJaV [ 1Z:(vs • ' + n &kl &kl
dV
(2.2-17)
(k * l) 
(2.2-21)
We have from equation (1.5-4):
In terms of the displacement vector es, we have:
d xl
k ®kl
el
°Xl — 
d xk
e^k 
e^l
d xl d xk _ ®kl = 2 ®kl ®kl
(2.2-18)
1 ! 
!
®ki ®ki = 2(Vxes)• (Vxes) 
(k ^ l) 
(2.2-22)
and so:
(see Section 1.5.1), and so equation (2.2-21) becomes:
£ki£
i
kl = 3 3 
+ ®kl ®kl
d Xi d Xk
(2.2-19)
fff QdV =
A V m
l S .1 
/! X /! X
-Z(vS• vS)+-n(VxeS)• (Vx!S) dV
AV 2^ S 
S/
k
(2.2-23)
33

The volume element AV in equation (2.2-23) is arbitrary, and so 
for this equation to be generally valid we must have:
_ 1 ! ! \ 1 
! 
!
Q = 2Zvs • r- ) + 2n(Vxes)• (Vxes) 
(2.2-24)
The first term on the right side of this equation is elastic 
kinetic energy density of aether, and the second term on the 
right side is elastic potential energy density of aether. Both of 
these energy densities result from transverse elastic waves 
propagating in aether. The kinetic energy density is associated 
with transverse vibrational motion of the elastic aether, and the 
potential energy density is associated with distortional strains 
within the elastic aether. As Maxwell (1865) noted: “The medium 
is therefore capable of receiving and storing up two kinds of energy, 
namely, the 'actual' energy depending on the motion of its parts, and 
'potential' energy, consisting of the work which the medium will do in 
recovering from displacement in virtue of its elasticity.”
The potential energy density can then be considered to be 
distortional strain energy density (which does not include 
strain energy density due to volume changes of the elastic 
aether). Since aether is frictionless and the elastic forces in 
aether are conservative, the concept of potential energy applies 
exactly to aether strain energy.
2.3 Continuity of Elastic Energy 
Density of Transverse Elastic 
Waves in Aether
The energy density Q of transverse elastic waves in aether 
within free space is a physical density entity. Since there can be 
no sources or sinks of Q in free space, Q must satisfy the 
equation of continuity:
-+V • (Q Uj) = 0 
(2.3-1)
where U is the velocity of propagation of elastic waves in 
aether. The flow of elastic energy density into or out of a very 
small volume element AV of aether within free space is 
compensated for by the change of Q within AV. Because we 
are considering only the elastic energy associated with 
transverse elastic waves in aether within free space, U = c (the 
velocity of light), and so equation (2.3-1) becomes:
+V • (Q !) = 0 
(2.3-2)
d t
The term V • (Q c) in equation (2.3-2) represents real 
elastic energy flux (quantity of elastic energy flowing per unit 
time per unit volume) for transverse elastic waves propagating 
in aether within free space. Mie (1898) first noted that the 
34

deformation of an elastic body results in an energy flux that 
spreads out with time in order to adjust for changes occurring 
within the elastic medium. We will now define:
! = □ ! 
(2.3-3)
where SP is a flux vector representing the elastic energy 
momentum density for transverse elastic waves propagating in 
aether within a vacuum. The vector SP is a point vector. Using 
equation (2.3-3) when the vacuum is free space, we can write 
equation (2.3-2) as:
+V •;?,, = 0 
(2.3-4)
d t
We will refer to SP as the Poynting vector for transverse elastic 
waves in aether within a vacuum. The Poynting vector SP is the 
energy flux vector for light waves.
Using equation (2.1-2), we then have:
— ! 
d f 1 <* d£? d£? 
1 |- 
-i 
|- -il
v• sp=-—•!—Z -t—^— +—n vxes • vxeS ■ (24-2)
P 
dt [ I* |_d1 
dt J 
2 'L 
SJ L 
SJJ ( 
)
or since the density and rigidity of aether are unaffected by the 
propagation of transverse elastic waves in aether, we have:
! !
V • SP = - Z d2es des 
 
• 
 
d t2-- d t
|- e “I e UCa
n [vx e ] •
(2.4-3)
Using the wave equation (2.1-26) for transverse elastic waves in 
aether within free space, we can write equation (2.4-3) as:
_e ! 
ee
V• Sp = - nV2es • S 
o t
“i — e^ 
n :vx !s ] • vxif
(2.4-4)
From the vector identity given in equation (C-43) of Appendix 
C, it is possible to write equation (2.4-4) in the form:
2.4 Poynting Vector for Light 
Waves
-! -! 
-! 
!
V• SP = nVx Vxes
d eSS 
~di~
__ I— __ 
_ 
nV V• es • d eSS 
ht
From equations (2.3-4) and (2.2-24), the divergence of the 
Poynting vector for transverse elastic waves in aether within 
free space is given by:
-n Vxes •
or since V • es = 0 from equation (2.1-14):
- d eS
V^—S 
d t
(2.4-5)
! ! dQ d f 1 ~ r! ! i 1 r^! ! -| 
! ql
v• sp = 
= ~dft 12z[vs • vs]+2nLVxesJ• LVxesJj
(2.4-1)
-! -! 
-! 
!
V• SP = nVx Vxes
.— uce 
n lVx-]• Vx^
(2.4-6)
ec-s 
d t
35

With the vector identity given in equation (C-39) of Appendix 
C, we can rewrite the first term on the right side of equation 
(2.4-6) to obtain:
! ! 
! 
!
V• SP = nV• Vxes x d eSS
~d7 + n Vx es
Vx—S 
d t
2.5 Summary
Electromagnetic waves propagate in the perfectly elastic 
aether. These waves possess energy density, and they can be 
characterized by a Poynting vector.
or
-n Vxes •
(2.4-7)
-! __ 
-! I” -!
V• Sp = nV• VXes x d eSS
~dt~
(2.4-8)
and so the Poynting vector SP for transverse elastic waves in 
aether within free space is: 
Sp = n Vxes x d es 
s 
~dt
(2.4-9)
as given by Whittaker (1910, page 349). In this equation, n is 
the rigidity of aether, and eS is the aether displacement 
associated with the vibrational motion of transverse elastic 
waves propagating in aether.
36

Chapter 3
Maxwell’s Field Equations
37

In this chapter we will derive Maxwell’s field equations 
for electromagnetism using the Poynting vector for elastic 
waves in aether. We will then determine the nature of electro­
magnetic fields. Finally, we will obtain Maxwell’s field 
equations for material media.
3.1 Maxwell’s Field Equations for
Transverse Elastic Waves in 
Aether within Free Space
We will now resolve the displacement vector !s (which 
accompanies the vibrational motion of transverse elastic waves 
propagating in aether) into two orthogonal component vectors 
!E and !H as in equation (2.1-32):
! = e + e 
fa i n
eS = eE + eH 
(3.1-1)
3.1.1 
Poynting Vector for Elastic Waves in
Aether
The Poynting vector SP for transverse elastic waves in 
aether within free space given by equation (2.4-9) can then be 
written as:
Sp = n VxeE X
e^E 
d t
+ n VxeH
X
eH 
d t
(3.1-2)
since, as Fresnel (1821b) discovered, the displacement vectors 
!E and !H are linearly independent. Equation (3.1-2) is simply 
an application of the principle of superposition. This principle 
states that for any linear vector system, if two causes acting 
separately produce two separate effects, then the two causes 
acting together produce a combined effect that is the vector 
sum of the two effects. Therefore, equation (2.4-9) must hold 
when written in terms of both component vectors as in 
equation (3.1-2).
From equations (2.4-9) and (3.1-1), we can also write:
! 
_! /
Sp = n vx(!e + H +
(3.1-3)
or
! 
.! 
.!
SP = n VxeE + VxeH x
d !e + de!H. 
d t d t
(3.1-4)
Using the distributive properties of the vector product, we
obtain:
Sp = n VxeE x
+ n VxeE x
eE 
d t
+ n VxeH
d t
x
d t
+ n VxeH x
eEL 
d t
(3.1-5)
38

Comparing equations (3.1-2) and (3.1-5), we see that we must 
have: 
n VxeE x
d t
or
= Vx eH
(3.1-6)
(3.1-7)
11 d eE ’ 
x - —
c d t
where, anticipating the result, we have multiplied by the factor 
1/nc. The speed c is the propagation speed of transverse elastic 
waves relative to the aether. For equation (3.1-7) to be valid for 
all values of !E and !H (which are linearly independent point 
vectors), both sides of this equation must equal 0 :
VxeE x
Vx eH
1 d !H 
c d t
= 0
(3.1-8)
r 1 d eF 1 !
~^E = 0
x
c d t
(3.1-9)
In general the vectors in these equations will not be zero. For 
equation (3.1-8) to be generally true, therefore, the vectors in 
the equation must be parallel. The same situation holds for 
equation (3.1-9).
3.1.2 
Maxwell’s Equations for Elastic
Waves in Aether
From the derivation of these equations, we then see that 
for each of these two equations, the vectors within brackets 
must be equal:
_! , 
1 d eH
Vx eE =---------— 
(3.1-10)
c d t
! 
1 d !p
Vx !h = -^E- 
(3.1-11)
c d t
Equations (3.1-10) and (3.1-11) together with equations (2.1-35) 
and (2.1-36):
!v • eE = 0 
(3.1-12)
V • !H = 0 
(3.1-13)
can be seen to constitute Maxwell’s field equations for 
transverse elastic waves propagating in aether within free 
space.
Maxwell’s field equations for free space are a direct 
consequence of energy density conservation for transverse 
elastic waves propagating in a homogeneous, isotropic, and 
perfectly elastic aether. As Maxwell (1861a) noted “The 
39

undulatory theory of light requires us to admit this kind of elasticity 
in the luminiferous medium, in order to account for transverse 
vibrations. We need not then be surprised if the magneto-electric 
medium possess the same property.”
This then is the true origin of Maxwell’s field equations. 
Electromagnetic waves therefore require a physical medium in 
which to propagate, and electromagnetism is a field theory as 
Maxwell proposed. We can also see that electromagnetic waves 
carry energy with them as they propagate in the aether. This 
energy is in the form of elastic energy: kinetic energy of aether 
particles vibrating and potential energy of aether strained by 
wave motion.
3.1.3 
Elastic Wave Equations for Aether
From Maxwell’s field equations (3.1-10) through (3.1-13), 
we can derive the wave equation for transverse elastic waves in 
aether within free space. Taking the curl of equation (3.1-10), we 
have:
! ! 
1 d ! .
Vx (Vx eE) = - -- (Vx h 
c d tx
)
(3.1-14)
Using the vector identity given in equation (C-43) of Appendix 
C, we obtain:
V(V• !e)-V2eE = -1 (V x!H) 
(31-15)
\ e ) E c d f\ 
'
With equation (3.1-12) we can write:
V2eE 11 — (V x eH)
E c d t( 
H )
(3.1-16)
Taking the time derivative of equation (3.1-11), we have:
d.(vx!)=1 d2eE 
d t( eH) = c d t2
From equations (3.1-16) and (3.1-17) we then obtain:
V 2 !e = ± 
c
d2 !e 
d t 2
(3.1-17)
(3.1-18)
Similarly we can obtain: 
i 1 d2 !„ 
v2 !h = 
-H- 
(3.1-19)
Adding equations (3.1-18) and (3.1-19), we have:
1 d2 z .
V2(! + ! ) =------(! + ! ) 
/Qi
V (eE + eH ) = c2 d12 (eE + eH ) 
(3.1-20)
or, using equation (3.1-1), equation (3.1-20) becomes:
i 1 d2 !
V2 !S = -tS- 
(3.1-21)
which is identical to the vector wave equation (2.1-27) for 
transverse elastic waves propagating in aether within free 
space.
40

The vibrational motion of transverse elastic waves occurs 
in a plane orthogonal to the direction of propagation of the 
waves. The vibration in this plane is described by the vector eS 
or by the component vectors !E and !H . The direction of 
vibrational motion can vary as a function of time. If the 
direction of vibrational motion is constant or varies with time 
in a definite way, the transverse wave is considered polarized. 
If the direction of vibrational motion is constant, the wave is 
plane polarized. The plane of vibration is designated as the 
plane determined by the directions of wave propagation and of 
particle vibration. Wave polarization can only occur for 
transverse waves.
3.2 Nature of Electromagnetic
Fields
We will now derive another form of the Poynting vector 
SP for transverse elastic waves in aether within a vacuum. 
Rewriting equation (3.1-2) using equations (3.1-10) and (3.1-11), 
we have:
Using equations (2.1-2) and (2.1-28) to write this equation in 
terms of the transverse vibrational velocity component vectors 
!E and vH , we have:
! n ^ ^ 
^ !^
SP = 2 c [ vE X vH ] = 2 cZ [ vE X vH ]
(3.2-2)
This again is the Poynting vector for transverse elastic waves 
propagating in aether within a vacuum. We will now make the 
definitions:
vE
vH
I!= J8nZ Ve =
(3.2-3)
h-jn !h=
(3.2-4)
where vE and vH are unit vectors in the direction of vE and vH , 
respectively. We then have from equations (3.2-2), (3.2-3), and 
(3.2-4):
! C I" ! !
SP = — [ E x H
(3.2-5)
1 d eE 1 |“d eH 
C ~dT X ~dt
Sp=n
1 d eH 
c d t
'E
(3.2-1)
which is the Poynting vector for electromagnetic waves 
propagating through a vacuum (Poynting, 1884; and Heaviside, 
1885a, b, c, d, e). Therefore, E as defined in equation (3.2-3) 
must be the electric field intensity or electric field strength,
X
d t
+n
41

and H as defined in equation (3.2-4) must be the magnetic field
! 
! 
! 
!
intensity or magnetic field strength. Both E and H are point
! 
!
vectors since they are field vectors, and both E and H specify
!
the state of the electromagnetic field. The dimensions of E and 
H are:
dimensions of E and H = yjenergy density 
(3.2-6)
as can be seen from equations (3.2-3) and (3.2-4). We also note 
that both E and H are functions of aether density, but not of 
aether rigidity.
The Poynting vector SP is a point vector specifying the 
elastic energy momentum density of electromagnetic waves 
propagating in aether within a vacuum. The Poynting vector is 
then the electromagnetic energy flux vector, and can be 
interpreted as the surface density of elastic energy flow (energy 
flow per unit area). We see that the Poynting vector SP is the 
energy flux vector both for transverse elastic waves in aether 
and for electromagnetic waves. These waves are, of course, 
identical.
We have now determined the nature of the electric field 
intensity E, and the nature of the magnetic field intensity H. 
From equations (3.2-3) and (3.2-4), we see that E and H are 
proportional to the orthogonal transverse aether vibrational 
velocities vE and vH, respectively. This means that there is no 
intrinsic physical difference between E and H other than that 
they are mutually orthogonal. They are both proportional to 
component vectors of the same field vector: the vibrational 
velocity of a transverse wave in aether. This conclusion is to be 
expected since the electromagnetic field intensity can be in the 
form of a purely electric field intensity with respect to one 
reference frame, and yet be in the form of a combination of both 
an electric and a magnetic field intensity with respect to 
another reference frame. Moreover, the vector wave equation 
(2.1-38) for !E and the vector wave equation (2.1-39) for vH 
both have the same form, and both apply to electromagnetic 
waves propagating through free space.
The nature of electromagnetic fields is now determined. 
The attribute or property of the real physical medium aether 
that constitutes the electromagnetic field is the transverse 
vibrational velocity of aether. Vibrations of aether occur 
around equilibrium positions since aether is perfectly elastic. 
Euler (1768, 1772) was essentially correct when he stated: “all 
the phenomena of electricity are a natural consequence of want of 
equilibrium in the ether, so that wherever the equilibrium of the ether 
is disturbed the phenomena of electricity must take place; 
consequently, electricity is nothing else but a derangement of the 
equilibrium of the ether.” Any separation of the electromagnetic 
42

field into electric and magnetic fields can now be seen to be 
arbitrary; there is really only an electromagnetic field.
3.3 Maxwell’s Field Equations for
Free Space
Free space for electromagnetic fields is defined as a 
vacuum with no sources or sinks of electromagnetic fields (see 
Section 1.4). Taking the time derivatives of equations (3.1-10) 
through (3.1-13) and multiplying by a constant k, we have 
Maxwell’s field equations for transverse elastic waves 
expressed in terms of aether vibrational velocity:
^ z 
1 d(kvH)
Vx (kvE) = — c ldt 
(3.3-1)
! . _ . 1 d(kvE)
Vx (kvH) = — 
< 
(3.3-2)
c 
d t
7 • (kv,) = 0 
(3.3-3)
V • (kv>H) = 0 
(3.3-4)
Since the speed c of transverse elastic waves is constant relative 
to the propagation medium aether, its time derivative is zero. 
Letting k = y/8nZ (the density of a medium remains constant 
during the propagation of transverse elastic waves in the 
medium), and using equations (3.2-3) and (3.2-4), we obtain:
V X E = — C ^H 
(3.3-5)
! ! 1 d E
Vx H = C It 
(3.3-6)
! !
V • E = 0 
(3.3-7)
! .!
V • H = 0 
(3.3-8)
which are Maxwell’s equations for electromagnetic waves 
propagating through free space. Maxwell (1865) determined 
that, “magnetic disturbances propagated through the electromagnetic 
field agree with light in this, that the disturbance at any point is 
transverse to the direction of propagation.”
Maxwell (1861a, b; 1862a, b; and 1865) developed his field 
equations based upon the known laws of electricity and 
magnetism, and upon the premise that aether is a real physical 
entity. In developing his equations, Maxwell used a physical 
analogy (a mathematical mechanical model) of the electro­
magnetic field that is “the most imaginative but least credible ever 
put forward” as Berkson (1974) noted. Nevertheless, this model 
led Maxwell to discover the correct electromagnetic field 
43

equations. While Maxwell’s model has long since been 
discarded, his field equations have stood the test of time. 
Heaviside (1892b) first wrote Maxwell’s field equations in the 
vector form given above.
Solely from a consideration of the elastic motion and 
energy flow associated with transverse elastic waves 
propagating in a perfectly elastic, homogeneous, and isotropic 
aether, we have now derived Maxwell’s field equations for 
electromagnetic waves propagating through free space. It is not 
surprising, therefore, that Maxwell’s equations describe only 
transverse waves and not compressional waves. The derivation 
given above of Maxwell’s field equations from classical 
elasticity theory provides the mechanical interpretation of 
Maxwell’s field equations (and, therefore, of electromagnetic 
phenomena) that has long been sought. Electromagnetism is 
simply classical elasticity theory as pertains to transverse elastic 
waves in aether. Electromagnetism can be reduced to terms of 
mechanics.
We have shown that Maxwell’s field equations can be 
derived by considering the motions of an inviscid fluid: aether. 
The derivation of Maxwell’s field equations given above then 
provides evidence, both that aether must exist, and that the 
aether in free space is perfectly elastic, homogeneous, and 
isotropic. Finally, it is now clear that neither of the two long- 
range forces known to physics, gravity and electromagnetism, 
involve action-at-a-distance. We note also that Newton’s 
mechanics and Maxwell’s electrodynamics are mutually 
consistent.
Weber and Kohlrausch (1856) determined that the ratio of 
electrostatic to electromagnetic units results in a quantity 
approximately equal to the speed of light. Maxwell (1862a) 
noted that “we can scarcely avoid the inference that light consists in 
the transverse undulations of the same medium which is the cause of 
electric and magnetic phenomena.." Maxwell (1865) then concluded 
that since the value of the electromagnetic wave speed c in his 
field equations “is so nearly that of light, that it seems we have 
strong reason to conclude that light itself (including radiant heat, and 
other radiations if any) is an electromagnetic disturbance in the form 
of waves propagated through the electromagnetic field according to 
electromagnetic laws.” He also stated that we have “some reason to 
believe, from the phenomena of light and heat, that there is an 
aetherial medium filling space and permeating bodies, capable of being 
set in motion from one part to another..."
The frame of reference for Maxwell’s field equations is the 
medium, aether, in which the transverse elastic waves 
(electromagnetic waves) are propagating. Aether is then the 
absolute (unique) frame of reference in which Maxwell’s 
equations are valid. The speed of light c appears as a constant 
44

in Maxwell’s field equations because the speed of light is 
constant with respect to the same unique frame of reference 
that Maxwell's equations have: the aether in which the 
electromagnetic waves are propagating. This is also the reason 
Maxwell’s field equations are incompatible with Galilean 
relativity. Maxwell’s equations have the same form with respect 
to all inertial frames of reference. The constant value of the 
speed of light in Maxwell’s field equation is strong evidence for 
the existence of a unique medium (aether) for light waves.
Because Maxwell’s field equations for free space contain 
the constant speed of light c, it has been inferred in the past 
that the speed of light in a vacuum is absolute. Unfortunately, it 
has often been erroneously assumed that it is with respect to 
some observer that c is a constant (rather than with respect to 
the aether in which light is propagating). In fact, this erroneous 
assumption is a postulate of the special theory of relativity.
Maxwell’s field equations (3.3-5) through (3.3-8) pertain to 
free space (space having no sources or sinks of the electro­
magnetic field). For an electromagnetic field to exist in free 
space, however, it is clear that sources and sinks of the field 
must exist somewhere (necessarily at some distance from the 
free space).
Maxwell’s field equations are independent of any motion 
of the source of the electromagnetic waves whose propagation 
they describe. This can be seen both from the above derivation 
of these field equations, and from the absence of source velocity 
and source acceleration in these field equations.
Maxwell’s field equations describe the transverse 
vibrational state of the aether at the given point under 
consideration, since E and H are point vectors. Based upon 
equations (3.3-5) and (3.3-6), it has previously been thought that 
! 
! 
!
E and H cannot be vectors of the same type, but that E must 
be a polar vector, and H must be an axial vector. Equations 
(3.3-5) and (3.3-6) both derive from equation (3.1-7), however, 
and so no requirement exists for the vibrational velocities !E 
and !H to be different types of vectors. Moreover, since vE and 
! 
! 
! 
!
vH are component vectors of vS, both vE and vH must be the 
same type of vector. The polarity of vS is established 
intrinsically, and not by convention, and so vS must be a polar 
vector. From equations (2.1-37), (3.2-3), and (3.2-4), we see that 
E and H are both linearly independent polar vectors.
3.3.1 
Derivation of Maxwell’s Wave
Equations for Free Space
From Maxwell’s field equations (3.3-5) through (3.3-8), we 
can obtain the vector wave equations for electromagnetic waves 
propagating in the aether within free space. Since spatial and 
time derivatives are independent of each other, taking the curl 
45

of equation (3.3-5) and the time derivative of equation (3.3-6), 
we have:
! ! ! 
1 ! d J J 1 d '!. !
Vx(Vx E) = —. Vx-. - - - (Vx H)
(3.3-9)
—(V x H) =1 d-E 
(33-10)
d ? 
= c d t2 
(3 
)
From equations (3.3-9) and (3.3-10), we can write:
— /— —x 1 d2 Tt
Vx (Vx E) = - -2 -t^- 
(3.3-11)
Using the vector identity given in equation (C-43) of Appendix 
C:
! ! ! ! ! ! 
!
Vx (Vx E) = V (V • E) -V2 E 
(3.3-12)
together with Maxwell’s field equation (3.3-7), we can rewrite 
equation (3.3-11) as:
_ 
1 d 2 E
V2E = W 
(3.3-13)
By a similar process, we can obtain:
d2!
V2' H = E IE 
(3.3-14)
Equations (3.3-13) and (3.3-14) are vector wave equations 
for electromagnetic waves propagating in aether within free 
space. They specify the state of motion of aether in the electro­
magnetic field at any given point and time as noted by Bateman 
(1914). The derivation of these wave equations from Maxwell’s 
field equations is the same as that used to obtain equations 
(3.1-18) and (3.1-19).
Following Maxwell's derivation of his field equations, 
electromagnetic waves in the radio frequency range were 
generated and detected by Hertz (1888a, b, c). The discovery of 
these waves confirmed important predictions of Maxwell’s field 
equations. Moreover, Hertz’s experiments demonstrated that 
electromagnetic energy propagates in the form of waves, which 
require a physical medium. Electromagnetism was thereby 
shown not to involve action-at-a-distance. Hertz’s discovery of 
electromagnetic waves was taken by scientists as confirmation 
of the existence of aether. Hertz was the first to generate and 
detect electromagnetic waves that were not in the visible 
frequency range.
Since Maxwell’s vector wave equations for free space are 
linear equations, a linear relation must exist between stress and 
strain in aether (as proposed in Section 1.5.3). This linear 
relation between stress and strain in aether is also evident from 
the fact that the principle of superposition always holds for 
electromagnetic waves. We can now understand why it is that 
electromagnetic waves are never nonlinear. The linearity that 
46

characterizes the perfectly elastic aether is an extremely 
important property in determining the physics of our Universe.
3.3.2 
Maxwell’s Field Equations for a
Vacuum having an Electromagnetic 
Field Source or Sink
The electromagnetic field in a vacuum is characterized by 
the vectors E and H. An electromagnetic field, therefore, is a 
! 
!
vector field. Both E and H are component vectors that are 
proportional, respectively, to components !E and !H of the 
vibrational velocity vS of an electromagnetic wave (transverse 
elastic wave) propagating in aether. The attribute of aether 
particles that constitutes the electromagnetic field, therefore, is 
the vibrational velocity of aether particles that occurs during 
elastic wave propagation in aether. An electromagnetic field 
cannot exist in a region, therefore, unless elastic waves are 
propagating in the aether within the region.
Since elastic wave vibrational velocity is not a kinematic 
flow property of aether, any sources or sinks of an electro­
magnetic field will not be flow sources or flow sinks of the field 
medium, aether. This means that no physical medium actually 
flows into electromagnetic sinks or out from electromagnetic 
sources. Rather, electromagnetic sources and electromagnetic 
sinks must both be entities from which transverse elastic 
vibrations of aether originate. These elastic vibrations result in 
transverse waves within the aether. Electromagnetic sources 
and sinks are then field non-flow sources and field non-flow 
sinks (see Section 1.1.2).
Vibrations emanating from a field non-flow source must 
be identical to those emanating from a corresponding field non­
flow sink except for a phase difference of 180°. This phase 
difference is necessary for the neutralization of the effects of the 
source and sink that must occur when the source and sink come 
together. Obviously the designation of which of these entities is 
a source and which is a sink is arbitrary, and is chosen simply 
by convention.
A source or sink for an electromagnetic field in a vacuum 
can be described using:
! !
V • E = 4 npE 
(3.3-15)
- ! ' !_ 
.
v • H = 4 npH 
(3.3-16)
where pE and pH represent, respectively, the E and H source 
density or sink density. These equations have the form of 
equation (1.1-1), and are the electromagnetic equivalent of 
Gauss's law for gravity. Unlike the density of matter p which is 
always positive, electromagnetic densities pE and pH can be 
either positive (source density) or negative (sink density).
47

Because all electromagnetic field sources and sinks are 
nonmaterial (see Masse, 2022), a vacuum can still exist in the 
presence of such sources and sinks, although the vacuum will 
then no longer be free space. Since E and H are proportional to 
the orthogonal transverse aether vibrational velocities vE and 
vH, respectively, pE and pH must each be proportional to the 
source or sink strengths per unit volume for transverse elastic 
vibrational velocities of aether. Both E and H are point vectors, 
and so pertain to some given point. For this given point, both 
the corresponding electromagnetic densities pE and pH are the 
average source or sink strengths per unit volume in the 
neighborhood of the point.
Maxwell’s field equations for electromagnetic waves 
originating from a source or sink in a vacuum are given by 
equations (3.3-5), (3.3-6), (3.3-15), and (3.3-16):
3.4 Electromagnetic Energy Density 
within Free Space
Energy is carried by electromagnetic waves (see Section 
2.2). The change with time of the elastic energy density Q of 
transverse elastic waves in aether within a small volume 
element AV of free space can be obtained from equations (2.3-4) 
and (3.2-5):
dQ ! ! c ! i-! !-i
= -V • SP = - 4n v • [ E x H
(3.4-1)
Using the vector identity given in equation (C-38) of Appendix 
C, we have:
dQ 
~tt
C I- ! ! ! ! ! !
— E • Vx H - H • Vx E 
4 n L
(3.4-2)
! 
1 d H
Vx E = - c 
(3.3-17)
V X H =1 dE 
(3.3-18)
c d t 
! !
V • E = 4 npE 
(3.3-19)
J! !
V • H = 4 npH 
(3.3-20)
From Maxwell’s field equations (3.3-6) and (3.3-5) we then 
obtain:
! 
!
dQ 1 ! dE ! dH 
— =  E • — + H •  
d t 4 n d t 
d t
(3.4-3)
or
dQ
IT
1 _a
8 n d t
(3.4-4)
E • E + H • H
and so:
48

Q = — r IE • E + Hi • Hi 
8 n L
(3.4-5)
or
Q = 8— E2 + 8— H 2
(3.4-6)
The first term on the right side of this equation is known 
as the electric energy density, and the second term on the right 
side is known as the magnetic energy density. Therefore, the 
sum of the electric energy density and the magnetic energy 
density is equal to the elastic energy density Q carried by 
transverse elastic waves propagating in aether within free 
space. Only in this sense is the electric and magnetic energy 
localized within the electromagnetic field. From equation (3.4-6) 
we see that the dimensions of E and H are the square root of 
energy density as given in equation (3.2-6).
Since the transmission of electromagnetic energy through 
free space is not instantaneous, it is to be expected that:
1. 
A physical medium must exist in which all 
electromagnetic energy is stored during the 
transmission time. Conservation of energy would 
seem to require this.
2. 
The transmission of energy should occur as the 
result of the interaction of contiguous particles of 
the medium.
We see that these two conclusions are obviously correct since 
electromagnetic energy is transmitted in the form of elastic 
waves in aether. As Maxwell (1873b) noted, “it is by the action of 
contiguous parts of this medium that the energy is passed on, from 
one portion to the next, . . . The luminiferous medium is therefore, 
during the passage of light through it, a receptacle of energy.” The 
speed of light being finite is consistent with action by contact of 
contiguous aether particles rather than with action-at-a- 
distance. Moreover, the concept of electromagnetic energy 
suddenly disappearing and then reappearing elsewhere as 
would be required with action-at-a-distance is absurd (see 
Heyl, 1907). Such an occurrence would be inconsistent with 
conservation of energy laws.
Finally, we note that most energy transport in our 
Universe occurs by means of elastic waves (electromagnetic 
waves) propagating in aether. We also note that light waves 
have no rest energy since a wave, by definition, cannot exist if it 
is not waving.
Using equations (3.4-5), (3.2-3), and (3.2-4) we can write:
Q- ! 
! 
! ! 
!
= Z [vE • vE ] + Z [vH • vH ] = Z v2 + ZvH 
(3.4-7)
and, since vE and vH are orthogonal component vectors of VS, 
using equation (2.1-37) we have:
49

Q=Z (! •!)
(3.4-8)
From equations (3.4-8) and (2.2-24) we then can write:
Q = Z (! • !) =1 Z(VS • !) +1 nfi x es) • (V x !S) (34-9)
d d- 
2 S d 2 
S 
S 
X^.
or
1 
! ! 
1 
! 
!
z(V (vS • vS) = -n(Vx !s) • (Vx !s) 
(34-10)
2^ S S 2 
S/\ S 
.“
and so the kinetic and potential energy densities of transverse 
elastic waves in aether are equal. This is to be expected since 
aether is a perfectly linear system. Aether is perfectly elastic, 
and so no energy is lost through friction. Considering the 
kinetic and potential energy associated with light waves, 
Maxwell (1865) noted: “The propagation of undulations consists in 
the continual transformation of one of these forms of energy into the 
other alternately, and at any instant the amount of energy in the 
whole medium is equally divided, so that half is energy of motion, and 
half is elastic resilience.”
From equations (3.4-6) and (3.4-7) we can determine that 
electromagnetic energy is mechanical energy as Maxwell (1865) 
concluded. From equation (3.4-10) we can also see that aether 
density Z enters into the calculation of kinetic energy density, 
and the elastic rigidity n enters into the calculation of potential 
energy density.
3.5 Derivation of Maxwell’s Field
Equations for Material Media
Electromagnetic waves propagate only in aether. Within 
material media the aether in proximity to nucleons will have a 
greater density than the aether within a vacuum, as is 
evidenced by the difference in the speed of light within 
material media as compared to within a vacuum. The wave 
equations for electromagnetic waves propagating through a 
material medium therefore have the form:
1 d 2 E
V 2 E = — 
c 2 d t2
(3.5-1)
v2 H = ± ,>2HH 
(3.5-2)
c 2 d t2
if propagating in aether not in proximity to nucleons, and the 
form:
V2 Ew = -1- '* E 
(35-3)
w w2 dt2 
( 3)
d 2 H
V 2 Hw = — —2T 
(3.5-4)
w w2 d t2
if propagating in aether in proximity to nucleons. In equations 
(3.5-3) and (3.5-4), w is the speed of light in the aether of greater 
50

density in proximity to nucleons. In these equations, Ew and 
Hw are the electric and magnetic field intensities, respectively, 
in proximity to nucleons.
When electromagnetic waves propagate in the aether 
within a material medium, only the composite wave speed u is 
observed, not the speeds c or w. The speed u corresponds to 
the absolute index of refraction n of the medium as given by:
u = c 
(3.5-5)
n
For material media neither the effects of E and H nor of 
Ew and Hw are observed, but only some composite results from 
the varying density aether. From equations (3.2-3) and (3.2-4), 
we see that both E and H are functions of ^nnZ, and so both 
E and H are dependent on aether density, and neither are 
dependent on aether rigidity. We then have for a material 
medium:
Eu = J8nZE !e 
(3.5-6)
Hu = 78 nZH vH 
(3.5-7)
where ZE and ZH are the average aether densities along the 
wave travel path in the material medium. These two densities 
may not be equal since the component vibrations of the light 
wave are in different directions in the aether. From equations 
(3.2-3), (3.2-4), (3.5-6), and (3.5-7) we then have:
E!uu =N Z £ =
(3.5-8)
H" NZH~ H! = YH! 
(3.5—9)
where we are making the following definitions:
P ^J^ 
(3.5-10)
Y =JZH 
(3.5-11)
In real material media, both p and y may not be simple 
constants, but can be rank two tensors (see Section 3.5.2).
3.5.1 
Neutralized Sources and Sinks
Material media consist of charged and uncharged 
particles. A charged particle is either a source or a sink for an 
electromagnetic field. If for a given material medium the effects 
of all sources and sinks are neutralized by corresponding sinks 
and sources nearby within the medium, the electromagnetic 
fields generated locally will be extremely limited in spatial 
extent.
51

We will now define neutralized sources and sinks as 
those that are neutralized by other sources and sinks in their 
near vicinity so that the overall region containing the sources 
and sinks has essentially no net electromagnetic charge. We will 
also define sources and sinks of electromagnetic fields that are 
not so neutralized as unneutralized. Of course, no real material 
medium has completely neutralized sources and sinks of 
electromagnetic fields, although some material media known as 
dielectrics approach it.
When an unneutralized source or sink for an electro­
magnetic field is not present, but electromagnetic waves are 
present, this can only mean that an unneutralized source or 
sink generating these waves must exist somewhere (generally 
assumed to be very many wavelengths distant). We will define 
an external electromagnetic field as an electromagnetic field 
having a distant source or sink (relative to the objects being 
considered).
3.5.2 
Material Media with Neutralized
Sources and Sinks
Maxwell’s field equations (3.3-5) through (3.3-8) for free 
space can be modified for material media having neutralized 
sources and sinks:
! ! 
1 d H
VX Eu = - c H 
(3.5—12)
! ! 
1 d E.
Vx Hu = - dE7 
(3.5—13)
c d t
! ! 
_
v • Eu = 0 
(3.5—14)
! ! 
_
v • Hu = 0 
(3.5-15)
Using equations (3.5-8) and (3.5-9) we then have:
! / !X 1 d(r H)
Vx (PE) = - --^ 
(3.5—16)
! 
_. I d(PE)
Vx(yH) = c 
- - 
(3.5-17)
V • (PE) = 0 
(3.5-18)
V • (y H )= 0 
(3.5-19)
Dividing equations (3.5-16) and (3.5-19) by p and equations 
(3.5-17) and (3.5-18) by y , we have:
52

S Y ! ^ 
11 pH
Vx E = --^—Z 
c d t
(3.5-20)
equations (3.5-20) through (3.5-23) become:
! ! 1 d( pH)
VxE=-- \ ’ 
c d t
(3.5-26)
( P ! ^ 
< Y E J
! ! 1
Vx H = - c d t
V • f ^ E1 = 0
kY 1
V • f Y H1 = 0
< p 7
Defining:
e =
Y
Ze
P ZZ
Zh 
z
Ze
Zh
Zh
Y Z Z 
^ P
Z z
Ze
Zh 
Ze
(3.5-21)
(3.5-22)
(3.5-23)
(3.5-24)
(3.5-25)
! ! 1 d( £E ) 
Vx H = -A-^ 
c d t
V • (eE) = 0
V • (11H )= 0
(3.5-27)
(3.5-28)
(3.5-29)
The proportionality factor £ is known as the electric 
permittivity, and the proportionality factor p is known as the 
magnetic permeability. The vector D is called the electric 
displacement or electric flux density, and the vector B is the 
magnetic induction or magnetic flux density. In general £ and 
p are functions of position within the matter through which the 
electromagnetic waves are propagating.
We will now also define:
—! 
—!
D = eE 
(3.5-30)
! 
!
B = pH 
(3.5-31)
Equations (3.5-30) and (3.5-31) are referred to as constitutive 
equations since they attempt in some manner to characterize
53

the constitution of the propagation medium for the 
electromagnetic waves using the factors £ and ^. As noted by 
Truesdell and Toupin (1960), “These relations are not to be 
regarded as constitutive equations for matter. We may think of them 
! ! ! ! ! 
Il' ! ! l! ! ! 
! 
! !
as constitutive relations for the aether. The vectors E and H must 
be replaced by D and B, respectively, when some of the aether 
in which electromagnetic waves are propagating is modified by 
the presence of matter.
Since the aether within real material media is not perfectly 
isotropic and homogeneous, P and y may be rank two tensors 
as noted previously. At any given point then, £ and ^ in 
equations (3.5-30) and (3.5-31) will not be reciprocals of each 
other. In fact, both D and B are often expressed as functions of 
! ! 
! 
!
both E and H rather than as a function of only E or H as 
given in equations (3.5-30) and (3.5-31). We will then generally 
have:
t'P * 1 
(3.5-32)
contrary to what would be expected from equations (3.5-24) 
and (3.5-25). The factors £ and ^ will generally not be simple 
constants and, in some cases, may not even exist. Moreover, 
since £ and ^ represent average properties of the aether within 
a material medium, they cannot be expected to correspond to 
reality for any given point within the material medium. In a 
vacuum we will, of course, have £ = 1 and ^ = 1.
From equations (3.2-3) and (3.2-4), we see that D and B 
are functions of the orthogonal transverse aether vibrational 
velocities vE and vH, respectively. Although D and B as 
defined are point vectors, we must emphasize that they 
generally will not represent true values of physical entities for 
any given point of the ray path. Since £ and ^ represent 
! 
!
average properties of the aether within a material medium, D
!
and B represent average properties of electromagnetic waves 
propagating in the aether within the material medium.
Using the definitions in equations (3.5-30) and (3.5-31), 
equations (3.5-26) through (3.5-29) become:
! 
1 d B
v x E = — — 
(3.5-33)
c d t
V x H =1 dD 
(3.5-34)
c d t
! !
v • D = 0 
(3.5-35)
! !
v • B = 0 
(3.5-36)
54

These are Maxwell’s equations for electromagnetic waves 
propagating in a material medium having no unneutralized 
sources or sinks of electromagnetic fields.
Taking the curl of equation (3.5-33), we can write:
! /! 
1 d(V x B)
Vx (Vx E) = - c v dt ' 
(3.5-37)
With the vector identity given in equation (C-43) of Appendix 
C, and equation (3.5-31) we have:
! !
! /! 
?! H di V X H )
v (V • E) -V 2 E = - H^----L 
(3.5-38)
c 
d t
Using this equation and equations (3.5-34), (3.5-35), and 
(3.5-30), we obtain a vector wave equation for electromagnetic 
waves propagating in the ‘average’ aether within a material 
medium with neutralized sources and sinks:
2 !
v2 E = -— dE- 
(3.5-39)
Similarly, we can obtain:
V2 H = 
dH 
(3.5-40)
c 2 d t2
Since the wave speed observed for electromagnetic waves 
in the ‘average’ aether within material media is u, equations 
(3.5-39) and (3.5-40) must be equivalent to:
d 2 E 
d t2
V 2 E = 4 
u
(3.5-41)
V2 H = -12- 
u
d 2 H 
d t2
(3.5-42)
Therefore, we see that the speed of light u in the ‘average’ 
aether within a material medium will be given by:
c
u = ^= 
(3.5-43)
^sli
From equations (3.5-43) and (3.5-5), the absolute index of 
refraction n of the material medium is then given by:
n = Jep 
(3.5-44)
where n is a function of frequency.
Note that equations (3.5-41) and (3.5-42) are only 
approximations for material media. Also note that although E 
and H are point vectors, the speed u and the absolute index of 
refraction n may not correspond to any given point on the ray 
path, but represent ‘average’ values over the entire ray path. 
Moreover, different ray paths through a given material medium 
can have different values of u (and so of n ).
55

3.5.3 
Material Media with an
Unneutralized Source or Sink
If unneutralized sources or sinks for an electromagnetic 
field exist within material media, then Maxwell’s equations 
(3.5-33) through (3.5-36) may all need to be modified. A source 
or sink for an electromagnetic field within a material medium 
can be described using the equations:
V • D = 4 npE 
(3.5-45)
! ! .
V • B = 4 npH 
(3.5-46)
where pE and pH represent, respectively, the E and H source 
(or sink) density. When unneutralized sources or sinks for E 
!T
and H are present in a material medium, Maxwell s field 
equations (3.5-35) and (3.5-36) must be replaced with equations 
(3.5-45) and (3.5-46), respectively.
Since unneutralized electromagnetic sources or sinks are 
physical density entities that can move through the aether 
without losing their identity (see Masse, 2022), we can use the 
equation of continuity to write:
dpE- + V • ( Pe U) = 0 
(3.5-47)
+ V • ( Ph 0) = 0 
t
(3.5-48)
where U is the velocity of the source or sink densities with 
respect to the aether. These equations express the fact that 
source and sink strength in a volume is being conserved. 
! 
!
Defining J and K as: 
! !
J = PeU 
(3.5-49)
K = PhU
(3.5-50)
we see that J represents the flux vector of unneutralized E 
sources or sinks, and K represents the flux vector of 
unneutralized H sources or sinks through a region. The flux 
vectors J and K are known as the electric flux vector and the 
magnetic flux vector, respectively. Equations (3.5-47) and 
(3.5-48) can now be written as:
dpE- + 7 • J = 0 
d t
dpH- + V • K = 0 
d t
(3.5-51)
(3.5-52)
Using equations (3.5-45) and (3.5-46), we have:
56

1 d(y • D)
4 n 
d t
!
+ V • J = 0
(3.5-53)
—! _!
Vx E =
1 d B —
+r 
c d t
(3.5-59)
1 d(^ • B) + V • K = 0
4 n 
d t
(3.5-54)
V x H =1 — + A 
c 31
(3.5-60)
or
!
where r and A are flux vectors to be determined. Taking the 
divergence of these two equations, we have:
__
V •
__
V •
1 d D _ 
4 n d t +
1 d B
4 n d t
+ K
= 0
= 0
(3.5-55)
(3.5-56)
Multiplying equation (3.9-55) by 4 a/c and equation (3.5-56) by 
- 4 n c, we obtain:
1 d D + 4 n J 
c d t 
c
= 0
(3.5-57)
-! -! _! -!
v • VxE = V•
1 d B - 
+r 
c d t
= 0
! ! ! ! 1 d D "
v • Vx H = V • 
+ A = 0
c d t
Comparing equations (3.5-61) and (3.5-62) 
(3.5-58) and (3.5-57), respectively, we have:
- — K
r =
K 
c
(3.5-61)
(3.5-62)
with equations
(3.5-63)
__
V •
1 d B 4 n 
— 
c d t c
= 0
K
(3.5-58)
4 n !
c
A =
(3.5-64)
If unneutralized sources or sinks in motion are present 
within a material medium, the right side of Maxwell’s field 
equations (3.5-33) and (3.5-34) must be modified to take into 
account all electromagnetic field variation with time:
Maxwell’s field equations (3.9-59) and (3.9-60) for electro­
magnetic waves propagating in a material medium having 
unneutralized sources and/or sinks in motion can then be 
written:
57

7 x E = -1 dB - — K 
(3.5-65)
c d t 
c
7 x H =1 dDD- + — J 
(3.5-66)
c d t 
c
! ! 
.
V • D = 4 np. 
(3.5-67)
- ! ! 
.
V • B = 4 npH 
(3.5-68)
Maxwell developed these equations with K = 0 and pH = 0 
for reasons that will be discussed in Sections 4.1.3 and 4.2. The 
field equations for electromagnetic waves propagating in a 
material medium having unneutralized sources and/or sinks 
with K = 0 and pH = 0 become:
^ ! 
1 d B
Vx E = - - — 
(3.5-69)
c d t
7 x H! =1 dDD- +—J 
(3.5-70)
c d t 
c
! ! .
V • D = 4 npE 
(3.5-71)
! !
V • B = 0 
(3.5-72)
Maxwell’s field equations for electromagnetic waves 
propagating in a vacuum having stationary unneutralized 
sources and/or sinks with pH = 0 can be written in the form:
! 
1 d H
v x E = - c — 
(3.5-73)
! ! 1 d E.
Vx H = c — 
(3.5-74)
! !•
V • E = 4 npE 
(3.5-75)
! ! _
V • H = 0 
(3.5-76)
Maxwell’s field equations for electromagnetic waves 
propagating in a vacuum having unneutralized sources and/or 
! !
sinks in motion with K = 0 and pH = 0 can be written in the 
form:
! 
1 d H
v X E = - c — 
(3.5-77)
V x H =1 dEE + — J 
(3.5-78)
c d t 
c
! !
V • E = 4 npE 
(3.5-79)
- ! ! _
v • H = 0 
(3.5-80)
58

The equation for conservation of source or sink density 
given in equation (3.5-51) can be obtained from equation 
(3.5-78):
! ! ! 
1 d(V • E) 4 n ! !
V• VxH = 0 = - V dt ’ + —V• J
(3.5-81)
Using equation (3.5-79) we have:
P- + 5/ • J = 0 
d t
(3.5-82)
3.6 Summary
Maxwell’s field equations for electromagnetism are 
derived using the Poynting vector for elastic waves in aether. 
The nature of electromagnetic fields is determined. The electric 
field intensity or electric field strength E, and the magnetic 
! ! . 
! 
!
field intensity or magnetic field strength H are proportional 
to the orthogonal transverse aether vibrational velocities !E 
and !H, respectively. Finally, Maxwell’s field equations for 
material media is derived.
59

Chapter 4
Electric Charge and Current
60

In this chapter we will determine the nature of charge and 
current. We will discuss the historical distinction between 
electric and magnetic field intensities. We will then present the 
force density and momentum density of electromagnetic 
waves.
4.1 Nature of Charge and Current
Faraday thought that charges were places where the lines 
of force carrying media stresses start (on positive charges) and 
stop (on negative charges). In Maxwell’s field equations (3.5-67) 
and (3.5-68), we have:
! ! .
V • D = 4 npE 
(4.1-1)
!. !
V • B = 4 npH 
(4.1-2)
where pE is a source or sink density for E, and pH is a source 
or sink density for H .
4.1.1 
Charge Density
The density pE is known as electric charge density, and 
the density pH is known as magnetic charge density. 
Equations (3.5-47) and (3.5-48) then state that charge density is 
conserved. From equations (4.1-1) and (4.1-2) we also see that 
charge density is a scalar. Although the magnetic charge 
density pH is a source or sink density for H, pH is not a source 
or sink density for magnetism.
The electric charge qE and magnetic charge qH existing 
within a volume V are given by:
qE =
pEdV
qH =
PHd-
(4.1-3)
(4.1-4)
Therefore, charge is a measure of the strength of a source or 
sink of an electromagnetic field. If electric and magnetic 
charges exist within a volume V of a vacuum, we can use 
Maxwell’s field equations (3.3-19) and (3.3-20) to rewrite 
equations (4.1-3) and (4.1-4):
qE=41n JH, ’ •E dV 
'"
qH = 41n JJJ ^ • H dV 
(4.1-6)
With Gauss’s theorem given in equation (C-58) of Appendix C, 
these two equations become:
qE = -±- |7 E • dS 
(4.1-7)
4 n s
61

qH=t- ff h • dS 
4 n s
(4.1-8)
where S is the surface of the volume V. From equations (3.2-3) 
and (3.2-4), we then obtain:
Z- ff %• dS 
2 n s E
(4.1-9)
qH Vi ff vH ^ dS 
2 n s
(4.1-10)
since aether density Z remains constant when transverse waves 
propagate in aether.
Electric and magnetic charges are then proportional to 
the magnitude of the orthogonal transverse vibrational 
velocities in aether generated by an electromagnetic source or 
sink. As Lodge (1925a) noted, “It is not matter which is strained 
when you charge a body electrically, it is ether.” From equations 
(4.1-9) and (4.1-10), we see that the appropriate units for electric 
and magnetic charge are gm^2 cm32 sec-1 as expected.
Electromagnetic sources and sinks generate transverse 
vibrations of aether, and so are non-flow sources and sinks. 
Since the electric charge of electromagnetic sources and sinks is 
always constant, electromagnetic sources and sinks must 
continuously radiate electromagnetic waves (transverse elastic 
waves). Moreover the transverse vibrational velocity of the 
sources and sinks must always be a constant.
An entity that is neutral must then either have no sources 
and no sinks of electromagnetic waves, or have the same 
number of sources and sinks positioned so as to effectively 
cancel (by destructive interference) the electromagnetic waves 
these sources and sinks continuously emit. It is now obvious 
why electromagnetic waves are, themselves, electrically 
neutral, since such waves are neither a source nor a sink for 
other electromagnetic waves. It follows that electromagnetic 
waves do not possess charge.
4.1.2 Current Density
Current density is given by equations (3.5-49) and (3.5-50);
J = PeU 
(4.1-11)
—! 
—!
K = PhU 
(4.1-12)
where U is the average velocity of the source or sink densities
! 
! ! ! 
! 
! ! 
! 
!
with respect to the aether. The electric flux vector J is known as 
the electric current density, and the magnetic flux vector K is 
known as the magnetic current density. From equations 
(3.5-49) and (3.5-50) we see that the electric and magnetic flux 
vectors are simply electromagnetic field source or sink densities 
62

in motion. Current therefore represents the ordered motion of 
sources or sinks of transverse elastic vibrations. Current exists 
when electromagnetic charge is in motion.
For positive charges, the direction of the current density is 
the same as that of the average velocity U. For negative 
charges, the direction of the current density is the opposite of 
that of the average velocity U.
The electric current IE and the magnetic current IH 
flowing through a surface area S are given by:
Ie = fl J ^ dS = JI Pe U * dS 
(4'1-13)
Ih = JJ K • dS = JJ Ph U • dS 
(4.1-14)
where we have used equations (4.1-11) and (4.1-12) in which U 
is the velocity of the source or sink densities with respect to the 
aether. We see then that the current increases with the velocity 
of the E and H source (or sink) densities. The flux vectors J 
and K therefore represent the quantity of electric and magnetic 
charge, respectively, traversing unit area in unit time.
Material media known as conductors have a large number 
of charged particles that are free to move through the media in 
response to an external electromagnetic field. Such particles are 
known as free charges. In a dielectric (a nonconductor) most 
charges are not free to migrate through the media and so are 
known as bound charges. If these bound charges can be 
displaced slightly from their equilibrium positions by an 
external electromagnetic field, a current will result. Motion of 
free charges constitutes a convection current, while motion of 
bound charges constitutes a conduction current.
Under electrostatic and magnetostatic conditions, the 
electromagnetic field does not change with time, and so we can 
use equations (3.5-65) and (3.5-66) to write:
! ! ! 
4 n! !
V • Vx E =----- V • K = 0 
(4.1-15)
V • V X H! = — V • J = 0 
(4.1-16)
c
where we have also used equation (C-37) of Appendix C. No
! ! ! 
! 
! 
T!
divergence exists in the flux vectors J and K under 
electrostatic and magnetostatic conditions, therefore, and so the 
current flow must be steady and continuous, and so must form 
a closed flow loop.
4.1.3 Polarization of Electromagnetic 
Sources and Sinks
From empirical evidence, we know that we can consider 
one of the two charge densities and the corresponding current
63

density of electromagnetic sources and sinks to be equal to 
zero. By convention the magnetic charge density pH and the 
magnetic current density K have been chosen to be zero:
K = 0 
(4.1-17)
Ph = 0 
(4.1-18)
Given the nature of sources, sinks, and currents of electro­
magnetism, K = 0 and pH = 0 can only mean that the sources 
and sinks of electromagnetic fields must always produce 
transverse elastic vibrations of aether that are all polarized 
orthogonal to one certain plane. It is then possible to represent 
the electromagnetic wave produced by any source or sink by 
only one transverse component of motion. By convention this 
component is designated to be E.
4.1.4 
Conservation of Charge
Even though an electromagnetic source or sink 
continuously radiates electromagnetic waves, nevertheless the 
electromagnetic charge is conserved. From equations (3.5-51) 
and (3.5-52) we have:
dpH- +V • K = 0 
d t
(4.1-20)
These are equations of continuity and are differential forms of 
the law of conservation of charge in the neighborhood of a 
given point.
Integrating equation (4.1-19) over a volume V containing a 
charge density, we have:
1 ’ • J dv=-dt
(4.1-21)
Using Gauss's theorem we obtain an integral form of the law 
of conservation of charge: 
jj> ds=-dt iff. PEdv
(4.1-22)
where S is a surface enclosing the volume V. The surface 
integral on the left side of this equation represents the amount 
of charge flowing outwards from S per unit time, while the 
volume integral on the right side of this equation represents the 
amount by which charge is decreasing within the volume V per 
unit time.
dpE-+7 • j = 0 
d t
(4.1-19)
64

4.2 Historical Distinction between
Electric and Magnetic Field 
INTENSITIES
! 
!
Since the electric and magnetic field intensities E and H 
are proportional to the aether vibrational velocities !E and !H , 
respectively, the only difference in the nature of these two 
intensities is that they are orthogonal (as noted in Section 3.2). 
The electric and magnetic intensities E and H represent the 
very same type of physical entity. In fact, they are proportional 
to component vectors of the very same vibrational velocity 
vector. This explains why the relative contributions of E and H 
are observed to depend upon the frame of reference. Physical 
reality would more accurately be portrayed, therefore, by 
recognizing that E and H are each a component vector of the 
electromagnetic field intensity in a vacuum.
During the development of the theory of electricity and 
magnetism, it was not realized that E and H represent the 
same type of physical entity, and so the units of measurement 
originally developed for them are not the same. For this reason 
the units of electromagnetism currently in use are not optimum 
for measuring the physical phenomenon they are intended to 
represent.
Sources and sinks of electromagnetic fields only produce 
transverse elastic vibrations of aether that are polarized 
orthogonal to one certain plane. Since, by convention, these 
polarized vibrations are represented by the single transverse 
component of vibrational motion designated E, it then appears 
that there are no sources or sinks of H . As a result both K and 
pH have, in effect, been defined out of existence. This has 
resulted in a fruitless search for nonexistent magnetic 
monopoles that could act as sources and sinks of only H (see 
Goldhaber and Trower, 1990).
All phenomena associated with electricity and magnetism 
should really be referred to simply as electromagnetic 
phenomena, including the sources and sinks of electro­
magnetism. Nevertheless, we will generally follow the 
historical usage in this book.
4.3 Electromagnetic Energy Density
WITHIN MATERIAL MEDIA
The change with time of the elastic energy density Q of 
transverse elastic waves in aether within a small volume 
element AV of free space is given by equation (3.4-1):
= 
V • [ E x H! ] 
(4.3-1)
d t 
4 n 
L J
65

Using the vector identity given in equation (C-38) of Appendix 
C, equation (4.3-1) can be written as:
and so:
dQ 
"dr
C 1“ _! -! _! 
_! -! -►
— E • Vx H - H • Vx E 
4 n L
(4.3-2)
d^ M 
d t
1 _3
8 n d t
eE 2 + ^H 2 + E • J + H • K
(4.3-7)
! ! 
! !
If J = 0 and K = 0 we have:
To obtain the change with time of the elastic energy density Q M 
associated with propagating transverse elastic waves in aether 
within a material medium when electromagnetic flux is 
present, we can use equations (4.3-2), (3.5-66), and (3.5-65) to 
write:
Q M = — eE2 + — Illi 2 = — T E • D + H • B 
8 n 8 n 8 n-
(4.3-8)
dQ M = c 
d t 4 n E •(1 d D 4 n ^ d + h ^
I c 
*~J)
11d B 4 . k y
। c d t + c
(4.3-3)
which is the energy density for electromagnetic waves 
propagating in a material medium when no currents are 
present. Using equations (3.2-3) and (3.2-4), equation (4.3-8) can 
be rewritten as:
^ m = z^'vE + zBvH = 2 e
or
' 1 ZvE 
\ 2
>J + 2 ^ ' 1 ^vH
\ 2
}
(4.3-9)
1
d-- ^ _ 1 E! • d D + E • J + 
d t 4 n 
d t 
4 n
! d B ! !
H • 
+ h • k (4.3-4)
d t
For a vacuum, equation (4.3-7) becomes:
Using equations (3.5-30) and (3.5-31), we can rewrite equation 
(4.3-4) as:
d^ M = 1
d t 
4 n
eE • — + BH 
d t 
d t
d H 
! ! ! !
+ E • J + H • K (4.3-5)
— = — — I" E2 + H 2 "I + E • J + H • K 
d t 8 n d t L J
(4.3-10)
If J = 0 and K = 0, equation (4.3-10) becomes equation (3.4-4).
or
d^ M
d t
! !
----- eE• E + LiH • H + E• J + H • K
8 n d t L 
J
(4.3-6)
4.4 Force Density and Momentum 
Density of Light Waves
The Poynting vector SP for transverse elastic waves in 
aether within a vacuum is given by equation (2.3-3):
! _
Sp = □ c 
(4.4-1)
66

and represents elastic energy density Q propagating with a 
velocity !. The energy density Q that electromagnetic waves 
carry with them produces a force density. From equations 
(3.4-9) and (3.4-10), we see that half of Q is kinetic energy 
density and half of Q is potential energy density. Maxwell 
(1873b) observed that these two propagating energy densities 
contribute equally to the force density. From a consideration of 
the capability of the propagating electromagnetic energy to do 
work, we can write:
dQ ! ^
IT=f •c
(4.4-2)
where f is the force density resulting from the propagating 
energy density. From equations (4.4-1) and (4.4-2), we have:
= 
c = (f • c)! 
(4.4-3)
Since the direction of the flow of elastic energy density at 
any point in the aether must necessarily be the direction of 
propagation of light at that point (as noted by de Tunzelmann, 
1910), f and ! must have the same direction, and so we can 
rewrite equation (4.4-3) as:
^=- = ! (! • c) = f c 2 
(4.4-4)
or
f = ± 'S = Al" SP
J c2 d t 
d t c2
(4.4-5)
Force density is the time derivative of momentum density, 
and so the momentum density associated with the energy 
density Q of electromagnetic waves within a vacuum must be 
Sp/c2 as was first determined by Poincare (1900). The change 
in momentum is in the same direction as the force density, 
consistent with Newton’s second law of motion. Equation 
(4.4-5) relates force density and momentum density of 
transverse elastic waves propagating in a perfectly elastic 
isotropic homogeneous aether.
We see that electromagnetic waves have associated with 
them an elastic energy density, a momentum density, and a 
force density. The resulting force in the direction of propagation 
produces a radiation pressure. From equation (4.4-2) then:
dO ! ^ dw
IT=f •c=;6 
where w is the work density done by the propagating 
electromagnetic waves. Work density is simply pressure, and so 
we have:
w = P = Q
(4.4-7) 
67

where P is the radiation pressure. Maxwell (1873b) noted that 
within the propagation medium for electromagnetic waves 
there is a radiation pressure that is numerically equal to the 
energy density. The radiation pressure of electromagnetic 
waves is generally weak, but it has been detected (Nichols and 
Hull, 1901, 1903a, b, c; and Gerlach and Golsen, 1923).
4.5 Lorentz Force Density
An electromagnetic field can produce a force that acts 
upon electromagnetic sources and sinks in motion. To calculate 
this force, we will now consider a charged particle beam 
consisting of electromagnetic source densities traveling through 
a vacuum. More specifically, we will consider a charged particle 
beam traveling through a small volume element AV of this 
! 
!
vacuum. A steady flux J will exist within AV due to the 
particle beam. We will also assume that there is an external 
electromagnetic field present within AV. Electromagnetic 
waves are then propagating in the aether within the vacuum of 
the volume element AV. The external electromagnetic field will 
exert a force on the charged particles of the particle beam. The 
! 
! 
! ! 
!
external electromagnetic field is independent of the flux J.
The electromagnetic waves will have an elastic energy
! 
! 
!
momentum density specified by the Poynting vector SP as 
given by equation (3.2-5):
! C I" ! !
SP = 4— [ E x H
We then have:
! ! C ! I" ! !
V • SP = — v • [ E x H
(4.5-1)
(4.5-2)
or using the vector identity given in equation (C-38) of 
Appendix C:
! ! C 1“ ! ! ! ! ! !
V • SP = - 4cn [ E • Vx H - H • Vx E
(4.5-3)
Using Maxwell’s field equations (3.5-77) and (3.5-78) for a 
vacuum in which a flux J exists (but K = 0), we obtain:
c
V • SP =
P 4 n
1E • dE + 4n E • J +1 h • dH
c 
11 
c c 
11
or
! ! 
1 d r !!!!
V • SP = - — dt [ E • E + H • H
(4.5-4)
(4.5-5)
- E • J
From equations (2.3-2), (2.3-3), and (3.4-4) we can rewrite 
equation (4.5-5) as:
+V • (Q c) = - E • J 
(4.5-6)
68

This is the equation of continuity (2.3-2) for the elastic energy 
! 
! r!!iii
density Q with a nonzero balance term of -E • J added.
This continuity equation can be interpreted as follows: If 
the elastic energy density in a volume element AV of a vacuum 
is increasing, the rate of increase of elastic energy density, 
dQ/d t, plus the elastic energy density flux, V • (Q !), will equal 
the rate at which elastic energy density is being added to the 
aether within AV. The quantity - E • J must then represent the 
rate at which elastic energy density is added to the 
electromagnetic field within AV. Alternatively, if energy is 
! < 
! < 
<• !• 
! ! !
being lost from the electromagnetic field within AV, E • J must 
represent the rate at which elastic energy density is being lost 
as noted by Slater and Frank (1947). The quantity E • J is 
therefore equal to the rate at which work per unit volume or ! 
work density w is done by the electromagnetic field E 
interacting with the charged particles within AV.
Using equation (3.5-49) we can then write:
dw ! ! ! 
! 
! !
— = E • J = E • pEU = pEE • U 
dt
(4.5-7)
where U is the constant velocity of an element of the flux J 
having electric charge density pE when it passes through the 
given point within AV being considered. The velocity U of the 
electric charge density pE is relative to the reference frame 
(aether) in which the electromagnetic field exists. If f is the 
force density (force per unit volume) due to the electromagnetic 
field at the same given point, we must also have:
! 
! dr ! !
dw = f • dr = f • — dt = f • U dt 
dt
(4.5-8)
and so the rate at which work density is done is given by:
dw = f • U
dt
(4.5-9)
From equations (4.5-7) and (4.5-9) we then obtain: 
! !
f = PeE ' 
(4.5-10)
where we have replaced E with E' to emphasize the fact that 
equation (4.5-10) is not quite complete since it considers only 
the force density f upon charged particles at a given point 
within the volume element AV. Any motion that carries these 
particles to different points within AV will result in the 
particles experiencing different electromagnetic field values. 
Therefore, E' in equation (4.5-10) must be replaced with an 
expression that also includes the effects of a changing 
electromagnetic field with position.
From Stokes’s theorem given in equation (C-63) of 
Appendix C, we obtain:
! 
! ! 
!
" E‘ • dr = JJ VxE'• dS 
(4.5-11)
69

where S is a surface bounded by a closed curve C within AV. 
Using equation (3.5-77), we have:
" E‘• dr = -- 17 
• dS 
(4.5-12)
c 
c s Dt
In this equation, we are using the substantive derivative D/Dt 
in order to include the effects of any spatial changes in the 
electromagnetic field acting upon the particles. Since the 
element of flux having charge density pE is moving with 
constant velocity U relative to the electromagnetic field (see 
Jackson, 1962), the substantive derivative D/Dt given in 
equation (C-69) of Appendix C becomes:
D
Dtt
d- + U! • V 
d t
(4.5-13)
We then obtain for equation (4.5-12):
" E ‘ • dr =
1 ff d H /! 
! 
!
- 
-- + (U • V) H • dS
cJJs d t ( 
)
S
(4.5-14)
Because the reference frame for the velocity U is the 
aether in which the electromagnetic field currently exists, the 
velocity U is absolute. Therefore, U cannot be observer 
dependent. Since U is also a constant velocity, using the vector 
identity given in equation (C-41) of Appendix C together with 
equation (3.5-80), we obtain the following equation:
! ! ! 
! ! !
Vx (U x H) = - (U • V) H
and so equation (4.5-14) becomes:
" E ‘ • dr = c fl
! ! ! ! 
!
-Vx(UxH) • dS
(4.5-16)
d H 
d t
From equation (3.5-77), we then have:
" E ‘ • dr = r r r! ! 1! ,! ! j
JJS [Vx E+c Vx (U x H)
(4.5-15)
!
• dS
(4.5-17)
or invoking Stokes’s theorem again:
! 
! 
1 
! ! X
" E‘• dr = " E• dr +-" (Ux H)• dr 
(4.5-18)
(^ 
C
and so we must have in general:
—! 
—! 
—! —!
E‘ = E + -U x H 
(4.5-19)
From equation (4.5-10), we then obtain: 
! 
! 
! !
f = PeE + c PeU x H 
(4.5-20)
or using equation (3.5-49):
—! 
—! 1 —! —!
f = PeE + -J x H 
(4.5-21) 
70

where f is known as the Lorentz force density, and represents 
the force density of an external electromagnetic field acting on a 
charge density pE in a vacuum. This relation was first 
discovered by Heaviside (1889), and then by Lorentz (1892).
Note that since U is orthogonal to U x H, the second term 
on the right side of equation (4.5-20) does not contribute to 
! ! !! 
! 
!
dw/dt as can be seen from equation (4.5-9). If the flux J is 
within a material media, equations (4.5-20) and (4.5-21) become:
-! 
_! 1 
_! _! 
_! 1 _! _! 
f = pEE + - pEU x B = pEE + -J x B
(4.5-22)
Using the definitions given in equations (3.2-3) and (3.2-4), 
we can rewrite the Lorentz force density for electromagnetic 
fields given in equations (4.5-20) and (4.5-22) as
f = PeE^
vE + 
X vH
c
(4.5-23)
f = PeE^
vE + E 
X vH
c
(4.5-24)
The force density f of electromagnetic waves is therefore a 
function of both components, vE and vH, of the transverse 
vibrational velocity of aether associated with the waves.
4.6 Polarization Vector and
Magnetization Vector
For many material media, the simple relations given by 
equations (3.5-30) and (3.5-31) do not apply, and must be 
replaced with more complex relations (see Section 3.5.2). The 
vector E may not have the same direction as the vector D, and 
the vector H may not have the same direction as the vector B. 
The proportionality constants £ and ^ must then be replaced 
by rank two tensors. 
! 
!
Approximations often used to express D and B are:
D = eE + 4 nP 
(4.6-1)
—! 
—! 
—!
B = pH + 4 nM 
(4.6-2)
while retaining £ and ^ as scalars. The vector P is known as 
the polarization vector, and the vector M is known as the 
magnetization vector. The polarization vector P can be shown 
to equal the electric dipole moment density of the material 
medium. Similarly, the magnetization vector M can be shown 
to equal the magnetic dipole moment density of the material 
medium. The directions of the vectors E and P can differ from 
each other and from D, and the directions of the vectors H and 
M can also differ from each other and from B. Dipole moments 
71

can result within a dielectric due to the presence of an external 
electromagnetic field. Although the dielectric remains neutral 
on average, bound surface charges can appear that produce an 
additional electromagnetic field.
For electromagnetic waves propagating through a material 
medium, the energy density QM can be written using equations 
(4.3-8), (4.6-1), and (4.6-2):
1 
—— / 
—! 
—! \ 
—! 
— 
—! 
—! \
QM = 8n [E• (~£E+4nP) + H• (V-H + 4nM)] 
(4.6-3) 
or
! ! ! 
1 
d B !
Vx E • dS = - - 
dB • dS
s 
c s d t
_ _ _ _ !
rr_ ^ ^ Hf dd 
^
JIVxH•dS=-c H [IT+4nJ • dS
(4.7-1)
(4.7-2)
Using Stokes’s theorem given in equation (C-63) of Appendix 
C, the left sides of these equations can be transformed into 
integrals over the closed curve C that bounds the surface S:
" E • dr
1 ff dB • ds
C S 11
(4.7-3)
Q M =— eE2 +— dH 2 +1E • P+1H • M
M 8 n 
8 n 
2 
2
(4.6-4)
" H • dr = 1 ff 
c c S
!
d D ! ! !
+ 4nJ • dS
(4.7-4)
4.7 Integral Form of Maxwell’s
Field Equations for Material 
Media
Maxwell’s differential field equations (3.5-69) through 
(3.5-72) for electromagnetic waves propagating in a material 
medium having unneutralized sources and/or sinks with K = 0 
and pH = 0 can all be written in integral form. The first two of 
these equations can be integrated over an arbitrary surface S to 
give:
Maxwell’s field equations (3.5-71) and (3.5-72) can be integrated 
over an arbitrary volume V to give:
Itt.
! !
V • DdV = 4 nJfh dV
(4.7-5)
Itt.
-! _!
V • BdV = 0
(4.7-6)
Transforming the left side of these equations using Gauss’s 
theorem and using equation (4.1-3) for the right side of 
equation (4.7-5), we have:
S
d t
72

JI
D • dS = 4 nqE
(4.7-7)
JIB • dS = 0
(4.7-8)
where qE is the electrical charge existing on the surface S. 
Equation (4.7-7) is Gauss’s law of electromagnetism. We then 
have:
qE = ± 17 D • dS
4 n s
(4.7-9)
4.8 The Trouton-Noble Experiment
In 1903 Trouton and Noble (1903a, b) conducted an 
experiment to detect the orbital motion of the Earth relative to a 
stationary aether. This experiment is equivalent to the 
Michelson-Morley experiment in purpose, but not in design.
The Trouton-Noble experiment consists essentially of a 
vertical oriented parallel plate capacitor C with the inner plates 
suspended by a wire connected to a high voltage source (see 
Figure 4.8-1). An electric field of intensity E is thereby 
established between the parallel capacitor plates.
As the Earth orbits the Sun, the motion of the charged 
capacitor plates moving in a stationary aether (with capacitor 
plate edges in the direction of motion) was expected to cause 
the electric field to move through a stationary aether. This 
motion of the electric field was expected to produce a magnetic 
field between the capacitor plates. This magnetic field would, in 
turn, exact a force on the oppositely charged capacitor plates, 
resulting in a torque about the wire.
Figure 4.8-1 A Trouton-Noble type experiment.
The magnetic force assumed to be present in the Trouton- 
Noble experiment is the Lorentz force density f:
73

—! 
—! 1 
—! —!
f = PeE+c pEU x B 
(4.8-1)
as given in equation (4.5-22), where pE is the charge density on 
the capacitor plates, and U is the orbital velocity of the Earth 
about the Sun.
Based upon the assumptions for this experiment, a torque 
was predicted and its magnitude calculated. When Trouton and 
Noble conducted their experiment, however, they found no 
indication of the presence of a torque. They obtained null 
results.
These null results were soon taken as evidence that a 
stationary aether in space does not exist. The special theory of 
relativity was then invoked to explain that the force between 
the capacitor plates must be the same for an observer at rest 
with respect to the plates regardless of whether the capacitor 
moves at a constant velocity or remains stationary relative to 
some reference frame (see Teukolsky, 1996).
This explanation is not correct. The electromagnetic field 
created by the capacitor plates moving through the aether is not 
an external field for the charge density pE of the capacitor. 
While it is true the aether is stationary for this experiment, the 
capacitor plates carry the electromagnetic field they create with 
them, continually creating a new strain field in the aether as the 
plates move on. As a result, the charge density pE never moves 
through the electromagnetic field; pE and the electromagnetic 
field move together with the orbital velocity of the Earth. 
Therefore, we must consider that U = 0 for this experiment 
since there is no difference in the velocity of pE and the velocity 
of the electromagnetic field surrounding pE .
This means that no torque should occur, and a null result 
of this experiment is to be expected. The null results of the 
Trouton-Noble experiment and of similar experiments 
conducted by Tomaschek (1925, 1926) and Chase (1926) are 
consistent then with the existence of aether.
4.9 Summary
Electric and magnetic charges are proportional to the 
magnitude of the orthogonal transverse vibrational velocities in 
aether generated by an electromagnetic source or sink. Electric 
current represents the ordered motion of sources or sinks of 
transverse elastic vibrations. Current will exist whenever 
electromagnetic charge is in motion.
74

Chapter 5
Electromagnetic Laws
75

In this chapter we will determine all the basic laws of 
electricity and magnetism as well as the main circuit 
parameters from Maxwell’s field equations. We will first 
present some scalar and vector potentials for electromagnetic 
fields.
From the vector identity given in equation (C-29) of Appendix 
C, we have:
VxV0 = 0 
(5.1-5)
where 0 is a scalar. Using equations (5.1-4) and (5.1-5), we can 
then define a scalar potential 0 such that:
5.1 Scalar and Vector Potentials 
for Electromagnetic Fields
The magnetic induction B can be expressed in terms of a 
vector potential A in the form: 
—! ! —!
B = Vx A 
(5.1-1)
since from Maxwell’s equation (3.5-72) for a material medium 
having unneutralized sources and/or sinks with K = 0 and 
pH = 0, we have:
or
V0 = —
E!+1 dA
E = -V $ -1
c d t
(5.1-6)
(5.1-7)
-! _! -! -! _!
v•B=V•VxA=0
(5.1-2)
From equations (5.1-1) and (3.5-69), we then obtain:
—! _!
Vx E =
1 dB 
c dt
1 d( V x A)
(5.1-3)
or
Vx E+1 dA = 0
(5.1-4)
By convention, the electromagnetic scalar potential 0 has 
a sign opposite to that of the gravitational potential p. We see 
that the scalar potential 0 defines the conservative part of E 
while the vector potential A defines the time varying part of E.
To determine the vector potential A uniquely, we can 
arbitrarily assign a value to the divergence of this vector. From 
equation (3.5-70) we can write:
Using equations (5.1-1) and (5.1-7) we then have:
(5.1-8)
c d t
c 
d t
1 e ! £ d E 4 n 
~> Vx B=-a7 +~ J
c d t
76

1 ! /^ !\ £ d !± 1 d A 4 n ! 
- V* (V* A)=c * [ -V0—c - J+-J
(5.1-9)
_1 d2A 
u 2 d t2
(5.1-15)
V 2A
n j 
c
and using the vector identity given in equation (C-43) of 
Appendix C:
_! ! ! ! ! ! 
!
V x (Vx A) = V (V • A) - V 2A 
(5.1-10)
we obtain:
!(! !\ w2! £^ d
V (V • A)-V 2A = —— — 
c d t
V q +1 dA + 4n^ J 
c c 31 
c
(5.1-11)
or rearranging:
ea d2A 2!! 
!r! £P ddl 4na ! Zl_ .
7dtr-’2A=-vv• A+vi *-^J (5-1-12>
We will now arbitrarily assign to the divergence of A:
V • 4 + W *’ = 0 
(5.1-13)
c d t
This is known as the Lorentz condition or Lorentz gauge.
Using this gauge equation (5.1-12) becomes:
2!! £V d2A 
4 na !
V2A - 
~t^ =---- ^J 
(5.1-14)
or from equation (3.5-43):
where u is the speed of light in the ‘average’ aether within a 
material medium. If the medium is a vacuum, we will have 
e = ^ = 1 and u = c, and equation (5.1-15) becomes:
V 2A
1 d2 A 
c 2 d t2
4 n !
c
(5.1-16)
Equations (5.1-15) and (5.1-16) are vector Helmholtz equations 
that are similar to a Poisson equation, but with the added time 
derivative. The general solution of these equations for a 
material medium is:
A = C JJJ ^dV 
(5.1-17)
and for a vacuum is:
A = c JJJ J^V 
(5.1-18)
We can also develop a Poisson equation for the scalar 
potential 0. From Maxwell’s equation (3.5-71) for a material 
medium having unneutralized sources and/or sinks with K = 0 
and pH = 0, we have:
! ! 
! !
V • D = eV • E = 4 npE
(5.1-19)
77

and using equation (5.1-7):
-V • V0 -
1 d(V • A) _ 4npE 
c d t 
£
(5.1-20)
Applying the Lorentz condition given in equation (5.1-13), we 
have:
V 20 - £^ d20 
It?
4 npE
£
(5.1-21)
or from equation (3.5-43):
V 20
1 d20 
U? It?
4 npE
£
(5.1-22)
where u is the speed of light in the ‘average’ aether within a 
material medium. For a vacuum, equation (5.1-22) becomes:
V 2$ - 
dt^ = - 4 n Pe 
(5.1-23)
Equations (5.1-22) and (5.1-23) are scalar Helmholtz equations. 
The general solution of these equations for a material medium 
is:
0 =
1
£^ 1 pEdv
(5.1-24)
and for a vacuum is:
0 = c JJJ p^dV 
(5.1-25)
Since the choice for the divergence of A is arbitrary, 
instead of equation (5.1-13), we can choose: 
! ! _
V • A = 0 
(5.1-26)
This is known as the Coulomb condition or the Coulomb 
gauge. Equation (5.1-12) for the vector potential A for a 
material medium then becomes:
„2! £u d2A 
£u dr4na !
V2A -/[V.]--/./ 
(5.1-27)
or
_2! 1 d-A 
£[i dr- -i 4nu ! 
t x
VA — UC- W c di V' }~CJ 
(5.1-28)
and equation (5.1-20) for the scalar potential 0 for a material 
medium then becomes:
V 2$ = - 4n-P- 
(5.1-29)
For a vacuum, equations (5.1-28) and (5.1-29) become:
_2! 1 d2A 1 dr4n ! 
z x
VA - c? w = c * W--J 
(5.1-30)
V 20 = - 4 nPE 
(5.1-31)
78

5.2 Basic Laws of Electricity and
Magnetism
All the basic laws of electricity and magnetism can be 
derived from Maxwell’s field equations in differential or 
integral form. The historical process was just the reverse, with 
Maxwell using the empirically obtained basic laws of electricity 
and magnetism to develop his field equations. We have now 
succeeded in deriving Maxwell’s field equations theoretically, 
however, from a consideration of transverse elastic waves 
propagating in aether. Therefore, we can reverse the historical 
process and use Maxwell’s field equations to derive the basic 
laws of electricity and magnetism.
Electrostatic and magnetostatic conditions can be 
considered to prevail within a material medium when no time­
varying electromagnetic fields are present and when the 
internal charge densities and currents are constant (time 
, 
, • 
, • S' 
, 
• , • 
^ 
1
stationary). The electric and magnetic field intensities E and H 
are then a function only of position, and not of time.
5.2.1 
Ampere’s Law
If in Maxwell’s field equation (3.5-70) we have d D/ d t = 0:
d D 
d t
<< J
(5.2-1) 
as will be true for any material medium that is a good 
conductor (such as a metal), then we can write:
V X H = — J
c
(5.2-2)
This equation is known as Ampere's law. Therefore, Maxwell’s 
field equation (3.5-70) can be considered to be a generalized 
form of Ampere’s law. From equations (4.7-4) and (4.1-13) we 
also have:
" H • dr = — 17 J • dS = — IE 
C 
C A S C
(5.2-3)
which is the integral form of Ampere’s law. Andre Ampere 
developed his law during the 1820s by considering electric 
circuits in terms of infinitesimal elements (Ampere, 1820a, 
1820b, 1826, 1827). He concluded that magnetism is really 
electromagnetism since it involves electric currents. Using 
equation (3.2-4), we can express Ampere’s law in terms of the 
transverse aether vibrational velocity !H :
8nnZ " Vh • dr = — ff J • dS = — Ie 
(5.2-4)
C 
c 
A S 
c
which gives the relation of the transverse vibration velocity !H 
around a small surface element AS to the current IE flowing 
through A S.
79

5.2.2 
Faraday’s Law and Lenz’s Law
Maxwell’s field equation (3.5-69):
V X E! = - C dB 
(5.2’5)
is known as Faraday’s law or Faraday’s law of induction. 
Faraday discovered that motion of a magnetic field relative to a 
conductor produces an electric current in the conductor. In 
other words, a changing magnetic field results in an electric 
field producing an electric current in a conductor. This can be 
compared to the discovery that electricity in motion produces a 
magnetic field (see Section 5.2.4). Defining O to be the flux of 
!
the magnetic flux density B, we have:
O = JI,* •dS
(5.2-6)
The electric field induced by the variation of the magnetic 
field will act to impede the magnetic field variation as can be 
seen from the negative sign on the right side of equation (5.2-5). 
This statement is known as Lenz’s law. Faraday’s law of 
induction can be written in integral form as given in equation 
(4.7-3):
!E • dr -1 [[¥ • ds 
c s d t
(5.2-7)
or using equation (5.2-6):
" E • dr = -1
(5.2-8)
Faraday published his experimental research in electricity 
in three volumes (Faraday, 1844, 1847, 1855). Using equations 
(3.2-3), (3.2-4), and (3.5-31), we can express Faraday’s law in 
integral form in terms of the transverse aether vibrational 
velocities vE and vH :
? JI
vE • dr =
d vH 
d t
!
• dS
(5.2-9)
5.2.3 
Coulomb’s Law
The electromagnetic force F on a stationary charge qb 
contained within a very small volume AVb of a vacuum can be 
obtained by integrating the Lorentz force density given in 
equation (4.5-21) over the volume AVb:
F! = fff fdV = fff PeEdV
AVb 
AVb
(5.2-10)
where J = 0. We will also assume that E results from a 
stationary charge qa not contained within AVb. We can then 
write:
80

F = E [17 pEdv = qbE!
NVb
(5.2-11)
From equations (5.2-11) and (5.2-15) we have finally:
(5.2-16)
By taking qb to be a unit test charge, equation (5.2-11) provides 
the force such a charge will experience due to the electric field 
E.
If AS is the surface area of a very small volume element 
containing qa, we have from equation (4.1-7):
17 E • dS = 4 n qa
N S
(5.2-12)
We can now integrate over a sphere of arbitrary fixed radius 
and surface area S centered on the charge qa. Since the charge 
qa is stationary, the field E will be stationary and will be 
assumed to be symmetric:
!E = Err 
(5.2-13)
where Er will be constant for a given radius r from qa, and 
where r is directed away from qa. We then obtain from 
equations (5.2-12) and (5.2-13):
Er 4 nr2 = 4 nq^ 
(5.2-14)
and so:
E = % r 
r
(5.2-15) 
F! = qaqE 
r 2
which is Coulomb’s law. It states that between two arbitrary 
stationary charges qa and qb there is a force F that is 
proportional to the product of these charges and inversely 
proportional to the square of the distance between these 
charges. Coulomb (1785a, b) verified this law using a torsion 
balance to measure the force between small charged pith balls. 
Coulomb’s law is valid only for stationary fields (electrostatic 
conditions). The inverse square nature of electrical force was 
first inferred by Priestley (1767).
5.2.4 
Biot-Savart Law
Equation (5.1-18) for the vector potential A:
A = c Jff J dV 
(5.2-17)
can be written as:
A = 1 
JdSdr =1 fff 1 (J • dS) dr 
(52-18)
c v r c vr '
where the vector differential dr has the same direction as J.
From equation (4.1-13), we can then write:
81

dA = - — !r 
c r
(5.2-19)
the first theoretical effort towards the unification of electricity 
and magnetism into electromagnetism.
where IE is the electric current flowing through the surface 
area. Therefore, from equation (5.1-1) for a vacuum:
! ! ! Ip ! dr 
dH = Vx dA = — Vx —
(5.2-20)
Expanding by using the vector identity given in equation (C-28) 
of Appendix C, we have:
5.2.5 
Ohm’s Law
Electrical conductivity refers to the capability of electrical 
charge carriers to be transported within a material medium by 
an electric field. For a homogeneous isotropic material medium 
under conditions of steady-state conduction, we will now 
! 
• 
! 
!
determine the relation between the electric flux vector J for an
dH = IE- 
c
1 
(1 ^
-Vxdr + V - x dr
(5.2-21)
! 
! 
! ! r* 
! 
!
electric current and the electric field intensity E associated with
and then using the vector identities given in equations (C-33) 
and (C-11) of Appendix C, we obtain the Biot-Savart law:
dH! = IL dr^LL 
(5.2-22)
c 
r 3
or
J C !r V r
H = " -p- 
(5.2-23)
where C is a curve that encircles the conductor. This law was 
established by Biot and Savart (1820) and made quantitative the 
experimental discovery by Oersted in 1820 that electricity in 
motion produces a magnetic field (which was the first 
discovery of electromagnetism). The Biot-Savart law was then
an external electromagnetic field. From 
equations (3.5-69) and (3.5-70), we can write:
Maxwell’s field
—! _!
Vx E = - 1 dB 
c d t
(5.2-24)
V X H =1 — + — J = - — + — J 
c d t 
c c d t 
c
Taking the curl of equation (5.2-24), we have:
! Z! !X 
n d(VxH)
Vx (Vx E) = - n^
c 
d t
(5.2-25)
(5.2-26)
Taking the time derivative of equation (5.2-25), we have:
d(Vx H) = g d2E 4 n dJ
d t 
c d t2 c d t
(5.2-27)
r
\ r 7
^ d H 
c d t
82

From equations (5.2-26) and (5.2-27) we can write:
! !
Vx (Vx E) = - li £ d2E 4 n^ d J 
~tf 
~tt
(5.2-28)
Using the vector identity given in equation (C-43) of Appendix 
C:
2 ! 
! ! !
E 4n^dJ
V ( V • E ) _V-E = - 
— 
29
For an external electromagnetic field we have from equation 
(3.3-7):
___ !
v • E = 0 
(5.2-30)
Equation (5.2-29) then becomes:
2E _ £ d2E 4n^ dJ 
c2 d t2 
c2 d t
(5.2-31)
and from equation (3.5-43):
1 d2 E + 4 n 1 d J 
u2 d t2 £ u2 d t
(5.2-32)
where u is the speed of light in the ‘average’ aether within the 
material medium.
We know electromagnetic waves are greatly attenuated in 
any conducting medium. Good electrical conductors are good 
conductors of electrical current and poor conductors of 
electromagnetic field energy. Equation (5.2-32), which is the 
wave equation for electromagnetic waves in a conducting 
medium, will have the required form of a damped wave 
equation if we have:
J = oE! 
(5.2-33)
where o is a scalar. Equation (5.2-32) can then be written as the 
damped wave equation:
1 d2 E 4 no 1 d E 
u2 d t2 £ u2 d t
(5.2-34)
This type of equation is known as a telegrapher’s 
equation. The relation given in equation (5.2-33) between the 
! 
!
electric current density J and the electric field intensity E is a 
form of Ohm’s law that has been found to be generally valid 
when the electric field intensity is not too strong (Ohm, 1827). 
The scalar o is known as electrical conductivity. 
!
We can derive an equation for H similar to equation 
(5.2-34). From equations (5.2-25) and (5.2-33) we can write:
v x H=e-dE+4nffE 
c d t c
(5.2-35)
Taking the curl and using equation (5.2-24), we have:
e /e ! 
£a d2H 4nao dH
Vx (Vx H)=-___ 
_ 
(5.2-36)
83

From the vector identity given in equation (C-43) of Appendix 
C and using equation (3.5-43), we obtain:
—! —! —! 
—!
V (V • H)-V 2H =
1 d2 H 4 ns 1 d H 
u2 d t2 e u2 d t
(5.2-37)
For an external electromagnetic field, we have from equation 
(3.3-8):
! !
V • H = 0
Equation (5.2-37) then becomes:
v2w- 1 d2H . 4no 1 dH
V H = U2 
+~ U2 IT
(5.2-38)
(5.2-39)
which can be compared to equation (5.2-34).
Equations (5.2-34) and (5.2-39) are damped wave 
equations whose solutions are propagating transverse waves 
that are being attenuated in an absorbing material medium. 
Using equations (3.2-3) and (3.2-4), we can write these two 
damped wave equations in terms of aether vibrational 
velocities:
V72 ! - 1 d vE _l
V vE = u2 d t2 +
4 no 1 d vE
------- 2 ^7" 
£ u d t
. _ 1 d2vH 4no 1 dvH 
H u2 d t2 
£ u2 d t
(5.2-40)
(5.2-41)
Material media are often categorized based upon their 
ability to conduct electric currents. Conductors generally offer 
at least some resistance to the motion of charges (which motion 
constitutes electric current). There is a wide range of media 
from good conductors to poor conductors (poor conductors are 
dielectrics or insulators). The value of the electrical 
conductivity o for a good conductor, such as a metal, can be 
1020 times greater than that for a poor conductor. A good 
conductor in motion can produce the same magnetic effect as a 
current flowing in a stationary conductor. A good conductor 
will be a good absorber of electromagnetic waves. For a very 
poor conducting medium we will have o ~ 0, and equations 
(5.2-38) and (5.2-39) then become:
. . 1 d2E!
v 2 E = u dE 
(5.2-42)
V 2 H = -12- 
u
d2 H 
d t2
(5.2-43)
which are the vector wave equations (3.5-41) and (3.5-42) for 
electromagnetic waves propagating in the aether within a 
material medium having neutralized sources and sinks. From 
equation (5.2-33) we see that if o ~ 0 then J = 0, and so no 
current will be flowing.
84

5.3 
Electromagnetic Circuit 
Parameters
Some of the more important parameters encountered in 
electromagnetic circuits include: current I, voltage V, 
resistance R, capacitance C, and inductance L. Current has 
already been defined in Section 4.1.2. We will now define 
voltage, resistance, capacitance, and inductance.
5.3.1 
Voltage
If we consider a material medium such as a wire in which 
an electromagnetic field is present under electrostatic 
conditions, we can use equation (3.5-69) to write:
! ! !
Vx E = 0 
(5.3-1)
Therefore, E can be expressed in terms of a scalar potential yE: 
! !
E = ^Ve 
(5.3-2)
since from the vector identity given in equation (C-29) of 
Appendix C we have: 
! ! 
—! 
! —!
W?E = 0 = Vx E 
(5.3-3)
The differential potential or voltage V along a length l of the 
wire is then defined by:
i^E = l
I
V =
VpE • dr =
E • dr
(5.3-4)
where dr is a differential distance along the wire. From 
equation (3.2-3) we then have: 
8nnZ j vE • dr
(5.3-5)
V =
and so voltage V is a measure of the vibrational velocity vE of 
electromagnetic waves over some distance l.
5.3.2 Resistance
The resistance R of a wire having a length l and a cross 
sectional area S is given by:
J E • dr
J E • dr
R = V
I JJ J • dS Jj ffE • dS 
(5.3-6)
where we have used equations (5.3-4), (4.1-13), and (5.2-33).
From equation (3.2-3) we then have:
I!' • dr
ft
(5.3-7)
&vE • dS
R =
85

Ohm’s law (derived in Section 5.2.5) is usually given in the 
form:
V = RI
(5.3-8)
We then have:
JvE • dr = RJJ&vE• dS
(5.3-9)
5.3.3 Capacitance
In a material medium consisting of two conductors 
separated by a small distance l such that the facing surfaces of 
the conductors have the surface charges + qE and - qE, the 
capacitance C is defined by:
C _q_ 
—
V
(5.3-10)
where V is the voltage difference between the conductors. 
Using equations (4.7-9) and (5.3-4) we can write:
1 
! ! 
1 
! !
^n JJ?• dS = 4^ JJ/£• dS 
J E • dr 
J E • dr
(5.3-11)
From equation (3.2-3) we then have:
[I" evF • dS 
r_ 4 n 
s E
J vE • dr
(5.3-12)
5.3.4 
Inductance
A current I flowing through a closed conductor of cross­
sectional area S will generate a field B. The inductance L is 
defined as:
L =
ft B • dS
ftpH • dS
I
ft J • dS
(5.3-13)
or using equation (5.2-33):
L =
ftpH • dS
ft
(5.3-14)
oE • dS
From equations (3.2-3) and (3.2-4) we then have:
L = JJ p.vH• dS
ft.
(5.3-15)
ovE • dS
86

5.4 
Summary
From Maxwell’s field equations Ampere’s law, Faraday’s 
law, Lenz’s law, Coulomb’s law, Ohm’s law, and the Biot-Savart 
law can all be determined. The circuit parameters voltage, 
resistance, capacitance and inductance can also be derived 
using Maxwell’s field equations.
87

Chapter 6
Electromagnetic Radiation
88

In this chapter we will present the equations describing 
the reflection and refraction of electromagnetic plane waves, 
and we will derive Fresnel’s formulas. We will also determine 
retarded solutions of Maxwell’s equations that describe 
electromagnetic radiation produced by accelerating charged 
particles.
6.1 Reflection and Refraction of
Electromagnetic Waves
The speed of electromagnetic waves in a material medium 
is a function of the optical density of the medium. The optical 
density of a material medium is the density of aether within the 
medium (see Masse, 2022). As evidence for this dependency of 
light speed on optical density, reflection and refraction of 
electromagnetic waves will occur at any boundary separating 
two material media having different optical densities. The 
energy of the incident waves in aether will be partitioned to the 
reflected and refracted waves.
Since electromagnetic waves are transverse elastic waves 
propagating in aether, the conditions that must be satisfied in 
the vibrating aether at a boundary (interface) separating two 
material media can be obtained from elasticity theory. It is first 
necessary, however, to determine if any compressional elastic 
waves are generated at the boundary during the reflection and 
refraction of transverse elastic waves.
The reflection and refraction of electromagnetic waves 
actually occurs only within aether since these waves only 
propagate in aether. Moreover, reflection and refraction of 
electromagnetic waves occurs only in proximity to nucleons 
since that is the only place where there is an increase in aether 
density.
Because nucleons are field flow sinks for aether, there is a 
strong accelerating flow of aether in proximity to nucleons. The 
flow acceleration of aether into a nucleon is controlled both by 
the strength of the aether sink (nucleon) and by the density of 
aether (see Masse, 2022). Any small density variations in aether 
associated with compressional waves propagating in aether 
will immediately be suppressed in proximity to a nucleon by 
corresponding variations in the rate of aether flow into the 
nucleon. In this way the required flow of aether into a nucleon 
is maintained.
The only waves in aether that can exist and propagate in 
proximity to nucleons, therefore, are waves that do not involve 
any density variation; that is, transverse waves. As a result no 
compressional waves in aether can be generated during the 
reflection and refraction of electromagnetic waves in a material 
medium, and so no energy can be carried away by such 
89

compressional waves. It is not necessary then to attribute 
unusual elastic properties to the aether in order to explain the 
absence of compressional waves in aether as was done by 
MacCullagh (1848) and many others. It is simply because 
matter is a field flow sink for aether that compressional waves 
are prevented from being created in the aether during the 
reflection and refraction of transverse waves near matter.
To describe the reflection and refraction occurring as 
electromagnetic waves impinge on a boundary separating two 
material media, we then need to determine only the following 
amplitude ratios:
1. 
The ratio of reflected transverse wave amplitude to 
incident transverse wave amplitude.
2. 
The ratio of refracted transverse wave amplitude to 
incident transverse wave amplitude.
Each of these amplitude ratios requires two boundary 
conditions for their determination.
The Poynting vector SP represents the elastic energy 
momentum density of electromagnetic waves propagating in 
aether. Across a boundary between two material media having 
different optical densities, aether particles will be contiguous 
and will remain so if an elastic wave impinges on the boundary. 
We can therefore expect that, across such a boundary, 
continuity will exist in the normal component of SP when a 
wave strikes the boundary.
Figure 6.1-1 The reflection and refraction of plane waves at a 
plane boundary between two different material 
media.
We will now consider two different homogeneous 
isotropic material media which we will designate as medium 
(1) and medium (2) as shown in Figure 6.1-1. Assuming a plane 
boundary exists between the two media, we will select a 
90

coordinate system such that the z-axis is taken as the normal to 
the boundary between these two media, with z = 0 being on the 
boundary. The x-y plane is then on the boundary. Because of 
the molecular structure of matter, the boundary between two 
material media will not actually be mathematically sharp.
For an electromagnetic wave impinging on the boundary 
of the two media, continuity of the normal component of SP 
across the media boundary can then be expressed using 
equation (3.2-5): 
c
c
E x H “I(1)
4 n 
Jz
E x H “I(2) 
4 n 
J:
(6.1-1)
or
E(1) h (1) - e (1) h (1) = e (2) h (2) - e (2) h (2) 
(6 121
‘x ^y y xE = x ^y y 
(6.1-2)
Since the intensities E and H are independent of each other, 
equation (6.1-2) will be true in general only if:
EX'1 = E?’ 
Ey'1 = Ey2 ’ 
(6.1-3)
I/' = H - ) 
H = H2 
(6.1-4)
or, equivalently, if the components of E and H tangent to the 
boundary of the media are continuous across the boundary of 
the media (Planck, 1919b). The continuity of the components of
E and H tangent to the boundary of the media provide the 
necessary boundary conditions for determining the amplitude 
ratios of reflected and refracted electromagnetic waves.
6.1.1 
Plane Wave Parameters
To greatly simplify the calculations, we will assume that 
the electromagnetic waves are plane waves. This assumption is 
valid far from the source (compared to the wavelength) where 
any small region of a spherical wave front can be approximated 
by the flat surface of a plane wave.
The incident plane E waves will exhibit both a spatial and 
a time variation given by:
E! = Eo eik!-^ 
(6.1-5)
where k is the wave vector, propagation vector, or wave 
number vector, ! is the line position vector of the point being 
considered on the wave front, a) = 2 nv is the circular 
frequency, and t is time. The wave vector is in the direction of 
propagation of the plane wave.
The incident ray is taken to lie in the x-z plane (which is 
therefore the plane of incidence as shown in Figure 6.1-1). The 
incident, reflected, and refracted waves must all coincide at the 
boundary. The vibration periods of all these waves must then 
be identical at the boundary, and they must continue to be 
91

identical as the waves propagate. Therefore, the frequency v of 
the waves is unchanged by reflection or refraction. Newton 
(1730) was the first to observe that the color of light does not 
change upon reflection or refraction.
The refracted plane waves are then given by:
!
! 
! 
.' !—f_ !
E' = E0 eik-r- i°t 
(6.1-6)
and the reflected plane waves are given by:
E" = E0‘ e
!
ik • r-irnt
(6.1-7)
Since the incident, reflected, and refracted waves must all 
coincide at the boundary, the spatial and time variation must be 
the same for all points of the wavefront at the boundary. 
Therefore, at z = 0 we must have:
ik •! -iat = 0 = ik' •! -iwt
= ik" • ! - iwt 
==0
(6.1-8)
= = 0
or
k • !
= k' • r
z = 0
= k" • r
z = 0
z = 0
(6.1-9)
Because the incident ray is in the x-z plane, ky = 0, and so at 
z = 0 we obtain from equation (6.1-9):
kxx = k‘ x + ky y 
(6.1-10)
This equation can hold for any value of y, and so we must have 
k'y = 0. Therefore, equation (6.1-10) becomes:
kx = kx 
(6.1-11)
Similarly we must have ky = 0, and so we obtain finally:
kx = kx = kX 
(6.1-12)
Since the plane of incidence is the x-z plane and since 
ky = ky = ky = 0, the incident, reflected, and refracted rays are 
coplanar and lie in the plane of incidence, which is orthogonal 
to the media interface. Equation (6.1-12) can be written as:
k sin p = k' sin p' = k‘ sin p" 
(6.1-13)
where the wave numbers k, k', and k" are given by:
k = 2n = 2nv = „ 
k' = ^ 
k‘ = « 
(6.1-14)
A u u 
u 
u
and where u = Xv is the speed of light in medium (1), and 
u' = X'v is the speed of light in medium (2). We also have:
k = - = k ‘ 
(6.1-15)
u
since the medium for k and k‘ is the same. We then have from 
equation (6.1-13):
P = P” 
(6.1-16)
and so the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence. The 
equality of these angles for reflected light waves indicates that 
92

the waves are not bouncing off the surfaces of matter particles 
since that would require a “fortuitous arrangement” of particles 
in the body, as Newton (1730) noted. Rather we can now see 
that the reflection must be occurring in the larger and more 
diffuse region of aether density increase that surrounds 
nucleons.
Using equations (6.1-13) and (6.1-14) and multiplying by 
c/ w, we have:
c sinP = — sinP 
(6.1-17)
u u
or
n sinP = n' sinP 
(6.1-18)
where n is the absolute index of refraction in medium (1), and 
n' is the absolute index of refraction in medium (2). Equation 
(6.1-18) is known as Snell’s law for refracted waves. Therefore, 
all electromagnetic waves follow the empirical laws of 
reflection and refraction determined for visible light waves.
Since the incident plane waves can have arbitrary 
polarization, we will now resolve their aether vibrations into 
two components so as to yield plane waves with specified 
polarizations: one polarization will be orthogonal to the plane 
of incidence, and the other polarization will be in (parallel to) 
the plane of incidence. In preparation for this, we will use 
Maxwell s field equations to obtain a relation for plane H 
waves in terms of plane E waves.
! ! 
-^! 
_!_
6.1.2 
Relation between e and h Plane
Waves
From Maxwell’s field equation (3.3-5) for free space, we 
have:
1 d H - -
- c -H- = Vx E 
(6.1-19)
! 
!
The time variation of E and H plane waves must be identical 
since they are both simply vector components of the same 
electromagnetic wave. Both E and H plane waves must then 
oscillate in phase, orthogonal to each other and to the 
propagation direction. Therefore, both E and H will go to zero 
at the same time, and will become a maximum at the same time 
as shown in Figure 6.1-2.
Using the same time variation for H as given in equation 
(6.1-5) for E, and taking the time derivative indicated in 
equation (6.1-19), we can write:
i - H = V x E 
(6.1-20)
c
or
93

i - H=(dr-¥■1 e. 
c ydy zz)
-(M JE1
I 3x 
dz: )
(d Ey 
, X x
Ey 1
y y)
ey +
z
(6.1-21)
! ! ! 
! • 
!
Figure 6.1-2 Propagating E and H plane waves showing 
relative orientation.
From the spatial variation given in equation (6.1-5), and 
taking the derivatives indicated in equation (6.1-21), we have:
i cH = i ( kyEZ — kzEy ) 4 - i (kxEz - kzEx) ey
+ i (kxEy - kyEx) ez 
(6.1-22)
and so:
m ! ! !
C H = k x E 
(6.1-23)
or from equations (6.1-14) and (3.5-5):
! C !! 
! 
! 
^ !
H = — k xE = — kkxE = — kxE = nkxE (6.1-24)
where k is a unit wave vector, and n is the absolute index of 
refraction for medium (1). The components of k, ic', and kc" can 
be obtained from Figure 6.1-1, and are summarized in Table 
6.1-1.
Table 6.1-1 Components of the unit wave vectors.
94

6.1.3 
Plane Waves Polarized Orthogonal
to the Plane of Incidence
From Figure 6.1-1, we see that plane waves polarized 
orthogonal to the plane of incidence (x-z plane) will be 
polarized in the y direction. The wave equations for E can then 
be written as scalar equations in terms of components 
orthogonal (±) to the plane of incidence:
Ey = E± eik! -iat 
(6.1-25)
Ey = Ey ek-- - ial 
(6.1-26)
E = Ey . ' r-im 
(6.1-27)
At z = 0 the y components of E are tangential to the boundary. 
Using equation (6.1-8) and the boundary conditions given in 
equation (6.1-3), we have:
E; + E" = e;
(6.1-28)
Using equations (6.1-24) and (6.1-22) and Table 6.1-1, the 
wave equations for H can also be written as scalar equations in 
terms of components orthogonal ( ±) to the plane of incidence:
_!
H = - n cos fiEL ea•r!-im
(6.1-29)
H‘ = - n’cos fi E± e 'r-iat 
(6.1-30)
H‘ = n cos F' E'L e,k'!-iat 
(6.1-31)
At z = 0 the x components of H are tangential to the boundary. 
Using equations (6.1-8), (6.1-16), and (6.1-4), we have:
- n cosP (E±-E") = - n‘ cosP E" 
(6.1-32)
From equations (6.1-28) and (6.1-32) we obtain:
E" n cos P - n' cos P 
E± n cos P + n' cos P
E2 
2 n cos P
(6.1-33)
(6.1-34)
E2 n cos P + n' cos P
These are the amplitude ratios of reflected and refracted 
electromagnetic waves polarized orthogonal to the plane of 
incidence. Equations (6.1-33) and (6.1-34) are called Fresnel 
equations for perpendicularly polarized light.
6.1.4 
Plane Waves Polarized Parallel to
the Plane of Incidence
For plane waves polarized parallel to the plane of 
incidence, we use the wave orientations shown in Figure 6.1-3.
95

Figure 6.1-3 Geometry of E waves polarized parallel to the 
plane of incidence.
The wave equations for E can then be written as scalar 
equations in terms of components parallel ( || ) to the plane of 
incidence:
Ex = - E! cos P eik!-iat 
(6.1-35)
E‘ = - E! cos P' ekf-iat 
(6.1-36)
E‘ = E‘‘ cosP"e'k'"! ^ 
(6.1-37)
E. = E! sinp eikr(6.1-38)
EZ = E‘ sinp'eik!^ 
(6.1-39)
E“ = E!‘ sinP"eikr't 
(6.1-40)
At z = 0, using equation (6.1-8) and the boundary conditions 
given in equation (6.1-3) for the x components of E, we have:
- cos0(E! - E‘‘) = - cosft E‘ 
(6.1-41)
Using equations (6.1-24) and (6.1-22) and Table 6.1-1, the 
wave equations for H can also be written as scalar equations in 
terms of components parallel ( || ) to the plane of incidence:
Hy = n (sin2 P + cos2 p) E„ eik!" = n E, eikr-im 
(6.1-42)
h‘ = n‘/sin2ft‘+cos2p‘\e‘e^r-iat=n‘e‘e^"—iat ((zi /iq\ 
y — n ( sin p + cos p ) ! e — n ! e (6.1-43)
2 ^2^^^^ 2^^2Qff\ ikiil’"• r-itet 
r?ff ,.-i"•"-i®t
y = n ( sin p + cos p ) E ‘ e 
= nE ‘ e (6.1-44)
From equation (6.1-8) and the boundary conditions in equation 
(6.1-4) for the y components of H at z = 0, we have:
96

nE! + nE ‘‘ = n' E ‘
Using equations (6.1-41) and (6.1-45) we get:
E‘‘ n' cos P - n cos P
E! n' cos P + n cos P
(6.1-45)
(6.1-46)
E J‘= tan (P - P)
E! tan (P + P)
E‘_ 
2 sin P cos P
E! = sin (P + P) cos (p - P)
(6.1-50)
(6.1-51)
E‘ 
2 n cos P
E! n' cos P + n cos P
(6.1-47)
These equations were first derived by Fresnel (1823) using the 
concept of an elastic aether.
These are the amplitude ratios of reflected and refracted 
electromagnetic waves polarized parallel to the plane of 
incidence. Equations (6.1-46) and (6.1-47) are called Fresnel 
equations for parallel polarized light.
6.1.5 
Fresnel’s Formulas
The four equations (6.1-33), (6.1-34), (6.1-46), and (6.1-47) 
are known as Fresnel’s formulas. These equations are usually 
written in a slightly different form obtained using Snell’s law of 
refraction given in equation (6.1-18):
E’L_ sin (P - P) 
 
— 
__ _ 
E±----sin (P + P )
E^_ 2 sinP cosp 
E± sin (P + P)
(6.1-48)
(6.1-49)
6.2 Electromagnetic Radiation
We will now consider electromagnetic waves that are 
propagating through free space. We will assume that the waves 
were generated by charged particles in accelerated motion 
located some distance away. Since the sources are accelerating, 
both flux vectors J and K will vary with time. We will also 
! ! ! 
!
assume that J and K are irrotational. Maxwell s field equations 
(3.5-65) through (3.5-68) can then be written for free space as:
V x E = -1 dH - — K 
(6.2-1)
c d t c
V X H! =1 dE + — J 
(6.2-2)
c d t 
c
! ! _
v • E = 0 
(6.2-3)
! !
V • H = 0 
(6.2-4)
97

Taking the curl of equations (6.2-1) and (6.2-2), we have:
- -
- <~ 
1 d(VxH) 4n ■ -\
Vx(VxE) = - - 
dt 1 - — (VxK) 
(6.2-5)
^ ■--
. 
. i d(VxE) 4n ■ -\
Vx(VxH) = - Y t 1 + -c^(VxJ) 
(6.2-6)
V 2 H
V 2 E
1 d2 E _ 4 n d J
’ c2 d t
(6.2-11)
c 2 d t - ■
1 d2 H
4 n d K
(6.2-12)
■ ---
c 2
d t2 = c2 d t
These two equations are satisfied by the retarded solutions:
Using the vector identity given in equation (C-43) of Appendix 
C, we obtain:
E = 1 Ifff 1J dV 
c2 dtJJJvr
(6.2-13)
! !
!/! !\ O! 1 d( VX H ) 4 n ! !\
V (V • E)-V2 E = --±drL - — (Vx K)
(6.2-7)
H =
-2 — fff 1K dV 
c 2 d t 
Vr
(6.2-14)
! !
! /! !\ O! 1 d( VX E ) 4 n ! !\ 
V (V • H)-V2 H = 
+—(Vx J)
(6.2-8)
From equations (6.2-3) and (6.2-4), and assuming that J and K 
to be irrotational, we have:
V 2 E! = 1 d( ^x H) 
c 
d t
(6.2-9)
2! 
1 d(Vx E)
V 2 H = ---±- 
c d t
(6.2-10)
Using equations (6.2-2) and (6.2-1), we then obtain:
! 
! 
!
where J and K are functions of position r and retarded time 
t - r/c.
The radiation from an electromagnetic source or sink will 
propagate a distance r in a time r/c. The arrival time for this 
radiation at a point r in space is given by the delayed time or 
retarded time t , where:
r
T = t---
c
(6.2-15)
Retarded solutions of Maxwell’s equations describe 
electromagnetic radiation produced by accelerating charged 
particles that cause the flux vectors J and K to vary with time 
(see Shadowitz, 1975). Equations (6.2-13) and (6.2-14) are a 
98

consequence of all waves requiring time to propagate (waves 
can only propagate in a physical medium, and only with a 
finite speed). These retarded solutions of Maxwell’s equations 
are in excellent agreement with observed electromagnetic 
radiation, thus providing another indication that electro­
magnetic energy propagates as waves in aether.
Since a charged particle is a steady source or sink for 
transverse elastic waves in aether, any charged particle must 
continuously radiate transverse elastic waves (electromagnetic 
waves) whether the particle is at rest, in uniform motion, or in 
accelerated motion. Therefore, a charged particle is always 
surrounded by a self-generated electromagnetic field, and any 
acceleration of the particle will then result in a change in this 
field.
If a charged particle is accelerated for a time At from an 
initial position O to a final position P, a radiating disturbance 
will be produced in the electromagnetic field as the field adjusts 
to the new position of the particle (see Figure 6.2-1). Since 
electromagnetic waves propagate in aether with a speed c, at 
distances r > c A t the electromagnetic field will still correspond 
to the initial location of the charged particle at point O. At 
distances r < c At the electromagnetic field will correspond to 
the new location of the charged particle at point P
Figure 6.2-1 Radiation field of an accelerating charged 
particle. Waves having large amplitude occur 
within the shaded ring defined by r ~ c At.
The transition zone between the two field patterns at a 
distance of r ~ c At represents a disturbance in the aether in the 
form of generally larger amplitude waves of electromagnetic 
energy that radiate outward with speed c. Therefore, an 
accelerating charged particle always radiates larger-amplitude 
waves of electromagnetic energy than a non-accelerating 
99

particle. The electric field intensity of these larger-amplitude 
waves is directly proportional to the acceleration of the charge.
The larger-amplitude waves formed by charged particle 
acceleration result from a concentration of electromagnetic field 
energy in the aether, creating a propagating large-amplitude 
disturbance in the aether. As we can see from Figure 6.2-1, such 
a concentration of energy exists for all directions of radiation 
except parallel to the direction of particle acceleration. This is a 
consequence of the wave motion of electromagnetic waves 
being transverse, and so the waves have no concentration of 
aether motion along the path of particle motion.
The larger-amplitude waves generated by acceleration of 
a charged particle have much more energy than the low 
energy waves continuously radiated by a charged particle. It 
is for this reason accelerating charged particles alone appear to 
generate electromagnetic waves. This has led to the erroneous 
conclusion that charged particles must be accelerating for 
electromagnetic wave radiation to occur.
On the contrary, accelerating charged particles could not 
radiate observable electromagnetic waves if charged particles 
did not continuously radiate electromagnetic waves. Without 
this continuing radiation, there would be no existing electro­
magnetic field, the changes in which cause the formation of the 
more energetic electromagnetic waves. That charged particles 
continuously radiate electromagnetic waves can be inferred 
from the existence of the electromagnetic Poynting vector even 
in static electromagnetic fields “where there is no observable energy 
flow” (Pugh and Pugh, 1967; and Shadowitz, 1975).
6.3 Summary
Equations describing the reflection and refraction of 
electromagnetic plane waves can be determined and Fresnel’s 
formulas derived using Maxwell’s field equations. Retarded 
solutions of Maxwell’s equations describing electromagnetic 
radiation produced by accelerating charged particles can also 
be obtained from Maxwell’s field equations.
100

Appendix A
Reynold’s Transport
Theorem for Aether in 
Free Space
Let AV be a very small constant volume element (control 
volume) moving in free space. This volume element will always 
contain only aether. Moreover it will always contain the same 
amount of aether. We wish to evaluate an integral of the form:
D U£p-
(A-1)
the integrand ZP not only with time, but also with the position 
of AV in free space. Using the substantive derivative:
D
Dtt
d-+'! •57 
d t
(A-2)
where u) is the flow velocity of the aether, we have since AV is 
constant:
DijJJ Z?dv = fff I(ZP)dv + JIf V• (zpu)dv
Dt 
AV 
AVd t 
AV
or using vector identity (C-16) of Appendix C:
D fib^=
JU. if
^+Z+Z^t 
d t +Zu • vfi+£V • (zu) !• dv
or
D Wv^=
U£k [f
+ U Np +p
d t +V • ($»)
dV
(A-3)
(A-4)
(A-5)
where Z is aether density, and where P is any scalar property 
of aether. The substantive derivative accounts for changes in
Using the equation of continuity for aether density:
101

Z+V • (ZU)=0 
d t
(A-6)
equation (A-5) becomes for free space:
D JJJ Z 
V=JJJ Z [^+u • VP ] dV
DiJJ Jw 
JJJw L dt 
J
(A-7)
since aether density is constant in free space. Using equation 
(A-2) we have:
D tif^=,<
(A-8)
which is Reynold’s transport theorem for aether in free space 
(see Aris, 1962; Malvern, 1969; and Salby, 1996).
102

Appendix B
The Greek Alphabet
Alpha
a
A
Beta
P
B
Gamma
Y
r
Delta
8
A
Epsilon
£
E
Zeta
z
Z
Eta
n
H
Theta
e
0
Iota
i
I
Kappa
K
K
Lambda
A
A
Mu
p
M
Nu
V
N
Xi
z
M
Omicron
o
o
Pi
n
n
Rho
P
p
Sigma
o
E
Tau
T
T
Upsilon
U
T
Phi
& V
O
Chi
X
X
Psi
W
T
Omega
m
Q
103

A x (B + C) = A x B + A x C
Appendix C
Vector Identities
In this appendix are listed some vector identities and 
relations that are useful for physics. The following notation is 
used: A, B, and C are arbitrary vectors; ax , ay, and az are 
rectangular components of the A vector; f and g are arbitrary 
scalar functions; and m is an integer. The vector ! is the line 
? ~ 
£
position vector. The vectors i, j, and k are unit vectors along 
the x, y, and z rectangular coordinate axes, respectively, and n 
is a unit normal vector.
(C-2)
A • B x C = A x B • C = B • C x A = B x C • A
(C-3)
= C • A x B = C x A • B
—! ! —! —! \ ! —! —! \ —! ! —! —! \ —! 
A x (B x C) = (A • C) B - (A • B) C
(C-4)
! ! ! ! ! ! ! 
!
A x (B x C) ^ (A x B) x C
(C-5)
! —! —! \ —! ! —! —! \ —! ! —! —! \ —!
(A x B) x C = (A • C) B - (B • C) A
(C-6)
! 
! ! 
! 
! ! 
! ! ! ! 
!
A x (B x C) + B x (C x A)+C x (A x B) = 0
(C-7)
df=
dn
!7f • fi
(C-8)
V (fg) = f V g+g'!'f
(C-9)
V rm = mmm 1Vr = mrm 1 r = mrm 2 !
(C-10)
! ( 1 ^
V -
k r ) = - r3 = - r2
(C-11)
vf (r) = df_(r) v r = df(r)! = df(r) r 
d r 
d r r 
d r
(C-12)
JA X B = ( ay b, - az by ) i + ( azbx - ax bz ) j + ( ax by - ay bx ) k (£-1)
104

V g (f) = 77 Vf
v. B=+ d-f + d-f
d x d y d z
! — —! —! \ ! —! ! —!
V • (A + B) = V • A + V • B
V • (fA) = A • Vf + f V • A
V • (f V g) = f V2 g + Vf • V g
V • r = 3
r 2
V • r = — 
r
V • (rmr) = (m + 3) rm
(dr • V) f = df
(A • V) f = A • Vf
(A • V) B = ax d B d B d B 
aX+a ay+a dk
(A • V)! = A
(C-13)
(C-14)
(C-15)
(C-16)
(C-17)
(C-18)
(C-19)
(C-20)
(C-21)
(C-22)
(C-23)
(C-24)
V • A (f) = f . Vf
d y 
d z
db dbr
__y  
x 
dx d y
H
(C-25)
(C-26)
Vx (A + B) = Vx A + Vx B 
(C-27)
V x (fA) = Vf x A + f V x A 
(C-28)
—! —! —!
v X Vf = 0 
(C-29)
V x (f V g) = Vf xV g 
(C-30)
X! X (f Vf) = 0 
(C-31)
V • (vf xV g) = 0 
(C-32)
! 
—!
V x — = 0 
(C-33)
V x (f (r) r) = 0 
(C-34)
(/! xV) f = /X xVf 
(C-35)
- !, . - dA
Vx A (f) = Vf x — 
(C-36)
dJ
105

V • Vx A = 0 
(C-37)
! 
! ! 
! ! 
! 
! 
! 
!
V • (A x B) = B • (Vx A) - A • (Vx B) 
(C-38)
! 
! ! ! ! ! 
! 
! 
! 
!
Vx A) • B = V • (A x B) + A • (Vx B) 
(C-39)
! 
! ! 
! ! !
V • (f Vx A) = (Vx A) • Vf 
(C-40)
! ! 
! ! ! 
! ! ! 
! ! ! 
! ! !
Vx (A x B) = (V • B) A - (V • A) B + (B • V) A - (A • V) B (C-41) 
! ! ! 
! ! ! ' _ ! ! !
V (A • B) = (A • V) B + (B • V) A 
! 
! ! 
- 
! ^
+A x (Vx B) + B x (Vx A) (C-42) 
! 
! ! 
! ! ! ! ! ! 
!
Vx (Vx A) = VxVx A = V (V • A)-V2A 
(C-43)
! i —! / —! —! \ \ / —! —! \ — ! ! \ / —! —! \ — ! ! \ 
V • (A x (B x C )) = (A • C) (V • B) - (A • B) (V • C)
+S • V (A • C) - C • V (A • B) (C-44)
! ! 
! ! ! ! ^ 1 !
Vx A) x A = (A • V) A ^-VA2 
(C-45)
! ! ! 
1 ! n / ! ! !
A x (V x A) 
VA2 - (A • V) A 
(C-46)
-! -! 
! 1 -! 
! / -! -*- \
A xV) x A 
V A2 - A (V • A) 
(C-47)
’ 
2
V 2,=+122+^4
d x 3 y 3 z
V • Vf = V2f
V 2 rm = m (m +1) rm - 2
/1 ^
V2 1 = 0
V r )
V 2 r2 = 6
! ! ! ! ! ! !
V 2A = V (V • A) - V x (V x A)
V 2 (Vf) = V (V2f)
(C-48)
(C-49)
(C-50)
(C-51)
(C-52)
(C-53)
(C-54)
V • (V2A) = V2 (V • A) 
(C-55)
V 2 (JA • !) = 2 V • A + r • V - A 
(C-56)
V 2( fg) = g V 2f + 2 Vf • V g + f V2g 
(C-57)
Divergence theorem (Gauss’s theorem):
! ff! ^ 
VV • Bdv = J^B • ds
(C-58)
106

Jjj V • B dV = JJ B • ri dS
(C-59)
Curl theorem:
! ^ 
^
JJJ VxBdV = JJ fixBdS
(C-60)
! - 
! !
JJJ VxBdV = -JJ BxdS
(C-61)
Gradient theorem:
ffjv f.,V = fj>
(C-62)
Stokes’s theorem:
Green’s first theorem:
JJJ(f V 28 + ^f • V 8) dV = JIf ^ g * dS 
(C-65)
Green’s second theorem:
fff (f V 2g - g V-f) dV = ff f fdg - gd-1 dS (C-66) 
JJJv 
y JJS L dn & dn J 
(C )
JJJ (f V2s—8 V2f)dV=JI (f v8—g Vf) * ndS (c-67)
Reynolds’ transport theorem:
-D fff padV = fff p Da dv 
(c-68)
Dt v 
v Dt
jjv x B • dS =" B • dr
(C-63)
-fivf x dS =" fdr
(C-64)
where D/Dt is the substantive derivative, p is the 
density of the medium having no sink or source in 
volume V, and a is some property of the medium.
Substantive or Total Derivative:
D
Dt
D-+v • v 
d t
(C-69)
107

Kronecker delta 8i: 
iJ
Sij=i
0
1
for i ^ j 
for i = j
(C-70)
108

Appendix D
Positron Mass
Proton Charge
Proton Mass
Speed of Light
9.10938215 x 10- 28 gm
+ 4.80320440 x 10-10Fr
1.672621923 x 10- 24 gm
2.99792458 x 1010cm/sec
Physical Constants
Electron Charge
Electron Mass
Gravitational Constant
Neutron Mass
Neutron Radius
Planck’s Constant
Planck’s Constant/ 2 n
Positron Charge
- 4.80320440 x 10- 10Fr 
9.10938370 x 10- 28 gm 
6.67430 x 10-8 cm3 sec-2 gm-1 
1.674927498 x 10-24 gm 
1.2 x 10-13cm 
6.62607015 x 10-27 erg sec 
1.054571628 x 10- 27 erg sec 
+ 4.80320440 x 10-10Fr
109

References
These references include all materials that were reviewed 
in the preparation of this book. When two publication dates are 
listed for a reference, the first is the date of the first edition, 
while the second (in parentheses) is the date of a later edition or 
printing that was actually consulted.
Achenbach, J. D., 1973, Wave propagation in elastic solids, 
North-Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam.
Acheson, D. J., 1990, Elementary fluid dynamics, Oxford 
University Press, Oxford.
Achinstein, P., 1991, Particles and waves: historical essays in the 
philosophy of science, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Ahmed, N., 1987, Fluid mechanics, Engineering Press, San Jose, 
California.
Akhmanov, S. A., and S. Yu. Nikitin, 1997, Physical optics, 
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Alvager, T., A. Nilsson, and J. Kjellman, 1964, On the 
independence of the velocity of light of the motion of the 
light source, Arkiv for Fysik, Volume 26, pages 209-221.
Ampere, A. M., 1820a, Sur l’action mutuelle entre deux courans 
electriques, entre un courant electrique et un aimant on le 
globe terrestre, et entre deux aimans, Annales de Chimie 
et de Physique, Volume 15, pages 59-76 (see English 
translation in Tricker, R. A. R., 1965, pages 140-151).
Ampere, A. M., 1820b, Sur l’action mutuelle entre deux courans 
electriques, entre un courant electrique et un aimant on le 
globe terrestre, et entre deux aimans, Annales de Chimie 
et de Physique, Volume 15, pages 170-208.
Ampere, A. M., 1826, Memoire sur la theorie mathematique des 
phenomenes electro-dynamiques, uniquement deduite de 
l’experience, Paris (see English translation in Tricker, R. A. 
R., 1965, pages 155-200).
Ampere, A. M., 1827, Memoire sur la theorie mathematique des 
phenomenes electrodynamiques, uniquement deduite de 
l’experience, Memoires de l’Academie Royale des Sciences 
de l’Institute de France, Volume 6, pages 175-388.
Anderson, C. D., 1933, The positive electron, The Physical 
Review, Volume 43, pages 491-494.
110

Anderson, D. L., 1964, The discovery of the electron: the 
development of the atomic concept of electricity, Van 
Nostrand Reinhold Company, New York.
Anderson, J. L., 1967, Principles of relativity physics, Academic 
Press, New York.
Anderson, N., 1968, The electromagnetic field, Plenum Press, 
New York.
Andrews, C. L., 1960, Optics of the electromagnetic spectrum, 
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Andrews, W. S., 1906, Manifestations of the ether, The Monist, 
Volume 16, pages 17-31.
Angel, R. B., 1980, Relativity: the theory and its philosophy, 
Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Arabatzis, T., 2009, Electrons, in Compendium of Quantum 
Physics: Concepts, Experiments, History and Philosophy, 
edited by D. Greenberger, K. Hentschel, and F. Weinert, 
pages 195-199, Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Aris, R., 1962 (1989), Vectors, tensors, and the basic equations of 
fluid mechanics, Dover Publications, New York.
Arons, A. B., 1965, Development of concepts of physics: from 
the rationalization of mechanics to the first theory of 
atomic structure, Addison-Wesley, Reading, 
Massachusetts.
Aspden, H., 1972, Modern aether science, Sabberton 
Publications, Southhampton, England.
Atkin, R. J., and N. Fox, 1980, An introduction to the theory of 
elasticity, Longman, London.
Attwood, S. S., 1932, Electric and magnetic Fields, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Auld, B. A., 1973 (1990), Acoustic fields and waves in solids, 
Volumes I and II, Krieger Publishing Company, Malabar, 
Florida.
Babcock, G. C., and T. G. Bergman, 1964, Determination of the 
constancy of the speed of light, Journal of the Optical 
Society of America, Volume 54, pages 147-151.
Baigrie, B. S., 2007, Electricity and magnetism: a historical 
perspective, Greenwood Press, Westport, Connecticut.
Barnett, S. J., 1903, Elements of electromagnetic theory, The 
Macmillan Company, New York.
Barut, A. O., 1964 (1980), Electrodynamics and classical theory 
of fields & particles, Dover Publications, New York.
Bateman, H., 1910, The transformation of the electrodynamical 
equations, Proceedings of the London Mathematical 
Society, Volume 8, pages 223-264.
111

Bateman, H., 1914 (1955), The mathematical analysis of 
electrical and optical wave-motion on the basis of 
Maxwell’s equations, Dover Publications, New York.
Bateman, H., 1922, The form of the ether, Publications of the 
Astronomical Society of the Pacific, Volume 34, pages 
94-107.
Bauer, E., 1955, Champs de vecteurs et de tenseurs: 
introduction a l’electro-magnetisme, Masson et Cie, Paris.
Becker, R., 1930 (1964), Electromagnetic fields and interactions, 
Volume 1, Electromagnetic theory and relativity, edited by 
F. Sauter, Blaisdell Publishing Company, New York.
Beckmann, P., 1987, Einstein plus two, The Golem Press, 
Boulder, Colorado.
Bedford, A., and D. S. Drumheller, 1994, Introduction to elastic 
wave propagation, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, 
England.
Bequerel, J., 1908, Sur la nature des charges d’electricite et sur 
l’existence des electrons positifs, Comptes Rendus 
Hebdomadaires des Seances de l’Academie des Sciences, 
Volume 146, pages 1308-1311.
Bergmann, P G., 1962a, The special theory of relativity, in 
Handbuch der Physik, Volume IV, Principles of 
Electrodynamics and Relativity, edited by S. Flugge, pages 
109-202, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Berkson, W., 1974, Fields of force: the development of a world 
view from Faraday to Einstein, John Wiley & Sons., New 
York.
Biot, J.-B., and F. Savart, 1820, Note sur le magnetisme de la pile 
de Volta, Annales de Chemie et de Physique, Volume 15, 
pages 222-223 (see English translation in Tricker, R. A. R., 
1965, pages 118-119).
Biot, J.-B., and F. Savart, 1824, Sur l’aimantation imposee aux 
metaux par l’electricite en mouvement, in Biot, Precis 
Elementaire de Physique, Volume II, 3rd Edition, pages 
707-723, Paris (see English translation in Tricker, R. A. R., 
1965, pages 119-139).
Birkhoff, G. D., 1943, Matter, electricity and gravitation in flat 
space-time, Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, Volume 29, pages 
231-239.
Bleaney, B. I., and B. Bleaney, 1957 (1968), Electricity and 
magnetism, 2nd Edition, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Boast, W. B., 1964, Vector fields: a vector foundation of electric 
and magnetic fields, Harper & Row Publishers, New York.
112

Borisenko, A. I., and I. E. Tarapov, 1966 (1979), Vector and 
tensor analysis with applications, Dover Publications, 
New York.
Bork, A. M., 1963, Maxwell, displacement current, and 
symmetry, American Journal of Physics, Volume 31, pages 
854-859.
Bork, A. M., 1967, Maxwell and the electromagnetic wave 
equation, American Journal of Physics, Volume 35, pages 
844-849.
Brecher, K., 1977, Is the velocity of light independent of the 
velocity of the source?, Physical Review Letters, Volume 
39, pages 1051-1054.
Bromberg, J., 1967, Maxwell’s displacement current and his 
theory of light, Archive for History of Exact Sciences, 
Volume 4, pages 218-234.
Bromberg, J., 1968, Maxwell’s electrostatics, American Journal 
of Physics, Volume 36, pages 142-151.
Brooker, G., 2003, Modern classical optics, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford.
Buchwald, J. Z., 1980, Optics and the theory of the punctiform 
ether, Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Volume 21, 
pages 245-278.
Buchwald, J. Z., 1981, The quantitative ether in the first half of 
the nineteenth century, in Conceptions of Ether: Studies in 
the History of Ether Theories 1740-1900, edited by G. N. 
Cantor and M. J. S. Hodge, pages 215-237, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Buchwald, J. Z., 1985, From Maxwell to microphysics: aspects 
of electromagnetic theory in the last quarter of the 
nineteenth century, The University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago.
Buchwald, J. Z., 1989, The rise of the wave theory of light: 
optical theory and experiment in the early nineteenth 
century, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Burton, C. V., 1907, Notes on aether and electrons, The London, 
Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and 
Journal of Science, Series 6, Volume 13, pages 693-708.
Butler, J. W., 1968, On the Trouton-Noble experiment, American 
Journal of Physics, Volume 36, pages 936-941.
Campbell, N. R., 1907, Modern electrical theory, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Cannon, R. H., Jr., 1967, Dynamics of physical systems, 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
113

Cauchy, A., 1838, Memoire sur la reflexion et la refraction de la 
lumiere produites par la surface de separation de deux 
milieux doues de la refraction simple, Comptes Rendus 
Hebdomadaires des Seances de l’Academie des Sciences, 
Volume 7, pages 954-965.
Chadwick, P., 1976 (1999), Continuum mechanics: concise 
theory and problems, 2nd Edition, Dover Publications, 
New York.
Chapman, C. H., 2004, Fundamentals of seismic wave 
propagation, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Chase, C. T., 1926, A repetition of the Trouton-Noble ether drift 
experiment, The Physical Review, Volume 28, pages 
378-383.
Cheng, D. K., 1989, Field and wave electromagnetics, 2nd 
Edition, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, 
Massachusetts.
Cheston, W. B., 1964, Elementary theory of electric and 
magnetic fields, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Chew, W. C., M. S. Tong, and B. Hu, 2009, Integral equation 
methods for electromagnetic and elastic waves, Morgan & 
Claypool Publishers, San Rafael, California.
Chirgwin, B. H., and C. Plumpton, 1967, Elementary classical 
hydrodynamics, Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Chou, P C., and N. J. Pagano, 1967 (1992), Elasticity: tensor, 
dyadic, and engineering approaches, Dover Publications, 
New York.
Clark, S. K., 1972, Dynamics of continuous elements, Prentice­
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Clemmow, P C., 1973, An introduction to electromagnetic 
theory, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Cohen, I. B., 1940, Roemer and the first determination of the 
velocity of light (1676), Isis, Volume 31, pages 327-379.
Comstock, D. F., 1907, Reasons for believing in an ether, 
Science, Volume 25, pages 432-433.
Condon, E. U., 1958, Electromagnetic waves, in Handbook of 
Physics, edited by E. U. Condon and H. Odishaw, pages 
(6-3)-(6-19), McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
Corson, D. R., and P Lorrain, 1962, Introduction to 
electromagnetic fields and waves, W. H. Freeman and 
Company, San Francisco.
Coulomb, C.-A., 1785a, Sur l’electricite et le magnetisme: I. 
Construction et usage d’une balance electrique, Comptes 
Rendus Hebdomadaires des Seances de l’Academie des 
Sciences, pages 569-577.
114

Coulomb, C.-A., 1785b, Sur l’electricite et le magnetisme: II. Ou 
1’on determine suivant quelles lois le fluide magnetique 
ainsi que le fluid electrique, Comptes Rendus 
Hebdomadaires des Seances de l’Academie des Sciences, 
pages 578-611.
Coulson, C. A., 1941, Waves: a mathematical account of the 
common types of wave motion, Oliver and Boyd, 
Edinburgh.
Coulson, C. A., 1948, Electricity, Oliver and Boyd, Edinburgh.
Cowan, E. W., 1968, Basic electromagnetism, Academic Press, 
New York.
Cox, G. N., and F. J. Germano, 1941, Fluid mechanics, D. Van 
Nostrand Company, New York.
Craik, D., 1995, Magnetism: principles and applications, John 
Wiley & Sons, New York.
Crew, H., 1900, The wave theory of light: memoirs by Huygens, 
Young, and Fresnel, American Book Company, New York.
Cullwick, E. G., 1916, The fundamentals of electro-magnetism, 
3rd Edition, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Cullwick, E. G., 1959, Electromagnetism and relativity: with 
particular reference to moving media and electromagnetic 
induction, 2nd Edition, Longmans, Green and Company, 
London.
Cunningham, E., 1907, The structure of the ether, Nature, 
Volume 76, page 222.
Currie, I. G., 1974 (1993), Fundamental mechanics of fluids, 2nd 
Edition, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Daily, J. W., and D. R. F. Harleman, 1966, Fluid dynamics, 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, 
Massachusetts.
Darrigol, O., 2000, Electrodynamics from Ampere to Einstein, 
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Davis, J. L., 2000, Mathematics of wave propagation, Princeton 
University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
de Sitter, W., 1913a, A proof of the constancy of the velocity of 
light, Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen te 
Amsterdam (Proceedings of the Royal Academy of 
Amsterdam), Volume 15, pages 1297-1298.
de Sitter, W., 1913b, On the constancy of the velocity of light, 
Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam 
(Proceedings of the Royal Academy of Amsterdam), 
Volume 16, pages 395-396.
de Tunzelmann, G. W., 1910, A treatise on electrical theory and 
the problem of the Universe: considered from the physical 
point of view, with mathematical appendices, Charles 
Griffin and Company, London.
115

Dirac, P. A. M., 1938a, Classical theory of radiating electrons, 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series A, 
Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Volume 167, pages 
148-169.
Dirac, P A. M., 1951, Is there an aether?, Nature, Volume 168, 
pages 906-907.
Ditchburn, R. W., 1953 (1991), Light, Dover Publications, New 
York.
Dodge, R. A., and M. J. Thompson, 1937, Fluid mechanics, 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
Doran, B. G., 1975, Origins and consolidation of field theory in 
nineteenth-century Britain: from the mechanical to the 
electromagnetic view of nature, Historical Studies in the 
Physical Sciences, Volume 6, pages 133-260.
Drude, P, 1900 (1959), The theory of optics, Dover Publications, 
New York.
du Fay, C. F. de Cisternai, 1734, A letter concerning electricity, 
Philosophical Transactions, Volume 38, pages 258-266.
Duffin, W. J., 1965, Electricity and magnetism, McGraw-Hill 
Publishing Company, London.
Elmore, W. C., and M. A. Heald, 1969 (1985), Physics of waves, 
Dover Publications, New York.
Ericksen, J. L., 1953, On the propagation of waves in isotropic 
incompressible perfectly elastic materials, Journal of 
Rational Mechanics and Analysis, Volume 2, pages 
329-337.
Ericksen, J. L., 1955, Deformations possible in every 
compressible, isotropic, perfectly elastic material, Journal 
of Mathematics and Physics, Volume 34, pages 126-128.
Eringen, A. C., and E. S. Suhubi, 1974a, Elastodynamics, 
Volume 1, Finite motions, Academic Press, New York.
Eringen, A. C., and E. S. Suhubi, 1974b, Elastodynamics, 
Volume 2, Linear theory, Academic Press, New York.
Eskinazi, S., 1962 (1968), Principles of fluid mechanics, 2nd 
Edition, Allyn and Bacon, Boston.
Euler, L., 1768, 1772, Lettres a une Princesse d’Allemagne sur 
quelques sujets de Physique et de Philosophie, 3 Volumes, 
St. Petersburg.
Euler, L., 1768, 1772 (1975), Letters of Euler on different subjects 
in natural philosophy, Arno Press, New York.
Ewing, W. M., W. S. Jardetsky, and F. Press, 1957, Elastic waves 
in layered media, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New 
York.
Eyges, L., 1972 (1980), The classical electromagnetic field, Dover 
Publications, New York.
116

Faber, T. E., 1995, Fluid dynamics for physicists, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Fano, R. M., L. J. Chu, and R. B. Adler, 1960, Electromagnetic 
fields, energy, and forces, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Faraday, M., 1844 (1952), Experimental researches in electricity: 
Volume 1, in Great Books of the Western World, Volume 
45, edited by R. M. Hutchins, Encyclopedia Britannica, 
London.
Faraday, M., 1847 (1952), Experimental researches in electricity: 
Volume 2, in Great Books of the Western World, Volume 
45, edited by R. M. Hutchins, Encyclopedia Britannica, 
London.
Faraday, M., 1852, On the physical character of the lines of 
magnetic force, The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin 
Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, Series 4, 
Volume 3, pages 401-427.
Faraday, M., 1855 (1952), Experimental researches in electricity: 
Volume 3, in Great Books of the Western World, Volume 
45, edited by R. M. Hutchins, Encyclopedia Britannica, 
London.
Faraday, M., 1859-1860 (1961), On the various forces of nature, 
Thomas Y. Crowell Company, Binghamton, New York.
Fay, J. A., 1994, Introduction to fluid mechanics, The M.I.T. 
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Feenberg, E., 1960, Inertia of energy, American Journal of 
Physics, Volume 28, pages 565-566.
Filonenko-Borodich, M., 1965, Theory of elasticity, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Fleming, J. A., 1902, Waves and ripples in water, air, and aether: 
being a course of Christmas lectures delivered at the Royal 
Institution of Great Britain, E. & J. B. Young and Company, 
New York.
Flint, H. T., 1929 (1967), Wave mechanics, 9th Edition, Methuen 
& Company, London.
Ford, K. W., 1963a, Magnetic monopoles, Scientific American, 
Volume 209, December, pages 122-131.
Fowles, G. R., 1968, Introduction to modern optics, Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, New York.
Fox, J. G., 1967, Constancy of the velocity of light, Journal of the 
Optical Society of America, Volume 57, pages 967-968.
Franklin, B., 1750a, Electricity, Philosophical Transactions, 
Volume 45, pages 98-120.
Franklin, B., 1750b (1887), Letter to Peter Collinson of 29 July 
1750, in The Works of Benjamin Franklin, Volume 2, 
1744-1757, edited by J. Bigelow, G. P. Putnam's Sons, New 
York.
117

Franklin, B., 1751, Experiments and observations on electricity, 
made at Philadelphia in America, E. Case, London.
Fresnel, A., 1821a (1868), Premier memoire sur la double 
refraction, in Oeuvres Completes d’Augustin Fresnel, 
Volume 2, edited by H. de Senarmont, E. Verdet, and L. 
Fresnel, pages 261-308, Imprimerie Imperiale, Paris.
Fresnel, A., 1821b (1868), Supplement au memoire sur la double 
refraction, in Oeuvres Completes d’Augustin Fresnel, 
Volume 2, edited by H. de Senarmont, E. Verdet, and L. 
Fresnel, pages 343-367, Imprimerie Imperiale, Paris.
Fresnel, A., 1823 (1866), Memoire sur la loi des modifications 
que la reflection imprime a la lumiere polarisee, in 
Oeuvres Completes d’Augustin Fresnel, Volume 1, edited 
by H. de Senarmont, E. Verdet, and L. Fresnel, pages 
767-799, Imprimerie Imperiale, Paris.
Fresnel, A., 1826 (1866), Memoire sur la diffraction de la 
lumiere, in Oeuvres Completes d’Augustin Fresnel, 
Volume 1, edited by H. de Senarmont, E. Verdet, and L. 
Fresnel, pages 247-382, Imprimerie Imperiale, Paris.
Froome, K. D., and L. Essen, 1969, The velocity of light and 
radio waves, Academic Press, London.
Fujimoto, M., 2007, Physics of classical electromagnetism, 
Springer Science+Business Media, New York.
Fung, S.-F., and K. C. Hsieh, 1980, Is the isotropy of the speed of 
light a convention?, American Journal of Physics, Volume 
48, pages 654-657.
Fung, Y. C., 1969 (1977), A first course in continuum mechanics, 
2nd Edition, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Furry, W. H., 1969, Examples of momentum distributions in the 
electromagnetic field and in matter, American Journal of 
Physics, Volume 37, pages 621-636.
Gamow, G., 1967, Electricity, gravity, and cosmology, Physical 
Review Letters, Volume 19, pages 759-761.
Garbuny, M., 1965, Optical physics, Academic Press, New York.
Gerlach, W., and A. Golsen, 1923, Untersuchungen an 
Radiometern, II, Eine neue Messung des 
Strahlungsdruckes, Zeitschrift fur Physik, Volume 15, 
pages 1-7.
Gilbert, W., 1600 (1952), De Magnete, Magneticisque 
Corporibus, et de Magno Magnete Tellure; Physiologia 
Nova, Pluribus et Argumentes et Experimentis 
Demonstrata, London (see translation: On the loadstone 
and magnetic bodies and on the great magnet the Earth, in 
Great Books of the Western World, Volume 28, edited by R. 
M. Hutchins, Encyclopedia Britannica, London).
118

Goldhaber, A. S, and W. P. Trower, 1990, Resource letter MM-1 
on magnetic monopoles, American Journal of Physics, 
Volume 58, pages 429-439.
Good, R. H., 1999, Classical electromagnetism, Harcourt Brace 
College Publishers, Fort Worth.
Gooding, D., 1980, Faraday, Thomson, and the concept of the 
magnetic field, The British Journal for the History of 
Science, Volume 13, pages 91-120.
Gooding, D., 1981, Final steps to the field theory: Faraday’s 
study of magnetic phenomena, 1845-1850, Historical 
Studies in the Physical Sciences, Volume 11, pages 231-275.
Gould, P L., 1983, Introduction to linear elasticity, Springer­
Verlag, New York.
Graff, K. F., 1975 (1991), Wave motion in elastic solids, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Granger, R. A., 1985 (1995), Fluid mechanics, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Grant, I. S., and W. R. Phillips, 1975, Electromagnetism, John 
Wiley & Sons, London.
Green, A. E., and W. Zerna, 1968 (1992), Theoretical elasticity, 
2nd Edition, Dover Publications, New York.
Green, G., 1838a, On the laws of the reflexion and refraction of 
light at the common surface of two non-crystallized 
media, Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical 
Society, Volume 7, pages 1-24.
Green, G., 1838b, On the laws of the reflexion and refraction of 
light at the common surface of two non-crystallized 
media, Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical 
Society, Volume 7, pages 113-120.
Griffiths, D. J., 1981 (1999), Introduction to electrodynamics, 3rd 
Edition, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
Guerlac, H., 1967, Newton’s optical aether: his draft of a 
proposed addition to his Opticks, Notes and Records of 
the Royal Society of London, Volume 22, pages 45-57.
Gurtin, M. E., 1972, The linear theory of elasticity, in Handbuch 
der Physik, Volume VIa/2, edited by C. Truesdell, pages 
1-295, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Hallen, E., 1962, Electromagnetic theory, Chapman & Hall, 
London.
Hammond, P, 1964, Electromagnetism for engineers, The 
Macmillan Company, New York.
Harpaz, A., and N. Soker, 2001, Radiation from an electric 
charge, Foundations of Physics, Volume 31, pages 935-949.
119

Harris, J. G., 2001, Linear elastic waves, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge.
Haus, H. A., and J. R. Melcher, 1989, Electromagnetic fields and 
energy, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Hauser, W., 1970, On the fundamental equations of 
electromagnetism, American Journal of Physics, Volume 
38, pages 80-85.
Hauser, W., 1971, Introduction to the principles of 
electromagnetism, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 
Reading, Massachusetts.
Hayt, W. H., Jr., and J. A. Buck, 1958 (2006), Engineering 
electromagnetics, 8th Edition, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Heaviside, O., 1885a, Electromagnetic induction and its 
propagation, The Electrician, Volume 14, pages 178-180.
Heaviside, O., 1885b, Electromagnetic induction and its 
propagation, The Electrician, Volume 14, pages 306-309.
Heaviside, O., 1885c, Electromagnetic induction and its 
propagation, The Electrician, Volume 14, pages 367-369.
Heaviside, O., 1885d, Electromagnetic induction and its 
propagation, The Electrician, Volume 14, pages 430-431.
Heaviside, O., 1885e, Electromagnetic induction and its 
propagation, The Electrician, Volume 14, pages 490-491.
Heaviside, O., 1889, On the electromagagnetic effects due to the 
motion of electrification through a dielectric, The London, 
Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and 
Journal of Science, Series 5, Volume 27, pages 324-339.
Heaviside, O., 1891, The rotational ether in its application to 
electro-magnetism, The Electrician, Volume 26, pages 
360-361.
Heaviside, O., 1892a (1970), Electrical Papers, 2nd Edition, 2 
Volumes, Chelsea Publishing Company, New York.
Heaviside, O., 1892b, On the forces, stresses, and fluxes of 
energy in the electromagnetic field, Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Volume 
183A, pages 423-484.
Heaviside, O., 1893 (1971), Electromagnetic theory, 3rd Edition, 
Volume I, Chelsea Publishing Company, New York.
Heaviside, O., 1899 (1971), Electromagnetic theory, 3rd Edition, 
Volume II, Chelsea Publishing Company, New York.
Heaviside, O., 1912 (1971), Electromagnetic theory, 3rd Edition, 
Volume III, Chelsea Publishing Company, New York.
Hecht, E., 1974 (2002), Optics, 4th Edition, Addison-Wesley 
Publishing Company, San Francisco.
120

Heilbron, J. L., 1979, Electricity in the 17th and 18th centuries: a 
study in early modern physics, University of California 
Press, Berkeley.
Heilbron, J. L., 1981a, Historical studies in the theory of atomic 
structure, Arno Press, New York.
Heilbron, J. L., 1981b, The electrical field before Faraday, in 
Conceptions of Ether: Studies in the History of Ether 
Theories 1740-1900, edited by G. N. Cantor and M. J. S. 
Hodge, pages 187-213, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge.
Heimann, P M., 1971, Maxwell, Hertz, and the nature of 
electricity, Isis, Volume 62, pages 149-157.
Heimann, P M., 1981, Ether and imponderables, in Conceptions 
of Ether: Studies in the History of Ether Theories 
1740-1900, edited by G. N. Cantor and M. J. S. Hodge, 
pages 61-83, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Helmholtz, H., 1858, Uber Integrale der hydrodynamischen 
Gleichungen, welche den Wirbelbewegungen entsprechen, 
Journal fur die reine und angewandte Mathematik 
(Crelle’s Journal), Volume 55, pages 25-55 (see English 
translation in Tait, 1867).
Hermann, A., 1971, The genesis of quantum theory (1899-1913), 
The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Hertz, H., 1888a, Uber Ausbreitungsgeschwindigkeit der 
elektrodynamischen Wirkungen, Sitzungsberichte der 
Koniglich Preufiischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu 
Berlin, pages 197-210.
Hertz, H., 1888b, Ueber die Entwirkung einer geradlinigen 
elektrischen Schwingung auf eine benachbarte Strombahn, 
Annalen der Physik und der Chemie, Volume 34, pages 
155-170.
Hertz, H., 1888c, Ueber elektrodynamische Wellen im 
Luftraume und deren Reflexion, Annalen der Physik und 
Chemie, Volume 34, pages 609-623.
Hertz, H., 1893 (1962), Electric waves: being researches on the 
propagation of electric action with finite velocity through 
space, Dover Publications, New York.
Hewson, A. C., 1970, An introduction to the theory of 
electromagnetic waves, Longman Group, London.
Heyl, P R., 1907, Reasons for believing in an ether, Science, 
Volume 25, page 870.
Hirst, A. W., 1936 (1959), Electricity and magnetism: for 
engineering students, Third Edition, Blackie & Son, 
Glasgow.
Home, D., and J. Gribbin, 1991, What is light?, New Scientist, 
Volume 132, pages 30-33.
121

Hooke, R., 1678, De potentia restitutiva, London.
Hudson, J. A., 1980, The excitation and propagation of elastic 
waves, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Hunt, J. N., 1964, Incompressible fluid dynamics, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York.
Huygens, C., 1690a, Traite de la lumiere ou sont expliquees les 
causes de ce qui luy arrive dans la reflexion et dans la 
refraction. Et particulierement dans l’etrange refraction du 
cristal d’Islande, Leyden.
Huygens, C., 1690b (1952), Treatise on light, in Great Books of 
the Western World, Volume 34, edited by R. M. Hutchins, 
pages 545-619, Encyclopedia Britannica, London.
Irodov, I. E., 1986, Basic laws of electromagnetism, Mir 
Publishers, Moscow.
Jackson, J. D., 1962, Classical electrodynamics, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York.
Jeans, J. H., 1908 (1966), The mathematical theory of electricity 
and magnetism, 5th Edition, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge.
Jefimenko, O. D., 1966, Electricity and magnetism: an 
introduction to the theory of electric and magnetic fields, 
Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York.
Jiles, D., 1998, Introduction to magnetism and magnetic 
materials, 2nd Edition, Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, 
Florida.
Johnson, C. C., 1965, Field and wave electrodynamics, 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
Jones, D. S., 1964, The theory of electromagnetism, The 
Macmillan Company, New York.
Kellogg, O. D., 1929 (1953), Foundations of potential theory, 
Dover Publications, New York.
Kirchhoff, G. R., 1859, Uber den Zusammenhang zwischen 
Emission und Absorption von Licht und Warme, 
Monatsberichte der Akademie der Wissenschaften zu 
Berlin.
Kirchhoff, G. R., 1860, Uber das Verhaltnis zwischen dem 
Emissionsvermogen und dem Absorptionsvermogen der 
Korper fur Warme und Licht, Annalen der Physik und 
Chemie, Volume 109, pages 275-301 (see English 
translation in Guthrie, 1860).
Knott, C. G., 1899, On the reflexion and refraction of elastic 
waves, with seismological applications, The London, 
Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and 
Journal of Science, Series 5, Volume 48, pages 64-97.
122

Knott, C. G., 1909, Seismic radiations, Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of Edinburgh, Volume 30, pages 23-37.
Knudsen, O., 1971, From Lord Kelvin’s notebook: ether 
speculations, Centaurus, Volume 16, pages 41-53.
Kolsky, H., 1953 (1963), Stress waves in solids, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Kovetz, A., 1990, The principles of electromagnetic theory, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Krafft, C. F., 1945, Ether and matter, The Dietz Printing 
Company, Richmond, Virginia.
Kragh, H., 1989, The aether in late nineteenth century 
chemistry, Ambix, Volume 36, pages 49-65.
Kraus, J. D., 1984, Electromagnetics, 3rd Edition, McGraw-Hill 
Book Company, New York.
Lamb, H., 1879 (1945), Hydrodynamics, 6th Edition, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Landau, L. D., and E. M. Lifshitz, 1951 (1975), The classical 
theory of fields, 4th Edition, Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Landau, L. D., and E. M. Lifshitz, 1959 (1970), Theory of 
elasticity, 2nd Edition, Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Landau, L. D., and E. N. Lifshitz, 1960, Electrodynamics of 
continuous media, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 
Reading, Massachusetts.
Langmuir, R. V., 1961, Electromagnetic fields and waves, 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
Larmor, J., 1894, A dynamical theory of the electric and 
luminiferous medium, Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society of London, A, Volume 185, pages 719-822.
Larmor, J., 1895, A dynamical theory of the electric and the 
luminiferous medium: Part II. Theory of electrons, 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 
A, Volume 186, pages 695-743.
Larmor, J., 1897, A dynamical theory of the electric and the 
luminiferous medium: Part III. Relations with material 
media, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London, Series A, Volume 190, pages 205-300.
Larmor, J., 1900, Aether and matter: a development of the 
dynamical relations of the aether to material systems on 
the basis of the atomic constitution of matter: including a 
discussion of the influence of the Earth’s motion on optical 
phenomena, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Leighton, R. B., 1959, Principles of modern physics, McGraw- 
Hill Book Company, New York.
123

Leipholz, H., 1974, Theory of elasticity, Noordhoff International 
Publishing, Leyden.
Levi-Civita, T., 1926 (1977), The absolute differential calculus 
(calculus of tensors), Dover Publications, New York.
Li, W.-H., and S.-H. Lam, 1964, Principles of fluid mechanics, 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, 
Massachusetts.
Lichnerowicz, A., 1962, Elements of tensor calculus, Methuen & 
Company, London.
Lipson, S. G., H. Lipson, and D. S. Taunhauser, 1969 (1995), 
Optical physics, 3rd Edition, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge.
Livingston, D. M., 1973, The master of light: a biography of 
Albert A. Michelson, Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York.
Lodge, O., 1883a, The ether and its functions, Nature, Volume 
27, pages 304-306.
Lodge, O., 1883b, The ether and its functions, II, Nature, 
Volume 27, pages 328-330.
Lodge, O., 1885, On the identity of energy: in connection with 
Mr. Poynting’s paper on the transfer of energy in an 
electromagnetic field; and on the two fundamental forms 
of energy, The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin 
Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, Series 5, 
Volume 19, pages 482-487.
Lodge, O. J., 1889b, Modern views of electricity, Macmillan and 
Company, London.
Lodge, O. J., 1889c, The relation between electricity and light, 
Lecture delivered at the London Institution on December 
16, 1880, in Modern Views of Electricity, pages 311-326, 
Macmillan and Company, London.
Lodge, O. J., 1889d, The ether and its functions, Lecture 
delivered at the London Institute on December 28, 1882, in 
Modern Views of Electricity, pages 327-358, Macmillan 
and Company, London.
Lodge, O., 1906, Electrons or the nature and properties of 
negative electricity, George Bell and Sons, London.
Lodge, O., 1907a, The structure of the ether, Nature, Volume 76, 
page 126.
Lodge, O., 1907b, Modern views of the ether, Nature, Volume 
75, pages 519-522.
124

Lodge, O., 1907c, The density of the aether, The London, 
Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and 
Journal of Science, Series 6, Volume 13, pages 488-506.
Lodge, O., 1907d, The density of the aether, Science, Volume 26, 
pages 482-483.
Lodge, O., 1908, The ether of space, Address to the Royal 
Institution of Great Britain on February 21, 1908, The 
North American Review, Volume 187, pages 724-736.
Lodge, O., 1909, The ether of space, Harper & Brothers, 
London.
Lodge, O., 1922a, Are there no ether waves?: an English answer 
to an American scientist, Popular Radio, Volume 2, pages 
153-158.
Lodge, O., 1922b, Speculation concerning the positive electron, 
Nature, Volume 110, pages 696-697.
Lodge, O., 1923, The ether and electrons, Nature, Volume 112, 
pages 185-192.
Lodge, O., 1925a, Ether & reality: a series of discourses on the 
many functions of the ether of space, George H. Doran 
Company, New York.
Lodge, O., 1925b, Hypothesis about push or contact force, 
Nature, Volume 116, pages 869-871.
Loitsyanskii, L. G., 1966, Mechanics of liquids and gases, 
Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Long, R. R., 1961, Mechanics of solids and fluids, Prentice-Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Lorentz, H. A., 1892, La theorie electromagnetique de Maxwell, 
et son application aux corps mouvants, Archives 
Neerlandaises des Sciences Exactes et Naturelles, Volume 
25, pages 363-552.
Lorentz, H. A., 1895, Versuch einer Theorie der elektrischen 
und optischen Erscheinungen von bewegten Korpern, E. J. 
Brill, Leiden.
Lorentz, H. A., 1899a, Simplified theory of electrical and optical 
phenomena in moving systems, Koninklijke Akademie 
van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam (Proceedings of the 
Royal Academy of Amsterdam), Volume 1, pages 427-442.
Lorentz, H. A., 1904, Electromagnetic phenomena in a system 
moving with any velocity smaller than that of light, 
Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam 
(Proceedings of the Royal Academy of Amsterdam), 
Volume 6, pages 809-831.
Lorentz, H. A., 1924, The radiation of light, Nature, Volume 113, 
pages 608-611.
125

Lorrain, P., and D. R. Corson, 1962 (1970), Electromagnetic 
fields and waves, 2nd Edition, W. H. Freeman and 
Company, San Francisco.
Lorrain, P., and D. R. Corson, 1978 (1990), Electromagnetism: 
principles and applications, 2nd Edition, W. H. Freeman 
and Company, New York.
Love, A. E. H., 1892 (1906), A treatise on the mathematical 
theory of elasticity, 2nd Edition, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge.
Love, A. E. H., 1901, The integration of the equations of 
propagation of electric waves, Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society of London, Series A, Volume 197, 
pages 1-45.
Low, F. E., 1997, Classical field theory: electromagnetism and 
gravitation, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Macelwane, J. B., and F. W. Sohon, 1936, Introduction to 
theoretical seismology, Part I, Geodynamics, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York.
Main, I. G., 1978, Vibrations and waves in physics, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Malvern, L. E., 1969, Introduction to the mechanics of a 
continuous medium, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 
New Jersey.
Marsden, J. E., and T. J. R. Hughes, 1983 (1994), Mathematical 
foundations of elasticity, Dover Publications, Mineola, 
New York.
Marshall, J. S., 2001, Inviscid incompressible flow, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York.
Mase, G. E., 1970, Schaum’s outline of theory and problems of 
continuum mechanics, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New 
York.
Mase, G. T., R. E. Smelser, and G. E. Mase, 1992 (2010), 
Continuum mechanics for engineers, 3rd Edition, CRC 
Press, Boca Raton, Florida.
Mason, M., and W. Weaver, 1929 (1952), The electromagnetic 
field, Dover Publications, New York.
Masse, R. P., 2022, Physics: nature of physical fields and forces, 
15th Edition, Kindle, Retrieved from Amazon.com.
Masse, R. P., 2023, Physics: gravity and mass, Kindle, Retrieved 
from Amazon.com.
Matveyev, A. N., and L. F. Landovitz, 1966, Principles of 
electrodynamics, Reinhold Publishing, New York.
Matveev, A. N., 1986, Electricity and magnetism, Mir 
Publishers, Moscow.
126

Maxwell, J. C., 1855, On Faraday’s lines of force, Transactions of 
the Cambridge Philosophical Society, Volume 10, pages 
27-83.
Maxwell, J. C., 1861a, On physical lines of force: Part I, The 
theory of molecular vortices applied to magnetic 
phenomena, The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin 
Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, Series 4, 
Volume 21, pages 161-175.
Maxwell, J. C., 1861b, On physical lines of force: Part II, The 
theory of molecular vortices applied to electric currents, 
The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical 
Magazine and Journal of Science, Series 4, Volume 21, 
pages 281-291.
Maxwell, J. C., 1862a, On physical lines of force: Part III, The 
theory of molecular vortices applied to statical electricity, 
The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical 
Magazine and Journal of Science, Series 4, Volume 23, 
pages 12-24.
Maxwell, J. C., 1862b, On physical lines of force: Part IV, The 
theory of molecular vortices applied to the action of 
magnetism on polarized light, The London, Edinburgh, 
and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of 
Science, Series 4, Volume 23, pages 85-95.
Maxwell, J. C., 1865, A dynamical theory of the electromagnetic 
field, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London, Volume 155, pages 459-512.
Maxwell, J. C., 1868, On a method of making a direct 
comparison of electrostatic with electromagnetic forces; 
with a note on the electromagnetic theory of light, 
Philosophical Transations of the Royal Society of London, 
Volume 158, pages 643-657.
Maxwell, J. C., 1873a, On action at a distance, Proceedings of 
the Royal Institution of Great Britain, Volume 7, pages 
44-54.
Maxwell, J. C., 1873b (1954), A treatise on electricity and 
magnetism, 3rd Edition, Volumes 1 and 2, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Maxwell, J. C., 1877 (1991), Matter and motion, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Maxwell, J. C., 1878, Ether, in Encyclopaedia Britannica, 9th 
Edition, Volume 8, pages 568-572, London.
McCormmach, R., 1967, J. J. Thomson and the structure of light, 
The British Journal for the History of Science, Volume 3, 
pages 362-387.
McCormmach, R., 1970b, H. A. Lorentz and the electromagnetic 
view of nature, Isis, Volume 61, pages 459-497.
127

McMullin, E., 2002, The origins of the field concept in physics, 
Physics in Perspective, Volume 4, pages 13-39.
Melia, F., 2001, Electrodynamics, The University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago.
Meyer, H. W., 1971, A history of electricity and magnetism, The 
M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Meyer-Arendt, J. R., 1972, Introduction to classical and modern 
optics, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Michelson, A. A., 1878, On a method of measuring the velocity 
of light, American Journal of Science and Arts, Volume 15, 
pages 394-395.
Michelson, A. A., 1902 (1961), Light waves and their uses, The 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Mie, G., 1898, Entwurf einer allgemeinen Theorie der 
Energieubertragung, Wiener Sitzungsberichte, Volume 
107, pages 1113-1182.
Miklowitz, J., 1978, The theory of elastic waves and 
waveguides, North-Holland Publishing Company, New 
York.
Millikan, R. A., 1910, A new modification of the cloud method 
of determining the elementary electrical charge and the 
most probable value of that charge, The London, 
Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and 
Journal of Science, Series 6, Volume 19, pages 209-228.
Millikan, R. A., 1913, On the elementary electrical charge and 
the Avogadro constant, The Physical Review, Volume 2, 
pages 109-143.
Moon, P., and D. E. Spencer, 1960, Foundations of 
electrodynamics, Dover Publications, Mineola, New York.
Moyer, D. F., 1978, Continuum mechanics and field theory: 
Thomson and Maxwell, Studies in History and Philosophy 
of Science, Volume 9, pages 35-50.
Nadeau, G., 1964, Introduction to elasticity, Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston, New York.
Narasimhan, M. N. L., 1993, Principles of continuum 
mechanics, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Newton, I., 1730 (1979), Opticks or a treatise of the reflections, 
refractions, inflections & colours of light, 4th Edition, 
Dover Publications, New York.
Newton, I., 1730 (1952), Optics, in Great Books of the Western 
World, Volume 34, edited by R. M. Hutchins, pages 
373-544, Encyclopedia Britannica, London.
128

Nichols, E. F., and G. F. Hull, 1901, A preliminary 
communication on the pressure of heat and light radiation, 
The Physical Review, Volume 13, pages 307-320.
Nichols, E. F., and G. F. Hull, 1903a, The pressure due to 
radiation, The Physical Review, Volume 17, pages 26-50.
Nichols, E. F., and G. F. Hull, 1903b, The pressure due to 
radiation, The Physical Review, Volume 17, pages 91-104.
Nichols, E. F., and G. F. Hull, 1903c, The pressure due to 
radiation, Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts 
and Science, Volume 38, pages 557-599.
Novozhilov, Yu V., and Yu A. Yappa, 1981, Electrodynamics, 
Mir Publishers, Moscow.
Nowacki, W., 1962 (1963), Dynamics of elastic systems, 
Chapman & Hall, London.
Nussbaum, A., 1965, Electromagnetic theory for engineers and 
scientists, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Oatley, C., 1976, Electric and magnetic fields: an introduction, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Ockendon, H., and A. B. Tayler, 1983, Inviscid Fluid Flows, 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Oersted, H. C., 1820, Experimenta circa effectum conflictus 
electrici in acum magneticam, Copenhagen (see English 
translation in Tricker, R. A. R., 1965, pages 113-117).
Ohanian, H. C., 1988, Classical electrodynamics, Allyn and 
Bacon, Boston.
Ohm, G. S., 1827, Die galvanische Kette, mathematisch 
bearbeitet, T. H. Riemann, Berlin.
O’Hara, J. G., 1975, George Johnstone Stoney, F. R. S., and the 
concept of the electron, Notes and Records of the Royal 
Society of London, Volume 29, pages 265-276.
Olenick, R. P., T. M. Apostol, and D. L. Goodstein, 1986, Beyond 
the mechanical Universe: from electricity to modern 
physics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
O’Neill, M. E., and F. Chorlton, 1986, Ideal and incompressible 
fluid dynamics, Ellis Horwood, Chichester, England.
Oppenheimer, J. R., 1970, Lectures on electrodynamics, Gordon 
and Breach Science Publishers, New York.
O’Rahilly, A., 1938 (1965), Electromagnetic theory: a critical 
examination of fundamentals, Volumes 1 and 2, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Owen, G. E., 1963 (2003), Introduction to electromagnetic 
theory, Dover Publications, Mineola, New York.
129

Page, L., 1922, An introduction to electrodynamics: from the 
standpoint of the electron theory, Ginn and Company, 
Boston.
Pain, H. J., 1968, The physics of vibrations and waves, John 
Wiley & Sons, New York.
Palit, S., 2005, Principles of electricity and magnetism, Alpha 
Science International, Harrow, United Kingdom.
Panofsky, W. K. H., and M. Phillips, 1955 (1962), Classical 
electricity and magnetism, 2nd Edition, Addison-Wesley 
Publishing Company, Reading, Massachusetts.
Panton, R. L., 1984, Incompressible flow, John Wiley & Sons, 
New York.
Park, D., 1997, The fire within the eye: a historical essay on the 
nature and meaning of light, Princeton University Press, 
Princeton, New Jersey.
Parton, J. E., and S. J. T. Owen, 1975, Applied electromagnetics, 
The Macmillan Press, London.
Parton, V. Z., and P. I. Perlin, 1981 (1984), Mathematical 
methods of the theory of elasticity, Volume 1, Mir 
Publishers, Moscow.
Pauli, W., 1949 (2000), Electrodynamics, in Pauli Lectures on 
Physics, Volume 1, edited by C. P. Enz, Dover Publications, 
New York.
Pearson, C. E., 1959, Theoretical elasticity, Harvard University 
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Pearson, K., 1888b, On the generalised equations of elasticity, 
and their application to the wave theory of light, 
Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, Volume 
20, pages 297-350.
Peck, E. R., 1953, Electricity and magnetism, McGraw-Hill Book 
Company, New York.
Peregrinus, P., 1269 (1902), Epistola de magnets, in Petrus 
Peregrinus and his Epistola de Magnets, translated by S. P. 
Thompson, Charles Whittingham, London.
Peres, A., 1967, Constancy of the fundamental electric charge, 
Physical Review Letters, Volume 19, pages 1293-1294.
Planck, M., 1914 (1959), The theory of heat radiation, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Planck, M., 1919b (1932), Theory of electricity and magnetism: 
introduction to theoretical physics, Volume III, 3rd 
Edition, Macmillan and Company, London.
Plonsey, R., and R. E. Collin, 1961, Principles and applications 
of electromagnetic fields, McGraw-Hill Book Company, 
New York.
130

Poincare, H., 1900, La theorie de Lorentz et le principe de 
reaction, Archives Neerlandaises des Sciences Exactes et 
Naturelles, Volume 5, pages 252-278.
Poincare, H., 1901, filectricite et optique: la lumiere et les 
theories electrodynamiques. Legons professees a la 
Sorbonne en 1888, 1890 et 1899, 2nd Edition, Gauthier- 
Villars, Paris.
Poisson, S. D., 1829a, Memoire sur l’equilibre et le mouvement 
des corps elastiques, Memoires de l’Academie des 
Sciences, Paris, Volume 8, pages 357-570.
Poisson, S. D., 1829b, Addition, Memoires de l’Academie des 
Sciences, Paris, Volume 8, pages 623-627.
Portis, A. M., 1978, Electromagnetic fields: sources and media, 
John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Poynting, J. H., 1884, On the transfer of energy in the 
electromagnetic field, Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society of London, Volume 175, pages 343-361.
Poynting, J. H., 1885, On the connexion between electric current 
and the electric and magnetic inductions in the 
surrounding field, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society of London, Volume 176, pages 277-306.
Prescott, J., 1924 (1946), Applied elasticity, Dover Publications, 
New York.
Preston, S. T., 1875, Physics of the ether, E. & F. N. Spon, 
London.
Preston, T., 1890 (1912), The theory of light, 4th Edition, 
Macmillan and Company, London.
Priestley, J., 1767, The history and present state of electricity, 
with original experiments, 2 Volumes, London.
Pugh, E. M., and G. E. Pugh, 1967, Physical significance of the 
Poynting vector in static fields, American Journal of 
Physics, Volume 35, pages 153-156.
Purcell, E. M., 1963 (1985), Electricity and magnetism, 2nd 
Edition, McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, New York.
Rainich, G. Y., 1925, Electrodynamics in the general relativity 
theory, Transactions of the American Mathematical 
Society, Volume 27, pages 106-136.
Rayleigh, J. W. S., 1900, Remarks upon the law of complete 
radiation, The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin 
Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, Series 5, 
Volume 49, pages 539-540.
Rayleigh, J. W. S., 1905a, The dynamical theory of gases and of 
radiation, Nature, Volume 72, pages 54-55.
Rayleigh, J. W. S., 1905b, The constant of radiation as calculated 
from molecular data, Nature, Volume 72, pages 243-244.
131

Reitz, J. R., F. J. Milford, and R. W. Christy, 1960 (1979), 
Foundations of electromagnetic theory, 3rd Edition, 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, 
Massachusetts.
Robertson, J. K., 1929 (1955), Introduction to optics: geometrical 
and physical, 4th Edition, D. Van Nostrand Company, 
New York.
Robertson, J. M., 1965, Hydrodynamics in theory and 
application, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Rogers, W. E., 1954, Introduction to electric fields: a vector 
analysis approach, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New 
York.
Rohrlich, F., 1961, The equations of motion of classical charges, 
Annals of Physics, Volume 13, pages 93-109.
Rohrlich, F., 1965, Classical charged particles: foundations of 
their theory, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 
Reading, Massachusetts.
Rohrlich, F., 1970, Electromagnetic momentum, energy, and 
mass, American Journal of Physics, Volume 38, pages 
1310-1316.
Romer, H., 2005, Theoretical optics: an introduction, Wiley- 
VCH, Weinheim, Germany.
Ronchi, V., 1939 (1970), The nature of light: an historical survey, 
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Rosenfeld, L., 1969, Newton’s views on aether and gravitation, 
Archive for History of Exact Sciences, Volume 6, pages 
29-37.
Rosser, W. G. V., 1996, Interpretation of classical 
electromagnetism, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Rossi, B., 1957, Optics, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 
Reading, Massachusetts.
Rothwell, E. J., and M. J. Cloud, 2001, Electromagnetics, CRC 
Press, Boca Raton, Florida.
Rouse, H., 1946 (1978), Elementary mechanics of fluids, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Royer, D., and E. Dieulesaint, 2000, Elastic waves in solids I: 
free and guided propagation, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Sadd, M. H., 2005, Elasticity: theory, applications, and 
numerics, Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Salby, M. L., 1996, Fundamentals of atmospheric physics, 
Academic Press, New York.
Sanders, J. H., 1965, Velocity of light, Pergamon Press, Oxford.
132

Sarton, G., 1928, The foundation of electromagnetism (1820), 
Isis, Volume 10, pages 435-445.
Schaffner, K. F., 1972, Nineteenth-century aether theories, 
Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Schelkunoff, S. A., 1943, Electromagnetic waves, D. Van 
Nostrand Company, Princeton, New Jersey.
Schott, G. A., 1912, Electromagnetic radiation and the 
mechanical reactions arising from it, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Schuster, A., 1904 (1909), An introduction to the theory of 
optics, 2nd Edition, Edward Arnold, London.
Schwartz, M., 1972 (1987), Principles of electrodynamics, Dover 
Publications, Mineola, New York.
Scipio, L. A., 1967, Principles of continua: with applications, 
John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Segel, L. A., 1977 (1987), Mathematics applied to continuum 
mechanics, Dover Publications, New York.
Serrin, J., 1959, Mathematical principles of classical fluid 
mechanics, in Handbuch der Physik, Volume VIII /1, 
edited by S. Flugge and C. Truesdell, pages 125-263, 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Shadowitz, A., 1975 (1988), The electromagnetic field, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Shames, I. H., 1962, Mechanics of fluids, McGraw-Hill Book 
Company, New York.
Shankar, R., 2016, Fundamentals of physics II: 
electromagnetism, optics, and quantum mechanics, Yale 
University Press, New Haven, Connecticut.
Sharman, R. V., 1963, Vibrations and waves, Butterworths & 
Company, London.
Shearer, P. M., 1999 (2009), Introduction to seismology, Second 
Edition, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Shedd, P. C., 1954, Fundamentals of electromagnetic waves, 
Prentice-Hall, New York.
Siegel, D. M., 1981, Thomson, Maxwell, and the universal ether 
in Victorian physics, in Conceptions of Ether: Studies in 
the History of Ether Theories 1740-1900, edited by G. N. 
Cantor and M. J. S. Hodge, pages 239-268, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Silberstein, L., 1918, Elements of the electromagnetic theory of 
light, Longmans, Green and Company, London.
Silliman, R. H., 1974, Fresnel and the emergence of physics as a 
discipline, Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences, 
Volume 4, pages 137-162.
133

Silvester, P., 1968, Modern electromagnetic fields, Prentice-Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Simmons, J. W., and M. J. Guttmann, 1970, States, waves and 
photons: a modern introduction to light, Addison-Wesley 
Publishing Company, Reading, Massachusetts.
Simpson, T. K., 1966, Maxwell and the direct experimental test 
of his electromagnetic theory, Isis, Volume 57, pages 
411-432.
Simpson, T. K., 1997, Maxwell on the electromagnetic field: a 
guided study, Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, 
New Jersey.
Skilling, H. H., 1948, Fundamentals of electric waves, 2nd 
Edition, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Slater, J. C., and N. H. Frank, 1947 (1969), Electromagnetism, 
Dover Publications, New York.
Slawinski, M. A., 2010, Waves and rays in elastic continua, 2nd 
Edition, World Scientific, New Jersey.
Smart, J. S., 1966, Effective field theories of magnetism, W. B. 
Saunders Company, Philadelphia.
Smith, G. S., 1997, An introduction to classical electromagnetic 
radiation, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Smythe, W. R., 1939 (1950), Static and dynamic electricity, 2nd 
Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
Sneddon, I. N., and D. S. Berry, 1958, The classical theory of 
elasticity, in Handbuch der Physik, Volume VI, edited by 
S. Flugge, pages 1-126, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Sobel. M. I., 1987, Light, The University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago.
Sokolnikoff, I. S., 1946 (1956), Mathematical theory of elasticity, 
2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
Sokolnikoff, I. S., 1964, Tensor analysis, theory and applications 
to geometry and mechanics of continua, 2nd Edition, John 
Wiley & Sons, New York.
Sommerfeld, A., 1942c (1964), Electrodynamics: lectures on 
theoretical physics, Volume III, Academic Press, New 
York.
Sommerfeld, A., 1942d (1964), Optics: lectures on theoretical 
physics, Volume IV, Academic Press, New York.
Soper, D. E., 1976 (2008), Classical field theory, Dover 
Publications, Mineola, New York.
Southwell, R. V., 1941 (1969), An introduction to theory of 
elasticity: for engineers and physicists, Dover Publications, 
New York.
134

Spain, B., 1960, Tensor calculus, 3rd Edition, Oliver and Boyd, 
Edinburgh.
Stein, H., 1970, On the notion of field in Newton, Maxwell, and 
beyond, in Historical and Philosophical Perspectives of 
Science, edited by R. H. Stuewer, pages 264-287, 
University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
Stein, H., 1981, ‘Subtler forms of matter’ in the period following 
Maxwell, in Conceptions of Ether: Studies in the History 
of Ether Theories 1740-1900, edited by G. N. Cantor and 
M. J. S. Hodge, pages 309-340, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge.
Steinberg, R. I., K. Kwiatkowski, W. Maenhaut, and N. S. Wall, 
1975, Experimental test of charge conservation and 
stability of the electron, Physical Review D, Volume 12, 
pages 2582-2586.
Stoner, E. C., 1926, Magnetism and atomic structure, Methuen 
& Company, London.
Stoney, G. J., 1894, Of the “electron”, or atom of electricity, The 
London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine 
and Journal of Science, Series 5, Volume 38, pages 418-420.
Stratton, J. A., 1941, Electromagnetic theory, McGraw-Hill Book 
Company, New York.
Street, R. L., G. Z. Watters, and J. K. Vennard, 1940 (1996), 
Elementary fluid mechanics, 7th Edition, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York.
Streeter, V. L., and E. B. Wylie, 1985, Fluid Mechanics, 8th 
Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
Strong, J., 1958, Concepts of classical optics, W. H. Freeman and 
Company, San Francisco.
Suisky, D., 2009, Euler as physicist, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Synge, J. L., and A. Schild, 1949 (1978), Tensor calculus, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Tallpaert, Y. R., 2002, Tensor analysis and continuum 
mechanics, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands.
Teukolsky, S. A., 1996, The explanation of the Trouton-Noble 
experiment revisited, American Journal of Physics, 
Volume 64, pages 1104-1109.
Thomson, J. J., 1904a, Electricity and matter, Yale University 
Press, New Haven, Connecticut.
Thomson, J. J., 1925, The structure of light, The London, 
Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and 
Journal of Science, Series 6, Volume 50, pages 1181-1196.
135

Thomson, W. (Lord Kelvin), 1855, Note on the possible density 
of the luminiferous medium and on the mechanical value 
of a cubic mile of Sunlight, The London, Edinburgh, and 
Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, 
Series 4, Volume 9, pages 36-40.
Thomson, W. (Lord Kelvin), 1856, Elements of a mathematical 
theory of elasticity, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society of London, Volume 146, pages 481-498.
Thomson, W. (Lord Kelvin), 1872, Reprint of papers on 
electrostatics and magnetism, Macmillan & Company, 
London.
Thomson, W. (Lord Kelvin), 1884 (1987), Notes of lectures on 
molecular dynamics and the wave theory of light, 
delivered at the John Hopkins University Baltimore, in 
Kelvin’s Baltimore Lectures and Modern Theoretical 
Physics, edited by R. Kargon and P Achinstein, pages 
7-263, The M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Thomson, W. (Lord Kelvin), 1888, On the reflexion and 
refraction of light, The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin 
Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, Series 5, 
Volume 26, pages 414-425.
Thomson, W. (Lord Kelvin), 1896, On the generation of 
longitudinal waves in ether, Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London, Volume 59, pages 270-273.
Thomson, W. (Lord Kelvin), 1899a, On the reflexion and 
refraction of solitary plane waves at a plane interface 
between two isotropic elastic mediums - fluid, solid, or 
ether, The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical 
Magazine and Journal of Science, Series 5, Volume 47, 
pages 179-191.
Thomson, W. (Lord Kelvin), 1899b, On the application of force 
within a limited space, required to produce spherical 
solitary waves, or trains of periodic waves, of both species, 
equivoluminal and irrotational in an elastic solid, The 
London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine 
and Journal of Science, Series 5, Volume 47, pages 480-493.
Thomson, W. (Lord Kelvin), 1901, Nineteenth century clouds 
over the dynamical theory of heat and light, The London, 
Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and 
Journal of Science, Series 6, Volume 2, pages 1-40.
Tiersten, H. F., 1990, A development of the equations of 
electromagnetism in material continua, Springer-Verlag, 
Berlin.
Timoshenko, S. P, and J. N. Goodier, 1934 (1970), Theory of 
elasticity, 3rd Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New 
York.
136

Todhunter, I., and K. Pearson, 1886 (1960), A history of the 
theory of elasticity and of the strength of materials: 
Volume I, Galilei to Saint-Venant, 1639-1850, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Todhunter, I., and K. Pearson, 1893a (1960), A history of the 
theory of elasticity and of the strength of materials: 
Volume II, Saint-Venant to Lord Kelvin, Part I, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Todhunter, I., and K. Pearson, 1893b (1960), A history of the 
theory of elasticity and of the strength of materials: 
Volume II, Saint-Venant to Lord Kelvin, Part II, Dover 
Publications, New York.
Tokaty, G. A., 1971 (1994), A history and philosophy of fluid 
mechanics, Dover Publications, New York.
Tomaschek, R., 1925, Uber Versuche sur Auffindung 
elektrodynamischer Wirkungen der Endbewegung in 
grossen Hohen, I, Annalen der Physik, Volume 78, pages 
743-756.
Tomaschek, R., 1926, Uber Versuche sur Auffindung 
elektrodynamischer Wirkungen der Endbewegung in 
grossen Hohen, II, Annalen der Physik, Volume 80, pages 
509-514.
Tomboulian, D. H., 1965, Electric and magnetic fields, Harcourt, 
Brace & World, New York.
Tonnelat, M.-A., 1959 (1966), The principles of electromagnetic 
theory and of relativity, Gordon and Breach, Science 
Publishers, New York.
Towne, D. H., 1967, Wave phenomena, Addison-Wesley 
Publishing Company, Reading, Massachusetts.
Treder, H.-J., 2002, Gravitational ether and Riemann’s theory of 
gravity, in Pushing Gravity: New Perspectives on Le 
Sage’s Theory of Gravitation, edited by M. R. Edwards, 
pages 279-283, Apeiron, Montreal.
Tricker, R. A. R., 1965, Early electrodynamics: the first law of 
circulation, Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Tricker, R. A. R., 2002, The contributions of Faraday and 
Maxwell to electrical science, Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Trimmer, W. S. N., R. F. Baierlein, J. E. Faller, and H. A. Hill, 
1973, Experimental search for anisotropy in the speed of 
light, Physical Review D, Volume 8, pages 3321-3326.
Trouton, F. T., and H. R. Noble, 1903a, The forces acting on a 
charged condenser moving through space, Proceedings of 
the Royal Society of London, Volume 72, pages 132-133.
Trouton, F. T., and H. R. Noble, 1903b, The mechanical forces 
acting on a charged electric condenser moving through 
space, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London, Series A, Volume 202, pages 165-181.
137

Truesdell, C., 1952, The mechanical foundations of elasticity 
and fluid dynamics, Journal of Rational Mechanics and 
Analysis, Volume 1, pages 125-300.
Truesdell, C., 1953, Corrections and additions to “The 
mechanical foundations of elasticity and fluid dynamics”, 
Journal of Rational Mechanics and Analysis, Volume 2, 
pages 593-616.
Truesdell, C., and R. A. Toupin, 1960, The classical field 
theories, in Handbuch der Physik, Volume III /1, edited by 
S. Flugge, pages 226-793, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Truesdell, C., 1966, The elements of continuum mechanics, 
Springer-Verlag, New York.
Turner, J., 1955, Maxwell on the method of physical analogy, 
The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, Volume 
6, pages 226-238.
Unzicker, A., 2000, What can physics learn from continuum 
mechanics? arXiv:gr-qc/0011064v1 20 Nov 2000.
Vago, I., and M. Gyimesi, 1998, Electromagnetic fields, 
Akademiai Kiado, Budapest.
van Bladel, J., 1964 (1985), Electromagnetic fields, Hemisphere 
Publishing, New York.
Vanderlinde, J., 2004, Classical electromagnetic theory, 2nd 
Edition, Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
van Heel, A. C. S., and C. H. F. Velzel, 1968, What is light?, 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
Vennard, J. K., and R. L. Street, 1940 (1982), Elementary fluid 
mechanics, 6th Edition, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Verschuur, G. L., 1993, Hidden attraction: the history and 
mystery of magnetism, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Very, F. W., 1919, The luminiferous ether: I. Its relation to the 
electron and to a universal interstellar medium; II. Its 
relation to the atom, The Four Seas Company, Boston.
Vonsovsky, S. V., 1975, Magnetism of elementary particles, Mir 
Publishers, Moscow.
Waldron, R. A., 1964, Waves and oscillations, D. Van Nostrand 
Company, New York.
Waldron, R. A., 1977, The wave and ballistic theories of light - a 
critical review, Frederick Muller Limited, London.
Walker, G. T., 1910, Outlines of the theory of electromagnetism: 
a series of lectured delivered before the Calcutta 
University, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Walshaw, A. C., and D. A. Jobson, 1972 (1979), Mechanics of 
fluids, 3rd Edition, Longman, London.
Wangsness, R. K., 1979, Electromagnetic fields, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York.
138

Warwick, A., 1995, The sturdy protestants of science: Larmor, 
Trouton, and the Earth’s motion through the ether, in 
Scientific Prectice: Theories and Stories of Doing Physics, 
edited by J. Z. Buchwald, pages 300-343, University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Wasley, R. J., 1973, Stress wave propagation in solids: an 
introduction, Marcel Dekker, New York.
Weber, W., and R. Kohlrausch, 1856, Ueber die 
Elektricitatsmenge, welche bei galvanischen Stromen 
durch den Querschnitt der Kette fliesst, Annalen der 
Physik, Volume 99, pages 10-25.
Weingard, R., 1977, On cracking that nut, absolute space, 
Philosophy of Science, Volume 44, pages 288-291.
Westgard, J. B., 1997, Electrodynamics: a concise introduction, 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
White, F. M., 1979 (1986), Fluid mechanics, 2nd Edition, 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
White, F. W. G., 1934 (1950), Electromagnetic waves, 4th 
Edition, Methuen & Company, London.
Whittaker, E. T., 1910, A history of the theories of aether and 
electricity: the age of Descartes to the close of the 
nineteenth century, Hodges, Figgis, & Company, Dublin.
Whittaker, E. T., 1926 (1960), A history of the theories of aether 
and electricity: Volume II, The modern theories, 1900-1926, 
Harper & Brothers, New York.
Whittaker, E. T., 1943, The aether: past and present, Endeavour, 
Volume 2, pages 117-120.
Wien, W., 1893, Eine neue Beziehung der Strahlung schwarzer 
Korper zum zweiten Hauptsatz der Warmetheorie, 
Sitzungberichte der Koniglichen Preussischen Akademie 
der Wissen-schaften zu Berlin, pages 55-62.
Wien, W., 1896, Ueber die Energievertheilung im 
Emissionsspectrum eines schwarzen Korpers, Annalen der 
Physik und Chemie, Volume 58, pages 662-669.
Wilczek, F., 2008, The lightness of being: mass, ether, and the 
unification of forces, Basic Books, New York.
Wilkinson, D. T., 1967, Properties of free electrons and 
positrons, in Atomic and Electron Physics: Part B: Free 
Atoms, edited by V. W. Hughes and H. L. Schultz, pages 
1-47, Academic Press, New York.
Williams, L. P., 1966, The origins of field theory, Random 
House, New York.
Wise, M. N., 1979, The mutual embrace of electricity and 
magnetism, Science, Volume 203, pages 1310-1318.
139

Wise, M. N., 1981, German concepts of force, energy, and the 
electromagnetic ether: 1845-1880, in Conceptions of Ether: 
Studies in the History of Ether Theories 1740-1900, edited 
by G. N. Cantor and M. J. S. Hodge, pages 269-307, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Wood, De V., 1885, The luminiferous aether, The London, 
Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and 
Journal of Science, Volume 20, pages 389-417.
Wood, R. W., 1911 (1934), Physical optics, 3rd Edition, The 
Macmillan Company, New York.
Worrall, J., 1982, The pressure of light, Studies in History and 
Philosophy of Science, Volume 13, pages 133-171.
Wrede, R. C., 1963 (1972), Introduction to vector and tensor 
analysis, Dover Publications, New York.
Yarwood, J., 1958 (1863), Electricity, magnetism, and atomic 
physics, Volume 2, Atomic physics, University Tutorial 
Press, London.
Yosida, K., 1996, Theory of magnetism, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Yuan, S. W., 1967, Foundations of fluid mechanics, Prentice­
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Zangwill, A. 2013, Modern electrodynamics, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
140

