
Copyright C> 1967 by Morris Kline. 
All rights reserved under Pan American and International Copyright 
Conventions. 
Published in Canada by General Publishing Company, Ltd., 30 
Lesmill Road, Don Mills, Toronto, Ontario. 
Published in the United Kingdom by Constable and Company, Ltd., 
10 Orange Street, London WC2H 7EG. 
This Dover edition, first published in 1985, is an unabridged re­
publication of the work first published by Addison-Wesley Publishing 
Company, Inc., Reading, Massachusetts, in 1967 under the tide Matht­
matia for Lihtral Arts. The Instructor's Manual published with the origi­
nal edition, containing additional answers and solutions to the problems 
in the text, has been added to this edition. 
Manufactured in the United States of America 
Dover Publications, Inc., 31 East 2nd Street, Mineola, N. Y. 11501 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Kline, Morris, 1908-
Mathematics for the nonmathematician. 
Reprint. Originally published: Mathematics for liberal ans. Reading, 
Mass.: Addison-Wesley, c> 1967. (Addison-Wesley series in introductory 
mathematics) 
Includes bibliographies and index. 
1. Mathematics-I961-
I. Tide. 
QA37.2.K6 
1985 
510 
84-25923 
ISBN 0-486-24823-2 

MATHEMATICS FOR THE 
NONMATHEMATICIAN 
MORRIS KLINE 
Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus 
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences 
New York University 
DOVER PUBLICATIONS, INC. 
NEW YORK 

COPYRIGHT @ 1967 BY ADDISON-WESLEY PUBLISHING COMPANY, INC. 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
THIS BOOK, OR PARTS THEREOF, MAY NOT BE REPRODUCED IN ANY FORM WITHOUT WRITTEN 
PERMISSION OF THE PUBLISHER. 
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. 
PUBLISHED 
SIMULTANEOUSLY IN CANADA. 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOG CARD NO. 67-12831. 

PREFACE 
" ... I cunsider that withum understanding as much of the abstruser part of 
geometry, as Archimedes or Apollunius, Im£ may understand enough to be assisted 
by it in the contemplatiun of nature; and that une needs not !mow the profoundest 
mysteries of it to be able to discern its usefulness. . .. I have often wished that 
I had employed about the speculative part of geometry, and the cultivatiun of the 
specious [symbolicJ algebra I had been taught very young, a good part of that time 
and industry that I spent about surveying and fortificatiun . .. .  
" 
ROBERT BOYLE 
I believe as firmly as I have in the past that a mathematics course addressed to 
liberal arts students must present the scientific and humanistic import of the sub­
ject. Whereas mathematics proper makes little appeal and seems even less pointed 
to most of these students, the subject becomes highly significant to them when it 
is presented in a cultural context. In fact, the branches of elementary mathematics 
were created primarily to serve extra-mathematical needs and interests. In the 
very act of meeting such needs each of these creations has proved to have inesti­
mable importance for man's understanding of the nature of his world and himself. 
That so many professors have chosen to teach mathematics as an integral 
part of Western culture, as evidenced by their reception of my earlier book, 
Mathematics: A Cultural Approach, has been extremely gratifying. That book will 
continue to be available. In the present revision and abridgment, which has been 
designed to meet the needs of particular groups of students, the spirit of the original 
text has been preserved. 
The historical approach has been retained because it is 
intrinsically interesting, provides motivation for the introduction of various topics, 
and gives coherence to the body of material. Each topic or branch of mathematics 
dealt with is shown to be a response to human interests, and the cultural import 
of the technical development is presented. I adhered to the principle that the level 
of rigor should be suited to the mathematical age of the student rather than to 
the age of mathematics. 
As in the earlier text, several of the topics are treated quite differently from 
what is now fashionable. These are the real number system, logic, and set theory. 
I tried to present these topics in a context and with a level of emphasis which I 
believe to be appropriate for an elementary course in mathematics. In this book, 
v 

VI 
PREFACE 
the axiomatic approach to the real numbers is formulated after the various types 
of numbers and their properties are derived from physical situations and uses. 
The treatment of logic is confined to the fundamentals of Aristotelian logic. And 
set theory serves as an illustration of a different kind of algebra. 
The changes made in this revision are intended to suit special groups. Some 
students need more review and drill on elementary concepts and techniques than 
the earlier book provides. 
Others, chiefly those preparing for teaching on the 
elementary level, need to learn more about elementary mathematics than their 
high school courses covered. 
Teachers of twelfth-year high school courses and 
one-semester college courses often found the extensive amount of material in 
Mathematics: A Cultural Approach rather disconcerting because it offered so much 
more than could be covered. 
To meet the needs of these groups I have made the following changes: 
I. 
Four of the chapters devoted entirely to cultural influences have been dropped. 
The size of the original book has thereby been reduced considerably. 
2. 
A few applications of mathematics to science have been omitted, primarily 
to reduce the size of the text. 
3. 
Some of the chapters on technical topics, Chapter 3 on logic and mathematics, 
Chapter 4 on number, Chapter 5 on elementary algebra, and Chapter 21 on 
arithmetics and their algebras have been expanded. 
4. 
Additional drill exercises have been added within a few chapters, and a set 
of review exercises providing practice in technique has been added to each of 
a number of chapters. 
5. 
Improvements in presentation have been made in a number of places. 
With respect to use in courses, it is probably true of the present text, as it is of the 
earlier one, that it contains more material than can be covered in some courses. 
However. many of the chapters as well as sections in chapters are not essential 
to the logical continuity. 
These chapters and sections have been starred (*). 
Thus Chapter !O on painting shows historically how mathematicians were led to 
projective geometry (Chapter II), but from a logical standpoint, Chapter 10 is 
not needed in order to understand the succeeding chapter. Chapter 19 on musical 
sounds is an application of the material on the trigonometric functions in Chapter 18 
but is not essential to the continuity. 
The two chapters on the calculus are not 
used in the succeeding chapters. 
Desirable as it may be to give students some 
idea of what the calculus is about, it may still be necessary in some classes to omit 
these chapters. The same can be said of the chapters on statistics (Chapter 22) and 
probability (Chapter 23). 
As for sections within chapters, Chapter 6 on Euclidean geometry may well 
serve as an illustration. The mathematical material of this chapter is intended as 
a review of some basic ideas and theorems of Euclidean geometry and as an intro­
duction to the conic sections. 
Some of the familiar applications are given in 
Section 6-3 (see the Table of Contents) and probably should be taken up. How-

PREFACE 
Vll 
ever the applications to light in Sections 6-4 and 6-6 and the discussion of cultural 
influences in Section 6-7 can be omitted. 
Some of the material, whether or not included in the following recommenda­
tions for particular groups, can be left to student reading. 
In fact, the first two 
chapters were deliberately fashioned so that they could be read by students. The 
objective here, in addition to presenting intrinsically important ideas, was to 
induce students to read a mathematics book, to give them the confidence to do so, 
and to get them into the habit of doing so. 
It seems necessary to counter the 
students' impression, resulting no doubt from elementary and high school instruc­
tion in mathematics, that whereas history texts are to be read, mathematics texts 
are essentially reference books for formulas and homework exetcises. 
For C(JUTSeS emphasizing the number concept and its extension to algebra, it is 
possible to take advantage of the logical independence of numerous chapters and 
use Chapters 3 through 5 on reasoning, arithmetic, and algebra and Chapter 2 1  
on different algebras. To pursue the development of this theme into the area of 
functions one can include Chapters 1 3  and 15. 
C(JUTSes emphasizing geometry can utilize Chapters 6, 7, 1 1 ,  12, and 20 on 
Euclidean geometry, trigonometry, projective geometry, coordinate geometry, 
and non-Euclidean geometry respectively. Some algebra, that reviewed in Chapter 5, 
is involved in Chapters 7 and 12. If knowledge of the material of Chapter 5 cannot 
be presupposed, this chapter must precede the treatment of geometry. 
The essence of the two preceding suggestions may be diagrammed thus: 
Chapters 3, 4, 5 
I 
1 
1 
Algebra 
Geometry 
Chapters 21, 1 3 , 15 
Chapters 6, 7, 1 1 ,  12, 20 
Of course, starred sections in these chapters are optional. 
For a one-semester liberal arts C(fUrse, the basic content can be as follows: 
Chapter 2 
on a historical orientation, 
Chapter 3 
on logic and mathematics, 
Chapters 
4 and 5 
Chapter 6 
Chapter 7 
Chapter 12 
Chapter 13 
Chapter 14 
Chapter 15 
Chapter 20 
Chapter 21 
on the number system and elementary algebra, 
through Section 6-5, on Euclidean geometry, 
through Section 7-3, on trigonometry, 
on coordinate geometry, 
on functions and their uses, 
through ,Section 14-4. on parametric equations. 
through Section 15-10, on the further use of 
SCience, 
on non-Euclidean geometry, 
on different algebras. 
functions In 

VllI 
PREFACE 
Any additional material would enrich the course but would not be needed for 
continuity. 
Though the teacher's problem of presenting material outside the domain 
of mathematics proper is far simpler with this text than with the earlier one, it 
may still be necessary to assure him that he need not hesitate to undertake this 
task. The feeling that one must be an authority in a subject to say anything about 
it is unfounded. 
We are all laymen outside the field of our own specialty, and 
we should not be ashamed to point this out to students. 
In contiguous areas we 
are merely giving indications of ideas that students may pursue further in other 
courses or in independent reading. 
I hope that this text will serve the needs of the groups of students to which 
it is addressed and that. despite the somewhat greater emphasis on technical matters, 
it will convey the rich significance of mathematics. 
I wish to thank my wife Helen for her critical scrutiny of the contents and her 
conscientious reading of the proofs. I wish to express, also, my thanks to members 
of the Addison-Wesley staff for very helpful suggestions and for their continuing 
support of a culturally oriented approach to mathematics. 
New York,1967 
M.K. 

CONTENTS 
1 
Why Mathematics? 
2 
A Historical Orientation 
2-1 
Introduction . 
II 
2-2 
Mathematics in early civilizations. 
I I  
2-3 
The classical Greek period 
14 
2-4 
The Alexandrian Greek period 
17 
2-5 
The Hindus and Arabs 
19 
2-6 
Early and medieval Europe 
20 
2-7 
The Renaissance 
20 
2-8 
Developments from 1550 [Q 1800 
22 
2-9 
Developments from 1800 to the present 
24 
2-10 The human aspect of mathematics 
27 
3 
Logic and Mathematics 
3-1 
Introduction. 
30 
3-2 
The concepts of mathematics 
30 
3-3 
Idealization 
38 
3-4 
Methods of reasoning 
39 
3-5 
Mathematical proof 
45 
3-6 
Axioms and definitions 
50 
3-7 
The creation of mathematics 
51 
4 
Number: the Fundamental Concept 
4-1 
Introduction . 
58 
4-2 
Whole numbers and fractions 
58 
4-3 
Irrational numbers 
65 
4-4 
Negative numbers 
72 
4-5 
The axioms concerning numbers 
75 
* 4-6 
Applications of the number system 
82 
5 
Algebra, the Higher Arithmetic 
5-1 
Introduction . 
94 
5-2 
The language of algebra 
94 
5-3 
Exponents 
97 
5-4 
Algebraic transformations 
102 
5-5 
Equations involving unknowns 
106 
5-6 
The general second-degree equation 
112 
* 5-7 
The history of equations of higher degree 
119 
ix 

X 
CONTENTS 
6 
The Nature and Uses of Euclidean Geometry 
6-1 
The beginnings of geometry 
6-2 
The content of Euclidean geometry 
6-3 
Some mundane uses of Euclidean geometry 
* 6-4 
Euclidean geometry and the study of light 
6-5 
Conic sections 
* 6-6 
Conic sections and light 
* 6-7 
The cultural influence of Euclidean geometry 
7 
Charting the Earth and the Heavens 
7-1 
The Alexandrian world 
7-2 
Basic concepts of trigonometry 
7-3 
Some mundane uses of trigonometric ratios 
* 7-4 
Charting the earth 
* 7-5 
Charting the heavens 
* 7-6 
Further progress in the study of light. 
8 
The Mathematical Order of Nature 
8-1 
The Greek concept of nature 
8-2 
PreGreek and Greek views of nature 
8-3 
Greek astronomical theories 
8-4 
The evidence for the mathematical design of nature. 
8-5 
The destruction of the Greek world 
* 9 
The Awakening of Europe 
9-1 
The medieval civilization of Europe 
9-2 
Mathematics in the medieval period 
9-3 
Revolutionary influences in Europe 
9-4 
New doctrines of the Renaissance 
9-5 
The religious motivation in the study of nature 
* 10 
Mathematics and Painting in the Renaissance 
10-1 
10-2 
10-3 
10-4 
10-5 
10-6 
10-7 
Introduction 
Gropings toward a scientific system of perspective 
Realism leads to mathematics 
The basic idea of mathematical perspective 
Some mathematical theorems on perspective drawing 
Renaissance paintings employing mathematical perspective 
Other values of mathematical perspective 
11 
Projective Geometry 
11-1 
The problem suggested by projection and section 
11-2 
The work of Desargues 
11-3 
The work of Pascal 
11-4 
The principle of duality 
11-5 
The relationship between projective and Euclidean geometries 
12 
Coordinate Geometry 
12-1 
12-2 
12-3 
Descartes and Fermat. 
The need for new methods in geometry. 
The concepts of equation and curve 
123 
125 
131 
138 
142 
144 
149 
153 
158 
163 
165 
171 
176 
187 
188 
190 
192 
194 
197 
199 
200 
202 
206 
209 
210 
213 
215 
219 
223 
229 
232 
234 
239 
242 
247 
250 
253 
256 

12-4 
12-5 
12-6 
* 12-7 
* 12-8 
12-9 
The parabola 
Finding a curve from its equation 
The ellipse . 
The equations of surfaces 
Four-dimensional geometry 
Summary 
13 
The Simplest Formulas in Action 
Mastery of nature 
The search for scientific method 
The scientific method of Galileo . 
Functions and formulas 
The formulas describing the motion of dropped objects 
CONTENTS 
Xl 
264 
269 
27 1 
273 
275 
277 
13-1 
13-2 
13-3 
13-4 
13-5 
13-6 
13-7 
The formulas describing the motion of objects thrown downward 
Formulas for the motion of bodies projected upward 
280 
281 
284 
290 
293 
299 
300 
14 
Parametric Equations and Curvilinear Motion 
14-1 
14-2 
14-3 
14-4 
* 14-5 
14-6 
Introduction 
The concept of parametric equations 
The motion of a projectile dropped from an airplane 
The motion of projectiles launched by cannons . 
The motion of projectiles fired at an arbitrary angle 
Summary 
15 
The Application of Formulas to Gravitation 
15-1 
15-2 
15-3 
15-4 
15-5 
15-6 
15-7 
15-8 
15-9 
15-10 
* 15-11 
* 15-12 
* 15-13 
The revolution in astronomy 
The objections w a heliocentric theory 
The arguments for the heliocentric theory 
The problem of relating earthly and heavenly motions 
A sketch of Newton's life 
Newton's key idea. 
Mass and weight 
The law of gravitation 
Further discussion of mass and weight 
Some deductions from the law of gravitation 
The rotation of the earrh 
Gravitation and the Keplerian laws 
Implications of the theory of gravitation. 
* 16 The Differential Calculus 
16-1 
16-2 
16-3 
16-4 
16-5 
16-6 
16-7 
16-8 
Introduction 
The problems leading to the calculus 
The concept of instantaneous rate of change 
The concept of instantaneous speed 
The method of increments 
The method of increments applied to general functions 
The geometrical meaning of the derivative 
The maximum and minimum values of functions 
ɑ 17 
The Integral Calculus 
17-1 
Differential and integral calculus compared 
17-2 
Finding the formula from the given rate of change 
307 
308 
310 
31 3 
318 
323 
326 
330 
331 
334 
336 
337 
340 
341 
343 
346 
352 
355 
359 
365 
365 
367 
368 
371 
374 
379 
382 
388 
389 

xii 
CONTENTS 
17-3 
17-4 
17-5 
17-6 
17-7 
17-8 
17-9 
Applications to problems of motion 
Areas obtained by imegration 
The calculation of work . 
The calculation of escape velocity 
The integral as the limit of a sum 
Some relevant history of the limit concept 
The Age of Reason 
18 
Trigonometric Functions and Oscillatory Motion 
18-1 
18-2 
18-3 
18-4 
18-5 
18-6 
Introduction 
The motion of a bob on a spring. 
The sinusoidal functions 
.-\cccleration in sinusoidal motion 
The mathematical analysis of the motion of the bob 
Summary 
* 19 
The Trigonometric Analysis of Musical Sounds 
19-1 
19-2 
19-3 
19-4 
19-5 
Introduction 
The nature of simple sounds . 
The method of addition of ordinates. 
The analysis of complex sounds 
Subjective properties of musical sounds 
20 
Non·Euclidean Geometries and Their Significance 
390 
394 
397 
401 
404 
409 
412 
416 
417 
418 
427 
429 
434 
436 
438 
442 
445 
448 
20-1 
Introduction 
452 
20-2 
The historical background 
452 
20-3 
The mathematical content of Gauss's non-Euclidean geometry 
458 
20-4 
Riemann's non-Euclidean geometry 
460 
20-5 
The applicability of non-Euclidean geometry 
462 
20-6 
The applicability of non-Euclidean geometry under a new interpretation 
of line 
464 
20-7 
Non-Euclidean geometry and the nature of mathematics 
471 
20-8 
The implications of non-Euclidean geometry for other branches of our 
culture 
474 
21 
Arithmetlcs and Their Algebras 
21-1 
21-2 
21-3 
21-4 
21-5 
21-6 
Introduction 
The applicability of the real number system 
Baseball arithmetic. 
Modular arithmetics and their algebras 
The algebra of sets 
Mathematics and models 
* 22 
The Statistical Approach to the Social and Biological Sciences 
22-1 
Introduction 
22-2 
A brief historical review 
22-3 
Averages 
22-4 
Dispersion 
22-5 
The graph and the normal curve 
22-6 
Fitting a formula to data 
22-7 
Correlation 
22-8 
Cautions concerning the uses of statistics 
478 
478 
481 
484 
491 
497 
499 
500 
502 
503 
505 
511 
516 
518 

<Ie 23 
The Theory of Probability 
23-1 
Introduction 
23-2 
Probability for equally likely outcomes 
23-3 
Probability as relative frequency. 
23-4 
Probability in continuous variation 
23-5 
Binomial distributions. 
23-6 
The problems of sampling 
24 
The Nature and Value. of Mathematics 
24-1 
24-2 
24-l 
24-4 
24-5 
24-6 
Introduction 
The structure of mathematics. 
The values of mathematics for the study of nature . 
The aesthetic and intellectual values . 
Mathematics and rationalism 
The limitations of mathematics 
Table 01 Trigonometric Ratios 
Answers to Selected and Review Exercises 
Additional Answers and Solutions 
Index 
CONTENTS 
xiii 
522 
524 
529 
530 
53l 
518 
541 
541 
546 
550 
552 
553 
557 
559 
569 
633 


CHAPTER 1 
WHY MATHEMATICS? 
In mathematics I can report no deficience, except it be that men do not 
sufficiently understand the excellent use of the Pure Mathematics . ... 
FRANCIS BACON 
One can wisely doubt whether the study of mathematics is worth while and 
can find good authority to support him. As far back as about the year 400 A.D., 
St. Augustine, Bishop of Hippo in Africa and one of the great fathers of 
Christianity, had this to say: 
The good Christian should beware of mathematicians and all those who make 
empty prophecies. The danger already exists that the mathematicians have made 
a covenant with the devil to darken the spirit and to confine man in the bonds 
of Hell. 
Perhaps St. Augustine, with prophetic insight into the conflicts which were to 
arise later between the mathematically minded scientists of recent centuries and 
religious leaders, was seeking to discourage the further development of the 
subject. At any rate there is no question as to his attitude. 
At about the same time that St. Augustine lived, the Roman jurists ruled, 
under the Code of Mathematicians and Evil-Doers, that "to learn the art of 
geometry and to take part in public exercises, an art as damnable as mathe­
matics, are forbidden." 
Even the distinguished seventeenth-century contributor to mathematics, 
Blaise Pascal, decided after studying mankind that the pure sciences were not 
suited to it. In a letter to Fermat written on August 10, 1660, Pascal says: "To 
speak freely of mathematics, I find it the highest exercise of the spirit; but at 
the same time I know that it is so useless that I make little distinction between 
a man who is only a mathematician and a common artisan. Also, I call it the 
most beautiful profession in the world; but it is only a profession; and I have 
often said that it is good to make the attempt [to study mathematics], but not 
to use our forces: so that I would not take two steps for mathematics, and I am 
confident that you are strongly of my opinion." Pascal's famous injunction 
was, "Humble thyself, impotent reason." 
I 

2 
WHY MATHEMATICS? 
The philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer, who despised mathematics, said 
many nasty things about the subject, among others that the lowest activity of 
the spirit is arithmetic, as is shown by the fact that it can be performed by a 
machine. Many other great men, for example, the poet Johann Wolfgang 
Goethe and the historian Edward Gibbon, have felt likewise and have not 
hesitated to express themselves. And so the student who dislikes the subject 
can claim to be in good, if not living, company. 
In view of the support he can muster from authorities, the student may 
well inquire why he is asked to learn mathematics. Is it because Plato, some 
2300 years ago, advocated mathematics to train the mind for philosophy? Is it 
because the Church in medieval times taught mathematics as a preparation for 
theological reasoning? Or is it because the commercial, industrial, and scien­
tific life of the Western world needs mathematics so much' Perhaps the sub­
ject got into the curriculum by mistake, and no one has taken the trouble to 
throw it out. Certainly the student is justified in asking his teacher the very 
question which Mephistopheles put to Faust: 
Is it right, I ask, is it even prndence, 
To bOTe thyself and bore the students? 
Perhaps we should begin our answers to these questions by pointing out 
that the men we cited as disliking or disapproving of mathematics were really 
exceptional. In the great periods of culture which preceded the present one, 
almost all educated people valued mathematics. The Greeks, who created the 
modern concept of mathematics, spoke unequivocally for its importance. Dur­
ing the Middle Ages and in the Renaissance, mathematics was never challenged 
as one of the most important studies. The seventeenth century was aglow not 
only with mathematical activity but with popular interest in the subject. We 
have the instance of Samuel Pepys, so much attracted by the rapidly expanding 
influence of mathematics that at the age of thirty he could no longer tolerate 
his own ignorance and begged to learn the subject. He began, incidentally, 
with the multiplication table, which he subsequently taught to his wife. In 
1 681 Pepys was elected president of the Royal Society, a post later held by 
Isaac Newton. 
In perusing eighteenth-century literature, one is struck by the fact that 
the journals which were on the level of our Harper's and the Atlantic Monthly 
contained mathematical articles side by side with literary articles. The edu­
cated man and woman of the eighteenth century knew the mathematics of 
their day, felt obliged to be au courant with all important scientific develop­
ments, and read articles on them much as modern man reads articles on politics. 
These people were as much at home with Newton's mathematics and physics 
as with Pope's poetry. 
The vastly increased importance of mathematics in our time makes it all 
the more imperative that the modern person know something of the nature and 

WHY MATHEMATICS? 
3 
role of mathematics. It is true that the role of mathematics in our civilization 
is nor always obvious, and the deeper and more complex modern applications 
are not readily compr.ehended even by specialists. But the essential nature and 
accomplishments of the subject can still be understood. 
Perhaps we can see more easily why one should study mathematics if we 
take a moment to consider what mathematics is. Unfortunately the answer 
cannot be given in a single sentence or a single chapter. The subject has many 
facets or, some might say, is Hydra-headed. One can look at mathematics as a 
language, as a particular kind of logical structure, as a body of knowledge 
about number and space, as a series of methods for deriving conclusions, as the 
essence of our knowledge of the physical world, or merely as an amusing in­
tellectual activity. Each of these features would in itself be difficult to describe 
accurately in a brief space. 
Because it is impossible to give a concise and readily understandable defi­
nition of mathematics, some writers have suggested, rather evasively, that 
mathematics is what mathematicians do. But mathematicians are human beings, 
and most of the things they do are uninteresting and some, embarrassing to 
relate. The only merit in this proposed definition of mathematics is that it 
points up the fact that mathematics is a human creation. 
A variation on the above definition which promises more help in under­
standing the nature, content, and values of mathematics, is that mathematics is 
what mathematics doel-. If we examine mathematics from the standpoint of 
what it is intended to and does accomplish, we shall undoubtedly gain a truer 
and clearer picture of the sunject. 
Mathematics is concerned primarily with what can be accomplished by 
reasoning. And here we face the first hurdle. Why should one reason? It is 
not a natural activity for the human animal. It is clear that one does not need 
reasoning to learn how to eat or to discover what foods maintain life. J\1an 
knew how to feed, clothe, and house himself millenniums before mathematics 
existed. Getting along with the opposite sex is an art rather than a science 
mastered by reasoning. One can engage in a multirude of occupations and 
even climb high in the business and industrial world without much use of 
reasoning and certainly without mathematics. One's social position is harctl y 
elevated by a display of his knowledge of trigonometry. In fact, civiliz?tions 
in which reasoning and mathematics played no role have endured and even 
flourished. If one were willing to reason, he could readily supply evidence to 
prove that reasoning is a dispensable activity. 
Those who are opposed to reasoning will readily point out other methods 
of obtaining knowledge. Most people are in fact convinced that their senses 
are really more than adequate. The very common assertion "seeing is believ­
ing" expresses the common reliance upon the senses. But e\'eryone should 
recognize that the senses are limited and often fallible and, even where ac­
curate, must be interpreted. Let us consider, as an example, the sense of sight. 

4 
WHY MATHEMATICS? 
How big is the sun? Our eyes tell us that it is about as large as a rubber ball. 
This then is what we should believe. On the other hand, we do not see the 
air around us, nor for that matter can we feel, touch, smell, or taste it. Hence 
we should not believe in the existence of air. 
To consider a somewhat more complicated situation, suppose a teacher 
should hold up a fountain pen and ask, What is it? A student coming from 
some primitive society might call it a shiny stick, and indeed this is what the 
eyes see. Those who call it a fountain pen are really calling upon education 
and experience stored in their minds. Likewise, when we look at a tall build­
ing from a distance, it is experience which tells us that the building is tall. 
Hence the old saying that "we are prone to see what lies behind our eyes, 
rather than what appears before them." 
Every day we see the sun where it is not. For about five minutes before 
what we call sunset, the sun is actually below the geometrical horizon and 
should therefore be invisible. But the rays of light from the sun curve toward 
us as they travel in the earth's atmosphere, and the observer at P (Fig. 1-1) 
not only "sees" the sun but thinks the light is coming from the direction O'P. 
Hence he believes the sun is in that direction. 
Apparent position 
01 -.;,'U. __ 
/Iȍ 
--
- - -- -
- - - ----
o::;--	
 
True position 
Fig. 1-1. Deviation of a ray by the earth's atmosphere. 
The senses are obviously helpless in obtaining some kinds of knowledge, 
such as the distance to the sun, the size of the earth, the speed of a bullet 
(unless one wishes to feel its velocity), the temperature of the sun, the predic­
tion of eclipses, and dozens of other facts. 
If the senses are inadequate, what about experimentation or, in simple cases, 
measurement? One can and in fact does learn a great deal by such means. But 
suppose one wants to find a very simple quantity, the area of a rectangle. To 
obtain it by measurement, one could lay off unit squares to cover the area and 
then count the number of squares. It is at least a little simpler to measure the 
lengths of the sides and then use a formula obtained by reasoning, namely, that 
the area is the product of length and width. In the only slightly more com­
plicated problem of determining how high a projectile will go, we should 
certainly not consider traveling with the projectile. 
As to experimentation, let us consider a relatively simple problem of mod­
ern technology. One wishes to build a bridge across a river. How long and 

WHY MATHEMATICS? 
5 
how thick should the many beams be? What shape should the bridge take? 
If it is to be supported by cables, how long and how thick should these be? Of 
course one could arbitrarily choose a number of lengths and thicknesses for the 
beams and cables and build the bridge. In this event, it would only be fair that 
the experimenter be the first to cross this bridge. 
It may be clear from this brief discussion that the senses, measurement, 
and experimentation, to consider three alternative ways of acquiring knowl­
edge, are by no means adequate in a variety of situations. Reasoning is essential. 
The lawyer, the doctor, the scientist, and the engineer employ reasoning daily 
to derive knowledge that would otherwise not be obtainable or perhaps obtain­
able only at great expense and effort. Mathematics more than any other human 
endeavor relies upon reasoning to produce knowledge. 
One may be willing to accept the fact that mathematical reasoning is an 
effective procedure. But just what does mathematics seek to accomplish with 
its reasoning) The primary objective of all mathematical work is to help man 
study nature, and in this endeavor mathematics cooperates with science. It 
may seem, then, that mathematics is merely a useful tool and that the real 
pursuit is science. We shall not attempt at this stage to separate the roles of 
mathematics and science and to evaluate the relative merits of their contribu­
tions. We shall simply state that their methods are different and that mathe­
matics is at least an equal partner with science. 
We shall see later how observations of nature are framed in statements 
called axioms. Mathematics then discloses by reasoning secrets which nature 
may never have intended to reveal. The determination of the pattern of mo­
tion of celestial bodies, the discovery and control of radio waves, the under­
standing of molecular, atomic, and nuclear structures, and the creation of 
artificial satellites are a few basically mathematical achievements. Mathematical 
formulation of physical data and mathematical methods of deriving new con­
clusions are today the substratum in all investigations of nature. 
The fact that mathematics is of central importance in the study of nature 
reveals almost immediately several values of this subject. The first is the prac­
tical value. The construction of bridges and skyscrapers, the harnessing of the 
power of water, coal, electricity, and the atom, the effective employment of 
light, sound, and radio in illumination, communication, navigation, and even 
entertainment, and the advantageous employment of chemical knowledge in 
the design of materials, in the production of useful forms of oil, and in medi­
cine are but a few of the practical achievements already attained. And the 
future promises to dwarf the past. 
However, material progress is not the most compelling reason for the study 
of nature, nor have practical results usually come about from investigations so 
directed. In fact, to overemphasize practical values is to lose sight of the 
greater significance of human thought. The deeper reason for the study of 
nature is to try to understand the ways of nature, that is, to satisfy sheer in-

6 
WHY MATHEMATICS? 
tellectual curiosity. Indeed, to ask disinterested questions about nature is one of 
the distinguishing marks of mankind. In all civilizations some people at least 
have tried to answer such questions as: How did the universe come about? 
Howald is the universe and the earth in particular? How large are the sun 
and the earth? Is man an accident or part of a larger design? Will the solar 
system continue to function or will the earth some day fall into the sun? What 
is light? Of course, not all people are interested in such questions. Food, 
shelter, sex, and television are enough to keep many happy. But others, aware 
of the pervasive natural mysteries, are more strongly obsessed to resolve them 
than any business man is to acquire wealth and power. 
Beyond improvement in the material life of man and beyond satisfaction 
of intellectual curiosity, the study of nature offers intangible values of another 
sort, especially the abolition of fear and terror and their replacement by a 
deep, quiet satisfaction in the ways of nature. To the uneducated and to those 
uninitiated in the world of science, many manifestations of nature have ap­
peared to be agents of destruction sent by angry gods. Some of the beliefs in 
ancient and even medieval Europe may be of special interest in view of what 
happened later. The sun was the center of all life. As winter neared and the 
days became shorter, the people believed that a battle between the gods of 
light and darkness was taking place. Thus the god Wodan was supposed to be 
riding through heaven on a white horse followed by demons, all of whom 
sought every opportunity to harm people. When, however, the days began to 
lengthen and the sun began to show itself higher in the sky each day, the peo­
ple believed that the gods of light had won. They ceased all work and cele­
brated this victory. Sacrifices were offered to the benign gods. Symbols of 
fertility such as fruit and nuts, whose growth is, of course, aided by the sun, 
were placed on the altars. To symbolize further the desire for light and the 
joy in light, a huge log was placed in the fire to burn for twelve days, and 
candles were lit to heighten the brightness. 
The beliefs and superstitions which have been attached to events we take 
in stride are incredible to modern man. An eclipse of the sun, a threat to the 
continuance of the light and heat which causes crops to grow, meant that the 
heavenly body was being swallowed up by a dragon. Many Hindu people 
believe today that a demon residing in the sky attacks the sun once in a while 
and that this is what causes the eclipse. Of course, when prayers, sacrifices, 
and ceremonies were followed by the victory of the sun or moon, it was clear 
that these rituals were the effective agent and so had to be pursued on every 
such occasion. In addition, special magic potions drunk during eclipses insured 
health, happiness, and wisdom. 
To primitive peoples of the past, thunder, lightning, and storms were 
punishments visited by the gods on people who had apparently sinned in some 
way. The stories in the Old Testament of the flood and of the destruction of 
Sodom and Gomorrah by fire and brimstone are examples of such acts of 

WHY MATHEMATICS? 
7 
wrath by the God of the Hebrews. Hence there was continual concern and 
even dread about what the gods might have in mind for helpless humans. The 
only recourse was to propitiate the divine powers, so that they would hring 
good fortune instead of evil. 
Fears, dread, and superstitions have been eliminated, at least in our Western 
civilization, by just those intellectually curious people who have studied na­
ture's mighty displays. Those "seemingly unprofitable amusements of specula­
tive brains" have freed us from serfdom, given us undreamed of powers, and, 
in fact, have replaced negative doctrines by positive mathematical laws which 
reveal a remarkable order and uniformity in nature. Man has emerged as the 
proud possessor of knowledge which has enabled him to view nature calmly 
and objectively. An eclipse of the sun occurring on schedule is no longer an 
occasion for trembling but for quiet satisfaction that we know nature's ways. 
We breathe freely, knowing that nature will not be willful or capricious. 
Indeed, man has been remarkably successful in his study of nature. History 
is said to repeat itself, but, in general, the circumstances of the supposed repe­
tition are not the same as those of the earlier occurrence. As a consequence, 
the history of man has not been tOO effective a guide for the future. Nature is 
kinder. When nature repeats herself, and she does so constantly, the repetitions 
are exact facsimiles of previous events, and therefore man can anticipate na­
ture's behavior and be prepared for what will take place. We have learned to 
recognize the patterns of nature and we can speak today of the uniformity of 
nature and delight in the regularity of her behavior. 
The successes of mathematics in the study of inanimate nature have in­
spired in recent times the mathematical study of human nature. Mathematics 
has not only contributed to the very practical institutions such as banking, 
insurance, pension systems, and the like, but it has also supplied some substance, 
spirit, and methodology to the infant sciences of economics, politics, and so­
ciology. Number, quantitative studies, and precise reasoning have replaced 
vague, subjective, and ineffectual speculations and have already given evidence 
of greater values to come. 
As man turns to thoughts about himself and his fellow man, other questions 
occur to him which are as fundamental as any he can ask. Why is man boޜn? 
What purposes does he serve or should he serve? What future awaits him' 
The knowledge acquired about our physical universe has profound implications 
for the origin and role of man. Moreover, as mathematics and science have 
amassed increasing knowledge and power, they have gradually encompassed 
the biological and psychological sciences, which in turn have shed further light 
on man's physical and mental life. Thus it has come about that mathematics 
and science have profoundly affected philosophy and religion. 
Perhaps the most profound questions in the realm of philosophy are, What 
is truth and how does man acquire it? Though we have no final answer to 
these questions, the contribution of mathematics toward this end is paramount. 

8 
WHY MATHEMATICS? 
For twO millenniums mathematics was the prime example of truths man had 
unearthed. Hence all investigations of the problem of acquiring truths neces­
sarily reckoned with mathematics. Though some startling developments in the 
nineteenth century altered completely our understanding of the nature of 
mathematics, the effectiveness of the subject, especially in representing and 
analyzing natural phenomena, has still kept mathematics the focal point of all 
investigations into the nature of knowledge. Not the least significant aspect of 
this value of mathematics has been the insight it has given us into the ways and 
powers of the human mind. Mathematics is the supreme and most remarkable 
example of the mind's power to cope with problems, and as such it is worthy 
of study. 
Among the values which mathematics offers are its services to the arts. 
Most people are inclined to believe that the arts are independent of mathe­
matics, but we shall see that mathematics has fashioned major styles of painting 
and architecture, and the service mathematics renders to music has not only 
enabled man to understand it, but has spread its enjoyment to all corners of 
our globe. 
Practical, scientific, philosophical, and artistic problems have caused men 
to investigate mathematics. But there is onc other motive which is as strong 
as any of these - the search for beauty. Mathematics is an art, and as such 
affords the pleasures which all the arts afford. This last statement may come 
as a shock to people who are used to the conventional concept of the true arts 
and mentally contrast these with mathematics to the detriment of the latter. 
But the average person has not thought through what the arts really are and 
what they offer. All that many people actually sޝe in painting, for example, 
are familiar scenes and perhaps bright colors. These qualities, however, are not 
the ones which make painting an art. The real values must be learned, and a 
genuine appreciation of art calls for much study. 
Nevertheless. we shall not insist on the aesthetic values of mathematics. It 
may be fairer to rest on the position that just as there are tone-deaf and color­
blind people, so' may there be some who temperamentally are intolerant of 
cold argumentation and the seemingly overfine distinctions of mathematics. 
To many people, mathematics offers intellectual challenges, and it is well 
known that such challenges do engross humans. Games such as bridge, cross­
word puzzles, and magic squares are popular. Perhaps the best evidence is the 
attraction of puzzles such as the following: A wolf, a goat, and cabbage are 
to be transported across a river by a man in a boat which can hold only one 
of these in addition to the man. How can he take them across so that the wolf 
does not eat the goat or the goat the cabbage? Two husbands and two wives 
have to cross a river in a boat which can hold only two people. How can they 
cross so that no woman js in the company of a man unless her husband is also 
present' Such puzzles go back to Greek and Roman times. The mathematician 
Tartaglia, who lived in the sixteenth century, tells us that they were after­
dinner amusements. 

\VHY MATHEMATICS? 
9 
People do respond to intellectual challenges, and once one gets a slight 
start in mathematics, he encounters these in abundance. In view of the addi­
tional values to be derived from the subject, one would expect people to spend 
time on mathematical problems as opposed to the more superficial, and in some 
instances cheap, games which lack depth, beauty, and importance. The tan­
talizing and compelling pursuit of mathematical problems offers mental absorp­
tion, peace of mind amid endless challenges. repose in activity, battle without 
conflict, and the beauty which the ageless mountains present to senses tried by 
the kaleidoscopic rush of events. The appeal offered by the detachment and 
objectivity of mathematical reasoning is superbly described by Bertrand Rus­
sell. 
Remote from human passions, remote even from the pitiful facts of nature, the 
generations have gradually created an ordered cosmos, where pure thought can 
dwell as in its natural home and where one, at least, of our nobler impulses can 
f!scape from the dreary exile of the actual world. 
The creation and contemplation of mathematics offer such values. 
Despite all these arguments for the study of mathematics, the reader may 
have justifiable doubts. The idea that thinking about numbers and figures leads 
to deep and powerful conclusions which influence almost all other branches of 
thought may seem incredible. The srudy of numbers and geometrical figures 
may not seem a sufficiently attractive and promising enterprise. Not even the 
founders of mathematics envisioned the potentialities of the subject. 
So we start with some doubts about the worth of our enterprise. We 
could encourage the reader with the hackneyed maxim, nothing ventured, 
nothing gained. We could call to his attention the daily testimony to the 
power of mathematics offered by almost every newspaper and journal. But 
such appeals are hardly inspiring. Let us proceed on the very weak basis that 
perhaps those more experienced in w hat the world has to offer may also have 
the wisdom to recommend worth-while studies. 
Hence, despite St. Augustine, the reader is invited to tempt hell and dam­
nation by engaging in a study of the subject. Certainly he can be assured that 
the subject is within his grasp and that no special gifts or qualities of mind are 
needed to learn mathematics. It is even debatable whether the creation of 
mathematics requires special talents as does the creation of music or great 
paintings, but certainly the appreciation of what others have done does not 
demand a "mathematical mind" any more than the appreciation of art requires 
an "artistic mind." Moreover, since we shall not draw upon any previously 
acquired knowledge, even this potential source of trouble will not arise. 
Let us review our objectives. We should like to understand what mathe­
matics is, how it functions. what it accomplishes for the world, and what it 
has to offer in itself. We hope to see that mathematics has content which 
serves the physical and social scientist, the philosopher, logician, and the artist; 
content which influences the doctrines of the statesman and the theologian; 

10 
WHY MATHEMATICS? 
content which satisfies the curiosity of the man who surveys the heavens and 
the man who muses on the sweetness of musical sounds; and content which has 
undeniably, if sometimes imperceptibly, shaped the course of modern history. 
In brief, we shall try to see that mathematics is an integral part of the modern 
world, one of the strongest forces shaping its thoughts and actions, and a body 
of living though inseparably connected with, dependent upon, and in turn 
valuable to all other branches of our culture. Perhaps we shall also see how by 
suffusing and influencing all thought it has set the intellectual temper of our 
times. 
EXERCISES 
I. A wolf, a goat, and a cabbage are to be rowed across a river in a boat holding 
only one of these three objects besides the oarsman. How should he carry them 
across so that the goat should not cat the cabbage or the wolf devour the goat? 
2. Another hoary teaser is the following: A man goes to a tub of water with two 
jars, one holding 3 pt and the other 5 pt. How can he bring back exactly 4 pt? 
3. Two husbands and two wives have to cross a river in a boat which can hold 
only two people. How can they cross so that no woman is in the company of a 
man unless her husband is also present? 
Recommended Reading 
RUSSELL, BERTRAND: "The Study of Mathematics," an essay in the collection entitled 
Mysticism and Logic, Longmans, Green and Co., New York, 1925. 
WHITEHEAD, ALFRED NORTH: "The Mathematical Curriculum," an essay in the col­
lection entitled The Aims of Education, The New American Library, New York, 
1949. 
WHITEHEAD, ALFRED NORTH: Science and the Modern World, Chaps. 2 and 3, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1926. 

CHAPTER 2 
A HISTORICAL ORIENTATION 
An educated mind is, as it were, composed of all the minds of preceding 
ages. 
LE BOV) ER DE FONTENELLE 
2-1 
INTRODUCTION 
Our first objective will be to gain some historical perspective on the subject of 
mathematics. Although the logical development of mathematics is not mark­
edly different from the historical, there are nevertheless many features of 
mathematics which are revealed by a glimpse of its history rather than by an 
examination of concepts, theorems. and proofs. Thus we may learn what the 
subject now comprises, how the various branches arose, and how the character 
of the mathematical contributions made by various civilizations was condi­
tioned by these civilizations. This historical survey may also help us to gain 
some provisional understanding of the nature, extent, and uses of mathematics. 
Finally, a preview may help us to keep our bearings. In studying a vast sub­
ject, one is always faced with the danger of getting lost in details. This is 
especially true in mathematics, where one must often spend hours and even 
days in seeking to understand some new concepts or proofs. 
2-2 
MATHEMATICS IN EARLY CIVILIZATIONS 
Aside possibly from astronomy, mathematics is the oldest and most contin­
uously pursued branch of human thought. Moreover, unlike science, philos­
ophy, and social thought, very little of the mathematics that has ever been 
created has been discarded. Mathematics is also a cumulative development, 
that is, newer creations are built logically upon older ones, so that one must 
usually understand older results to master newer ones. These facts recommend 
that we go back to the very origins of mathematics. 
As we examine the early civilizations, one remarkable faޞt emerges im­
mediately. Though there have been hundreds of civilizatio:1s, many with 
great art, literature, philosophy, religion, and social institutions, very few 
possessed any mathematics worth talking about. Most of these civilizations 
hardly got past the stage of being able to count to five or ten. 
1 1  

12 
A HISTORICAL ORIENTATION 
In some of these early civilizations a few steps in mathematics were taken. 
In prehistoric times, which means roughly before 4000 B.C., several civilizations 
at least learned to think about numbers as abstract concepts. That is, they 
recognized that three sheep and three arrows have something in common, a 
quantity called three, which can be thought about independently of any phys­
ical objects. Each of us in his own schooling goes through this same process 
of divorcing numbers from physical objects. The appreciation of "number" 
as an abstract idea is a great, and perhaps the first, step in the founding of 
mathematics. 
Another step was the introduction of arithmetical operations. It is quite 
an idea to add the numbers representing two collections of objects in order 
to arrive at the total instead of counting the objects in the combined collec­
tions. Similar remarks apply to subtraction, mult.iplication, and division. The 
early methods of carrying out these operations were crude and complicated 
compared with ours, bur the ideas and the applications were there. 
Only a few ancient civilizations, Egypt, Babylonia, India, and China, pos­
sessed what may be called the rudiments of mathematics. The history of 
mathematics, and indeed the history of Western civilization, begins with what 
occurred in the first two of these civilizations. The role of India will emerge 
later, whereas that of China may be ignored because it was not extensive and 
moreover had no influence on the subsequent development of mathematics. 
Our knowledge of the Egyptian and Babylonian civilizations goes back to 
about 4000 B.C. The Egyptians occupied approximately the same region that 
now constitutes modern Egypt and had a continuous, stable civilization from 
ancient times until about 300 B.C. The term "Babylonian" includes a succession 
of civilizations which occupied the region of modern Iraq. Both of these 
peoples possessed whole numbers and fractions, a fair amount of arithmetic, 
some algebra, and a number of simple rules for finding the areas and volumes 
of geometrical figures. These rules were but the incidental accumulations of 
experience, much as people learned through experience what foods to eat. 
Many of the rules were in fact incorrect bur good enough for the simple 
applications made then. For example, the Egyptian rule for finding the area 
of a circle amounts to using 3.16 times the square of the radius; that is, their 
value of Tr was 3.16. This value, though not accurate, was even better than the 
several values the Babylonians used, one of these being 3, the value found in 
the Bible. 
What did these early civilizations do with their mathematics? If we may 
judge from problems found in ancient Egyptian papyri and in the clay tablets 
of the Babylonians, both civilizations used arithmetic and algebra largely in 
commerce and state administration. to calculate simple and compound interest 
on loans and mortgages, to apportion profits of business to the owners, to buy 
and sell merchandise, to fix taxes, and to calculate how many bushels of grain 
would make a quantity of beer of a specified alcoholic content. Geometrical 
rules were applied to calculate the areas of fields, the estimated yield of pieces 

MATHEMATICS IN EARLY CIVILIZATIONS 
1 3  
of land, the volumes of structures, and the quantity of bricks or stones needed 
to erect a temple or pyramid. The ancient Greek historian Herodotus says 
that because the annual overflow of the Nile wiped out the boundaries of the 
farmers' lands, geometry was needed to redetermine the boundaries. In fact, 
Herodotus speaks of geometry as the gift of the Nile. This bit of history is a 
partial truth. The redetermination of boundaries was undoubtedly an applica­
tion, but geometry existed in Egypt long before the date of 1400 B.C. men­
tioned by Herodotus for its origin. Herodotus would have been more accurate 
to say that Egypt is a gift of the Nile, for it is true today as it was then that 
the only fertile land in Egypt is that along the Nile; and this because the river 
deposits good soil on the land as it overflows. 
Applications of geometry, simple and crude as they were, did play a large 
role in Egypt and Babylonia. Both peoples were great builders. The Egyptian 
temples, such as those at Karnak and Luxor, and the pyramids still appear to be 
admirable engineering achievements even in this age of skyscrapers. The 
Babylonian temples, called ziggurats, also were remarkable pyramidal struc­
tures. The Babylonians were, moreover, highly skilled irrigation engineers, 
who built a system of canals to feed their hot dry lands from the Tigris and 
Euphrates rivers. 
Perhaps a word of caution is necessary with respect to the pyramids. Be­
cause these are impressive structures, some writers on Egyptian civilization 
have jumped to the conclusion that the mathematics used in the building of 
pyramids must also have been impressive. These writers point out that the 
horizontal dimensions of any one pyramid are exactly of the same length, the 
sloping sides all make the same angle with the ground, and the right angles are 
right. However, not mathematics but care and patience were required to ob­
tain such results. A cabinetmaker need not be a mathematician. 
Mathematics in Egypt and Babylonia was also applied to astronomy. Of 
course, astronomy was pursued in these ancient civilizations for calendar reck­
oning and, to some extent, for navigation. The motions of the heavenly bodies 
give us our fundamental standard of time, and their positions at given times 
enable ships to determine their location and caravans to find their bearings in 
the deserts. Calendar reckoning is not only a common daily and commercial 
need, but it fixes religious holidays and planting times. In Egypt it was also 
needed to predict the flood of the Nile, so that farmers could muve property 
and cattle away beforehand. 
It is worthy of note that by observing the motion of the sun, tho Egyptians 
managed to ascertain that the year contains 365 days. There is a conjecture 
that the priests of Egypt knew that 365t was a more accurate figure but kept 
the knowledge secret. The Egyptian calendar was taken over much later by 
the Romans and then passed on to Europe. The Babylonians, by contrast, 
developed a lunar calendar. Since the duration of the month as measured from 
new moon to new moon varies from 29 to 30 days, the twelve-month year 
adopted by the Babylonians did not coincide with the year of the seasons. 

14 
A HISTORICAL ORIENTATION 
Hence the Babylonians added extra months, up to a total of seven, in every 
19-year cycle. This scheme was also adopted by the Hebrews. 
Astronomy served not only the purposes just described, but from ancient 
times until recently it also served astrology. In ancient Babylonia and Egypt 
the belief was widespread that the moon, the planets, and the stars directly 
influenced and even controlled affairs of the state. This doctrine was gradually 
extended and later included the belief that the health and welfare of the in­
dividual were also subject to the will of the heavenly bodies. Hence it seemed 
reasonable that by studying the motions and relative positions of these bodies 
man could determine their influences and even predict his future. 
When one compares Egyptian and Babylonian accomplishments in mathe­
matics with those of earlier and contemporary civilizations, one can indeed 
find reason to praise their achievements. But judged by other standards, 
Egyptian and Babylonian contributions to mathematics were almost insignifi­
cant, although these same civilizations reached relatively high levels in religion, 
art, architecture, metallurgy, chemistry, and astronomy. Compared with the 
accomplishments of their immediate successors, the Greeks, the mathematics of 
the Egyptians and Babylonians is the scrawling of children just learning how 
to write as opposed to great literature. They barely recognized mathematics 
as a distinct subject. It was a tool in agriculture, commerce. and engineering, 
no more important than the other tools they used to build pyramids and zig­
gurats. Over a period of 4000 years hardly any progress was made in the 
subject. Moreover, the very essence of mathematics, namely. reasoning to es­
tablish the validity of methods and results, was not even envisioned. Experi­
ence recommended their procedures and rules, and with this support they were 
content. Egyptian and Babylonian mathematics is best described as empirical 
and hardly deserves the appellation mathematics in view of what, since Greek 
times, we regard as the chief features of the subject. Some flesh and bones of 
concrete mathematics were there. but the spirit of mathematics was lacking. 
The lack of interest in theoretical or systematic knowledge is evident in 
all activities of these two civilizations. The Egyptians and Babylonians must 
have noted the paths of the stars, planets, and moon for thousands of years. 
Their calendars, as well as tables which are extant, testify to the scope and 
accuracy of these observations. But no Egyptian or Babylonian strove, so far 
as we know, to encompass all these observations in one major plan or theory of 
heavenly motions. Nor does one find any other scientific theory or connected 
body of knowledge. 
2-3 
THE CLASSICAL GREEK PERIOD 
We have seen so far that mathematics, initiated in prehistoric times, struggled 
for existence for thousands of years. It finally obtained a firm grip on life in 
the highly congenial atmosphere of Greece. This land was invaded about 

THE CLASSICAL GREEK PERIOD 
15 
1000 B.C. by people whose oflgms are not known. By about 600 B.C. these 
people occupied not only Greece proper but many cities in Asia Minor on the 
Mediterranean coast, islands such as Crete, Rhodes, and Samos, and cities in 
southern Italy and Sicily. Though all of these areas bred famous men, the chief 
cultural center during the classical period, which lasted from about 600 B.C. 
to 300 B.C., was Athens. 
Greek culture was not entirely indigenous. The Greeks themselves ac­
knowledge their indebtedness to the Babylonians and especially to the Egyp­
tians. Many Greeks traveled in Egypt and in Asia Minor. Some went there 
to study. Nevertheless, what the Greeks created differs as much from what 
they took over from the Egyptians and Babylonians as gold differs from tin. 
Plato was too modest in his description of the Greek contribution when he 
said, "Whatever we Greeks receive we improve and perfect." The Greeks 
not only made finished products out of the raw materials imported from Egypt 
and Babylonia, but they created totally new branches of culture. Philosophy, 
pure and applied sciences, political thought and institutions, historical writings, 
almost all our literary forms (except fictional prose), and new ideals such as 
the freedom of the individual are wholly Greek contributions. 
The supreme contribution of the Greeks was to call attention to, employ, 
and emphasize the power of human reason. This recognition of the power of 
reasoning is the greatest single discovery made by man. Moreover, the Greeks 
recognized that r"eason was the distinctive faculty which humans possessed. 
Aristotle says, "Now what is characteristic of any nature is that which is best 
for it and gives most joy. Such to man is the life according to reason, since it 
is that which makes him man." 
It was by the application of reasoning to mathematics that the Greeks 
completely altered the nature of the subject. In fact, mathematics as we 
understand the term today is entirely a Greek gift, though in this case we 
need not heed Virgil's injunction to fear such benefactions. But how did the 
Greeks plan to employ reason in mathematics? Whereas the Egyptians and 
Babylonians were content to pick up scraps of useful information through 
experience or trial and error, the Greeks abandoned empiricism and undertook 
a systematic, rational attack on the whole subject. First of all, the Greeks saw 
clearly that numbers and geometric forms occur everywhere in the heavens 
and on earth. Hence they decided to concentrate on these important concepts. 
Moreover, they were explicit ahout their intention to treat general abstract 
concepts rather than particular physical realizations. Thus they would consider 
the ideal circle rather than the boundary of a field or the shape of a wheel. 
They then observed that certain facts about these concepts are both obvious 
and basic. It was evident that equal numbers added to or subtracted from equal 
numbers give equal numbers. It was equally evident that two right angles are 
necessarily equal and that a circle can be drawn when center and radius are 
given. Hence they selected some of these obvious facts as a starting point and 

16 
A HISTORICAL ORIENTATION 
called them axioms. Their next idea was to apply reasoning, with these facts 
as premises, and to use only the most reliable methods of reasoning man pos­
sesses. If the reasoning were successful, it would produce new knowledge. 
Also, since they were to reason about general concepts, their conclusions 
would apply to all objects of which the concepts were representative. Thus if 
they could prove that the area of a circle is 7T times the square of the radius, 
this fact would apply to the area of a circular field, the floor area of a circular 
temple, and the cross section of a circular tree trunk. Such reasoning about 
general concepts might not only produce knowledge of hundreds of physical 
situations in one proof, but there was always the chance that reasoning would 
produce knowledge which experience might never suggest. All these advan­
tages the Greeks expected to derive from reasoning about general concepts on 
the basis of evident reliable facts. A neat plan, indeed! 
It is perhaps already clear that the Greeks possessed a mentality totally 
different from that of the Egyptians and Babylonians. They reveal this also 
in the plans they had for the use of mathematics. The application of arithmetic 
and algebra to the computation of interest, taxes, or commercial transactions, 
and of geometry to the computation of the volumes of granaries was as far 
from their minds as the most distant star. As a matter of fact, their thoughts 
were on the distant stars. The Greeks found mathematics valuable in many 
respects, as we shall learn later, but they saw its main value in the aid it 
rendered to the study of nature; and of all the phenomena of nature, the 
heavenly bodies attracted them most. Thus, though the Greeks also studied 
light, sound, and the motions of bodies on the earth, astronomy was rheir chief 
scientific interest. 
Just what did the Greeks seek in probing nature? They sought no mate­
rial gain and no power over nature; they sought merely to satisfy their minds. 
Because they enjoyed reasoning and because nature presented the most im­
posing challenge to their understanding, the Greeks undertook the purely in­
tellectual study of nature. Thus the Greeks are the founders of science in the 
true sense. 
The Greek conception of nature was perhaps even bolder than their con­
ception of mathematics. Whereas earlier and later civilizations viewed nature 
as capricious, arbitrary, and terrifying, and succumbed to the belief that magic 
and rituals would propitiate mysterious and feared forces, the Greeks dared 
to look nature in the face. They dared to affirm that nature was rationally and 
indeed mathematically designed, and that man's reason, chiefly through the 
aid of mathematics, would fathom that design. The Greek mind rejected 
traditional doctrines, supernatural causes, superstitions, dogma, authority, and 
other such trammels on thought and undertook to throw the light of reason 
on the processes of nature. In seeking to banish the mystery and seeming 
arbitrariness of nature and in abolishing belief in dreaded forces, the Greeks 
were pioneers. 

THE ALEXANDRIAN GREEK PERIOD 
1 7  
For reasons which will become clearer in a later chapter, the Greeks 
favored geometry. By 300 B.C., Thales, Pythagoras and his followers, Plato's 
disciples, notably Eudoxus, and hundreds of other famous men had built up an 
enormous logical structure, most of which Euclid embodied in his Elements. 
This is, of course, the geometry we still study in high school. Though they 
made some contributions to the study of the properties of numbers and to the 
solution of equations, almost all of their work was in geometric form, and so 
there was no improvement over the Egyptians and Babylonians in the repre­
sentation of, and calculation with, numbers or in the symbolism and techniques 
of algebra. For these contributions the world had to wait many more centuries. 
But the vast development in geometry exerted an enormous influence in suc­
ceeding civilizations and supplied the inspiration for mathematical activity in 
civilizations which might otherwise never have acquired even the very concept 
of mathematics. 
The Greek accomplishments in mathematics had, in addition, the broader 
significance of supplying the first impressive evidence of the power of human 
reason to deduce new truths. In every culture influenced by the Greeks, this 
example inspired men to apply reason to philosophy, economics, political the­
ory, art, and religion. Even today Euclid is the prime example of the power 
and accomplishments of reason. Hundreds of generations since Euclid's days 
have learned from his geometry what reasoning is and what it can accomplish. 
Modern man as well as the ancient Greeks learned from the Euclidean docu­
ment how exact reasoning should proceed, how to acquire facility in it, and 
how to distinguish correct from false reasoning. Although many people de­
preciate this value of mathematics, it is interesting nevertheless that when these 
people seek to offer an excellent example of reasoning, they inevitably turn to 
mathematics. 
This brief discussion of Euclidean geometry may show that the subject is 
far from being a relic of the dead past. It remains important as a stepping 
stone in mathematics proper and as a paradigm of reasoning. With their gift 
of reason and with their explicit example of the power of reason, the Greeks 
founded Western civilization. 
2-4 THE ALEXANDRIAN GREEK PERIOD 
The intellectual life of Greece was altered considerably when Alexander the 
Great conquered Greece, Egypt, and the Near East. Alexander decided to 
build a new capital for his vast empire and founded the city in Egypt named 
after him. The center of the new Greek world became Alexandria instead of 
Athens. Moreover, Alexander made deliberate efforts to fuse Greek and Near 
Eastern cultures. Consequently, the civilization centered at Alexandria, though 
predominantly Greek, was strongly influenced by Egyptian and Babylonian 
contributions. This Alexandrian Greek civilization lasted from about 300 B.C. 
to 600 A.D. 

1 8  
A HISTORICAL ORIENTATION 
The mixture of the theoretical inrerests of the Greeks and the practical 
outlook of the Babylonians and Egyptians is clearly evident in the mathematical 
and scientific work of the Alexandrian Greeks. The purely geometric investi­
gations of the classical Greeks were continued, and twO of the most famous 
Greek mathematicians, Apollnnius and Archimedes, pursued their studies dur­
ing the Alexandrian period. In fact, Euclid also lived in Alexandria, but his 
writings reflect the achievements of the classical period. For practical applica­
tions, which usually require quantitative results, the Alexandrians revived the 
crude arithmetic and algebra of Egypt and Babylonia and used these empir­
ically founded tools and procedures, along with results derived from exact 
geometrical studies. There was some progress in algebra, but what was newly 
created by men such as Nichomachus and Diophantus was still short of even 
the elementary methods we learn in high school. 
The attempt to be quantitative, coupled with the classical Greek love for 
the mathematical study of nature. stimulated two of the most famous astron­
omers of all time, Hipparchus and Ptolemy, to calculate the sizes and distances 
of the heavenly bodies and to build a sound and, for those times, accurate 
astronomical theory, which is still known as Ptolemaic theory. Hipparchus 
and Ptolemy also created the chief tool they needed for this purpose, the 
mathematical subject known as trigonometry. 
During the centuries in which the Alexandrian civilization flourished, the 
Romans grew strong, and by the end of the third century D.C. they were a 
world power. After conquering Italy, the Romans conquered the Greek main­
land and a number of Greek cities scattered about the Mediterranean area. 
Among these was the famous city of Syracuse in Sicily, where Archimedes 
spent most of his life, and where he was killed at the age of 75 by a Roman 
soldier. According to the account given by rhe noted historian Plutarch, rhe 
soldier shouted to Archimedes to surrender, but the latter was so absorbed in 
studying a mathematical problem that he did not hear the order, whereupon 
the soldier killed him. 
The contrast between Greek and Roman cultures is striking. The Romans 
have also bequeathed gifts to Western civilization, but in the fields of mathe­
matics and science their influence was negative rather than positive. The 
Romans were a practical people and even boasted of their practicality. They 
sought wealth and world power and were willing to undertake great engineer­
ing enterprises, such as the building of roads and viaducrs, which might help 
them to expand, control, and administer their empire, but they would spend 
no time or effort on theoretical studies which might further these activities. 
As the great philosopher Alfred North Whitehead remarked, "No Roman 
ever lost his life because he was absorbed in the contemplation of a mathe­
matical diagram." 
Indirectly as well as directly, rhe Romans brought about the destruction 
of the Greek civilization at Alexandria, directly by conquering Egypt and 

THE HINDUS AND ARABS 
19 
indirectly by seeking to suppress Christianity. The adherents to this new 
religious movement, though persecuted cruelly by the Romans, increased in 
number while the Roman Empire grew weaker. In 3 1 3  A.D. Rome legalized 
Christianity and, under the Emperor Theodosius ( 379-395), adopted it as the 
official religion of the empire. But even before this time, and certainly after it, 
the Christians began to attack the cultures and civilizations which had opposed 
them. By pillage and the burning of books, they destroyed all they could 
reach of ancient learning. Naturally the Greek culture suffered, and many 
works wiped out in these holocausts are now lost to us forever. 
The final destruction of Alexandria in 640 A.D. was the deed of the Arabs. 
The books of the Greeks were closed, never to be reopened in this region. 
2-S THE HINDUS AND ARABS 
The Arabs, who suddenly appeared on the scene of history in the role of 
destroyers, had been a nomadic people. They were unified under the leader­
ship of the prophet Mohammed and began an attempt to convert the world to 
Mohammedanism, using the sword as their most decisive argument. They 
conquered all the land around the Mediterranean Sea. In the Near East they 
took over Persia and penetrated as far as India. In southern Europe they oc­
cupied Spain, southern France, where they were stopped by Charles Martel, 
southern Italy and Sicily. Only the Byzantine or Eastern Roman Empire was 
not subdued and remained an isolated center of Greek and Roman learning. 
In rather surprisingly quick time as the history of nations goes, the Arabs 
settled down and built a civilization and culture which maintained a high level 
from about 800 to 1200 A.D. Their chief centers were Bagdad in what is now 
Iraq, and Cordova in Spain. Realizing that the Greeks had created wonderful 
works in many fields, the Arabs proceeded to gather up and study what they 
could still find in the lands they controlled. They translated the works of 
Aristotle, Euclid, Apollonius, Archimedes, and Ptolemy into Arabic. In fact, 
Ptolemy's chief work, whose title in Greek meant "Mathematical Collection," 
was called the Almagest (The Greatest Work) by the Arabs and is still known 
by this name. Incidentally, other Arabic words which are now common 
mathematical terms are algebra, taken from the title of a book written by AI­
Khowarizmi, a ninth-century Arabian mathematician, and algorithm, now 
meaning a process of calculation, which is a corruption of the man's name. 
Though they showed keen interest in mathematics, optics, astronomy, and 
medicine, the Arabs contributed little that was original. It is also peculiar that, 
although they had at least some of the Greek works and could therefore see 
what mathematics meant, their own contributions, largely in arithmetic and 
algebra, followed the empirical, concrete approach of the Egyptians and 
Babylonians. They could on the one hand appreciate and critically review the 
precise, exact, and abstract mathematics of the Greeks while, on the other, offer 

20 
A HISTORICAL ORIENTATION 
methods of solving equations which, though they worked, had no reasoning to 
support them. During all the centuries in which Greek works were in their 
possession, the Arabs manfully resisted the lures of exact reasoning in their 
own contributions. 
We are indebted to the Arabs not only for their resuscitation of the Greek 
works but for picking up some simple bur useful ideas from India, their neigh­
bor on the East. The Indians, too, had built up some elementary mathematics 
comparable in extent and spirit with the Egyptian and Babylonian develop­
ments. However, after about 200 A.D., mathematical activity in India became 
more appreciable, probably as a result of contacts with the Alexandrian Greek 
civilization. The Hindus made a few contributions of their own, such as the 
use of special number symbols from 1 to 9, the introduction of 0, and the use 
of positional notation with base ten, that is, our modern method of writing 
numbers. They also created negative numbers. These ideas were taken over 
by the Arabs and incorporated in their mathematical works. 
Because of internal dissension the Arab Empire split into two independent 
parts. The Crusades launched by the Europeans and the inroads made by the 
Turks further weakened the Arabs, and their empire and culture disintegrated. 
2-6 EARLY AND MEDIEVAL EUROPE 
Thus far Europe proper has played no role in the history of mathematics. The 
reason is simple. The Germanic tribes who occupied central Europe and the 
Gauls of western Europe were barbarians. Among primitive civilizations. theirs 
were primitive indeed. They had no learning, no art, no science, not even a 
system of writing. 
The barbarians were gradually civilized. While the Romans were still 
successful in holding the regions now called France, England, southern Ger­
many, and the Balkans, the barbarians were in contact with, and to some extent 
influenced by, the Romans. When the Roman Empire collapsed, the Church, 
already a strong organization, took on the task of civilizing and converting the 
barbarians. Since the Church did not favor Greek learning and since at any 
rate the illiterate Europeans had first to learn reading and writing, one is not 
surprised to find that mathematics and science were practically unknown in 
Europe until about 1 100 A.D. 
2-7 TH E RENAISSANCE 
Insofar as the history of mathematics is concerned, the Arabs served as the 
agents of destiny. Trade with the Arabs and such invasions of the Arab lands 
as the Crusades acquainted the Europeans, who hitherto possessed only frag­
ments of the Greek works, with the vast stores of Greek learning possessed by 
the Arabs. The ideas in these works excited the Europeans, and scholars set 
about acquiring them and translating them into Latin. Through another acci-

THE RENAISSANCE 
2 1  
dent of history another group of Greek works came to Europe. We have 
already noted that the Eastern Roman or Byzantine Empire had survived the 
Germanic and the Arab aggrandizements. But in the fifteenth century the 
Turks captured the Eastern Roman Empire, and Greek scholars carrying 
precious manuscripts fled the region and went to Europe. 
We shall leave for a later chapter a fuller account of how the European 
world was aroused by the renaissance of the novel and weighty Greek ideas, 
and of the challenge these ideas posed to the European beliefs and way of 
life.· From the Greeks the Europeans acquired arithmetic, a crude algebra, 
the vast development of Euclidean geometry, and the trigonometry of Hip­
parchus and Ptolemy. Of course, Greek science and philosophy also became 
known in Europe. 
The first major European development in mathematics occurred in the 
work of the artists. Imbued with the Greek doctrines that man must study 
himself and the real world, the artists began to paint reality as they actually 
perceived it instead of interpreting religious themes in symbolic styles. They 
applied Euclidean geometry to create a new system of perspective which 
permitted them to paint realistically. Specifically, the artists created a new 
style of painting which enabled them to present on canvas, scenes making the 
same impression on the eye as the actual scenes themselves. From the work 
of the artists, the mathematicians derived ideas and problems that led to a new 
branch of mathematics, projective geometry. 
Stimulated by Greek astronomical ideas, supplied with data and the 
astronomical theory of Hipparchus and Ptolemy, and steeped in the Greek 
doctrine that the world is mathematically designed, Nicolaus Copernicus 
sought to show that God had done a better job than Hipparchus and Ptolemy 
had described. The result of Copernicus' thinking was a new system of 
astronomy in which the sun was immobile and the planets revolved around 
the sun. This heliocentric theory was considerably improved by Kepler. Its 
effects on religion, philosophy, science, and on man's estimations of his own 
importance were profound. The heliocentric theory also raised scientific and 
mathematical problems which were a direct incentive to new mathematical 
developments. 
Just how much mathematical activity the revival of Greek works might 
have stimulated cannot be determined, for simultaneously with the translation 
and absorption of these works, a number of other revolutionary developments 
altered the social, economic, religious, and intellectual life of Europe. The 
introduction of gunpowder was followed by the use of muskets and later 
cannons. These inventions revolutionized methods of warfare and gave the 
newly emerging social class of free common men an important role in that 
domain. The compass became known to the Europeans and made possible 
long-range navigation, which the merchants sponsored for the purpose of 
• See Chapter 9. 

22 
A HISTORICAL ORIENTATlON 
finding new sources of raw materials and better trade routes. One result was 
the discovery of America and the consequent influx of new ideas into Europe. 
The invention of printing and of paper made of rags afforded books in large 
quantities and at cheap prices, so that learning spread far more than it ever had 
in any earlier civilizations. The Protestant Revolution stirred debate and doubts 
concerning doctrines that had been unchallenged for 1500 years. The rise of a 
merchant class and of free men engaged in labor in their own behalf stimulated 
an interest in materials, methods of production, and new commodities. All of 
these needs and influences challenged the Europeans to build a new culture. 
2-8 DEVELOPMENTS FROM 1550 TO 1800 
Since many of the problems raised by the motion of cannon balls, navigation, 
and industry called for quantitative knowledge, arithmetic and algebra became 
centers of attention. A remarkable improvement in these mathematical fields 
followed. This is the period in which algebra was built as a branch of mathe­
matics and in which much of the algebra we learn in high school was created. 
Almost all the great mathematicians of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, 
Cardan, Tartaglia, Vieta, Descartes, Fermat, and Newton, men we shall get to 
know better later, contributed to the subject. In particular, the use of letters to 
represent a class of numbers, a device which gives algebra its generality and 
power, was introduced by Vieta. In this same period, logarithms were created 
to facilitate the calculations of astronomers. The history of arithmetic and 
algebra illustrates one of the striking and curious features of the history of 
mathematics. Ideas that seem remarkably simple once explained were thousands 
of years in the making. 
The next development of consequence, coordinate geometry, came from 
two men, both interested in Ipethod. One was Rene Descartes. Descartes is 
perhaps even more famous as a philosopher than as a mathematician, though 
he was one of the major contributors to our subject. As a youth Descartes was 
already troubled by the intellectual turmoil of his age. He found no certainty 
in any of the knowledge taught him, and he therefore concentrated for years 
on finding the method by which man can arrive at truths. He found the clue 
to this method in mathematics, and with it constructed the first great modern 
philosophical system. Because the scientific problems of his time involved 
work with curves, the paths of ships at sea, of the planets, of objects in motion 
near the earth, of light, and of projectiles, Descartes sought a better method of 
proving theorems about curves. He found the answer in the use of algebra. 
Pierre de Fermat's interest in method was confined to mathematics proper, but 
he too appreciated the need for more effective ways of working with curves 
and also arrived at the idea of applying algebra. In this development of 
coordinate geometry we have one of the remarkable examples of how the 
times influence the direction of men's thoughts. 

DEVELOPMENTS FROM 1550 TO 1800 
23 
We have already noted that a new society was developing in Europe. 
Among its features were expanded commerce, manufacturing, mining, large­
scale agriculture, and a new social class-free men working as laborers Of 
as independellt artisans. These activities and interests created problems of 
materials, methods of production, quality of the product, and utilization of 
devices to replace or increase the effectiveness of manpower. The people 
involved, like the artists, had become aware of Greek mathematics and 
science and sensed that it could be helpful. And so they too sought to employ 
this knowledge in their own behalf. Thereby arose a new motive for the 
study of mathematics and science. Whereas the Greeks had been content to 
study nature merely to satisfy their own curiosity and to organize their 
conclusions in patterns pleasing to the mind, the new goal, effectively pro­
claimed by Descartes and Francis Bacon, was to make nature serve man. 
Hence mathematicians and scientists turned earnestly to an enlarged program 
in which both understanding and mastery of nature were to be sought. 
However, Bacon had cautioned that nature can be commanded only when 
one learns to obey her. One must have facts of nature on which to base 
reasoning about nature. Hence mathematicians and scientists sought to acquire 
facts from the experience of artists, technicians, artisans, and engineers. The 
aIIiance of mathematics and experience. was gradually transformed into an 
alliance of mathematics and experimentation, and a new method for the pursuit 
of the truths of nature, first clearly perceived and formulated by Galileo 
Galilei ( 1564--1642) and Newton, was gradually evolved. The plan, perhaps 
oversimply stated, was that experience and experiment were to supply basic 
mathematical principles and mathematics was to be applied to these principles 
to deduce new truths, just as new truths are deduced from the axioms of 
geometry. 
The most pressing scientific problem of the seventeenth century was the 
study of motion. On the practical side, investigations of the motion of 
projectiles, of the motion of the moon and planets to aid navigation, and of 
the motion of light to improve the design of the newly discovered telescope 
and microscope, were the primary interests. On the theoretical side, the new 
heliocentric astronomy invalidated the older, Aristotelian laws of motion and 
called for totally new principles. It was one thing to explain why a ball fell 
to earth on the assumption that the earth was immobile and the center of the 
universe, and another to explain this phenomenon in the light of the fact that 
the earth was rotating and revolving around the sun. A new science of motion 
was created by Galileo and Newton, and in the process two brand-new 
developments were added to mathematics. The first of these was the notion 
of a function, a relationship between variables best expressed for most purposes 
as a formula. The second, which rests on the notion of a function but repre­
sents the greatest advance in method and content since Euclid's days, was the 
calculus. The subject matter of mathematics and the power of mathematics 

24 
A HISTORICAL ORIENTATION 
expanded so greatly that at the end of the seventeenth century Leibniz could 
say, 
Taking mathematics from the beginning of the world to the time when Newton 
lived, what he had done was much the better half. 
With the aid of the calculus Newton was able to organize all data on 
earthly and heavenly motions into one system of mathematical mechanics 
which encompassed the motion of a ball falling to earth and the motion of 
the planets and stars. This great creation produced universal laws which not 
only united heaven and earth but revealed a design in the universe far more 
impressive than man had ever conceived. Galileo's and Newton's plan of 
applying mathematics to sound physical principles not only succeeded in one 
major area but gave promise, in a rapidly accelerating scientific movement, of 
embracing all other physical phenomena. 
We learn in history that the end of the seventeenth century and the 
eighteenth century were marked by a new intellectual attitude briefly described 
as the Age of Reason. We are rarely told that this age was inspired by the 
successes which mathematics, to be sure in conjunction with science, had 
achieved in organizing man's knowledge. Infused with the conviction that 
reason, personified by mathematics, would not only conquer the physical 
world but could solve all of man's problems and should therefore be employed 
in every intellectual and artistic enterprise, the great minds of the age 
undertook a sweeping reorganization of philosophy, religion, ethics, literature, 
and aesthetics. The beginnings of new sciences such as psychology, economics, 
and politics were made during these rational investigations. Our principal 
intellectual doctrines and outlook were fashioned then, and we still live in the 
shadow of the Age of Reason. 
While these major branches of our culture were being transformed, 
eighteenth-century scientists continued to win victories over nature. The 
calculus was soon extended to a new branch of mathematics called differential 
equations, and this new tool enabled scientists to tackle more complex problems 
in astronomy, in the study of the action of forces causing motions, in sound, 
especially musical sounds, in light, in heat (especially as applied to the develop­
ment of the steam engine), in the strength of materials, and in the flow of 
liquids and gases. Other branches, which can be merely mentioned, such as 
infinite series, the calculus of variations, and differential geometry, added to 
the extent and power of mathematics. The great names of the Bernoullis, 
Euler, Lagrange, Laplace, d' Alemberr, and Legendre, belong to this period. 
2-9 DEVELDPMENTS FRDM 1800 TO THE PRESENT 
During the nineteenth century, developments in mathematics came at an ever 
increasing rate. Algebra, geometry and analysis, the last comprising those 

DEVELOPMENTS FROM 1 800 TO THE PRESENT 
25 
subjects which stem from calculus, all acquired new branches. The great 
mathematicians of the century were so numerous that it is impractical to list 
them. We shall encounter some of the greatest of these, Karl Friedrich Gauss 
and Bernhard Riemann, in our work. We might mention also Henri Poincare 
and David Hilbert, whose work extended into the twentieth century. 
Undoubtedly the primary cause of this expansion in mathematics was the 
expansion in science. The progress made in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries had sufficiently illustrated the effectiveness of science in penetrating 
the mysteries of the physical world and in giving man control over nature, to 
cause an all the more vigorous pursuit of science in the nineteenth century. 
In that century also, science became far more intimately linked with engi­
neering and technology than ever before. Mathematicians, working closely 
with the scientists as they had since the seventeenth century, were presented 
with thousands of significant physical problems and responded to these 
challenges. 
Perhaps the major scientific development of the century, which is typical 
in its stimulation of mathematical activity, was the study of electricity and 
magnetism. While still in its infancy this science yielded the electric motor, 
the electric generator, and telegraphy. Basic physical principles were soon 
expressed mathematically, and it became possible to apply mathematical tech­
niques to these principles, to deduce new information just as Galileo and 
Newton had done with the principles of motion. In the course of such 
mathematical investigations, James Clerk Maxwell discovered electromagnetic 
waves of which the best known representatives are radio waves. A new world 
of phenomena was thus uncovered, all embraced in one mathematical system. 
Practical applications, with radio and television as most familiar examples, 
soon followed. 
Remarkable and revolutionary developments of another kind also took 
place in the nineteenth century, and these resulted from a re-examination of 
elementary mathematics. The most profound in its intellectual significance 
was the creation of non-Euclidean geometry by Gauss. His discovery had 
both tantalizing and disturbing implications: tantalizing in that this new field 
contained entirely new geometries based on axioms which differ from Euclid's, 
and disturbing in that it shattered man's firmest conviction, namely that 
mathematics is a body of truths. With the truth of mathematics undermined, 
realms of philosophy, science, and even some religious beliefs went up in 
smoke. So shocking were the implications that even mathematicians refused to 
take non-Euclidean geometry seriously until the theory of relativity forced 
them to face the full significance of the creation. 
For reasons which we trust will become clearer further on, the devastation 
caused by non-Euclidean geometry did not shatter mathematics but released 
it from bondage to the physical world. The lesson learned from the history 
of non-Euclidean geometry was that though mathematicians may start with 

26 
A HISTORICAL ORIENTATION 
axioms that seem to have little to do with the observable behavior of nature, 
the axioms and theorems may nevertheless prove applicable. Hence mathe­
maticians felt freer to give reign to their imaginations and to consider abstract 
concepts such as complex numbers, tensors, matrices, and n-dimensional 
spaces. This development was followed by an even greater advance in mathe­
matics and. surprisingly, an increasing use of mathematics in the sciences. 
Even before the nineteenth century, the rationalistic spirit engendered by 
the success of mathematics in the study of nature penetrated to the social 
scientists. They began to emulate the physical scientists, that is, to search 
for the basic truths in their fields and to attempt reorganization of their 
subjects on the mathematical pattern. But these attempts to deduce the laws 
of man and society and to erect sciences of biology, economics, and politics 
did not succeed, although they did have some indirect beneficial effects. 
The failure to penetrate social and biological problems by the deductive 
method, that is, the method of reasoning from axioms, caused social scientists 
to take over and develop further the mathematical theories of statistics and 
probability, which had already been initiated by mathematicians for various 
purposes ranging from problems of gambling to the theory of heat and 
astronomy. These techniques have been remarkably successful and have given 
some scientific methodology to what were largely speculative domains. 
This brief sketch of the mathematics which will fall within our purview 
may make it clear th:lt mathematics is not a closed book written in Greek 
times. It is rather a living plant that has flourished and languished with the 
rise and fall of civilizations. Since about 1600 it has been a continuing 
development which has become steadily vaster, richer, and more profound. 
The character of mathematics has been aptly, if somewhat floridly, described 
by the nineteenth-century English mathematician James Joseph Sylvester. 
Mathematics is not a book confined within a cover and bound between brazen 
clasps, whose contents it needs only patience to ransack; it is not a mine, whose 
treasures may take long to reduce into possession, but which fill only a limited 
number of veins and lodes; it is not a soil, who¾e fertility can be exhausted by the 
yield of successive harvests; it is not a continent or an ocean, whose area can be 
mapped out and its contour defined; it is as limitless as the space which it finds 
too narrow for its aspirations; its possibilities are as infinite as the worlds which 
are forever crowding in and multiplying upon the astronomer's gaze,. it is incapable 
of being restricted within assigned boundaries or being reduced to definitions of 
permanent validity as the consciousness, the life, which seems to slumber in each 
monad, in every atom of matter, in each leaf and bud and cell and is forever ready 
to burst forth into new forms of vegetabLe and animal existence. 
Our sketch of the development of mathematics has attempted to indicate 
the major eras and civilizations in which the subject has flourished, the 
variety of interests which induced people to pursue mathematics, and the 
branches of mathematics that have been created. Of course, we intend to 

THE HUMAN ASPECf OF MATHEMATICS 
27 
investigate more carefully and more fully what these creations are and what 
values they have furnished to mankind. One fact of history may be noted 
by way of summary here. Mathematics as a body of reasoning from axioms 
stems from one source, the classical Greeks. All other civilizations which 
have pursued or are pursuing mathematics acquired this concept of mathe­
matics from the Greeks. The Arab and Western European were the next 
civilizations to take over and expand on the Greek foundation. Today 
countries such as the United States, Russia, China, India, and Japan are 
also active. Though the last three of these did possess some native mathe­
matics, it was limited and empirical as in Babylonia and Egypt. Modern 
mathematical activity in these five countries and wherever else it is now 
taking hold was inspired by Western European thought and actually learned 
by men who studied in Europe and returned to build centers of teaching in 
their own countries. 
2-10 THE HUMAN ASPECT OF MATHEMATICS 
One final point about mathematics is implicit in what we have said. We have 
spoken of problems which gave rise to mathematics, of cultures which empha­
sized some directions of thinking as opposed to others, and of branches of 
mathematics, as though all these forces and activities were as impersonal as 
the force of gravitation. But ideas and thinking are conveyed by people. 
Mathematics is a human creation. Although most Greeks did believe that 
mathematics existed independently of human beings as the planets and moun­
tains seem to, and that all that human beings do is discover more and more of 
the structure, the prevalent belief today is that mathematics is entirely a human 
product. The concepts, the axioms, and the theorems established are all 
created by human beings in man's attempt to understand his environment, to 
give play to his artistic instincts, and to engage in absorbing intellectual 
activity. 
The lives and activities of the men themselves are also fascinating. While 
mathematicians produce formulas, no formula produces mathematicians. They 
have come from all levels of society. The special talent, if there is such, 
which makes mathematicians has been found in Casanovas and ascetics, among 
business men and philosophers, among atheists and the profoundly religious, 
among the retiring and the worldly. Some, like Blaise Pascal and Gauss, were 
precocious; Evariste Galois was dead at 21, and Niels Hendrik Abel at 27. 
Others, like Karl Weierstrass and Henri Poincare, matured more normally and 
were productive throughout their lives. Many were modest; others extremely 
egotistical and vain beyond toleration. One finds scoundrels, such as Cardan, 
and models of rectitude. Some were generous in their recognition of other 
great minds; others were resentful and jealous and even stole ideas to boost 
their own reputations. Disputes about priority of discovery abound. 

28 
A HISTORICAL ORIENTATION 
The point in learning about these human varIations, aside from satisfying 
our instinct to pry into other people's lives, is that it explains to a large extent 
why the progress of the highly rational subject of mathematics has been highly 
irrational. Of course, the major historical forces, which we sketched above, 
limit the actions and influence the outlook of individuals, but we also find in 
the history of mathematics all the vagaries which he have learned to associate 
with human beings. Leading mathematicians have failed to recognize bright 
ideas suggested by younger men, and the authors died neglected. Big men and 
little men made unsuccessful attempts to solve problems which their successors 
solved with ease. On the other hand, some supposed proofs offered even by 
masters were later found to be false. Generations and even ages failed to note 
new ideas, despite the fact that all that was needed was not a technical achieve­
ment but merely a point of view. The examples of the blindness of human 
beings to ideas which later seem simple and obvious furnish fascinating insight 
into the working of the human mind. 
Recognition of the human element in mathematics explains in large measure 
the differences in the mathematics produced by different civilizations and the 
sudden spurts made in new directions by virtue of insights supplied by genius. 
Though no subject has profited as much as mathematics has by the cumulative 
effect of thousands of workers and results, in no subject is the role of great 
minds more readily discernible. 
EXERCISES 
1. Name a few civilizations which contributed to mathematics. 
2. What basis did the Egyptians and Babylonians have for believing in their mathe-
matical methods and formulas? 
3. Compare Greek and pre-Greek understanding of the concepts of mathematics. 
4. What was the Greek plan for establishing mathematical conclusions? 
5. What was the chief contribution of the Arabs to the development of mathe­
matics? 
6. In what sense is mathematics a creation of the Greeks rather than of the Egyp­
tians and Babylonians? 
7. Criticize the statement "Mathematics was created by the Greeks and very little 
was added since their time." 
Topics for Further Investigation 
To write on the following topics use the books listed under Recommended Reading. 
I. The mathematical contributions of the Egyptians or Babylonians. 
2. The mathematical contributions of the Greeks. 

Recommended Reading 
THE HUMAN ASPECT OF MATHEMATICS 
29 
BALL, W. W. ROUSE: A Short Account of the History of Mathematics, Dover Pub­
lications, Inc., New York, 1960. 
BELL, ERIC T.: Men of Mathematics, Simon and Schuster, New York, 1937. 
CHILDE, V. GORDON: Man Makes Himself, The New American Library, New York, 
1951. 
EVES, HOWARD: An Introduction to the History of Mathematics, Rev. ed., Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, Inc., New York, 1964. 
NEUGEBAUER, OTTO: The Exact Sciences in Antiquity, Princeton University Press, 
Princeton, 1952. 
SCOTT, J. F.: A History of Mathematics, Taylor and Francis, Ltd., London, 1958. 
SMITH, DAVID EUGENE: History of Mathematics, Vol. I, Dover Publications, Inc., 
New York, 1958. 
STRUlK, DIRK J.: A Concise History of Mathematics, Dover Publications, Inc., New 
York, 1948. 

CHAPTER 3 
LOGIC AND MATHEMATICS 
Geometry will draw the soul toward truth and create the spirit of 
philosophy. 
PLATO 
3-1 INTRODUCTION 
Mathematics has its own ways of establishing knowledge, and the understand­
ing of mathematics is considerably promoted if one learns first just what those 
ways are. In this chapter we shall study the concepts which mathematics treats; 
the method, called deductive proof, hy which mathematics establishes its con­
clusions; and the principles or axioms on which mathematics rests. Study of 
the contents and logical structure of mathematics leaves untouched the subject 
of how the mathematician knows what conclusions to establish and how to 
prove them. We shall therefore present a brief and preliminary discussion of 
the creation of mathematics. This topic will recur as we examine the subject 
matter itself in subsequent chapters. 
Since mathematics, as we conceive the subject today, was fashioned by the 
Greeks, we shall also attempt to see what features of Greek thought and 
culture caused these people to remodel what the Egyptians and Babylonians 
had pursued for several thousand years. 
3-2 THE CONCEPTS OF MATHEMATICS 
The first major step which the Greeks made was to insist that mathematics 
must deal with abstract concepts. Let us see just what this means. When we 
first learn about numbers we are taught to think about collections of particular 
ohjects such as two apples, three men, and so on. Gradually and rather sub­
consciously we begin to think about the numbers 2, J, and other whole 
numbers without having to associate them with physical objects. We soon 
reach the more advanced stage of adding, subtracting, and performing other 
operations with numbers without having to handle collections of objects in 
order to understand these operations or to see that the results agree with 
experience. Thus we soon become convinced that 4 times 5 must be 20, 
whether these numbers represent quantities of apples, horses, or even purely 
30 

THE CONCEPTS OF MATHEMATICS 
31 
imaginary objects. By this time we are really dealing with concepts or ideas, 
for the whole numbers do not exist in nature. Any whole number is rather an 
abstraction of a property which is common to many different collections or 
sets of objects. 
The whole numbers then are ideas, and the same is true of fractions such 
as Ϲ, f, and so on. In the latter case, too, the formulation of the physical 
relationship of a part of an object to the whole, whether it refers to pies, 
bushels of wheat .. or to a smaller monetary value in relation to a larger one. 
again leads to an abstraction. Mathematicians formulate operations with 
fractions. that is. combining parts of an object. taking one part away from 
the other, or taking a part of a part, in such a way that the result of any 
operation on abstract fractions agrees with the corresponding physical occur­
rence. Thus the mathematical process of, say adding i and S, which yields ii, 
expresses the addition of ! of a pie and ! of a pie, and the result tells us how 
many parts of a pie one would actually have. 
Whole numbers, fractions, and the various operations with whole numbers 
and fractions are abstractions. Although this fact is rather easy to understand, 
we tend to lose sight of it and cause ourselves unnecessary confusion. Let us 
consider an example. A man goes into a shoe store and buys 3 pairs of shoes 
at 10 dollars per pair. The storekeeper reasons that 3 pairs times 10 dollars is 
30 dollars and asks for 30 dollars in return for the 3 pairs of shoes. If this 
reasoning is correct, then it is equally correct for the customer to argue that 
3 pairs times 10 dollars is 30 pairs of shoes and to walk out with 30 pairs of 
shoes without handing the storekeeper one cent. The customer may end up in 
jail, but he may console himself while he languishes there that his reasoning 
is as sound as the storekeeper's. 
The source of the difficulty is, of course, that one cannot multiply shoes 
hy dollars. One can multiply the number 3 hy the number 10 and obtain the 
numher 30. The practical and no doubt obligatory physical interpretation of 
the answer in the above situation is that one must pay 30 doIlars rather than 
walk out with 30 pairs of shoes. We see, therefore, that one must distinguish 
between the purely mathematical operation of multiplying 3 by 10 and the 
physical objects with which these numhers may be associated. 
The same point is involved in a slightly different situation. Mathematically 
t is equal to !. But the corresponding physical fact may not be true. One may 
he willing to accept 4 half-pies instead of 2 whole pies, but no woman would 
accept 4 half-dresses in place of 2 dresses or 4 half-shoes in place of 1 pair of 
whole shoes. 
The Egyptians and Babylonians did reach the stage of working with pure 
numhers dissociated from physical objects. But like young children of our 
civilization, they hardly recognized that they were dealing with abstract 
entities. By contrast, the Greeks not only recognized numbers as ideas but 
emphasized that this is the way we must regard them. The Greek philosopher 

32 
LOGIC AND MATHEMATICS 
Plato, who lived from 428 to 348 B.C. and whose ideas are representative of the 
classical Greek period, says in his famous work, the Republic, 
We must endeavor that those who are to be the principal men of our State go 
and learn arithmetic, not as amateurs, but they must carry on the study until 
they see the nature of numbers with the mind only; . . .  arithmetic has a very 
great and eLevating effect, compelling the soul to reason about abstract number, 
and rebelling against the introduction of visible or tangible objects into the 
argument. 
The Greeks not only emphasized the distinction between pure numbers 
and the physical applications of such numbers, but they preferred the former 
to the latter. The study of the properties of pure numbers, which they called 
arithmetica, was esteemed as a worthy activity of the mind, whereas the use 
of numbers in practical applications, iogistica, was deprecated as a mere skill. 
Geometrical thinking prior to the classical Greek period was even less 
advanced than thinking about numbers. To the Egyptians and Babylonians 
the words "straight line" meant no more than a stretched rope or a line traced 
in sand, and a rectangle was a piece of land of a particular shape. The Greeks 
began the practice of treating point, line, triangle, and other geometrical 
notions as concepts. They did of course appreciate that these mental notions 
are suggested by physical objects, but they stressed that the concepts differ 
from the physical examples as sharply as the concept of time differs from the 
passage of the sun across the sky. The stretched string is a physical object 
illustrating the concept of line, but the mathematical line has no thickness, no 
color, no molecular structure, and no tension. 
The Greeks were explicit in asserting that geometry deals with abstractions. 
Speaking of mathematicians, Plato says, 
And do you not know also that although they make use of the visible forms and 
reason about them, they are thinking not of these, but of the ideals which they 
resemble; not of the figures which they draw, but of the absoLute square and the 
absolute diameter . . .  they are really seeking to behold the things the'l1seives, 
which can be seen only 'u.'ith the eye of the mind? 
On the basis of elementary abstractions, mathematics creates others which 
are even more remote from anything real. Negative numbers, equations 
involving unknowns, formulas, and other concepts we shall encounter are 
abstractions built upon abstractions. Fortunately, every abstraction is ultimately 
derived from, and therefore understandable in terms of, intuitively meaningful 
objects or phenomena. The mind does play its part in the creation of mathe­
matical concepts, but the mind does not function independently of the outside 
world. Indeed the mathematician who treats concepts that have no physically 
real or intuitive origins is almost surely talking nonsense. The intimate connec­
tion between mathematics and objects and events in the physical world is 

THE CONCEPTS OF MATHEMATICS 
33 
reassuring, for it means that we can not only hope to understand the mathe­
matics proper, but also expect physically meaningful and valuable conclusions. 
The use of abstractions is not peculiar to mathematics. The concepts of 
force. mass, and energy, which are studied in physics, are abstractions from 
real phenomena. The concept of wealth, an abstraction from material pos­
sessions such as land, buildings, and jewelry, is studied in economics. The 
concepts of liberty. justice, and democracy are familiar in political science. 
Indeed, with respect to the use of abstract concepts, the distinction between 
mathematics on the one hand and the physical and social sciences on the other 
is not a sharp one. In fact, the influence of mathematics and mathematical 
ways' of thinking on the physical sciences especially has led to ever increasing 
use of abstract concepts including some, as we shall see, which may have no 
direct real counterpart at all. any more than a mathematical formula has :t 
direct real counterpart. 
The very fact that other studies also engage in abstractions raises an 
important question. Mathematics is confined ޘo some abstractions, numbers 
and geometrical forms, and to concepts built upon these basic ones. Abstrac­
tions such as mass, force, and energy belong to physics, and still other 
abstractions belong to other subjects. Why doesn't mathematics also treat 
forces, wealth, and justice' Certainly these concepts are also worthy of study. 
Did the mathematicians make an agreement with physicists, economists, and 
others to divide the concepts among themselves? The restriction of mathe­
matics to numbers and geometrical forms is partly a historical accident and 
partly a deliberate decision made by the Greeks. Numbers and geometrical 
forms had already been introduced by the Egyptians and Babylonians, and 
their utility in daily life was established. Since the Greeks learned the rudi­
ments of mathematics from these civilizations, the sheer weight of tradition 
might have caused them to continue the practice of regarding mathematics as 
the study of numbers and geometrical figures. But people as original and bold 
in thought as the Greeks would not have been bound merely by tradition, had 
they not found in numbers and geometrical forms sharp and clear notions 
which appealed to their delight in the processes of exact thinking. However, 
an even more compelling reason was their belief that numerical and geometrical 
properties and relationships were basic, that they underlay the phenomena of 
the physical world and the design of the entire universe. Hence to under­
stand the world one should seek this mathematical essence. The brilliance and 
depth of their conception of the universe will be revealed more and more as 
we proceed. 
When one compares the pre-Greek and Greek understanding of the con­
cepts of mathematics and notes the sharp transition from the concrete to the 
abstract, another question presents itself. The Greeks eliminated the physical 
substance and retained only the idea. Why did they do it' Surely it is more 
difficult to think about abstractions than about concrete things. Also it would 

34 
LOGIC AND MATHEMATICS 
seem that an attempt to study nature by concentrating on just a few aspects of 
physical objects rather than on the objects themselves would fall far short of 
effectiveness. 
Insofar as the emphasis on abstractions is concerned, the Greeks saw at 
once what any thinking people would see sooner or later. One advantage of 
treating abstractions is the gain in generality. When a child learns that 
5 + 5 = 10, he acquires in one swoop a fact which applies to hundreds of 
situations. Likewise a theorem proved about the abstract triangle applies to a 
triangular piece of land, a musical percussion instrument, and a triangle 
determined by three heavenly bodies at any instant of time. It has been said 
that the process of abstraction amounts to giving the same name to different 
things, but this very recognition that different objects possess the common 
property named in the abstraction carries with it the implication that anything 
true of the abstraction will apply to the several objects. Part of the secret of 
the power of mathematics is that it deals with abstractions. 
Another advantage of abstraction was also clear to the Greeks. Abstract­
ing from a physical situation just those properties which are to be studied frees 
the mind from burdensome and irrelevant details and enables one to concen­
trate on the features of interest. When one wishes to determine the area of a 
piece of land, only shape and size are relevant, and it is desirable to think only 
about these and not about the fertility of the soil. 
The emphasis on mathematical abstractions by the classical Greeks was 
part and parcel of their outlook on the entire universe. They were concerned 
with truths, and leading philosophical schools, notably the Pythagoreans and 
the Platonists, maintained that truths could be established only about abstrac­
tions. Let us follow their argument. The physical world presents various 
objects to the senses. But the impressions received by the senses are inexact, 
transitory, and constantly changing; indeed, the senses may be even deceived, 
as by mirages. However, truth, by itޙ very meaning, must consist of perma­
nent, unchanging, definite entities and relationships. Fortunately, the intelli­
gence of man excited to reflection by the impressions of sensible objects may 
rise to higher conceptions of the realities faintly exhibited to the senses, and so 
man may rise to the contempla"ion of ideas. These are eternal realities and the 
true goal of thought, whereas mere "things are the shadows of ideas thrown on 
the screen of experience." 
Thus Plato would say that there is nothing real in a horse, a house, or a 
beautiful woman. Tht reality is in tht universol type or idea of a horse, a 
home, or a woman. The ideas, among wޚich Plato emph1sized Beauty, Justice, 
Intelligence, Goodness, Perfection, and the Sute, are independent of the super­
ficial appearances of things, of the /lux of life, and of the biases and warped 
desires of man; they arc in fact constant and invariabie, and knowledge con­
cerning them is firm acd indestructible. Real and eternal knowledge concerns 
these ideas, rather than sensuous objects. This distinr:tion between the intelli­
gible world and the world revealed by the senses is all-important in Plato. 

Fig. 3-1. 
THE CONCEPTS OF MATHEMATICS 
35 
Polyclitus: Spear·bearer (Oaryphorus). National Museum, 
Naples. 
To put Plato's doctrine in everyday language, fundamental knowledge 
does not concern itself with what John ate, Mary heard, or William felt. 
Knowledge must rise above individuals and particular objects and tell us about 
broad classes of objects and about man as a whole. True knowledge must 
therefore of necessity concern abstractions. Plato admits that physical or sen­
sible objects sugges: the ideas just as diagrams of geometry suggest abstract 
geometrical concepts. Hence there is a point to studying physical objects, but 
one must not lose himself in trivial and confusing minutiae. 
The abstractions of mathematics possessed a special importance for the 
Greeks. The philosophers pointed out that, to pass from a knowledge of the 
world of matter to tho world of ideas, man must train his mind to grasp the 

36 
LOGIC AND I\lATHEi\lATICS 
FIG. 3-2. 
Bust of Caesar. Vatican. 
ideas. These highest realities blind the person who is not prepared to contem­
plate them. He is, to use Plato's famous simile, like one who lives continuously 
in the deep shadows of a cave and is suddenly brought out into the sunlight. 
The study of mathematics helps make the transition from darkness to light. 
Mathematics is in fact ideally suited to prepare the mind for higher forms of 
thought because on the one hand it pertains to the world of visible things and 
on the other hand it deals with abstract concepts. Hence through the study of 
mathematics man learns to pass from concrete figures to abstract forms; more­
over, this srudy purifies the mind by drawing it away from the contemplation 
of the sensible and perishable and leading it to the eternal ideas. These latter 
abstractions are on the same mental level as the concepts of mathematics. 
Thus, Socrates says, "The understanding of mathematics is necessary for a 
sound grasp of ethics." 
To sum up Plato's position we may say that while a little knowledge of 
geometry and calculation suffices for practical needs, the higher and more 
advanced portions tend to lift the mind above mundane considerations and 
enable it to apprehend the final aim of philosophy, the idea of the Good. 
Mathematics, then, is the best preparation for philosophy. For this reason 
Plato recommended that the future rulers, who were to be philosopher-kings, 
be trained for ten years, from age 20 to 3D, in the study of the exact sciences, 
arithmetic, plane geometry, solid geometry, astronomy, and harmonics (music). 
The oft-repeated inscription over the doors of Plato's Academy, stating that 
no one ignorant of mathematics should enter, fully expresses the importance 

Fig. 3-3. Parthenon, Athens. 
THE CONCEPTS OF MATHEMATICS 
37 
he attached to the subject, although modern Critics of Plato read into these 
words his admission that one would not be able to learn it after entering. This 
value of mathematical training led one historian to remark, "Mathematics 
considered as a science owes its origins to the idealistic needs of the Greek 
philosophers, and not as fable has it, to the practical demands of Egyptian 
economics." 
The preference of the Greeks for abstractions is equally evident in the art 
of the great sculptors, Polyclirus, Praxiteles, and Phidias. One has only to 
glance at the face in Fig. 3-1 to observe that Greek sculpture of the classical 
period dwelt not on particular men and women but on rypes, ideal types. 
Idealization extended to standardization of the ratios of the parts of the body 
to each other. Polyclitus believed, in fact, that there were ideal numerical ratios 
which fix the proportions of the human body. Perfect art must follow these 
ideal proportions. He wrote a book, The Canon, on the subject and con­
structed the "Spear-bearer" to illustrate the thesis. These abstract types con­
trast sharply with what is found in numerous busts and starues of private 
individuals and military and political leadets made by Romans (Fig. 3-2). 
Greek architecrure also reveals the emphasis on ideal forms. The simple 
and austere buildings were always rectangular in shape; even the ratios of 
the dimensions employed were fixed. The Parthenon at Athens (Fig. 3-3) 
is an ex"mple of the style and proportions found in almost all Greek temples. 

38 
LOGIC AND MATHEMATICS 
EXERCISES 
1. Suppose 5 trucks pass by with 4 men in each. To answer the Question of how 
many men there are in all the trucks, a person reasons that 4 men times 5 trucks 
is 20 men. On the other hand, if there ar.e 4 men each owning 5 trucks, the total 
number of trucks is 20 trucks. Hence 4 men times 5 trucks yields 20 trucks. 
How do you know that the answer is 20 men in one case and 20 trucks in the 
other? 
2. If the product of 25¢ and 25¢ is obtained by multiplying 0.25 by 0.25 the result 
is 0.0625 or 6t¢. Does it pay to multiply money? 
3. Can you suggest some abstract political or ethical concepts? 
4. Suppose 30 books are to be distributed among 5 people. Since 30 books divided 
by 5 people yields 6 books, each person gets 6 books. Criticize the reasoning. 
5. A store advertises that it will give a credit of $ 1  for each purchase amounting to 
$1. A man who spends $6 reasons that he should receive a credit of $6 times $1, 
or $6. But $6 is 600¢ and $1 is 100¢. Hence 600¢ times IOO¢ is 60,000¢, or $600. 
It would seem that it is more profitable to operate with the almost worthless cent 
than with dollars! What is wrong? 
6. What does the statement that mathematics deals with abstractions mean? 
7. Why did the Greeks make mathematics abstract? 
3-3 IDEALIZATIDN 
The geometrical notions of mathematics are abstract in the sense that shapes 
are mental concepts which actual physical objects merely approximate. The 
sides of a rectangular piece of land may not be exactly straight nor would each 
angle be exactly 90°. Hence, in adopting such abstract concepts, mathematics 
does idealize. But in studying the physical world, mathematics also idealizes 
in another sense which is equally important. Very often mathematicians under­
take to study an object which is not a sphere and yet choose to regard it as 
such. For example, the earth is not a sphere but a spheroid, that is, a sphere 
flattened at the top and bottom. Yet in many physical problems which are 
treated mathematically the earth is represented as a perfect sphere. In problems 
of astronomy a large mass such as the earth or the sun is often regarded as 
concentrated at one point. 
In making such idealizations, the mathematician deliberately distorts or 
approximates at least some features of the physical situation. Why does he 
do it? The reason usually is that he simplifies the problem and yet is quite 
sure that he has not introduced any gross errors. If one is to investigate, for 
example, the motion of a shell which travels ten miles, the difference between 
the assumed spherical shape of the earth and the true spheroidal shape does not 
matter. In fact, in the study of any motion which takes place over a limited 
region, say one mile, it may be sufficient to treat the earth as a Rat surface. On 
the other hand, if one were to draw a very accurate map of the earth, he would 

METHODS OF REASONING 
39 
take into account that the shape is spheroidal. As another example, to find the 
distance to the moon, it is good enough to assume that the moon is a point in 
space. However, to find the size of the moon, it is clearly pointless to regard 
the moon as a point. 
The question does arise, how does the mathematician know when idealiza­
tion is justified' There is no simple answer to this question. If he has to solve 
a series of like problems. he may solve one using the correct figure, and 
another, using a simplified figure, and compare results. If the difference does 
not matter for his purposes, he may then retain the simpler figure for the 
remaining problems. Sometimes he can estimate the error introduced by using 
the simpler figure and may find that this error is too smaIl to matter. Or the 
mathematician may make the idealization and use the result because it is the 
best he Can do. Then he must accept experience as his guide in deciding 
whether the result is good enough. 
To idealize by deliberately introducing a simplification is to lie a little, 
but the lie is a white one. Using idealizations to study the physical world does 
impose a limitation on what mathematics accomplishes, but we shaH find that 
even where idealizations are employed, the knowledge gained is of immense 
value. 
EXERCISES 
1. Distinguish between abstraction and idealization. 
2. Is it correct to assume that the lines of sight to the sun from two places A and B 
on the earth's surface are parallel? 
3. Suppose you wished to measure the height of a flagpole. Would it be wise to 
regard the flagpole as a line segment? 
3-4 METHODS OF REASONING 
There are many ways, more or less reliable, of obtaining knowledge. One can 
resort to authority as one often does in obtaining historical knowledge. One 
may accept revelation as many religious people do. And one may rely upon 
experience. The foods we eat are chosen on the basis of experience. No one 
determined in advance by careful chemical analysis that bread is a healthful 
food. 
We may pass over with a mere mention such sources of knowledge as 
authority and revelation, for these sources cannot be helpful in building 
mathematics or in acquiring knowledge of the physical world. It is true that 
in the medieval period of Western European culture men did contend that 
all desirable knowledge of nature was revealed in the Bible. However in no 
significant period of scientific thought has this view played any role. Experi­
ence, on the other hand, is a useful source of knowledge. But there are 

40 
LOGIC AND MATHEMATICS 
difficulties in employing this method. We should not wish to build a fifty­
story building in order to decide whether a steel beam of specified dimensions 
is strong enough to be used in the foundation. Moreover, even if one should 
happen to choose workable dimensions, the choice may be wasteful of ma­
terials. Of course, experience is of no use in determining the size of the earth 
or the distance to the moon. 
Closely related to experience is the method of experiment which amounts 
to setting up and going through a series of purposive, systematic experiences. 
It is true that experimentation fundamentally is experience, but it is usually 
accompanied by careful planning which eliminates extraneous factors, and 
the experience is repeated enough times to yield reliable information. How­
ever, experimentation is subject to much the same limitations as experience. 
Are authority, revelation, experience, and even experimentation the only 
methods of obtaining knowledge? The answer is no. The major method is 
reasoning, and within the domain of reasoning there are several forms. One 
can reason by analogy. A boy who is considering a college career may note 
that his friend went to college and handled it successfully. He argues that 
since he is very much like his friend in physical and mental qualities, he too 
should succeed in college work. The method of reasoning just illustrated is 
to find a similar situation or circumstance and to argue that what was true for 
the similar case should be true of the one in question. Of course, one must be 
able to find a similar situation and one must take the chance that the differences 
do not matter. 
Another common method. of reasoning is induction. People use this 
method of reasoning every day. Because a person may have had unfortunate 
experiences in dealing with a few department stores, he concludes thޛt all 
department stores are bad to deal with. Or, for example, experimentation 
would show that iron, copper, brass, oil, and other substances expand when 
heated, and one consequently concludes that all substances expand when 
heated. Inductive reasoning is in fact the common method used in experimen­
tation. An experiment is generally performed many times, and if the same 
result is obtained each time, the experimenter concludes that the result will 
always follow. The essence of induction is that one observes repeated occur­
rences of the same phenomenon and concludes that the phenomenon will 
always occur. Conclusions obtained by induction seem well warranted by the 
evidence, especially when the number of instances observed is large. Thus the 
sun is observed so often to rise in the morning that one is sure it has risen even 
on those mornings when it is hidden by clouds. 
There is still a third method of reasoning, called deduction. Let us consider 
some examples. If we accept as basic facts that honest people return found 
money and that John is honest, we may conclude unquestionably that John 
will return money that he finds. Likewise, if we start with the facts that no 
mathematician is a fool and that John is a mathematician, then we may con-

METHODS OF REASONING 
41 
c1ude with certainty that John is not a fool. In deductive reasoning we start 
with certain statements, called premises. and assert a conclusion which IS a 
necessary or inescapable consequence of the premises. 
All three methods of reasoning, analogy, induction, and deduction, and 
other methods we could describe, are commonly employed. There is one 
essential difference, however, between deduction on the one hand and all other 
methods of reasoning on the other. Whereas the conclusion drawn by analogy 
or induction has only a probability of being correct, the conclusion drawn by 
deduction necessarily holds. Thus one might argue that because lions are 
similar to cows and cows eat grass, lions also eat grass. This argument by 
analogy leads to a false conclusion. The same is true for induction: although 
experiment may indeed show that two dozen different substances expand when 
heated, it does not necessarily follow that all substances do. Thus water, for 
example, when heated from 0° to 4° centigrade· does not expand; it contracts. 
Since deductive reasoning has the outstanding advantage of yielding an 
indubitable conclusion, it would seem obvious that one should always use 
this method in preference to the others. But the situation is not that simple. 
For one thing analogy and induction are often easier to employ. In the case 
of analogy, a similar situation may be readily available. In the case of induction, 
experience often supplies the facts with no effort at all. The fact that the sun 
rises every morning is noticed by all of us almost automatically. Furthermore, 
deductive reasoning calls for premises which it may be impossible to obtain 
despite all efforts. Fortunately we can use deductive reasoning in a variety of 
situations. For example, we can use it to find the distance to the moon. In 
this instance, both analogy and induction are powerless, whereas, as we shall 
see later, deduction will obtain the result quickly. It is also apparent that 
where deduction can replace induction based on expensive experimentation, 
deduction is preferred. 
Because we shall be concerned primarily with deductive reasoning, let us 
become a little more familiar with it. We have given several examples of 
deductive reasoning and have asserted that the conclusions are inescapable 
consequences of the premises. Let us consider, however, the following ex­
ample. We shall accept as premises that 
All good cars are expensive 
and 
All Locomobiles are expensive. 
We might conclude that 
All Locomobiles are good cars . 
• In scientific texts, "celsius" is considered to be the more precise term. 

42 
LOGIC AND MATHEMATICS 
Good 
cars 
Expensive 
objects 
Fig. 3-4 
Learned 
people 
Intelligent 
people 
Fig. 3-5 
The reasoning here is intended as deductive; that is, the presumption in draw­
ing this conclusion is that it is an inevitable consequence of the premises. 
Unfortunately, the reasoning is not correct. How can we see that it is not 
correct? A good way of picturing deductive arguments which enables us to 
see whether or not they are correct is called the circle test. 
We note that the first premise deals with cars and expensive objects. Let 
us think of all the expensive objects in this world as represented by the points 
of a circle, the largest circle in Fig. 3-4. The statement that all good cars are 
expensive means that all good cars are a part of the collection of expensive 
objects. Hence we draw another circle within the circle of expensive objects, 
and the points of this smaller circle represent all the good cars. The second 
premise says that all Locomobiles are expensive. Hence if we represent all 
Locomobiles by the points of a circle, this circle, too, must be drawn within the 
circle of expensive objects. However we do not know, on the basis of the two 
premises, where to place the circle representing all Locomobiles. It can, as far 
as we know, fall in the position shown in the figure. Then we cannot conclude 
that all Locomobiles are good cars, because if that conclusion were inevitable, 
the circle representing Locomobiles must fall inside the circle representing 
good cars. 
Many people do conclude from the above premises that all Locomobiles 
are good cars and the reason that they err is that they confuse the premise " All 
good cars are expensive" with the statement that "All expensive cars are good." 
Were the latter statement our first premise then the deductive argument would 
be valid or correct. 
Let us consider another example. Suppose we take as our premises that 
All professors are learned people 
and 
Some professors are intelligent people. 
May we necessarily conclude that 
Some intelligent people are learned? 

METHODS OF REASONING 
43 
It may or may not be obvious that this conclusion is correct. Let us use the 
circle test. We draw a circle representing the class of learned people (Fig 3-5). 
Since the first premise tells us that all professors are learned people, the 
circle representing the class of professors must fall within the circle represent­
ing learned people. The second premise introduces the class of intelligent 
people, and we now have to determine where to draw that circle. This class 
must include some professors. Hence the circle must intersect the circle of 
professors. Since the latter is inside the circle of learned people, some intelli­
gent people must fall within the class of learned people. 
These examples of deductive reasoning may make another point clear. In 
determining whether a given argument is correct or valid, we must rely only 
upon the facts given in the premises. We may not use information which is 
not explicitly there. For example, we may believe that learned people are 
intelligent because to acquire learning they must possess intelligence. But 
this belief or fact, if it is a fact, cannot enter into the argument. Nothing that 
one may happen to know or believe about learned or intelligent people is to 
be used unless explicitly stated in the premises. In fact, as far as the validity 
of the argument IS concerned, we might just as well have considered the 
premises 
and the conclusion, then, IS 
All x's are y's, 
Some x's are z's, 
Some z's are y's. 
Here we have used x for professor, y for learned person, and z for intelligent 
person. The use of x, y, and z does make the argument more abstract and 
more difficult to retain in the mind, but it emphasizes that we must look only 
at the information in the premises and avoids bringing in extraneous informa­
tion about professors, learned people, and intelligenr people. When we 'Nrite 
the argument in this more abstract form, we also see more clearly that what 
determines the validity of the argument is the fonn of the premises rather than 
the meaning of x, y, and z. 
A great deal of deductive reasoning fails into the patterns we have been 
illustrating. There are, however, variations that should be noted. It is quite 
customary, especially in the geometry we learn in high school, to state 
theorems in what is called the "if . . .  then" form. Thus one might say, if a 
triangle is isosceles, then its base angles are equal. One could as well say, all 
isosceles triangles have equal base angles; or, the base angles of an isosceles 
triangle are equal. All three versions say the same thing. 
Connected with the "if . . .  then" form of a premise is a related statement 
which is often misunderstood. The statement "if a man is a professor, he is 
learned" offers no difficulty. As noted in the preceding paragraph, it is 
equivalent to "all professors are learned." However the statement "only if a 

44 
LOGIC AND MATHEMATICS 
man is a professor, is he learned" has quite a different meaning. It means that 
to be learned one must be a professor or that if a man is learned, he must be 
a professor. Thus the addition of the word only has the significance of inter­
changing the "if" clause and the "then" clause. 
We shall encounter numerous instances of deductive reasoning in our 
work. The subject of deductive reasoning is customarily studied in logic, a 
discipline which treats more thoroughly the valid forms of reasoning. How­
ever, we shaIl not need to depend upon formal training in logic. In most cases, 
common experience will enable us to ascertain whether the reasoning is or is 
not valid. When in doubt, we can use the circle test. Moreover, mathematics 
itself is the superb field from which to learn reasoning and is the best exercise 
in logic. The laws of logic were in fact formulated by the Greeks on the 
basis of their experiences with mathematical arguments. 
EXERCISES 
1. A coin is tossed ten times and each time it falls heads. What conclusion does 
inductive reasoning warrant? 
2. Characterize deductive reasoning. 
3. What superior features does deductive reasoning possess compared with induc­
tion and analogy? 
4. Can you prove deductively that George Washington was the best president of 
the United States? 
5. Can one always apply deductive reasoning to prove a desired statement? 
6. Can you prove deductively that monogamy is the best system of marriage? 
7. Are the following purportedly deductive arguments valid? 
a) All good cars are expensive. A Daffy is an expensive car. Therefore a Daffy 
is a good car. 
b) All New Yorkers are good citizens. All good citizens give to charity. There­
fore all New Yorkers give to charity. 
c) All college students are clever. All young boys are clever. Therefore all 
young boys are college students. 
d) The same premises as in (c), but the conclusion: All college students are 
young boys. 
e) It rains every Monday and it is raining today; hence today must be Monday. 
£) No decent people curse; Americans are decent; therefore Americans do 
not curse. 
g) No decent people curse; Americans curse; therefore some Americans are 
not decent. 
h) No decent people curse; some Americans are not decent; therefore some 
Americans curse. 
i) No undergraduates have a bachelor-of-arts degree; no freshmen have a 
bachelor-of-arts degree. Therefore all freshmen are undergraduates. 

MATHEMATICAL PROOF 
45 
8. If someone gave you a valid deductive argument but the conclusion was not 
true, where would you look for the difficulty? 
9. Distinguish between the validity of a deductive argument and the truth of the 
conclusion. 
3-5 MATHEMATICAL PROOF 
We have seen so far in our discussion of reasoning that there are several 
methods of reasoning and that all are useful. These methods can be applied to 
mathematical problems. Let us suppose that one wished to determine the sum 
of the angles of a triangle. He could draw on paper many different triangles 
or construct some out of wood or metal and measure the angles. In each 
case he would find that the sum is as close to 180° as the eye and hand can 
determine. By inductive reasoning he could conclude that the sum of the 
angles in every triangle is 1 80°. As a matter of fact, the Babylonians and 
Egyptians did in effect use inductive reasoning to establish their mathematical 
results. They must have determined by measurement that the area of a triangle 
is one-half the base times the altitude and, having used this formula repeatedly 
and having obtained reliable results, they concluded that the formula is correct. 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 3-6. 
The mid· points of parallel 
chords lie on a straight 
line. 
To see that reasoning by analogy can be used in mathematics, let us note 
fitst that the centers of a set of parallel chords of a circle lie on a straight line 
(Fig. 3-6a). In fact this line is a diameter of the circle. Now an ellipse 
(Fig. 3-6b) is very much like a circle. Hence one might conclude that the 
centers of a set of parallel chords of an ellipse also lie on a straight line. 
Deduction is certainly applicable in mathematics. The proofs which one 
learns in Euclidean geometry are deductive. As another illustration we might 
consider the following algebraic argument. Suppose one wishes to solve the 
equation x - 3 = 7. One knows that equals added to equals give equals. If we 
added 3 to both sides of the preceding equation, we would be adding equals to 
an equality. Hence the addition of 3 to both sides is justified. When this is 
done, the result is x = la, and the equation is solved. 
Thus all three methods are applicable. There is a lot to be said for the use 
of induction and analogy. The inductive argument for the sum of the angles 
of a triangle can be carried out in a matter of minutes. The argument by 
analogy given above is also readily made. On the other hand, finding deduc-

46 
LOGIC AND MATHEMATICS 
tive proofs for these same conclusions might take weeks or might never be 
accomplished by the average person. As a matter of fact, we shall soon en­
counter some examples of conjectures for which the inductive evidence is 
overwhelming but for which no deductive proof has been thus far obtained 
even by the best mathematicians. 
Despite the usefulness and advantages of induction and analogy, mathe­
matics does not rely upon these methods to establish its conclusions. All 
mathematical proofs must be deductive. Each proof is a chain of deductive 
arguments, each of which has its premises and conclusion. 
Before examining the reasons for this restriction to deductive proof, we 
might contrast the method of mathematics with those of the physical and 
social sciences. The scientist feels free to draw conclusions by any method of 
reasoning and, for that matter, on the basis of observation, experimentation, 
and experience. He may reason by analogy as, for example, when he reasons 
about sound waves by observing water waves or when he reasons about a 
possible cure for a disease affecting human beings by testing the cure on 
animals. In fact reasoning by analogy is a powerful method in science. The 
scientist may also reason inductively: if he observes many times that hydrogen 
and oxygen combine to form water, he will conclude that this combination 
will always form water. At some stages of his work the scientist may also 
reason deductively and, in fact, even employ the concepts and methods of 
mathematics proper. 
To contrast further the method of mathematics with that of the scientist 
-and perhaps to illustrate just how stubborn the mathematician can be-we 
might consider a rather famous example. Mathematicians are concerned with 
whole numbers, or integers, and among these they distinguish the prime 
numbers. A prime is a number which has no integral divisors other than itself 
and 1. Thus 1 1  is a prime number, whereas 12 is not because it is divisible by 
2 for example. Now by actual trial one finds that each of the first few even 
numbers can be expressed as the sum of two prime numbers. For example, 
2 ® 1 + 1; 4 ­ 2 + 2; 6 ¯ 3 + 3; 8 ° 3 + 5; 1 0 ­ 3 + 7; . . . .  If one investi­
gates larger and larger even numbers, one finds without exception that every 
even number can be expressed as the sum of two primes. Hence by inductive 
reasoning one could conclude that every even number is the sum of two prime 
numbers. 
But the mathematician does not accept this conclusion as a theorem of 
mathematics because it has not been proved deductively from acceptable 
premises. The conjecture that every even number is the sum of two primes, 
known as Goldbach's hypothesis because it was first suggested by the 
eighteenth-century mathematician Christian Goldbach, is an unsolved problem 
of mathematics. The mathematician will insist on a deductive proof even if it 
takes thousands of years, as it literally has in some instances, to find oneޔ 
However a scientist would not hesitate to use this inductively well supported 
conclusion. 

MATHEMATICAL PROOF 
47 
Of course, the scientist should not be surprised to find that some of his 
conclusions are false because, as we have seen, induction and analogy do not 
lead to sure conclusions. But it does seem as though the scientist's procedure 
is wiser since he can take advantage of any method of reasoning which will 
help him advance his knowledge. The mathematician by comparison appears 
to be narrow-minded or shortsighted. He achieves a reputation for certainty, 
but at the price of limiting his results to those which can be established 
deductively. How wise the mathematician may be in his insistence on deduc­
tive proof we shaIl learn as we proceed. 
The decision to confine mathematical proof to deductive reasoning was 
made by the Greeks of the classical period. And they not only rejected all 
other methods of proof in mathematics, but they also discarded all the 
knowledge which the Egyptians and Babylonians had acquired over a period 
of four thousand years because it had only an empirical justification. Why 
did the Greeks do it' 
The intellectuals of the classical Greek period were largely absorbed in 
philosophy and these same men, because they possessed intellectual interests, 
were the very ones who developed mathematics as a system of thought. The 
lonians, the Pythagoreans, the Sophists, the Platonists, and the Aristotelians 
were the leading philosophers who gave mathematics its definitive form. The 
credit for initiating this step probably helongs to one school of Greek 
philosopher-mathematicians, known as the Ionian school. However, if credit 
can be assigned to any one person, it belongs to Thales, who lived about 600 
B.C. Though a native of Miletus, a Greek city in Asia Minor, Thales spent 
many years in Egypt as a merchant. There he learned what the Egyptians had 
to offer in mathematics and science, but apparently he was not satisfied, for he 
would accept no results that could not be established by deductive reasoning 
from clearly acceptable axioms. In his wisdom Thales perceived what we 
shaIl perceive as we follow the story of mathematics, that the obvious is far 
more suspect than the abstruse. 
Thales probably supplied the proof of many geometrical theorems. He 
acquired great fame as an astronomer and is believed to have predicted an 
eclipse of the sun in 585 B.C. A philosopher-astronomer-mathematician might 
readily be accused of being an impractical stargazer, but Aristotle tells us 
otherwise. In a year when olives promised to be plentiful, Thales shrewdly 
cornered all the oil presses to be found in Miletus and in Chios. When the 
olives were ripe for pressing, Thales was in a position to rent out the presses 
at his own price. Thales might perhaps have lived in history as a leading 
businessman, but he is far better known as the father of Greek philosophy and 
mathematics. From his time onward, deductive proof became the standard in 
mathematics. 
It is to be expected that philosophers would favor deductive reasoning. 
Whereas scientists select particular phenomena for observation and experimen­
tation and then draw conclusions by induction or analogy, philosophers are 

48 
LOGIC AND MATHEMATICS 
concerned with broad knowledge about man and the physical world. To 
establish universal truths, such as that man is basically good, that the world is 
designed, or that man's life has purpose, deductive reasoning from acceptable 
principles is far more feasible than induction or analogy. As Plato put it in his 
Republic, "If persons cannot give or receive a reason, they cannot attain that 
knowledge which, as we have said, man ought to have." 
There is another reason that philosophers favor deductive reasoning. These 
men seek truths, the eternal verities. We have seen that of all the methods of 
reasoning only deductive reasoning grants sure and exact conclusions. Hence 
this is the method which philosophers would almost necessarily adopt. Not 
only do induction and analogy fail to yield absolutely unquestionable conclu­
sions, but many Greek philosophers would not have accepted as facts the data 
with which these methods operate, because these are acquired by the senses. 
Plato stressed the unreliability of sensory perceptions. Empirical knowledge, 
as Plato put it, yields opinion only. 
The Greek preference for deduction had a sociological basis. Contrary to 
our own society wherein bankers and industrialists are respected most, in 
classical Greek society, the philosophers, mathematicians, and artists were the 
leading citizens. The upper class regarded earning a living as an unfortunate 
necessity. Work robbed man of time and energy for intellectual activities, 
the duties of citizenship and discussion. These Greeks did not hesitate to 
express their disdain for work and business. The Pythagoreans, who, as we 
shall see, delighted in the properties of numbers and applied numbers to the 
study of nature, derided the use of numbers in commerce. They boasted that 
they sought knowledge rather than wealth. Plato, too, maintained that knowl­
edge rather than trade was the goal in studying arithmetic. Freemen, he 
declared, who allowed themselves to become preoccupied with business should 
be punished, and a civilization which is concerned mainly with the material 
wants of man is no more than a "city of happy pigs." Xenophon, the famous 
Greek general and historian, says, "What are called the mechanical arts carry 
a social stigma and are rightly dishonored in our cities." Aristotle wanted an 
ideal society in which citizens would nOt have to practice any mechanical arts. 
Among the Boeotians, one of the independent tribes of Ancient Greece, those 
who defiled themselves with commerce were by law excluded from state 
positions for ten years. 
Who did the daily work of providing food, shelter, clothing, and the other 
necessities of life? Slaves and free men ineligible for citizenship ran the busi­
nesses and the households, did unskilled and technical work, managed the in­
dustries, and carried on the professions such as medicine. They produced 
even the articles of refinement and luxury. 
In view of this attitude of the Greek upper class towards commerce and 
trade, it is not hard to understand the classical Greek's preference for deduction. 
People who do not "live" in the workaday world can learn little from experi-

MATHEMATICAL PROOF 
49 
ence, and people who will not observe and use their hands to experiment will 
not have the facts on which to base reasoning by "nalogy or induction. In 
fact the institution of slavery in classical Greek society fostered a divorce of 
theory from practice and favored the development of speculative and deduc­
tive science and mathematics at the expense of experimentation and practical 
applications. 
Over and above the various cultural forces which inclined the Greeks 
toward deduction were a farsightedness and a wisdom which mark true genius. 
The Greeks were the first to recognize the power of reason. The mind was a 
faculty not only additional to the senses but more powerful than the senses. 
The mind can survey all the whole numbers, but the senses are limited to 
perceiving only a few at a time. The mind can encompass the earth and the 
heavens; the sense of sight is confined to a small angle of vision. Indeed the 
mind can predict future events which the senses of contemporaries wiII not 
live to perceive. This mental faculty could be exploited. The Greeks saw 
clearly that if man could obtain some truths, he could establish others entirely 
by reasoning, and these new truths, together with the original ones, enabled 
man to establish still other rruths. Indeed the possibilities would multiply at an 
enormous rate. Here was a means of acquiring knowledge which had been 
either overlooked or neglected. 
This was indeed the plan which the Greeks projected for mathematics. 
By starting with some truths about numbers and geometrical figures they 
could deduce others. A chain of deductions might lead to a significant new 
fact which would be labeled a theorem to call attention to its importance. 
Each theorem added to the stock of truths that could serve as premises for 
new deductive arguments, and so one could build an immense body of knowl­
edge about the basic concepts. 
Although the Greeks may have been guilty of overemphasizing the power 
of the mind unaided by experience and observation to obtain truths, there is 
no doubt that in insisting on deductive proof as the sole method, they rose 
above the practical level of carpenters, surveyors, farmers, and navigators. At 
the same time they elevated the subject of mathematics to a system of thought. 
Moreover the preference for reason which they exhibited gave this faculty the 
high prestige which it now enjoys and permitted it to exercise its true powers. 
When we have surveyed some of the creations of the mind that succeeding 
civilizations building on the Greek plan contributed, we shall appreciate the 
true depth of the Greek vision. 
EXERCISES 
I. Compare Greek and pre-Greek standards of proof in mathematics. Reread the 
relevant parts of Chapter 2. 
2. Distinguish science and mathematics with respect to ways of establishing con­
clusions. 

50 
LOGIC AND MATHEMATICS 
3. Explain the statement that the Greeks converted mathematics from an empirical 
science to a deductive system. 
4. Are the following deductive arguments valid? 
a) All even numbers are divisible by 4. Ten is an even number. Hence 10 IS 
divisible by 4. 
b) Equals divided by equals give equals. Dividing both sides of Jx = 6 by 
IS 
dividing cquals by equals. Hence x = 2. 
5. Does it foIlow from the fact that the square of any odd number is odd that the 
square of any even number is even? 
6. Criticize the argument: 
The square of every even number is evcn because 22 = 4, 42 = 16, 62 = 36, and 
it is obvious that the square of any larger even number also is even. 
7. If we accept the premises that the square of any odd number is odd and the 
square of any even number is even. does it follow deductively that if the square 
of a number is even. the number must be even? 
8. Why did the Greeks insist on deductive proof in mathematics? 
9. Let us take for granted that if a triangle has two equal sides, the opposite 
angles are equal and that we have a triangle in which all three sides are equal. 
Prove deductively that all three angles are equal in the triangle under considera­
tion. You may also use the premise that things equal to the same thing are equal 
to one another. 
10. How did the Greeks propose to obtain new truths from known ones? 
3-6 AXIOMS AND DEFINITIONS 
From our discussion of deductive reasoning we know that to apply such 
reasoning we must have premises. Hence the question arises, what premises 
does the mathematician use? Since the mathematician reasons about numbers 
and geometrical figures, he must of course have facts about these concepts. 
These cannot be obtained deductively because then there would have to be 
prior premises. and if one continued this process backward, there would be no 
starting point. The Greeks readily found premises. It seemed indisputable, for 
example, that two points determine one and only one line and that equals 
added to equals give equals. 
To the Greeks the premises on which mathematics was to be built were 
self-evident truths, and they called these premises axioms. Socrates and Plato 
believed, as did many later philosophers, that these truths were already in our 
minds at birth and that we had but to recall them. And since the Greeks be­
lieved that axioms were truths and since deductive reasoning yielded unques­
tionable conclusions, they also believed that theorems were truths. This view 
is no longer held, and we shall see later in this book why mathematicians 
abandoned it. We now know that axioms are suggested by experience and 
observation. Naturally, to be as certain as we can of these axioms we select 
those facts which seem clearest and most reliable in our experience. But we 

THE CREATION OF MATHEMATICS 
51 
must recognize that there is no guarantee that we have selected truths about 
the world. Some mathematicians prefer to use the word assumptions instead 
of axioms to emphasize this point. 
The mathematician also takes care to state his axioms at the outset and to 
be sure as he performs his reasoning that no assumptions or facts are used 
which were not so stated. There is an interesting story told by former Presi­
dent Charles W. Eliot of Harvard which illustrates the likelihood of intro­
ducing unwarranted premises. He entered a crowded restaurant and handed 
his hat to the doorman. When he came out, the doorman at once picked Eliot's 
hat out of hundreds on the racks and gave it to him. He was amazed that the 
doorman could remember so well and asked him, "How did you know that was 
my hat?" "I didn't," replied the doorman. "Why, then, did you hand it to 
me?" The doorman's reply was, "Because you handed it to me, sir." 
Undoubtedly no harm would have been done if the doorman had assumed 
that the hat he returned to President Eliot belonged to the man. But the 
mathematician interested in obtaining conclusions about the physical world 
might be wasting his time if he unwittingly introduced an assumption that he 
had no right to make 
There is one other element in the logical structure of mathematics about 
which we shall say a few words now and return to in a later chapter (Chap­
ter 20). Like other studies mathemarics uses definitions. Whenever we have 
occasion to use a concept whose description requires a lengthy statement, we 
introduce a single word or phrase to replace that lengthy statement. For 
example, we may wish to talk about the figure which consists of three dis­
tinct points which do not lie on the same straight line and of the line segments 
joining these points. It is convenient to introduce the word triangle to repre­
sent this long description. Likewise the word circle represents the set of all 
points which are at a fixed distance from a definite point. The definite point 
is called the center, and the fixed distance is called the radius. Definitions 
promote brevity. 
EXERCISES 
1. What belief did the Greeks hold about the axioms of mathematics? 
2. Summarize [he changes which the Greeks made in the nature of mathematics. 
3. Is it fair to say that mathematics is the child of philosophy? 
3·7 THE CREATION OF MATHEMATICS 
Because mathematical proof is strictly deductive and merely reasonable or 
appealing arguments may not be used to establish a conclusion, mathematics 
has been described as a deductive science, or as the science which derives 
necessary conclusions, that is, conclusions which necessarily or inevitably 

52 
LOGIC AND MATHEMATICS 
follow from the axioms. This description of mathematics is incomplete. 
Mathematicians must also discover what to prove and how to go about estab­
lishing proofs. These processes are also part of mathematics and they are 
not deductive. 
How does the mathematician discover what to prove and the deductive 
arguments that lead to the conclusions? The most fertile source of mathemat­
ical ideas is nature herself. Mathematics is devoted to the study of the physical 
world, and simple experience or the more careful scrutiny of nature suggests 
idea after idea. Let us consider here a few simple examples. Once mathema­
ticians had decided to devote themselves to geometric forms, it was only 
natural that such questions should arise as, what are the area, perimeter, and 
sum of the angles of common figures? Moreover, it is even possible to see 
how the precise statement of the theorem to be proved would follow from 
direct experience with physical objects. The mathematician might measure 
the sum of the angles of various triangles and find that these measurements all 
yield results close to 180°. Hence the suggestion that· the sum of the angles 
in every triangle is 1800 occurs as a possible theorem. To decide the question, 
which has more area, a polygon or a circle having the same perimeter, one 
might cut out cardboard figures and weigh them. The relative weights would 
suggest the statement of the theorem to be proved. 
After some theorems have been suggested by direct physical problems, 
others are readily conceived by generalizing or varying the conditions. Thus 
knowing the problem of determining the sum of the angles of a triangle, one 
might ask, What is the sum of the angles of a quadrilateral, a pentagon, and so 
forth? That is, once the mathematician begins an investigation which is sug­
gested by a physical problem, he can easily find new problems which go be­
yond the original one. 
In the domains of arithmetic and algebra direct calculation with numbers, 
which is analogous to measurement in geometry, wiIl suggest possible theorems. 
Anyone who has played with integers, for example, has doubtless observed the 
following facts: 
1 =  
I ,  
+ 3 = 4 =  22, 
+ 3 + 5 
9 =  32 , 
+ 3 + 5 + 7 
1 6  = 42 , 
We note that each number on the right is the square of the number of odd 
numbers appearing on the left; thus in the fourth line, there are four numbers 
on the left side, and the right side is 42• The general result which these cal­
culations suggest is that if the first " odd numbers were on the left side, then 
the sum would be ,,2. Of course, this possible theorem is not proved by the 

THE CREATION OF MATHEMATICS 
53 
above calculations. Nor could it ever be proved by such calculations, for no 
mortal man could make the infinite set of computations required to establish 
the conclusion for every n. The calculations do, however, give the mathe­
matician something to work on. 
These simple illustrations of how observation, measurement, and calcu­
lation suggest possible theorems are not too striking or very profound. We 
shall see in the course of later work how physical problems suggest more 
significant mathematical theorems. However, experience, measurement, cal­
culation, and generalization do not include the most fertile source of possible 
theorems. And it is especially true in seeking methods of proof that more 
than routine techniques must be utilized. In both endeavors the most im­
portant source is the creative act of the human mind. 
 
IJ 
C 
Fig. 3-7 
Let us consider the matter of proof. Suppose one has discovered by 
measurements that the sum of the angles of various triangles is 1800• One 
must now prove this result deductively. No obvious method will do the job. 
Some new idea is required, and the reader who remembers his elementary 
geometry will recall that the proof is usually made by drawing a line through 
one vertex (A in Fig. 3-7) and parallel to the opposite side. It then turns out 
as a consequence of a previously established theorem on parallel lines that the 
angles I and 2 are equal, as are the angles 3 and 4. However the angles I, 3, 
and the angle A of the triangle itself do add up to 180", and so the same is true 
for the angles of the triangle. This method of proof is not routine. The idea 
of drawing the line through A must be supplied by the mind. Some methods 
of proof seem so devious and artificial that they have provoked critical com­
ments. The philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer called Euclid's proof of the 
Pythagorean theorem "a mouse-trap proof" and "a proof walking on stilts, 
nay, a mean, underhand proof." 
The above example has been offered to emphasizc the fact that ingenious 
mathematical work must be done in finding methods of proofs even after the 
question of what to prove is disposed of. In the search for a method of proof, 
as in finding what to prove, the mathematician must use audacious imagination, 
insight, and creative ability. His mind must see possible lines of attack where 
others would not. In the domains of algebra, calculus, and advanced analysis 
especially, the first-rate mathematician depends upon the kind of inspiration 
that we usually associate with the creation of music, literature, or art. The 
composer feels that he has a theme which when properly developed will pro-

54 
LOGIC AND j\JATHEi\IATICS 
duce true music. Experience and a knowledge of music aid him in arriving at 
this conviction. Similarly, the mathematician surmises that he has a conclusion 
which will follow from the axioms of mathematics. Experience and knowledge 
may guide his thoughts into the proper channels. Modifications of one sorr or 
another may he required before a correct proof and a satisfactory statement of 
the new theorem are achieved. But essentially both mathematician and com­
poser are moved by an afflatus which enables them to see the final edifice 
before a single stone is laid. 
We do not know just what mental processes may lead to correct insight 
any more than we know how it was possible for Keats to write fine poetry 
or why Rembrandt was able to turn out fine paintings. One might say of 
mathematical creation what P. W. Bridgman, the noted physicist, has said of 
scientific method. that it consists of "doing one's damnedest with one's mind, 
no holds barred." There is no logic or infallible guide which tells the mind 
how to think. The vcry fact that many great mathematicians have tackled a 
problem and failed and that another comes along and solves it shows that the 
mind has something to contribute. 
The preceding discussion of the creation of mathematics should correct 
several mistaken popular impressions. When creating a mathematical proof, 
the mind does not see the cold, ordered arguments which one reads in texts, 
but rather it perceives an idea or a scheme which when properly formulated 
constitutes the deductive proof. The formal proof, so to speak, merely sanc­
tions the conquest already made by the intuition. Secondly, the deductive 
proof is not the preferable form by which to grasp the idea or method em­
ployed. In fact the deductive argument often conceals the idea because the 
logical form is not perspicuous to the intuition. At the very least the details 
of the arguments obscure the main threads. The value of the deductive or­
ganization of the proof is that it enables the creator and the reader to test the 
arguments by the standards of exact reasoning. Thirdly, there is the prevalent 
but mistaken notion that scientists and mathematicians must keep their minds 
open and unbiased in pursuing an investigation. They are not supposed to 
prejudge the conclusion. Actually the mathematician must first decide what 
to prove, and this conclusion not only does bur must precede the search for 
the proof, or else he would not know where to head. This is not to say that 
the mathematician may not sometimes make a false conjecture. If he does, his 
search for a proof will fail or in the course of the search he will realize that 
he cannot prove what he is after, and he will correct his conjecture. But in 
any case he knows what he is trying to prove. 
EXERCISES 
I. Consider the parallelogram ABeD (Fig. 3-8). By definition, the opposite sides 
are parallel. Now introduce the diagonal BD. Does observation suggest a 
possible theorem relating the triangles ABD and BDC? 

THE CREATION OF MATHEJ\lATICC; 
55 
Ar---------B 
A _--;;E_:_-,U 
F 
H 
/),""'-----------'c 
D L-
--
------ɍť
--
--
--
--
--ɎC 
G 
Fig. 3-8 
Fig. 3-9 
2. Consider any quadrilateral ABeD (Fig. 3-9) and the figure formed by joining 
the mid-points E, F, G, H of the sides of the quadrilateral. Does observation or 
intuition suggest any significant fact about the quadrilateral EFGH? 
3. The formula n2 - n + 41 IS supposed to yield primes for various values of n. 
Thus when n = I, 
1' - 1  + 41 = 41, 
and this is a prime. When n = 2, 
2' - 2 + 41 = 43, 
and this is a prime. Test the formula for n = 3 and n = 4. Are the resulting 
values of the formula primes? Have you proved, then, that the formula always 
yields primes? 
4. Can you specify conditions under which two yuadrilaterals will be congruent, 
that is, have the same size and shape? 
5. The following lines show some calculations with the sum of the cubes of whole 
numbers: 
13 = I, 
13 + 23 = 1 + 8 = 9 = 32 = (I + 2)2, 
13 + 23 + 33 = 1 + 8 + 27 = 36 = 62 = (1 + 2 + 3)2 
13 + 23 + 33 + 43 = 1 + 8 + 27 + 64 = 100 = 102 
= (1 + 2 + 3 + 4)2. 
What generalization do these few calculations suggest? 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
1. What basis did the Egyptians and Babylonians have for believing in the cor­
rectness of their mathematical conclusions? 
2. Compare Greek and pre-Greek understanding of the concepts of mathematics. 
3. What was the Greek plan for establishing mathematical conclusions? 

56 
LOGIC AND MATHEMATICS 
4. ]n what sense is mathematics a creation of the Greeks rather than of the 
Egyptians and the Babylonians? 
5. Suppose we accept the premises that all professors are intelligent people and 
all professors are learned people. Which of the following conclusions is 
validly deduced? 
a) Some intelligent people are learned. 
b) Some learned people are intelligent. 
c) All intelligent people are learned. 
d) All leamed people are intelligent. 
6. Suppose we accept the premises that all college srudents are wise, and no pro­
fessors are colIege students. Which of the following conclusions is validly 
deduced? 
a) No professors are wise. 
b) Some professors are wise. 
c) All professors are wise. 
7. ]s the foIIowing argument valid? 
All parallelograms are quadrilaterals, and figure ABCD is a quadrilateral. 
Hence figure ABCD is a parallelogram. 
S. What conclusion can you deduce from the premises, 
Every successful srudent must work hard, 
and 
John does not work hard? 
9. Smith says, 
If it rains I go to the movies. 
If Smith went to the movies, what can you conclude deductively? 
10. Smith says, 
] go to the movies only if it rains. 
If Smith went to the movies, what can you conclude deductively? 
Topics for Further Investigation 
To pursue any of these topics use the books listed below under Recommended 
Reading. 
1. The life and work of the Pythagoreans 
2. The life and work of Euclid 
Recommended Reading 
BELL, ERIC T.: The Development of Mathematics, 2nd ed., Chaps. 2 and 3, McGraw­
Hill Book Co., N.Y., 1945. 
BELL, ERIC T.: Men of Mathematics, Simon and Schuster, New York, 1937. 

THE CREATION OF MATHEMATICS 
57 
CLAGETT, MARSHALL: Greek Science in Antiquity, Chap. 2, Abelard-Schuman, Inc., 
New York, 1955. 
COHEN, MORRIS R. and E. !·..J"AGEL: An Introduction to Logic and Scientific Method, 
Chaps. 1 through 5, Harcourt Brace and Co., New York, 1934. 
COOLIDGE, j. L.: The Mathematics of Great Amateurs, Chap. 1, Dover Publications, 
Inc., New York, 1963. 
HAMILTON, EDITH: The Greek Way to Western Civilization, Chaps. 1 through 3, 
The New American Library, New York, 1948. 
JEANS, SIR JAMES: The Growth of Physical Science, 2nd ed., Chap. 2, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, 1951. 
NEUGEBAUER, OTTO: The Exact Sciences in Antiquity, Princeton University Press, 
Princeton, 1952. 
SMITH, DAVID EUGENE: History of Mathematics, Vol. 1., Dover Publications, Inc., 
New York, 1958. 
STRUIK, DIRK j.: A Concise History of Mathematics, Dover Publications, Inc., New 
York, 1948. 
TAYLOR, HENRY OSBORN: Ancient Ideals, 2nd ed., Vol. I, Chaps. 7 through 13, The 
Macmillan Co., New York, 1913. 
WEDBERG, ANDERS: PLato's Philosophy of Mathematics, Almqvist and Wiksell, StOck­
holm, 1955 (for students of philosophy). 

CHAPTER 4 
NUMBER: THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT 
A marvelous neutrality have these things Mathematical, and also a strange 
participation between things supernatural, immortal, intellectual, simple, 
and indivisible, and things natural, mortal, sensible, compounded and 
divisible. 
JOHN DEE (1527-1608) 
4-1 INTRODUCTION 
Just as we are inclined to accept the sun, moon, and stars as our birthright and 
do not appreciate the grandeur, the mystery, and the knowledge which can be 
gleaned from the contemplation of the heavens, so are we inclined to accept 
our number system. There is, however, this difference. Many of us would 
not claim the latter and would gladly sell it for a mess of pottage. Because we 
ace forced to learn about numbers and operations with numbers while we are 
still too young to appreciate them-a preparation for life which hardly excites 
our interest in the future-we grow up believing that numbers are drab and 
uninteresting. But the number system warrants attention not only as the basis 
of mathematics, but because it contains weighty and beautiful ideas which lend 
themselves to powerful applications. 
Among past civilizations, the Greeks best appreciated the wonder and 
power of the concept of number. They were, of course, a people with great 
intellectual perception, but perhaps because they viewed numbers abstractly, 
they saw more clearly their true nature. The very fact that one can abstract 
from many diverse collections of objects a property such as "fiveness" struck 
the Greeks as a marvelous discovery. If one may use the ridiculous to ac­
centuate the sublime, one may say that the Greek delight in numbers was the 
rational counterpart of the hysteria which many young and old Americans 
experience when they encounter numbers in the form of baseball scores and 
batting averages. 
4-2 WHOLE NUMBERS AND FRACTIONS 
The first Greeks who, to our knowledge, expressed their satisfaction with 
numbers and propounded a philosophy based on numbers which is extremely 
58 

WHOLE NUMBERS AND FRACTIONS 
59 
alive and vital today were the Pythagoreans. This group was founded in the 
middle of the sixth century B.C. by Pythagoras. We know rather little that is 
certain about this man. However, it seems very likely that he was born in 
569 B.C. in a Greek settlement on the island of Samos in the Aegean Sea. Like 
many other Greeks he traveled to Egypt and to the Near East to learn what 
these older civilizations had to offer, and then settled in Croton, another Greek 
city in southern Italy. Pythagoras and his followers were among the early 
founders of the great Greek civilization, and so it is not surprising to find that 
the rational attitude which characterizes the Greeks was still surrounded in his 
times with mystical and religious doctrines prevalent in Egypt and its eastern 
neighbors. In fact the Pythagoreans were a religious sect as well as students 
of philosophy and nature. 
Membership in the group was restricted, and the members were pledged 
to secrecy. Among their religious doctrines was the belief that the soul was 
tainted by the body. To purify the soul they maintained celibacy; their 
religious practices were also supposed to be efficacious in purifying the soul. 
At death the soul was reincarnated in another human or an animal. Like most 
mystics they observed certain taboos. They would not touch a white cock, 
walk on the highways, use iron to stir a fire, or leave the marks of ashes on a 
pot. 
The secrecy of the group, its aloofness, and an attempted interference in 
the political affairs of Croton finally aroused the people of this city to drive 
out the Pythagoreans. We do not know for certain what happened to Pythag­
oras. One story has it that he fled to Metapontum, another Greek city in 
southern Italy, and was murdered there. However, the Pythagoreans con­
tinued to be influential in Greek intellectual life. One of their notable mem­
bers was the philosopher Plato. 
The Pythagoreans were impressed with numbers and, because they were 
mystics, attached to the whole numbers meanings and significances which we 
now regard as childish. Thus, they considered the number "one" as the es­
sence or very nature of reason, for reason could produce only one consistent 
body of doctrines. The number "two" was identified with opinion, clearly 
because the very meaning of opinion implies the possibility of an opposing 
opinion, and t:ms of at least two. "Four" was identified with justice because 
it is the first number which is the product of equals. Of course, one can also 
be thought of as 1 times 1, but to the Pythagoreans one was not a number in 
the full sense because it did not represent quantity. The Pythagoreans repre­
sented numbers as dots in sand or by pebbles, and for each number the dots 
or pebbles had a special arrangement. Thus the number "four" was pictured as 
four dots suggesting a square, and so the square and justice were also linked. 
Foursquare and square shooter still mean a person who acts justly. "Five" 
signified marriage because it was the union of the first masculine number, three, 
and the first feminine number, two. (Odd numbers were masculine and even 

60 
NUMBER: THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT 
numbers feminine.) The number "seven" represented health and "eight," 
friendship or love. 
We shall not pursue all the ideas which the Pythagoreans developed about 
numbers. What is significant about their work is that they were the first to 
study properties of whole numbers. As we shall see in a later chapter, they also 
possessed the vision of deep mystics and saw that numbers could be used to 
represent and even embody the essence of natural phenomena. 
The speculations and results obtained by the Pythagoreans about whole 
numbers and ratios of whole numbers, or fractions as we prefer to call them, 
were the beginning of a long and involved development of arithmetic as a 
science as opposed to arithmetic as a tool for daily applications. During the 
2500 years since the Pythagoreans first called attention to the importance of 
numbers, man has not only learned to better appreciate the idea but has in­
vented excellent methods of writing quantity and of performing the four 
operations of arithmetic, i.e., ambition, distraction, uglification, and derision, 
as Lewis Carroll called them. While these methods of writing and operating 
with numbers are largely familiar, there are a few facts which are worthy of 
comment. 
One of the most important members of our present number system is the 
mathematical representation of no quantity, that is, zero. We are accustomed 
to this number and yet usually fail to appreciate two facts about it. The first 
is that this member of our number system came rather late. The idea of using 
zero was conceived by the Hindus and, like other of their ideas, reached 
Europe through the Arabs. It had not occurred to earlier civilizations, even 
to the Greeks, that it would be useful to have a number which represents the 
absence of any objects. Connected with this late appearance of the number is 
the second significant fact, namely, that zero must be distinguished from noth­
ing. Undoubtedly it was the inability of earlier peoples to perceive this dis­
tinction which accounts for their failure to introduce the zero. That zero 
must be distinguished from nothing is easily seen from several examples. A 
student's grade in a course he never rook is no grade or nothing. He may, 
however, have the grade of zero in a course he has taken. If a person has no 
account in a bank, his balance is nothing. If he has a bank account, he may 
very well have a balance of zero. 
Because zero is a number, we may operate with it; for example, we may 
add zero to another number. Thus 5 + 0 = 5. By contrast 5 + nothing is 
meaningless or nothing. The only restriction on zero as a number is that one 
cannot divide by zero. Division by zero does, so to speak, produce nothing. 
Because so many false steps in mathematics result from division by zero, it is 
well to understand clearly why we cannot do this. The answer to a problem 
of division, say !, is some number which when multiplied by the divisor 
yields the dividend. In our example, 3 is the answer because 3 . 2 = 6. Hence 

WHOLE NUMBERS AND FRACfIONS 
61 
the answer to ޕ should be a number which when multiplied by 0 gives 5. 
However, any number multiplied by 0 gives 0 and not 5. Thus, there is no 
answer to the problem of ޖ. In the case of * the answer should be some 
number which when multiplied by 0 yields the dividend O. However, any 
number may then serve as a quotient because any number multiplied by 0 gives 
O. But mathematics cannot tolerate such an ambiguous situation. If ޗ arises 
and any number may serve as an answer, we do not know what number to 
take and hence are not aided. It is as if we asked a person for directions to 
some place and he replied, Take any direction. 
With the availability of zero, mathematicians were finally able to develop 
our present method of writing whole numbers. First of all we count in units 
and represent large quantities in tens, tens of tens, tens of tens of tens, etc. 
Thus we represent two hundred and fifty-two by 252. The left-hand 2 means, 
of course, twO tens of tens; the 5 means 5 times 10; and the right-hand 2 means 
2 units. The concept of zero makes such a system of writing quantities prac­
tical since it enables us to distinguish 22 and 202. Because ten plays such a 
fundamental role, our number system is called the decimal system, and ten is 
called the base. The lise of ten resulted most likely from the fact that man 
counted on his fingers and, when he had used the fingers on his two hands, 
considered the number arrived at as a larger unit. 
Because the position of an integer determines the quantity it represents, 
the principle involved is called positional notation. The decimal system of 
positional notation is due to the Hindus; however, the same scheme was used 
two millenniums earlier by the Babylonians, but with base 60 and in more 
limited form since they did not have zero. 
The operations of arithmetic, addition, subtraction, multiplication, and 
division, are of course familiar to us, but it is perhaps not recognized that 
these operations are quite sophisticated and remarkably efficient. They date 
back to Greek times and gradually evolved, as improvements in the methods 
of writing numbers and the concept of zero were introduced. The Europeans 
picked up the methods from the Arabs. Previously the Europeans had used 
the Roman system of writing numbers, and the operations were based on that 
system. Partly because these latter methods were relatively cumbersome and 
partly because education was limited to a few people, those who acquired the 
art of calculation were regarded as skilled mathematicians. In fact the pro­
cesses defied the average man so much that it seemed to him that those pos­
sessed of the ability must have magical powers. Good calculators were called 
practitioners of the "Black Art." 
To appreciate the efficiency of our present methods we would have to 
learn the older ones and even acquire some facility in them, to make the 
comparison a fair one. But we cannot spare the time and effort. Perhaps the 
one point we should emphasize is how much our methods of arithmetic depend 

62 
NUMBER: THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT 
upon positional notation. This can be seen even in a simple problem of ad­
dition. To add 387 and 359 say, the written work is 
387 
359 
746 
However, in performing this work, we think as follows. We add the units 
7 and 9, the "tens" quantities 8 and 5, and the "hundreds" 3 and 3, separately. 
When we add the 7 and 9, we obtain 16. We recognize that 16 is 1 · 10 + 6, 
and so we add the I ·  10 to the 1 3 · 10 already obtained from the 8 and 5. We 
say that we "carry" the I ·  10 over, and instead of I l · 10 we obtain 14 · 10. 
However, 14 · 10 is (10 + 4) · 10 or 1 · 10' + 4 · 10. Thus we write 4 in the 
tens' column, add the I ·  10' to the 6 · 10' already obtained from the 3 and 3, 
and arrive at 7 ·  10'. All these steps are usually executed rather mechanically 
by writing the appropriate numbers in the units', tens', and hundreds' places 
and by using the process called carrying. Were we to analyze the processes 
of subtraction, multiplication, and division, we would again see how the steps 
which we learn mechanically in elementary school are just the skeletal pro­
cesses of thinking suited to positional notation in base ten. 
A word about fractions may also be in order. The natural method of 
writing fractions, for example, ! or ގ, to express parts of a whole presents no 
difficulties of comprehension. However the operations with fractions do seem 
to be somewhat arbitrary and mysterious. To add Ϲ and t, say, we go through 
the following process: 
i + t = H + H = H' 
What we have done is to express each fraction in an equivalent form such 
that the denominators are now alike, and then add the numerators. We are 
not required by law to add fractions in this manner. It would, of course, be 
much simpler if we agreed to add fractions by adding the numerators and 
adding the denominators so that 
ޏ+ t = l 
As a matter of fact, when we multiply two fractions, we do multiply the 
numerators and multiply the denominators so that it does seem as though the 
mathematicians prefer to be unnecessarily complicated about the addition of 
fractions. 
The explanation of this seeming mathematical idiosyncrasy is simple: the 
operations with fractions are formulated to fit experience. When one has t 
of a pie and t of a pie, he has in all not ! but H of a pie. In other words, if 
mathematical concepts and operations are to fit experience, the nature of the 
operations is forced upon us. In the case of multiplication of fractions it is 

WHOLE NUMBERS AND FRACTlONS 
63 
correct that multiplying the numerators and multiplying the denominators will 
yield the fraction which represents the physical result. Thus suppose we had 
to find  of t, that is  + We think of i as 2 . }. Now 
Then 
1 , 7 _
L ll _ -'L 
"3 
'5 - "3  15 -
I S '  
2 . 1 . 1. - 2 . 7  _
ll 
"3 5 -
15 - n' 
The same result is obtained by multiplying the original numerators and multi­
plying the original denominators. 
The operation of dividing one fraction by another presents a little more 
difficulty, To see how we arrive at the correct process let us start with some 
simple examples. Suppose we had to answer the question of how many one­
thirds of a pie are in 2 pies. Mathematically this question is formulated as how 
much is 
We should note that one bar is larger than the other and the longer bar sepa­
rates the numerator, the 2, from the denominator ސ .. Now, we know on phys­
ical grounds that we can obtain 6 one-thirds from 2 pies. We can obtain this 
answer arithmetically hy inverting the denominator ! and multiplying the 
inverse into the numerator 2. That is, 
2 
! 
f ' f  = t = 6. 
Now let us complicate the problem slightly. How many two-thirds of a 
pie are contained in 2 pies? Again this question is formulated mathematically 
as 
2 
We know on physical grounds that there are 3 two-thirds of a pie in 2 pies. 
We can obtain this answer arithmetically by inverting the denominator and 
multiplying this inverse fraction into the numerator. Thus, 
2 
- = f ' 4  = ! = 3. 
 
Now let us comRlicate the problem still more. We would certainly agree 
that 2 pies are the same as .If pies. If thetefore we had to answer the question 
of how many two-thirds of a pie are contained in .1.f pies, we would know 

64 
NUMBER: THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT 
from the preceding example that the answer is 3. How could we obtain this 
answer directly? The question is, how much is 
Let us invert the denominator and multiply the inverse into the numerator. 
Thus 
Again we see that the process of inverting the denominator and multiplying it 
into the numerator gives the result which we know on physical grounds is 
correct. 
The significant point, then, is that the rule "to divide one fraction by an­
other, invert the denominator and multiply this inverse into the numerator" 
is designed to make the mathematical operation give a result which fits ex­
perience. This is, of course, the same principle which applies to the other 
operations. Logically, we may say that we define the operations to be what 
we have just illustrated for addition, multiplication and division, and in our 
purely mathematical definitions we do not say anything about agreement with 
physical facts. Bur, of course, the definitions would be pointless if they did 
not give physically correct results. 
Fractions, like the whole numbers, can be written in positional notation. 
Thus 
1 
_ __2ɐ__ 
_ _"-"- + --'--
_ 
2 + 
5
.
 
'4 - T01)" - 1lITi 
1lITi - 10 
TIm 
If we now agree to suppress the powers of 10, that is 10, 100, and higher 
powers where they occur, then we can write :l = 0.25. The decimal point 
reminds us that the first number is really ޑ, the second Th, and so forth. 
The Babylonians had employed positional notation for fractions, but they 
used base 60 rather than base 10, just as they had for whole numbers. The 
decimal base for fractions was introduced by sixteenth-century European 
algebraists. Of course, the operations with fractions can also be carried out in 
decimal form. 
The disappointing feature of the decimal representation of fractions is that 
some simple fractions cannot be represented as decimals with a finite number 
of digits. Thus when we seek to express l as a decimal, we find that neither 
0.3, nor 0.33, nor 0.333, and so on, suffices. All one can say in this and similar 
cases is that by carrying more and more decimal digits one comes closer and 
closer to the fraction, but no finite number of digits will ever be the exact 
answer. This fact is expressed by the notation 
i = 0.333 . . .  , 

IRRATIONAL NUMBERS 
65 
where the dots indicate that we must keep on adding threes to approach the 
fraction * more and more closely. 
From the standpoint of applications the fact that some fractions cannot 
be expressed as decimals with a finite number of digits does not matter because 
we can always carry enough digits to obtain an answer as accurate as the 
application requires. 
EXERCISES 
1. What is the principle of positional notation? 
2. Why is the number zero almost indispensable in the system of positional notation? 
3. What is the meaning of the statement that zero is a number? 
4. What two methods are there of representing fractions? 
5. What principle determines the definitions of the operations with fractions? 
4-3 IRRATIONAL NUMBERS 
The Pythagoreans, as we noted earlier, were the first to appreciate the very 
concept of number, and sought to employ numbers to describe the basic 
phenomena of the physical and social worlds. Numbers to the Pythagoreans 
were also interesting in and for themselves. Thus they liked square numbers, 
that is, numbers such as 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, and so on, and observed that the sums 
of cerrain pairs of square numbers, or perfect squares, are also square numbers. 
For example, 9 + 16 = 25, 25 + 144 = 169, and 36 + 64 = lOa. These relation­
ships can also be written as 
32 + 42 = 52, 
52 + 122 = [ J2, 
and 
62 + 82 = !O2. 
The three numbers whose squares furnish such equalities are today called 
Pythagorean triples. Thus 3, 4, 5 constitute a Pythagorean triple because 
32 + 4' = 5'. 
The Pythagoreans liked these triples so much 
because, among other features, they have an inter­
esting geometrical interpretation. If the two smaller 
numbers are the lengths of the sides or arms of a 
right triangle, then the third one is the length of the 
hypotenuse (Fig. 4-1 ). Just how the Pythagoreans 
knew this geometrical fact is not clear, but assert it 
they did. They also claimed that in any right tri­
angle, the square of the length of one arm added to 
the square of the length of the other gives the square 
of the length of the hypotenuse. This more general 
assertion is still called the Pythagorean theorem and 
n 
3 
Fig. 4-1 
13 
12 
5 

66 
NUMBER: THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT 
a proof of it, such as we learn in high-sޒhool geometry, was given about 200 
years later by Euclid. Pythagoras is said to have been so overjoyed with this 
theorem that he sacrificed an ox to celebrate its discovery. 
This theorem proved to be the undoing of a central doctrine in the 
Pythagorean philosophy and caused woe and misery to many mathematicians. 
But before we pursue this story, we should look into a few simple properties 
of the whole numbers which are embodied in the following exercises. 
EXERCISES 
I. Prove that the square of any even number is an even number. [Suggestion: By 
definition every even number contains 2 as a factor.] 
2. Prove that the square of any odd number is an odd number. [Suggestion: Every 
odd number ends in I, 3, 5, 7, or 9.] 
3. Let a stand for a whole number. Prove that if a2 is even, then a is even. [Sug­
gestion: Use the result in Exercise 2.] 
4. Establish the truth or falsity of the assenion that the sum of any two square 
numbers is a square number. 
There are tragedies in mathematics also, and one of these struck the very 
group of mathematicians who deserved a better fate. The Pythagoreans had 
constructed, aޓ least to their own satisfaction, a philosophy which asserted that 
all natural phen0mena and all social and ethical concepts were in essence just 
whole numbers or relationships among whole numbers. But one day it oc­
curred to a member of the group to examine the seemingly simplest case of the 
Pythagorean theorem. Suppose each arm of a right triangle (Fig. 4-2) is 1 
unit in length; how long, he asked, is the hypotenuse? The Pythagorean 
theorem says that the square of (the length of) the hy-
potenuse equals the sum of the squares of the arms. 
Hence if we call c the unknown length of the hypote-
nuse, then the theorem says that 
v2 
(' = 1 ' + 1' 
or 
Fig. 4-2 
Now 2 is not a square number, that is, a perfect square, and so c is not a 
whole number. But it certainly seemed reasonable to this Pythagorean that 
c should be a fraction; that is; there should be a fraction whose square is 2. 
Even the simple fraction .g. comes close to being the correct value because 
(t)' = H, and this is almost 2. However, simple trial does not easily yield a 
fraction whose square is 2. Hence this Pythagorean became worried, and he 
decided to investigate the question of whether there is a fraction whose square 

IRRATIONAL NUMBERS 
67 
is 2. We shall examine his reasoning which, as far as we know, is the same as 
that given in Euclid's famous work on geometry, the Elements. 
The number c which we seek to determine is one whose square is 2. Let 
us denote it by Vi. All we mean by this symbol is that it represents a number 
whose square is 2. And now let us suppose that Vi is a fraction a/ b, where a 
and b are whole numbers. Moreover, to make matters simpler, let us suppose 
that any factors common to a and b are cancelled. Thus if a/ b were t, for 
example, we would cancel the common factor 2 and write it as !. Hence we 
have assumed so far that 
(I) 
and that a and b have no common factors. 
If equation (1) is correct, then by squaring both sides, a step which utilizes 
the axiom that equals multiplied by equals give equals (because we multiply 
the left side by'Vi and the right side by a/ b), we obtain 
a2 
2 = ­
b2 
Again by employing the axiom that equals multiplied by equals yield equals, 
we may multiply both sides of this last equation by b2 and write 
2b2 = a2• 
(2) 
The left side of this equation is an even number because it contains 2 as a 
factor. Hence the right side must also be an even number. But if a2 is even, 
then, according to Exercise 3 above, a must be even. If a is even, it must 
contain 2 as a factor. That is, a = 2d, where d is some whole number. If we 
substitute this value of a in (2) we obtain 
2b2 = (ld)2 = 2d · 2d = 4d2. 
(3) 
Since then 
2b2 = 4d2, 
we may divide both sides of this equation by 2 and obtain 
b2 = 2d2• 
(4) 
We now see that b2 is an even number and so, by again appealing to the result 
in Exercise 3, we find that b is an even number. 
What we have shown in the above argument is that if Vi = a/ b, then a 
and b must be even numbers. But at the very outset we had cancelled any 
common factors in a and b; yet we find that a and b still contain 2 as a com-

68 
NUMBER: THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT 
mon factor. This result contradicts the fact that a and b have no common 
factors. 
Why do we arrive at a contradiction? Since our reasoning is correct, the 
only possibility is that the assumption that V2 equals a fraction is not correct. 
In other words. VI cannot be a ratio of two whole numbers. 
This proof is so ncat that one can almost believe the legend that Pythag­
oras sacrificed an ox in honor of its creation. But there are at least two reasons 
for discrediting this tale. The first is that if all the legends telling of Pythagoras 
sacrificing an ox were true, he could not have had time for mathematics. The 
second reason is that the above proof was not a triumph for the Pythagoreans 
but a disaster. The symbol V2 is a number because it represents the length 
of a line, namely the hypotenuse of the triangle in Fig. 4-2. But this number 
is not a whole number or a fraction. The Pythagoreans had, however, devel­
oped an embracing philosophy which asserted that everything in the universe 
reduced to whole numbers. Clearly, then, this philosophy was inadequate. 
Indeed the existence of numbers such as V2 was such a serious threat to the 
Pythagorean philosophy that another legend, more credible, states that the 
Pythagoreans. who were at sea when the above discovery was made, threw 
overboard the member who made it, and pledged to keep the discovery secret. 
But secrets will out, and later Greeks not only learned that V2 is neither 
a whole number nor a fraction, but they discovered that there is an indefinitely 
large collection of other numbers which are not whole numbers or fractions. 
Thus YJ, ys, 0, and, more generally, the square root of any number which 
is not a perfect square. the cube root of any number which is not a perfect 
cuhe, and so on, are numbers which are not whole numbers or fractions. The 
number 7f, which is the ratio of the circumference of any circle to its diameter, 
is also neither a whole number nor a fraction. All these new numbers are called 
irrational numbers, the word "irrational" now meaning that these numbers 
cannot be expressed as ratios of whole numbers, although in Pythagorean times 
it meant unmentionable or unknowable. 
If these irrational numbers are really so common and represent lengths of 
sides of triangles and circumferences of circles in terms of the diameters, why 
weren't they encountered before? Didn't the Babylonians and Egyptians run 
across them? They did. But since they were concerned only with having 
numbers serve their practical purposes, they used convenient approximations. 
Thus, when they encountered a length such as yfi, they were content to use a 
value such as 1.4 or 1.41. For 7f, as we noted in :?on earlier chapter, they used 
values even as crude as 3. Not only did these peoples use such approximations, 
but they never realized that the most complicated fraction or decimal could 
never represent an irrational number exactly. The Egyptians and Babylonians 
treated irrational numbers and their mathematics in general rather lightheart­
edly. We may hail their blithe spirits, but mathematicians they never were. 

IRRATIONAL NUMBERS 
69 
The Greeks, as we know, were of a different intellectual breed and could 
not be content with approximations, but they also exhibited a weakness. Al­
though they recognized that quantities exist which are neither whole numbers 
nor fractions, they were so convinced that the concept of number could not 
comprise anything else than whole numbers or fractions that they did not 
accept irrationals as numbers. Instead they thought of such quantities only as 
geometrical lengths or areas. Thus the Greeks never did develop an arithmetic 
of irrational numbers. In their astronomical work, for example, they used only 
whole numbers and fractions. The difficulty which the Greeks experienced 
also baffled all mathematicians up to modern times. The greatest mathema­
ticians refused to accept irrationals as numbers and followed the Greek pro­
cedure of thinking about such quantities as lengths or areas. All these people 
wished that the Pythagoreans had thrown all irrational numbers overboard 
rather than the man who discovered them. 
But the needs of society often oblige even mathematicians to face un­
pleasantnesses. In the seventeenth century, science began to develop at an 
amazing rate, and science needs quantitative results. It may be nice to know 
that Vi is a certain length and that Vi, v'l is an area, but this knowledge does 
not suffice when one needs numerical results. And so finally mathematicians 
had to accept the fact that if they were to treat numerically all the quantities 
that arise in scientific work, they must handle irrational numbers as numbers. 
The mathematicians' refusal over centuries to grant irrationals the status of 
numbers illustrates one of the surprising features of the history of mathematics. 
New ideas are often as unacceptable in this field as they are in politics, religion, 
and economics. 
The situation, then, which must be faced squarely is that there are other 
numbers besides whole numbers and fractions. It is, of course, quite under­
standable that whole numbers and fractions should have been created and used 
first, for these numbers arise in the simplest physical situations man encounters. 
The irrational numbers on the other hand are not commonly encountered. 
Only the application of a theorem such as the Pythagorean theorem brings 
them to our attention, and even then one must go through a proof such as that 
examined above, to see that they are not whole numbers or fractions. But the 
fact that irrational numbers are late-comers does not mean that they are less 
acceptable or less genuine numbers. Just as we gradually add to our knowledge 
of the varieties of human beings and animals which exist in our physical world, 
so must we broaden our knowledge of the varieties of numbers and with true 
liberality accept these strangers on the same basis as the already familiar 
numbers. 
However. if we are to use irrational numbers, we must know how to 
operate with them, that is, how to add, subtract, multiply, and divide them. 
We have already noted with whole numbers and fractions that if we wish 

70 
NUMBER: THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT 
the operations to fit experience, we must formulate the operations accord­
ingly. So it is with the irrational numbers. We could define addition, multi­
plication, and the other operations as we please. But if we wish these opera­
tions to represent physical situations, we must define them properly. However, 
there is no real difficulty here. Since irrational numbers are quantities, as are 
whole numbers and fractions, we may use the latter as a guide to the proper 
operations with irrational numbers. 
Let us consider a few examples which will be sufficient to indicate the 
general principles. Should we say that 
V2 + v'J = 0? 
To answer this question let us consider the analogous Question: May we say 
that 
y'4 + V9 = VTJ? 
It is clear in the latter case that 2 + l does not equal v'fi, for v'fi is certainly 
less than 4. Hence we should not add the radicands, that is, the 2 and the l, 
in the preceding equation. One might then ask, How much is Vi + 0? Since 
both summands are numbers, the sum is also a number, but it cannot be written 
more compactly than Vi + 0. This inability to combine the summands is 
not something new or troublesome. When we add 2 and t, for example, the 
answer continues to be 2 + t. We usually omit the plus sign and write 2t, 
but the summands are really not combined. 
Let us consider next whether 
Here too we shall see what the analogous operation with whole numbers sug­
gests. Is it true that 
y'4 .  V9 = V36? 
The answer is clearly yes, and so we shall agree that to multiply square roots 
we shall multiply the radicands. That is, 
V2 . v'J = 0. 
The definitions of the operations of subtraction and division are also readily 
determined. Thus 0 - Vi yields a definite number, but the difference cannot 
be written any more compactly than 0 - Vi. 
For division, say 0/0, the procedure. as in the case of multiplication. is 
suggested by observing that 

IRRATIONAL NUMBERS 
7 1  
for this equation simply says that 6 ¬ l Hence we shall agree that 
The general principle which these examples illustrate is that operations 
with irrational numbers are defined so as to agree with the same operations on 
whole numbers when the latter are expressed as roots. We could state our 
definitions in general form. but there is no need [Q do so. 
In applications we often approximate irrational numbers by fractions or 
decimals because actual physical objects cannot be constructed exactly anyway. 
Thus if we had to construct a length which strictly should be 0, we would 
approximate "f. Since ( 1 .4)2 = 1.96 and 1.96 is nearly 2, we could approx­
imate 0 by 1.4. If we desired a more accurate approximation, we might de­
termine to the nearest hundredth the number whose square approximates 2. 
Thus, since 
(1.41) 2 = 1 .988 
and 
(1 .42) 2 = 2.016, 
we see that 1.41 is a good two-decimal approximation of "f. We could, of 
course, improve still more on the accuracy of the approximation. We should. 
however, realize that no matter how many decimal places we employed, we 
would never obtain a number which is exactly V2 because any decimal with 
a finite number of digits or a whole number plus such a decimal is just another 
way of writing a fraction, whereas 0, as the above proof showed, can never 
equal a quotient of two whole numbers. 
The fact that we often approximate an irrational number when we wish to 
construct something raises a question which merits an answer. The question 
is, Why don't we approximate irrational numbers wherever they arise and 
forget about operations with irrationals as such? For example. to calculate 
0 · 0, we could approximate 0 by, say 1.41, approximate 0 by 1.73, and 
then multiply 1.41 by 1.73. The answer is 2.44, and since (2.44)' is 5.95, we 
see that we have a good approximation to V6. If we wanted a more accurate 
answer, we could approximate 0 and Yl more closely and then multiply. 
One reason we do not approximate in mathematics proper is that mathematics 
is an exact science. It insists on reasoning as rigorous as human beings can 
perform. We pay a price for this rigor by expending more thought and effort, 
but we shall see that mathematics has made its contributions just because it 
insists on exactness. 
There is also a practical advantage in working with irrational numbers as 
such. ' Let us suppose that some problem required us to calculate (Yl)4, that 
is, 0 ·  0 ·  0 . 0. The person who insists on approximating would now 
approximate Yl to some number of decimal places, for example, 1.732, and 
then calculate (1.732)4 While the practical person takes an hour to calculate 

72 
NUMBER: THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT 
and check his arithmetic, the mathematician would see at once that 
0 · 0 ·  0· 0= (0· 0)(0 · 0) = 3 · 3 = 9, 
and could spend the rest of the hour in refreshing sleep. Moreover, the mathe­
matician's answer is exact, whereas the practical man's answer is not accurate 
even to the four demical places with which he started, because the product of 
two approximate numbers is less accurate than either facror. To achieve an 
answer accurate to four decimal places. the practical man would have to use 
an approximation of 0 containing seven decimal places and then multiply. 
The irrational number is the first of many sophisticated ideas which the 
mathematician has introduced to think about and cope with the real world. 
The mathematician creates these concepts, devises ways of working with 
them which fit real situations, and then uses his abstractions to think about 
the phenomena to which the ideas apply. 
EXERCISES 
1. Express the answers to the following problems as compactly as you can: 
a) 0 + V5 
e) 0 ·  v'7 
i) V5 
v2 
b) 0 + 0  
f) 0 · .;IS  
.) VB 
J v2 
2. Simplify the following: 
a) v'sO 
b) v200 
[Sugg,stion: V 50 = v25 . 2 = VTI ·  V2.] 
c) 0 + v'7 
g) 0 · V'4  
k) Ȍ 
o 
c) v05 
d) v7 + v'7 
h) Vi1 .  vI 
3. Criticize the foIIowing argument: No irrational number can be expressed as a 
decimal with a finite number of decimal places. The number i cannot be ex­
pressed as a decimal with a finite number of decimal places. Hence i is an 
irrational number. 
4-4 NEGATIVE NUMBERS 
One more addition to the number system which has considerably extended the 
power of mathematics comes from far-off India. Numbers are commonly used 
to represent an amount of money, in particular the amount of money which a 
person owns. Perhaps because the Hindus were in debt more often than not, it 
occurred to them that it would also be useful to have numbers which represent 
the amount of money one owes. They therefore invented what are now 
called negative numbers, while the previously known numbers are called 

NEGATIVE NUMBERS 
73 
positive numbers. Thus numbers which we denote by -3, -ދ and -Vi came 
into existence. Where necessary to distinguish clearly positive from negative 
numbers or to emphasize what is positive as opposed to what is negative, one 
writes + 3 or +! instead of 3 or !. 
Ir is not necessary, incidentally, to use such symbols as -3 to represent the 
negative counterpart to 3. Modern banks and large commercial corporations, 
which deal with negative numbers continually, often write these in red ink, 
whereas positive numbers are written in black ink. However, we shall find 
that placing the minus sign in front of a number to indicate a negative number 
. 
. 
IS a convemence. 
The use of positive and negative numbers is not limited to the representa­
tion of assets and debts. One represents temperatures below 0° as negative 
temperatures, while temperatures above 0° are positive. Likewise heights 
above and below sea level can be represented by positive and negative numbers, 
respectively. It is sometimes convenient to represent time after and before a 
specified event by positive and negative numbers. For example, using the birth 
of Christ as the event, the year 50 B.C. can just as well be described as the 
year - 50. 
To derive more use from the concept of negative numbers it must be 
possible to operate with them just as we operate with positive numbers. The 
operations with negative numbers and with negative and positive numbers 
together are easy to understand if one keeps in mind the physical significance 
of these operations. For example, suppose a man has assets of 3 dollars and 
debts of 8 dollars. What is his net wealth? Clearly the man is 5 dollars in 
debt. The same calculation is represented in terms of positive and negative 
numbers by stating that the amount 8 dollars must be taken from 3 dollars, that 
is, 3 - 8, or that a debt of 8 dollars must be added to assets of 3 dollars, that 
is, +3 + ( -8). The answer is obtained by subtracting the smaller numerical 
value (that is, the smaller number without regard to sign) from the larger 
numerical value and giving the answer the sign attached to the larger numerical 
value. That is, we subtract 3 from 8 and call the answer negative because the 
larger numerical value, namely 8, has the minus sign attached to it. 
Since negative numbers represent debts and subtraction usually has the 
physical meaning of "taking away" or "removing," then the subtraction of a 
negative number means the removal of a debt. Thus, if a person has assets of, 
say 3 dollars, but this figure already takes into account a debt of 8 dollars, the 
removal or cancellation of the debt leaves the person with assets of 1 1  dollars. 
Mathematically we say +3 - (-8) = + 11. In words, to subtract a negative 
number we add the corresponding positive number. 
Suppose a man goes into debt at the rate of 5 dollars per day. Then in 
3 days after a given date he will be 15 dollars in debt. If we denote a debt of 
5 dollars as - 5, then going into debt at the rate of 5 dollars per day for 3 days 
can be stated mathematically as 3 ·  (-5) = - 1 5. That is, the multiplication of 

74 
NUMBER: THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT 
a positive and a negative number yields a negative number whose numerical 
value is the product of the two given numerical values. 
]n the very same situation in which a man goes into debt at the rate of 5 
dollars per day, his assets three days before a given date are 15 dollars more 
than they are at the given date. If we represent time before the given or zero 
date by 
- J and the loss per day as -5, then his relative financial position J 
days ago can be expressed as - J . (-5) = +15; that is, to consider his assets 
three days ago, we would multiply the debt per day by - J, whereas to calcu­
late the financial status three days in the future, we multiply by +J. Hence 
the result is + 15 in the former case compared to - 15 in the latter. 
There is one more definition concerning negative numbers which is readily 
seen to be sensible. For the positive numbers and zero we say for obvious 
reasons that 3 is greater than 2, that 2 is greater than i, and that any positive 
number is greater than zero. The negative numbers are said to be less than the 
positive numbers and zero. Moreover, we say that -5 is less than - 3, or that 
-J is greater than -5. If one thinks of these various numbers as representing 
people's wealth, then the agreement concerning their order fits our usual 
understanding of relative wealth. A person whose financial status is -3 is 
wealthier than one whose status is -5; one is better off to be J dollars than 5 
dollars in debt. Incidentally, the symbol > is used to denote "greater than" as 
in 5 > J, and the symbol < denotes "less than" as in -5 < - J. 
The relative position of the various positive and negative numbers and zero 
is readily remembered if one visualizes these numbers as points on a line as 
shown in Fig. 4-J. The figure is really not different from that obtained by 
moving a thermometer scale into a horizontal position. 
-4 
-3 
- 2  
- 1  
I 
I 
I 
o 
I 
3 
2 
2 
I I 
3 
I 
4 
I 
5 
Fig. 4-3 
The above situations, which illustrate how the definitions of the operations 
with positive and negative numbers were suggested, are of course by no means 
the only ones in which positive and negative numbers are employed. Indeed 
the usefulness of negative numbers would hardly be great were this the case. 
However, these simple financial transactions show not only how mathemati­
cians arrived at the definitions, but that there is no more mystery about nega­
tive numbers than about positive ones. The definitions represent in abstract 
form what takes place physically, and, as with all numbers, we can think in 
terms of the abstractions to arrive at a knowledge of physical happenings. 
It may be of some comfort to the reader to know that the concept of nega­
tive numbers, like the concept of irrational numbers, was resisted by mathema­
ticians for several hundred years. The history of mathematics illustrates the 
rather significant observation that it is more difficult to get a truth accepted 
than to discover it. The mathematicians to whom "number" meant whole 

THE AXIOMS CONCERNING NUMBERS 
75 
numbers and fractions found it hard to accept negative numbers as true num­
bers. They, too, failed to realize for centuries that mathematical concepts are 
man-made abstractions which can be introduced at will if they can serve 
useful purposes. 
EXERCISES 
1. Suppose a man has $3 and incurs a debt of $5. What is his net worth? 
2. Suppose a man owes $5 and then incurs a new debt of $8. Use negative numbers 
to calculate his financial condition. 
3. Suppose a man owes $5 and earns $8. Use positive and negative numbers to 
calculate his net worth. 
4. Suppose a man owes $13, and a debt of $8 is cancelled. Use negative numbers 
to calculate his net worth. 
5. A man loses money in business at the rate of $100 per week. Let us denote this 
change in his assets by 
- 100 and let us denote time in the furore by positive 
numbers and time in the past by negative numbers. How much will the man lose 
in 5 weeks? How much more was the man worth 5 weeks ago? 
4-5 THE AXIOMS CONCERNING NUMBERS 
In the preceding chapter we said that mathematics proceeds by deductive 
reasoning from explicitly stated axioms. Yet thus far in this chapter we have 
said nothing about axioms. The reason is simply that the axioms concerning 
numbers are such obvious properties that we use them automatically without 
realizing that we are doing so. 
This situation may perhaps be better understood by means of an analogy. 
Whenever a child at play throws a ball up into the air, he expects that the ball 
will come down. He is really assuming that all balls thrown up will come 
down. Of course, this assumption is well founded in experience; nevertheless, 
the child's expectation that the ball will come down is a deduction from the 
assumption just stated and the additional premise that he is throwing a ball up 
into the air. Recognition of the fact that he has made an assumption makes 
clear the reasoning, conscious or unconscious, behind the act. 
To understand the deductive process in the mathematics of numbers, as 
well as in geometry, we must recognize the existence and use of the axioms. We 
do not hesitate to say that 275 + 384 = 384 + 275. Surely we did not add 384 
objects to 275, count the total, then add 275 objects to 384, count that total, and 
check that the two totals agree. Rather, whenever in our experience we coތ­
bined two groups of objects, we found that we obtained the same total collec­
tion regardless of whether we put the first group with the second or the 
second with the first. Of course, our evidence to the effect that the order of 
addition is immaterial is limited to a small number of cases, whereas in practice 

76 
NUMBER; THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT 
we use this fact with all numbers. Hence, we are really making an assumption, 
namely, that for any two numbers a and b, integral, fractional, irrational, and 
negative, the order of addition will not affect the result. Thus our assumption 
also includes the affirmation that 0 + V5 ® V5 + 0. It is important for 
another reason to recognize that this assumption is being made. Numbers are 
not apples or cows. They are abstractions from physical situations. Mathema­
tics works with these abstractions in order to deduce information about 
physical situations. However, if the axioms are not well chosen, the deductions 
will not apply. Hence it is well to note what assumptions are being employed 
and to ascertain that they are well founded in experience. 
Let us, therefore, note the axioms which we have been using and will 
continue to use. The first axiom is the one discussed in the preceding para­
graph: 
AXIOM I. For any two numbers a and b, 
a + b = b + a. 
The aXIOm is called the commutative axiom of addition because it says 
that we can commute or interchange the order of the two numbers to be 
added. We note that subtraction is not commutative, that is, 3 - 5 does nOt 
equal 5 - 3. 
If we had to calculate 3 + 4 + 5, we could 'first add 4 to 3 and then add 5 
to this result, or we could add 5 to 4, and then add this result to 3. Of course, 
the result is the same in the two cases, and this is exactly what our second 
aXIOm says. 
AXIOM 2. For any numbers a, b, and c, 
(a + b) + c = a + (b + c) . 
This axiom is called the associative axiom of addition because we can 
associate the three numbers in two different ways in performing the addition. 
The two axioms we have just discussed have their analogues for the 
operation of multiplication. 
AXIOM 3. For any two numbers a and b, 
a '  b = b ·  a. 
This axiom is called the commutative axiom of multiplication. Inciden­
tally, the dot which is used to denote multiplication is omitted if there is no 
danger of misunderstanding. Thus, we could as well write ab ­ ba. The 
axiom is clearly a property of numbers; yet we sometimes fail to recognize 
that it is applicable. Many a student hesitates to write 5 ·  a instead of a ·  5. 
But the commutative axiom says that the two expressions are equal. We 

THE AXIOMS CONCERNING NUMBERS 
77 
might note in this context that the operation of division is not commutative, 
for 4 + 2 does not equal 2 + 4. 
AXIOM 4. For any three numbers a, b, and c, 
(ab)e = a (be) . 
This aXIOm IS called the associative axiom of multiplication. Thus 
(3 · 4)5 = 3(4· 5). 
We also find in our work with numbers that it is convenient to use the 
number O. To recognize formally that there is such a number and that it has 
the properties which its physical meaning requires, we state another axiom. 
AXIOM 5. There is a unique number 0 such that 
a) 0 + a = a for every number a, 
b) o ·  a = 0 for every number a, 
c) if ab = 0 then either a = 0 or b = 0 or both are O. 
The number 1 is another whose properties are somewhat special. Again, 
we know from the physical meaning of I just what its properties are, but if 
one is to justify the operations with I by appealing to axioms rather than to 
physical meaning, there must be a statement which tells us just what these 
properties are. In the case of 1. it is sufficient to specify a sixth axiom. 
AXIOM 6. There is a unique number I such that 
I '  a = a 
for every number a. 
In addition to adding and multiplying any two numbers, we also have 
physical uses for the operations of subtraction and division. We know that 
given any two numbers a and b, there is a number c which results when b is 
subtracted from a. From a practical standpoint, it is helpful to recognize that 
subtraction is the inverse operation to addition. What this means is simply 
that if we have to find the answer to 5 - 3 we can and, in fact, do ask ourselves 
what number added to 3 gives 5. If we know addition, we can then answer 
the subtraction problem. Even if we obtain the answer by a special subtrac­
tion process, and we do in the case of large numbers, we check it by adding 
the result to what we subtracted to see if it gives the original number or 
minuend. Hence a subtraction problem such as 5 - 3 = x really asks for what 
number x added to 3 gives 5, that is, x + 3 = 5. 
In our logical development of the number system we wish to affirm that 
we can subtract any number from any other number and we phrase this 
statement so that the meaning of subtraction is precisely what it is, the inverse 
of addition. 

78 
NUMBER: THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT 
AXIOM 7. If a and b are any two numbers, there is a unique number x 
such that 
a = b + x. 
Of course, the quantity x is what we usually denote by a - b. 
The relation of division to multiplication is also that of an inverse opera­
tion. When we seek the answer to ! we may happen to know directly from 
experience that the answer is 4. But jf we don't, we can reduce the division 
problem to a multiplication problem and ask what number, x, multiplied by 2 
gives 8, and if we know multiplication we can find the answer. Here too, as 
in the ·case of subtraction, even if we use a special division process such as long 
division to find the answer, we check the answer by multiplying the divisor by 
the quotient to see if the product is the dividend. The reason for doing this 
is simply that the basic meaning of a/ b is to find some number x such that 
bx= a. 
In our logical development of the number system we affirm that we can 
divide any number by any other number (except 0) and we phrase the asser­
tion so that the meaning of division is precisely what it actually is, the inverse 
of multiplication. 
AXIOM 8. If a and b are any two numbers, except that b "" 0, then there 
is a unique number x such that 
bx = a. 
Of course x is the number usually denoted by a/b. 
The next axiom is not quite so obvious. It says, for example, that 
3 · 6 +  3 · 5  
= 3 (6 + 5). In this example we can perform the calculation to 
see that the left and right sides are equal, but this is really not necessary. 
Suppose we had 157 cows in one herd and 379 in another, and each herd in­
creased sevenfold. The total number of cattle is then 7 · 157 + 7 · 379. But if 
the original two herds were one herd with 157 + 379 cows, and this single 
herd increased sevenfold, we would have 7( 157 + 379) cows. It is physically 
clear that we have the same number of cows now as before, that is, that 
7 . 157 + 7 . 379 = 7 ( 1 57 + 379). Stated in general terms, the axiom is: 
AXIOM 9. For any three numbers a, b, and c, 
ab + ac = a(b + c). 
This axiom, called the distributive axiom, is very useful. For example, to 
calculate 571 . 36 + 571 · 64 we can apply the axiom to state that this quantity 
is 571 (36 + 64) or 571 · 100 or 57,100. We say often that we have factored 
the quantity 571 out of the sum 571 . 36 + 571 · 64. 

THE AXIOMS CONCERNING NUMBERS 
79 
We should note that from 
ab + ac = a(b + c) 
we Can also state that 
ba + ca = (b + c)a, 
because in each term of the first equation we can apply the commutative axiom 
of multiplication to change the order of the factors. 
We often use the second form of the distributive axiom. 
is some number and we wish to calculate Sa + 7a. 
by (5 + 7)a, and obtain 12a. 
We can 
Thus, suppose a 
replace this sum 
The distributive axiom is also applicable in the 
pose we have to calculate 
following situation. Sup-
296 + 148 
296 
One might be tempted to cancel the two numbers 296. But this is incorrect. 
The given fraction means 
$(296 + 148), 
and the distributive axiom tells us that we may write instead 
$ ' 296 + $ ' 148, or 1 + t. 
In addition to the above axioms, we have the following evident properties 
of numbers: 
AXIOM 10. Quantities equal to the same quantity are equal to each other. 
AXIOM 11. If equal quantities are added to, subtracted from, multiplied 
with, or divided into equal quantities, the results are equal. However, 
division by zero is not permitted. 
The set of axioms we have just given is not complete; that is, it does not 
form the logical basis for all of the properties of the positive and negative 
whole numbers, fractions, and irrational numbers. However, the set does pro­
vide the logical basis for what is usually done with numbers in ordinary algebra. 
Moreover, it does give some idea of what the axiomatic basis for mathematical 
work with numbers amounts to. 
Now that we have the axioms, what do we do with them? We can prove 
theorems about numbers. Let us consider a few examples. Negative numbers 
were introduced to represent physical happenings such as debts or time before 
a given event. When we examined the physical situation in which we wished 
to use these numbers, we found that if the numbers are to be useful then we 

80 
NUMBER: THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT 
should agree that, for example, 
- 2 ' 3 = -6 and - 2 ' (-3) = 6. 
There we agreed to operate with positive and negative numbers so as to make 
the results fit the physical situation. In the deductive approach to numbers 
we prove on the basis of our axioms that certain theorems are correct. Let us 
prove that a positive number times a negative number is negative. 
Let a and b be positive numbers. Then -b is a negative number; for 
example, -b = -5. We shall prove that a( -b) = -abo We know by Axiom 
7, wherein we let it be 0, that if b and a are given, then there is a number x 
such that b + x = O. This number x is denoted by 0 - b or -b. Then 
b + (-b) = O. 
Now we can multiply both sides of this equation by a, and since equals multi­
plied by equals give equals, we have 
a[b + (-b)] = a · O. 
Now a ·  0 = O ·  a by Axiom 3, and O ·  a = 0 by Axiom 5. By applying the 
distributive axiom, Axiom 9, to the left-hand side of our equation, we obtain 
a ' b + a(-b) = O, 
(\) 
and now we see that a( -b) is the number which added to ab gives O. But 
Axiom 7 says that given ab and 0 (these are the a and b of Axiom 7), there 
is a unique number x such that 
ab + x = 0. 
(2) 
This number x is denoted by ° - ab or -abo But equation ( \ )  says that a( -b) 
is the number which added to ab gives O. Since there is just one such number 
which when added to ab gives 0, and that number we know is -ab, it must be 
be that a( -b) = -abo 
The proof is now complete and yet may not be convincing. The reason 
is simply that we are so accustomed to operating with numbers on the basis of 
physical arguments and experience with them that we have not accustomed 
ourselves to reasoning with numbers on an axiomatic basis. 
Let us consider another proof. In Section 4-2 we gave a physical argument 
to show that if we divide alb by cld then we can get the answer by inverting 
cld to obtain dlc and then multiplying; that is, 
a 
b 
a d 
ad 
- = - . - = 
e 
b e 
be 
d 

THE AXIOMS CONCERNING NUMBERS 
81 
We can prove, on the basis of our axioms, that this rule of inverting the de­
nominator and then multiplying is correct. 
To divide alb by eld is to find a number x such that 
a 
c 
x · _ · 
d 
(3) 
b 
Now Axiom 8 tells us that there is a unique number x which satisfies such an 
equation. We do know that 
because if we cancel common factors in the numerator and denominator of the 
right side we obtain alb. Hence one number which can serve as the x which 
satisfies equation (3) is adl be. But since the value of x is unique, x = adl be. 
Thus the result of dividing alb by eld is adlbe. We note that the answer 
adlbe is obtained by multiplying alb by the inverse of eld. Hence to divide 
one fraction by another, we invert the denominator and multiply. 
This proof, like the preceding one, may not be convincing, and the reason 
is the same. We are not accustomed to reasoning about numbers on an axiom­
atic basis. Rather, we have relied upon the physical meaning of numbers and 
operations. Historically, the mathematicians did the same thing. They learned 
to operate with numbers by noting the uses to which numbers were put, and 
they constructed the axiomatic basis long afterward, just to satisfy themselves 
that deductive proofs of the properties of numbers could be made. 
Since we, too, are accustomed to the properties and operations with 
numbers since childhood, and we are sure of these properties, we shall not 
often cite axioms to justify our steps. Thus if we write 3a in place of a ·  3, we 
shall not cite the commutative axiom of multiplication as the justification for 
this step. In fact, it would be pedantic to do so. The axioms are useful, rather, 
in helping us to determine what is correct when our experience fails us or 
leaves us in doubt. However, we should not lose sight of the fact that the 
mathematics built upon the number system is a deductive system. This point 
needs emphasis because we begin to learn arithmetic at an early age by rote 
and thereafter we tend to operate with numbers mechanically without per­
ceiving that we are constantly using axioms of numbers. 
EXERCISES 
1. Do you believe that 
256(437 + 729) 
= 256 ' 437 + 256 ' 729? 
Why? 

82 
NUMBER: THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT 
2. Is it correct to assert that 
a(b - c) = ab - ac? 
[Suggestion: b - c = b  + (-c).J 
3. Perform the operations called for in the following examples: 
a) 3a + 9a 
e) 3(2a + 4b) 
i) 2 (8a) 
b) a ' 3 + a '  9 
f) (40 + 5b)7 
j) a(ab) 
c) a(5 + 0) 
g) a(a + b) 
4. Carry out the multiplication: 
(a + 3)(a + 2). 
d) 7a - 9a 
h) a(a - b) 
[Suggestion: Regard (a + 3) as a single Quantity and apply the distributive axiom.] 
5. Calculate (n + I) (n + I). 
6. If 3x= 6, is x = 2? Why? 
7. 1f 3x + 2 = 7, is 3x = 5? Why? 
8. Is the equality x' + xy = x(x + y) correct? 
9. Is it correct to assert that 
a + (be) = (a + b)(a + c)? 
* 4-6 APPLICATIONS OF THE NUMBER SYSTEM 
Something of the power, methodology, and subtlety of mathematical reasoning 
can already be seen in the applications which have been made of the several 
types of number. Indeed, we shall see that these resulted in significant scien­
tific discoveries. 
Let us begin with some rather simple matters. Suppose a man drives a car 
for one mile at 60 miles per hour and for another mile at 120 miles per hour. 
What is his average speed? We tend to answer this question by applying the 
common procedure for finding an average. Thus, if a man buys one pair of 
shoes for $5 and another for $10, the average price is $5 + $10 divided by 2, 
or $7.50. Hence it would seem as though the average speed in the above 
problem should be 60 + 120 divided by 2, or 90 miles per hour. However, this 
answer is not correct. The number 90 is an average in the arithmetic sense, but 
it is not the average we seek. The average speed should be that speed which 
would enable the man to drive the two miles in the same time as it took him to 
drive that distance at the two different speeds. Now, it took the man I minute 
to drive the first mile and it took him ލ minute to drive the second mile. 
Hence it took him I! minutes to drive 2 miles. We now ask, what average 
* Starred sections and chapters can be omitted without disrupting the mathematical 
continuity. 

APPLICATIONS OF THE NUMBER SYSTEM 
83 
speed maintained for I! minutes would cover 2 miles? Since the average speed 
multiplied by the total time should give the total distance, the average speed 
is the total distance divided by the total time, that is, 
average speed = 
2 
4 
-
ţ 
J 
The average speed is then ! miles per minute or 80 miles per hour. 
The point of this example, not a momentous one to be sure, is merely that 
the unthinking, blind application of arithmetic does not produce the correct 
result. The notion of average speed serves a physical purpose, and unless we 
are clear about what average speed is supposed to mean, we shall not profit by 
the use of arithmetic. 
EXERCISES 
1. A man can row a boat in still water at 6 mi;hr. He plans to row upstream for 
12 mi and then back in a river whose current flows at 2 mi;hr. Thus his speed 
upstream is 4 mi;hr and his speed downstream is 8mi;hr. He reasons that his 
average Ρpeed is 6 mi/hr and that the entire trip of 24 mi should therefore take 
4 hr. ]s this reasoning correct? 
2. Suppose that a merchant sells apples at a price of 2 for 5 ¢ and oranges at 3 for 
5,. To make his arithmetic simpler he decides to sell any 5 pieces of fruit for to, 
or at the average price of 2, per piece. Thus, if he sells 2 apples and 3 oranges, he 
sells 5 pieces of fruit at 2, each and receives the same to, as if he had sold them at 
the original separate prices. ]s the merchant's average price correct? [Suggestion: 
Consider what results if he sells 12 apples and 12 oranges.] 
3. Suppose the merchant wishes to sell a apples and b oranges to some customer at 
the prices given in Exercise 2. What should the average price be? 
4. Given the data of Exercise 2, is there an average price which would be correct 
no matter how many apples and how many oranges are sold? 
5. One man can dig a certain ditch in 2 days and another can dig the same ditch in 
3 days. What is their average rate of ditch-digging per day? 
Let us consider next an application of simple arithmetic to genetics. 
Suppose we have before us 2 red aces and 2 red kings from the usual deck 
of 52 cards. How many different pairs consisting of one ace and one king can 
be put together' Since each ace can be paired with either of 2 kings, there are 
2 different pairs for any one ace. Since we have 2 aces, there are 2 ·  2 or 4 
different pairs. 
Now let us suppose that we have 2 red aces, 2 red kings, and 2 red queens. 
How many different sets consisting of one ace, one king, and one queen can 
we form with the given cards? We saw above that there are 4 different pairs 
of aces and kings. With each of these 4 pairs we can place 2 different 

84 
NUMBER: THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT 
queens. Hence there are 4 ·  2 or 8 different sets of J cards. We note that 
4 ·  2 = 2 . 2 . 2 = 23. 
If we have 2 red aces, 2 red kings, 2 red queens, and 2· red jacks, the 
number of different sets, each consisting of one ace, one king, one queen, and 
one jack, can also be readily calculated. Each of the 8 choices of ace, king, and 
queen can be paired with each of the 2 jacks. Hence there are 8 · 2  or 16 
choices in all. Now, 
8 . 2 
= 4 '  2 . 2 
= 2 ' 2 . 2 . 2 = 24. 
Clearly, if we had 10 different pairs of cards and had to make all possible 
choices of 10 cards, one from each pair, the number of all possible sets of 10 
cards would be 
2 . 2 . 2 . 2 . 2 . 2 . 2 . 2 . 2 . 2 = 2 '0 = 1024. 
This simple reasoning about cards has an important application to genetics. 
The reproductive cells <as well as ordinary cells) of the human male contain 
24 pairs of chromosomes. When a sperm cell is formed from the reproductive 
cell, it contains 24 chromosomes, each coming from one of the 24 pairs. 
Hence a sperm cell can be formed in 224 possible combinations. The reproduc­
tive cells of the human female also contain 24 pairs of chromosomes. An ovum 
formed from the female reproductive cell contains 24 chromosomes, each 
coming from one of the 24 pairs of the reproductive cell. Hence there are 
224 possible ways in which an ovum can be formed. In conception, any one 
sperm joins, or fertilizes, any one ovum. Since there are 224 possible sperms 
and 224 possible ova, the number of possible chromosome combinations for 
the fertilized ovum is then 
224 . 224 = 16,777,216 ' 16,777,216 = 281,474,976,710,656. 
This is the number of possible variations in the genetic make-up of any one 
child a man and wife may have. Actually, the number of variations is some­
what larger. Each chromosome contains genes, and these determine the 
hereditary qualities. Biologists have found that any two paired chromosomes 
in a reproductive cell may exchange some genes, and this exchange gives rise 
to new varieties of sperm cells and ova. 
EXERCISES 
1. The usual deck of 52 cards contains 4 different aces and 4 different kings. How 
many different pairs of cards, each pair consisting of one ace and one king, can 
be formed from the aces and kings? 
2. A manufacturer offers his automobile in 3 different colors, with or without .a 
heater, and with or without a radio. How many different choices can a purchaser 
make? 

APPLICATIONS OF THE NUMBER SYSTEM 
85 
3. A girl has 3 hats. 2 dresses. and 2 pairs of shoes. How many different costumes 
does she have? 
4. There are six numbers on a die (singular of dice). How many different pairs of 
numbers can show up on a throw of a pair of dice? The twO dice are to be 
marked so that a throw of a 2 on one die (say A )  and of a 5 on the other (say B) 
can be distinguished from the reverse arrangement (5 on A and 2 on B). 
We have already discussed the fact that our method of writing quantities 
uses the idea of positional notation in base ten (see Section 4--2). However, 
some civilizations used other numbers as a base. For example, the Babylonians. 
for reasons that are obscure. selected 60. This system was taken over by the 
Greek astronomers and was used in Europe for many mathematical and all 
astronomical calculations as late as the seventeenth century. It still survives in 
our practice of dividing hours and angles into 60 minutes and 60 seconds. In 
adopting ten as a base, Europe followed the practice of the Hindus. Let us 
challenge history and see whether we can derive some advantage from a 
change to a new base. 
We shall choose base six. The quantities from zero to five would be 
designated by the symbols 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, as in base ten. The first essential 
difference comes up when we wish to denote six objects. Since six is to be the 
base, we would no longer use the special symbol 6, but place the 1 in a new 
position to denote 1 times the base. just as in base ten the I in 10 denotes one 
times the base, or the quantity ten. Hence, to write six in base six, we would 
write 10, but now the symbols 10 means 1 times six plus O. Thus the symbols 
10 can denote two different quantities, depending upon the base employed. 
Seven in base six would be written 11, because in base six these symbols mean 
I times six + I, just as I I  in base ten means I times ten + I. Again the symbols 
\ I  represent different quantities, depending upon the base implied. As another 
example. to denote twenty-two in base six we write 34. because these symbols 
now mean 3 times six + 4. 
In base ten, to write numbers larger than ninety-nine, we use a third 
position, the hundreds' place, to indicate tens of tens. Similarly in base six, 
when we reach numbers larger than thirty-five, we use a third position to 
denote sixes of sixes. Thus thirty-eight would be written in base six as 102, 
wherein the one means I times six times six, the 0 means 0 times six, and the 
2 denotes just 2 units. To express very large numbers we would use four­
place numbers, five-place numbers, and so forth. 
We can perform the usual arithmetic operations in base six. However, we 
would have to learn new addition and multiplication tables. For example, in 
base ten we write 5 + 3 = 8, whereas in base six, eight must be written 12. 
Hence our addition table would have to state that 5 + 3 = 12. Likewise, our 
new multiplication table would have to list 3 · 5  
= 23, because fifteen is 2 · 6 +  3 
or, in base six, 23. When we learned to use base ten, we had to memorize the 

86 
NUMBER; THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT 
result of adding each number from 0 to 9 to every number from 0 to 9, and 
the result of multiplying each number from 0 to 9 with every number from 
o to 9. For base six we would have to learn to add (and multiply) only 
numbers from 0 to 5 to (or with) the numbers of this set. Thus our addition and 
multiplication tables would be shorter, and we would learn arithmetic sooner 
as youngsters. We might even pass the hurdle of arithmetic so easily that we 
might get to like mathematics. The only disadvantage of base six would be 
that to represent large quantities we would have to use more digits. For 
example, the quantity fifty-four, written as 54 in base ten, must be written as 
1 30 in base six, because fifty-four equals I . 6' + 3 . 6 + O. 
There are people who campaign for the adoption of base twelve, because 
it offers special advantages. For one thing, more fractions can be written as 
finite decimals in base twelve. Thus i must be written as the unending decimal 
0.333 . . .  in base ten, but can be written as 0.4 in base twelve, since in this base 
0.4 means n' Also, since the English system of denoting length calls for 12 
inches in one foot, we could, for example, express 3 feet and 6 inches as 36 
inches in base twelve, whereas to express this number of inches in base ten, we 
must first calculate 3 · 12 + 6 and then write 42 in base ten. To a limited 
extent we could use base twelve in our method of recording time. In the United 
States the day has two sets of twelve hours, and in base twelve the hours of 
the day would run from 0 to 20. Whereas determining what 7 hours after 6 
o'clock will be requires at present some computation, under the addition table 
for base twelve we would state at once that 7 + 6 = I ! .  However, base ten is 
now so widely used that a change to another base for ordinary daily use or 
commerce is hardly likely. 
In the subject of bases we have an idea that was pursued for centuries, 
largely as an interesting and amusing speculation, but which suddenly became 
highly important in science and even in the commercial world. For several 
centuries mathematicians worked on the design of machines which would 
perform arithmetical computations quickly and thus remove a good deal of 
the drudgery of arithmetic. Although some types of computing machines 
were invented and used, mathematicians saw their golden opportunity in the 
electronic devices developed by modern radio engineers. The key is the radio 
vacuum tube, which can be made to pass current by applying a voltage to it 
or can be kept inactive. Two maneuvers are thus possible. In base two all 
numbers require only two symbols, the 0 and the 1. A typical number would 
be lOll, which means 
I . 23 + 0 . 22 + I . 2 + 1. 
This number can be recorded by the machine by employing four tubes, one 
for the units' place, another for multiples of 2, a third for multiples of 2', and 
a fourth for multiples of 23. To record lOll, the first, second, and fourth 
tubes can be activated, and the third, which records the third place in the 

APPLICATlONS OF THE NUMBER SYSTEM 
87 
number, kept inactive. The currents passed by the tubes which "fire" are 
recorded by the machine in special circuits. Another number can then be fed 
into the machine. Let us suppose that it is to be added to the first number. The 
result of having two l's in the same place means, in base 2, that the sum is to 
be 0 and a I carried over to the next place. This operation is readily performed 
by the circuits. While this description of an electronic computer certainly 
doesn't begin to present the ingenious ideas which engineers and mathemati­
cians have incorporated, we may perhaps see that the workings of a vacuum 
tube are ideally suited to operations in base two. 
To take advantage of the fact that computers can perform calculations 
in base two, the numbers to be worked on are converted beforehand from 
base ten to base two and then fed to the machine along with other instruc­
tions. The machine then operates in this latter base. The result is, of course, 
reconverted to base ten. 
Because computers work with microsecond speed, they are exceedingly 
valuable in any commercial or industrial organization which must process a 
lot of numerical data. Calculations in banks, insurance companies, and in 
industry, which used to require an immense amount of human labor, are now 
performed by machines. Computers are the first in a new series of machines 
which keep track of great quantities of data, select information from millions 
of cards on which data are recorded, plan factory operations, direct machinery, 
and may soon provide translations of foreign-language publications. 
Electronic computing machines are an enormous boon to science and 
mathematics also. The arithmetic required to extract concrete information 
from mathematical formulas is often so lengthy that it would take years to 
perform these calculations. Computing machines do such work in hours. 
Moreover, mathematicians no longer hesitate to work on problems which will 
lead to extensive computations, because they now know that their work will 
not be in vain. 
Computing machines may help us to learn more about the action of the 
human brain. According to biologists, the nerve cells in the nerve chains and 
the cells in our brains respond to electrical impulses much as a vacuum tube 
does. Just as a tube will "fire" when it receives electrical current beyond a 
certain minimum value and remain inactive otherwise, so do the nerve cells 
in the nerve chains transmit an electrical impulse to whatever organ they may 
lead when this impulse exceeds a thresh hold value; otherwise they are inactive. 
Computing machines also have a memory; that is, partial results of calcula­
tions are stored aUtOmatically in a special device, called the memory. When 
these results are needed, the memory device releases them. Thus the result of 
an addition process might be stored in the memory device until the result of 
some multiplication process is obtained and then, if so instructed, the machine 
will add these two results. The machine's memory device, then, functions 
somewhat like the human memory. Hence, in tWO respects at least, electronic 

88 
NUMBER: THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT 
computing machines simulate the actions of human nerves and memory. 
Though machines are, in speed, accuracy, and endurance, superior to the 
human brain, one should not infer, as many popular writers are now suggest­
ing, that machines will ultimately replace brains. Machines do not think. They 
perform the calculations which they are directed to perform by people who 
have the brains to know what calculations are wanted. Nevertheless, we un­
doubtedly have in the machine a useful model for the study of some functions 
of the human brain and nerves. 
EXERCISES 
1. Construct an addition table for base six. 
2. Construct a multiplication table for base six. 
3. Construct an addition and multiplication table for base two. 
4. The following numbers are in base ten: 
9, 10, 12, 36, 48, 100. 
Write the respective quantities in base six. 
5. The following numbers are in base six: 
5, 10, 12, 20, 100. 
Write the respective quantities in base ten. 
6. Write the fraction ! as a decimal in base six. 
7. The Quantity 0.2 is in base six. Write the corresponding quantity in base ten. 
S. The number 101 is written in some unknown base and equals ten. What is the 
base? 
9. Find the least number of weights needed to weigh. to the nearest pound. objects 
weighing from 0 to 63 lb. The scale to be used contains twO pans and the weights 
are to be put in one pan. [Suggestion: Consider the problem of representing all 
numbers from 0 to 63 in base 2.] 
Some of the most remarkable uses of numbers, which have led to profound 
discoveries, are found in the study of the structure of matter. During the 
early and middle part of the nineteenth century, certain basic experimental 
facts about the varieties of matter found in nature led, after some inevitable 
fumbling on the parr of John Dalton, Amadeo Avogadro, and Stanislav 
Cannizzaro, to the theory that all matter is made up of atoms. Thus hydrogen, 
oxygen, chlorine, copper, aluminum, gold, silver, and all other varieties of 
matter are composed of atoms. Experimental techniques were developed to 
measure the relative weights of the atoms of different elements. The con­
venient unit of weight chosen was Tފthe weight of the oxygen atom, so that 
the weight of the atom of oxygen is 16. The weight of the hydrogen atom 
then proved to be 1.0080, that of copper 63.54, that of gold 197.0, and so on. 

APPLICATIONS OF THE NUMBER SYSTEM 
89 
By this time, too, a number of chemical properties of these various elements, 
such as their melting temperatures, boiling temperatures, and their ability to 
combine with other elements to form compounds, had been determined. 
The question which had begun to stir the chemists was whether there 
existed any law or principle which utilized the atomic weights of these 
elements. The crowning discovery was made in 1869 by Dimitri I vanovich 
Mendeleev (1834-1907). He found, as he began to arrange the elements in 
order of increasing atomic weight, that every eighth element, starting from a 
given one, had chemical properties similar to the first one. Thus, the gases 
fluorine and chlorine, the latter the eighth element starting from fluorine, both 
combine readily with metals. However, as he continued to place each of the 
63 different elements known in his time in the eighth position after the one 
with similar chemical properties, he saw that he had to leave blank spaces. 
Mendeleev was so much impressed with the periodicity of chemical properties 
that he did not hesitate to leave the blank spaces and to affirm that there must 
be elements to fill these spaces. Since each of these missing elements should 
have chemical properties similar to those of the element found in the eighth 
position preceding or succeeding the missing element, he could even predict 
some of the properties of the unknown elements. Mendeleev described the 
properties of three of the missing elements, and his immediate successors dis­
covered them. These are now called scandium, gallium, and germanium. Still 
later, others were found. The interesting fact about Mendeleev's work from 
the mathematical standpoint is that he had no physical explanation of why 
elements eight positions removed from one another should have similar chemi­
cal properties. He knew only that the number eight was the key to the 
arrangement, and he followed this mathematical guide faithfully. Long after 
Mendeleev's time, other elements, for example helium, were found, which do 
not fit into this arrangement, but his periodic table is still the basic one which 
all students of chemistry learn today. 
Simple arithmetic continued to play a leading role in subsequent develop­
ments of atomic theory. The continuing study of the atomic weights of 
various elements and their chemical properties showed that elements formerly 
regarded as pure were really not so. Thus, there are two kinds of hydrogen. 
These have similar chemical properties, but different atomic weights; in fact, 
one is twice as heavy as the other. Since both were previously called hydrogen, 
and since they do, in any case, have similar chemical properties, these two 
forms of hydrogen are called isotopes of hydrogen. Likewise, there is not one 
substance, oxygen, but there are three, of atomic weights 16, 17, and 18. 
Uranium, a very important element today, has two isotopes of atomic weights 
238 and 235. 
The startling fact which emerged from the discovery of isotopes is that 
when all isotopes are distinguished and the relative weights of the distinct 
elements determined, the weight of any one element is within 1 % of a whole 

90 
NUMBER: THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT 
number. Such a fact can hardly be accidental. The explanation would seem 
to be that all these elements are really multiples of a single element, namely 
the lighter isotope of hydrogen, which has the least weight of all elements. 
In other words, the various elements which previously appeared to be entirely 
different substances. now were seen to be just smaller or larger collections of 
the same element, but arranged in special ways peculiar to the substance. 
(Strictly speaking, the fundamental building block is not the lighter isotope of 
hydrogen, bur what is now called the proton. The lighter hydrogen isotope 
also has an electron whose weight is insignificant by comparison.) 
If all of the different elements are really just aggregates of the lighter 
hydrogen atom, it should be possible to remove some atoms and convert one 
substance into another. Thus, we should be able to convert mercury, which 
is the next heavier element after gold, into gold. And we can. What the 
medieval alchemists hoped to do on mystical and superficial grounds, we can 
now do on the basis of far better scientific knowledge. Unfortunately, the 
cost of converting mercury into gold is too great to make it worth while. But 
we do have uses for the transmutation of elements which are, in our age, more 
valued, and which we shall describe in a moment. 
A scientist who has a theory cannot afford to overlook even one detail, 
trivial as it may seem, which does not square with his theory. If all elements 
are merely combinations of the lighter hydrogen atom, then their weights 
should be exact multiples of the weight of this atom instead of having values 
within 1 % of such weights. (The electrons in the atoms do not account for 
the difference.) This discrepancy must be explained. The lightest isotope of 
oxygen had, somewhat arbitrarily, been given weight 16. With this rather 
arbitrary standard, the lighter hydrogen atom has weight 1.008 rather than 
exactly 1. But helium, which consists of 4 hydrogen atoms, proves to have 
weight 4.0028. However, if it consists of 4 hydrogen atoms, its atomic weight 
should be 4 times 1.008, or 4.032. The difference, 4.032 - 4.0028, or about 
0.03, is the discrepancy which muSt be accounted for. Now it so happens that 
Einstein, working in an entirely different field, the theory of relativity, had 
already shown that mass can be converted into energy. Energy can take 
different forms. It can be the heat created by burning coal or wood, or it can 
be radiation such as comes to us from the sun. At the moment the precise 
form of it does not matter. What does matter is the thought which occurred 
to scientists that perhaps, when 4 hydrogen atoms are fused to form helium, 
the missing 0.03 of matter is converted into energy in the process. Hence the 
fusion of elements should release energy. And experiments showed that this is 
indeed what happens. The energy which is released is called the binding 
energy, and it is this energy which is released when a hydrogen bomb is 
exploded. 
In this brief account of the role of arithmetic in chemistry and atomic 
theory, we have said almost nothing abour the great thinking and brilliant 

APPLICATIONS OF THE NUMBER SYSTEM 
91 
experiments which physicists and chemists contributed. Our interest has 
been to show how the use of simple numbers supplies scientists with a power­
ful tool. Of course, the mathematics of numbers remains to be developed, and 
we shall learn how much more can be accomplished with slightly more ad­
vanced tools. But we can already see something of what the Pythagoreans 
envisioned when they spoke of numbers as the essence of reality. 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
I. Calculate: 
a) 4 + 5 
e) j - f-,; 
i) ȋ - Ȋ 
b 
d 
2. Calculate: 
a) % .  * 
. 
, 
e) 
-
'
­
b d 
i) i + .g. 
• 
c 
m) - + -
b 
d 
3. Calculate: 
o 
a) (2 ' 5) (2 . 7) 
d) 2x ' ly 
4. Calculate: 
d) 4x + 8y 
2 
5. Calculate: 
a) v'49 
b) % - 5 
f) Ť - rt  
b)  .  -: 
. 
, 
f) - . -
b • 
n) š + 5΢ 
b) Vil 
c) f - 4 
I 
I 
k) - + -
x 
2 
c) =,!- '  Ţ 
• b 
g) -
'
­
b • 
k)  + -to-
0) -8 + -2 
b) 2. · 2b 
e) 2x ' ly . 4z 
b) l + 6a 
l 
c) .b + .c 
• 
c) v1 
. 
, 
h) - + -
b 
d 
d) (-) . (-t) 
• -c 
h) 
b 
d 
c) 2. · lb 
l. + 6b 
c) --'--
d) VR 

92 
NUMBER: THE FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT 
e) vJ v'J 
6. Simplify: 
a) v32 
e) v1 
7. Write as a fraction: 
a) 0.294 
f) v'2 v'8  
b) v'48 
I) v'Jj 
b) 0.3742 
g) v'2 v'4 
c) vn 
g) v'¥ 
c) 0.08 
8. Approximate by a number which is correct to 1 decimal place: 
a) v'l 
b) v'5 
h) v'2 V1 
d) v'8 
h) v'¥ 
d) 0.003 
c) v'7 
9. Are the following equations true for all values of a and b? [Suggestion: If you 
wish to disprove a general statement. it is sufficient to show one instance where 
it does not hold.) 
a) 2 (a + b) = 2a + 2b 
c) a + b 
= ȉ + Š 
2 
2 
2 
e) va2 + b2 = v'Q2 + v'b2 
g) v'ib = Va vb 
i) Va + b = Va + vb 
b) 2ab = 2a '  2b 
ab 
a b 
d) 
-
= -
'
-
2 
2 2 
f) va2 + b2 = a + b 
h) va2 - b2 = a - b 
to. Write the following numbers in positional notation but in base 2. The only 
digits one can use in base 2 are 0 and 1. 
a) I 
b) 
c) 5 
d) 7 
e) 8 
f) 16 
g) 19 
11. The following numbers are in base 2. Write the corresponding quantities in 
base 10. 
a) I 
b) 101 
c) 110 
d) 1101 
e) 1001 
Topics for Further Investigation 
1 .  The Egyptian method of writing whole numbers and fractions. 
2. The Babylonian method of writing whole numbers and fractions. 
3. The Roman method of writing whole numbers and fractions. 
4. The fundamental arithmetical laws of atomic theory. (Use the references to 
Holton and Roller and to Bonner and Phillips). 
5. Pythagorean number theory, 

Recommended Reading 
APPLICATIONS OF THE NUMBER SYSTEM 
93 
BALL, W. W. ROUSE: A Short Account of the History of Mathematics, Chaps. I and 
2, Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1960. 
BONNER, F. T. and M. PHILLIPS: Principles of Physical Science, Chap. 7, Addison­
Wesley Publishing Co., Inc., Reading, Mass., 1957. 
CoLERUS, EGMONT: From Simple Numbers to the Calculus, Chaps. 1 through 8, Wm. 
Heineman Ltd., Σondon, 1954. 
DANTZIG, TOBIAS: Number, the Language of Science, 4th ed., Chaps. I through 6, 
The Macmillan Co., New York, 1954 (also in a paperback edition). 
DAVIS, PHILIP J.: The Lore of Large Numbers, Random House, New York, 1961. 
EVES, HOWARD: An Introduction to the History of Mathematics, Rev. ed., pp. 29-64, 
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., New York, 1964. 
GAMOW, GEORGE: One Two Three . . .  Infinity, Chap. 9, The New American 
Library, New York, 1953. 
HOLTON, G. and D. H. D. ROLLER: Foundations of Modern Physical Science, Chaps. 
22 and 23, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Inc., Reading, Mass., 1958. 
JONES, BURTON W.: Elementary Concepts of Mathematics, Chaps. 2 and 3, The 
Macmillan Co., New York, 1947. 
SMITH, DAVID EUGENE: History of Mathematics, Vol. I, pp. 1-75, Vol. II, Chaps. 1 
through 4, Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1953. 

CHAPTER 5 
ALGEBRA, THE HIGHER ARITHM ETIC 
Algebra is the intellectual instrument which has been created for rendering 
clear the quantitative aspect of the world. 
ALFRED NORTH WHITEHEAD 
5-1 INTRODUCTION 
Mathematics is concerned with reasoning about certain special concepts, the 
concepts of number and the concepts of geometry. Reasoning about numbers 
-if one is to go beyond the simplest procedures of arithmetic-requires the 
mastery of two facilities, vocabulary and technique, or one might say, vocab­
ulary and grammar. In addition, the entire language of mathematics is charac­
terized by the extensive use of symbolism. In fact, it is the use of symbols 
and of reasoning in terms of symbols which is generally regarded as marking 
the tra'nsition from arithmetic to algebra, though there is no sharp dividing 
line. 
The task of learning the vocabulary and techniques of algebra may be 
compared with that which faces the prospective musician. He must learn to 
read music and he must develop the technique for playing an instrument. 
Since our goal in mathematics is far more the acquisition of an understanding 
than the attainment of professional competence, the problem of learning the 
vocabulary and techniques will hardly be a severe one. 
5-2 THE LANGUAGE OF ALGEBRA 
The nature and use of the language of algebra are readily illustrated, although 
the illustration is at the moment a trivial one. Most readers have encountered 
parlor number games, of which the following is an especially simple example. 
The leader of the game says to any member of the group: Take a number; add 
10; multiply by 3; subtract 30; and give me your answer. And now, says the 
leader, I shall tell you the number you chose originally. To the amazement of 
the audience he does so immediately. The secret of his method is absurdly 
simple. Suppose the subject chooses the number a. Then adding 10 yields 
a + 10. Multiplication by 3 means 3 (a + 10). By the distributive axiom, this 
quantity is 3a + 30. Subtraction of 30 yields 3a. The leader has only to divide 
by 3 the number given to him to tell the subject what his original choice was. 
94 

THE LANGUAGE OF ALGEBRA 
95 
If the leader wishes to be especially impressive, he can ask the subject to 
perform many more computations that will yield a simple and known multiple 
of the original number, and he can give the original number just as readily. 
By representing in the language of algebra the operations which he asks the 
subject to perform and by noting what the operations amount to, the leader 
can easily see how the final result is related to the original number chosen. 
The language of algebra involves more than the use of a letter to represent 
a number or a class of numbers. The expression J(a + 10) contains, in addi­
tion to the usual plus sign of arithmetic, the parentheses which denote that 
the J multiplies the entire quantity a + 10. The notation b' is a shorthand 
expression for b . b and is read b-square. The word square enters here because 
Ii' is the area of a square whose side is b. Likewise, the notation b3 means b ·  b . b 
and is read b-cube. The word cube is suggested by the fact that b3 is the 
volume of a cube whose side is b. The expression (a + b)' means that the 
entire quantity a + b is to be multiplied by itself. An expression such as Jab' 
means J times some quantity a and that product multiplied by the quantity b'. 
In addition, the notation uses the convention that numbers and letters following 
one another with no symbol in between any two are to be multiplied together. 
Another important convention stipulates that if a letter is repeated in an 
expression, it stands for the same number throughout. For example, in a2 + ab 
the value of a must be the same in both terms. Thus algebra uses many 
symbols and conventions to represent quantities and operations with quantities. 
Why do mathematicians bother with such special symbols and conven­
tions? Why must they place hurdles in the way of would-be students of 
their subject? The answer is not that mathematicians are trying to introduce 
hurdles; nor are they seeking to impress people by making their subject look 
awesome. Rather the symbolism of algebra and the symbolism of mathematics 
in general are an unfortunate necessity. The most weighty reason is compre­
hensibility. Symbolism enables the mathematician to write lengthy expressions 
in a compact form so that the eye can see quickly and the mind can retain 
what is being said. To describe in words even the simple expression Jab' + abc 
would require the phrase, "The product of J times a number multiplied by a 
second number which is multiplied into itself added to the product of the first 
number, the second number. and still a third number." It is unfortunate that 
our eyes and minds are limited. The long and complicated sentences that 
would be required if ordinary language were used could not be remembered 
and, in fact, can be so involved as to be incomprehensible. 
In addition to comprehensibility, there is the advantage of brevity. The 
expression in ordinary language of what is covered in typical texts on mathe­
matics would require tomes of two to ten or fifteen times the customary 
size of such books. 
Still another advantage is clarity. Ordinarily English or, for that matter, 
any other language is ambiguous. The statement, "I read the newspaper," can 

96 
ALGEBRA, THE HIGHER ARITHMETIC 
mean that one reads newspapers regularly, once in a while, or often, or that 
one has read the newspaper, presumably the paper of the day. One must 
judge by the context just what this sentence means. Such ambiguity is in­
tolerable in exact reasoning. By using symbols for specific ideas mathematics 
avoids ambiguity or, to put the matter positively, each symbol has its own 
precise meaning, and so the resulting expressions are clear. 
Symbolism is one of the sources of the remarkable power of algebra. Sup­
pose that one wished ro discuss equations of rhe form 2x + 3 = 0, 3x + 7 
= 0, 
4x - 9 = 0, and the like. The particular numbers which appear in these 
equations do not happen to be important in the discussion; in fact, one wishes 
to include all equarions in which the product of some number and x is added 
to some other number. The way to represent all possible equations of this 
form is 
ax + b = 0. 
(1 ) 
Here a stands for any number, and so does b. These numbers are known, 
but their precise value is not stated. The letter x stands for some unknown 
number. By reasoning about the general form ( 1 )  the mathematician covers 
the millions of separate cases which arise when a and b have specific values. 
Thus, by means of symbolism, algebra can handle a whole class of problems 
in one bit of reasoning. 
Of course, it is unfortunate that one must learn the elements of a new 
language to master some mathematics. But one could with much justice 
complain that the French people insist on their language, the Germans on 
theirs, and so on. Obviously English is the best language, and the French and 
Germans are exhibiting provincialism by insisting on holding on to their re­
spective languages. The language of mathematics has the additional merit of 
being universal. 
There are justifiable criticisms of the symbolism of algebra, although they 
are hardly major ones. Mathematicians are greatly concerned about the ac­
curacy of their reasoning, but pay little attention to the aesthetics or appropri­
ateness of their symbolism. Very few symbols suggest their meaning. The 
signs +, 
-, 
=
, varc easy to write, but they are historical accidents. No 
mathematician has bothered to replace these by at least prettier ones, perhaps 0 
for plus. The seventeenth-century mathematician Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, 
who did spend days on the choice of symbols in an effort to make them sug­
gestive, was an exception. There are even inconsistencies in symbolism which, 
once recognized, fortunately do not impair the clarity. For example, when 
two letters, such as ab, are written together with no symbol between them, 
then it is understood that multiplication is meant. However two numbers, 
such as 3t, with no symbol between them, mean 3 + t. 
Symbolism entered algebra rather late. The Egyptians, Babylonians, 
Greeks, Hindus, and Arabs knew and applied a great deal of the algebra which 

EXPONENTS 
97 
we learn in high schoo!. But they wrote out their work in words. Their 
algebraic style is in fact called rhetorical algebra because, except for a few 
symbols, they used ordinary rhetoric. It is significant that symbolism entered 
mathematics in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries when pressure to im­
prove the efficiency of mathematics was applied by science. The idea of using 
symbols was no longer new, but mathematicians were undoubtedly stimulated 
to extend the application of symbolism and to adopt it readily. 
EXERCISES 
1. Why does mathematics use symbols? 
2. Criticize the statement that all men are created equal. 
3. In the following symbolic expressions the letters stand for numbers. Write out 
in words what the expressions state. 
a) a + b 
e) (x + y)(x -- y) 
4. Does 
b) a(a + b) 
f) x + 3 
7 
x + 3 
--
= 
7 
t(x + 3)? 
c) a(a2 + ab) 
g) t(x + 3) 
[Suggestion: What do these symbolic expressions say in words?] 
d) 3x2y 
5. Write in symbols: (a) three times a number plus four; (b) three times the square 
of a number plus four. 
5-3 EXPONENTS 
One of the simplest examples of the convenience of algebraic symbolism or 
algebraic language is found in the use of exponents. We have already used 
frequently such expressions as 52. In this expression the number 2 is an expo­
nent, and 5 is called the base. The exponent is placed above and to the right 
of the base to indicate that the quantity to which it applies, 5 in this example, 
is to be multiplied by itself, so that 5' = 5 . 5. Of course, there would be no 
great value in the use of exponents if their use were limited to such instances. 
Suppose, however, that we wished to indicate 
5 . 5 . 5 . 5 . 5 . 5. 
Here 5 occurs as a factor six times. We can indicate this quantity hy means of 
exponents thus: 56, That is, when the exponent is a positive whole number it 
indicates how many times the quantity to which it is applied occurs as a 
factor in a product of this quantity and itself. In such instances as 5' the use 
of exponents saves a lot of writing and counting of factors. 

98 
ALGEBRA, THE HIGHER ARITHMETIC 
Exponents are even more useful than we have thus far indicated. Suppose 
we wished to write 
5 . 5 . 5 . 5 . 5 . 5 times 5 . 5 . 5 . 5. 
With exponents we can write 
56 . 5'. 
Moreover, the original product calls for 5 multiplied by itself to a total of 
10 factors. This product can be written as 510. We see, however, that if we 
add the exponents in 56 . 5\ we also get 510• That is, it is correct to write 
56 . 5' = 56+' = 5 10. 
More generally, when m and 11 are positive whole numbers, 
This statement is really a theorem on exponents. Its proof is trivial. All that 
the theorem says is that if one quantity contains a as a factor m times, and 
another quantity contains a as a factor 11 times, the product of these two 
quantities contains a as a factor m + 11 times. 
And now suppose we wished to write 
5 . 5 . 5 . 5 . 5 . 5 
5 . 5 . 5 . 5 
With the use of exponents we can write 
56 
5' 
Moreover, if we were to calculate the value of the original quotient, we know 
that we could cancel 5's in the numerator and denominator. We would be 
left with 
5 . 5 or 
We can obtain the same result if in 5'/54 we subtract the 4 from the 6 and so 
arrive at 52, Here. too, as in the case of multiplication, the exponents keep 
track of the number of 5's which occur in the numerator and denominator, and 
the subtraction of the 4 from the 6 tells us the net number of 5's remaining as 
factors. 

EXPONENTS 
99 
]n more general language, we can say that if m and 11 are positive whole 
numbers, and if m is greater than n, then 
This result, too, is a theorem on exponents, and the proof is again trivial be­
cause all the theorem states is that if we cancel the a's common to numerator 
and denominator, we shall have m - 11 factors left over. 
We might find that we have to deal with 
5 ' 5 . 5 . 5 
5 . 5 . 5 . 5 . 5 . 5 
In exponent form this quotient is 
This time, if we cancel the 5's common to the numerator and denominator, we 
are left with 5 occurring twice in the denominator; that is, we are left with 
We can obtain this result at once by subtracting the exponent 4 in the numera­
tor from the exponent 6 in the denominator. ]n general form we have the 
theorem: If m and 11 are positive whole numbers and if n is greater than m, 
then 
There is the possibility of encountering 
5 . 5 . 5 . 5 
5 . 5 . 5 . 5 
In exponent form this quotient is written 
It would be nice to be able to simplify this expression, too, by using exponents. 
However, here, unlike the two previous cases, the twO exponents are equal. If 

100 
ALGEBRA, THE HIGHER ARITHMETIC 
we were to, say, subtract the exponent 4 of the denominator from the exponent 
4 of the numerator, we would have 
5' 
5' 
5'-' = 5° 
Now 5° has no meaning. However we know that 5'/54 has the value 1. If we 
agree to give a meaning to a zero exponent and, in fact, agree that a number 
to the 0 exponent is to be I, then we can use the symbol 5°. Further, with this 
meaning we can properly write 
5' 
-
= 54-' = 5° = 1 
5' 
. 
]n general, if m is a positive whole number, 
EXERCISES 
1. Simplify the following expressions by using the theorems on exponents: 
a) 5" 56 
b) 63 . 6' 
c) 105 . 10' 
d) x2 . x3 
5' 
e) -
5' 
x4 
h) 104 
i) 10 ' 10' 
j) 
5' 
k) 7' 
g) -
10' 
5' 
x2 
74 
f) 10' 
104 
57 . 52 
1) --
58 
2. Could we apply the above theorems on exponents to negative numbers as bases? 
Then, is it true that (-3 )'(-3 )4 = (_3 )9? 
3. Which of the following equations are correct? 
a) 32 + 3' = 36 
b) 32 • 34 = 36 
e) )4 + )' = )8 
We can use exponents even more effectively than has thus far been in­
dicated. Suppose that in the course of algebraic work, there occurred the 
expression 
53 ' 53 ' 53 ' 53 • 
• It is necessary to add that a must not be 0, because then the original quotient has 
no meaning. 

EXPONENTS 
101 
Could we write this more briefly' By the very meanmg of an exponent we 
certainly can write 
53 . 53 . 53 . 53 = (53)4. 
We can go further. The left-hand side of this equation contains 5 as a factor 
12 times. We can recognize the same fact if we multiply the two exponents on 
the right-hand side. That is, 
This example is the essence of another theorem on exponents. namely, if m and 
n are positive integers, then 
There is one more commonly useful theorem on exponents. Suppose we 
wished to denote 
2 . 2 . 2 . 2 . 3 . 3 . 3 . 3 
briefly, by taking advantage of exponents. We certainly could write this 
quantity as 
24 • 34• 
However, we know that the order in which we multiply numbers does not 
matter. Hence it is correct that 
2 ' 2 . 2 . 2 . 3 . 3 . 3 . 3 
= 2 '  3 . 2 . 3 . 2 . 3 . 2 . 3, 
and now if we use exponents, we can say that 
24 ' 34 = (2 ' 3) 4. 
What this fact amounts to, in general terms, is that if m is a positive whole 
number, then 
EXERCISES 
1. Use the theorems on exponents to simplify the following expressions: 
a) 34 ' 34 ' 34 
b) (34)3 
c) (54) , 
d) 10' . 10' . 10' 
e) (104)3 
f) 54 . 24 
g) 37 . 33 
h) 104 . 34 
2. Calculate the values of the following Quantities: 
a) 25 . 55 
b) 24 . 3'" 
c) 45 .  25 
d) (ab) 3 
c) a3b3 
63 
S" 
a' 
(ab) 2 

102 
ALGEBRA, THE HIGHER ARITHMETIC 
3. Which of the following equations are correct? 
a) (3 ' 10)' = 3' · 10' 
d) (32 .  53)' 
= 38 .  5" 
b) (3 ' 102)3 = 33 . 10" 
e) (3')3 = 3' 
c) (3 + 10)' = 3' + 10' 
f) (32)3 = 39 
All the above theorems deal with positive integral (whole-numbered) 
exponents or zero as an exponent. Though we shall not deal with other types 
of numbers as exponents, it is significant to know that the exponent notation 
can be more valuahle than we have thus far indicated. Let us consider y3. We 
know that 
VJ · VJ  = 3. 
Let us suppose that we would like to investigate whether the exponent notation 
could be used to simplify work with irrational numbers. (Of course, this is 
the kind of problem that one takes up when he has nothing better to do.) Now 
the right-hand side of the ahove equation can be written as 31• No matter what 
exponent notation we do adopt for '1/3. say 3a, the equation would have to read 
3a . 3" = 3 I .  
Moreover, we would like, if possible, to maintain the validity of our previous 
theorems on exponents. In the present case, we would like to be able to say 
that 
and since pa = 3', we would have to have Za = 1 or a = 1. What these ex­
ploratory thoughts suggest is that if we denote 
VJ by 
3 1/2 , 
then we would be able to use at least the first theorem on exponents to state 
that 
3 1/2 . 3 1/2 = 3 1/2+1f2 = 3 1 
= 3. 
As a matter of fact, this example typifies what is done. Thus we use the 
notation 
yl 
= 3 1/2, 
and so on. 
5-4 ALGEBRAIC TRANSFORMATIONS 
Symbolism is a means to an end. The function of algebra is not to display 
symbols hut to convert or transform expressions from one form to another 
which may be more useful for the problem in hand. 

ALGEBRAIC TRANSFORMATIONS 
103 
Let us consider an example. Suppose that in the course of some mathe­
matical work we encounter the expression 
(x + 4) (x + 3). 
(2) 
The letter x in this expression may stand for some number whose value we 
do or do not happen to know, or it may stand for any one of some class of 
numbers. What matters is that x stands for a number. If x is a number, then 
x + 4 is a number. We may now apply the distributive axiom, which states 
that for any numbers a, h, and c, 
a(b + c) 
= ab + ac. 
(3) 
If we compare (2) and ( 3 )  we see that (2) has the form of (3) if we think 
of x + 4 in (2) as the a of (3). Then by applying the distributive axiom to 
(2) we may assett that 
(x + 4) (x + 3) = (x + 4)x + (x + 4) 3. 
(4) 
We also know that there is another form of the distributive axiom, namely 
(b + c)a = ba + ca. 
If we apply this axiom to each of the terms on the right side of (4), we see 
that 
(x + 4).x = x2 + 4x 
and 
(x + 4) 3 = 3x + 12. 
If we substitute these last two results on the right side of (4), we have 
or 
(x + 4) (x +  3) = x2 + 4x +  3x + 12 = x2 + (4 + 3)x + 12 
(5) 
(x + 4) (x + 3) = x2 + 7x + 12. 
(6) 
Before discussing what this example illustrates, let us note that we do not 
usually carry out the multiplication of (x + 4) by (x + 3) in this long and 
rather cumbersome fashion. Instead we write 
x + 4  
x + 3 
3x + 12 
x2 + 4x 
x2 + 7x + 1 2. 
The partial product 3x + 12 results from multiplying x + 4 by 3, and the 

104 
ALGEBRA, THE HIGHER ARITHMETIC 
partial product x' + 4x results from multiplying x + 4 by x. The two partial 
products are then added. This manner of carrying out the multiplication is 
faster, but fails to indicate explicitly that we have used the distributive axiom 
several times. 
The main point of the above example is that we have transformed the 
expression (x + 4) (x + 3 )  into the expression x2 + 7x + 12. We do not 
maintain that the latter expression is more attractive than the former, but it 
may be more useful in a particular mathematical application. On the other 
hand, we might, in some situation, find ourselves with the expression x2 + 
7x + 12 and, by recognizing that it is equal to (x + 4) (x +3), be able to 
make progress toward some significant conclusion. In this latter transformation 
we say that we have factored x2 + 7x + 12 into (x + 4) (x + 3). Which of 
the two forms is more useful depends upon the application in hand. At the 
moment we should merely see that algebra is concerned with the technique of 
such transformations, and that a skilled mathematician should be able to per­
form them rapidly. Since we shall not become too involved in complicated 
technical processes, we shall not spend much time in developing skills. 
The problem of factoring to which we referred in the preceding paragraph 
does arise reasonably often. For example, one usually starts with an expression 
such as x' + 6x + 8 and seeks to transform it into a product of factors of the 
form (x + a) (x + b). The original expression is said to be of second degree 
because it contains x' but no higher power of x. The factors are first-degree 
expressions because each contains x but no higher power of x. The problem 
is to find the correct values of a and b so that the product (x + a) (x + b) 
will equal the original expression. We know from our work on multiplication 
[see equation (5) 1 that 
x' + (a + b)x + ab = (x + a) (x + b). 
Hence to factor the second-degree expression, we should look for two num­
bers a and b whose sum is the coefficient of x and whose product is the con­
stant. Thus to factor x2 + 6x + 8, we look for two numbers whose sum is 6 
and whose product is 8. By mere trial of the possible factors of 8 we see that 
a = 4 and b = 2 will meet the requirement; that is: 
x2 + 6x + 8 = (x + 4) (x + 2). 
EXERCISES 
1. Transform to an equal expression: 
a) 3x ' 5x 
d) (x - 3) (x + 3) 
b) (x + 4) (x + 5) 
e) (x + Î)(x + Ƨ) 
c) (3x + 4) (x + 5) 
f) (x + Î) (x - Î) 

ALGEBRAIC TRANSFORMATIONS 
105 
2. Factor the following expressions. Experiment with numbers to find the correct 
factors. 
a) x' + 9x + 20 
d) x' - 9 
b) x' + 5x + 6 
e) x' - 16 
3. Prove that x(x' + 7x) =x" + 7x'. 
c) x' - 5x + 6 
f) x' + 7x - 18 
4. Can you think of a way of testing or verifying (not proving) that 
x' + 5xy + 6y' = (x + 3y) (x + 2y) 
for all values of x and y? 
5. Write out in words the equivalent of 
(x - 3) (x + 3) = x' - 9. 
6. A high school girl had to simplify (a2 - b2)/(a - b). She reasoned that a' 
divided by a gives a. Minus divided by minus gives plus. And b2 divided by b 
gives b. Hence the answer is a + b. Is the answer correct? Is the argument 
correct? 
7. There is a well known "proof" that 2 = I. The proof runs as follows. 
Suppose a and b are two numbers such that 
a =  b. 
We may multiply both sides of this equation by a and obtain 
a2 
= abo 
Now we may subtract b2 from both sides and obtain 
By factoring we may replace the left and right sides of this equation by 
(a - b) (a + b) 
= b(a - b). 
Division of both sides of this equation by a - b yields 
a + b = b. 
Since a = b, we may as well write 
2b = b. 
But now we can divide both sides of this last equation by b, and there results 
2 = I .  
Find the flaw in this proof. 

106 
ALGEBRA, THE HIGHER ARITHMETIC 
5-5 EQUATIONS INVOLVING UNKNOWNS 
The study of algebraic transformations as such is not very interesting. It is 
much like the grammar of a language. The significant uses of these transforma­
tions occur in larger investigations which we shall undertake later. However, 
a direct use of the processes of algebra does arise in the problem of finding 
unknown quantities, a problem not without some interest in itself and one 
which also arises in the course of broader investigations. 
A somewhat practical, though by no means vital, example is the following. 
The radiator of a car contains 10 gallons of liquid 20 per cent of which is 
alcohol. The owner wishes to draw off a quantity of liquid and replace it by 
pure alcohol so that the resulting mixture contains 50 per cent alcohol. How 
many gallons of liquid should he draw off? 
Now the very practical person who "refuses to use mathematics can handle 
this situation very readily. He can draw off 5 gallons of the mixture and re­
place it by 5 gallons of alcohol. Then the mixture will certainly contain at 
least 50 per cent alcohol because even the remaining 5 gallons contain some 
alcohol. However, if the final mixture need contain only 50 per cent alcohol, 
then the practical person has wasted alcohol and therefore money. If he draws 
off 4 gallons, 6 gallons will be left, and since 20 per cent of this is alcohol, the 
alcoholic content is It gallons. If he now adds 4 gallons of alcohol he will 
have 5t gallons of alcohol, or more than 50 per cent, in the 10 gallons. On the 
other hand, if he draws off only J gallons, 20 per cent of the remaining 7 
gallons is t gallons of alcohol, and the addition of J more will yield 4i gallons 
of alcohol out of 10, or less than 50 per cent. The correct answer lies some­
where between 3 and 4, but where? Instead of continuing to guess let's use a 
little algebra. 
Let x be the number of gallons of the mixture to be drawn off and to be 
replaced by an equal amount of pure alcohol. Then the number of gallons 
remaining of the original mixture is 10 - x. Of this 20 per cent, or t, is alcohol, 
so that of the 10 - x gallons, (i) (IO - x) is alcohol. After the x gallons are 
replaced with pure alcohol, the amount of alcohol in the tank will be (!) ( 10 -
x) + x. We should like to fix x so that the amount of alcohol should be 50 
per cent of 10 gallons, or 5 gallons. Hence we seek the value of x which 
satisfies the equation 
HIO - x) + x = 5. 
(7) 
Now we can apply the distributive axiom to start off our transformations and 
write 
! . 10 - tx + x = 5. 
(8) 
The terms - !x + x or x - tx amount to !x. Hence (8) is equivalent to 
2 + !x = 5. 
(9) 

EQUATIONS INvOLVING UNKNOWNS 
107 
If we now subtract 2 from both sides of this equation, the result will still be 
an equality because equals subtracted from equals give equals. Then 
!x = l .  
We now multiply both sides of this equation by ş, and since equals multiplied 
by equals give equals, we have 
x = 3 · :t. 
(10) 
Hence the answer is that the owner of the car should draw off J! gallons of 
the original liquid. We knew before we applied algebra that the answer lies 
between 3 and 4, and we now know exactly where. 
The more significant point made by this example, however, is that we 
started with equation (7) which expresses the condition to be satisfied by the 
unknown quantity x and that, by executing a series of almost mechanical steps 
justified by axioms about numbers, we arrived at a new equation, ( 10), which 
tells us what we wish to know. In other words, we performed a series of 
transformations which carried us from one equation to another and we profited 
thereby. The answer is not sensational, but we see how the manipulation of 
symbols gives us new information. 
There is another point which the above example illustrates, at least in a 
minor way. Once we formulate equation (7) we forget all about the physical 
situation and concentrate solely on the equation. Nothing that is not relevant 
to the problem, i.e., to the problem of determining the number x, interferes 
with our thinking. Ernst Mach, a famous scientist of the late nineteenth cen­
tury, said that mathematics is characterized by "a total disburdening of the 
mind," and we can now see what he meant. The make of the car, the shape 
of the radiator, the fact that the owner may be concerned with protecting the 
liquid in the radiator from freezing, and any other facts which have nothing 
to do with determining x can be forgotten. We disburden our minds of every­
thing but the quantitative facts expressed in equation (7), and proceed to 
handle quantitative relationships only. 
Equation (7) is rather simple. It is called a linear or first-degree equation 
because the unknown x occurs to the first power only. Let us consider a 
second example which will again illustrate the transformation value of algebra, 
but which also has other interesting features. Suppose that one ship is at A 
(Fig. 5-1) and another is at B, exactly 10 miles north of A. The ship at B is 
steaming east at the rate of 2 miles per hour. The ship at A is capable of 
traveling at a speed of 5 miles per hour and wishes to intercept the other ship. 
To set his course properly the captain of the ship at A must know where the 
two will meet. 
Let us suppose that C is the point where they will meet. If the captain 
can determine the distance BC, he will head along the hypotenuse of a right 

108 
ALGEBRA, THE HIGHER ARITHMETIC 
triangle whose arms are AB and BC. Let us therefore denote the distance BC 
by x. Now that we seem to have labeled all relevant quantities, we encounter 
the first puzzling aspect of this problem, namely, that we do not have any 
equation to find x. Without this, of course, we can only sit and do some wish­
ful thinking. Vet we do have enough information to set up such an equation. 
What we have overlooked is a physical fact which is implied by the given 
information: The time that the ship at B will take to travel to C must be the 
same as the time it will take the ship at A to reach C. Since the ship at B 
travels at 2 miles per hour, it will take xl2 hours to reach C. To calculate 
the time required by the ship at A to reach C, we need the distance AC. We 
do not know AC, bur we can at least express its value by means of the 
Pythagorean theorem of geometry. This theorem says in the present instance 
that 
AC' = 100 + x'. 
Brr-"x-,C 
Then 
AC = VTO+ x'. 
The time required for the ship at A to travel the dis-
10 
tance AC at 5 miles per hour is 
ylOO + " 
5 
A 
Fig. 5-1 
We next equate the time required for the ship at B to travel the distance 
BC and the time required for the ship at A to travel the distance AC. This 
equation is 
x 
2 
ylOO + " 
5 
(II) 
We now have an equation to work with. Let us see whether we can trans­
form it so that it will yield a value for x. Since the square root is annoying, 
let us square both sines, i.e., multiply the left side by itself and the right side 
by itself. Since the left side equals the right side we are in effect multiplying 
equals hy equals, and so the step is justified. Squaring both sides, we obtain 
" 
4 
100 + " 
25 
(12) 
Since fractions are also annoying, let us multiply both sides by lOa. We choose 
100 because both 25 "nd 4 divide evenly into 100. Thus 
" 
100 ' - = 
4 
100 + x' 
100 . 
--:c:-
-
25 

EQUATIONS INVOLVING UNKNOWNS 
109 
We may apply our operations with fractions to write 
25x' = 4(100 + x'). 
Application of the distributive axiom yields 
(13) 
Now we subtract 4x2 from both sides, and because equals subtracted from 
equals yield equals, we obtain 
21 x' = 400. 
(14) 
Division of both sides by 21, which is a division of equals by equals, yields 
400 
x
2
=
_ . 
21 
(1 5) 
Now we ask ourselves what number squared yields 400/21. Certainly 
v'400/21 is one possibility. But a negative number squared or multiplied by 
itself is also positive. Hence there are two possible answers: 
x = v'400/21 
and 
x = -v'400/21 .  
(16) 
Let us accept both of these for the moment and dispose first of a purely 
arithmetical question. How much is v'400/21? Well, we can divide 21 into 
400 and obtain 19.05 to two decimal places. We must now find v'19.05. 
There is an arithmetic process for finding the square root of a number, but 
for our purposes it will be sufficient to estimate the answer. Clearly 4 is toO 
small and 5 is too large. By sheer trial we find that (4.3)'= 18.49 and 
(4.4)' =  19.36. Hence the correct value lies between 4.3 and 4.4. If we 
wished to have a more accurate answer, we could now try 4.31, 4.32, and so 
on, until we found a result which came as close to 19.05 as possible, and so 
obtain an answer to the nearest hundredths' place. We shall accept 4.4 as 
good enough for our purposes and thus we may say that 
x = 4.4 
and 
x = -4.4. 
(17) 
And now we have more than we want; we have two answers, whereas we 
sought only one. Of course, we wish to use the positive answer because the x 
we seek stands for a length which is positive. This is the value which has the 
proper physical meaning in our problem. But the question, How did the 
negative value of x get into the picture, remains open. The answer involves 
a rather important point about the nature of mathematics and its relation to 
the physical world. The mathematician starts with concepts and axioms which 

110 
ALGEBRA, THE HIGHER ARITHMETIC 
express some idealized facts about the world, and proceeds to apply these 
concepts and axioms to solve physical problems. In the present case the 
methods used lead to two solutions. Hence the methods may involve new 
elements which arc not present in the physical world, even though the intent 
was to stay close to it. Thus, squaring both sides of equation (I I), a justifiable 
mathematical step, introduced a new solution, for, if our original equation had 
been 
x 
2 
VIO + X2 
5 
(I 8) 
we would have obtained the same equation, (12) and everything we did 
thereafter would have applied to (18) as well as (II). Hence, in this case, 
we can see specifically where mathematics departs from the physical situation. 
The main point to be noted is then that, although mathematical concepts 
and operations are formulated to represent aspects of the physical world, 
mathematics is not to be identified with the physical world. However, it tells 
us a g<'>od deal about that world if we are careful to apply it and interpret it 
properly. We shall find that this point, which eluded the best thinkers until 
the late nineteenth century, will acquire increasing importance as we proceed. 
There is another valuable lesson to be learned from the solution of the 
problem we have just examined. When we arrived at step (13), we combined 
terms in x' and then proceeded to find x. The subsequent work led to a fair 
amount of arithmetic. An engineer working with the same problem and 
perhaps satisfied with an approximate answer might argue that the term 4x' 
is small compared with the term 25x' and so disregard it. Instead of our next 
equation, ( 14), his new equation would then read 
25x2 = 40, 
and by dividing both sides of this equation by 25, he would obtain 
x2 = 16. 
It now follows that 
x = 4  
and 
x = -4. 
Thus 4 is an approximate answer. Engineers often are satisfied with such 
approximations because, in constructing actual objects of wood and steel, they 
cannot meet a specified value exactly. Not only can't one measure exactly, 
but tools and machines also introduce errors. By neglecting 4x' in ( I  J) the 
engineer gained the advantage of finding the approximate answer much more 
readily than we were able to determine the correct answer even to one decimal 
place only. 

EQUATIONS INVOLVING UNKNOWNS 
I I I  
In the present problem the saving is trivial, but approximation may make 
a lot of difference in more difficult problems. Whereas the mathematician, 
who seeks exact answers, will work months and years on a problem, the 
engineer will often settle for an approximate answer and obtain it far more 
easily. The point we are making is not that the engineer is smarter. To get 
on with his job the engineer must arrive at an answer quickly, whereas the 
mathematician's job is to obtain a correct answer, no matter how long it takes. 
Both are true to the objectives and spirit of their own work. Moreover, in 
making approximations, the engineer raises a question which he may not be 
able to answer. How good is his approximation? After all, while physical 
constructions and measurements are not exact, beams must fit. Hence the 
engineer should really ascertain that the approximation is good enough for 
his purposes. If he can tolerate an error of only 0.1 of an inch, he must make 
sure that his approximations do not introduce a larger error. 
In really difficult problems the engineer will make approximations and, 
usually with the aid of a mathematician, determine the error introduced. If 
he cannot do so, he will often overdesign; that is, if the approximate result 
shows that a beam supporting a building need be only one inch thick, he may 
make it two inches thick and thereby hope that he has more than allowed for 
the error. Is he certain even with this precaution that his beam will hold up? 
No. Big bridges have collapsed because such calculations and additional pre­
cautionary measures were not enough. A recent example was the Tacoma 
bridge in the State of Washington. The bridge did not withstand the force of 
the wind and collapsed. 
EXERCISES 
I. The speed of sound in an iron rod is 16,850 ft/sec, and the speed in air is 1100 
ft/sec. If a sound originating at one end of the rod is heard one second sooner 
through the rod than through the air, how long is the rod? 
2. A bridge AB is 1 mi (5280 ft) long in winter and expands 2 ft in the summer. 
For simplicity suppose that the shape in summer is the triangle ACB shown in 
Fig. 5-2. How far does the center of the bridge drop in summer, that is, how long 
is CD? Before calculating the answer, estimate it. To calculate, use the Pythag­
orean theorem and estimate the square root to the nearest foot. 
A 
D 
B 
~ 
C 
Fig. 5-2 
3. An airplane which can fly at a speed of 200 mi;hr in still air flies a distance of 800 
mi with the wind in the same time as it flies 640 mi against the wind. What is the 

112 
ALGEBRA, THE HIGHER ARITHMETIC 
speed of the wind? [Suggestion: If x is the speed of the wind, then the speed of 
(he plane when flying with the wind is 200 + x; the speed of the plane when 
flying against the wind is 200 - x.] 
4. The population of town A is 10,000 and is increasing by 600 each year. The 
population of town B is 20,000 and is increasing by 400 each year. After how 
many years will the two towns have the same population? 
5. A rope hanging from the top of a flagstaff is 2 ft longer than the staff. When 
pulled out taut, it reaches a point on the ground 18 ft from the foot of the staff. 
How high is the staff? 
6. A publisher finds that the cost of preparing a book for printing and of making 
the plates is $5000. Each set of 1000 printed copies cOstS $1000. He can sell the 
books at $5 per copy. How many copies must he sell to at least recover his costs? 
7. We may certainly say that 
! dollar = 25 cents. 
We take the square root of both sides and obtain 
! dollar = 5 cents. 
What is wrong? 
8. A glass which is half full certainly contains as much liquid as a glass which is 
half empty. Then 
! full = ! empty. 
If we multiply both sides by 2 we obtain 
I full = I empty. 
or a full glass contains as much as an empty glass. What is wrong? 
5-6 THE GENERAL SECOND·DEGREE EQUATION 
Our discussion of the solution of equations in the preceding section dealt with 
two types of equations, first-degree equations illustrated by equation (7) and 
second-degree equations illustrated by equation ( 14). No difficulties can arise 
in the process of solving first-degree equations, i.e., equations which, by proper 
algebraic operations, can be expressed in the form 
ax + b = O, 
(19) 
where a and b are definite numbers and x is the unknown. Equation ( 19) can 
readily be solved for x. 
The case of second-degree equations is not so simple. We were fortunate 
that equation (14) led to (15). and that by taking the square root of both 
sides we obtained the two solutions, or roots as they are called. However we 
might have to solve an equation such as 
x2 - 6x + 8 = O. 
(20) 

THE GENERAL SECOND-DEGREE EQUATION 
1 1 3  
This equation is more complicated than ( 14) because (20) also contains the 
first-degree term in x. 
In solving equation (20), we still do not encounter much trouble. We 
know from our work on transforming algebraic expressions that the left-hand 
side of (20) can be factored; that is, the equation can be written as 
(x - 2) (x - 4) 
= o. 
(21) 
We now see that when x = 2, the left side is zero because 
(2 - 2) (2 - 4) = O. 
When x = 4, the left side is again zero because 
(4 - 2) (4 - 4) 
= O. 
Hence the solutions or roots are 
x = 2 
and 
x = 4. 
Now suppose we had to solve the second-degree equation 
,,' + lOx + 8 = O. 
(22) 
This time it is not possible to find simple factors of the left side. Equations 
such as (22) do arise in real problems. Hence the mathematician considers 
the question, Is there a method which will solve such second-degree equations' 
Naturally he studies those he can solve to see whether they furnish any clue 
to such a method. 
Examination of equation (20) reveals an interesting fact. The roots are 
2 and 4. The sum of these two numbers is 6, and the coefficient, or multiplier, 
of x is -6. The product of 2 and 4 is 8, and 8 is the constant term, t,",t is, 
the term free of x. These facts might be a coincidence, and so the mathema­
tician would investigate whether they hold for other simple equations. Con­
sider the very simple equation: 
x
' - 4 = O. 
(23) 
Here the roots are +2 and -2. Their sum is 0, and we note that the term 
in x is missing. which means it is 0 ·  x. The product of the roots is -4, pre­
cisely the constant term in (23). Presumably we have some facts about the 
roots, but how can we use them? 
Equations of the form (23) are easy to solve, since one only has to take a 
square root. Perhaps the method we should seek is one which reduces all 
equations of the type (20) to the type (23). But how do we do this? The 
sum of the roots in (23) is zero. The sum of the roots in (20) is 6, and this is 

1 14 
ALGEBRA. THE HIGHER ARITHMETIC 
the negative of the coefficient of x. If we added to each root of (20) one-half 
the coefficient of x, that is, 
- 3, the sum of the roots would be zero. What 
this suggests, then, is to form a new equation whose roots are the roots of the 
old one, each increased" by one-half the coefficient of x. Since the coefficient 
of x is -6, we let 
y = x + (- 3) = x - 3 
or 
x = y + 3. 
If we substitute this value of x in (20), we obtain 
(y + 3) 2 
- 6(y + 3) + 8 = O. 
(24) 
We now calculate the square in the first term, carry out the multiplication in 
the second term, and find that 
y2 + 6y + 9  
6y - 1 8  + 8 = 0 
or 
y2 
_ 1 = O. 
Then 
y2 = 
and 
y =  
and 
y = - 1 .  
But from (24) we see that 
and 
x = - 1  + 3 
or 
x = 4 
and 
x = 2. 
Thus we obtain without factoring the very same roots of equation (20) that 
we found previously by factorization. 
Now let us reconsider equation (22), namely 
x2 + lOx + 8 = O. 
(22) 
Since the roots cannot be obtained by any apparent method of factoring, let 
us see whether the idea just tried works here also; that is. let us form a new 
equation whose roots are the roots of (22) increased by one-half the coeffi-
• We use the term "increased" here, even though in the example we add a negative 
quantity to each root and really decrease the value of the roots. 

THE GENERAL SECOND-DEGREE EQUATION 
115 
cient of x. The roots of (22) are represented by x. Then we shall form a new 
equation whose roots y are: 
y = x + ¥ = x + 5. 
(25) 
From (25) we have 
x = y - 5. 
(26) 
We substitute this value of x in (22) and obtain 
(y - 5)' + 1O(y - 5) + 8 = O. 
We perform the indicated multiplications and obtain 
y' - lOy + 25 + lOy - 50 + 8 = O. 
By combining terms we find that 
y' 
17 = 0 
or 
y' = 17. 
Then 
y = vu 
and 
y = 
-VU
. 
We now use (26) to state that 
x = VU - 5  
and 
x = -VU - 5. 
(27) 
We have found the two roots of (22) without factoring. 
EXERCISES 
1. Find the roots of the following equations by factoring the left-hand side: 
a) x' - 8x + 12 = 0 
b) x' + 7x - 18 = 0 
2. Find the roots of each of the equations in Exercise 1 by forming a new equation 
whose roots are "larger" than those of the original equation by one-half the 
coefficient of x. 
3. Solve the following equations by the method of forming a new equation whose 
roars are "larger" than those of the original equation by one-half the coefficient 
of x. 
a) x' + 12x + 9 = 0 
b) x' - 12x + 9 = 0 
The method of solving second-degree equations by forming a new equa­
tion seems to work, but we have no proof that it will always work. To secure 

116 
ALGEBRA, THE HIGHER ARrTHMETIC 
a general proof we shall use one of the basic devices of algebra; that is, instead 
of working with particular equations, we shall consider the general second­
degree equation 
x2 + px + q = O. 
(28) 
Here p and q are letters, each of which can stand for any given real number. 
The use of the letters p and q must be distinguished from the use of x to stand 
for the specific unknown rOOts of the equation. Now we follow the method 
employed to solve equations (20) and (22); that is, we form a new equation 
whose roots are the roots of (28), each increased by one-half the coefficient 
of x. This means that we introduce the expression 
Then 
(29) 
We substitute this value of x in (28) and obtain 
By squaring the first term and multiplying through by p in the second one, 
we obtain 
2 
2 
y2 
_ py + L + py 
_ f!.:. + q = O. 
4 
2 
The terms involving py cancel. Moreover, p2/4 - p2/2 = -p'/4. Hence 
2 
y2 
_ L + q = O. 
4 
By adding p'/4 to both sides and subtracting q from both sides, we obtain 
Hence 
y = p: - q 
2 
p2 
Y 
= - - q. 
4 
and 
y = 
-l: - q. 
In this general case, we cannot determine the numerical value of the square 

THE GENERAL SECOND-DEGREE EQUATION 
117 
root, but we can leave the result in this form. We now see from equation 
(29) that 
x = Ip' 
_ q 
_ e 
'V 4  
2 
and 
(30) 
This result is remarkable.· We have shown that the roots of any equation 
of the form (28) (that is, no matter what p and q are) are given by the ex­
pressions (30). 
We really have accomplished more than we sought to accomplish. We 
sought a method of solving an equation such as (22). We not only have 
found such a method, but, since the result (30) holds for any such equation, 
we do not have to go through the entire process each time; we proceed by 
simply substituting the proper value of p and q in (30). Thus if we compare 
equations (22) and (28), we see that the p in (22) is 10 and q is 8. Hence 
let us substitute [0 for p and 8 for q in (30). We find 
x = v# - 8 - V-
and 
x = - v# - 8 - V- ,  
or 
x = Vl7 - 5  
and 
x = -Vl7 - 5. 
(Jl) 
This is exactly the result obtained in (27). 
By working with the general form x' + px + q = 0 instead of equations 
with specific numbers as coefficients, we have shown how to solve any second­
degree equation. This general result could never be derived from equation, 
with numerical coefficients because there are infinitely many such equations, 
and one could not investigate them all. Thus the use of letters to represent 
any one of a class of numbers gives mathematics a power and generality 
which achieves what could not be accomplished in many lifetimes of effort 
with particular equations. Of course, to people who do not care to solve one 
quadratic the ability to solve all is no boon. But even these people have 
benefited indirectly. The preceding theory illustrates how the mathematician, 
when called upon to solve the same type of problem repeatedly, seeks a general 
method which will handle all of them . 
• In many books a method is given for solving the general second-degree equation 
ax' + hx + c = O. If we divide this equation by a, we obtain x' + (hla)x + (cia) = o. 
This equation is now of the same form as (28), where p = bja and q = cia. If we 
enter these values of p and q in (30), we get the roots 
b 
-v!"b,;;--'-4a::, 
x = - - + -=-=---''' 
2a 
2a 
and 
x =  
b 
-v!"'
b,'----;4a-:::, 
- - - -'--'--"" 
2a 
2a 

1 18 
ALGEBRA, THE HIGHER ARITHMETIC 
The use of letters such as p and q, which has made an enormous difference 
in the effectiveness of mathematics, seems like a small idea once understood, 
and yet it is a rather recent development. From the time of the Babylonians 
and Egyptians to about 1550, all the equations solved had numerical coefficients. 
Although many algebraists realized that the method they used for one set of 
numerical coefficients would work for any other, they had no general proof. 
The idea of employing general coefficients in algebraic equations, an idea 
which, as we shall see, was taken over into other domains of mathematics, is 
due to Franމois Vieta (1540--1603), a great French mathematician. The re­
markable fact about Vieta is that he was a lawyer who worked for the kings 
of France. Mathematics was just a hobby to him, but one at which he 
"worked" extensively. Vieta was ful1y conscious of what he had done by in­
troducing literal coefficients. He said that he was introducing a new kind of 
algebra which he called logistica speciosa, that is calculation with whole species, 
as opposed to the numerical work of his predecessors which he called logistica 
llumerosa. 
We could consider other examples of how the processes of algebra permit 
us to solve equations involving unknowns, but we shall not devote more time 
to the subject. What is important is the recognition that by means of algebra 
we can extract information from some given facts. ] t is also important to see 
how readily and mechanically the processes of solving equations yield the 
desired information. In fact, one of the curious things about mathematics that 
clearly emerges even from our brief work in algebra is that mathematics which 
is concerned with reasoning nevertheless creates processes which can be applied 
almost mechanically, that is, without reasoning. The thinking is, so to speak, 
mechanized and this mechanization enables us to solve complicated problems 
in no time. We think up processes so that we don't have to think. 
It may be necessary to caution the reader again that while the techniques 
of transformations are necessary to perform useful and interesting mathe­
matical work, they are not the substance of mathematics. If all that one learns 
in mathematics is the ability to execute these techniques, however quickly and 
accurately, he will not see the real purpose, nature, and accomplishments of 
mathematics. To a large extent, techniques are a necessary evil, like practicing 
scales on a piano, in order to be able to play grand and beautiful compositions. 
Naturally those who wish to be professional mathematicians must learn as 
many of these techniques as possible. 
EXERCISES 
I. Solve by means of (30) the following equations: 
a) x2 - 8x + 10 = 0 
d) 2x2 + 8x + 6 = 0 
b) x2 + 8x + 10 = 0 
e) x2 - 8x + 16 = 0 
c) x2 - 6x - 9 = 0 

HISTORY OF EQUATIONS OF HIGHER DEGREE 
1 19 
* 5-7 THE HISTORY OF EQUATIONS OF HIGHER DEGREE 
The search for generality in mathematics began in the sixteenth century. One 
type of generality became possible when Vieta showed how to treat a whole 
class of equations by means of literal coefficients. Another direction which 
the search for generality took was the investigation of equations of degree 
higher than the second. 
The first of the notable mathematicians to pursue the mathematics of 
equations of higher degree and certainly the greatest combination of mathe­
matician and rascal is Jerome Cardan. He was born in Pavia, italy, in 1501 
to somewhat disreputable parents, although his father was a lawyer, doctor, 
and minor mathematician. Cardan had no upbringing worth speaking about 
and was sickly during the first half of his life. Despite these handicaps, he 
studied medicine and became so celebrated a physician that he was invited to 
treat prominent people in many countries of Europe. At various times he was 
professor of medicine, and he also lectured on mathematics at several Italian 
universities. 
He was aggressive, high-tempered, disagreeable, and even vindictive, as 
if anxious to make the world suffer for his early deprivations. Because illnesses 
continued to harass him and prevented him from enjoying life, he gambled 
daily for many years. This experience undoubtedly helped him to write a 
now famous book, 0" Games of Chance, which treats the probabilities in 
gambling. He even gives advice on how to cheat, which was also gleaned from 
expeflence. 
A product of his age in many respects, Cardan collected and published 
prolifically legends, false philosophical and astrological doctrines, folk cures, 
methods of communion with spirits, and superstitions. Apparently he himself 
believed in spirits and in astrology. He cast horoscopes, many of which proved 
to be false. Toward the end of his life he was imprisoned for casting the 
horoscope of Christ, but was soon pardoned, pensioned by the Pope, and lived 
peacefully until his death in 1576. In his Book of My Life, an autobiography, 
he says that despite his years of trouble he has to be grateful, for he had 
acquired a grandson, wealth, fame, learning, friends, belief in God, and he still 
had fifteen teeth. 
Part of Cardan's rascality concerns our present subject. The mathema­
ticians of the sixteenth century had undertaken to solve higher-degree equa­
tions, for example, equations of the third degree such as 
x3 - 6x = 8. 
Among them was another famous man. Nicolo of Brescia, better known as 
Tartaglia (1499-1557), whom we shall meet occasionally in other contexts. 
Tartaglia had discovered a method for solving third-degree equations, and 
Cardan wished to publish this method in a book he was writing on algebra, 

120 
ALGEBRA, THE HIGHER ARITHMETIC 
which later appeared under the title Ars Magna, the first major book on 
algebra in modern times. After refusing to divulge the method, Tartaglia 
finally acquiesced, but asked Cardan to keep it secret. However, Cardan 
wished his book to be as important as possible and so published the method, 
though acknowledging that it was Tartaglia's. From this book, which appeared 
in 1545, the mathematical world learned how to solve third-degree equations. 
In this same book Cardan also published a method of solving fourth-degree 
equations discovered by one of his own pupils, Lodovico Ferrari ( 1522-1565). 
Although general coefficients were not in use as yet, it was clear that all third­
and fourth-degree equations could be solved. In other words, the solutions 
could be expressed in terms of the coefficients by means of the ordinary 
operations of algebra, i.e., addition, subtraction, multiplication, division. and 
roots (though not necessarily square roots), in just about the manner in which 
( 30) expresses the solutions of a second-degree equation in terms of the co­
efficients p and q. 
And now the mathematicians' interest in generality rook over. Since the 
general equations of the first, second, third, and fourth degree could be solved, 
what about fifth-, sixth- and higher-degree equations? It seemed certain that 
these equations could also be solved. For three hundred years many mathe­
maticians worked on this basic problem and made almost no progress. And 
then a young Norwegian mathematician, Niels Henrik Abel (1802-1829), 
showed at the age of 22 that fifth-degree equations could not be solved by the 
processes of algebra. Another youth, Evariste Galois ( 181 1-1832), who failed 
twice ro pass the entrance examinations for the fcole Poly technique and spent 
just one year at the f.cole Normale, demonstrated that all general equations of 
degree higher than the fourth cannot be solved by means of the operations of 
algebra. In a letter he wrote the night before he was killed in a duel, Galois 
explained his ideas and showed how a new and general theory of the solution 
of equations could be developed. Galois' ideas gave algebra a totally new turn. 
Instead of being a tool, a series of techniques for the transformation of ex­
pressions into more useful ones, it became a beautiful body of knowledge which 
can be of interest in itself. Unfortunately we cannot undertake to study Galois' 
ideas, or the Galois theory as it is called, because there are more basic things to 
be learned first. 
This brief account of the search for generality in the solution of equations 
has been given here because it illustrates many important features of mathe­
matics. One is the persistence, stubbornness if you will, of mathematicians 
over hundreds of years. Another is the experience that the search for gen­
erality leads to new and important developments, even though at the outset 
the generality is sought for its own sake. Today, the solution of higher-degree 
equations is a most practical marter, and we owe to Galois the most revealing 
insight into this subject. We also find in this history of the theory of equations 
a major example of how mathematicians find prohlems on which to work, 

HISTORY OF EQUATIONS OF HIGHER DEGREE 
121 
problems of significance drawn from other problems which have humble and 
practical origins such as simple equations involving unknowns. 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
I. Carry out the indicated multiplication: 
a) 3(2x + 6) 
d) (x + 3)(x -- 3) 
g) (x + y) (x -- y) 
b) (x + 3)(x + 2) 
e) (x + Ş) (x + 6) 
c) (x + 7)(x -- 2) 
f) (2x + 1) (x + 2) 
2. Factor the following expressions. You may have to experiment to find the 
correct factors. 
a) x2 - 9 
d) a2 _ b2 
g) x' + 5x + 4 
j) x' -- 5x + 4 
m) x' + 6x -- 27 
b) x' -- 16 
e) x' + 6x + 9 
h) x' -- 6.; + 9 
k) x' -- 7x + 12 
c) x2 - a2 
f) x' + 7x + 6 
i) x' -- 7x + 6 
1) x' + 6x -- 16 
3. If 2x + 7 = 5, what does 2x equal, and what does x equal? 
4. Solve the following equations. State what you do in each step. 
a) 2x + 9 == 12 
b) 2x + 12 == 9 
c) -to + 3 == 4  
d) -to + ϸ == Ŝ 
e) fo + ! == ŝ 
f) 3x + fa == ! 
g) ¥ + ϸ =  6 
h) ax + 2 == b 
i) ax -- b == c 
5. A solution of acid and water contains 75% water. How many grams of acid 
would you add to 50 grams of the solution to make the percentage of water 
60%? 
6. A student has grades of 60 and 70 on two examinations. What grade must he 
earn on a third examination to attain an average of 75%? 
7. Solve the following equations by factoring: 
a) x' -- 6x + 5 == 0 
d) x' + 6x -- 27 == 0 
b) x' -- 6x -- 7 == 0 
e) " -- 7x + 12 == 0 
c) x' -- 7x + 6 == 0 
f) x' -- 5x -- 14 == 0 
8. Solve the following equations by the method of forming a new equation whose 
roots are "larger" than those of the original equation by one-half the coefficient 
of x. 
a) x' + lOx + 9 == 0 
b) x' -- lOx + 9 == 0 
c) x' + lOx + 6 == 0 

122 
ALGEBRA, THE HIGHER ARITHMETIC 
d) x' - lOx + 6 = O  
e) x' - 12x + 15 = 0 
f) x' + 12x + 15 = 0 
9. Solve the following equations by applying formula (30) of the text: 
a) x' + 12x + 6 = 0 
d) x' - 12x - 6 = 0 
g) t' + lOt = 8 
b) x' - I 2x + 6 = 0 
e) 2x' + 1 2x + 6 = 0 
c) x' + 12x - 6 = 0 
f) 3%' + 27x + 1 5 = 0  
10. In Section 5-5 of the text, we solved a problem wherein one ship sets its course 
properly so as to overtake another ship. To set up the equation which solved 
the problem, equation (11), we started by letting x be the distance which the 
ship traveling east covers. Solve the same problem by letting t be the time that 
both ships travel until they meet. Then x = 2t. The algebra of this alternative 
solution is easier to handle. However it is not so obvious that we should let our 
unknown be the time of travel. 
Topics for Further Investigation 
1. The rise of symbolism in algebra. 
2. The history of the solution of equations. 
Recommended Reading 
BALL, W. W. ROUSE: A Short Account of the History of Mathematics, pp. 201-243. 
Dover Publications Inc., New York, 1960. 
COLERUS, EGMONT: From Simple Numbers to the Calculus, Chaps. 9 through 13. 
Wm. Heinemann Ltd., London, 1954. 
ORE, OYSTEIN: Cardano, The Gambling Scholar, Chaps. 1 through 5, Princeton 
University Press, Princeton, 1953. 
SAWYER, W. W.: A Mathematician's Delight, Chap. 7. Penguin Books Ltd., Har­
mondsworth, England. 1943. 
SMITH, DAVID E.: History of Mathematics, Vol. II, pp. 378-470, Dover Publications 
Inc., New York, 1958. 
WHITEHEAD, ALFRED N.: An Introduction to Mathematics, Chaps. V and VI, Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, Inc., New York, 1939 (also in paperback). 

CHAPTER 6 
THE NATURE AND USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOM ETRY 
Circles to square and cubes to double 
Would give a man excessive trouble. 
MATTHEW PRIOR 
6-1 THE BEGINNINGS OF GEOMETRY 
Just as the study of numbers and its extensions fo algebra arose out of the very 
practical problems of keeping track of property, trading, taxation, and the like, 
so did the study of geometry develop from the desire to measure the area of 
pieces of land (or geodesy in general), to determine the volumes of granaries, 
and to calculate the dimensions and amount of material needed for various 
structures. 
The physical origin of the basic figures of geometry is evident. Not only 
the common figures of geometry bur the simple relationships, such as per­
pendicularity, parallelism, congruence, and similarity, derive from ordinary 
experiences. A tree grows perpendicular to the ground, and the walls of a 
house are deliberately set upright so that there will be no tendency to fall. 
The banks of a river are parallel. A builder constructing a row of houses ac­
cording to the same plan wishes them to have the same size and shape, that is, 
to be congruent. A workman or machine producing many pieces of a particu­
lar item makes them congruent. Models of real objects are often similar to the 
object represented, especially if the model is to be used as a guide to the con­
struction of the object. 
The science of geometry, indeed, the science of mathematics, was founded 
by the Greeks of the classical period. We have already described the major 
steps: the recognition that there afe abstract concepts or ideas such as point, 
line, triangle, and the like, which are distinct from physical objects, the adop­
tion of axioms which contained the surest knowledge about these abstractions 
man can obtain, and the decision to prove deductively any other facts abour 
these concepts. The Greeks converted the disconnected, empirical, limited 
geometrical facts of the Egyptians and Babylonians into a vast, systematic, and 
thoroughly deductive structure. 
12l 

124 
NATURE AND USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
Although the Greeks also studied the properties of numbers, they favored 
geometry. The reasons are pertinent. First of all, the Greeks liked exact 
thinking, and found that this faculty was more readily applied to geometry. 
Possible theorems are rather easily gleaned from the visualization of geometri­
cal configurations. The neat correspondence between deductively established 
conclusions and intuitive understanding further increases this appeal of geom­
etry. That one can draw pictures to represent what one is thinking about in 
geometry has its drawbacks. One is prone to confuse the abstract concept with 
the picture and to accept unconsciously properties of the picture. Of course, 
the idea of a triangle must be distinguished from the triangle drawn in chalk 
or pencil, and no properties of the picture may be used unless they are con­
tained in the axioms or in some previously proved theorem. The Greeks were 
careful to make this distinction. 
Secondly, the Greek philosophers who founded mathematics were in­
trigued with the design and structure of the universe, and they studied the 
heavens. certainly the most impressive spectacle in nature. to fathom the 
design. The shapes and paths of the heavenly bodies and the over-all plan 
of the solar system were of interest. On the other hand, they hardly saw any 
value in the ability to describe the exact locations of the moon, sun. and 
planets and to predict their precise locations at a given time, information of 
importance in calendar reckoning and in navigation. 
Thirdly, since commerce and daily business were handled in large part by 
slaves, and were in any case in low regard. the study of numbers, which 
served such purposes, was subordinated. Why worry abour the uses of num­
bers for measurement and trade if one does not measure or trade? One does 
not need the dimensions of even one rectangle to speculate about the properties 
of all rectangles. 
The Greek philosophers emphasized an aspect of reality which is today, 
at least in scientific circles, neglected. To the Greeks of the classical period 
the reality of the universe consisted of the forms which matter possessed. 
Matter as such was formless and therefore meaningless. But an object in the 
shape of a triangle was significant by the very fact that it was triangular. 
Finally, there were purely mathematical grounds for the Greek emphasis 
on geometry. The Greeks were the first to recognize that quantities such as 
VI. V3, iVl, etc., are neither whole numbers nor fractions, but they failed 
to recognize that these were new types of numbers, and that one could reason 
with them. To handle all types of quantities, they conceived the idea of 
treating them as line segments. As line segments, the hypotenuse of a right 
triangle (Fig. 4--2) and the arms have the same character, despite the fact that 
if the arms are each 1 unit long, the hypotenuse has the irrational length Vi, 
To execute their plan of treating all quantities geometrically, the Greeks 
converted the algebraic processes developed in Egypt and Babylonia into 
geometrical ones. We could illustrate how the Greeks solved equations geo-

THE CONTENT OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
125 
metrically, but their methods are no longer favored. For science and engineer­
ing, the knowledge that a certain line segment solves an equation is not nearly 
so useful as a numerical answer which can be calculated to as many decimal 
places as needed. But the classical Greeks, who regarded exact reasoning as 
paramount in importance and who deprecated practical applications, found the 
solution of their difficulty in geometry and were conte.nt with this solution. 
Geometry remained the basis for all exact mathematical reasoning until the 
seventeenth century, when the needs of science forced the shift to number 
and algebra and the ultimate recognition that these could be built up as 
logically as geometry. In the intervening centuries arithmetic and algebra 
were regarded as practical disciplines. 
Of course. the Greek conversion of exact mathematics to geometry was, 
from our present viewpoint, a backward step. Not only are the geometrical 
methods of performing algebraic processes insufficient for science, engineer­
ing, commerce, and industry, bur they are by comparison clumsy and lengthy. 
Moreover. because Greek geometry was so complete and so admirable, mathe­
maticians following in the Greeks' footsteps continued to think that exact 
mathematics must be geometrical. As a consequence, the development of 
algebra was unnecessarily delayed. 
6-2 THE CONTENT OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
The major book on geometry of the classical Greek era is Euclid's Elements, 
a work on plane and solid geometry. Written about 300 B.C., it contains the 
best results produced by dozens of fine mathematicians during the period from 
600 to 300 B.C. The work of Thales, the Pythagoreans, Hippias, Hippocrates, 
Eudoxus, members of Plato's Academy, and many others furnished the material 
which Euclid organized. His text was not the first to be written, but un­
fortunately we do not have copies of the earlier ones. It is quite certain that 
the particular axioms one finds in the Ele11ents, the arrangement of the the­
orems, and many of the proofs are all due to Euclid. The geometry texts used 
in high schools today in essence reproduce Euclid's work, although these 
contemporary versions usually contain only a small part of the 467 theorems 
and many corollaries found in the Elements. Euclid's version is so marvelously 
knit together that most readers are amazed to see so many profound theorems 
deduced from the few self-evident axioms. 
Though the reader may already be familiar with the basic theorems of 
Euclidean geometry, we shall take a few moments to review some features of 
the subject and the nature of the accomplishment. We might nOte first the 
structure of Euclid's Elements. He begins with some definitions of the basic 
concepts: point, line, circle, triangle, quadrilateral, and the like. Although 
modern mathematicians would make some critical comments about these 
definitions, we shall not discuss them at present. (See Chapter 20.) 

126 
NATURE AND USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
Euclid then states ten axioms on which all subsequent reasoning is based. 
We shall note these merely to see that they do indeed describe apparently 
unquestionable properties of geometric figures. The first five axioms are: 
AXIOM 
1. Two points determine a unique straight line. 
AXIOM 2. A straight line extends indefinitely far in either direction. 
AXIOM 
3. A circle may be drawn with any given center and any given 
radius. 
AXIOM 4. All right angles are equal. 
P 
m 
Fig. 6-1. 
The parallel axiom. 
AXIOM 5. Given a line I (Fig. 6-1) and a point P not on that line, there 
exists in the plane of P and I and through P one and only one line m, which 
does not meet the given line I. 
In a separate defil1ition Euclid defines parallel lines to be any two lines in 
the same plane which do not meet, that is, do not have any points in common. 
Thus, Axiom 5 asserts the existence of parallel lines. 
The remaining five axioms are: 
AXIOM 6. Things equal to the same thing are equal to each other. 
AXIOM 7. If equals be added to equals, the sums are equal. 
AXIOM 8. If equals be subtracted from equals, the remainders are equal. 
AXIOM 9. Figures which can be made to coincide are equal (congruent). 
AXIOM 10. The whole is greater than any part. 
The formulations of these axioms are not quite the same as those pre­
scribed by Euclid. Axiom 5 is, in fact, different from Euclid's, but is stated 
here in the form which is most likely to be familiar to the reader. The differ­
ences between Euclid's versions and those introduced by later mathematicians 
are not important for our present purposes, and so we shall not take time now 
to note them. (See Chapter 20.) 
After stating his axioms, Euclid proceeded to prove theorems. Many of 
these theorems are indeed simple to prove and obviously true of the geo­
metrical figures involved. But Euclid's purpose in proving them was to play 
safe. As we shall see in later chapters, many a conclusion seems obvious but 
is false. Of course, the major proofs are those which establish conclusions that 
are not at all obvious and, in some cases, even come as a surprise. 

THE CONTENT OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
127 
Partly to refresh our memories about some theorems of Euclidean geom­
etry and partly to note once again the deductive procedure of mathematics, 
let us review one or two proofs. A basic theorem of Euclidean geometry 
asserts the following: 
THEOREM I. An exterior angle 
mote interior angle of the triangle. 
B 
, 
C 
of a triangle is greater than either re-
Fig. 6-2. 
An exterior angle of a triangle is greater 
than either remote interior angle. 
Before proving this theorem, let us be clear about what it says. Angle D, 
in Fig. 6-2, is called an exterior angle of triangle ABC because it is outside 
the triangle and is formed by one side, Be, and an extension of another side, 
AC. With respect to angle D, angles A and B are remote interior angles of 
triangle ABC, whereas angle C is an adjacent interior angle. Hence we have 
to prove that angle D is larger than angle A and larger than angle B. Let us 
prove that angle D is larger than angle B. 
' 
A 
C 
Fig. 6-3 
The problem before us is a tantalizing one because, while it does seem 
visually obvious that angle D is greater than angle B, there is no apparent 
method of proof. An idea is needed, and this is supplied by Euclid. He tells 
us to bisect side BC (Fig. 6-3), to join the mid-point E of BC to A, and to 
extend AE to the point F, so that AE = EF. He then proves that triangle 
AEB is congruent to triangle CEF, that)s, that the sides and angles of one 
triangle are equal, respectively, to the sides and angles of the other. This 
congruence is easy to prove. Euclid had previously proved that vertical angles 
are equal, and we see from Fig. 6--3 that angles 1 and 2 are vertical angles. 
Further, the fact that E is the mid-point of BC means that BE = EC. More­
over, we constructed EF to equal AE. Hence, in the two triangles in question, 
two sides and the included angle of one triangle are equal to two sides and the 
included angle of the other. But Euclid had previously proved that two tri­
angles are congruent if merely two sides and the included angle of one are 

128 
NATURE AND USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
equal to two sides and the included angle of the other. Since these facts are 
true of our triangles, the two triangles must be congruent. 
Because triangles AEB and CEF are congruent, angle B of the first triangle 
equals angle 3 of the second one. We know that angle 3 is the angle to choose 
in the second triangle as the angle which corresponds to B, because angle B 
is opposite AE, and angle 3 is opposite the corresponding equal side EF. The 
proof is practically finished. Angle D is larger than angle 3 because the whole, 
angle D in our case, is greater than the part, angle 3. Hence angle D is also 
greater than angle B because angle B has the same size as angle 3. 
We have now proved a major theorem, and we should see that a series of 
simple deductive arguments leads to an indubitable result. 
And now let us prove another, equally important theorem which will 
exhibit one or two other features of Euclid's work: 
THEOREM 2. If two lines are cut by a transversal so as to make alternate 
interior angles equal, then the lines are parallel. 
Fig. 6-4 
Again let us see what the theorem means before we consider its proof. 
In Fig. 6-4, AB and CD are two lines cut by the transversal EF. The angles 
1 and 2 are called alternate interior angles, and we are told that they are equal. 
The theorem asserts that, under this condition, AB must be parallel to CD. As 
in the case of the preceding theorem, the assertion is seemingly correct, and 
yet the method of proof is by no means apparent. 
Here Euclid uses what is usually called the indirect method of proof; 
that is, he supposes that AB is not parallel to CD. Two lines that are not 
parallel must, by definition, meet somewhere. Thus AB and CD meet, let us 
say, in the point G. But now EG, GF, and FE form a triangle. Angle 2 is an 
exterior angle of this triangle and angle I is a remote interior angle. Since 
we have the theorem that in any triangle an exterior angle is greater than 
either remote interior angle, it follows that angle 2 must be greater than angle 
1. But, in the above figure, we were given as fact that angle 2 equals angle 1. 
We have arrived at a contradiction which. if we did not make any mistakes 
in reasoning. has only one explanation: somewhere we introduced a false 
premise. We find that the only questionable fact is the assumption that AB 
is not parallel to CD. But there are only two possibilities, namely, that AB 
is parallel to CD or that it is not parallel to CD. Since the latter supposition 

THE CONTENT OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
129 
led to a contradiction, it must be that AB is parallel to CD. Thus the theorem 
is proved. 
We should be sure to note that the indirect method of proof is a deductive 
argument. The essence of the argument is that if AB is not parallel to CD, 
then angle 2 must be greater than angle I. But angle 2 is not greater than 
angle 1. Hence it is not true that AB is nOt parallel to CD. But AB is or is 
not parallel to CD. If :lonparallelism is not true then parallelism must hold. 
Though we shall use a few other theorems of Euclidean geometry in sub­
sequent work, we shall not present their proofs. We are now reasonably 
familiar with the nature of proof in geometry, and so we shall merely state 
the theorems when we wish to use them. 
Perhaps one other point about the contents of the Elements warrants 
attention. A superficial survey of the many different theorems may leave one 
with the impression that the Greek geometers proved what they could and 
produced merely a melange. But there are broad themes in Euclidean geom­
etry, and these are pursued systematically. The first major theme is the study 
of conditions under which geometric figures must be congruent. This is a 
highly practical subject. Suppose, for example, that a surveyor has twO tri­
angular pieces of land and wishes to show that they are equal or congruent. 
Must he measure all the sides and all the angles of the first piece and show that 
they are of the same size, respectively, as the sides and angles of the second 
piece? Not at all' There are several Euclidean theorems which can aid the 
surveyor. If he can show, for example, that two angles and the included side 
of the first triangle equal, respectively, the two angles and the included side 
of the second one, then Euclid's theorem tells him that the triangular pieces of 
land must be equal. 
A second major theme in Euclid's work is the similarity of figures, that 
is, figures with the same shape. We have already mentioned that models of 
houses, ships, and other large structures are often built to assist in planning. 
One may wish to know what conditions will guarantee the similarity of the 
model and the actual structure. Let us suppose that the model or some part 
of it is triangular in shape. One of Euclid's theorems tells us that if the cor­
responding sides of two triangles have the same ratio, then the two triangles 
will be similar. Thus, if the model is constructed so that each side of the model 
is n\o of the corresponding side of the actual structure, we know that the 
model will be similar to the structure. This similarity is useful because, by 
definition, twO triangles are similar if the angles of one equal the corresponding 
angles of the other. Hence, an engineer can measure the angles of the model 
and know precisely what the angles of the actual structure will be. 
Suppo,e that two figures are neither congruent nor similar. Could they 
have some other significant property in common? One answer. clearly, is 
area. And so Euclid considers conditions under which two figures may have 
the same area, or, in Euclid's language, be equivalent. 

1 30 
NATURE AND USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
Tetrahedron 
Dodecahedron 
_ - - - .-1. ... ... _ 
- -
« 
Cube 
Icosahedron 
Octahedron 
Fig. 6-5. 
The five regular polyhedra. 
There are many other themes in Euclid, such as interesting proper'ties of 
circles, quadrilaterals, and regular polygons. He also considers the common 
solid figures such as pyramids, prisms, spheres, cylinders, and cones. Finally, 
Euclid devotes considerable space to a class of figures which all Greeks favored, 
the regular polyhedra (Fig. 6-5). 
EXERCISES 
1. What essential fact distinguishes axioms from theorems? 
2. Why were the Greeks willing to accept the statements 1 through 10 above as 
. 
, 
aXIOms. 
3. Use the indirect method of proof to show that if two angles of a triangle are 
equal, then the opposite sides are equal. [Suggest jon: Suppose that angle A 
(Fig. 6-<\) equals angle C, but that BC is greater than BA. Lay off BC'=BA 
and draw AC'. Use the theorem that the base angles of an isoceles triangle are 
equal and Theorem 1 above.] 
B 
A ..:=----',C 
Fig. 6-6 
G 
- -
A 
c 
B 
D 
F 
Fig. 6-7 

SOME MUNDANE USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
1 3 1  
4. Use the indirect method of proof to show that if two lines are parallel, alternate 
interior angles must be equal. [Suggestion: Suppose angle 1 in Fig. 6-7 is greater 
than angle 2. Then draw GH so that angle l' equals angle 2. Now use Theorem 
2 and Axiom 5.] 
5. ]n Section 3-7, we have briefly outlined the proof that the sum of the angles 
of a triangle is 180°. Write out the full proof. 
6. Under what conditions would two parallelograms be congruent? 
7. What conditions would ensure the similarity of two rectangles? 
8. A right triangle has an arm 1 mi long and a hypotenuse 1 mi plus 1 ft long. 
How long is the other arm? Before you apply mathematics, use your imagina­
tion to estimate the answer. To work out the problem, use the Pythagorean 
theorem which says that the square of the hypotenuse equals the sum of the 
squares of the arms. 
9. A farmer is offered two triangular pieces of land. The dimensions are 25, 30, 
and 40 ft and 75, 90, and 120 ft, respectively. Since the dimensions of the second 
one are 3 times the dimensions of the first, the two triangles are similar. The 
price of the larger piece is 5 times the price of the smaller one. Use intuition, 
measurement, or mathematical proof to decide which is the better buy in the 
sense of price per square foot. 
Fig. 6-8 
to. Suppose a roadway is to be built around the earth and each point on the surface 
of the roadway is to be 1 ft above the surface of the earth (Fig. 6-8). Given 
that the radius of the earth is 4000 mi or 21,120,000 ft, estimate by how much 
the length of the roadway would exceed the circumference of the earth. Then 
use the fact that the circumference of a circle is 27T times the radius and calculate 
how much longer the rGadway would be. 
11. Criticize the statemenΟ: Euclid assumes that two parallel lines do not meet. 
6-3 SOME MUNDANE USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
The creation of Euclidean geometry was motivated by the desire to learn the 
properties of figures in the world about us. Let us see now whether the 
knowledge can be applied to the world to good ad,·anrage. 
Suppose a farmer has 100 feet of fencing at his disposal and he wishes to 
enclose a rectangular piece of land. Since the perimeter will be 100 feet, the 

1 3 2  
NATURE AND USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
farmer can enclose a piece of land 10 feet by 40 feet, 15 feet by 35 feet, 20 
feet by 30 feet, or of still other dimensions, all of which yield a perimeter of 
100 feet. The farmer plans to garden in the enclosed plot and therefore 
wishes the enclosed area to be as large as possible. He notes that the dimen­
sions 10 by 40 would yield an area of 400 square feet; the dimensions 15 by 
35 enclose 525 square feet; and the dimensions 20 by 30 enclose 600 square 
feet. Evidently the area can vary considerably despite the fact that the 
perimeter in each case is 100 feet. The question then arises, What dimensions 
would yield the maximum area? 
Our first task in seeking to answer this question is to make some reason­
able conjecture about these dimensions. We might then be able to prove 
that the conjecture is correct. Since in the present instance it is easy to play 
with the numbers involved, let us make a little table of dimensions (always 
yielding a perimeter of 100 feet) and the corresponding area. 
Dimensions, in feet 
I by 49 
5 by 45 
10 by 40 
IS by 35 
20 by 30 
Area, in square teet 
49 
225 
400 
525 
600 
Study of the table suggests that the more nearly equal the dimensions are, 
the larger is the area. Hence one might readily conjecture that if the dimen­
sions were equal, that is, if the rectangle were a square, the area would be a 
maximum. 
We can see at once that the dimensions 25 by 25 give an area of 625 
square feet, and this area is larger than any of the areas in the table. So far 
our conjecture is confirmed. However, we could not be sure that some other 
dimensions, perhaps 24k by 25t, would not do even better. Moreover, even 
if we could be certain that the square furnishes the largest area among all 
rectangles with a perimeter of 100 feet, the question would arise whether the 
square would continue to be the answer for some other perimeter. Hence, 
let us see whether we can prove the general theorem that ot all rectangles 
with the same perimeter, the square has maximum area. 
Figure 6-9 shows the rectangle ABCD. Since this rectangle is not a square, 
let us erect on the longer side a square which has the same perimeter. Thus, 
the square EFGD has the same perimeter as ABCD. We now denote equal 
segments by the same letters. The perimeter of the rectangle is then 2x + 2u + 
2 y, and the perimeter of the square is 2x + 2v + 2 y. Since the two figures 
have the same perimeter. we have 
2x + 2v + 2y = 2x + 2u + 2y. 

SOME MUNDANE USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
133 
If we subtract 2x and 2y from both sides of this equation and then divide both 
sides by 2, we obtain 
v = u. 
(I) 
Moreover, because the square has equal sides, 
y = x + v. 
(2) 
If we now multiply the left side of equation (2) by the left side of equation 
(I), and do the same for the right sides, the results must be equal. Hence, 
yv = u(x + v), 
or, by the distributive axiom, 
yv = ux + uv. 
Since yv = ux plus an additional area, it must be that yv is greater than ux. 
Now yv is area B in the figure, and !IX is area A. Thus B is greater than A, 
and so B + C is greater than A + C. But B + C is the area of the square, and 
A + C is the area of the rectangle. Hence the square has more area than the 
rectangle. 
We have proved that a square has more area than a rectangle of the same 
perimeter, no matter what this perimeter may be. A little thinking proves in 
a few minutes what may have taken man hundreds of years to learn through 
trial and error. 
B 
x 
A 
F 
v 
u 
A 
x 
U 
E 
y 
B 
y 
C 
y 
G 
c 
x 
D 
Fig. 6-9. 
Of all rectangles of the same perimeter the 
square has the greatest area. 
The result is far more useful than may appear at first sight. Suppose a 
house is to be built. The major consideration is to have as much floor area 
or living space as possible. Now the perimeter of the lIoor determines the 
number of feet of wall that will be needed and hence the cost of the walls. 
To obtain the maximum floor area for a given cost of walls, the shape of the 
lIoor should be square. 
A farmer who seeks the rectangle of maximum area with given perimeter 
might, after finding the answer to his question, turn to gardening, but a 
mathematician who obtains such a neat result would not stop there. He might 

134 
NATURE AND USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
ask next, Suppose we were free to utilize any quadrilateral rather than just 
rectangles, which one of all quadrilaterals with the same perimeter has max­
imum area? The answer happens to be a square, though we shall not prove it. 
The mathematician might then consider the question, Which pentagon of all 
pentagons with the same perimeter has maximum area? One can show that 
the answer is the regular pentagon, that is, the pentagon whose sides are all 
equal and whose angles are all equal. Now the square also has equal sides and 
equal angles. Hence it would seem that if one compares all polygons of the same 
perimeter and same number of sides, then the one with equal sides and equal 
angles, i.e., the regular polygon, should have maximum area. This general 
result can also be proved. 
But now an obvious question comes to the fore. The square has maximum 
area among all quadrilaterals of the same perimeter. The regular pentagon 
has maximum area among all pentagons of the same perimeter. Suppose that 
we compared the regular pentagon with the square of the same perimeter. 
Which would have more area? The answer, perhaps surprising, is the regular 
pentagon. And now the conjecture seems reasonable that of two regular 
polygons with the same perimeter, the one with more sides will have more 
area. This is so. Where does this result lead? One can form regular polygons 
of more and more sides, which all have the same perimeter. As the number 
of sides increases, the area increases. But as the number of sides increases, the 
regular polygon approaches the circle in shape. Hence the circle should have 
more area than any regular polygon of the same perimeter. And since the 
regular polygon has more area than an arbitrary polygon, the circle has more 
area thall any poly gOIl with the same perimeter. This result is a famous 
theorem. 
Now the sphere, among surfaces, is the analogue of the circle among 
curves. Hence, a reasonable conjecture would be that the spherical surface 
bounds more volume than any other surface with the same area. This conjec­
ture can be proved. Nature obeys this mathematical theorem. For example, if 
one blows up a rubber balloon, the balloon assumes a spherical shape. The 
reason is that the rubber must enclose the volume of air blown into the balloon 
and the rubber must be stretched. But rubber contracts as much as possible. 
The spherical figure requires less surface area to contain a given volume of gas 
than does any other shape. Hence, with the spherical shape, the rubber is 
stretched as little as possible. 
The problem of bounding the greatest possible area with a perimeter of 
given length has a variation whose solution shows how ingenious mathematical 
reasoning can be. Suppose that a person has a fixed amount of fencing at his 
disposal and wishes to enclose as much area as possible along a river front in 
such a way that no fencing is required along the shore itself. The question 
now is, What should the shape of the boundary curve be? According to a 
legend, which may or may not have a factual basis, this problem was solved 

SOME MUNDANE USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
135 
thousands of years ago by Dido, the founder of the city of Carthage on the 
Mediterranean coast of Africa. Dido, the daughter of the king of the Phoeni­
cian city of Tyre, ran away from home. She took a fancy to this land on the 
Mediterranean, and made an agreement to pay a definite sum of money for as 
much land as "could be encompassed by a bull's hide." Dido thereupon took a 
bull's hide, cut it up into thin long strips, tied the strips together, and used this 
length to "encompass land." She chose an area along the shore, because she was 
smart enough to realize that no hide would be needed along the shore. But 
there still remained the question of what shape to use for the boundary formed 
by the hide, that is, for ABC of Fig. 6-10. Dido decided that the most favor­
able shape was a semicircle, enclosed that shape, and built a city there. 
B 
c 
Fig. 6-10 
Fig. 6-11 
A sequel to this story, which has nothing to do with the mathematics of 
Dido's problem, is not without relevance to the history of mathematics. 
Shortly after she founded Carthage, Aeneas, a refugee from Troy, intent on 
getting to Italy to found his own city, was blown ashore along with his com­
patriots. Dido took a fancy to Aeneas also, and did her best to persuade him 
to remain at Carthage, but despite the best of hospitality, Aeneas could not be 
diverted from his plan, and soon sailed away. Rejected and scorned, Dido was 
so despondent that she threw herself on a blazing pyre just as Aeneas sailed 
out of the harbor. And so an ungrateful and unreceptive man with a rigid 
mind caused the loss of a potenrial mathematician. This was the first blow to 
mathematics which the Romans dealt. 
Dido's fate was a tragic end to a brilliant beginning, for her solution to the 
geometrical problem described above was correct. The answer is a semicircle. 
We do not know how Dido found the answer, but it can be obtained very 
neatly. The way to prove it is by complicating the problem. Suppose that, 
instead of bounding an area on one side of the seashore, which we idealize as 
the line AC (Fig. 6-1 1), we try to solve the problem of enclosing an area on 
both sides of AC with double the length of hide Dido had for one side, i.e., 
now we seek to solve the problem by determining the maximum area which 
can be completely enclosed by a perimeter of given length. The answer to this 
problem is a circle. If, therefore, we choose a semicircle for arc ABC, it will 
contain maximum area on one side of the shore. For if there were a more 
favorable shape than the semicircle, the mirror image in AC of that shape 

1 36 
NATURE AND USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
would, together with the original, do better than the circle and yet have the 
same perimeter as the circle. But this is impossible. 
Our last few pages have dealt with problems which grew out of deter­
mining the rectangle of maximum area with given perimeter. We can see from 
the lines of thought pursued how the mathematician can raise one question 
after another on this same theme of figures with maximum area and given 
perimeter and will find the answers to these questions. Moreover. many of 
these answers prove to be applicable to physical problems. 
Fig. 6-12. 
Eratosthenes' method of deducing the 
circumference of the earth. 
The first reasonably accurate calculation of the size of the earth was made 
by a simple application of Euclidean geometry. One of the most learned men 
of the Alexandrian Greek world, Eratosthenes (275-194 B.C.), a geographer, 
mathematician, poet, historian, and astronomer. used the following plan. At 
the summer solstice, the sun shone directly down into a well at Syene (C in 
Fig. 6-12). As Eratosthenes well appreciated, this meant that the sun was 
directly overhead. At the same time, at the city of Alexandria, 500 miles north 
of Syene, the direction of the sun was AS', whereas the overhead direction was 
OAD. Now the sun is so far away that the lines AS' and CS could be taken to 
be parallel. Eratosthenes measured the angle DAS' and found it to be 7to. 
But this angle equals the vertical angle OAE, and the latter and angle AOC are 
alternate interior angles of parallel lines. Hence angle AOC is also 7tO, or 
7t/360, or 1/48 of the entire angle at O. Then arc AC is 1/48 of the entire 
circumference. Since AC is 500 miles, the entire circumference is 48 · 500 or 
24,000 miles. 
Strabo, a Greek geographer who lived in the first century B.C., tells us that 
after Eratosthenes obtained this result, he realized that one might sail from 
Greece past Spain across the Atlantic Ocean to India. This is. of course, 
what Columbus attempted. Fortunately or unfortunately, the geographers 
who lived after Eratosthenes, notably Poseidonius (first century B.C.) and 
Ptolemy (second century A.D.), gave other results which were interpreted by 
Columbus (because of some uncertainty about the units of distance used by 
these early scientists) to mean that the circumference of the earth is 17,000 
miles. Had he known the correct value, he might never have undertaken to 
sail to India because the greater distance might have daunted him. 

SOME MUNDANE USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
1 37 
EXERCISES 
A 
I. Suppose that DF (Fig. 6-13 )  is the course of a railroad, and A and B are two 
towns. It is desired to build a station somewhere on DF so that the station will 
be equally distant from A and B. Where should the station be built? One draws 
the line AB and, at its mid-point, erects the perpendicular CEo The point E on 
DF is equidistant from A and B. Prove this statement. 
F 
B 
c 
E 
c 
D 
A 
D 
Fig. 6-15 
B 
Fig. 6-13 
J foot 
I \ .1' 
i ś D' 
O ,----, B' 
Fig. 6-14 
2. A pinhole camera is a practical device if a long exposure time is possible. In 
fact, one of the best pictures of the scene following the explosion of the first 
atomic bomb was made with a pinhole camera. The principle involves similar 
triangles. The object AB being photographed (Fig. 6-14) appears on the film 
inside the box as A'B'. If one draws OD perpendicular to AB, the extension of 
OD to D' will be perpendicular to A'B'. Then triangles OAD and OA'D' are 
similar. Now suppose the sun. whose radius is AD, is photographed. We know 
that OD is 93,000,000 mi. Suppose that OD', rhe width of the box, is 1 ft. The 
length A'B' is readily measured and is found to be 0.009 ft. What is the radius 
of the sun? 
3. A farmer has 400 yd of fencing and wishes to enclose a rectangle of maximum 
area. What dimensions should he choose? 
4. A farmer has p yd of fencing and wishes to enclose a rectangle of maximum 
area. What dimensions should he choose? 
5. A farmer plans to enclose a rectangular piece of land alongside a lake; no 
fencing is required along the shoreline AD (Fig. 6-15). He has toO ft of fence 
and wishes the area of the rectangle to be as large as possible. What dimensions 
should he choose? 

138 
NATURE AND USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
6. Of any two numbers whose sum is 12, the product is 
greatest for 6 and 6; that is, 6 · 6  is greater than 5 ·  7, 
4 . 8, 3! ' 8!, and so forth. Can you explain why this is 
so? [Suggestion: Think in geometrical terms.] 
7. Suppose h is the known height of a mountain, and R 
is the radius of the earth (Fig. 6-16). How far is it 
from the top of the mountain to the horizon; that is, 
how long is x.? [Suggestion: Use the fact that the line 
of sight from the top of the mountain to the horizon 
is tangent to the circle shown, and that a radius of a 
circle drawn to the point of tangency is perpendicular 
to the tangent.] 
x 
Fig. 6-16 
8. Having obtained the exact answer to Problem 7, can you suggest a good 
approximate answer which would suffice for many applications and yet make 
calculation easier? 
9. A boy stands on a cliff i mi above the sea. How far away is the horizon? 
10. Knowing that of all rectangles with the same perimeter, the square has maximum 
area, prove that of all rectangles with the same area, the square has the least 
perimeter. [Suggestion: Use the indirect method of proof. Suppose, then, that 
the square has more perimeter than the rectangle of the same area and consider 
the square which has the same perimeter as the rectangle.] 
* 6-4 EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY AND THE STUDY OF LIGHT 
Light is certainly a pervasive phenomenon. Man and the physical world are 
subject daily to the light of the sun, and the process of vision of course is 
dependent upon light. Hence it is to be expected that the Greeks, the first 
great students of nature, would investigate this phenomenon. Plato and 
Aristotle had much to say on the nature of light, and the Greek mathemati­
cians also tackled the subject. It has continued to be a primary concern of 
mathematicians and physicists right down to the present day. Despite man's 
continuous experience with light, the nature of this occurrence is stilI largely 
a mystery. Through mathematics and through Euclidean geometry in par­
ticular, man obtained his first grip on the subject. Two books by Euclid were 
the beginning of the mathematical attack. 
In ordinary air, light is observed to travel along straight lines. This 
preference of light for the simplest and shortest path is in itself of significance. 
But Euclid proceeded beyond this point to study the behavior of light under 
reflection in a mirror, and discovered a now famous mathematical law of light. 
Suppose light issuing from A (Fig. 6-17) takes the path AP to the point P 
on the mirror m. As we all know, the light is reflected and takes a new direc­
tion, PA'. The significant fact about this reflection, which was pointed out by 
Euclid, is that the reflected ray, i.e., the line PA' along which the reflected 
light travels, always takes a direction such that angle 1 equals angle 2. Angle 

EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY AND THE STUDY OF LIGHT 
139 
Q 
A' 
m 
Fig. 6-17. 
The law of reflection of light. 
1 is called the angle of incidence and angle 2 the angle of reflection.· It is, of 
course, very obliging of light to follow such a simple mathematical law. As a 
consequence, we are able to prove other facts rather readily. 
Assume there is a source of light at A (Fig. 6-18), and rays of light spread 
out in all directions from A. Many of these will strike the mirror. But through 
a definite point A' only one of these rays will pass, namely the ray PA' for 
which angle 1 equals angle 2. To prove that only one ray from A will pass 
through A', let us suppose that another ray, AQ, is also reflected to A'. Now 
angle 2 is an exterior angle of triangle A'QP. Hence 
L2 > L4. 
Angle 3 is an exterior angle of triangle AQP, and so 
L3 > Ll. 
Since angle 1 equals angle 2, we see from the two preceding inequalities that 
L3 > L4. 
Then QA' cannot be the reflected ray corresponding to the incident ray AQ 
because the reflected ray must make an angle with the mirror which equals 
angle 3. 

. 
, 
4 
1
2
m 
:;
;P
;
z
 
Fig. 6-18 
The more interesting point, which was first observed and proved by the 
Greek mathematician and engineer Heron (first century A.D.), is that the 
• It is more common to introduce the perpendicular PQ to the mirror and to call 
angle 3 the angle of incidence and angle 4 the angle of reflection. However, if angle 
1 equals angle 2, then angle 3 equals angle 4. 

140 
NATURE AND USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
A 
c 
2 
B 
m 
.1 ' 
Fig. 6-19. 
The shortest path from A to A' is 
the one for which L 1 = L2. 
unique ray from A (Fig. 6-(9) which does reach A' after reflection in the 
mirror travels the shortest possible path in going from A to the mirror and 
then to A'. In other words, AP + PA' is less than AO + OA', where 0 is 
any point on the mirror other than P, the point at which the angle of incidence 
equals the angle of reflection. 
How can we prove this theorem? Nature not only sets problems for US, 
but often solves them too, if we are but keen enough in our observations. If 
a person at A' sees in the mirror the reflection of an object at A, he must be 
looking in the direction A'P and actually sees the image of A at B. Hence, 
perhaps we should bring B into our thinking. Closer observation shows that 
the mirror image of an object is on the perpendicular from A to the mirror 
and, moreover, seems to be as far behind the mirror as the object is in front. 
That is, AB seems to be perpendicular to the mirror and AC seems to equal CB. 
Let us use this suggestion. We construct the perpendicular from A to the 
mirror, thus obtaining AC, and extend AC by its own length to B. Now it 
is not hard to see that triangles ACO and BCO are congruent because OC is 
common to both triangles, the angles at C are right angles, and AC = CB. 
Hence, AO = BO, because they are corresponding parts of congruent triangles. 
Likewise triangles ACP and BCP are congruent and AP = BP. We wish to 
prove that 
(AP + PA') < (AQ + OA'). 
But now, since AP = BP and AO = BO, it will be enough to prove that 
(BP + PA') < (BQ + QA'.) 
(3) 
Well, we have exchanged one difficulty for another, but perhaps this 
second one is easier to overcome. Physically one looks directly along A'P 
and sees B. If we could prove that BPA' is a straight line, then, of course, the 
inequality (3) would be proved because BO and OA' are the other two sides 

EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY AND THE STUDY OF LIGHT 
141 
of triangle A'BQ, and the sum of these two sides must be greater than the 
third side. Our goal, then, is to prove that A'PB is a straight line. 
We know that 
L1 + LJ + L2 = 180° 
(4) 
because m is a straight line. But angle 1 equals angle 4 because triangle PCA 
and PCB are congruent. Also, according to the law of reflection, angle 2 
equals angle 1. If, therefore, in (4) we replace angle 1 by angle 4 and angle 
2 by angle 1, we have 
L4 + LJ + L I  = 180°. 
(5) 
Hence, A'PB is a straight line and the inequality (3) is proved. Then the light 
ray, in going from A to m to A', really travels the shortest path. 
This behavior of light rays is striking. It seems to show that nature is 
interested in accomplishing its ends by the most efficient means. We shall 
find this theme to be a recurring one, and it will be seen to have broad 
applicability. 
We have proved a theorem about light rays, bur we have also proved 
somewhat more. As far as the mathematics is concerned, the lines AP and 
PA' are any lines which make equal angles with m, and the fact that they are 
light rays plays no role. What we have proved, then, is a theorem of geometry, 
namely: 
Of all tbe broken line paths from a point A to a point on a line and then 
to a point A' on the same side as A, the sbortest patb is tbe one fixed by 
tbe point P on m for whicb AP and A'P make equal angles with m. 
This theorem has applications in quite different domains (see the exercises). 
It is worth noting how the study of light gives rise to purely mathematical 
theorems. The converse of this theorem is, incidentally, equally true and is 
presented in the exercises. 
EXERCISES 
1. Where is the mirror image of a point A which is in from of a plane mirror? 
2. Suppose that m (Fig. 6-20) is the shore of a river and a pier is to be built 
somewhere along m so that merchandise can be trucked from the pier to two 
inland towns, A and A'. Where should the pier be built so that the total trucking 
distance from the pier to A and from the pier to A' is a minimum? 
• 
A 
m 
• 
A' 
Fig. 6-20 

142 
NATURE AND USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
Fig. 6-21 
l. A billiard player wishes to hit the ball at A (Fig. 6-21 )  in such a way that it will 
strike side 11 of the table and then hit the ball at A'. Now billiard balls behave 
like light rays, that is, the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence. At 
what point on m should the billiard player aim? 
4. A billiard ball starting from a point A on the table (Fig. 6-2 1 )  strikes two suc­
cessive sides and then travels along the table. What can you say about the final 
in relation to the original direction of travel? 
.1 
A' 
5, In the text we proved that if angle 1 equals angle 2 (Fig. 6-22), then AP + PA' 
is the shortest path from A to any point on the mirror to A'. Prove the converse, 
namely, that if AP + PA' is the shortest path, then L 1 must equal L 2. rSug­
gestion: Use the indirect method of proof. If L 1 does not equal L 2, then one can 
find another point, P', on 11 for which the angles made by AP' and A'P' with 11 
are equa1.] 
6-5 CONIC SECTIONS 
The Elements of Euclid dealt with plane figures which can be built up with 
line segments and circles, with the corresponding solid figures which can be 
huilt up with pieces of a plane, such as prisms and the regular polyhedra, and 
with the sphere. But the classical Greeks also studied another class of curves 
which they called conic sections because they were originally obtained by 
slicing a cone with a plane, The resulting curves, the parabola, ellipse, and 
hyperbola, were treated by Euclid in a separate book. Unfortunately, no 
copies of this book have survived, But a little after Euclid's time another 
famous Greek geometer, Apollonius, wrote a book entitled Conic Sections, 
which is known to us and which is about as exhaustive in its treatment of these 
curves as the Element,- are about figures formed by lines and circles, 

I)f-r--r,p 
Axis 
F 
d 
Fig. 6-23. 
The parabola. 
F' 
CONIC SECTIONS 
143 
p 
F 
Fig. 6-24. 
The ellipse. 
Conic sections were introduced, as already noted, by cutting a conical 
surface with a plane. However, the curves themselves can be considered apart 
from the surface on which they lie. For example, the circle is also one of the 
conic sections. Vet we know that the circle can be defined as the set of all 
points which are at a fixed distance from a given point, and this definition does 
not involve the cone at all. Indeed, insofar as properties and applications of 
these curves are concerned, it is far more convenient to disregard the conical 
surface and concentrate on the curves themselves. 
Let us consider, therefore, the direct definitions of conic sections. To 
define the parabola, we start with a fixed point F and a fixed line d (Fig. 6-23). 
We then consider the set of all points, each of which is equally distant from F 
and d. Thus the point P in Fig. 6-23 is such that PF = PD. The collection of 
all points, each of which is equidistant from F and d, fills out a curve called 
the paf3bola. The point F is called the focus of the parabola, and the line d is 
called the directrix. 
Each choice of a point F and line d determines a parabola. Hence there 
are infinitely many different parabolas. The general shape of all such curves 
is, however, about the same. Each is symmetric about the line which passes 
through F and is perpendicular to d. This line is called the axis of the 
parabola. Each parabola passes between its focus and directrix and opens out 
as it extends farther and farther from the directrix. 
The direct definition of the ellipse is also simple. We start with two fixed 
points F and F' (Fig. 6-24) and consider any constant quantity greater than 
the distance F to F'. If, for example, the distance from F to F' is 6, we may 
choose 10 as the constant quantity. One then determines all points for each of 
which the distance from F and the distance from F' add up to 10. This collec­
tion of points is called an ellipse. Thus, if P is a point for which PF + PF' 
equals 10, then P lies on the ellipse determined by F, F', and the quantity 10. 
The points F and F' are called the foci of the ellipse. 
By changing the distance FF' or the quantity 10, one obtains another 
ellipse. Some ellipses are long and narrow; others are almost circular. All are 

144 
NATURE AND USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
symmetric about the line FP and about the line perpendicular to and midway 
between F and P. 
The direct definition of the hyperbola also calls for choosing two fixed 
points F and F', called foci, and a constant quantity which, however, must be 
less than the distance from F to F'. If FP is 6, then the constant quantity can, 
for example, be 4. We now consider any point P for which the difference 
PF' - PF equals 4. All such points lie on the right-hand portion of Fig. 6-25, 
whereas the points for which PF - PF' Π 4 lie on the left-hand portion of the 
figure. The two portions together are the hyperbola; each portion is a branch 
of the hyperbola. 
F' 
Fig. 6-25. 
The hyperbola. 
As for the ellipse, each choice of the distance FF' and the constant quantity 
determines a hyperbola. Here, too, the curve is symmetric about the line FF' 
and about a line perpendicular to and midway between F and F'. One branch 
opens to the right and the other to the left. 
We shall not prove that the curves we have defined by means of focus 
and directrix or by means of foci and constant quantities are the same as those 
obtainable by slicing a conical surface. In our future work we shall use the 
direct definitions. 
EXERCISES 
1. Since the circle is also a conic section, it should be included among one of the 
three types-parabola, ellipse, and hyperbola. From the shapes of these curves it 
would appear that the circle falls among the ellipses. Can you see how the circle 
may arise as a special kind of ellipse? 
2. Suppose that we have an ellipse for which F'F is 6 and the constant quantity is 
10. If the point P of the ellipse lies on the line F'F to the right of F, how much 
is PF? 
3. For the ellipse, why must the constant quantity be chosen greater than the 
distance F'F? 
4. Given a parabola for which the distance from focus to directrix is 10, how 
far from the focus is that point on the parabola which lies on the axis? 
* 6-6 CONIC SECTIONS AND LIGHT 
Next to straight line and circle, conic sections are the most valuable curves 
mathematics has to offer for the study of the physical world. We shall examine 
here the uses of the parabola in the control of light. 

d 
Fig. 6-26. 
/ 
2 
V 
Axis 
The reflecting property ofthe parabola. 
CONIC SECfIONS AND LIGHT 
145 
D,p--Q-P-7Q:-' 
Axis 
F 
d 
Fig. 6-27 
Let P be any point on the parabola (Fig. 6-26). By the tangent to the 
parabola at P we mean the line through P which meets the parabola in just that 
one point and lies entirely outside the curve. From the standpoint of the con­
trol of light, the curve possesses a most pertinent property. If P is any point 
on the curve and F is the focus, then the line FP and PV, the line through P 
parallel to the axis, where V is any point on this parallel, make equal angles 
with the tangent t at P. That is, angle 1 equals angle 2. 
Before proving the geometrical property just stated, let us see why it is 
significant. If a light ray issues from some source of light at F and strikes a 
parabolic mirror at. P, it will be reflected in accordance with the law that the 
angle of incidence equals the angle of reflection. The curve acts at P as though 
it had the direction of the tangent. Then angle 1 is the angle of incidence. 
Because angle 1 equals angle 2, the reflected ray will be PV. Hence the re­
flected ray will travel out parallel to the axis of the parabola. Now, P is any 
point on the parabola. Hence any ray leaving F and striking the parabola will, 
after reflection, travel out parallel to the axis of the parabola, and the reflected 
light will form a powerful beam in one direction. We thus obtain a concen­
tration of light. 
Let us now prove that PF and PV make equal angles with the tangent at P. 
We shall prove first that every point outside of the parabola is farther from 
the focus than from the directrix, and every point inside is closer to the focus 
than to the directrix. Consider the point Q (Fig. 6-27) outside the parabola. 
We wish to show QF > QD, where QD is the distance from Q to the directrix. 
We continue the line QD until it strikes the parabola at P. Now 
QF > PF - PQ 
because any side of a triangle is greater than the difference of the other two 

146 
NATURE AND USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
sides. Since P i, on the parabola, by the very definition of the curve, PF = PD. 
then 
QF > PD - PQ = QD. 
We may use the same figure to show that Q', any point inside the parabola, 
is closer to F than to the directrix, that is, that Q'F < Q'D. First, 
Q'F < PF + PQ' 
because any side of a triangle is less than the sum of the other two sides. 
Since PF = PD, 
Q'F < PD + PQ' = Q'D. 
And now let us prove that PF and PV of Fig. 6-26 make equal angles with 
the tangent t at P. We shall invert our approach just to make the proof 
easier. Let us draw a line t through the point P (Fig. 6-28), which makes 
equal angles with PF and PV, and we shall prove that this line is the tangent 
to the parabola at P. We shall make the proof by showing that any point Q 
on this line lies outside the parabola. Since this line does have one point P in 
common with the parabola, it must, by the definition of tangent, be the 
tangent. 
-f--t-----.\xis 
d 
Fig. 6-28 
Consider the triangles PDQ and PFQ. We know that PD = PF because P 
is a point on the parabola. Further, since L I = L 2 by the very choice of the 
line t, and since L 2 = L J because they are vertical angles, then L I = L J. 
Finally, PQ is common to the two triangles. Then the triangles are congruent 
and QD = QF because they are corresponding sides of the congruent triangles. 
Now QE is the distance from Q to the directrix, and QE < QD because the 
hypotenuse of a right triangle is longer than either arm. Then QF > QE. 
According to the preceding proof, Q must lie outside the parabola. Since Q is 

CONIC SECTIONS AND LIGHT 
147 
any point on t (except P, of course), the line t must be the tangent at P. Thus 
the line through P which makes equal angles with PF and P V is the tangent 
at P. 
We now know, then, that any light ray issuing from F and striking the 
parabola at P will be reflected along PV, that is, parallel to the axis. The 
parabolic mirror's power to concentrate light in one direction is very useful. 
The commonest application is found in automobile headlights. In each head­
light there is a small bulb. Surrounding this bulb is a surface (Fig. 6-29), 
called a paraboloid, which is fonned by rotating a parabola about its axis. (The 
surface is, of course, silvered so that it will reflect.) Light issuing in millions of 
directions from the bulb, which is placed at the focus of the paraboloidal mirror, 
strikes the mirror, is reflected along the axis of the paraboloid, and illuminates 
strongly whatever lies in that direction. The effectiveness of this arrangement 
may be judged from the fact that the light thrown forward by bulb and mirror 
is about 6000 times as intense as that thrown in the same direction by the bulb 
alone. The reflecting property of the paraboloidal mirror is also utilized in 
searchlights and flashlights. 
The reflecting property of a paraboloidal mirror can be used in reverse. 
If a beam of parallel light rays enters such a mirror while traveling parallel to 
the axis, each ray will be reflected by some point on the surface in accordance 
with the law of reflection. But since FP (Fig. 6-29) and VP make equal angles 
with the tangent, the reflected ray will travel along PF and all reflected rays 
will arrive at the focus F. Hence there will be a great concentration of light 
at F. 
Fig. 6-29. 
The paraboloidal mirror. 
This concentration of light is used effectively in telescopes. The light 
emitted by stars is so faint that it is necessary to collect as much as possible in 
order to obtain a clear image. The axis of the telescope is therefore directed 
toward the star, and, because this source is so far away, the rays enter the tele­
scope practically parallel to the axis, travel down the telescope to a paraboloidal 
mirror at the back, and are reflected to the focus of the mirror. 
Radio waves behave very much like light rays. Hence paraboloidal 
reflectors made of metal are used to concentrate radio waves issuing from a 
small source into a powerful beam. Conversely, a paraboloidal antenna can 

148 
NATURE AND USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
pick up faint radio signals and produce a relatively strong signal at the focus. 
Since radio is used today for hundreds of purposes, the paraboloidal radio 
antenna is a very common instrument. 
We see from this brief account that the conic sections are immensely 
valuable. Some of the most momentous applications have yet to be described 
and will be taken up in later chapters. 
How did the Greeks come to study these curves? As far as we know, the 
conic sections were discovered in attempts to solve the famous construction 
problems of Euclidean geometry, i.e., to trisect any angle, to construct a square 
equal in area to a given circle, and to construct the side of a cube whose volume 
is twice that of a cube of given side. The constructions were to be performed 
subject to the restriction that only a straight edge (not a ruler) and a compass 
be used. Having obtained the curves, the Greeks continued to work on them, 
partly because they were interested in geometrical forms and partly because 
they discovered the uses of these curves in the control of light. Apollonius 
himself wrote a book entitled On Burning Glasses, whose subject was the 
parabola as a means of concentrating light and heat, and there is a story that 
Archimedes constructed a huge paraboloid which focused the sun's rays on the 
Roman ships besieging his city of Syracuse, and thus set them on fire. 
We see in the history of conic sections one more example of how mathe­
maticians, pursuing a subject far beyond the immediate problems which give 
rise to it, come to make important contributions to science. 
EXERCISES 
l. Let Q be any point outside of an ellipse (Fig. 6-30). Prove that F2Q + FIQ is 
greater than a, where a is the sum of the distances of any point on the ellipse 
from the foci. [Suggestion: Introduce the point P where F2Q cuts the ellipse.] 
Q 
p 
Ŧ--"'--'P 
F, 
Fig. 6-30 
Fig. 6-31 
2. Let t be the tangent at any point P of an ellipse (Fig. 6-31). Let F2 and Fl be 
the foci. Prove that F2P and FIP maKe equal angles with t. [Suggestion: Use the 
result of Exercise 1 and Exercise 5 of Section 6-4.] 
3. In view of the result of Exercise 2. what do you expect to happen to the light 
rays issuing from a source placed at the focus F2 of the ellipse? 

CULTURAL INFLUENCE OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
149 
4. When the distance between the two foci F 2 and F I of an ellipse approaches 0, 
the ellipse approaches a circle in shape. What do the lengths F2P and FIP become 
when F 2 and F I coincide? What theorem about circles follows as a special case 
of the result in Exercise 2? 
* 6-7 THE CULTURAL INFLUENCE OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
If the development of mathematics had ceased with the creation of Euclidean 
geometry, the contribution of the subject to the molding of Western civiliza­
tion would still have been enormous, for Euclidean geometry was and still is 
an overwhelming demonstration of the power and effectiveness of our reason­
ing faculty. The Greeks loved to reason and applied it to philosophy, political 
theory, and literary criticism. But philosophy breaks down into philosophies 
whose relative merits become the object of much dispute between the adher­
ents of one school and those of another. Plato's Republic may indeed be the 
perfect answer to the quest for a satisfactory political system, but we must still 
be convinced of this fact. And literary criticism certainly does not lead to 
universally accepted standards and the creation of universally acclaimed 
literature. In Euclidean geometry, however, the Greeks showed how reason­
ing which is based on just ten facts, the axioms, could produce thousands of 
new conclusions, mostly unforeseen, and each as indubitably true of the 
physical world as the original axioms. New, unquestionable, thoroughly 
reliable, and usable knowledge was obtained, knowledge which obviated the 
need for experience or which could not be obtained in any other way. 
The Greeks, therefore, demonstrated the power of a faculty which had not 
been put to use in other civilizations, much as if they had suddenly shown the 
world the existence of a sixth sense which no one had previously recognized. 
Clearly, then, the way to build sound systems of thought in any field was to 
start with truths, apply deductive reasoning carefully and exclusively to these 
basic truths, and thus obtain an unquestionable body of conclusions and new 
knowledge. 
The Greeks themselves recognized this broader significance of Euclidean 
geometry, and Aristotle stressed that the Euclidean procedure must be the 
aim and goal of all sciences. Each science must start with fundamental prin­
ciples relevant to its field and proceed by deductive demonstrations of new 
truths. This ideal was taken over by theologians, philosophers, political 
theorists, and the physical scientists. We shall see later on how widely and 
how deeply it influenced subsequent thought. 
By teaching mankind the principles of correct reasoning, Euclidean 
geometry has influenced thought even in fields where extensive deductive 
systems could not be or have not thus far been erected. Stated otherwise, 
Euclidean geometry is the father of the science of logic. We pointed out in 
Chapter 3 that certain ways of combining statements lead to unquestionable 

150 
NATURE AND USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
conclusions, provided the original premises are unquestionable. These ways 
are called principles or methods of deductive reasoning. Where did we get 
these principles? The answer is that the Greeks learned to recognize them in 
their work on Euclidean geometry and then appreciated that these principles 
apply to all concepts and relationships. If one argues from the premises that 
all bankers are wealthy and some bankers are intelligent to the conclusion that 
some intelligent men are wealthy, he is using a principle of valid reasoning 
discovered in the work on Euclidean geometry. The indirect method of proof 
which we applied earlier in this chapter owes its recognition to the same source. 
Toward the end of the classical Greek period, Aristotle formulated the valid 
principles of reasoning and created the science of logic. In particular, he 
called attention to some basic laws of logic, such as the principle of contradic­
tion, which says that no proposition can be both true and false, and the prin­
ciple of the excluded middle, which states that any proposition must be either 
true or false. 
It is because Euclidean geometry applies these principles of reasoning so 
clearly and so repeatedly that this subject is often taught as an approach to 
reasoning. The Greeks themselves stressed the value of mathematics as a 
preparation for the study of philosophy. Whether this is the best way of 
learning to reason may perhaps be disputable, but there is no doubt that his­
torically this is the way in which Western man learned. And it is pertinent that 
even current texts on logic use mathematical examples quite freely because 
these illustrate the principles clearly, unobscured by irrelevant implications or 
by vagueness in the concepts and relations employed. 
The most portentous fact about Euclidean geometry is that it inspired a 
large-scale mathematical investigation of nature. From the outset the geomet­
rical studies were an investigation of nature. But as the Greeks proved more 
and deeper theorems and these theorems continued to agree perfectly with 
observations and measurements, the Greeks became convinced that through 
mathematics they were learning some of the secrets of the design of this world. 
It became clear that mathematics was the instrument for this investigation, and 
the results fostered the expectation that the further application of mathematics 
would reveal more and more of that design. Just how far the Greeks were 
emboldened to carry this venture will be apparent in the next twO chapters. 
From the Greeks the Western world learned that mathematics was the extra­
ordinarily powerful instrument with which to explore nature. 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
1. One of the basic theorems of Euclidean geomecry is that the base angles of an 
isoceles triangle are equal. Euclid's proof proceeded thus. Given triangle ABC 
(Fig. 6-32) with AB = AC, prolong AB to D and AC to E so that BI) = CEo 

CULTURAL INFLUENCE OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
151 
A 
,, 
I
...... 
"'..-
\ 
I 
........ ...-...-
\ 
" 
..-..- ><......... 
\ 
/Ś..-"'''..-
............ \ 
Do<----------- --"'E 
Fig. 6-32 
3 
A--------ɏ
4ř1Ř-----B 
C---2----D 
Fig. 6-33 
Now draw DE, BE, and DC. Complete the proof by first proving that BE = DC 
and then that t. CBD = t. BCE. 
2. In the text we proved that if the alternate interior angles 1 and 2 of Fig. 6-33 are 
equal, the lines AB and CD are parallel. Prove 
a) if the corresponding angles 2 and 3 are equal, the lines are parallel; 
b) if the angles 2 and 4 are supplementary, that is, if their sum is 180°, then the 
lines are parallel. 
3. Suppose that 11 in Fig. 6-34 represents a road, and a telephone central is to be 
built somewhere on this road to serve towns at A and A'. Where along the road 
should the central be built to minimize the total distance from the central to A 
and the central to A'? 
A' 
• 
m 
Fig. 6-34 
m 
Fig. 6-35 
4. A ship must pass between the guns of a fort at A (Fig. 6-35) and equally power­
ful guns along the shore 11. What path should it take to be as safe as possible 
from all the guns? 
Fig. 6-36 
5. Let C and /) be two fixed circles (Fig. 6-36) with radii c and d, respectively. and 
c > d. Moreover D and C are tangent internally at P. Now let T be a third 
circle which is tangent externally to D and internatly to C. Show that the posi­
tions of the centers of all possible circles T is an ellipse whose foci are the centers 
of C and D. 

152 
NATURE AND USES OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
Topics for Further Investigation 
1. The use of Euclidean geometry in the design of spherical mirrors. Use the first 
reference to Kline or the reference to Taylor below or any college physics text. 
2. The use of Euclidean geometry in the design of optical lenses. Use the references 
to Taylor below or any college physics text. 
3. The contents of Euclid's Elements. Use the reference to Heath. 
4. Euclidean geometry as a manifestation of Greek culture. Use the second refer­
ence to Kline. 
Recommen!led Reading 
BALL, W. W. R.: A Short Account of the History Of Mathematics, pp. 13-63, 
Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1960. 
Boys, C. VERNON: Soap Bubbles, Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1959. 
COURANT, R. and H. ROBBINS: What is Mathematics?, pp. 329-338, pp. 346-361, 
Oxford University Press, New York, 1941. 
EVES, HOWARD: An Introduction to the History of Mathematics, Rev. ed., pp. 52-
130, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., New York, 1964. 
HEATH, SIR THOMAS L.: A Manual of Greek Mathematics, Chaps. 8, 9 and 10, Dover 
Publications, Inc., New York, 1963. 
KLINE, MORRIS: Mathematics: A Cultural Approach, Sections 6-8, Addison-Wesley 
Publishing Co., Reading, Mass., 1962. 
KLINE, MORRIS: Mathematics and the Physical World, Chaps. 6 and 17, T. Y. Crowell 
Co., New York, 1959. Also in paperback, Doubleday and Co., N.Y., 1963. 
SAWYER, W. W.: Mathematician's Delight, Chaps. 2 and 3, Penguin Books, Har­
mondsworth, England, 1943. 
ScOTT, J. F.: A History of Mathematics, Chap 2, Taylor and Francis, Ltd., London, 
1958. 
SMITH, DAVID EUGENE: History of Mathematics, Vol. I., Chap. 3, Vol. II, Chap. 5, 
Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1958. 
TAYLOR, LLOYD WM.: Physics, The Pioneer Science, Chaps. 29-32, Dover Publica­
tions, Inc., New York, 1959. 

CHARTING THE EARTH AND THE H EAVENS 
Thrice happy souls! to whom 'twas given to rise 
To truths like these, and scale the spangled skies! 
Far distant stars to clearest view they brought, 
And girdled ether with their chains of thought. 
So heaven is reached:-not as old they tried 
By mountaim piled on mountains in their pride. 
OVID 
7-1 THE ALEXANDRIAN WORLD 
CHAPTER 7 
The course of mathematics is very much dependent upon the caprices of man. 
What more the classical Greeks might have produced had they been able 
to continue their way of life uninterruptedly, we shall never know. In 352 H.C. 
Philip II of Macedonia, a province to the north of Athens and outside the pale 
of Greek culture, started out to conquer the world. He defeated Athens in 
338 B.C. In 336 B.C. Alexander the Great, Philip's son, took over the Mace­
donian armies, completed the conquest of Greece, conquered Egypt, and 
penetrated Asia as far east as India, and Africa as far south as the cataracts of 
the Nile. For a new capital he chose a site in Egypt which was central in his 
empire. Too hig a man to be hampered by modesty, he called the capital 
Alexandria. Alexander drew up plans for the city and for populating it, and 
the work was begun. Alexandria did become the center of the Hellenistic 
world, and even 700 years later was still called the noblest of all cities. 
Alexander was the most cosmopolitan of men and sought to break down 
barriers of race and creed. Hence he encouraged and invited Greeks, Egyp­
tians, Jews, Romans, Ethiopians, Arabs, Indians. Persians, and Negroes to settle 
in the city. At that time the Persian culture was flourishing, and so Alexander 
made special efforts to fuse Greek and Persian ways of life. He himself married 
Statira, daughter of Darius, in 325 B.C. and compelled 100 of his generals and 
10,000 of his soldiers to marry Persians. After his death written orders were 
found to transport large groups of Asians to Europe and vice versa. 
Alexander died while still engaged in reconstructing the world, and his 
empire split into three parts. Of these Egypt proved to be the most significant 
153 

154 
CHARTING THE EARTH AND THE HEAVENS 
from the standpoint of mathematical progress. Alexander had indeed chosen 
a good site for his capital. Located at the junction of Asia, Africa, and Europe, 
it became the center of trade, which brought wealth to the city. The succes­
sors of Alexander who ruled Egypt and who adopted the title of Ptolemy were 
wise men. They appreciated the cultural greatness of classical Greece and 
decided to make Alexandria a great cultural center. Under their direction parr 
of the wealth was used to beautify the city with splendid buildings, baths, 
parks, theaters, temples, libraries, and a national archive. They also erected a 
famous building devoted to the Muses of literature, arr, and science, called the 
Museum, and adjacent to it, an enormous library to house manuscripts. At its 
height this library was said to contain 750,000 works, an enormous number in 
view of the fact that in those days "books" were written and reproduced by 
hand. The Ptolemies invited scholars from all over the world to work there 
and supported them. Euclid and Eratosthenes, to speak for the moment of men 
we have already met, lived and worked at this center; Apollonius was educated 
there; and we shall meet other luminaries shortly. These men, coming from all 
over the world, brought knowledge of their lands, people, animals, and vege­
tation to Alexandria, and this in itself helped to make Alexandria cosmopolitan. 
The scholars set to work in the fields of mathematics, science, philosophy, 
philology, astronomy, history, geography, medicine, jurisprudence, natural 
history, poetry, and literary criticism. Fortunately, Egyptian papyrus, cheaper 
than parchment, was available for books, and so many more works could not 
only be written but copied. Alexandria became in fact the center of the book­
copying trade of the ancient world. The scholars undertook not only to create 
and write, bur they sent expeditions all over the world to gather knowledge. 
At Alexandria they built a huge zoological garden and a botanical garden to 
house the species of animals and plants brought back by these expeditions. 
Alexander had planned to fuse cultures in his new empire, and at Alex­
andria his goal was realized. The culture which developed there was indeed 
different from that of classical Greece, for reasons that are of interest because 
they account for the kind of mathematics the Alexandrians produced. First 
of all, the rather sharp segregation between free men and slaves which existed 
in Athens was destroyed. The scholars came from all parts of the world and 
from all economic levels and took a natural interest in the scientific, commer­
cial, and technical problems of commerce, industry, engineering, and naviga­
tion. Although Athens also was primarily a sea power and lived on trade, 
Alexandrian commerce and navigation were far more widespread. Hence 
there developed an intense interest in astronomy and in geography, i.e., in the 
subjects enabling man to tell time, navigate over land and sea, build roads, and 
determine boundaries of the empire. Free men engaged in commerce arc 
naturally more concerned with materials, methods of production, and new 
ventures. Fin.lll', though the nucleus of the scholars gathered at Alexandria 
was Greek, it was exposed to the influence of the practical Egyptians to whom 

THE ALEXANDRIAN WORLD 
155 
mathematics, to the extent that it was used in ancient Egypt, was a tool for 
engineering, commerce, and state administration. 
The results of the new outlook and interests are readily detected. First of 
all, there was a sharp increase in mechanical devices, which of course aid men 
in their work. Even training schools to educate young people in mechanics 
were established. Pulleys, wedges, tackles, geared devices, and a mileage­
measuring instrument such as is found in the modern automobile were invented. 
Archimedes, the greatest intellect of the Alexandrian world, constructed a 
planetarium which reproduced the motions of the heavenly bodies and de­
signed a pump for raising water from a river to land. He used pulleys to 
launch a heavy galley for King Hiero of Syracuse. Instruments to improve 
astronomical measurements were also invented. 
Another science whose beginnings may be found in Alexandria is the 
study of gases. The Alexandrians, notably Heron (about first century A.D.), 
a famous mathematician and engineer, learned that the steam created by heating 
water seeks to expand and that compressed air can also exert force. Heron is 
responsible for many inventions which used these forces. Temple doors 
opened automatically when a coin was deposited. Inside the temple another 
coin inserted in a machine blessed the donor by automatically sprinkling holy 
water upon him. Fires lit under the altar created steam, and the mystified and 
awe-struck audience observed gods who raised their hands to bless the wor­
shippers, gods shedding tears, and statues pouring out libations. Doves rose 
and descended under the unobservable action of steam. Guns similar to the 
toy bee-bee gun were operated by compressed air. Steam power was used to 
drive automobiles in the annual religious parade along the streets of Alexandria. 
The Alexandrians also studied water power and applied it. They invented 
improved water clocks (used in the courts to limit the time allowed to 
lawyers), fountains in which figures moved under water pressure, pumps to 
bring water from wells and cisterns, musical organs worked by water pressure, 
and a water-spraying device operating on exactly the same principle as that 
applied in contemporary lawn-sprinklers. 
The study of sound and light was intensified. We have already mentioned 
Euclid's and Heron's studies on the reflection of light by mirrors. Books on 
optics were written not only by Euclid and Apollonius but also by Heron, the 
astronomer Ptolemy (whom we shall discuss shortly), and others. Indeed the 
Alexandrians were the first to concern themselves with a second basic phe­
nomenon of light, refraction, which we shall encounter in this chapter. 
Chemical and medical skills, if not a science of chemistry, show a marked 
advance in Alexandria. The Egyptians had previously acquired some knowl­
edge in these areas, as we know from their ability to embalm. However, 
metallurgical studies, including the first text on the subject, and the investiga­
tion of chemicals, including poisons and their uses, wefe essentially new 
developments. Dissection of bodies, forbidden in classical Greece, was per-

156 
CHARTING THE EARTH AND THE HEAVENS 
mitted, and the Alexandrian world produced the beginnings of anatomy and 
the most famous doctor of the ancient world, Galen. 
Where was mathematics in this scheme of things' The Greeks brought to 
Alexandria a fully formed, mature, and philosophically oriented mathematics 
which had little bearing on practical problems. Although the great Alexan­
drian mathematicians continued to display the Greek genius for theory and 
abstraction. they combined with that an interest in the world about .them and 
in practical problems. To the classical Greek concern with qualitative prop­
erties such as congruence. the Alexandrians added a new theme. quantitative 
results which are useful in a variety of ways. 
To illustrate the combination of old and new we might note that while 
Euclid chronologically belongs to the Alexandrian period, his mathematical 
work is in essence a recapitulation of the work done in the classical period. 
Thus Euclid tells us, for example, that the ratio of the area of any circle to 
the square of its radius is the same for all circles. In symbols, if A is the area 
of any circle of radius r, then 
A 
2 = k, 
T 
where k is the same number for al/ circles. But now suppose that we wish to 
find the area of a particular circle. Does Euclid's theorem help us? Not 
directly. We know from the preceding equation that for any circle 
A = kr', 
where k is a constant. But how much is k? This quantity which we usually 
denote by 7r is an irrational number. It is not readily computed and, because 
it is irrational, can be expressed as a decimal only approximately. One of 
Archimedes' great achievements, which also illustrates the interest in quanti­
tative knowledge, is his determination that '1' lies between 3t and 3*. The 
achievement is all the more remarkable because neither the classical nor the 
Alexandrian Greeks had an efficient system for writing and operating with 
numbers. 
As a matter of fact, Archimedes (287-2 12 B.C.) is the man whose work 
best illustrates the character of Alexandrian Greek mathematics. He derived 
many formulas for the areas and volumes of geometric figures, and his results, 
as opposed to those of Euclid and Apollonius, made actual computations 
possible. At the same time, Archimedes also pursued the classical Greek 
interest in proof and in beautiful mathematical results. In this area, he was 
proudest of his proof that the ratio of the volume of a sphere inscribed in a 
cylinder (Fig. 7-1) is to the volume of the cylinder as 2 is to 3. He also 
proved that the same ratio holds for the areas of the sphere and the cylinder. 
Archimedes was so pleased with this result that he asked that it be inscribed 

THE ALEXANDRIAN WORLD 
157 
on his tomhstone. After Archimedes was killed by a Roman soldier during 
the Roman conquest of Syracuse, the Romans built an elaborate tomb on 
which they inscribed this theorem. It was this inscription which enabled 
Cicero to recognize the tomb on a visit to Syracuse two hundred years later. 
Fig. 7-1. 
The volume of a sphere inscribed 
in a cylinder is two-thirds the volume 
of the cylinder. 
Even in his physical studies Archimedes displayed this combination of 
theoretical and practical interests. He took up the subject of the lever, a 
device which had been used in Egypt and Babylonia for thousands of years. 
Like a true Greek, he produced a scientific work, 0" the Lever, along the lines 
of Euclidean geometry; that is, he started from axioms and proved theorems 
ahout the lever. He did the same with the subjects of floating hodies and 
centers of gravity of various surfaces and volumes. To these achievements 
must be added his inventions, of which we have already spoken. 
The work of some other giants of the Alexandrian civilization also il­
lustrates the combination of theoretical and practical interests. Eratosthenes 
(273 H.c.-192 B.C.), director of the library at Alexandria, was distinguished in 
mathematics, poetry, philology, philosophy, and history. He was the first 
outstanding mathematical geographer and geodesist. The calculation of the 
circumference of the earth, which we studied in the preceding chapter, is one 
of his great achievements. He collected and integrated all available geograph­
ical knowledge, introduced methods of surveying, made maps, and compiled 
all of this information in his Geographica. 
Eratosthenes was also an astronomer. He constructed some new instru­
ments, made many astronomical measurements, and, among other applications, 
used his astronomical knowledge to improve the calendar. As a result of his 
work, an old Greek calendar based on a year of 12 months each containing 30 
days was replaced by the Egyptian year of 365 days, to which Eratosthenes 
added an extra day every fourth year. This calendar was adopted by the 
Romans when Julius Caesar called in Sosigenes, an Alexandrian, to reform the 
calendar. Julius contributed his name. The Julian calendar was taken over by 
the Western world with the slight modification that we omit the leap year in 
three out of every four century years. 

158 
CHARTING THE EARTH AND THE HEAVENS 
The work in geography and astronomy, continued by such famous men as 
Strabo (ca. 63 B.C.-ca. 15 B.C.), Poseidonius (first century B.C.), and many 
others, was crowned by the achievements of two of the greatest men of the 
Alexandrian world, Hipparchus and Ptolemy. Hipparchus (second century 
B.C.), about whom we know rather little, lived at Rhodes, but was in close 
touch with the developments in Alexandria. After criticizing Eratosthenes' 
Geographica, he refined the method of locating places on the earth by system­
atically employing latitude and longitude. He improved astronomical instru­
ments, measured irregularities in the moon's motion, catalogued about 1000 
stars, and estimated the length of the solar year as 365 days, 5 hours, and 55 
minutes, i.e., he overestimated by about 6!- minutes. One of his notable astro­
nomical discoveries was the precession of the equinoxes, a slow change in the 
time of occurrence of the spring and fall equinoxes. Hipparchus is the creator 
of the most famous and most useful astronomical theory of antiquity, about 
which we shall learn more later. 
The work of Hipparchus is known to us largely through the writings 
of the mathematician, astronomer, geographer. and cartographer Claudius 
PtOlemy. Ptolemy, who is believed to be Egyptian-he was no relation to the 
Greek rulers of Egypt-lived from about 100 to 178 A.D. One of his influ­
ential achievements was his Guide to Geography, or Geographica, the most 
comprehensive work of antiquity on this subject. This book, which contains 
the latitude and longitude of 8000 places, almost every place on the earth then 
known, estimates of the size and extent of the habitable world, and methods of 
map-making, summarized the geographical knowledge of the ancient world 
and became the standard atlas for over a thousand years. Better known is 
Ptolemy's great work on astronomy, the Mathematical Syntaxis or The Mathe­
matical Col/ection, which the Arabs called Al Megiste (an Arabic and Greek 
combination meaning "the greatest")-Iater Anglicized as The Almagest. This 
book contains the full development of Hipparchus' and Ptolemy's astronomical 
theory, generally known as Ptolemaic theory, which dominated astronomy 
until about 1600 A.D. when it was superseded by the work of Copernicus and 
Kepler. 
7-2 BASIC CONCEPTS OF TRIGON OM ETRY 
The theoretical sciences of geography and astronomy require their own mathe­
matical tOol, trigonometry. Hipparchus and Ptolemy created this branch of 
mathematics whose first presentation is found in PtOlemy's Almagest. With this 
simple branch of mathematics it is possible to calculate the sizes and distances 
of the heavenly bodies as easily as one calculates the area of a rectangle. In 
presenting the trigonometry of Hipparchus and Ptolemy, we shall not use 
their notation and proofs; however, the modern approach is not essentially 
different. 

B 
A L--Ll C 
BASIC CONCEPTS OF TRIGONOMETRY 
159 
Fig. 7-2. 
A'L------C' 
Simi lar right triangles. 
Let us consider the two right triangles shown in Fig. 7-2 and let us sup­
pose that angle A equals angle A'. Since all right angles are equal, angle C 
equals angle C. One of the key theorems in Euclidean geomerry states that 
the sum of the angles in any triangle is 180". Since all three angles in each 
triangle add up to rhe same amount and two angles of one are equal to two of 
the other, the third angles must be equal; i.e., angle B equals angle B'. 
Now another theorem of Euclidean geometry states that if two triangles 
are similar, the ratio of any two sides in one equals the ratio of the correspond­
ing sides in the other. Thus, for example, 
BC 
We' 
AB 
A'B' 
Let us note here that triangle A'B'C is any other right triangle which has an 
acute angle, A', equal to angle A. Hence for any such triangle the ratio 
B'C I A'B' must equal BCI AB. Therefore, if we could compute this ratio-­
it is a number of course-for any one right triangle containing a given angle 
A, we would know it for all right triangles having an acute angle equal to A. 
Before we pursue this idea, let us observe that what we said about the 
ratio BCI AB applies to any other ratio of two sides of triangle ABC. Of the 
many ratios we can form three are especially useful and are gIVen names. 
These ratios are: 
sine A = side opposite angle A 
BC 
- ,  
hypotenuse 
AB 
cosine A = side adjacent to angle A 
AC 
- - , 
hypotenuse 
AB 
tangent A 
side opposite angle A 
BC 
-
_
.
 
side adjacent to angle A 
AC 

160 
CHARTING THE EARTH AND THE HEAvENS 
B" 
Fig. 7-3. 
The variation of sin A 
with angle A. 
The angle A is written alongside the name of each ratio. This practice is 
necessary not only because the very use of such words as opposite and adjacent 
depends upon which angle of the triangle we are talking about, but also 
because the values of the ratios depend upon the size of the angle. It is very 
common to abbreviate these names as sin, cos, and tan, respectively. 
Since we intend to employ these ratios, our first task should be to see 
whether we can compute them for angles of various sizes. First of all let us 
get some general notion of how these ratios vary with the angle. Let us 
consider sin A as an example. We have already pointed out that the values of 
these ratios for a given angle A are the same in any right triangle containing 
A. To study the variation of sin A as A changes, we can then take right 
triangles whose hypotenuse is I. We know from the very definition of sin A 
that it is the ratio of the side opposite angle A to the hypotenuse. Since sin A 
equals BC/AB and AB = 1, then sin A = Be. When A is small (Fig. 7-3), 
BC or sin A is small. We should expect, then, that for an angle close to 0", 
the sine of that angle should be close to O. On the other hand, as Fig. 7-3 
shows, when angle A increases and the hypotenuse is kept one unit in length, 
the opposite side must increase; hence the sine ratio must increase. When angle 
A is very close to 90°, as in triangle AC"B", the side R"C" is almost as large as 
A B"; hence sin A must be close to I. When angle A is 90", it can no longer be 
an acute angle of a right triangle, but because sin A approaches 1 as A ap­
proaches 90", it is agreed that in this special case we shall take sin A to be I. 
Likewise, we take sin 0" to be O. The general point of this discussion is that 
sin A varies from 0 to 1 as A varies from 0° to 90°. 
Next let us take a particular angle and let us see whether we can calculate 
the three ratios. We shall choose 30". Consider the equilateral triangle ABD 
(Fig. 7-4). We know that in such a triangle each angle is 60". If we now 
draw the angle bisector AC, then angle BAC is 30". Moreover, triangle ACB 
is a right triangle because triangles ACB and ACD are congruent, and hence 
the twO angles at C must be equal. Since the sum of these two angles is 180", 
each must be 90". Triangle ACB is, then, a right triangle containing an acute 
angle of 30". 
Now it does not matter how long we take AB to be, for we saw earlier 
that we may compute the ratios in any right triangle containing the given 

BASIC CONCEPTS OF TRIGONOMETRY 
161 
acute angle. Let us therefore choose a convenient number, say 2, for the 
length of AB. Since ABD is equilatetial, side BD = 2. But because triangles 
ACB and ACD are conguent, CB = CD. Hence CB = 1. We now find the 
length of AC. The Pythagorean theorem says that 
B 
(AC)' + (CB)' = (AB) '; 
therefore 
2 
(AC)' = (AB)' - (CB)'. 
Since AB = 2 and CB = 1, 
(AC)' = 4 
I, 
D 
or 
AC = 0. 
Fig. 7-4 
We can now use the definitions of sine, cosme, and tangent to state at 
once that 
sin 30° = side opposite 
= - ,  
hypotenuse 
2 
cos 30° = side adjacent 
0 .  
- , 
hypotenuse 
2 
tan 30° = side opposite 
1 
side adjacent 
= 0 ' 
As a dividend for our patience we get more information from the above 
reasoning than we sought. Let us note that angle B, which is 60", is also an 
acute angle in a right triangle, and we know the lengths of the sides. Hence, 
since sin B is the side opposite angle B divided by the hypotenuse, we have 
. 
° 
0 
sm 60 
=
-
'
 
2 
Similarly, by applying the definitions of cosine and tangent we obtain 
cos 60° = t, 
tan 60° = vl. 
We must admit that in undertaking to find the ratios belonging to 30" we 
selected a simple case. For most angles the ratios are not so easily found, and 
a good deal of geometry must be applied. The process of determining the 
ratios for angles from 0" to 90" is not particularly fascinating. Fortunately 
these values were obtained by Hipparchus and Ptolemy and compiled in a 
table to be found in Ptolemy's Almagest. (These tables were checked and 

162 
CHARTING THE EARTH AND THE HEAVENS 
extended by many later mathematicians.) Hence let us take over their results 
which appear in the "Table of Trigonometric Ratios" (in the Appendix). 
The table gives the sine, cosine, and tangent values for each angle from 
0" to 90". For angles from 0" to 45" we use the left-hand column and the 
headings across the top of the page. For example, alongside of 30" and under 
tangent we find 0.5774. This number is the approximate decimal value of 
lh!J. To find the sine, cosine, or tangent of an angle from 45" to 90" we use 
the right-hand column and the column designations at the bottom of the page. 
For example, to find sin 60" we look for 60" in the right-hand column and 
above the word sine we find 0.8660. This number is the approximate decimal 
value of Vfl2. 
Our table does not give the ratios for angles which contain minutes and 
seconds as well as degrees. There are tables which do so, but we shall not 
bother with them because the idea is the same. Where we need the value of 
a ratio for an angle not in the table, it will be supplied in the text proper. 
Let us note that we can use these tables in reverse. If, for example, we are 
given tan A = 1.7321, we can look down one tangent column and up the other 
until we come to 1.7321. We can then look to the left (or to the right, de­
pending upon where we locate this number), and find the angle which has 
the given tangent value. In the present case we must choose the angle at the 
right, namely 60°. If the table does not contain the exact value given, it will 
suffice, for our purposes, to choose the one nearest to it. 
EXERCISES 
1. Use the isosceles right triangle shown in Fig. 7-5 to compute sin 45°, cos 450, 
and tan 45°. 
2. Use the Table of Trigonometric Ratios to find 
a) sin 20° 
d) cos 55" 
b) sin 70" 
e) ran 15° 
c) cos 35" 
f) tan 80° 
3. Use Fig. 7-3 in the text to determine the range of cosine values as angle A varies 
from 0° to 900. 
4. Use Fig. 7-3 in the text to determine the range of tangent values as angle A varies 
from 0" ro 90". 
5. Show that when A and B are the two acute angles of a right triangle, then sin 
A = cos B and cos A =sin B. 
6. Prove that cos (90" - A) = sin A and that sin (90" - A) = cos A. 
7. Show that sin2A + cos2A = 1 for any acute angle A. Here the notation sin2A 
means (sin A )(sin A) or the square of sin A. Can the result be used to compute 
trigonometric ratios? If so, how? 
8. State the definitions of sine, cosine, and tangent of angle D in terms of the sides 
DE, EF, and FD of the triangle shown in Fig. 7-6. 

Fig. 7-5 
SOME MUNDANE USES OF TRIGONOMETRIC RATIOS 
163 
B 
D 
FL----LJ E 
Fig. 7-6 
Fig. 7-7 
7-3 SOME MUNDANE USES DF TRIGONOMETRIC RATIOS 
Before we venture onto vast stretches of the earth's surface or into the heavens. 
let us see what we can do with trigonometric ratios in rather simple. homely 
situations. Suppose we had to find the height of the cliff BC in Fig. 7-7. Of 
course, we could climb the cliff, let a rope down from point B until it just 
reaches C, pull up the rope, and measure the length which stretched from B 
to C. There is, however, an easier method which is especially recommended to 
people who do not like heights. 
Instead of climbing the cliff, one can walk along the ground from C to any 
convenient point A. The distance from C to A is then measured; let us suppose 
it proves to be 150 feet. At A, a person measures the angle between the hori­
zontal AC and the line of sight from A to B. A surveyor would use a transit 
for this purpose, but there are simpler devices, called protractors, which one 
can carry in his pocket. Suppose that angle A turns out to be 40". We are 
interested in side BC and we know side AC. The fact that these two sides are 
the side opposite angle A and the side adjacent to angle A suggests that we use 
the tangent ratio and write 
tan 400 = 
BC 
1 50 
This equation involves numbers, and we can therefore apply the axiom that 
equals multiplied by equals give equals, to justify multiplying both sides by 
150. We obtain 
150 (tan 40°) = Be. 
Now tan 40" can be found in the table which Hipparchus and Ptolemy so 
considerately prepared, and proves to be 0.8391. Hence 
Be = 1 50(0.8391) = 1 26. 
The answer, then, is 126 feet. We ignore the decimals because the gIven 
information is presumably accurate only to the nearest foot. 

164 
CHARTING THE EARTH AND THE HEAVENS 
EXERCISES 
1. To measure the width BC of a canyon (Fig. 7-8), a surveyor at C walks along 
the edge (preferably alongside the edge) to some convenient point A. He then 
measures AC and the angle A. Suppose AC is 300 ft and angle A is 56°. How 
large is Be? 
2. At some point on the ground, located at a distance from the Empire State 
Building in New York City, an observer finds that the angle between the 
horizontal and the line of sight to the top is 5° (Fig. 7-9). The building is 1248 
ft high. How far away is the observer? 
B 
5° 
} 
Fig. 7-9 
1 
58° 
c 
Fig. 7-8 
Fig. 7-10 
3. A railroad line is being planned which must rise to 1000 ft (Fig. 7-10) at a 
"grade" of 5D• How long must the line be? 
4. A lighthouse beacon is 400 ft above sea level (Fig. 7-11), and the sea around it 
is obstructed by rocks extending as far as 300 ft from the base of the lighthouse. 
A sailor on a ship's deck 20 ft above sea level measures the angle between his 
horizontal and the line of sight to the top of the beacon and finds it to be 500. 
Is his ship clear of the rocks? 
5. The Alexandrian Greek mathematician and engineer Heron showed how one 
could dig a tunnel under a mountain by working from both ends simultaneously 
and have the borings meet. He chose a convenient point A on one side, a con-
400 
D 
t-i-- 50 
Fig. 7-11 
Fig. 7-12 

CHARTING THE EARTH 
165 
venient point B on the other, and finally point C for which angle ACB is 90° 
(Fig. 7-12). He next measured AC and BC and found their lengths to be 100 ft 
and 75 ft, respectively. Now, said Heron, it is possible to calculate angles A and 
B. He then instructed the workers at A to follow a line which made the calcu­
lated angle with AC, and gave analogous directives to the workers at B. How 
did he calculate angle A and angle B? 
6. Trigonometric ratios can be used to compute the radius of the earth, whence, 
of course, the circumference can be determined by plane geometry. The method 
is an alternative to Eratosthenes' procedure. From a point A which is 3 mi above 
the surface of the earth (A can be the top of a mountain or an airplane), an 
observer looks to the horizon. His line of sight. AC 
A 
in Fig. 7-13, is just tangent to the earth's surface. 
According to a theorem of Euclidean geometry, the 
radius OC of the earth is perpendicular to the tangent 
at C. Hence triangle ACO is a right triangle. Sup­
pose that the size of angle A is 87° 46'. Let us denote 
the length of OC by T. Then OD is also T. We can 
now say that 
sin 87°46' = _
T
_ . 
r + 3 
Given that sin 87° 46' is 0.99924, calculate r. 
* 7-4 CHARTING THE EARTH 
T 
o 
Fig. 7-13 
c 
T 
We have already related that geography was one of the major interests of 
the Alexandrians. Here Hipparchus and Ptolemy, helped by the trigonometry 
they had created, made great strides. Let us see how they determined the loca­
tions of important places and how they calculated the distances between such 
places. 
Hipparchus proceeded by employing systematically an idea already ad­
vanced prior to his time, namely the scheme of latitude and longitude. The 
earth is, of course a sphere. Let us consider circles with center 0, which is 
the center of the earth, each going through the North and South Poles, N 
and S in Fig. 7-14. Thus NWS is one half of such a circle; the other half 
runs in back of our figure and is therefore invisible. Likewise NVS is one 
half of another such circle. Obviously we can think of such a circle through 
N, S, and any other point on the earth's surface. Each half circle from N to 
S is called a longitude line or a meridian of longitude. 
To distinguish among these many lines, we introduce another circle, 
XWVU, which is perpendicular to the longitude lines and halfway between 
the two poles. This circle is called the equator. Now one of the longitude 
lines, say NWS, is chosen as the starting line, so to speak. (Today this line goes 
through the city of Greenwich, England.) We consider next any other line, 

166 
CHARTI!\"G THE EARTH A:\,D THE HEAVEl\'S 
N 
T 
-- ...... ... 
v 
\ 
x 
Bquator 
s 
Fig. 7-14. 
latitude and longitude. 
such as N VS in our figure. The angle VOW formed at the earth's center, 0, 
by the lines VO and OW is called the longitude of any point on NVS. Thus 
longitude is an angle. To distinguish the meridians of longitude on the left of 
'!\' lVS from those on the right, we use the term "west longitude" to designate 
the angles determined by the former, and apply the term "east longitude" to 
those formed hy the latter. 
Thus any point on the earth's surface has a definite longitude. However 
all points on the half circle N VS have the same longitude. How shall we 
distinguish any one of these points from the others? The answer is: by intro­
ducing horizontal circles going around the earth. The equator is one such 
circle, and the circle TPQR of our figure is another. Clearly we can introduee 
many such circles lying in planes parallel to the equator. These circles are 
called circles of latitude. Again we have the problem of distinguishing among 
these circles. This is solved by introducing angles formed at the center of the 
earth, such as POV of Fig. 7-14, where P is any point on a circle of latitude, 0 
is the center of the earth, and V is on the equator and on the meridian of 
longitude through P. The angle PO V is called the latitude of P. If P is north 
of the equator, it is said to have north latitude; if it is south of the equator, it 
is said to have south latitude. Thus points on the same meridian of longitude are 
distinguished b,' their differing latitudes. 
The point P is a typical point on the earth's surface, and its position is now 
described by its latitude and longitude. For example, it might have 30° north 
latitude and 50° west longitude. In this case, angle POV is 30°, and angle 
VOW is 50°. Any point north or south of P, that is, on the same meridian, 
",ill have the same longitude as P but a different latitude. Any point east or 
west of P, that is, on the same circle of latitude, will have the same latitude as 
P but a different longitude. 
We have described what is meant by the latitude and longitude of any 
point on the earth's surface, but how do ,ve determine the latitude and longi­
tude for any given point P' (After all, we cannot penetrate to the center of 

---
Z -+--."f--'--"'o II 
Equator 
Fig. 7-15. 
The determination of latitude at a point on 
the earth's surface. 
CHARTING THE EARTH 
167 
- - ­
, - -
v 
Fig. 7-16 
N 
Equator 
s 
the earth to measure the angles POV and VOW.) There are numerous 
methods available. We shall describe a simple one just to see that the latitude 
and longitude of places on the earth can be determined. Suppose we seek the 
latitude of some point P (Fig. 7-15). On the day of the spring equinox, that 
is about March 21, the sun is in the plane of the equator and, at noon on that 
day, it is also in the plane of the meridian of longitude. For a person ,It P, the 
overhead direction is PA, and the direction to the sun is PZ'. Now the sun is 
so far away that PZ' and VZ can be taken to be parallel lines. Then angle 2 
equals the angle of latitude PO V because they are alternate interior angles of 
parallel lines. But angle 1 equals angle 2 because they arc verticlc angles. 
Hence angle 1 equals the latitude of P. But angle 1 can be measured. It is the 
angle between the direction of the sun and the overhead direction at P. Thus 
the latitude of P can be determined. 
There are other methods of measuring latitude as well as methods for 
finding the longitude of places on the earth. It is of interest that the methods 
of measuring latitude are more readily applied. The prohlem of determining 
longitude accurately aboard a ship at sea was not resolved until the middle of 
the eighteenth century. We shall have more to say about this later. 
We may suppose, then, that the latitude and longitude of places on the 
earth can be determined. Can we now determine how far apart two places 
are? We can and we shall illustrate the process. Suppose P (Fig. 7-16) is 
New York City, which has a north latitude of 41° and a west longitude of 74°. 
Hence angle POV is 41°, and angle VOW is 74°. Let us answer first the 
question, How far north of the equator is New York City? This question is 
easy to answer. The distanee we seek is the arc PV. But POV is 41° and arc 
PV is the arc of a circle whose radius is the radius of the earth. Hence arc PV 
is that part of the circumference of the earth which 41 ° is of 360°; that is, if 

168 
CHARTING THE EARTH AND THE HEAVENS 
we take the circumference of the earth to be 25,000 miles, then 
PV = Nr; '  25,000 = 2847. 
Thus New York City is 2847 miles north of the equator. 
Now let us calculate how far west New York City is of the point Q which 
has the same latitude and has longitude 0". This point Q is actually the location 
of Morella, Spain, a small town about 200 miles east of Madrid. Since the 
longitude of New York City is 74", angle VOW is 74". But the distance we 
seek is not arc VW but arc PQ. Now arc PQ is on the circle of latitude 
through P. This circle has its center at 0' on the straight line through NS, 
and its radius, O'P, is not the radius of the earth. If we could calculate O'P, 
then we could calculate the circumference of the circle of latitude, and since 
angle PO'Q is also 74", we could calculate arc PQ. 
Our problem then reduces to finding O'P. We can find it. The radius 
O'P is a side of the triangle OO'P. Moreover, 00' is perpendicular to O'P. 
Hence we have a right triangle. Since O'P and a v are parallel, angle O'PO 
equals the latitude of P because O'PO and PO V are alternate interior angles of 
parallel lines. Hence in triangle O'PO, 
or 
cos 41° = O'P 
OP 
O'P = OP cos 41°. 
Now OP is the radius of the earth, or 4000 miles. From our table we find that 
cos 41" is 0.7547. Hence 
O'P = 400 ' 0.7547 = 3019. 
We may now calculate arc PQ. This arc is ŗ of the circumference of the 
circle whose radius is 3019 miles. Hence 
PQ = Ho '  2". ' 3019. 
Using the approximate value of 3.14 for 11', we find that 
PQ = 3897. 
Thus New York City is 3897 miles west of Morella, Spain. 
We have computed the distance between two points on the same meridian 
of longitude and the distance berween twO points on the same circle of lati­
tude. We could investigate how to calculate the distance between two points 
on the earth's surface which have neither the same longitude nor the same 
latitude. However, we have seen enough of the method to comprehend how 

CHARTING THE EARTH 
169 
the trigonometric ratios can be used. Only one point may be worthy of note 
here. Suppose that P and Q (Fig. 7-17) are two points on the surface of the 
earth. and we now consider the question. What is the distance between them? 
We cannot mean the straight-line distance between P and Q because this does 
not lie on the earth's surface. The distance along the surface of the earth from 
P to Q must then be an arc of a curve. Which shall we choose? If we choose 
a circle whose center 0 is the center of the earth and which passes through P 
and Q, then we shall have what is called a great circle. The shorter of the two 
arcs from P to Q along this great circle is the shortest distance from P to Q 
along the surface of the sphere. This theorem of spherical geometry, which 
we shall not prove, is noteworthy because it tells us what route ships and 
planes should take if they are to save time and expense. 
N 
s 
Fig. 7-17. 
A great circle on the 
earth's surface. 
Let us consider this theorem in connection with travel by the shortest 
route between two points such as New York City and Morella, Spain, which 
are on the same circle of latitude. Although in this case, one wishes to reach a 
point due east or west (depending on the direction of the trip) of a given 
point, the circle of latitude is not the shortest route because it is not a great 
circle. We saw in fact that the circle of latitude has 0' as its center (Fig. 
7-16), whereas the center of the earth is O. 
Determining the latitude and longitude of places on the earth and their 
distances apart is valuable not only for navigation but for map-making. Both 
Hipparchus and Ptolemy made maps of the ancient world. Although we 
shall not describe their mathematical methods, we would like to call artention 
to the problem of making a map. A map is supposed to be a reproduction on 
flat paper of the relative locations of places on the earth. Now the earth is a 
sphere, and the one deficiency of this most prized figure of the Greeks is that 
one cannot take a sphere, cut it open. and lay it fiat without creasing, folding, 
stretching, or tearing the material. One can see this readily if he peels an 
orange and then tries to flatten out the skin. 

170 
CHARTING THE EARTH AND THE HEAVENS 
Since it is not possible to flatten a sphere without distorting it, any attempt 
to reproduce on flat paper the relationships that exist on the sphere must 
involve a distortion of areas, or the relative directions of one place from 
another, or distances. Hipparchus and Ptolemy therefore invented several 
methods of map making each of which has features useful for one or more 
purposes. Thus some methods preserve area, others direction, and still others 
project great circles into straight lines so that the shortest distance on the sphere 
between two points is represented by the shortest distance on the map. No 
map can be a true representation in all respects. 
North Star 
N 
Fig. 7-18 
N 
s 
N 
Eqmltol' 
Equator 
Fig. 7-19 
s 
Fig. 7-20 
s 
EXERCISES 
1. To determine the latitude of a point P (Fig. 7-18) on the surface of the earth, 
an observer at P measures the angle between the horizontal at P and the direction 
of the North Star. He finds this angle to be 10'. What is the latitude of P? 
2. As one travels north along a meridian from the South Pole to the North Pole, 
how does his latitude change? 
3. Suppose that one travels west from some point on the 0° meridian. How does 
his longitude change? 

CHARTING THE HEAVENS 
171 
4. Of the two circles of latitude, 300 nonh and 400 north, which has the larger 
radius? 
5. If a man changes his latitude by 2D in traveling along a meridian (Fig. 7-19), 
how far does he travel? 
6. Suppose a man travels due west along the 41 ° circle of latitude and changes his 
longitude by 5° (Fig. 7-20). How far does he travel? 
7. In one day (24 hr) the earth rotates through 360°. Hence a person has in effect 
moved around in a complete circle. How far has a person traveled who is at 
410 latitude? 
* 7-5 CHARTING THE HEAVENS 
From the determination of the latitude and longitude of places on the earth's 
surface and of distances between places, Hipparchus and Ptolemy proceeded to 
the far more ambitious problem of calculating the sizes and distances of the 
heavenly bodies. The classical Greeks had indeed speculated about these sizes 
and distances, but since they relied far more upon aesthetically pleasing prin­
ciples than upon keen observation, measurement of angles, and numerical 
calculation. their conclusions were often absurd. 
The Alexandrian Greeks made the decisive step in quantitative astronomy. 
They were, as we have noted, more disposed to measure. Moreover many of 
them, including Hipparchus himself, had improved the astronomical instruments 
and the sundials and water clocks which helped to fix more accurately the time 
at which observations were made. Hipparchus and Ptolemy also had at their 
disposal in Alexandria a wealth of astronomical data which the Egyptians, 
Babylonians, and Alexandrians had compiled over many centuries. Let us see 
how these men "triangulated" the heavens. We shall not reproduce their exact 
procedures but merely show the essential principles. 
, 
, , , 
.. 
- - - - -+.:
-
-
-
-
-
-==-M 
E 
P 
Equator 
Fig. 7-21. 
Finding the distance to the moon. 
We shall consider first how one can find the distance to the moon. Suppose 
that P and Q (Fig. 7-21) are two points on the earth's equator which are 
chosen to satisfy the following conditions: The moon is to be directly overhead 
at P; that is, the moon, M, regarded as a point, is to be on the line from the 
center of the earth, E, through P. The moon is in this position at certain times 
each month. The point Q is chosen such that the moon is just visible from it. 
This means that the moon is clearly visible from points closer to P but not 

172 
CHARTING THE EARTH AND THE HEAVENS 
visible from points farther away from P and along the equator. Another way 
of saying the same thing is that the line MQ is tangent to the equator at Q. 
Let us draw the line EQ. The angle EQM is a right angle because the radius 
of a circle drawn to the point of contact of a tangent is perpendicular to 
the tangent. 
We now have a right triangle. Moreover, EQ is the radius of the earth 
and this is known. The angle at E is the difference in longitude between the 
points P and Q, and since the longitudes of places on the earth are known, so 
is angle E. A modern value for it is 89° 4', a value far more accurate than 
Hipparchus or Ptolemy could have obtained with their instruments. The 
calculation of EM is now child's play, for 
EQ 
cos E = - ·  
EM 
The value of cos E or cos 89' 4', taken from a larger trigonometric table than 
ours, is 0.0163. Moreover EQ is 4000 miles. Then 
400 
0.0163 = EM 
. 
If we multiply both sides of this equation by EM and then divide by 0.0163, 
we obtain 
400 
EM = -- = 245 00. 
0.0163 
' 
Our data yield EM = 245,000 miles, and if we now subtract EP, the radius 
of the earth, we find that PM, the distance from the surface of the earth to 
the moon, is 241,000 miles. Hipparchus arrived at the figure of about 280,000 
miles because his angular measure of E was nOt so accurate.· 
Precisely the same method can be used to find the distance to the sun. 
The point M (Fig. 7-21) would now represent the sun. However, because 
the distances PM and QM are much larger in the case of the sun, angle E is 
larger and very close to 90°. Moreover, the angle must be measured very 
accurately because a small error in the angle will cause a large error in the 
value of PM. For this reason the result of Hipparchus and Ptolemy, of the 
order of millions of miles, was, as they realized, not very accurate (see 
Exercise 1). 
Let us now find the radius of the moon. Whereas in the preceding calcu­
lation we regarded the moon as a point, this idealization will obviously not 
• The distance of the earth from the moon varies over the year. The above value is 
about an average value. 

CHARTING THE HEAVENS 
173 
Fig. 7-22. 
Determining the radius 
of the moon. 
do in finding the radius. Instead let us regard the moon as a small sphere with 
center M and radius MR (Fig. 7-22). At a point E on the earth's surface, one 
measures the angle between the line EM which has the direction from E to 
the center of the moon, and the line ER which is tangent to the moon's 
surface. This angle proves to be 15'. We know the distance from earth to 
moon, at least when the moon is idealized as a point. Let us use this distance, 
even though it is not exactly EM in our figure. We shall see that the error 
introduced is minor. Hence EM for us is 241,000 miles. We shall use again 
the Euclidean theorem that a radius of a circle drawn to the point of tangency 
of a tangent is perpendicular to the tangent. For our figure this theorem says 
that MR is perpendicular to ER. Then in the right triangle EMR we have 
. 
MR 
sm E = -_ . 
EM 
Now angle E = 15' and sin 15', taken from a tahle giving sine values for angles 
in minutes, is 0.0044. Moreover EM is 241,000. Hence 
Then 
MR 
0.0044 = 241,00 
MR = 241,000 · 0.0044 = 1060. 
Thus the radius of the moon is 1060 miles. We can see now that the error 
introduced by using 241,000 miles as the distance to the center of the moon 
cannot be great because the radius of the moon is only 1060 miles. The 
distance of 241,000 miles is really the distance EM' since, in determining the 
distance to the moon, we could observe only the surface. (For a more accurate 
calculation of the moon's radius see Exercise 3.) It is of interest that Hip­
parchus obtained the result of 1,333 miles; his measurement of angle E was 
not as accurate as the modern one. 
The method just used to find the radius of the moon can also be applied 
to find the radius of the sun. The point M in Fig. 7-22 becomes the center 
of the sun, and the distance EM becomes the distance to the sun (see Exer­
cise 2). Angle E is about the same for this case as for the moon, as one might 

174 
CHARTING THE EARTH AND THE HEAVENS 
Ca) 
Fig. 7-23. 
Determining the distance of Venus from the sun. 
Cb) 
expect from the fact that when the moon is between the earth and the sun, 
the moon just about eclipses the sun. 
We can find the distances to the moon and sun and the radii of the moon 
and sun by making measurements on the surface of the earth. But now sup­
pose that we wish to calculate the distance from Venus to the sun. If we 
were to use the preceding methods we should have to make measurements on 
the surface of V cnus. Of course, we all expect to be able to make the rrip 
to Venus shortly, and can then make the measurements. In the meantime, to 
satisfy our curiosity, we shall employ a somewhat less direct method. 
Let us regard all three bodies, the earth, the sun, and Venus, as points and 
let us suppose that the paths of earth and Venus are circular. At any time 
the three bodies are the vertices of triangle ESV' in Fig. 7-23 (a). From the 
earth we can observe the size of angle E, which, of course, changes as the 
earth and Venus move around the sun. 
A neat fact, which emerges from a study of Fig. 7-23(b), is that when 
angle E is a maximum, then the line from earth to Venus is tangent to the 
path of Venus around the sun. For when the angle at E is a maximum, the 
line from the earth to Venus is farthest from ES and still meets the circle on 
which Venus travels. But such a line must be tangent to the circle. A tangent 
to a circle is perpendicular to the radius drawn to the point of contact. Hence 
the radius SV (Fig. 7-23b) is perpendicular to EV. What we should do, then, 
is measure the angle E at various times of the year and find out when it is 
largest. At this time EV is perpendicular to SV. 
Measurements show that the largest value of angle E is 47". If in Fig. 
7-23(b), we use 47" for E and the fact that angle V must then be a right 
angle, we have 
. 
" 
SV 
s," 47 
=
-
' 
ES 

CHARTING THE HEAVENS 
175 
From our tables we find that sin 47° = 0.73 14. The distance ES is 93,000,000 
miles. Hence 
Then 
SV 
0.7314 = 
. 
93,000,000 
SV = 93,000,000 · 0.7314 = 68,000,000. 
Thus the distance from Venus to the sun is 68,000,000 miles. 
We can begin to see from these examples how Hipparchus and Ptolemy 
gave mankind its first reasonable values for the dimensions of our solar system. 
The figures they produced were staggering to the Greeks because these people 
believed that our solar system and universe were far smaller. 
The crowning achievement of Hipparchus and Ptolemy was the creation 
of a new astronomical theory which described the paths of the heavenly bodies 
and enabled man to predict their positions. We shall consider their theory in the 
next c ha pter. 
EXERCISES 
I. Let us use the method given in the text to find the distance to the sun. We 
know that in Fig. 7-24, QE is the radius of the earth, or 4000 mi. The angle at E 
is the difference in longitude between P and Q and in our case is 89° 59' 51". 
Given that cos E = 0.00004 J, find ES. 
E 
Fig. 7-24 
Fig. 7-25 
2. Let us apply the method of the text to find the radius of the sun (Fig. 7-25). 
The distance to the sun, ES, is 93,000,000 mi. Angle E is measured and found to 
be about 16'. Given that sin 16' = 0.0046, find the radius SR. 
3. In the text (Fig. 7-22) we found the radius of the moon without considering the 
distance M'M. By a slight bit of extra work we can take this radius into account. 
Let us denote M'M, which equals RM, by r. Then, since EM' is 241,000 miles and 
angle E equals 15', we have 
T 
sin 1 5' = -:-:-:-:-:-:--,-
-
241,00 + T 
Use the value of sin IS' given in the text to find T. 

176 
CHARTING THE EARTH AND THE HEAVENS 
4. Use the method in the text to find the distance from Mercury to the sun. The 
relevant angle E in this case is 230• 
* 7-6 FURTHER PROGRESS IN THE STUDY DF LIGHT 
We saw in the preceding chapter that Euclid had already formulated one basic 
law for the behavior of light, namely the law of reflection. The Alexandrians 
undertook to study a second basic phenomenon of light, namely the change in 
the direction of light as it passes from one medium to another. 
i 
Air 
Witter 
Fig. 7-26. 
Refraction of light. 
We often recognize that something strange does happen when light goes 
from air to water, say, because a straight rod when partially immersed in water 
seems to bend sharply at the water level. Also if one should shine a flashlight 
beam into water, he would observe the sudden change in the direction of the 
beam as it enters the water. This bending of light is called refraction. The 
Alexandrians sought to determine the extent of this change in direction. Spe­
cifically, if i is the angle (Fig. 7-26) which the direction of the incident light 
ray makes with the perpendicular to the surface which separates the two media, 
say air and water, and if T is the angle which the refracted light makes with 
this same perpendicular, then what the Alexandrians sought is the relationship 
between angle i and angle T. But the Alexandrians and Ptolemy, in particular, 
who worked very hard on this problem, were baffied. They did observe that as 
i increased, r increased, but the increase did not occur in any simple manner. 
Moreover, the r which corresponds to a given i is not the same for any two 
different media. Thus, if the first medium should be air, then for the same i, 
the value of T for glass would be different from that for water. 
Ptolemy did not succeed in arriving at the correct law, but he developed 
the mathematical tool which finally enabled the Dutchman Willebrord Snell 
and the Frenchman Rene Descartes to discover and express it. It was found 
in the seventeenth century that light travels with a finite velocity and that this 
velocity is different in different media. Let us suppose that we have two media 
bordering each other as shown in Fig. 7-26, and let VI be the velocity of light 
in the upper medium and V, the"velocity in the lower medium. Then Snell and 

FURTHER PROGRESS IN THE STUDY OF LIGHT 
177 
Descartes demonstrated by arguments we shall not reproduce that 
sm 1 
Vl 
--
=
_
.
 
(I) 
Thus it is the sine ratio which proves to be the key to this phenomenon of 
light. We see here, as we shall see many times later, how-as more mathe­
matical ideas are placed at our disposal-we can take hold of more natural 
phenomena. 
To familiarize ourselves with the law of refraction, we shall consider a 
concrete example. Let us suppose that the two media in question are air and 
water. The ratio of VI to V2 in this case is 4 to 3. If we are then given a 
value of i, say 30", we can find r. Since sin 30" = t, it follows from (I) that 
Therefore 
! 
--
=
 t ·  
sm T 
t = ! sin T. 
If we multiply both sides of this equation by i, we obtain 
sin r = i = 0.3750. 
We have now but to find the angle whose sine value is 0.3750. From our 
table we see that r = 22° to the nearest degree. Hence, as the light enters 
the water, the angle between its direction and the perpendicular will change 
from 30" to 22". 
We now know how light refracts. Can we put this knowledge to use? Let 
us assume that the sun is close to the horizon. Of course, light from the sun 
streams out in all directions, but some rays will travel horizontally. Suppose 
that the surface over which the light travels is the surface of a large body of 
water (Fig. 7-27). Then some rays will enter the water at a very large angle 
of incidence i, in fact, so close to 90" that we shall consider angle i to be 90". 
The question we shall discuss is, How large is angle r in this case? To obtain 
an answer, we follow the procedure described in the preceding paragraph. 
This time, angle i is 90", and sin 90" is I .  If we substitute this value in F or­
mula ( I ) ,  we have 
Sin T 
or 
sin r = !. 
Reference to the table shows that r =  49". Here the change 10 direction is 

178 
CHARTING THE EARTH AND THE HEAVENS 
Q 
Sun 
Air 
Water 
, 
/' 
Fig. 7-27. 
Fig. 7-28 
The fish-eye view of the world. 
P' 
Air 
Wilier 
considerable. Before we draw any further conclusions, let us note that 90° 
is the largest angle of incidence possible. If angle i should be less than 90', 
angle r will be less than 49'. Hence any light entering the water will take a 
direction which makes an angle between 0' and 49' with the perpendicular. 
Now suppose that a person located at the point P (Fig. 7-27) in the water 
sees the light ray OP coming toward him. Since the light travels along the 
direction OP, he will conclude that the sun is located above the water in the 
direction PO. Moreover, if light from any source enters the water at an angle 
of incidence less than 90', the angle of refraction will be even less than 49'. 
In such cases a person in the water observing this light will conclude that the 
light comes from a source whose angle of incidence is less than 49'. The point 
of this discussion is that a person at P will believe that all objects in the air 
are situated within a 49'-angle from the perpendicular because the light from 
them will seem to come from a direction within this range. The region in the 
air extending in all directions within 49' of the perpendicular at 0 is the 
interior of a cone. Hence to a person in the water all objects seem to lie 
within this cone. We have of course presumed that the person in the water 
does not know the refractive effect of light or that he at least does not know 
how much light is bent under refraction. It is fairly certain that fish do not 
know mathematics. and so the inference that all ohjects above water must be 
within the 49' -cone around the perpendicular is called the fish-eye view of 
the world. 
To be a little clearer about the possible error into which one may be led, 
suppose that light comes to a person in a submarine at P (Fig. 7-28) and that 
the direction of the light is OP. The object which emits the light will then 
appear to lie along the line PO. If, to hit the object, he shoots a bullet in the 
direction PO, the bullet will enter the air and follow the direction POP'. But 
the object at which he believes to be shooting is located along the direction 
OQ. 

FURTHER PROGRESS IN THE STUDY OF LIGHT 
179 
Let us now reverse the roles of air and water and let us suppose that the 
light originates in the water. Assume, in fact, that a beam of light is shot in 
the direction of QO of Fig. 7-29. The angle of incidence is now the angle 
marked i in the figure. The angle of refraction is the angle T. Since the ratio 
of the twO velocities of light, that is VI/V" is now to the law of refraction 
(1) becomes 
s¶n , 
= f 
Sin T 
or 
sin T = ! sin i. 
(2) 
We see that sin T is greater than sin i and that therefore T must be greater 
than i. This is as it should be because light in going from water to air will 
bend away from the perpendicular. 
Let us now suppose that angle i is greater than 49", say 60", and let us 
seek to determine the corresponding angle of refraction, T. Then, knowing that 
sin 60" = 0.8660, we find by (2) that 
sin r = !(0.8660) = 1.155. 
We see then that sin r is greater than 1. Unfortunately, there is no angle 
whose sine value is greater than I. and so there is no angle of refraction. Thus 
mathematics predicts that the light cannot leave the water. Is this the case 
physically' Well, no decently behaving light ray would wish to disobey the 
mathematical law of refraction. And none does. The light remains in the 
water. But what does it do' The answer is that the light is reflected from 
the boundary between air and water. Since the light must return to the water, 
it may as well do what it has already learned how to do under the process of 
reflection, namely, be reflected at an angle equal to the angle of incidence 
which in the present case is 60" (Fig. 7-30). 
r 
o 
Air 
Air 
Wat('r 
Water 
Q 
Fig. 7-29. 
FIg. 7-30. 
Refraction from water into air. 
Total reflection. 

180 
CHARTING THE EARTH AND THE HEAVENS 
Thus we have discovered that if light seeks to pass from one medium to 
a second one in which the velocity is greater, then for all angles larger than 
a certain angle (49" for water and air), the light is not refracted but reflected. 
This particular angle, the largest for which refraction is still possible, is called 
the critical angle, and the phenomenon that for all greater angles of incidence 
the light is reflected is called total reflection. 
This phenomenon is indeed a surprising one. It means that a surface, such 
as the surface of the water in the above example, serves as a mirror for some 
angles of incidence. Now mirrors are very useful devices. Generally they 
are made by silvering the back of a glass plate. Would there be any use for 
the phenomenon of total reflection in view of the fact that here too we en­
counter a reflecting surface' As a matter of fact, the phenomenon is put to 
use in a number of familiar instruments. 
0---1 
C ""--.,.,-"-A 
Fig. 7-31. 
Parallel displacement of light by 
means of total reflection in two 
prisms. 
Let us consider the following situation (Fig. 7-31), where ACB and A'C'B' 
are two prism-shaped pieces of glass with the faces AC and A'C' parallel to 
each other. Both prisms are shaped as isosceles right triangles. Suppose that 
OP is a light ray which first strikes the face BC perpendicularly. Here the 
angle of incidence is 0". Hence the angle of refraction is also 0", and the light 
therefore goes through unchanged in direction. The light ray strikes the 
face BA at an angle of 45". Now if the prisms are made of flint glass, the 
critical angle is 37". Thus the light ray strikes the face BA at an angle of 
incidence greater than the critical angle. In accordance with the phenomenon 
of total reflection, the light is reflected at an angle of 45" to AB and follows 
the direction PO. The light strikes the faces AC and A'C' at an angle of 
incidence of 0" and so goes right through unchanged. It then strikes the face 
A'B' at an angle of 45". Since this angle of incidence also is greater than the 
critical angle, the light is again totally reflected at an angle of 45" with B' A' 

FURTHER PROGRESS IN THE STUDY OF LIGHT 
181 
and takes the direction RO'. Thus the final ray, RO', has the same direction 
as the original ray, OP, but is displaced by the distance PRo 
We might well ask, Does this combination of prisms have any practical 
value? One application is the periscope. The two prisms are at opposite ends 
of a long vertical tube. Now OP is the light received above water and RO' 
is the light received below. One could very well use two silvered mirrors at 
BA and A'B' and obtain the same result. But silvered mirrors tarnish with 
age and lose their effectiveness. Moreover, well-made glass prisms reflect 
almost all the light that falls on a face such as BA, whereas a silvered mirror 
reflects only about 70% of the incident light; the rest is absorbed or scattered 
in all directions. Hence the prism not only outlasts the silvered mirror but 
is much more efficient. 
Another application of the above combination of two prisms is made in 
binoculars. The two tubes which first receive the light are deliberately placed 
rather far apart so that the field of vision is large. But the eye pieces of the 
binoculars cannot be farther apart than the distance between a person's eyes. 
In each half of a binocular, the incident light is displaced as OP is displaced 
to RO'. Then the two incoming rays, one in each of the main tubes, can be 
far apart, whereas the two emerging rays are no farther apart than the eyes 
of a person. 
0, 
II, 
P 
0, 
II, 
S 
Fig. 7-32. 
0, 
II, 
Refraction by a 
lens. 
Total reflection is but one phenomenon of the refractive effect of light. 
The most common use of the refractive effect of light is in lenses. If light 
streams out from an object at P (Fig. 7-32) in all directions, some of the 
rays will strike the lens at points such as 0" 0" and 0,. There their direc­
tions will change because they are entering glass. Thus the rays PO" PO" 
and PO, may take the directions O,R" O,R" and O,R" respectively. At the 
right-hand surface of the glass, the rays re-enter the air and, since the medium 
in which the light is traveling changes, the light rays bend again. By properly 
shaping the lens surfaces, that is 0,0,0, on the left and R,R,R, on the right, 
the light from P may be made to concentrate at S. All optical instruments, 
such as telescopes. microscopes, binoculars, and cameras, contain lenses of this 
kind. 
The eye itself is a complicated refracting device. When light enters the 
eye (Fig. 7-33), it passes through a liquid (denoted by A in the figure), 

182 
CHARTING THE EARTH AND THE HEAVENS 
called the aqueous humor, then through the lens, L, which is made of a fibrous 
jelly, and finally it enters another liquid, V, called the vitreous humor. Al­
though all three media have some refractive effect upon the light, most of the 
refraction occurs when it encounters the aqueous humor. To be perceived, 
light rays that enter the eye must strike the retina, R, in the rear. The eye 
has a ciliary muscle which changes the shape of the lens and therefore the 
direction of the light rays passing through the eye so that the rays are directed 
toward the retina. Eyes which for one reason or another cannot direct the 
rays to the retina must be aided by additional lenses in eyeglasses. Clearly the 
science of medicine profits immensely from the mathematical and physical 
knowledge acquired about the action of the eye. 
In the camera, the lens or lenses are fixed in shape. The film acts as does 
the retina in the eye. Since the shapes of the lenses are fixed, the distances 
of the lenses from the film can be varied to enable the refracted light to reach 
the proper places on the film. 
Fig. 7-33. 
A sketch of the eye. 
We have been discussing the law of refraction and some of the remarkable 
effects which take place at a sharp boundary between the two media. But the 
refractive effect of light is equally striking and important when there is a 
gradual change in the nature of the medium through which the light passes. 
Let us consider the passage of light through air, which is not a uniform me­
dium. Generally it is more dense near the ground and thinner at higher alti­
rudes. Hence, when light comes to a person at P (Fig. I-I) from the sun at 
0, the light ray follows a curved path as it travels through the earth's atmos­
phere because it is continually refracted. For the observer at P the direction 
of the incoming light is O'P, and hence he thinks that the source lies along the 
direction PO'. This is the reason that we are often deceived about the true 
position of the sun (see Chapter I). 
The refractive effect of light is, as we can see, a peculiar phenomenon. 
Why does light behave this way? We do not understand what light is and 
so cannot analyze the substance itself to learn why it refracts, but we have 
another kind of explanation which sheds light on nature's operations. The 
clue lies in the law of refraction. We note that refraction depends upon the 
velocity of light in the medium. The seventeenth-century mathematician 
Pierre de Fermat, whom we shall meet again, pondered on this fact and, after 
analyzing the law of refraction, found an important principle. Suppose that 

p 
FURTHER PROGRESS IN THE STUDY OF LIGHT 
183 
Air 
Waler 
IJ 
Fig. 7-34. 
light takes the path requiring 
least time. 
light travels from the point P in air (Fig. 7-34) to the point Q in water and 
bends at 0 in accordance with the law of refraction. Were the light to follow 
the straight-line path from P to Q instead of the broken-line path POQ, it 
would travel a shorter distance. Let us note, however, that the distance O'Q 
in water would be longer than OQ. Because the velocity in water is smaller 
than in air, the light might lose more time in traveling the path O'Q instead 
of OQ than it might save by traveling the shorter distance PO' instead of PO 
in air. By a mathematical argument Fermat showed that light takes the path 
which requires least time. 
But is this fact true for other phenomena of light? When light travels 
from one point to another in a uniform medium, it takes the straight-line path. 
It would seem as though in this case light chooses the criterion of shortest 
path and not that of least time. But in a uniform medium the velocity of light 
is constant, and so the shortest path requires the least time. Let us consider 
next what happens when light goes from a point P to a mirror and then to a 
point Q. We proved in Chapter 6 that light takes the shortest path. But here 
too the light travels in one medium and. because the medium is uniform, the 
velocity is constantj hence the shortest path again means least time. It would 
appear from Fermat's analysis that nature l'i wise. It knows mathematics and 
employs it in the interest of economy. 
We have gotten a little ahead of our story by presenting the mathematical 
law of refraction and Fermat's analysis of the deeper implications of this law. 
The Alexandrian Greeks had grappled with the phenomenon of refraction and, 
as we noted earlier. supplied the key in the concept of the trigonometric ratios, 
but did not attain the law itself or see its meaning in terms of least time. But 
by providing these ratios and by charting the earth and heavens, the Alex­
andrians extended enormously man's mathematical understanding of the phys­
ical world. The power of mathematics to describe and analyze nature's ways 
was advanced well beyond the stage at which Euclid and Apollonius had left 
it. The crowning achievement of the Alexandrians is yet to be related. 

184 
CHARTING THE EARTH AND THE HEAVENS 
EXERCISES 
1. Given that the ratio of the velocity of light in air to that in water is 4 to 3 and 
that the angle of incidence of a light ray originating in the air and striking the 
surface of the water is 450, what is the angle of refraction? 
2, Suppose a light ray traveling in glass strikes the boundary of the glass and seeks 
to enter the air beyond the boundary. The velocity of light in the glass is rwo­
thirds of its velocity in air. What angles of incidence can the light ray have and 
still penetrate into the air? 
Air 
;jI ,I 
) Glas 
, /(' 
Air 
Fig. 7-35 
3. Prove that a light ray passing through a plate of glass (Fig. 7-35) emerges 
parallel to its original direction but is somewhat displaced. 
4. Suppose that one measures the angle of incidence, i, and the angle of refraction, 
T, for a light ray passing from air into a plate of glass, and assume that angle i 
proves to be 500 and angle r, 450• The velocity of light in air is 186,000 mi/sec. 
What is the velocity of light in the glass? 
5. What is the mathematical theme of this chapter? 
6, Is it correct to say that the tri'gonometry of the Alexandrian Greeks is an exten­
sion of Euclidean geometry? 
7. Contrast the classical and the Alexandrian Greek activities in mathematics. 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
I. Use the Table of Trigonometric Ratios to find the angle 
a) whose sine is 0.3256, 
b) whose tangent is 0.5 3 1 7. 
c) whose cosine is 0.3256, 
d) w hose tangent is 1.8807. 
2, It is possible to find the sine, cosine, and tangent of 450 in somewhat the same 
manner as we found the corresponding values of 30° and 600, Take a right 
triangle whose arms are each 1. Calculate the length of the hypotenuse by 
means of the Pythagorean theorem. Now write the values of sin 450, cos 45°, 
and tan 45°. 

FURTHER PROGRESS IN THE STUDY OF LIGHT 
185 
3. Find the sine, cosine, and tangent of the acute angle A of a right triangle 
a) when the opposite side is 5 and the hypotenuse is 13, 
b) when the opposite side is 12 and the adjacent side is 5, 
c) when the opposite side is v'3 and the adjacent side is 2, 
d) when the opposite side is V3 and the adjacent side is v'6, 
e) when the opposite side is 1 and the hypotenuse is v'iO. 
4. If sin A = t, find cos A and tan A. 
5. If cos A = t, find sin A and tan A. 
6. If tan A = t, find sin A and cos A. 
7. To find the width AB of a river, a line segment AC perpendicular to AB is 
measured along one bank and found to be 100 ft. By sighting along CA and 
CB, the angle ACB is found to be 40°. How wide is the river? 
8. The shadow on the horizontal ground of a vertical pole is 15 ft. At the end of 
the shadow the angle between the horizontal and the line of sight to the top of 
the pole is 20·. Find the height of the pole. 
9. A wire 60 ft long reaches from the top of a 4O-ft pole to the ground. What 
angle does the wire make with the pole? 
10. From the top of a lighthouse 60 ft high, the angle between the vertical and the 
line of sight to a ship at sea is 35°. How far is the ship from the foot of the 
lighthouse? 
I I .  An observer in an airplane 2000 ft directly above a gun observes that the angle 
between his vertical and the line of sight to an enemy target is 500. How far 
is the target from the gun? 
12. Find the radius and the circumference of the circle of latitude 230 north. 
13. Suppose a man changes his longitude by 5° while traveling along the circle of 
latitude 23° north. How far does he travel? 
14. Find the radius of the circle of latitude 670 north. 
15. Suppose a light ray traveling in air strikes the water at an angle of incidence 
of 45°. What is the angle of refraction? 
16. A ray of light starts from a point P in water and strikes the surface at an angle 
of incidence of 300 and emerges into air. What is the angle of refraction of the 
light ray? 
Topics for Further Investigation 
I .  The mathematics of lenses. Use the references to Taylor, or to Sears and 
Zemansky. or look up any elementary physics book. 
2. The mathematics of map-making. Use the references to Brown. Raisz, Deetz, or 
Chamberlin. 
3. The history of mathematics during the Alexandrian period. Use the references 
to Smith. Ball, Eves. or Scott. 
4. The creation of trigonometry. Use the references to Aaboe. 
5. The life and work of Archimedes. Use any history. 

186 
CHARTING THE EARTH AND THE HEAVENS 
Recommended Reading 
AABOE, ASGER: Episodes from the Early History of Mathematics, Chap. 4, Random 
House, New York, 1964. 
BALL, W. W. ROUSE: A Short Account of the History of Mathematics, 4th ed., 
Chaps. 4 and 5, Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1960. 
BROWN, LLOYD A.: The Story of Maps, Little, Brown and Co., Boston, 1944. 
CHAMBERLIN, WELLMAN: The Round Earth on Flat Paper, National Geographic 
Society. Washington, D.C., 1947. 
DEETZ, CHARLES H. and OSCAR S. ADAMS: Elements of Map Projection, pp. 1-52. 
U.S. Department of Commerce, Special Publication No. 68, 1938. 
GREENHOOD, DAVID: Mapping, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1964. 
HEATH, SIR THOMAS L.: A Manual of Greek Mathematics, Chap. 14, Dover Publi­
cations Inc., New York. 1963. 
PARSONS, EDWARD A.: The Alexandrian Library, The Elsevier Press, Amsterdam, 
1952. 
RAISZ, E.: General Cartography, McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1948. 
SAWYER, W. W.: Mathematician's Delight, Chap. 13, Penguin Books, Harmonds­
worth, England, 1943. 
ScOTT, J. F.: A History of Mathematics, Chap. 3, Taylor and Francis, Ltd., 
London, 1958. 
SEARS, FRANCIS W. and MARK ZEMANSKY: University Physics, 3rd ed., Chaps. 39-43, 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Inc., Reading, Mass., 1964. 
SMITH, DAVID E.: History of Mathematics, Vol. I, Chap. 4, Dover Publications, Inc., 
New York, 1958. 
TAYLOR, LI,OYD W.: Physics, The Pioneer Science, pp. 442-470, Dover Publications, 
Inc., New York, 1959. 

CHAPTER B 
THE MATHEMATICAL ORDER OF NATURE 
Great men! elevated above the common standard of human nature, by 
discovering the laws which celestial occurrences obey, and by freeing the 
wretched mind of man from the fears which the eclipses inspired. 
PLINY 
8-1 THE GREEK CONCEPT OF NATURE 
The Greeks, as we now know, molded the nature of mathematics, constructed 
Euclidean geometry and trigonometry, and applied their theoretical results to 
objects in space, to the behavior of light, to mapping the earth, and to deter­
mining the sizes and distances of heavenly bodies. But these extensive and 
magnificent achievements within mathematics proper and in its applications do 
not exhibit the full greatness of the Greek genius, and are indeed dwarfed by 
the Greeks' grand conception of the universe itself. 
Possessed with insatiable curiosity and courage, they asked and answered 
the questions which occur to many, are tackled by few, and are resolved only 
by individuals of the highest intellectual caliber. Is there any plan under­
lying the workings of the entire universe? Are planets, men, animals, plants, 
light, and sound merely physical accidents or are they part of a grand plan? 
Because they were dreamers enough to arrive at new points of view, the 
Greeks fashioned a conception of the universe which has dominated all sub­
sequent Western thought. They affirmed that nature is rationally and indeed 
mathematically designed. All phenomena apparent to the senses, from the 
motions of planets in the heavens to the stirrings of leaves on a tree, can be 
fitted into a precise, coherent, intelligible pattern. The Greeks were the first 
people with the audacity to conceive of such law and order in the welter of 
phenomena and the first with the genius to uncover a pattern to which nature 
conforms. They dared to ask for and they found a design underlying the 
greatest spectacle man beholds, the motion of the brilliant sun, the changing 
shapes of the many-hued moon, the piercing shafts of the planets, the broad 
panorama of lights from the canopy of stars, and the seemingly miraculous 
eclipses of the sun and moon. 
187 

188 
THE MATHEMATICAL ORDER OF NATURE 
8-2 PRE·GREEK AND GREEK VIEWS OF NATURE 
To appreciate the originality and boldness of the steps which the Greeks took 
in this direction, one must compare their attitude with what preceded. To all 
pre· Greek civilizations and later ones which lay beyond the Greek pale, nature 
appeared arbitrary, capricious, mysterious, and even terrifying. The ancient 
Egyptians and Babylonians did note the periodic motions of the sun and moon. 
But the motions of the planets made no sense at all. These bodies moved with 
varying speeds at different times of the year; at times they stood still; and 
often they reversed their courses. They appeared and disappeared. The few 
regularities which were observed in these motions were beclouded by the 
many irregularities. 
If these two ancient peoples had any expectation at all that the universe 
would continue to function in the future as it had in the past, it was because 
they believed that sun, moon, and planets were gods who would most likely 
behave in a gentlemanly and beneficent manner. In the complex actions of 
nature, they saw no glimpse of plan, order, or law. They scarcely dreamed 
of design and certainly conceived no embracing theories. 
Even the Greeks of abour 1000 B.C. accepted fanciful accounts of the 
universe, accounts which are found in Homer and Hesiod. There were many 
gods, each of whom played some role in the creation and maintenance of the 
universe. Indeed the names Jupiter, Saturn, Venus, Mercury, and Mars are 
merely the Roman names for the Greek gods, and the Greek names, such as 
Aphrodite for Venus and Hermes for Mercury, were replacements for Baby­
lonian names. These gods not only determined but even intervened in the 
affairs of man. 
Rather suddenly, or so at least our knowledge of history indicates, rational 
accounts of the structure of the universe and of the motions of heavenly 
bodies appeared in the Greek city of Miletus located in Ionia, a region of 
Asia Minor. There is the theory that the Miletans, far from home and there­
fore free of the tyranny of beliefs which a society imposes on its members 
and yet repelled by the strange doctrines they encountered among the peoples 
of the Near East, were propelled into thinking for themselves. Certainly from 
600 B.C. onward rational views dominate the picture. These Greeks and their 
successors were the first to reveal the passionate desire for knowledge, the 
love of reason, and the conviction that nature not only is rational but that an 
examination of nature's ways would reveal the order inherent in the physical 
world. The new thesis is proclaimed by the Ionian Anaxagoras: "Reason rules 
the world." The early rational theories are crude from a modern standpoint, 
but the new outlook is evident. 
The decisive step leading to the construction of precise and verifiable 
scientific theories in place of vague and largely speculative accounts was the 
involvement of mathematics. This step was made by the Pythagoreans. We 
have already noted the prepossession of these people with the concept of 

PRE-GREEK AND GREEK VIEWS OF NATURE 
189 
number, though admixed with mystical and religious doctrines. In their philos­
ophy of nature the Pythagoreans began with the principle that number is the 
essence of all substance. Unlimited space furnishes the material for particular 
forms of matter. But to the Pythagoreans any form was a pattern of discrete 
points arranged, as small pebbles might be, to build up the form. Hence the 
forms reduced to numbers. Since number is the essence of any object, the 
explanation of natural phenomena could be achieved only through number. 
The natural philosophy of the Pythagoreans is hardly very substantial. 
Aesthetic principles commingled with an obsession to find number relation­
ships certainly led to assertions transcending observational evidence. Nor did 
the Pythagoreans develop any one branch of physical science very far. One 
can justifiably call their theories superficial. But whether by a lucky stroke 
or by intuitive genius the Pythagoreans did hit upon two doctrines which later 
proved to be all important. The first is that nature is built in accordance with 
mathematical principles, and the second that number relationships reveal the 
order in nature. They underlie and unify the seeming diversity exhibited by 
nature. The Pythagoreans said in fact that numbers and number relationships 
are the essence of nature. This statement will assume deeper meaning when 
we get to modern times. 
Perhaps because mathematics developed considerably in the intervening 
century, the principle that nature is mathematically designed emerged more 
sharply and was applied more substantially in Plato's time. Plato was indeed 
a Pythagorean but a master in his own right who influenced Greek thought 
in a most important century, the fourth century B.C. He was the founder of 
an academy in Athens, a university which attracted the leading thinkers of his 
day and which, in fact, endured for nine hundred years. 
Plato's own doctrines were extreme. Reality to him was not to be found 
in the physical world but in a system of ideas and in an ideal plan of the 
universe which God himself had created and contemplates. The visible and 
sensible world is just a vague, dim, and imperfect realization of these ideas. 
Moreover, the ideas were perfect and eternal, whereas the physical world is 
imperfect and decays. One might say that, unlike the Pythagoreans, Plato did 
not wish to comprehend the physical world through mathematics but aimed 
at understanding the mathematical plan itself which observation of the physical 
world suggested very imperfectly. 
For example, Plato describes the real science of astronomy. The visible 
figures in the heavens are far inferior to the true objects, namely those objects 
that are to be apprehended by reason and mental conceptions. The varied 
configurations which the sky presents to the eye are to be used only as 
diagrams to assist in the study of higher truths. We must treat astronomy, 
like geometry, as a series of problems suggested by visible things. True 
astronomy deals with the laws of motion of true stars in a mathematical 
heaven of which the visible heaven is but an imperfect expression. True 

190 
THE MATHEi\lATlCAL ORDER OF NATURE 
astronomy must leave the actual heavens alone. It is clear, incidentally, that 
Plato, like the classical Greeks in general, was indifferent to the practical 
problems of navigation, calendar reckoning, and the measurement of time. 
Although the planets, at least as seen from the earth, do not appear to 
follow any regular course (the word "planet" means in fact "wanderer," and 
the planets were referred to as the vagabonds of the sky), Plato was sure­
because "God eternally geometrizes"-that there was a mathematical pattern 
underlying and governing the motions of all heavenly bodies. Plato's own 
attempts to find such a plan were crude, largely because he would not devote 
himself to a careful study of the actual motions. Bur he did pose to his col­
leagues and students the problem of devising a mathematical scheme that 
would call for regular motions and yet account for the irregular motions we 
see, the problem he described as "saving the appearances." 
8-3 GREEK ASTRONOMICAL THEORIES 
One of Plato's pupils, Eudoxus (408-355 B.C.), who later became one of the 
most famous of Greek mathematicians, did take on this problem and, by cre­
ating the first major astronomical theory known to history, made one of the 
great and ingenious contributions to the demonstration of the mathematical 
design of nature. We shall not present the details of his theory. It was con­
structed before Hipparchus and Ptolemy calculated the sizes and distances of 
the heavenly bodies, and so Eudoxus did not have the data on which to build 
an accurate system. The defects in the theory were soon recognized. 
The problem of finding the design of planetary motions continued to 
engage the minds of the Greeks, possibly because they were not distracted 
by the "heavenly" stars of stage, screen, and radio with whom many modern 
minds seem to be preoccupied. One of the solutions advanced but rejected is 
worthy of mention. Aristarchus, who lived about 270 B.C. and who had made 
many estimates of the sizes and distances of heavenly bodies, though with 
methods cruder than those developed later by Hipparchus and Ptolemy, pro­
posed the theory that the planets move in circles about the sun. Aristarchus. 
to our knowledge, did not attempt to show that such a theory would fit the 
data known to his time. But the theory was not acceptable to his contem­
poraries and successors because it was totally at variance with Greek concep­
tions of the universe and Greek physics. For one thing, the Greeks already 
knew that simple circular motion would not do because the distance of the 
earth from the sun was known not to be constant. One piece of evidence was 
that the apparent diameter of the sun varied with the seasons. Another objec­
tion to Aristarchus' plan arose from the knowledge that the earth consisted 
of heavy matter; it was inconceivable that such a heavy body could be in 
motion. The planets, on the other hand, were supposed to be made of some 

GREEK ASTRONOJ\llCAL THEORIES 
191 
light substance and so their motion was feasible. This distinction between the 
physical constitution of the earth and that of the planets was almost universally 
accepted up to the seventeenth century. Moreover, if the earth were in mo­
tion, why did objects on the earth not fall behind? Greek physics had no 
answer to this argument. 
The supreme achievement of all Greek efforts aimed at exhibiting the 
mathematical design of the universe is the astronomical theory of Hipparchus 
and Ptolemy. These two men, as we noted in the preceding chapter, had 
created the mathematical method that enabled them to determine the sizes and 
distances of the sun, moon, and several planets, the method which, as Ptolemy 
put it, gave them the tool needed to base astronomy "on the incontrovertible 
ways of arithmetic and geometry." They also had older Egyptian and Baby­
lonian observations at their disposal as well as innumerable others made by 
Hipparchus himself at Rhodes and by the observatory in Alexandria. They 
tackled the plan of organizing all this knowledge into one comprehensive 
scheme. 
-
, 
..: :!:Q_--+-/ 
t 
o E  
Q 
p 
Fig. 8-1. 
A planet moves on its epicycle, which in turn moves around the deferent. 
In the astronomy of Hipparchus and Ptolemy, which we now refer to as 
the Ptolemaic theory, the earth is the center of the universe and stationary. 
To account for the motion of a planet P (Fig. 8-1), these men assumed that 
P moves at a constant speed along a circle whose center is Q. At the same 
time that P moves around Q, Q is supposed to be moving in a circle and at 

192 
THE MATHEMATICAL ORDER OF NATURE 
a constant speed around the earth, E. The circle on which P moves is called 
an epicycle, and the circle on which Q moves is called the deferent. Hip­
parchus and Ptolemy could, of course, choose the radii of the two circles and 
the speeds at which P and Q move on their respective circles so that the 
motion of P agreed with the observed positions of the particular planet. For 
each planet the choice of radii and speeds was different. 
Actually the above scheme did not give these men enough latitude. Hence 
their astronomical system contained also some minor devices which enabled 
them to fit a system of such circles to the motion of any one heavenly body, but 
the essential principle is the use of deferent and epicycle. It should be noted 
that the motion of a planet as viewed from the earth is actually quite compli­
cated and yet, by the above scheme, is readily understood in terms of a combi­
nation of circular motions. This theory accounted for planetary motions 
within the accuracy of observations attained in Alexandrian times. From the 
time of Hipparchus an eclipse of the moon could be predicted to within an hour 
or two. Predictions of the sun's motion were not so precise, but we must recall 
here a point made in the preceding chapter, namely, that calculations of the sun's 
distances at various times were not exact because the requisite angles were too 
small to be measured accurately. 
The scheme we have just described is contained in Ptolemy's Almagest, 
the book mentioned earlier (Chapter 7). This theory was quantitatively so 
precise that it was accepted as the true design of the heavens until the work 
of Copernicus and Kepler displaced it. It is significant, however, that Ptolemy 
at least laid no claims to truth. He had constructed a mathematical scheme 
which accounted for the motions of the celestial bodies, a theory which 
worked, but he did not profess that God had so designed the universe. Un­
fortunately people's confidence in the truth of a doctrine increases with the 
length of time it holds sway, and since Ptolemaic theory was accepted for 
about 1500 years, people came to regard it as an absolute and unchallengeable 
truth. No other product of the entire Greek era rivals the Almagest in the 
profound influence it exerted on conceptions of the universe and none, except 
Euclid's Elements, achieved such unquestioned authority. 
The theory of Hipparchus and Ptolemy is the final Greek answer to Plato's 
problem of rationalizing the appearances in the heavens and is the first really 
great scientific synthesis. Whereas the Greeks of the classical period were 
convinced on philosophical and intuitive grounds that nature was rationaIly 
designed, Ptolemaic theory provided overwhelming, concrete evidence. 
8-4 THE EVIDENCE FOR THE MATHEMATICAL DESIGN OF NATURE 
Let us look back for a moment to see the total evidence which the Greeks 
could muster for their momentous doctrine that nature is mathematically 
designed. The astronomical theory of Hipparchus and Ptolemy was certainly 

EVIDF:NCE FOR THE MATHEMATICAL DESIGN OF NATURE 
193 
the most impressive evidence not only because it dealt with the grandest natural 
spectacle but because it showed design in a maze of phenomena whose out­
ward appearances scarcely suggested design. To this achievement we must 
add Euclidean geometry. We have already pointed out the larger significance 
of this body of knowledge; it demonstrated that the shapes and sizes of earthly 
figures conform to a reasoned system of doctrines. One might very well prove 
on the basis of self-evident axioms and of reasoning that satisfies the mind that 
the sum of the angles of a triangle is 1 80". But when one constructs triangle 
after triangle for various purposes and finds in every case that the sum is 
indeed 180", one cannOt escape the implication that this and the other theorems 
of Euclidean geometry express essential principles of nature. Moreover, be­
cause these principles are all part of one reasoned body of knowledge, it seems 
clear that nature is designed in accordance with a reasoned plan. 
In the domains of light and sound (music), the progress made by the 
Greeks was not nearly so impressive, but they had produced the law of re­
flection and they did know and use the properties of curved mirrors to con­
centrate light. The Greeks were sure that further investigation would reveal 
additional laws, and almost every Greek mathematician worked on light. 
Many, among them Euclid, Archimedes, Apollonius, Heron, and Ptolemy, 
wrote mathematical books on the subject. The development of a mathematical 
theory of musical sounds was initiated by the Pythagoreans and, as in the case 
of light, pursued by many later Greeks. 
The Greeks also applied mathematics to various other classes of natural 
phenomena and found the mathematical laws applicable. Archimedes wrote 
a still famous book on the mathematical laws of the lever. Another of his 
works investigated the weight and stability of various shapes placed in water. 
It was primarily motivated by the experience that a ship whose shape is not 
well chosen may readily overturn in water. Still another study dealt with the 
centers of gravity of various shapes, an important bit of knowledge if bodies 
are to be balanced or remain upright. 
Phenomena of motion were also studied by the Greeks. Here too they 
adopted what seemed to be self-evident principles and made deductions which 
fitted their limited experience. In the Aristotelian theory of matter all objects 
were composed of lightness. heaviness, wetness, and dryness. Those in which 
lighmess dominated (for example, fire) always sought to rise. Those in which 
heaviness dominated (for example, metals) sought to fall. Every object had 
a natural place and, when not hindered, sought it. Thus the natural place of 
light objects was a region near the moon, whereas heavy objects tended to 
congregate at the center of the universe which was, of course, the center of 
the earth. Force is required to set an object in motion, and a measure of this 
force was the product of the weight and the velocity given to the body. Also, 
a force must constantly be applied to keep a body in motion or else the motion 

194 
THE MATHEMATICAL ORDER OF NATURE 
would cease. Forces are transmitted by material agents. Thus one body must 
strike another to transmit motion to the latter." The Greeks made progress 
in other scientific fields such as geography and geodesy which we discussed 
somewhat in the preceding chapter. 
In all of the fields discussed above mathematics was, at the very least, 
considerably involved. In fact, in the classical period mathematics meant 
arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music and, by the end of the Alexan­
drian period. it had come to mean, in addition. mechanics (motion, the lever, 
the hydrostatics of Archimedes), optics, geodesy, and logistics (practical 
arithmetic). 
From these scientific investigations one major fact stood forth: the uni­
verse is mathematically designed. Mathematics is immanent in nature; it is the 
truth about its structure, or, as Plato would have it, the reality of the physical 
world. Moreover, human reason could penetrate the divine plan and reveal 
the mathematical structure of nature. Almost all of the mathematical and 
scientific research which has taken place since Greek times has been inspired 
by the conviction that there is law and order in the universe, and that mathe­
matics is the key to this order. 
The Greek miracle has not been rivaled, not even by our modern civiliza­
tion. A relative handful of people produced in a few hundred years supreme 
works not only in mathematics and science but in literature, art, music, logic, 
and in many branches of philosophy. 
8-5 THE DESTRUCTION OF THE GREEK WORLD 
It is accurate to say of the Greeks that God proposed them but man disposed 
of them. We have already related in Chapter 2 that the Romans conquered 
the Greek lands and that Roman practicality affected adversely the theoretical 
studies in Alexandria. We have also mentioned the rise of Christianity and 
that the Christian reaction to Roman persecution was to condemn and forbid 
all pagan learning, though, of course, the new religion did absorb some Greek 
philosophic doctrines, notably Aristotle's. The destruction of what remained 
at Alexandria, Christian and pagan, was completed by the Mohammedans. The 
Arabs had been inspired by Mohammed to adopt a new religion. Mohammed 
died in 632 A.D., but his successors undertook to convert the world by the 
sword. They conquered Alexandria in 646 and burned the Museum on the 
ground that if the books there contained anything contrary to the teachings 
of Mohammed, they were wrong, and if in agreement, superfluous. With this 
stroke the dusk settled on Alexandria. 
Although the Museum was destroyed and the scholars dispersed, Greek 
learning did ultimately become an integral part of European civilization and 
• See also Section 1 3-5. 

THE DESTRUCTION OF THE GREEK WORLD 
195 
culture. Just how the Greek creations found a new home in Western Europe 
through one of the quirks of history has already been indicated briefly in 
Chapter 2, and we shall say more about it in later chapters. 
EXERCISES 
I. What essential differences can you find between the pre-Greek and the Ptolemaic 
view of the heavens? 
2. What is the Pythagorean doctrine concerning the essence of reality? 
3. What is the meaning of the statement that Ptolemaic theory is a geocentric 
theory? 
4. Describe the basic idea in Ptolemaic theory. 
5. Suppose a planet moves on an epicycle at twice the speed with which the center 
of the epicycle moves on the deferent. Suppose, further, that the radius of the 
deferent is three times the radius of the epicycle. Sketch the path of the planet 
around the earth. 
6. What is meant by the rationality of nature? 
7. How does Ptolemaic theory support the belief in the mathematical design of 
nature? 
8. How does Euclidean geometry tend to establish the mathematical design of 
nature? 
Topics for Further Investigation 
1. The mathematical doctrines of the Pythagoreans. Use the references on the 
history of mathematics in Chapter 7. 
2. The accomplishments of Greek physical science. 
3. The astronomical theory of Eudoxus. 
4. The astronomical theory of Aristarchus. 
5. The astronomical theory of Ptolemy. 
6. Pre-Greek views of the universe. Use Dreyer in the references below. 
Recommended Reading 
CLAGETI, MARSHALL: Greek Science in Antiquity, Abelard-Schuman, Inc., New 
York, 1955. 
DAMPIER-WHETHAM, WM. C. D.: A History of Science, Chap. 1, Cambridge Uni­
versity Press, Cambridge, 1929. 
DREYER, J. L. E.: A History of Astronomy, 2nd ed., Chaps. 1 through 9, Dover 
Publications, Inc., New York, 1953. 
FARRINGTON, BENJAMIN: Greek Science, 2 voIs., Penguin Books, Harmondsworth, 
England, 1944 and 1949. 

196 
THE MATHEMATICAL ORDER OF NATURE 
JEANS, SIR JAMES: The Growth of Physical Science, 2nd ed., Chaps. 1 through 3, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1951. 
JEANS, SIR JAMES: Science and Music, pp. 160-190, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, 1947. 
KUHN, THOMAS S.: The Copernican Revolution, Chaps. 1 through 3, Harvard 
University Press, Cambridge, 1957. 
SAMBURSKY, S.: The Physical World of the Greeks, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 
London, 1956. 
SARTON, GEORGE: A History of Science, Vols. I and II, Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge, 1952 and 1959. 
SINGER, CHARLES: A Short History of Science, Chaps. 1 through 4, Oxford Univer­
sity Press, London, 1953. 

THE AWAKENING OF EUROPE 
Solicit not thy thoughts with matters hid, 
Leave them to God, Him serve and fear . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . be lowly wise; 
Think only what concerns thee and thy being. 
JOHN MILTON 
9-1 THE MEDIEVAL CIVILIZATION OF EUROPE 
CHAPTER 9* 
It is perhaps a comfort after reading about the destruction of the Greek civili­
zation to turn to a new one-the civilization of western Europe. We know 
that Europe did acquire the Greek creations and built upon them a vast, scien­
tifically oriented civilization. How did this come about? To answer this 
question and to understand the special nature of subsequent developments in 
Europe, we must note a few historical facts. 
The Germanic tribes, who have occupied western and central Europe as 
far back as history goes and who are the forefathers of most Americans, were 
barbarians. We know very litt.!e about their early history because they had 
no writing and hence no records were kept. From Roman historians, notably 
Tacitus (first century A.D.), we know that the Germanic tribes possessed a 
very primitive civilization. Tacitus describes them as honest, hospitable, hard­
drinking, hating peace, and proud of the loyalty of their wives. Their dwell­
ings were huts of timber and straw located in woods and surrounded by crude 
fortifications. Animal skins and coarse linens served for clothes, while herds 
of cattle, hunting, and the cultivation of grain crops provided food. Industry 
was unknown; just enough iron was mined to provide crude weapons. Trade 
was effected through barter and supplemented by plundering other tribes and 
more civilized regions. There were no arts, no science, and no learning. The 
chief activities were eating, sleeping, carousing, and fighting other tribes. Since 
such activities are also characteristic of peoples we call civilized, we may say 
that to that extent the Germanic tribes were civilized. 
Although the Romans won many battles with the Germanic tribes, the 
Empire grew weaker for a variety of reasons which we cannot survey here, 
and the barbarians finally conquered it. Barbarians became kings of Rome and 
197 

198 
THE AWAKENING OF EUROPE 
what was left of the Empire. Only a small region around Constantinople, 
which we call the Eastern Roman or Byzantine Empire, managed to remain 
independent and isolated. The Eastern Roman Empire, incidentally, also 
withstood the Mohammedans, who in the seventh century conquered Egypt, 
the Near East, and the lands bordering the Mediterranean Sea. 
By the time that the Roman Empire collapsed in the fifth century A.D., 
the Catholic Church had become a strong organization with good leadership. 
It gradually converted the heathens to Christianity, established schools in 
Europe, and taught reading, writing, and ethics. Moreover, it perpetuated and 
imposed the legal and political organization of Rome. The Christian influence 
was certainly beneficial in that it produced a more stable state of affairs and 
even induced the barbarians to remain at peace for longer periods of time, a 
restraining influence which the barbarians did not resent because they soon 
learned that civilization had its advantages. With a little thought they found 
that peaceful interludes permitted them to develop methods of mass destruc­
tion and so do as much killing at intervals as previously in constant warfare. 
Cities and small states governed by powerful leaders were established in 
Europe. Trade between cities developed, producing the wealth necessary to 
support scholarship. But study was almost entirely confined to understanding 
the word of God as fostered, expounded, and dictated by the Fathers of the 
Church. Those Greek works which had survived destruction by Romans, 
Christians, and Mohammedans lay almost unnoticed in neglected public build­
ings, in private libraries, or in the isolated, beleaguered Eastern Roman Empire. 
What little knowledge of nature was deemed necessary in the life pre­
scribed by the Church was derivable, so the Christian leaders said, from the 
Bible. St. Augustine (354-430), a man learned in Greek and Christian thought, 
even declared that the authority of the Scriptures is greater than the capacity 
of the human mind. Unfortunately the Biblical statements about the nature 
and structure of the physical world are of Babylonian origin and hence 
decidedly inferior to the knowledge acquired by the Greeks. 
Of course, some of the actual phenomena of nature were observed, and 
questions raised about them. The medieval intellectuals who pursued such 
matters offered a kind of explanation which is satisfying to some minds. They 
believed that natural processes were mainly means to an end, i.e., they adopted 
what is called a teleological viewpoint. Thus rain existed to nourish the crops. 
Crops and animals existed to provide food for man. Sickness was a punishment 
from God. Plagues and earthquakes were expressions of God's anger. In 
general, all explanations focused on the phenomenon's value to, or effect on, 
man. Man was the center of the universe not merely geographically but also 
in terms of the ultimate purposes served by nature. 
Although nature existed to serve man, man himself existed on this earth 
only to serve an apprenticeship during which he prepared his soul for a life 
in heaven with God-or elsewhere. Life on earth was but an unimportant 

MATHEMATICS IN THE MEDIEVAL PERIOD 
199 
prelude, to be endured but not enjoyed. To prepare for the afterlife man 
had to wrest his soul from a stubborn flesh which was guilty of original sin. 
Participation in the bounty of nature, food, clothing, and sex, tainted the soul 
and so had to be severely restricted. Medieval man, certain of his sins and 
doubtful of salvation, had to bend all his efforts to attain redemption. By 
earning divine grace man could escape from this foul earth to the divine 
empyrean.· 
9-2 MATHEMATICS IN THE MEDIEVAL PERIOD 
We see that a new civilization did arise in Europe, but from the standpoint of 
the perpetuation of mathematical learning or the creation of mathematics, it 
was totally ineffective. Although this civilization did spread ethical teachings, 
fostered Gothic architecture and great religious paintings, no scientific, tech­
nical, or mathematical concept gained any foothold. In none of the civiliza­
tions which have contributed to the modern age was mathematical learning 
reduced to so Iow a level. 
Superficially mathematics did seem to play an important role. In the 
medieval schools the standard curriculum consisted of seven subjects, the 
quadrivium and the trivium. The quadrivium comprised arithmetic, the science 
of pure numbers; music as an application of numbers; geometry, or the study 
of magnitudes such as length, area, and volume at rest; and astronomy. the 
study of magnitudes in motion. But the scope of these studies was terribly 
limited. Even the first universities of Europe, which began to function about 
1 100 A.D., offered merely a minimum of arithmetic and geometry. Arithmetic 
consisted of simple calculations mingled with complex superstitions. Geometry 
was confined to the first part of Euclid, far less than we learn in high-school 
courses today. The most advanced point reached in some of these institutions 
of learning was the very elementary theorem that the base angles of an isosceles 
triangle are equal. 
The little mathematics kept alive in the schools served various purposes in 
the medieval period. Some astronomy was pursued to keep the calendar. 
Here a minimum of arithmetic and geometry sufficed for the accuracy needed, 
just as it did in ancient Egypt and Babylonia. This work was usually per­
formed by monks because the clergy was the most learned class. Astronomy 
and therefore elementary mathematics played a larger role in medieval life in 
that they provided the factual information needed for astrology, which was 
regarded as a science. 
One more medieval use of mathematics is worthy of mention. Plato's 
belief that the study of mathematics trains the mind for philosophy was taken 
over by the Church which, however, substituted theology for philosophy . 
• A term of medieval cosmology referring to the "highest heaven" or paradise. 

200 
THE AWAKENING OF EUROPE 
Clearly the interest here was not in mathematics as such but as a preparation 
for grasping the subtle reasoning which the Church employed to build and 
strengthen the foundations of religious doctrines. 
9-3 REVOLUTIONARY INFLU"ENCES IN EUROPE 
Whether or not the civilization of medieval Europe might in due time have 
given rise to mathematical activity will never be known. But dramatic changes, 
largely initiated by non-European forces, drastically altered the Christian 
world. The earliest influence tending to transform thought and life in medieval 
Europe may be credited to the Arabs. While the Church was gradually civi­
lizing the European barbarians and establishing the Christian way of life, the 
Arabs, perhaps more ruthless in proselytizing and certainly more dynamic and 
aggressive. succeeded in establishing their own civilization and culture in 
southern Europe, North Africa, and the Near East. Though fanatic in the 
advancement of their own religion, once their empire was stabilized, the Arabs 
displayed great tolerance toward alien ideas and learning, readily absorbed the 
mathematics and science of the Greeks and Hindus, and built cultural centers 
in Spain and the Near East. They translated the Greek works into Arabic and 
added commentaries and contributions of their own to mathematics, astron­
omy, medicine, optics, meteorology, and science in general. 
By about 1100 A.D. Europeans were trading freely with Arabs. The 
Crusades, which attempted to wrest Palestine from the Arabs, brought further 
contacts between Christians and Moslems. Through these channels the Euro­
peans became aware of the Greek works and Arab additions. They were so 
fascinated by this material that they aroused themselves to acquire it. Wealthy 
merchants, princes, and popes sent agents to the Arab centers to purchase 
manuscripts. Many Europeans went to live in Spain and learned Arabic in 
order to read the works and translate them into Latin. Others were assisted by 
Jewish and Arab scholars in making the translations. Plato, Aristotle, Eltclid, 
Ptolemy, and the Greek literary works were avidly grasped. 
In the fifteenth century Italy made new contacts with the Greek heritage. 
Ambassadors from Constantinople, the capital of the Eastern Roman empire, 
which still possessed the largest collection of ancient manuscripts, came to 
Italy several times in the first half of the fifteenth century, largely to seek 
help against the Turks. The Italians learned about the Greek works and 
like the Europeans of three centuries earlier, sought eagerly to possess them. 
In addition, some Greek scholars discouraged by the poverty in Eastern 
Europe and Alexandria migrated to Italy. When the Turks finally captured 
Constantinople in 1453, a Rood of these men bringing their manuscripts with 
them came to Italy. 
By financing the geographical explorations of the fifteenth and sixteenth 
centuries, which were intended to discover new trade rOlltes, the merchants 

REVOLUTIONARY INFLUENCES IN EUROPE 
201 
affected the life of Europe. The discovery of America and of a route to China 
around Africa resulted in acquainting Europe with strange lands, beliefs, cus­
toms, religions. and ethical doctrines. Catholics met Mohammedans, Chinese, 
and the American Indian. To the broadening influence of trade itself was 
added knowledge which conflicted sharply with the doctrines and way of life 
hitherto accepted in Europe. Questioning of the accepted doctrines and values 
ensued. 
The merchant class and the large classes of artisans and free laborers 
introduced new interests. Employers and employees sought material gain, and 
so looked for commodities, machinery, and natural phenomena which might 
be employed to advantage. The rulers of the Italian cities and states also 
spurred on these interests. They coveted power and magnificence and, to 
acquire the necessary wealth, favored trade, industries, and inventions. The 
cities competed to surpass one another in skills, devices, and quality of mer­
chandise. These groups, though selfishly motivated, were nevertheless effective 
in orienting the civilization toward the physical world and in fostering the 
accumulation of empirical knowledge. 
The Protestant Revolution, or the Reformation as it is called, also upset 
the old culture in Europe. We are not concerned here with justification of 
the break from the Church. But Luther fanned the fire of discontent which 
had spread throughout Europe. Disputes about the nature of the sacrament, 
the validity of the control of the Church by Rome, and the meaning of 
passages of the Scriptures raised doubts in many people, who were thus em­
boldened to turn to other sources of knowledge, notably the physical world 
itself. 
Several discoveries and inventions of the late medieval period had effects 
far greater than one might at first expect. In the twelfth century the Euro­
peans learned from the Chinese about the compass. The introduction of the 
compass was important because it was an immense aid to navigators on long 
sea voyages. The explorers who dared the Atlantic might not have been 
willing to do so without it. 
The introduction of gunpowder in the thirteenth century produced as its 
most obvious effects changes in methods of warfare and the design of forti­
fications. It also introduced a new physical problem, the motion of projectiles. 
An indirect result was the granting of more power to the common man because 
with a musket he could be effective in warfare. Previously only those who 
could afford expensive armor, that is, the wealthy nobles, could wield military 
power. 
The invention of printing (about 1450) was immensely important in help­
ing to spread Greek knowledge across Europe. Another invention, paper made 
of cotton and later of rags, which replaced costly parchment, also helped to 
make books plentiful and cheap. Many editions and translations of Greek 
works were printed in the century following these inventions. They helped 

202 
THE AVVAKENING OF EUROPE 
to bridge the gulf between the learned and the untutored just at the time when 
great numbers were seeking to obtain knowledge. 
Advances in the subject of optics had a vast effect on future scientific 
activity. The first was the discovery made in the thirteenth century that lenses 
can be used to magnify objects and thus aid in the examination of materials and 
natural phenomena. Lens grinders began to produce spectacles. Early in the 
seventeenth century, two of them discovered that a pair of lenses held at some 
distance from each other could be used to make distant objects seem close. 
Thus the telescope became available and was immediately applied to astronomy 
with results we shall describe later. At about the same time, it was found that 
a combination of lenses would do even better than a single lens to magnify 
nearby objects, and the microscope was invented. The investigation of the 
biological world and the revelation of hitherto unsuspected small-scale phe­
nomena soon followed. 
9-4 NEW DOCTRINES OF THE RENAISSANCE 
It was to be expected that the insular world of medieval Europe accustomed 
for centuries to one rigid, dogmatic system of thought would be shocked and 
aroused by the series of events we have just described. The European world 
was in revolt. As John Donne put it, "All in pieces, all coherence gone." 
Europe revolted against scholastic domination of thought, rigid authority, and 
restrictions on the physical life. It revolted against the Scriptures as the source 
of all knowledge and the authority for all assertions. It revolted against en­
forced conformity to the established canons of conduct. 
A leading figure in the revolt from the old modes of thought is Leonardo 
da Vinci (1452-1519). Because he saw how most scholars accepted as author­
itative all that they read, he distrusted the men who took their learning only 
from books and professed their knowledge so dogmatically. He describes 
them as puffed up and pompous, strutting about, and adorned only by the 
labors of others whom they merely repeated. These were only the reciters 
and trumpeters of other people's learning. Leonardo determined to learn for 
himself and made exhaustive studies of plants, animals, the human body, light, 
the principles of mechanical devices, rocks, the flight of birds, and hundreds 
of other subjects. Although he is most often remembered as one of the great 
masters of painting, he also was a psychologist, linguist, botanist, zoologist, 
anatomist, geologist, musician, sculptor, architect, and engineer. 
Many scholars turned to exhaustive studies of the Greek authors, to trans­
lations, and to compilations. They gave to these works the same infinitely 
detailed and critical attention that they and others had formerly given to 
biblical documents. The writings of Luca Pacioli ( 1445-1514) show this 
tendency. He was a monk, who in 1499 published Summa de Arithmetica, 
Geometric., Proportione et Proportionalita. As a full, almost encyclopedic, 

NEW DOCTRINES OF THE RENAISSANCE 
203 
account of the mathematical knowledge available to Europe by 1500, it was 
enormously helpful. 
More interesting as a transitional figure is Jerome Cardan whom we met 
in Chapter 5. He wrote a great number of works which exhibit a critical 
attirude only in the sense that he traced the origins of stories, miracles, and 
"facts" to the authorities. However, he accepted freely any number of medie­
val superstitions, legends, accounts of supernatural events, pseudo-sciences, and 
even magical medical trearments. He believed in the significance of dreams, 
ghosts, portents, palmistry, and astrology, which to him were sciences. He 
also wrote volumes on moral aphorisms and on the varieties of beings and 
bodies which fill the universe. Among these were spirits which took the form 
of sylphs, salamanders, gnomes, and ondines. Communion with these spirits 
was the highest aim in life. 
Cardan's writings in the above fields were compilations; much of the 
material, incidentally, he stOle from Leonardo da Vinci, who was a friend of 
Cardan's father. In his mathematical and scientific work, however, he shows 
the new influences. His still famous ATs Magna (1545), which contains a full 
account of the algebraic methods known to the Arabs, also contains results due 
to himself and his contemporaries. He is the first European mathematician of 
consequence. Some indication of what was new in his work was given in 
Chapter 5. 
Pacioli and Cardan are mathematical figures in the movement commonly 
known as humanism. The humanists, and we speak now of those active in 
all fields, have been criticized because they idolized the past too much and 
looked backward rather than forward. They slavishly accepted the Greek 
works and pored over them, even undertaking extensive philological studies 
to determine the meanings of dubious words. To their credit may be noted 
that they prepared the atmosphere for the revival of reason, spread the Greek 
ideas through Europe, secularized education, and stressed the individual, ex­
perience, and the natural world. 
The period devoted to the collection and study of the classics was followed 
by one in which intellectuals groped for positive doctrines and methods to 
replace or at least alter the medieval culture. We cannot trace in detail the 
oscillations of thought, the mixture of medieval fantasy and rational specula­
tions, the commingling of fine observations with outmoded principles, all of 
which one finds especially in the sixteenth century. Many European thinkers 
finally broke away from the endless rationalizing on the basis of dogmatic 
principles which were vague in meaning and unrelated to experienct, and chose 
human inquiry rather than divine authority. 
It was from the Greek works that the leaders in this intellectual revitaliza­
tion of Europe derived the principles of a new approach to man and the 
universe. They learned that man could enjoy a physical life and find pleasure 
in food, sports, and the development of his own body. Beauty was not a snare, 

204 
THE AVVAKENING OF EUROPE 
and pleasure not a sin. Man, the unworthy creature, who had been commanded 
to regard himself as a sinner, to spend his life in abstinence, penance and ab­
jecmess, and to prepare for death, the only real event of life, could find dignity 
in his own being, and demand a full life on this earth as his birthright. In place 
of sin, death, and judgment, men should seek beauty, pleasure, and joy. The 
Renaissance world began to see man as the goal of God rather than God as 
the goal of man. 
The human spirit was emancipated and inspired to refashion its ideals of 
existence. Perhaps the most important decision was to tum to nature herself 
as the source of knowledge. "Back to nature" became the new cry. Europeans 
turned to nature's laws instead of divine pronouncements gleaned from the 
Scriptures, to the universe of God instead of God. Man himself was included 
in the study of nature. 
Leonardo is a representative figure in this shift to nature as the prime 
focus. He almost boasts that he is not a man of letters and that he chose to 
learn from experience. His observations and inventions recorded in his note­
books give evidence of his extensive and detailed physical studies. He says, 
"If you do not rest on the good foundation of nature, you will labor with 
little honor and less profit." Sciences which arise in thought and end in 
thought do not give truths because no experience enters into these purely 
mental reflections, and without experience no thing is sure. 
A new school of biologists arose, of whom Andreas Vesalius (1514-64) 
was the leader. His On the Structure of the Human Body (1543) may be 
regarded as the beginning of modern anatomy. Although this work is based 
on Galen, he corrected many of Galen's errors and added new observations. 
Vesalius asserted that the true Bible is the human body, and he dissected 
corpses to learn the human structure. William Harvey (1578-1657), the 
famous seventeenth-century doctor, voices the spirit of Vesalius in the preface 
to his book On the Movement of the Heart and the Blood: "I profess to learn 
and to teach anatomy, not from books, but from dissections; not from the 
positions of philosophers, but from the fabric of nature." Harvey also fol­
lowed Galen but, like Vesalius, added new material derived from his own ob­
servations and thought. Andrew Cesalpinus (1520-1603), the botanist, clearly 
advocated starting from observation and then proceeding through careful 
differentiation of the species observed to inductive truths. 
We shall see in the next chapter how the artists, too, turned to the study 
of nature and to new goals in painting which obliged them to study anatomy, 
perspective, light, and mechanics. Regard for the primacy of observation 
forced Johannes Kepler to devise revolutionary doctrines in astronomy. In­
deed, experience became the source of all basic scientific laws and, in this 
respect, usurped the role of mind. 
The second guiding principle adopted by the Europeans of the Renaissance 
was to let reason be the judge of what to accept. Revelation, faith, and author-

NEW DOCTRINES OF THE RENAISSANCE 
205 
ity were to be subordinated as support for assertions about man and the uni­
verse, and reason was to be applied freely to all problems man sought to solve. 
Although the Church itself had used reason to erect its own theology, it had 
said that some matters were beyond reason. Moreover, the results obtained by 
reasoning were not put forth to be scrutinized rationally but rather to be 
accepted. In the Renaissance, mind replaced faith as the sovereign authority, 
and man was encouraged to apply it to the problems besetting his age. 
The new impulse to study nature and the decision to apply reason instead 
of. relying upon authority were forces which might in themselves have led to 
mathematical activity. But the Europeans also had the Greek works. From 
the Greeks the Europeans learned that nature is mathematically designed, and 
that this design is harmonious, aesthetically pleasing, and the inner truth about 
nature. Nature is not only rational, simple, and orderly but it acts in accord­
ance with inexorable and immutable laws. 
Almost from the beginning of the period in which Greek works began to 
be known in Europe, one finds leading thinkers impressed with the importance 
of the mathematical study of nature. In the thirteenth century, Roger Bacon 
believed that the laws of nature are but the laws of geometry. Mathematical 
truths are identical with things as they are in nature. Moreover mathematics 
is basic to the other sciences because it takes cognizance of quantity. Leonardo, 
too,-although his knowledge of Greek works was rather limited and his 
appreciation of what mathematical proof means almost nil-had caught the 
new spirit. He says that only by holding fast to mathematics can the mind 
safely penetrate to the essence of nature. "No human inquiry can be called 
true science unless it proceeds through mathematical demonstrations." He 
also says, "The man who discredits the supreme certainty of mathematics is 
feeding on confusion and can never silence the contradictions of sophistical 
sciences, which lead to eternal quackery." Leonardo was not a mathematician, 
and his understanding of the principles of mechanics, the study of bodies at 
rest and in motion, was intuitive and but a dim foreshadowing of the work of 
Galileo and Newton, but he had prophetic vision. He says in one of his 
notebooks, "Mechanics is the paradise of the mathematical sciences because 
in it we come to the fruits of mathematics." Leonardo does stress the role 
of theory in science and says, "Theory is the general; experiments are the 
soldiers." However he did not appreciate the precise role of theory or foresee 
what later became the true method of science. He, in fact, lacked method­
ology. Copernicus and Kepler, whom we shall study in more detail later, 
were also convinced that the world is mathematically and harmoniously 
designed, and this belief sustained them in their scientific endeavors. 
Galileo speaks of mathematics as the language in which God wrote the 
great book-the universe-and unless one knows this language, it is impossible 
to comprehend a single word. Rene Descartes, father of coordinate geometry, 
was convinced that nature is but a vast geometrical system. He says that he 

206 
THE AWAKENING OF EUROPE 
"neither admits nor hopes for any principles in Physics other than those 
which are in Geometry or in abstract Mathematics, because thus all the phe­
nomena of nature are explained, and some demonstrations of them can be 
given." Certainly by 1600 the conviction that mathematics is the key to 
nature's behavior had taken firm hold and stimulated the great scientific work 
which was to follow. 
To the intellectuals of the Renaissance mathematics appealed for stiII an­
other reason. The Renaissance, as we have seen, was a period in which medieval 
civilization and culture were challenged and new influences, information, and 
revolutionary movements were sweeping Europe. These men sought new and 
sound bases for the erection of knowledge, and mathematics offered such a 
foundation. Mathematics remained the one accepted body of truths amid 
crumbling philosophical systems, disputed theological beliefs, and changing 
ethical values. Mathematical knowledge was certain knowledge and offered a 
secure foothold in a morass. The search for truth was redirected toward 
mathematics. 
9-5 THE RELIGIOUS MOTIVATION IN THE STUDY OF NATURE 
The decisions to study nature, to apply reason, and to seek the mathematical 
design of natu;"e led to a revival of mathematical activity and to the emergence 
of great mathematicians. But the thinking of these men took a turn which is 
of interest because it shows one of the strong motivations for mathematical 
activity over a couple of centuries and because it played a role in the subse­
quent cultural history. 
The mathematicians and scientists of the Renaissance were brought up in 
a religious world which stressed the universe as the handiwork of God. The 
scientists whom we shall meet shortly, Copernicus, Brahe, Kepler, Pascal, 
Galileo, Descartes, Newton, and Leibniz, accepted this doctrine. These men 
were in fact orthodox Christians. Copernicus was a member of the Church. 
Kepler studied for the ministry although he did not take orders. Newton was 
deeply religious and, when late in life he felt too exhausted to pursue creative 
scientific work, turned to religious studies. 
However, in the sixteenth century the new goal in the intellectual world 
became to study nature through mathematics and indeed to uncover the mathe­
matical design of nature. Now Catholic teachings had by no means included 
this last principle, which is Greek. How then was the attempt to understand 
God's universe to be reconciled with the search for the mathematical laws of 
nature? The answer was to add a new doctrine, namely, that God had designed 
the universe mathematicaI1y. Thus the Catholic doctrine postulating the 
supreme importance of seeking to understand God and his creations took the 
form of a search for God's mathematical design of nature. Indeed the work of 
the sixteenth, seventeenth, and even some eighteenth-century mathematicians 

RELIGIOUS MOTIVATION IN THE STUDY OF NATURE 
207 
was a religious quest, motivated by religious beliefs, and justified in their 
minds because their work served this larger purpose. The search for the 
mathematical laws of nature was an act of devotion. It was the study of the 
ways and nature of God which would reveal the glory and grandeur of his 
handiwork. The Renaissance scientist was a theologian studying nature instead 
of the Bible. Copernicus, Kepler, and Descartes speak repeatedly of the 
harmony which God imparted to the universe through his mathematical design. 
Mathematical knowledge, being in itself truth about the universe, is as sac­
rosanct as any line of the Scriptures. Galileo says, "Nor does God less 
admirably discover Himself to us in Nature's actions than in the Scripture's 
sacred dictions." Man could not hope to perceive the divine plan as clearly as 
God himself understood it, but man could with humility and modesty seek to 
at least approach the mind of God. 
One can go further and assert that these men were sure of the existence of 
mathematical laws underlying natural phenomena and persisted in the search 
for them because they were convinced a priori that God had incorporated 
them into the construction of the universe. Each discovery of a law of nature 
was hailed as evidence testifying more to God's brilliance than to the ingenuity 
of the investigator. Kepler in particular wrote paeans to God on the occasion 
of each discovery. The beliefs and attitudes of the mathematicians and scien­
tists exemplify the larger cultural phenomenon which swept Renaissance 
Europe. The Greek works impinged on a deeply devour Christian world, and 
the intellectual leaders born in one and attracted by the other fused the 
doctrines of both. 
EXERCISES 
1. In view of what we know about Greek and medieval attitudes toward the 
physical world and mathematical activities in these two cultures, would you draw 
any conclusion about the connection between interest in the physical world and 
the pursuit of mathematics? 
2. What events and influences led to a revival of interest in mathematics? 
3. How did Renaissance scientists and mathematicians reconcile the Greek doctrine 
that the world is mathematically designed and the Christian doctrine that the 
universe is the creation of God? 
Topics for Further Investigation 
1. The rise of algebra in the sixteenth century. 
2. Hindu and Arab mathematics. 
3. The life and work of Roger Bacon. 
4. The life and work of Jerome Cardan. 
S. The life and work of Leonardo da Vinci. 

208 
THE AWAKENING OF EUROPE 
Recommended Reading 
BALL, W. W. ROUSE: A Short Account of the History of Mathematics, 4th ed., 
Chaps. 6 to 12, Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1960. 
CAJOR., FLORIAN: A History of Mathematics, 2nd ed., pp. 83-129, The Macmillan 
Co., New York, 1938. 
CARDAN, JEROME: The Book of My Life, E. P. Dutton and Co., New York, 1930. 
CROMBIE, A. C.: Augustine to Gatileo, Chaps. 1 to 5, Falcon Press, London, 1952. 
Also published in paperback under the title Medieval and Early Modern Science, 
2 vols., Doubleday and Co. Anchor Books, New York, 1959. 
CROMBIE, A. C.: Robert Grosseteste and the Origins of Experimental Science, Ox­
ford University Press, London, 1953. 
DAMPIER-WHETHAM, WILLIAM C. D.: A History of Science, pp. 65-138, Cambridge 
University Press, London, 1929. 
DA VINCI, LEONARDO: Philosophical Diary, Philosophical Library, Inc., New York, 
1959. 
EASTON, STEWART C.: Roger Bacon and His Search for a Universal Science, Colum­
bia University Press, New York, 1952. 
HOFMANN, JOSEPH E.: The History of Mathematics, Chaps. 3 and 4, The Philosophi­
cal Library, New York, 1957. 
MACCURDY, EDWARD: The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci, George Braziller, 
New York, 1954. 
ORE, OYSTEIN: Cardano, The Gambling Scholar, Princeton University Press, Prince­
ton, 1953. 
RANDALL, JOHN HERMAN, JR.: The Making of the Modern Mind, rev. ed., Chaps. 
I through 9, Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston, 1940. 
RUSSELL, BERTRAND: A History of Western Philosophy, pp. 324-545, Simon and 
Schuster, New York, 1945. 
SMITH, DAVID EUGENE: History of Mathematics, Vol. I, Chaps. 5 through 8, Dover 
Publications, Inc., New York, 1958. 
VALLENTIN, ANTONINA: Leonardo da Vinci, The Viking Press, New York, 1938. 

CHAPTER 10* 
MATHEMATICS AND PAINTING IN THE RENAISSANCE 
Mighty is geometry; joined with art, resistless. 
EURIPIDES 
10-1 INTRODUCTION 
The new currents of thought in the European Renaissance, the search for new 
truths to replace the discredited ones, the tum to the study of nature to obtain 
reliable facts, and the revived Greek conviction that the essence of nature's 
behavior should be sought in mathematical laws, bore fruit first in the field of 
art rather than science. While philosophers and scientists sought to unearth 
basic facts which might somehow be incorporated into their yet to be formu­
lated new scientific merhod, and while mathematicians were still digesting the 
Greek works and awaiting inspiration for new themes, the artists, particularly 
the painters, reacted far more quickly and revolutionized the art of painting. 
That the painters turned to mathematics to formulate their new style of 
painting is a little surprising, but the phenomenon has an explanation. The 
painters of the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth centuries were the architects 
and engineers of their time. They were also the sculptors, inventors, gold­
smiths, and stonecutters. They designed and built churches, hospitals, palaces, 
cloisters, bridges, dams, fortresses, canals, town walls, and weapons. Thus 
Leonardo da Vinci, in offering his services to Lodovico Sforza, ruler of Milan, 
promises to serve as engineer, constructor of military works, and designer of 
war machines, as well as architect, sculptor, and painter. The artist was even 
expected to predict the motion of cannon balls, by no means a simple problem 
for the mathematics of those times. In view of these manifold activities the 
painter necessarily had to be something of a scientist. 
Further, the Renaissance painter, unlike the builder of Gothic cathedrals, 
was influenced by the current doctrines which proclaimed that he learn truths 
from nature and that the essence of natural phenomena is best expressed 
through mathematics. Again, in comparison with his predecessors, he had the 
advantage of gleaning some mathematical knowledge from the newly recovered 
Greek works that were exciting the Europeans. The Renaissance painters went 
209 

210 
MATHEMATICS AND PAINTING IN THE RENAISSANCE 
so far in assimilating this knowledge and in applying mathematics to painting 
that they produced the first really new mathematics in Europe. In the fifteenth 
century they were the most accomplished and also the most original mathe­
maticians. 
10-2 GROPINGS TOWARD A SCIENTIFIC SYSTEM OF PERSPECTIVE 
Before we examine just how Renaissance painters employed mathematics and 
thereby revolutionized the art of painting, let us see what had been going on 
in this field. Rather early in the medieval period painting became an extensive 
activity. Kings, princes, and church leaders commissioned works of art to 
enhance buildings. The system which the medieval painters used until about 
1 300 was conceptual. Their objective was to portray and embellish the central 
themes in the Christian drama. Since the intent was to stir up religious feelings 
rather than to present real scenes, people and objects were drawn in accordance 
with conventions which had acquired symbolic meaning. Thus people were 
placed in unnatural, stylized positions; the general impression was one of 
flatness; and the entire painting had a two-dimensional effect. The backgrounds 
were usually solid gold to suggest that the action or people existed in some 
supra-earth I y region. 
Examples of this style of representation are abundant. A classic example 
of the late medieval period is found in Simone Martini's (1285-1344) "Majesty" 
(Fig. 10-1). Clearly this is no real scene. The background is blue. Despite the 
assemblage the scene looks flat; the throne especially lacks depth. There is 
hardly the suggestion of a floor on which the figures stand, and these appear 
lifeless and unrelated to one another. Moreover, sizes are not important. This 
painting also illustrates another conceptual device used in medieval painting, 
known as terraced perspective. To show a group of people arranged in depth, 
those farther back are placed somewhat above those in front. 
Toward the end of the thirteenth century, the painters began to be influ­
enced by the Renaissance. Since the preoccupation with religious themes still 
existed and paintings. in fact, continued to be commissioned mainly by church 
officials, the same subjects appear but in more realistic settings. The painters 
had turned to the observation of nature and saw a real world, physical beings, 
earth, sea, and air. Their paintings reveal this interest in natural scenes by 
reflecting their efforts to render space, depth, mass, volume, and other visual 
effects largely through the use of lines, surfaces, and other geometric forms. 
To achieve naturalism they also tried to render emotions and to depict drapery 
folding around parts of the body as drapery actually does. People began to 
look like real individuals instead of types. Mysticism gradually gave way to 
realism and art became more and more secular. 
Cimabue (ca. 1 300), Cavallini (ca. 1250-1 330), Duccio ( 1255-1318), and 
Giotto ( 1266-1 337) were the leaders of the new movement to inject realism 

Fig. 10-1. 
GROPINGS TOWARD A SYSTEM OF PERSPECTIVE 
2 1 1  
Simone Martini: Majesty. Pallazzo Communale. Siena. 
into painting and to incorporate the beauty of nature. Giono, in particular, 
is often called the father of modem painting. In the works of the men cited 
and in those of their immediate successors, we can readily observe the search 
for an optical system of perspective. 
Duccio's "Last Supper" (Fig. 10-2) shows what could be a real scene and 
offers an ambitious attempt at depth. The receding wall and ceiling lines 
create this effect. Moreover, pairs of lines which are parallel in the actual 
scene and symmetrically placed with respect to the center are drawn so as 
to meet on a vertical line through the center of the painting. This scheme 
is referred to as vertical perspective and was developed further by other 
painters. 
On the whole the picture is not too successful. The table seems to slant 
toward the front. The objects on the table are too much in the foreground 
and appear to be on the point of sliding off or toppling over. The table and 
the room are not seen from the same point of view. The various parts lack 
proportion. The failure of the painting to depict depth properly causes one 
to look from side to side instead of into the painting. An interesting feature 

Fig. 10-2. Ouccio: Last Supper. Opera del Ouomo, Siena. 
Ȏ,. " 
Fig. 10-3. Giotto : Birth and Naming of St. John the Baptist. Church of Santa Croce, 
Florence. 

REALISM LEADS TO MATHEMATICS 
2 1 3  
characteristic of the period is the setting in a partially boxed-in room. The 
artists were beginning to treat nature, but for the moment limited themselves 
to scenes which had both interior and exterior components. They were already 
looking into space and were about to venture into the wide world. 
Giotto painted with the definite goal of reproducing visual perceptions 
and spatial relations, and his paintings tend to produce the effect of photo­
graphic copies. His figures possess. mass, volume, and vitality, are grouped 
appealingly, and are interrelated. His "Birth and Naming of St. John the 
Baptist" (Fig. 10-3) is typical. The partially boxed-in interior is again evident 
as is the use of lines and surfaces. The side walls are drawn small or fore­
shortened to suggest depth. The ground plane is a clear surface. Although 
Giotto's paintings are not visually correct and although he introduced no new 
principles, his results are far better than those of his predecessors. He chose 
homelike scenes, gave human feelings to his figures, and distributed them in 
space. He catches shades of emotions and expresses them through the features 
and postures of the bodies. There is no mysticism nor ecstatic piety; "real" 
angels, Christ, and disciples stand before us. He was aware of the progress he 
had made and he delighted in showing his skill. 
A step forward in the achievement of realism was made by Ambrogio 
Lorenzetti (fourteenth century). His outdoor panoramas are the best of this 
period. However, from the standpoint of the significant development which 
was to follow, his "Presentation in the Temple" (Fig. 10-4) is more worthy 
of attention. There is a definite foreground or horizontal plane as opposed to 
the background or vertical plane. The lines on the floor clearly recede and 
meet in one point. Other pairs of receding parallel lines meet in respective 
points of a vertical line. Also significant is the gradual decrease (foreshorten­
ing) in the size of the floor blocks to suggest distance. But the floor and the 
rest of the painting are not unified. 
These few samples of fourteenth-century Renaissance painting show the 
increasing efforts to achieve naturalism, real scenes, and three-dimensionality. 
The innovators were groping for an effective technique but did not succeed. 
Visualization and sheer artistic skill were not enough. 
10-3 REALISM LEADS TO MATHEMATICS 
There was rather little progress in the second half of the fourteenth century 
because the Black Death seriously disturbed the life of Europe and decimated 
the population. The fifteenth century witnessed, as we noted in the preceding 
chapter, a new flood of Greek works to Italy, a new series of translations, and 
enormous support for artists. The Greek ideals became better known and 
were discussed enthusiastically in Italy. Secularization was hastened, and the 
artist acquired a heightened interest in humanity and in the study of nature, 
and a zeal for science. 

214 
MATHEMATICS AND PAINTING IN THE RENAISSANCE 
Fig. 10-4. 
Ambrogio Lorenzetti: Presentation in the Temple. Uffizi, Florence. 
To achieve an accurate delineation of actual objects and a system of 
painting which would yield sound portraiture, painters studied nudes, the body 
in various postures, anatomy, expression, light, and color. The Madonna and 
Son were portrayed as human beings suffering human emotions, and Church 
history was enacted by real people. Religious themes became predominantly 
a conventional or habitual outlet for the depiction of the real world. Later, 
instead of humanizing religious themes, the artists turned to glorifying man 
and nature. The ascetic, mystical, and devotional attitudes were dropped 

THE BASIC IDEA OF MATHEMATICAL PERSPECTIVE 
2 1 5  
entirely. Still later pagan subjects were adopted. The glory and gladness of 
nature, the delight in physical existence, the beauty of earth, sea, and air were 
the new values. Painting became entirely secular. 
In their striving for realism the artists went one step further and decided 
that their function was to imitate nature, to depict what they saw as realis­
rically as they could. Nature was to be the authority for what appeared on 
canvas, and painting was to be the science of reproducing nature accurately. 
The objective of painting, says Leonardo da Vinci, is to reproduce nature and 
the merit of a painting lies in the exactness of the reproduction. Even a purely 
imagined scene must appear to the spectator as if it existed exactly as pictured. 
Painting was to be a veridical reproduction of reality. 
But how was the reproduction to be achieved? Here, too, the Renaissance 
artist adopted a Greek ideal. By the fifteenth century he had become thor­
oughly familiar and imbued with the Greek doctrine that mathematics is the 
essence of the real world. Hence to penetrate to the real substance of the 
theme he sought to display on canvas, the Renaissance artist believed that he 
must reduce it to its mathematical content. To capture the essence of forms, 
the organization of objects in space, and the structure of space the artist 
decided that he must find the underlying mathematical laws. 
But realistic painting includes more than the mathematical properties of 
the objects being portrayed. The eye sees the painting, and this must create 
on the eye the same impression as the scene itself. Also, since vision and the 
light which carries the scene to the eye are involved, these too must be 
analyzed. But the study of light also led to mathematics. From Greek times on, 
as we have already seen in earlier chapters, light had been shown to be subject 
to mathematical laws. Indeed, the few mathematical laws of light were about 
the only precise knowledge about the phenomenon which the Greek and 
Renaissance worlds possessed, because the nature of light itself was a mystery. 
And so, to study the impress of scene and painting on the eye, the artists were 
once again led to mathematics. 
Thus, although the artists made extensive and intensive physical studies 
of light and shade, color, the chemistry of pigments, the laws of movement 
and balance, the eye, anatomy, and the effect of distance on sight, they were 
chiefly dominated by the new thought that mathematics must be used to 
achieve realism in painting and that geometry is the key to the solution of this 
problem. Thereupon they created and perfected a totally new mathematical 
system of perspective which enabled them to "place reality on their canvases." 
10-4 THE BASIC IDEA OF MATHEMATICAL PERSPECTIVE 
The mathematical system of perspective which the Renaissance painters created 
and which is known as the system of focused perspective was founded about 
1425 by the architect and sculptor Brunelleschi ( 1 l77-1446). His ideas were 
furthered and written down by the architect and painter Leone Battista 

216 
MATHEMATICS AND PAINTING IN THE RENAISSANCE 
Alberti (\404-1472). It is not Alberti's artistic work which entitles him to 
fame but his technical knowledge. He studied architecture, painting, perspec­
tive, and sculpture, wrote several books explaining theoretical matters to 
artists, and exercised enormous influence. In his Della Pittura (1435) Alberti 
says that learning is essential to the artist. The arts are learned by reason 
and method; they are mastered by practice. He says further that the first 
necessity of a painter is to know geometry and that painting by incorporating 
and revealing the mathematical structure of nature can even improve on 
nature. 
The mathematical scheme was developed and perfected by Paolo Uccello 
(1397-1475), Piero della Francesca (1416--1492), and Leonardo da Vinci 
( 1452-1519). The system these men and others created and which Leonardo 
called the rudder and guide rope of painting has been used since the Renais­
sance by all artists who seek exact depiction of reality, and is taught in art 
schools today. 
In their study of light, vision, and the representation of objects on canvas, 
these artists discovered the following facts. Suppose that a person looks at a 
real scene from a fixed position. Of course, he sees with both eyes, bur each 
eye sees the same scene from a slightly different position. Although in ordinary 
vision we need both sensations to give us some perception and measure of 
depth, this perception is really not very good. Experience teaches us how to 
interpret the combined sensations, as Leonardo points out in his Treatise on 
Painting. The Renaissance artists decided to concentrate on what one eye 
sees and to compensate for the deficiency by shading, shadows where pertinent, 
and by what is known as aerial perspective, that is the gradual diminution of 
the intensity of colors with distance.· 
Let us imagine that lines of light are drawn from one eye to various points 
on the objects in the scene. This collection of lines is called a projection. Let 
us imagine next, as did Alberti, Leonardo, and the German artist Albrecht 
Durer ( 1471-1528), that a glass screen is interposed between the eye and the 
scene itself. Thus when one looks out of a window at a scene outside, the 
window serves as the glass screen. The lines of the projection will pierce the 
glass screen, and we may imagine a dot placed on the screen where each line 
pierces it. The figure formed by these dots on the screen is called a section. 
The most important fact which the Renaissance artists discovered is that this 
section makes the same impression on the eye as does the scene itself, for all 
that the eye sees is light traveling along a straight line from each point on 
the object to the eye, and if the light emanates from points on the glass screen 
hut travels along the very same lines, it should still create the same impression . 
• The difference between a drawing made according to the laws of perspective and 
a three-dimensional picture is clear when one views a stereoscopic drawing with 
both eyes through colored glasses. 

Fig. 10-5. 
THE BASIC IDEA OF MATHEMATICAL PERSPECTlVE 
2 1 7  
Albrecht Durer: Designer of the Sitting Man. 
Fig. 10-6. 
Albrecht Durer: Designer of the Lying Woman. 

218 
MATHEl\lATICS AND PAINTING IN THE RENAISSANCE 
Fig. 10-7. 
Albrecht DUrer: Designer of the Lute. 
Hence this section, which is two-dimensional, is what the artist must place on 
the canvas to create the correct impression on the eye. DUrer used the word 
"perspective" because the Latin verb from which it is derived means "to see 
through." 
Before we investigate just how the painter is to put this section on canvas, 
let us study the idea of projection and section. Fortunately some woodcuts 
made by DUrer, who learned the mathematical system of perspective in Italy 
and then returned to Germany to teach it to his countrymen, are very helpful. 
The woodcuts are in DUrer's text Underweysung der MesSlmg mit dem Zyrkel 
lind Rycbtscbeyed ( 1525). The first of these, "The Designer of the Sitting 
""an" (Fig. 10-5), shows an artist looking through a glass screen; he holds his 
eye at a fixed position, and marks on the screen the point at which a line of light 
from his eye to some point on the man's body pierces the screen. 
The second woodcut, "The Designer of the Lying Woman" (Fig. 10-6), 
shows the artist again holding his eye at a fixed position and noting on paper 
the points where the lines of light from his eye to the woman pierce the screen. 
To facilitate the process of reproducing the correct location of the dots on 
the paper, he has divided screen and paper into little squares. 

MATHEMATICAL THEOREMS ON PERSPECTIVE DRAWING 
219 
The third woodcut, "The Designer of the Lute" (Fig. 10-7), delineates on 
the screen the section which the eye would see if it viewed the lute from the 
point on the wall where the rope is attached. 
These woodcuts, then. illustrate what the artists meant by a section on a 
glass screen. Of course, a section depends upon the position of the glass screen 
as wen as on the position of the observer. But this implies no more than that 
there can be many different paintings of the same scene. Thus, for example, 
two paintings can be the same except for size, and size is determined by the 
distance between glass screen and eye. Two paintings may differ in that one 
shows a frontal view and the other represents the same scene viewed somewhat 
from the side. The difference is due to a change in the observer's position. 
10-5 SOME MATHEMATICAL THEOREMS ON PERSPECTIVE DRAWING 
Let us accept, then, the principle that the canvas must contain the same section 
that a glass screen placed between the eye of the painter and the actual scene 
would contain. Since the artist cannot look through his canvas at the actual 
scene and may even be painting an imaginary scene, he must have theorems 
which tell him how to place his objects on the canvas so that the painting will, 
in effect, contain the section made by a glass screen. 
Gluss screen 
Fig. 10-8. 
The image of a line horizontal 
and parallel to the screen is 
horizontal. 
Suppose then that the eye at E (Fig. 10-8) looks at the horizontal line GH 
and that GH is parallel to a vertical glass screen. The lines from E to the 
points of GH lie in one plane, namely the plane determined by the point E 
and the line GH, for a point and a line determine a plane. This plane will cut 
the screen in a line. G'H', because two planes which meet at all meet in a line. 
It is apparent that the line G'H' must also be horizontal, but we can prove this 
fact and so be certain. We can imagine a vertical plane through GH. Since 
GH is parallel to the screen and the latter is also vertical, the two planes 
must be parallel. The plane determined by E and GH cuts these parallel 
planes, and a plane which intersects two parallel planes intersects them in 
parallel lines. Hence G'H' is parallel to GH, and since GH is horizontal, so 

220 
MATHEMATICS AND PAINTING IN THE RENAISSANCE 
is G'H'. Bur GH was any horizontal line parallel to the screen. Hence the 
image on the screen of any horizontal line parallel to the screen or picture 
plane must be horiwntal. Thus in a painting which is to contain what this 
glass screen contains, the line G'H' must be drawn horizontally. 
We can present practically the same argument to show that the image of 
any vertical line, which is automatically parallel to the vertical screen, must 
appear on the screen as a vertical line. Thus all vertical lines must be drawn 
vertically. 
Now let us consider a somewhat more complicated situation. Suppose 
that AB and CD (Fig. 10-9) are two parallel, horizontal lines in an actual 
scene. Moreover, assume that these lines are perpendicular to the screen. The 
eye is at E. If we now imagine that lines go from E to each point of AB, these 
lines, that is the projection, will lie in one plane for the point E, and the line 
AB will determine this plane by virtue of the theorem of solid geometry 
already mentioned. Similarly, E and the line CD determine another plane. 
The screen cuts the two planes we have just described, The sections must lie 
on the screen, and our problem is to determine where they should lie. 
Fig. 10-9. 
A--/ 
C 
The images of two horizontal parallel lines which are perpen­
dicular to the screen meet at a point on the screen. 
Of course, the intersection of two planes is a line, and so the section cor­
responding to AB and that corresponding to CD will be lines, A'B' and C'D', 
respectively. Moreover, as the eye at E looks farther and farther out along 
the parallels AB and CD, the lines of sight will become more and more 
horizontal. As the eye follows AB and CD to infinity, so to speak, the lines 
from E tend to merge into one horizontal line which will be parallel to AB 
and CD. This line from E will pierce the screen at some point, say 0', and 
this point corresponds to the imaginary point 0 where AB and CD seem to 

MATHEMATICAL THEOREMS ON PERSPECTIVE DRAWING 
221 
meet at infinity. Of course, AB and CD are parallel and do not meet, but it is 
convenient to think of them as meeting at a point at infinity. Indeed, the eye 
gets the impression that they do meet. Then the line EO' will be perpendicular 
to the screen because it is parallel to AB and CD and these two lines are 
perpendicular to the screen. The point 0' corresponds to the imagined meet­
ing point at infinity of AB and CD, but because this point does not actually 
exist, 0' is called the principal vanishing point. It vanishes in the sense that it 
does not correspond to any actual point on AB or CD, whereas other points 
on A'B' or C'D' do correspond to actual points on AB or CD, respectively. 
Now the lines AB and CD extend out to infinity to the hypothetical 
meeting point 0; that is, ABO and CDO are lines in the real scene. The sec­
tions of these lines, A'B'O' and C'D'O', must therefore meet at 0'. What we 
have shown then is that A'B' and C'D' must be placed on the screen so that 
they meet at 0', and 0' is the foot of the perpendicular extending from the 
eye to the screen. Let us now note that AB and CD are any horizontal lines 
perpendicular to the screen. Hence all horizontal lines which are perpendicu­
lar to the screen must be drawn so as to go through 0', the principal vanish­
ing point, which is the foot of the perpendicular from the eye to the screen. 
We may draw another important conclusion from the preceding situation. 
The distances AC and BD are equal, for they are the distances between 
parallel lines. However, the corresponding images A'C' and B'D' are not 
equal because the lines A'B' and C'D' converge to 0'. Moreover, B'D' will 
be shorter than A'C' because it is closer to 0'. But B'D' corresponds to the 
actual distance BD which is farther from the screen than AC is. Hence 
lengths which are farther from the screen must be drawn shorter than equal 
lengths closer to the screen. This fact is often described by the statement 
that, to obtain proper perspective in a painting, lengths farther away from 
the observer must be foreshortened. 
We shall establish one more theorem about perspective drawing. Let us 
now suppose that JK (Fig. 10-10) is a horizontal line which makes an angle 
of 45" with the screen. Assume that the eye at E looks out along the line JK 
toward infinity. Then the line from the eye to the point at infinity on JK 
will be parallel to JK. Since JK is horizontal, the new line, EL in Fig. 10-10, 
will also be horizontal. It will pierce the screen at some point, say D" and will 
also make an angle of 45" with the screen. The triangle D,EO' is a right 
triangle because EO' is perpendicular to the screen. In view of the acute 
angles of 45", O'D, ­ EO'. Then the point D, is as far from 0' as E is. The 
projection from E to the various points of JK cuts the screen in some line, 
J'K', say. As the eye continues to follow JK toward infinity, the projection 
cuts the screen in points lying on an extension of J'K'. and we have already 
established that when the eye looks toward infinity on JK, the projection cuts 
the screen at D,. Hence J'K' must go through D,. We now have another im­
portant result. The image of any horizontal line which makes an angle of 45" 

222 
MATHEMATICS AND PAINTING IN THE RENAISSANCE 
E 
Fig. 10-10. 
K 
The image of a horizontal line which makes a 45°·angle with the screen 
goes through a diagonal vanishing point. 
with the screen must go through the point DI which lies on the screen, on 
the same level as E, but is as far to the right of the principal vanishing point 
as E is from the principal vanishing point. The point D, is called a diagonal 
vanishing point. 
Had we considered instead of JK lines which make an angle of 1 35° with 
the screen, we would have found that their images must go through a point 
D, which lies as far to the left of 0' as E is from 0'. The point D, is also 
called a diagonal vanishing point. 
We see, then, that the points 0', D1, and D2 correspond to points at in­
finity in the actual scene. As a matter of fact, all points on the horizontal 
line D20'D1 correspond to points at infinity in the actual scene, and this line 
is called the vanishing line. It is the image of what one might call the 
horizon in the actual scene, that is, the points at infinity toward which the 
eye gazes when it looks in a horizontal direction. 
The above theorems hardly begin to illustrate what one must know and 
apply to draw actual scenes realistically. The treatment of curves is especially 
difficult. For example, actual circles and spheres cannot, in general, be drawn 
as circles unless their centers happen to lie on the perpendicular from the eye 
to the screen. In all other cases, they must be drawn as ellipses or as arcs of 
parabolas or hyperbolas, depending upon their position relative to the observer. 
This fact becomes clear if one considers that the lines from the eye to each 
point on the edge of the circle or sphere, the projection, in other words, form 

RENAISSANCE PAINTING: MATHEMATICAL PERSPECfIVE 
223 
a cone and that the section of this cone on the screen will be one of the conic 
sections discussed in Chapter 6. We shall not investigate the more complicated 
theorems because to do so would require a course in the subject and because 
the detailed theorems are of interest only for the specific purpose of learning 
to paint realistically. We may have seen enough of the basic principles to 
appreciate that the problem of painting realistically is handled by the applica­
tion of a thoroughly mathematical system. 
We know that the construction of a painting in accordance with the 
focused scheme presupposes a definite fixed position of the painter in relation 
to the scene. To view properly a painting so constructed, the observer should 
place himself in precisely the position the painter used in planning the painting. 
Otherwise the observer will get a distorted view. Strictly speaking, paintings 
In museums should be hung so that the observer can conveniently take that 
position. 
1ƃ RENAISSANCE PAINTINGS EMPLOYING MATHEMATICAL PERSPECTIVE 
Renaissance painters achieved their goal of devising a mathematical system 
which permitted the realistic representation of actual scenes and joyously 
hastened to employ it. Realistic paintings constructed in accordance with 
the focused scheme of perspective begin to appear about 1430. 
The artist who contributed key principles of mathematically determined 
perspective, including new methods of construction. and who was the best 
mathematician of his times is Piero della Francesca. This highly intellectual 
painter with a passion for geometry planned all his works mathematically to 
the last detail. Each scene to be painted was a mathematical problem. The 
placement of each figure was calculated to ensure its correctness in relation to 
other figures and to the painting as a whole. He loved geometrical forms so 
much that he used them for hats, parts of the body, and other details in his 
paintings. Piero practically identified painting and perspective. His De pros­
petth'Q pingendi, a treatise on painting and perspective in which he uses 
Euclid's deductive method, presents perspective as a science and provides 
sample constructions illustrating how perspective problems are to be handled. 
Though incidental to our purposes, it is worth noting that Piero painted the 
first Renaissance portraits of real people, the Duke and Duchess of Urbina, 
F ederigo de Montefeltro and his wife Battista Sforza. 
There are numerous examples which illustrate Piero's excellent perspec­
tive. His "Flagellation" (Fig. 10-1 1 )  is one of the best. As in all of his paint­
ings a geometric framework underlies the design. The principal vanishing 
point is chosen to be near the figure of Christ. This device of placing the 
principal vanishing point within the most important area in the painting is 
deliberate because the eye tends to focus on that vanishing point. All objects 
are carefully foreshortened; this is especially noticeable in the marble blocks on 

224 
MATHEMATICS AND PAINTING IN THE RENAISSANCE 
Fig. 10-11. 
Piero della Francesca: The Flagellation. Ducal Palace. Urbino. 
Fig. 10-12. 
Piero della Francesca: Architectural View of a City. Kaiser Friedrich Museum. Berlin. 

Fig. 10-13. 
RENAISSANCE PAINTING: MATHEMATICAL PERSPECTIVE 
225 
Leonardo d a  Vinci : Study for the Adoration of the Magi. Uffizi. Florence. 
the floor and in the beams. The immense labor which went into the calculation 
of these sizes is indicated by a drawing in the book referred to above wherein 
he explains a similar construction. 
Piero achieves unity of the various parts by means of the system of 
perspective. All parts are mathematically tied together to produce this syn­
thesis. Indeed, it was somewhat because of this effect that the Renaissance 
painters valued the system and were excited about it. The example shown 
here should be compared with the foun.enth-century works (Section 10-2), 
where unity is lacking. The entire layout of Piero's painting is so carefully 
planned that movement is sacrificed to the unity of design. 
To illustrate the power of perspective Piero painted several scenes of cities. 
His "Architectural View of a City" (Fig. 10-12) gives a striking illusion of 
depth. These examples of Piero's paintings show his obsession for perspective 
and his great technique. 
Leonardo da Vinci's work provides excellent examples of paintings em­
bodying mathematical perspective. Leonardo prepared for painting by deep 
and extensive studies in anatomy, perspective, geometry, physics, and chem­
istry. In his Treatise on Painting, a scientific treatise on painting and perspec­
tive, Leonardo gives his views. He opens with the statement, "Let no one who 
is not a mathematician read my works." Painting, he says, is a science which 
should be founded on the study of nature and, like all sciences, must also be 
based on mathematics. He scorns those who think they can ignore theory and 
oy mere practice pro-iuce art: "Practice must be founded on sound theory." 

226 
MATHEMATICS AND PAINTING IN THE RENAISSANCE 
Fig. 10-14. 
Leonardo da Vinci: Adoration of the Magi. Uffizi. Florence. 
Fig. 10-15. 
Leonardo da Vinci: Annunciation. Uffizi. Florence. 

RENAISSANCE PAINTING: MATHEMATICAL PERSPt:CTlVE 
227 
Painting, which he regarded as superior to architecture, music, and poetry. 
is a science because it deals with the geometry of surfaces. 
The detailed mathematical studies which Leonardo undertook in prepara­
tion for his paintings are illustrated by one of several sketches he made for 
his "Adoration of the Magi" (Fig. 10-13). The painting itself, which was 
never completed, is shown in Fig. 10-14. His "Last Supper" is another excellent 
example of mathematical perspective, but is so well known that we shall 
reproduce instead "The Annunciation" (Fig. 10-15). Although the action 
takes place in the foreground and the chief figures are far apart, they and the 
distant scene in the rear are all brought together by the perspective structure. 
Raphael (1483-1520) supplies many superb paintings which exhibit ex­
cellent perspective. In his "School of Athens" (Fig. 10-16) he boldly tackles 
an enormous scene encompassing a vast number of people within a magnifi­
cent architectural setting. The portrayal of depth, the harmonious organiza­
tion, coherence, and exactness of proportions achieved despite the difficulty 
of the undertaking are extraordinary. This picture, especially, shows how 
perspective unifies a composition and ties figures at the sides to the central 
theme. 
The history of this painting is of interest. Pope Julius II (1443-1513) was 
impressed with ancient learning and regarded Christianity as the climax of 
Fig. 10-16. 
Raphael : School of Athens. Vatican. 

228 
MATHEMATlCS AND PAINTING IN THE RENAISSANCE 
Flg. 1G-17. 
Raphael: Fire in the 8orgo. Vatican. 
Jewish religious thought and Greek philosophy. He wished to have his idea 
embodied in paintings and commissioned both Michelangelo and Raphael to 
develop this theme. Michelangelo treated it in his frescoes on the ceiling of 
the Sistine Chapel, where he shows the human race led to Christ through a 
long line of Jewish prophets and pagan sibyls. Raphael executed the same 
theme in a somewhat different manner. In four frescoes which cover the 
walls of the Pope's principal official room, the Camera della Segnatura, he 
teaches that the human soul is to aspire to God through each of its faculties: 
reason, the artistic capacity, the sense of order and good government. and 
the religious spirit. "The School of Athens" glorifies reason and naturally 
exhibits the people who excelled in the intellectual sphere. Plato and Aristotle 
are the central figures. Plato points upward to the eternal ideas and Aristotle 
down to the earth as the field of experience. At Plato's left is Socrates. In 
the left foreground Pythagoras writes in a book. The right foreground shows 
the bald-headed Euclid; Archimedes stoops to demonstrate a theorem; Ptolem)' 
holds up a sphere. All the way to the right is Raphael himself. 
Raphael offers so many examples of excellent perspective that it is difficult 
to limit oneself to one or two representative samples. His "The Fire in the 

OTHER VALUES OF MATHEMATICAL PERSPECTIVE 
229 
Borgo" «Fig. 10-17) shows exquisite depth, perfect handling of figures in 
various positions, the proper foreshortening, and again the unification of a 
scene in which many actions take place. 
10-7 OTHER VALUES or MATHEMATICAL PERSPECTIVE 
We could offer countless examples illustrating the application of the mathemat­
ical system of perspective by the Renaissance masters.' All painters of this 
period in which western European art reached one of its pinnacles employed it 
and employed it well. Many, among them Uccello and Piero, were obsessed 
by it and painted scenes viewed from unusual positions just to solve the 
mathematical problems involved. The essential difference between the art of 
the Renaissance and that of the Middle Ages is the introduction of the third 
dimension, and Renaissance painting is characterized by the importance at­
tached to realism, to the realistic rendering of space, distance, and forms, 
achieved by means of the mathematical system of perspective. Through it, 
the process of seeing was rationalized; the extended world was brought under 
control; and the rational interests of the painters were satisfied. 
In the history of culture the accomplishments of the Renaissance artists 
have broad significance. Their apparent goal was to gaze at nature and to 
depict what they saw on canvas, but their true, more profound objective 
was to uncover the very secrets of nature. The Renaissance artist was a 
scientist, and painting was a science not merely in the sense that it had a 
highly technical and even mathematical content, but because it was inspired 
by the ultimate goal of science, understanding nature. Art and science are 
never separated in the thinking and work of Ghiberti, Alberti and Leonardo, 
for example. Leonardo's Paragone, A Comparison of the Arts (Treatise on 
Painting) contains a chapter on "Painting and Science" in which he asserts 
that painting seeks the truths of nature. The artist of that period regarded 
himself as the servant of science. These men who explored and represented 
nature with methods peculiar to their art were motivated precisely by the 
spirit and objectives of the scientists who studied astronomy, light, motion, 
and other phenomena. They were in fact the forerunners in spirit and goals 
of the great physical scientists of modern times and they revealed truth in 
a form which means more to many people than the deep and intricate analyses 
of modern mathematical physics. That mathematics proved to be the founda­
tion of painting and thereby enabled painting to reveal the structure of nature 
was no more than fitting, for the Greeks had already shown that mathematics 
was the essence of design, and later scientists were to confirm this fact in ever 
more striking fashion . 
• The same theme is treated in the author's Mathematics in Western Culture. Other 
examples can be found there. 

230 
MATHEMATICS AND PAINTING IN THE RF.NAISSANCl-: 
The works of the Renaissance artists are hung in art museums. They 
could, with as much justification, be hung in science museums. The lover of 
Renaissance art is consciously or unconsciously a lover of science and mathe­
matics. 
EXERCISES 
1. Relate the "back to nature" movement of the Renaissance to the development of 
a mathematical system of perspective. 
2. Distinguish between conceptual and optical systems of perspective. 
3. Which artists did most to create a mathematical system of perspective? 
4. What is the principle of projection and section in the theory of perspective? 
5. Draw the rear wall, and the visible portions of the side walls, ceiling, and floor 
of a room as seen by an observer in the room whose eye is looking directly at 
the rear wall. 
6. Add to the drawing of the preceding exercise a square table, two of whose edges 
are parallel to the rear wall. 
7. Draw a cube positioned in such a way that one edge is closest to you and that 
neighboring edges make angles of 45° and 1350, respectively, with the canvas. 
Go as far as you can with the theorems at your disposal. 
8. State three theorems of the geometry of perspective drawing. 
Topics for Further Investigation 
I .  The influence of mathematics on Renaissance painting. 
2. Theories of the artists on human proportions. Use the reference to Panofsky's 
Meaning in the Visual Arts. 
3. Vision and painting. Use the reference to Helmholtz. 
Recommended Reading 
BLUNT, ANTHONY: Artistic Theory in Italy, Oxford University Press, London, 1940. 
BUN 1M, MIRIAM: Space ill Medieval Painting and the Forerunners of Perspective, 
Columbia University Press, New York, 1940. 
CLARK, KENNETH: Piero della Francesca, Oxford University Press, New York, 1951. 
COLE, REX V.: Perspective, Seeley, Service and Co., Ltd., London, 1927. 
COOLIDGE, JULIAN L.: Mathematics of Great Amateurs, Dover Publications, Inc., 
New York, 1963. 
DA VINCI, LEONARDO: Treatise on Painting, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 
1956. 
FRY, ROGER: Visioll alld DesiJ.{n, pp. 112-168, Penguin Books Ltd., Baltimore, 1937. 

OTHER VALUES OF MATHEMATICAL PERSPECTIVE 
231 
HELMHOLTZ, HERMAN VON: Popular Lectures on Scientific Subjects, pp. 250-286, 
Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1962. 
IVINS, WM. M., JR.: Art and Geometry, Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1964. 
JOHNSON, MARTIN: Art and Scientific Thought, Pan Four, Faber and Faber, Ltd., 
London, 1944. 
KLINE, MORRIS: Mathematics in Western Culture, Chap. to, Oxford University 
Press, New York, 1953. 
LAWSON, PHILIP J.: Practical Perspective Drawing, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., 
New York, 1943. 
PANOFSKY, ERWIN: "Durer as a Mathematician," pp. 603--621 of James R. Newman: 
The World of Mathematics, Simon and Schuster, New York, 1956. 
PANOFSKY, ERWIN: Meaning in the Visual Arts, Chap. 6, Doubleday Anchor Books, 
New York, 1955. 
POPE-HENNESSY, JOHN: The Complete Work of Paolo Uccello, Phaidon Press, 
London, 1950. 
PORTER, A. T.: The Principles of Perspective, University of London Press Ltd., 
London, 192 7. 
VASARI, GIORGIO: Lives of the Most Famous Painters, Sculptors and Architects, E. P. 
Dunon, New York, 1927, and many other editions. 

CHAPTER 1 1  
PROJECTIVE 
GEOMETRY 
The gods did not reveal all things to men at the start; but as time goes on, 
by searching, they discover more and more. 
XENOPHANES 
11-1 THE PROBLEM SUGGESTED BY PROJECTION AND SECTION 
The origins of mathematical ideas are far more novel and surprising than is 
commonly believed. Practical and scientific problems no doubt most fre­
quently suggest new areas of exploration. However, not only are there other 
sources, hut these often give rise to major branches of mathematics, some of 
which become valuable tools in scientific and practical endeavors. The ques­
tions raised by the painters during their work on the mathematics of perspec­
tive caused them and. later, professional mathematicians to develop the subject 
known as projective geometry. This subject, the most original creation of 
the seventeenth century, is now one of the principal branches of mathematics. 
Let us see just what problems led to this development. The basic mathe­
matical concepts in the system of focused perspective are projection and sec­
tion. A projection we may recall, is a set of lines of light from the eye to the 
points of an object or scene; a section is the pattern formed by the intersection 
of these lines with a glass screen placed between the eye and the object viewed. 
232 
A __ 
C 
Fig. 11-l. 
The section of the projection 
of a horizontal square. 

PROBLEM SUGGESTED BY PRO]ECfION AND SECfION 
233 
Let us consider, as an example, the section of the projection of a square. 
Suppose that the square is horizontal (Fig. I I-I) and is viewed from a point 
somewhere above the level of the plane in which it lies. Furthermore, let us 
suppose that a vertical glass screen is placed paraIlel to the front and back edges 
of the square. We know from our work on perspective that the section on the 
screen of the two sides of the square which are perpendicular to the glass 
screen will consist of two line segments which tend to meet in the principal 
vanishing point. That is, the extensions of A'B' and C'D' meet at 0'. Since the 
sides AC and BD of the square are paraIle! to the screen, they give rise to the 
paraIlel sections A'C' and B'D'. 
The section A'B'D'C' is not a square because the sides A'B' and C'D' are 
not paraIle!. Nor is it a rectangle. The angles, then, of the section do not 
equal the corresponding angles of the original figure. The size of the section 
clearly depends upon where the glass screen is placed. Hence neither the 
lengths of the sides of the section nor the area equals the corresponding 
quantities in the original figure. In the language of Euclidean geometry, we 
may say that the section is neither congruent, similar, nor equivalent to the 
original figure. But the section does create the same impression on the eye as 
the original figure does. Hence it should possess some properties in common 
with the origina!. The question then becomes, What geometrical properties 
do the section and original figure have in common? 
It is a natural step from this question to the next one. If two observers 
view the same scene from different positions, two different projections are 
formed (Fig. 1 1-2). If a section of each of these projections is made, then, 
in view of the fact that the sections are determined by and suggest the same 
scene, the sections should possess common geometrical properties. What are 
they? 
E' 
Fig. 11-2. 
D 
C 
Glass screen 
Glass screen 
E" 
The different sections of two different projections of a square. 

2 J4 
PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY 
These questions, which were originally raised by the artists, could occur 
to anybody who thinks about what he sees. Suppose that an observer looks 
at a rectangular picture frame from various positions. The figure he actually 
perceives varies with his position. Thus he would be led to ask the same 
question that we raised above, What properties do these various shapes have 
in common? Again, as a man walks along a street and near a street lamp, his 
shadow changes in size and shape. The projection here consists of the lines 
of light from the street lamp, which takes the place of the eye, extending to 
the outlines of the man's body and then continuing to the ground. The section 
made by the plane of the ground is the shadow, although in this case the lamp 
and the section are on opposite sides of the actual object. The mathematical 
question raised by this example is, What properties do the various shadows 
have in common? 
Another familiar, contemporary example illustrating projection and sec­
tion is the photograph. In this case, the eye is the lens of the camera, and 
rays of light proceed from the scene through the lens to the film. The section 
is made by the film. We know that different sections can be obtained by 
placing the camera closer or farther from the scene being photographed or 
by tilting the camera. Yet all photographs of the same scene should contain 
some common geometrical properties. 
The srudy of properties common to a figure and a section of a projection 
of that figure, or to two sections of the same projection, or to two sections 
of two different projections of the same figure has led to new concepts and 
theorems which today comprise a whole new branch of geometry, namely 
projective geometry. We shall attempt in this chapter to gain some under­
standing of the nature of this subject. 
11-2 THE WORK OF DESARGUES 
If we study any section of the projection of a figure and consider its relation 
to the original figure, then a few facts are readily noted. Mathematically the 
eye is a point. and this point and any line in the actual figure determine a plane, 
which is the projection determined by the line. The glass screen which cuts 
the projection is also a plane, and since two nonparallel planes meet in a line, 
the section is a line. Hence corresponding to a line in the actual scene there is 
a line in the section. We may therefore say that the property of linearity is 
common to an actual line and any section of a projection of that line. Similarly, 
it is easy to visualize that two intersecting lines of the actual figure will gen­
erate two intersecting lines in the section. This, then, is another minor mathe­
matical property which is common to actual object and section. It follows 
that a triangle will give rise to a triangular section, although the shape of the 
triangle in the section will not necessarily be the same as that of the original 
triangle. Likewise a quadrilateral will correspond to a quadrilateral. 

THE ·WORK OF DESARGUES 
235 
But the discovery of these few properties which a figure and its section 
or two sections of the same projection have in common hardly elates one nor 
does it give us any significant answers to the question of what properties 
figures and sections or various sections have in common. The first man to 
explore the problem and come up with nontrivial answers was Girard 
Desargues (1593-1662). Desargues was not a professional mathematician; he 
was a self-educated architect and engineer. His motive in tackling the subject 
was to help his colleagues. He believed that he could compile in compact 
form the many theorems on perspective that were useful to architects, engi­
neers, painters, and stone-cutters. He even invented a special terminology 
which he thought would be more comprehensible to craftsmen and artists than 
the usual mathematical language. Of his motives Desargues writes: 
I freely confess that I never had taste for study or research either in physics or 
geometry except in JO far as they could serve as a means of arriving at some sort 
of knowledge of the proximate causes . . .  for the good and convenience of life, 
in maintaining health, in the practice of some art, . . .  having observed that a 
good part of the arts is based on geometry, among others the cutting of stone in 
architecture, that of sundials, that of perspective in particular. 
Desargues began by organizing numerous theorems and published one book 
on the construction of sundials and another on the application of his own 
geometric theories to stone-cutting and masonry. He lectured in Paris about 
1626, and wrote a pamphlet on perspective ten years later. Desargues' chief 
contribution, a book on projective geometry, appeared in 1639. 
The basic theorem of projective geometry, a theorem now fundamental in 
the entire field of mathematics, was formulated and proved by Desargues and 
is named after him. It illustrates how mathematicians responded to the ques­
tions raised by perspective. 
Suppose the eye at point 0 (Fig. 11-3) looks at a triangle ABC. The 
lines from 0 to the various points on the sides of the triangle constitute, as 
we know, a projection. A section of this projection will then contain a 
triangle, A'B'C', where A' corresponds to A, B' to B, and C' to C. Alterna­
tively, we may regard both triangles as sections of a projection of a third 
triangle. The two triangles, ABC and A'We', are said to be perspective from 
the point O. Desargues' theorem states an important geometrical fact which 
relates triangles ABC and A'B'C'. If we prolong the corresponding sides AC 
and A'e', they will meet in a point P; the sides AB and A'B' extended will 
meet in a point Q; and the extensions of BC and We' will meet in a point R. 
Then, the theorem asserts, P, Q, and R will lie on a straight line. In more 
compact language, the theorem says: 
If two triangles in different planes are perspective from a point, the three pairs 
of corresponding sides meet in three points which lie on one straight line. 

236 
PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY 
The proof of this theorem is simple. The lines AC and A'C' lie in one plane 
because OAA' and OCC' are two intersecting lines and, as such, determine a 
plane. Then AC and A'C' will meet in a point because any two lines in one 
pbne meet in a point.' Let us denote this point by P. The same argument 
shows that AB and A'B' meet in a point Q, and that BC and B'C' meet in a 
point R. 
0..;:=---
Fig. 11-3. 
Desargues' theorem. 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
, 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
\ 
A 
We now wish to show that P, Q, and R lie on one line. Now P, Q, and R 
lie in the plane of triangle ABC because P lies on AC, Q on AB, and R on 
Be. Likewise P, Q, and R lie in the plane of triangle A'B'C'. Now the 
points common to two planes must lie on one line, the line of intersection of 
the two planes. Hence, P, Q, and R lie on one line. 
The reader may be troubled about the assertion in Desargues' theorem 
that each pair of corresponding sides of the two triangles must meet in a 
point. He may ask, If these sides happen to be parallel, does the theorem 
fail' Desargues had taken account of this possibility. We observed in the 
preceding chapter that a set of lines which are parallel in a particular scene 
being painted may have to be drawn on the canvas so as to meet in a point. 
In this case, there is a point in the section which does not correspond to any 
point in the scene itself. This breakdown of the correspondence between 
points in the scene and points in the section can be repaired by agreeing that 
any set of parallel lines is to be regarded as having a point in common. Where 
is this point? The answer is that it cannot be visualized. although the student 
is often advised to think of it as being at infinity, a bit of advice which es-
• We shall neglect for the moment the special case of twO parallel lines. 

THE WORK OF DESARGUES 
237 
sentially amounts to answering a question by not answering it. However, 
whether or not one can visualize the point common to parallel lines, a point 
distinct from the usual, finitely located points of the lines. it is convenient to 
say that they have a point in common. In addition. it is agreed that two or 
more parallel lines are to have just one point in common as do nonparallel lines. 
Hence we say of any two lines in projective geometry ·that they meet in one 
and only one point. This agreement is further recommended by the argument 
that projective geometry is concerned with problems which arise from the 
phenomenon of vision, and we never see parallel lines, as the familiar example 
of apparently converging railroad tracks illustrates. 
One more agreement must be made about these new points introduced in 
projective geometry. We just agreed that any set of parallel lines has one 
point in common. Since there are many sets of parallel lines in one plane, 
each set having its own direction, there are many such new points in the 
plane of projective geometry. It is agreed that all these new points lie on one 
new line, sometimes called the line at infinity. 
Let us now turn back to Desargues' theorem. If each of the three pairs 
of corresponding sides of the triangles presented in Desargues' theorem con­
sisted of parallel lines, it would follow from our agreements that the two 
lines of each pair intersect in one point and that the three points of inter­
section lie on one line, the line at infinity. These conventions or agreements 
about points and a line at infinity obviate the necessity for making special 
statements when parallel lines happen to be involved in the theorems. This 
is as it should be, because the property of parallelism plays no role in pro­
jective geometry as opposed to Euclidean geometry. The reader who balks 
at accepting the agreements about parallel lines may nevertheless accept the 
theorems of projective geometry, with the mental reservation that they fail 
to state the truth when parallel lines are involved. 
Desargues discovered another fundamental property which is common to 
a figure and to a section of a projection of that figure. Let us consider the 
figure consisting of the line I on which any four points are selected and 
designated A, B, C, and D (Fig. 11-4). We may form a projection of this 
figure from an arbitrary point 0 and cut this projection with the usual glass 
Fig. 11-4. 
A section of a projection of 
four points on a line. 

238 
PROJECfIVE GF.OMETRY 
screen to obtain a section. The original figure and the point 0 determine a 
plane. Then the section consists of the line I' on which A' corresponds to 
A, B' to B, and so on. Since length in the figure differs from length in a section 
or, to use more technical phraseology, length is not invariant under projection 
and section, we should not expect that A'B' would equal AB, or that any 
segment on I would equal the corresponding segment on 1'. One might next 
consider the ratio CAICB and venture that perhaps this ratio would equal the 
corresponding ratio C' A' je'H', This conjecture is not correct. However, 
one can prove the surprising fact, namely that 
CA/CB 
DA/DB 
- C'A'/C'B' 
D'A'/D'B' 
Thus this ratio of ratios, or cross ratio as it is called, is a projective invariant. 
This is a very surprising fact. It does not matter where the points A, B, C, 
and D lie on the line I or which points are labeled A, B, C, or D. The cross 
ratio of the lengths they determine and the cross ratio of the corresponding 
lengths in the section will be the same. 
Incidentally the fact that the cross ratio of four points on a line is the 
same in the section as in the original figure permits us to check the correctness 
of a painting executed in accordance with the system of focused perspective. 
If four points A', B', e', D' in the painting correspond to four points A, H, C, 
D which lie on one line in the original scene, then the cross ratio of the first 
set must equal the cross ratio of the second set. This fact, however, is not roo 
useful in constructing the painting itself. 
EXERCISES 
I. What fact or facts may you assert about: 
a) a section of a projection of an equilateral triangle; 
b) a section of a projection of a square? 
2. Why should one expect that a figure and a section of a projection of that figure 
should possess some geometrical properties in common? 
B 
c 
A' A 
Fig. 11-5 
3. Figure 11-5 shows two triangles lying in the same plane, the plane of the paper. 
Moreover, these two triangles are perspective from the point O. 
a) What is the difference between this figure and the one considered in the text? 

THE WORK OF PASCAL 
239 
b) Verify by actually drawing lines that the pairs of corresponding sides of the 
two triangles in Fig. 11-5 meet in three points which lie on one straight line. 
c) What generalization of Desargues' theorem is suggested by the result in (b)? 
2 
3 
• 
A 
B 
c 
D 
Fig. 11-6 
4. Given the points and lengths in Fig. 1 1--6, what is the cross ratio of the lengths 
determined by A, B, C, and D? 
5. What is the meaning of the statement that a geometrical property is invariant 
under projection and section? 
A 
c 
B 
D 
Fig. 1 1-7 
6. In projective geometry, lengths are sometimes regarded as directed. For the 
positions shown in Fig. 1 1-7, CA would be taken to be negative, whereas CB is 
positive because it is in the opposite direction. Then the cross ratio 
CAICB 
DAIDB 
in the present case is negative. When the cross ratio is -1, the four points A, B, 
C, D are said to form a har1lonic set. Suppose now that D is moved indefinitely 
far to the right and C is moved so as to keep the cross ratio - I . Can you discover 
any special property of the point C in relation to A and B? 
11-3 THE WORK OF PASCAL 
In the domain of projective geometry, Desargues' ideas were further advanced 
by Blaise Pascal ( 1623-1662). This man of many contradictory qualities, beset 
by deep emotional conflicts, is commended to us also by his superb original 
work in other branches of mathematics, physics, literature, and theology. His 
father, a judge and tax commissioner, recognized that his son was bright and 
guided his education. He decided that Blaise should not tackle mathematics 
until he was 16 years old, but somehow the boy got started on his own and 
learned a good deal quickly. 
When Pascal was still a youth in Paris his father tOok him to the weekly 
sessions of a group of noted intellectuals, Roberval, Mersenne, Mydorge, and 
others. There Blaise met Desargues and as a result became interested in study­
ing properties of geometric figures which remain invariant under projection 
and section. At the age of 16 he proved a famous theorem, still called Pascal's 
theorem, which we shall examine shortly. He then wrote the Essay 011 Conic 
Sections, which contains many original results. Mathematics became his great 

240 
PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY 
passion. To aid his father he conceived the idea of having a machine perform 
arithmetic operations, and he constructed the first successful computing ma­
chine. He also was one of the notable precursors of Newton and Leibniz in 
the creation of the calculus and, together with Pierre de Fermat, another great 
French mathematician whom we shall meet later, founded the theory of 
probability . •  
Pascal made some famous physical experiments which confirmed the 
discovery by Evangelista Torricelli, a pupil of Galileo, that the air presses 
down upon us, or that the air has weight, and he also clarified and furthered 
the study of pressure in liquids, a study which, in technical parlance, is known 
as hydrostatics. 
It was clear to Pascal that the data of experience are the starting points of 
knowledge and he respected and superbly exercised the power of reason. His 
Spirit of Geometry, an essay on method and rules of thought, may well be 
classed with Descartes' Discourse 011 Method, another landmark on the role 
of reason. But as he grew older, he became more and more dissatisfied with 
the limited results attained by reason. About ten years before he died, he 
began to find emptiness in the knowledge of nature and acquired some distaste 
for it. "Don't overrate science," he cautioned. He became convinced that the 
truths of mathematics were not broad enough to encompass all of man's world. 
He would frequently say that all the sciences could not comfort one in days 
of affliction, but that the doctrines of Christian truth would comfort one at all 
times both in affliction and in one's ignorance of these sciences. Famous are 
his epigrams, "The heart has its reasons which the reason knows nothing of" 
and "Nothing that has to do with faith can be the concern of reason." More 
and more he turned to religion. He had been brought up as a Catholic, but 
he would not accept the strict dogmatic theology of the powerful Jesuits. He 
became a Jansenist and his Provincial Letters, one of his famous literary works. 
is filled with anti-Jesuitical polemics. In his Penst!es, another literary classic, 
he penned many more of his thoughts on religion. The conflict between 
science and faith ended with a victory for religion. Ironically, Pascal, the de­
fender of faith, helped immensely to found the ensuing Age of Reason. 
Typical of theorems in projective geometry is the one conceived and 
proved by Pascal. This theorem, like Desargues', states the property of a 
geometrical figure which is common to the figure and to any section of any 
projection of that figure; that is, it states a property of a geometrical figure 
which is invariant under projection and section. 
Pascal has this to say: Draw any six-sided polygon (hexagon) inscribed 
in a circle and letter the vertices A, B, C, D, E, F (Fig. 11-8). Prolong a pair 
of opposite sides, AB and DE say, until they meet in a point, P. Extend an­
other pair of opposite sides, AF and CD say, until they meet in a point, Q . 
• See Chapter 23. 

THE WORK OF PASCAL 
241 
Finally, prolong the third pair until they meet in a point, R. Then, Pascal 
asserts, P, Q, and R will always lie on one straight line. The mathematician, 
with his usual passion for brevity, says: 
If a hexagon is inscribed in a circle, the pairs of opposite sides intersect in three 
points which lie on one straight line. 
We shall not give the proof of this theorem because it would require more 
time than we should devote to the subject. The statement, however, offers 
another illustration of the type of theorem investigated in projective geom­
etry. 
p 
Ȉ'---... 
, , , , 
, , 
Fig. 11-8. 
Pascal's theorem. 
, 
,\ 
Fig. 11-9. 
B 
Il 
_-9 
---
// 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
C 
A section of a projection of a 
hexagon inscribed in a circle. 
F 
E 
o 
B 
c 
As stated, Pascal's theorem seems to have little to do with properties com­
mon to all sections of a projection. However, let us visualize (Fig. 11-9) a 
projection of the figure involved in Pascal's theorem and a section of this 
projection. The projection of the circle is a cone, and a section of this cone 
will not necessarily be a circle, but, as we know from the work of the Greeks, 
it may be an ellipse, a parabola, or a hyperbola, that is, a conic section. To 
each side of the hexagon inscribed in the circle there corresponds a side of the 
hexagon inscribed in this conic section, and to each intersection of lines in 
the original figure there belongs an intersection of the corresponding lines in the 
section. Finally, since the points P, Q, R lie on one line in the original figure, 
the corresponding points will be on one line in the section. Hence Pascal's 
theorem states a property of a circle which continues to hold in any section 
of any projection of that circle. 

242 
PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY 
EXERCISES 
1. Draw a circle, choose any six points on it as the vertices of a hexagon, find the 
points of intersection of the three pairs of opposjte sides, and see whether they 
lie on a straight line. 
2. Draw any two straight lines. Choose three points on one and label them A, B, C. 
Choose three points on the second line and label them A', B', C'. Find the point 
of intersection of AB' and A'B; do the same for AC' and A'C, and for BC' and 
B'e. Do you observe any interesting fact about these three points of intersection? 
11-4 THE PRINCIPLE OF DUALITY 
It would be pleasant to relate that the innovations of Desargues and Pascal 
were immediately appreciated by their fellow mathematicians and that the 
potentialities in their methods and ideas were eagerly seized upon and further 
developed. Actually this pleasure is denied to us. Perhaps Desargues' novel 
terminology batRed his contemporaries just as many people today are batRed 
and repulsed by the language of mathematics. At any rate, except for Des­
cartes, Pascal, and Fermat. Desargues' colleagues exhibited the usual reactions 
to radical ideas: they dismissed them, called Desargues crazy, and forgot pro­
jective geometry. Desargues himself became discouraged and returned to the 
practice of architecture and engineering. Every printed copy of Desargues' 
book, originally published in 1639, was lost. Pascal's work on conics and his 
other studies on projective geometry, though published in 1640, also remained 
unknown until almost 1800. Fortunately, a pupil of Desargues, Philippe de 
La Hire, made a manuscript copy of Desargues' book which was accidentally 
picked up in a bookshop by the nineteenth-century geometer Michel Chasles, 
and thus the world finally learned the full extent of Desargues' major work. 
Apart from some results which La Hire used and which were incorrectly 
credited to him for 150 years, Desargues' and Pascal's discoveries had to be 
remade one by one by the nineteenth-century geometers. 
Another reason for the neglect of projective geometry during the seven­
teenth and eighteenth centuries was that analytic geometry, created by Desar­
gues' contemporaries, Descartes and Fermat (see Chapter 12), and the calculus, 
developed chiefly by Newton and Leibniz during the latter half of the seven­
teenth century (see Chapters 16 and 17), proved to be so useful in the rapidly 
expanding branches of physical science that mathematicians concentrated on 
these subjects. 
The study of projective geometry was revived through a series of accidents 
and events almost as striking as those which had first stimulated interest in this 
discipline. The problem of designing fortifications attracted the geometrical 
talents of Gaspard Monge (1746-1818), the inventor of descriptive geometry. 
It is relevant that this subject, .though distinct from projective geometry, uses 
projection and section. Monge was a most inspiring teacher, and there gathered 

THE PRINClPLE OF DUALITY 
243 
about him a host of bright pupils, among them Charles J. Brianchon (1785-
1 864), L. N. M. Carnot ( 1753-1823), and Jean Victor Ponce let ( 1788-1867). 
These men were so impressed by Monge's geometry that they sought to show 
that geometric methods could accomplish as much and more than the algebraic 
or analytical methods of treating geometry introduced by Descartes. Carnot 
in particular wished "to free geometry from the hieroglyphics of analysis." As 
if to take revenge on Descartes whose creation had caused the abandonment 
of pure geometry, the early nineteenth-century geometers made it their ob­
jective to outdo Descartes. 
The revival of projective geometry was launched dramatically by Poncelet. 
While serving as an officer in Napoleon's army, he was captured during the 
campaign in Russia and spent the year 1813-1814 in a Russian prison. There 
Poncelet reco'nstructed without the aid of any books all he had learned from 
Monge and Carnot and then proceeded to create new results in projective 
geometry. He was the first mathematician to appreciate fully that this subject 
was indeed a totally new branch of mathematics, and he consciously sought 
properties of geometrical figures which were common to all sections of any 
projection of a given figure. A group of French and, later, a group of German 
mathematicians continued Poncelet's work and developed intensively the sub­
ject of projective geometry. 
B 
c 
(a) 
Fig. 11-10. 
(a) A set of points on a line; 
(b) a set of lines on a point. 
D 
L 
d 
a 
b 
c 
(h) 
The many accomplishments of this period were capped by the discovery 
of one of the most beautiful principles in all mathematics-the principle of 
duality. It is true in projective geometry, as in Euclidean geometry, that any 
two points determine one line or, as we now prefer to put it, any two points 
lie on one line. But in projective geometry it is also true that any two lines 
determine, or lie on, one point. (The reader who has refused to accept the 
convention that parallel lines in Euclid's sense are also to be regarded as having 
a point in common will have to forego the next few paragraphs and pay for 
his stubbornness.) It will be noted that the second italicized statement can be 
obtained from the first one by merely interchanging the words point and line. 
We say in projective geometry that we have dualized the original statement 
or that one is the dual of the other. If we are discussing a set of points on a 
line and interchange "point" and "line," we obtain the phrase a set of lines on 
a point. Figure 1 1-10 illustrates the two dual statements. 

244 
PROJECfIVE GEOMETRY 
A triangle consists of three points not all on the same line and the lines 
joining them. We could speak of three lines 110t all on the same point and the 
points joining them. We usually do not speak of a point as joining two lines; 
rather, we refer to such a point as the point of intersection of the lines. But 
the meaning is clear either way. The figure described by the rephrased or 
dualized Statement is again a triangle. Because the dual figure of the triangle 
is a triangle, the triangle is called self-dual. 
In projective geometry the quadrilateral is defined as a figure consistng 
of four lines and the six points in which the lines join in pairs. This use of 
the term "quadrilateral" differs slightly from the one common in Euclidean 
geometry. A picture of a quadrilateral is shown in Fig. II-I I (a). We can 
equally well speak of a figure consisting of four points and the six lines which 
join the points in pairs (Fig. II-lib). This new figure is called a quadrangle. 
Hence quadrilateral and quadrangle are dual figures. 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 11-11. 
(a) A quadrilateral; 
(b) a quadrangle. 
We seem to be able to take the statement describing any figure and by 
dualizing the statement obtain a new figure. Let us try next something more 
ambitious. We shall dualize Desargues' theorem. We shall consider the case 
where the two triangles and the point 0 from which the triangles are per­
spective all lie in one plane, and see what results when we interchange point 
and line. We shall use the fact already noted that the dual of a triangle is a 
triangle. 
Desargues' Theorem 
If we have two triangles 
such that lines joining 
corresponding vertices 
lie on one point, 0, 
then corresponding sides 
join in three points 
which lie on one straight line. 
Dual of Desargues' Theorem 
If we have two triangles 
such that points which join 
corresponding sides 
lie on one line, 0, 
then corresponding vertices 
are joined by three lines 
which lie on one point. 
If we examine the new statement we see that it is actually the converse of 
Desargues' theorem; that is, the hypothesis and the conclusion in Desargues' 
theorem are now interchanged. Hence by interchanging point and line we 

THE PRINCIPLE OF DUALITY 
245 
have discovered a possible theorem. It would be too much to ask that the 
proof of the new statement should be obtainable from the proof of the 
original theorem by interchanging point and line. Although It IS too much 
to ask, the gods have been generous beyond our merits, for the new proof 
can indeed be obtained in this way. 
The principle of duality, as thus far described, tells us how to obtain a 
new statement or theorem from a given one involving points and lines. But 
projective geometry also deals with curves. How should one dualize state­
ments describing curves? The clue lies in the fact that a curve is after all but 
a collection of points satisfying some condition. For example, the circle is the 
set of all points at a fixed distance from a given point. The principle of duality 
suggests, then, that the figure dual to a given curve might be a collection of 
lines satisfying the condition dual to the condition defining the given curve. 
(However the definition given for the circle is not in the form which can be 
dualized.) This collection of lines may also be called a curve, for a collection 
of lines suggests a curve as well as does a collection of points (Fig. 11-12). It 
is called a line curve. 
Fig. 11-12. 
(a) A point curve; (b) a line curve. 
Fig. 11-13. 
Brianchon's theorem, the dual of 
Pascal's theorem. 
For conic sections, the figure dual to a point conic, that is, a conic re­
garded as a collection of points, turns out to be the collection of tangents to 
that point conic. Thus if the conic section is a circle, the dual figure is the 
collection of tangents to that circle. This collection of tangents suggests the 
circle as well as does the usual collection of points, and we shall call this 
collection of tangents the line circle. 
,Ve have dualized statements about simple figures with suggestive results. 
Let us now see whether the application of the principle of duality to 
theorems on curves is equally productive. As a test we shall dualize Pascal's 
theorem. Figure 1 1-1J illustrates the content of the dual statement. 

246 
PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY 
Pascal's theorem 
If we take six points, A, B, C, D, E, 
and F on the point circle, then 
the lines which join A and B and 
D and E join in the point Pj 
the lines which join B and C and E 
and F join in the point Qj 
the lines which join C and D and F 
and A join in the point R. 
The three points P, Q, and R lie on 
one line, 1. 
Dual of Pascafs theorem 
If we take six lines a, h, c, d, e, 
and f on the line circle, then 
the points which join a and b and 
d and e are joined by the line p; 
the points which join h and c and e 
and f are joined by the line qj 
the points which join c and d and f 
and a are joined by the line T. 
The three lines p, q, and T lie on 
one point, L. 
Geometrically the dual statement has the following meaning: Since the 
line circle is the collection of tangents to the point circle, the six lines on 
the line circle are any six tangents to the point circle, and these six tangents 
form a hexagon circumscribed about the point circle. Hence the dual state­
ment tells us that if we circumscribe a hexagon about a point circle, the lines 
joining opposite vertices of the hexagon, lines p, q, and r in the dual statement, 
meet in one point. This dual statement is indeed a theorem of projective 
geometry. It is called Brianchon's theorem after the man who discovered it 
by applying the principle of duality to Pascal's theorem. 
The principle of duality in projective geometry says that we can inter­
change point and line in a theorem about figures lying in one plane and obtain 
a meaningful statement. Moreover-although nothing said so far justifies the 
assertion-the new, or dual, statement will itself be a theorem; that is, it can 
be proved. However, it is possible to show by one proof that every rephrasing 
of a theorem of projective geometry in accordance with the principle of 
duality must lead to a theorem. The principle of duality is a remarkable 
property of projective geometry. It reveals the symmetry in the roles which 
point and line play in the structure of that geometry, and this symmetry in 
turn reveals that line and point are equally fundamental concepts. 
The principle of duality also gives us some insight into the process of 
creating mathematics. Whereas the discovery of this principle as well as of 
theorems such as Desargues' and Pascal's calls for imagination and genius, the 
discovery of new theorems by means of the principle is an almost mechanical 
procedure. 
EXERCISES 
1. Given the figure consisting of four points no three of which are on the same 
line, what is the dual figure? 
2. State the principle of duality. 
3. Given the figure consisting of four points all on one line, what is the dual figure? 

PROJECTIVE AND EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRIES: RELATIONSHIP 
247 
4. Given the figure consisting of three points on one line. a founh point not on 
that line, and the lines joining any two of these points. what is the dual figure? 
5. In what way is the principle of duality a means of discovering new theorems? 
11-5 THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PROJECTIVE AND EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRIES 
Projective geometry offers many more exciting concepts than we can hope 
to survey. Let us see rather what the broader features of the subject are. The 
basic concept is projection and section and the main goal is to find properties 
of geometric figures which hold for any section of any projection of those 
figures. A careful examination of the properties which prove to be invariant 
under projection and section shows that these properties deal with the col­
linearity of points, that is, with points lying on the same line; with the con­
currence of lines, that is with a set of lines meeting in one point; with cross 
ratio; and with the fundamental roles of point and line as exhibited by the 
principle of duality. On the other hand, Euclidean geometry, which, of course, 
was well known to the nineteenth-century projective geometers, deals, for 
example, with the equality of lengths, angles, and areas. A comparison of these 
two classes of properties suggests that the projective properties are simpler than 
those treated in Euclidean geometry. One might say that projective geometry 
deals with the very formation of the geometrical figures whose congruence, 
similarity, and equivalence (equal area) are discussed in Euclidean geometry. 
With hindsight to aid us, we can see that there should be a geometry 
more fundamental than Euclidean geometry. Anybody first perceives the 
position in space of trees, houses, roads, and other objects and only then thinks 
of distances and sizes. When traveling, one must first choose a particular road 
to follow before being concerned with how far to move along the road. That 
is. position and relative position precede distance in importance both practically 
and logically. 
Hence one might suspect that logically projective geometry is the more 
fundamental and encompassing subject and that Euclidean geometry is in 
some sense a specialization. This conjecture is coqect. The clue to the rela­
tionship between the two geometries may be obtained by again examining pro­
jection and section. Consider a geometric figure, a rectangle say (Fig. 11-14). 
Let a projection of this figure be formed from an arbitrary point 0, 
and then let a section ()f this projection be made by a plane parallel to the 
plane of the rectangle. By applying some theorems of Euclidean geometry one 
can prove that the section will be a rectangle similar to the original one. Hence 
the relationship of similarity is a special type of projective relationship in 
which the plane of the section and the plane of the original figure are parallel. 
If, now, the point ° moves indefinitely far to the left, the lines of the 
projection come closer and closer to being parallel to each other. When the 
center of the projection is the "point at infinity"(!), these lines are parallel; 

248 
PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY 
C 
	' 
o 
A' 
A 
Fig. 11-14. 
Similar figures related by projection and 
section. 
C 
C' 
o ´  
Fig. 11-15. 
Congruent figures related by projection 
and section. 
then the section made by a plane parallel to the rectangle is a rectangle con­
gruent to the original one (Fig. 1 1-15). This last type of projection, called 
parallel projection, thus yields congruent sections. In other words, from the 
standpoint of projective geometry, the relationships of congruence and sim­
ilarity which are so intensively studied in Euclidean geometry can be studied 
through projection and section for special projections. We see therefore that 
Euclidean geometry is not only a logical subdivision of projective geometry, 
but we can now look upon it in a new light, namely, as a study of properties 
of geometric figures which are invariant under special projections. 
Although projective geometry was initiated by Desargues for the very 
practical purpose of extending and systematizing theorems which might help 
the artists, it is not highly significant from the standpoint of applications to art 
or science. The subject has been developed and cultivated by mathematicians 
who sought and found pleasure in its ideas. The Renaissance artists and 
geometers opened up new themes which the Greek world did not grasp, the 
investigation of the propenies of intersections of lines, cross ratio, duality, 
projection and section, and, above all. the theme of properties invariant under 
projection and section. Projective geometry is now a vast branch of mathe­
matics because it does offer latitude to intuition, new methods of proof, ele­
gant results, and aesthetically satisfying ideas. This subject born of art makes 
its primary contribution to mathematics as an art. 
EXERCISES 
1. What major mathematical problem was suggested by the artists' use of projection 
and section? 
2. How would you distinguish projective geometry from Euclidean geometry with 
respect to the propenies of geometrical figures? 
3. Write a shan essay on how the rise of realistic painting in the Renaissance 
stimulated a new mathematical development. 

PROJECfIVE AND EUCLmEAN GEOMETRIES: RELATIONSHIP 
249 
Recommended Reading 
BELL, E. T.: Men of Mathematics, Chaps. 5 and 13, Simon and Schuster, New 
York, 1937. 
IVINS, WM. M., JR.: Art and Geometry, Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1964. 
KLINE, MORRIS: "Projective Geometry," an article in James R. Newman: The 
World of Mathematics, pp. 622-641, Simon and Schuster, New York, 1956. 
MORTIMER, ERNEST: Blaise Pascal: The Life and Work of a Realist, Harper and 
Bros., New York, 1959. 
SAWYER, W. W.: Prelude to Mathematics, Chap. 10, Pelican Books Ltd., England, 
1955. 
YOUNG, JACOB W. A.: Monographs on Topics of Modern Mathematics, Chap. 2, 
Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1955. 
YOUNG, JOHN W.: Projective Geometry, The Open Court Publishing Co., Chicago, 
1930. 

CHAPTER 12 
COORDINATE GEOMETRY 
In order to seek truth it is necessary once in the course of our life to doubt 
as far as possible all things. 
DESCARTES 
12-1 DESCARTES AND FERMAT 
Doubts as to the soundness of the knowledge and outlook possessed by medi­
eval Europe had already been raised during the Renaissance. The revived 
Greek knowledge, great explorations, new inventions, the rise of an artisan 
class with problems of its own which could not be answered by purposive or 
teleological explanations of natural phenomena, and the advocacy of experi­
ence as the source of all knowledge, all tended to undermine the old founda­
tions. No one appreciated more the need for the reconstruction of knowledge 
than did Rene Descartes ( 1 596-1650). 
Born to moderately wealthy parents in La Haye, France, Descartes re­
ceived an excellent formal and traditional education at the Jesuit College of 
La Fleche. But while still at school, he had already become critical of the 
truths which so many of his contemporaries and teachers professed so con­
fidently and he began to question the kind of knowledge that was being im­
parted to him. Of the traditional studies, he said, eloquence has incomparable 
force and beauty, and poetry has its ravishing graces and delights. However 
these attainments he judged to be gifts of nature rather than the fruits of 
study. He respected theology because it pointed out the path to heaven and 
he, too, aspired to heaven, but "being given assuredly to understand that the 
way is not less open to the most ignorant than to the most learned, and that 
the revealed truths which lead to heaven are above our comprehension," he 
did not presume to subject these truths to his impotent reason. Philosophy, 
he agreed, "affords the means of discoursing with an appearance of truth on all 
matters, and commands the admiration of the more simple," but, though 
cultivated for ages by the most distinguished men, it had not produced doc­
trines which were beyond dispute. Law, medicine, and other professions 
secure riches and honor for their practitioners, but since these subjects borrow 
250 

DESCARTES AND FERMAT 
251 
principles from philosophy, they could not be solid structures, and fortunately 
he was not obliged to pursue them to better his fortune. Logic he also de­
precated because its syllogisms and the majority of its other rules are of use 
only in the communication of what one already knows or in speaking without 
judgment about things of which one is ignorant. It does not in itself proffer 
knowledge. Treatises on morals contain useful precepts and exhortations to be 
virtuous but no evidence that these ace founded on truths. 
Because he had a critical mind and because he lived at a time when the 
world outlook which had dominated Europe for a thousand years was being 
vigorously challenged, Descartes could not be satisfied with the tenets so 
forcibly and dogmatically pronounced by his teachers and other leaders. He 
felt all the more justified in his doubts when he realized that he was in one of 
the most celebrated schools of Europe and that he was not an inferior student. 
At the end of his course of study he concluded that all his education had 
advanced him only to the point of discovering man's ignorance. 
At the age of 20, after having graduated from the University of Poi tiers, 
where he studied law, Descartes decided to learn some things that were not 
in books. He began by living a gay life in Paris, after which he retired for 
a period of reflection in a quiet corner of that city. To see the world he 
joined an army, participated in military campaigns, and traveled. Finally he 
decided to settle down. 
Because Descartes thought he could more easily find peace and seclusion 
in the saner atmosphere of Holland, he secured in 1628 a house in Amsterdam. 
There he devoted himself over a period of twenty years to critical and pro­
found thinking about the nature of truth, the existence of God, and the 
physical structure of the universe. There he created his best works. As he 
continued to write. he and his audience became more and more impressed 
with the greatness of his work. Lucid thoughts set forth in literary classics 
which revealed the clarity, precision, and effectiveness of the French language 
made Descartes famous and his philosophy popular. 
His retirement from the world was broken by an invitation to serve as a 
tutor to Queen Christina of Sweden. Reluctant as he was to leave his com­
fortable home, he could not resist the attraction of royalty and so moved to 
Stockholm. The queen preferred to begin her day at 5 a.m. by studying in 
an icy library, and her tutor was obliged to meet her at that hour. This 
regimen was too much for the frail Descartes. His flesh was weak, and his 
spirit unwilling. He.caught cold and died in the year 1650. 
From the profound thinking and writings carried on during the years in 
Holland there emerged new foundations of knowledge. Descartes is the 
acknowledged father of modern mathematics and philosophy, and he founded 
a new cosmology which dominated the seventeenth century until it was ulti­
mately displaced by the work of Galileo and Newton. Convinced that the 
knowledge he had acquired in school was either unteliable or worthless, 

252 
COORDINATE GEOMETRY 
Descartes swept away all opinions, prejudices, dogmas, pronouncements of 
authorities, and, so he believed, preconceived notions. He began reconstruction 
by seeking a new method of obtaining sure and reliable knowledge. The 
answer, he says, came to him in a dream while he was on one of his campaigns. 
The "long chains of simple and easy reasonings by which geometers are 
accustomed to reach the conclusions of their most difficult demonstrations" 
led him to the conclusion that "all things to the knowledge of which man is 
competent are naturally connected in the same way." He decided, then, that 
a sound body of philosophy could be deduced only by the methods of the 
geometers, for only they had been able to reason clearly and unimpeachably 
and to arrive at universally accepted truths. Having concluded that mathe­
matics "is a more powerful instrument of knowledge than any other that has 
been bequeathed to us by human agency," he sought to distill from a study 
of the subject some general principles which would provide a method of 
obtaining exact knowledge in all fields, a method which he called a "universal 
mathematic." 
Following the pattern of mathematics which builds on axioms, he decided 
that he would accept nothing as true which was not so clear and distinct 
to his mind as to exclude all doubt. He would begin, in other words, with 
unquestionable, self-evident truths. The next principle of his method was to 
break down larger problems into smaller ones; he would proceed from the 
simple to the complex. Then he would write out the steps of his reasoning 
and review them so thoroughly that nothing would be inadvertently assumed 
or necessary arguments omitted. These four principles are the core of his 
method. 
However, he first had to find those simple, clear, and distinct truths which 
would play the part in his philosophy that axioms play in mathematics proper. 
And here Descartes took a backward step. Whereas his age was turning to 
experience as the reliable source of knowledge, Descartes looked into his mind. 
After much critical reflection he decided that he was sure of the following 
truths: (a) I think, therefore I am. (b) Each phenomenon must have a cause. 
(c) An effect cannot be greater than the cause. (d) The mind has within it 
the ideas of perfection, space, time, and motion. 
He then proceeded to reason on the basis of these axioms. The full story 
of his search for method and of the application of the method to actual prob­
lems of philosophy is presented in his famous Discourse 071 Method (1637). 
In later writings he continued to follow the procedure outlined in this work 
and thereby founded the first great modern system of philosophy. What is 
relevant at the moment is that the truths of mathematics and mathematical 
method served as a beacon to a great thinker lost in the intellectual storms of 
the seventeenth century and enabled him to develop a philosophy which was 
more rational, less mystical, and less bound to theology than the systems 
produced by all his European predecessors. 

THE NEED FOR NEW METHODS IN GEOMETRY 
253 
To show what his new method could accomplish in fields outside of phi­
losophy, Descartes applied it to geometry and published these results in his 
Geometry, an appendix to his Discourse on Method. But before we examine 
how Descartes revolutionized method in geometry, we must note another 
great seventeenth-century thinker, Pierre de Fermat, who, equally concerned 
with improving geometrical methods, independently arrived at the same broad 
idea. 
In contrast to Descartes' adventurous, romantic, and purposive life Fennat's 
was highly conventional. He was born in 1601 to a French leather merchant. 
After studying law at Toulouse, he earned his living as a lawyer and served 
as King's councillor for the parliament of Toulouse, a position much like that 
of a modern district attorney. Fermat's home life was also quite ordinary. 
He married and brought up five ·children. His evenings he devoted to study. 
Whereas Descartes cared little for knowledge as such or for the beauty and 
harmony in mathematics and the arts but sought truths and useful knowledge, 
Fermat was faithful to the Greek ideals of speculative knowledge and intel­
lectual pleasures. He was a student of Greek literature, wrote poetry, joined 
in the solution of the scientific problems of his day, and above all regaled him­
self in all branches of mathematics. Despite the brief amount of time he could 
devote to study, he made fundamental contributions to algebra, the calculus, 
the mathematical theory of probability, coordinate geometry, and the theory 
of numbers. Fermat's mathematical achievements entitle him to the honor of 
being considered one of the best mathematicians the world has had. 
12-2 THE NEED FDR NEW METHODS IN GEOMETRY 
Descartes and Fermat developed a new approach to geometry, specifically, an 
algebraic method of representing and analyzing curves. Why were the mathe­
maticians of the seventeenth century so much concerned with ways of work­
ing with curves? The general reason is that the rise of science and the vast 
expansion of commercial and industrial activities had raised problems involving 
curves. Let us see what these problems were. 
The heliocentric theory of Copernicus and Kepler, which we shall ex­
amine in Chapter IS, won gradual acceptance during the seventeenth century, 
and scientists and mathematicians, at least, began to apply it intensively to the 
purely scientific problem of understanding the heavenly motions and to the 
more practical concerns, such as navigation, wherein astronomical knowledge 
was essential. Now the heliocentric theory called for the use of ellipses and, 
to some extent, of parabolas and hyperbolas. Many new facts about these 
curves were needed. 
In the seventeenth century the idea that a ship's longitude could be de­
termined most easily and accurately by means of a clock was actively pursued. 
The precise details of this method of determining longitude do not matter at 

254 
COORDINATE GEOMETRY 
the moment, but it is relevant that there were no clocks at that time which 
could be carried conveniently aboard ships. The adaptation of a spring and 
a pendulum to a clock was initiated by several scientists, notably Galileo 
Galilei, Robert Hooke, and Christian Huygens. The motion of the bob of a 
pendulum and of objects suspended from springs (see Chapter 18) is studied 
by the use of curves. 
The very motion of ships at sea raised problems involving curves. Al­
though the ideal path of a ship on a spherical surface is a great circle, the 
actual path cannot always be that since ships must obviously detour around 
land. Moreover, on maps the ideal and actual paths have to be represented 
by even more complicated curves whose shapes depend on the method of 
projection used to draw the flat map. 
The increased interest in light raised numerous problems involving curves. 
When light travels long distances through the earth's atmosphere, it is grad­
ually bent or refracted and hence follows a curved path (see Chapter 1 and 
Section 6 of Chapter 7). Since observations of the positions of heavenly bodies 
may be in error because the path of light is curved, it is obviously necessary to 
know something about these curved paths to correct our observations. A 
knowledge of curves was needed to design lenses used in telescopes and micro­
scopes. Both of these instruments had been invented in the early part of the 
seventeenth century and attracted considerable attention. Lenses for spectacles 
had by this time been in use for 300 years, but improvement in design was a 
constant problem. Both Descartes and Fermat were very much interested in 
optics, and Descartes in particular did a great deal of work on the design of 
lenses. A good part of his findings are contained in the essay Dioptrics which, 
incidentally, appeared with the Geometry as one of three appendices to his 
Discourse on Method. Fermat, too, was a notable contributor to optics; his 
principle of least time, which we described earlier (Chapter 7), still stands as 
a basic postulate in that subject. 
Another class of problems calling for the study of curves was presented 
by the increasing use of cannons. The balls or shells shot from cannons are 
called projectiles, and a number of questions were raised concerning their 
motion. What paths or curves do projectiles follow? How do the paths de­
pend upon the angle at which the cannon is inclined? What is the range or 
horizontal distance traveled by the projectile) And how is the path affected 
by the initial velocity imparted to the ball? 
The motion of projectiles was but one of a wider class of problems in­
volving motion. As we shall note more fully in a later chapter, the motion 
of objects on and near the surface of the earth became an active concern in 
the early seventeenth century because the heliocentric theory raised basic 
problems in this domain. Since all such motions take place along straight-line 
or curved paths, these more fundamental problems of motion also led to the 
study of curves. 

THE NEED FOR NEW METHODS IN GEOMETRY 
255 
Of course, this study was not new to mathematics. The Greeks had 
studied extensively the line, circle, and conic sections and had deduced hun­
dreds of theorems about these curves. These contributions were known to 
seventeenth-century Europe. Why, then, did Fermat and Descartes decide 
that mathematics needed new methods of working with curves? The reason 
was stated by Descartes. He complained that Greek geometry was so much 
tied to figures "that it can exercise the understanding only on condition of 
greatly fatiguing the imagination." Descartes also deplored that the methods 
of Euclidean geometry were exceedingly diverse and specialized and did not 
allow for general applicability. Each theorem required a new type of proof, 
and much imagination, effort, and ingenuity had to be expended to find such 
proofs. The Greeks, with ample time at their disposal and no concern for 
immediate application, were not troubled by the lack of general procedures. 
However, these conditions no longer obtained in the seventeenth century. 
J\1oreover, new curves were needed for the applications which were of im­
portance to the seventeenth century, and the Greek geometrical methods did 
not seem to be effective in these cases. 
There is another limitation inherent in Greek geometry which the seven­
teenth century could no longer tolerate. One might indeed determine by 
some geometrical argument what type of curve a projectile shot from a can­
non follows and one might prove some geometrical facts about this curve, but 
geometry could never answer such questions as how high the projectile would 
go or how far from the starting point it would land. The seventeenth century 
sought quantitative or numerical information because such data are paramount 
in practical applications. 
It was clear ro Descartes and Fermat that entirely new methods of work­
ing with curves were needed. Descartes, impatient with the methods of the 
Greeks and their disinterest in application, says, 
I have resolved to quit only abstract geometry, that is to say, the consideration 
of questions which serve only to exercise the mind, and this, in order to study 
another kind of geometry, which has for its object the explanation of the 
phenomena of nature. 
Both Descartes and Fermat, working independently of each other, saw 
clearly the potentialities of algebra for the representation and study of curves. 
This realization was not entirely a bolt from the blue. A great deal of progress 
had been made in algebra during the latter half of the sixteenth and the early 
part of the seventeenth century, much of it contributed by Descartes and 
Fermat themselves. Cardan, Tartaglia, Vieta, Descartes, and Fermat had ex­
tended the theory of the solution of equations (d. Chapter 5), had introduced 
symbolism, and had established a number of algebraic theorems and methods. 
What impressed Descartes especially was that algebra enables man to reason 
efficiently. It mechanizes thought, and hence produces almost automatically 

256 
COORDINATE GEOMETRY 
results that may otherwise be difficult to establish. This value of algebra has 
already been pointed out earlier in this book, but historically it was Descartes 
who clearly perceived and called attention to this feature. Whereas geometry 
contained the truth about the universe, algebra offered the science of method. 
It is, incidentally, somewhat paradoxical that great thinkers should be enamored 
of ideas which mechanize thought. Of course, their goal is to get at more 
difficult problems, as indeed they do. 
EXERCISES 
I .  How did mathematics help Descanes build his philosophy? 
2. What were the four steps of mathematical method emphasized by Descartes? 
3. Why did Descartes and Fennat seek a new method of deriving properties of 
curves? 
4. What scientific prob1ems of the seventeenth century required more know1edge 
about curves? 
12-3 THE CONCEPTS OF EQUATION AND CURVE 
We can understand more readily what Descartes and Fermat accomplished if 
we examine a somewhat modernized version of their idea. In his general study 
of methodology, Descartes had decided to solve problems by proceeding from 
the simple to the complex. Now the simplest figure in geometry is the straight 
line, and so Descartes sought to analyze curves by working with straight lines. 
He observed, first of all, that if one introduces (Fig. 12-1) a horizontal line, 
OX, then the shape of a curve C could be studied by observing how vertical 
line segments such as O'PI> 02P2, O,P" . . .  changed in length. 
y 
PI -
/" 
5 
3 
0 
QI 
P2 
r--
Q2 
P, 
P3/ 
Q3 
Q, 
C 
X 
Fig. 12-1 
The next step was to express this information in arithmetical terms. The 
position of 0" for example, could be specified by stating its distance from 
a fixed point 0, called the origin, on the horizontal line. The length O,P, 
could certainly be specified by a number. Thus the position of P, would be 
determined by two numbers, the length 00, and the length O,P,. The length 
OQ" which is 3 in Fig. 12-1, is called the abscissa of PI> and the length P,O" 

THE CONCEPTS OF EQUATION AND CURVE 
257 
which is 5 in Fig. 12-1, is called the ordinate. The line OX is called the X-axis, 
and the line OY, which is perpendicular to OX and which shows the direction 
in which Q,P, is taken, is called the Y-axis. 
Stated in more general terms, Descartes' and Fermat's first step was to 
describe the position of any point P on a curve by two numbers, an abscissa 
and an ordinate. The first expresses the distance or length from 0 along the 
X-axis to the point Q directly below P, and the second denotes the distance 
or length from Q to P along a line perpendicular to the X -axis or parallel to 
the Y-axis. The pair of numbers is called the coordinates of P and is written 
thus: (3, 5). 
y 
R 
5 
_-+_-",3-.,+-..;3,---,-__ X 
o 
-4 
-4 
s 
T 
Fig. 12-2. 
Plotting points on a 
rectangular Cartesian 
coordinate system. 
To distinguish points which are reached by proceeding along the X-axis 
to the right of 0 from those which are reached by proceeding to the left of 
0, distances to the left are represented by negative numbers. Thus to arrive 
at the point R of Fig. 12-2 one proceeds 3 units to the left along the X-axis 
and 5 units upward in the direction of the Y-axis. The coordinates of R are 
therefore -3 and 5 and are represented as ( - 3, 5). The distinction between 
upward and downward is also made by using positive and negative numbers, 
and as a consequence the coordinates of S in Fig. 12-2 are -3 and -4, and the 
coordinates of T are 3 and -4. 
Thus far, then, Descartes and Fermat had a simple scheme for representing 
the position of any point in the plane by means of numbers, these numbers 
being distances from two arbitrarily chosen but fixed axes. To each point 
there corresponds a pair of numbers, and to each pair of numbers a unique 
point. The system using axes and coordinates to represent points is called a 
rectangular Cartesian coordinate system. 
To represent a curve such as C of Fig. 12-1, one could list the coordinates 
of the many points on the curve, that is, the coordinates of Ph P2, Pa, . . .  
But such a representation would hardly be convenient, for each curve consists 
of an infinite number of points. Descartes and Fermat had a better idea. First 
of all they introduced the lette" x and y to stand for the coordinates of any 

258 
CooRDINATF. GEOMETRY 
one of the points on the curve. When x and y have specific numerical values, 
for example, 2 and 3, respectively, then they refer, of course, to a definite 
point. Otherwise they represent an arbitrary point. The use of x and y here 
is analogous to using the words "man" and "woman" to represent any man or 
woman in the United States, whereas John and Mary would describe a par­
ticular couple. 
y 
c 
y 
--o-X--L--------X 
Fig. 12-3 
Now, if one looks at the curve C of Fig. 12-3 and observes the abscissas 
and ordinates of the points on this curve, he notices that as the abscissas in­
crease <as one looks from left to right), the corresponding ordinates at first 
increase and then decrease. The behavior of the ordinates changes as the 
abscissas change. Might it not be possible to describe the relationship between 
these abscissas and ordinates by specifying how large any ordinate is when 
the corresponding abscissa is named? This description should hold for all 
points on the curve and apply to that curve and no other. The answer is yes, 
and the general description turns out to be an algebraic equation involving 
x and y, the coordinates of an arbitrary point. This statement is a bit vaguej 
let us see, therefore what it means in concrete examples. 
Suppose, first, that the curve happens to be a straight line inclined 45' to 
the horizontal.' To describe the line algebraically, we introduce a horizontal 
line which passes through any point 0 of the given line (Fig. 12-4) and con­
sider this horizontal line as the X-axis of our coordinate system. The Y-axis 
is then a vertical line through O. Consider any point P on the line. The 
coordinates of this general point P are the x and y shown in the figure. Now 
Euclidean geometry tells us that the triangle OOP is an isosceles right triangle. 
Hence 00 = OP or x = y. Therefore the line OP appears to be characterized 
by the algebraic equation 
y = x  
(I) 
because for any point P on the line, the coordinates are such that y = x . 
• In coordinate geometry and in higher mathematics, in general, the word "curve" 
includes straight lines. 

P' 
Fig. 12-4. 
THE CONCEPTS OF EQUATION AND CURVE 
259 
--'-4-+-x 
Fig. 12-5. 
A straight line on a rectangular Cartesian 
coordinate system. 
A straight line of slope 3 on a rectangular 
Cartesian coordinate system. 
We should note that this equation also describes points, such as P', which 
lie to the left of the vertical axis. Thus, for example, the abscissa of P' may 
be -4; now angle Q'OP' is also 45', and hence the ordinate of P' must also be 
-4. Since abscissa and ordinate arc equal, x = y also holds for P'. Then the 
all-important fact about the line P'P is that it may be described algebraically 
by the equation y = x. In other words, we may say that the coordinates of any 
point on the line satisfy the equation y = x. On the other hand, points not on 
that line, such as R, will have ordinates unequal to the abscissas because. while 
R has the <arne abscissa as P, the ordinate of R is larger than the ordinate of P, 
and hence for R, y does not equal x. 
Let us consider a second example. One may describe the line of Fig. 12-4 
by saying that it rises one unit for each unit of horizontal distance or, in the 
customary expression, that it has slope 1. We now consider a line which rises 
more steeply, for example, one which rises 3 units for each horizontal distance 
of 1 unit (Fig. 12-5). Again let P be any point on the line. The coordinates 
of this general point P are then (x, y). Then from the similar triangles OQ'P' 
and OQP we may argue that 
Hence 
is the equation of the line. 
y 
1 
-
= 
_
. 
x 
1 
y = lx 
(2) 
The nature of equations such as y = x and y = 3x requirp.s some attention. 
In elementary algebra we also treat equations, for example, :Ii' - 5x + 6 = 0 

260 
COORDINATE GEOMETRY 
or 2x + 3 = 7. In these latter equations, however, x represents some definite 
but unknown quantity and our aim is to find the value or values of x. On 
the other hand, when we represent a curve by an equation such as y = 3x, 
we are not seeking to determine unknowns. In fact, x and y are not unknown. 
They represent the coordinates of any point on the line. Thus x = 3 and y = 9 
are one pair of values satisfying the equation; x = 4  and y = 12 constitute 
another such pair; there are millions of others. The end product of the process 
of finding the equation of a curve is then an equation involving x and y which 
states the relationship between x and y peculiar to all points on the curve. Of 
course, if one wishes to find the coordinates of a particular point on the curve, 
he can, provided he knows the abscissa of the point, substitute this number for 
x in the equation and now solve for the ordinate. Thus, if the given line has 
the equation y = 3x and we wish to determine the ordinate of the point whose 
abscissa is 21, we substitute 2i for x and immediately find that the ordinate of 
this point is 7 i. 
Let us cons:der next another example which will enlarge our understanding 
of these new equations. Suppose we are given two straight lines as shown in 
Fig. 12-6. The line 01' is the one we have just discussed and its equation is 
y = 3x. The line 0'1" is supposed to be parallel to 01' and 2 units above it; 
that is, 1'1" is 2. What is the equation of the line 0'1''1 
To answer this question, we again seek the relation between x and y which 
holds for any point on this line. Now l' and 1" have the same x-value or 
abscissa, namely OQ. But the ordinato of 1" is larger than that of l' by the 
amount pP'. The distance PP' is given to be 2. Since the two lines are parallel, 
the vertical distance between a point on 01' and a point on 0'1" will always be 
2. Hence, whereas the ordinate of each point on the line 01' is always 3 times 
the abscissa, the ordinate of each point on 0'1" will be 3 times the abscissa 
plus 2. That is, the equation of O'P' is 
y = 3x + 2. 
(3) 
We should note that although the straight line 0'1" is identical except 
for position with the straight line 01', its equation is different. The differ­
ence results from the fact that 01' passes through the origin 0 of the system 
of coordinates, wheieas Q'P' does not. Hence the very same curve may be 
represented by a different equation if its position with respect to the coordinate 
axes is changed. 
Why do we bother with different equations for the same curve' If a 
straight line having a slope of 3 can always be placed on a coordinate system 
so that its equation is y = 3x, why do we have to consider the more compli­
cated form y = 3x + 2? The answer is that if one wishes to work with two 
straight lines simultaneously and keep these lines in the same relative positions 
which they may happen to have in some physical application, one cannot assign 
to them an identical position on the set of axes. 

THE CONCEPTS OF EQUATION AND CURVE 
261 
Fig. 12-6. 
Two parallel lines of slope 3 on a 
rectangular Cartesian coordinate system. 
p 
y 
--;,-o-:-'--1t"-- X 
Fig. 12-7. 
A line with negative slope. 
While we are discussing equations of straight lines, we wish to note one 
more case which will be of interest later. Let us compare the line OP of Fig. 12-7 
with the line OP of Fig. 12-5. The line in Fig. 12-7 may be said to "fall" 
as one views it from left to right, whereas that in Fig. 12-5 rises. Alternatively, 
we may say that the ordinates in Fig. 12-7 decrease as the abscissas increase. 
What is the equation of the line OP of Fig. 12-7? Suppose that the coordinates 
of some point P' on the line are (- 1, l). The point P is an arbitrary point of 
the line OP, so let us denote its coordinates by x and y. Again we have the 
similar triangles OQP and OQ'P'. Insofar as mere lengths, without regard to 
sign, are concerned, we can say that 
! = 1 
x 
However, we know that for the line OP, the ordinate of any point is always 
opposite in sign to the abscissa of that point. That is, when y is a positive 
number, x is a negative one and conversely. Hence, in the present case, not 
y = lx, but 
y = - lx 
(4) 
is the equation of the line OP. Thus the fact that OP falls to the right is 
reflected in the negative sign of the coefficient of x. To distinguish, with 
respect to slope, lines which fall to the right from those which rise to the 

262 
COORDINATE GEOMETRY 
right, we say that the former have negative slope. Thus the slope of OP 
is - 3. 
To illustrate Descartes' and Fermat's idea once more we shall seek the 
equation of a circle. Suppose that we choose our axes so that the origin is 
at the center of the circle (Fig. 12-8). Now the circle is defined to be the 
collection of all points which are at the same distance from one point, called 
the center. Let us assume that this distance is 5 units. (The quantity 5 is, of 
course, the length of the radius.) Since each point on the circle is described by 
a pair of coordinates, the problem of finding the algebraic equation of this 
circle can be solved by answering the following question. What property or 
relationship do the coordinates of points on the circle possess which dis­
tinguishes them from those of other points? If we consider a typical point P 
on the circle and let x and y represent its two coordinates, then we see that the 
lengths x, y, and 5 form a right triangle. According to the Pythagorean theo­
rem of Euclidean geometry, the square of OP must equal the square of OQ plus 
the square of QP; hence 
x2 + y2 
= 52. 
(5) 
This same statement also holds for points on the circle such as P', for even 
though the coordinates of P' are negative, their squares are positive and so 
satisfy equation (5). Equation (5) is the algebraic representation of the circle. 
It says in words that the square of the abscissa of any point on the curve plus 
the square of the ordinate equals the square of the radius. 
y 
--+---µo'f-"--cQL---1--X 
P' 
Fig. 12-8. 
A circle on a rectangular 
Cartesian coordinate 
system. 
To decide algebraically whether any point belongs to the circle repre­
sented by equation (5), we have to test whether the coordinates of the point 
satisfy the equation. Thus the point whose abscissa is 3 and whose ordinate is 
4 belongs to the circle under discussion because, substituting 3 for x and 4 for 
y in equation (5), we see that the resulting left side equals the right side, that 
is, 32 + 42 
= 52. As another example, let us consider the point whose abscissa 

THE CONCEPTS OF EQUATION AND CURVE 
263 
is 2 and whose ordinate is y'IT. Again, substituting 2 for x and y'IT for y in 
equation (5), we find that 
2' + (vIzl)' = 25, 
becallse the square of y'IT is 21. Thus the point whose coordinates are 
(2, y'IT) lies on the circle. 
EXERCISES 
l. What is meant by the coordinates of a point? 
2. State in your own words what the equation of a curve is. 
3. Find the equation of the straight line which 
a) rises 2 units for each horizontal distance of one unit and passes through the 
origin of the coordinate system chosen; 
b) makes an angle of 300 with the X-axis and passes through the origin [Sug­
gestion: tan 30· = 1/v'l.l; 
c) falls 4 units for each unit of horizontal distance traversed and passes through 
the origin; 
d) passes through the origin and has slope 4; 
e) passes through the origin and has slope -4. 
4. Find the coordinates of one point which lies on the curve whose equation is 
a) , + 2y = 71; 
b) " + y' = 36. 
5. Does the point whose coordinates are (-3, 5) lie on the curve whose equation 
is X2 + 2y2 = 59? 
6. Detennine whether the point whose coordinates are (3, -2) lies on the curve 
whose equation is X2 + y2 = 4x + 1. 
7. Describe the curve whose equation is 
a) y = 3, + 7, 
d) , + 2y = 6, 
b) " + y' = 49, 
e) y' = 20 - x'. 
c) " + y' = 20, 
8. Would latitude and longitude serve as a coordinate system for points on the 
surface of the earth? 
9. Can a curve have more than one equation? If so, how is this possible? 
to. Can you say anything about the slope of the line whose equation is y = mx + 2? 
I I. What are the coordinates of the point of intersection of the line y = 3x + 7 and 
the Y-axis? 
12. What are the coordinates of the point of intersection of the line y = 3x + b and 
the Y-axis? 
13. What is the slope of the line whose equation is y = 111X + b, and what are the 
coordinates of the point where the line cuts the Y-axis? 

264 
CORDINATE GEOMETRY 
14. The equation of a circle with center at the origin and radius 1 is 
.' + y' = 1. 
<a) 
The equation of a circle with center at the origin and radius 2 is 
.' + y' = 4. 
<b) 
If we subtract equation (a) from equation (b), we obtain the result 0= 3. What 
is wrong? 
y 
p 
y - 3 
F 
y 
(0, 3) ŕ--Ŗ---Y 
3 
------7o89x----x 
3 
3 
Q 
d 
D 
12-4 THE PARABOLA 
Fig. 12-9. 
A parabola on a rectangular 
Cartesian coordinate system. 
The curve most widely used, next to the straight line and circle, is the 
parabola. Let us see how this curve is represented algebraically. Recalling the 
definition of the parabola given in Chapter 6, we start with a fixed line d, 
called the directrix, and a fixed point F (Fig. 12-9), called the focus. We now 
consider all points each of which is equidistant from d and F. This set of points 
is called a parabola. Thus if P is a typical point on the parabola determined by 
d and F, then the distance from P to F must equal the distance from P to ':, 
that is 
PF = PD. 
(6) 
To obtain the equation of this curve, we first introduce a set of coordinate 
axes. We know from the discussion of the straight line that the same curve 
may have different equations, depending upon how one chooses the axes in 
relation to the curve. Mathematicians have learned by experience that a simple 
equation results if the axes are chosen in the following way (see Fig. 12-9). 
Let the Y-axis be the line through F and perpendicular to d. The X-axis, 
which is, of course, perpendicular to the Y-axis, is drawn halfway between 
F and d. 
Since the point F and the line d are fixed, the distance from F to d, namely 
FQ, is fixed. Let us suppose that this distance is 6 units. Then the distance 
OF is J units, and the distance OQ is also J units because the X-axis is halfway 

THE PARABOLA 
265 
between F and d. Then the coordinates of F are (0, 3). We now wish to 
express equation (6) in algebraic tenns. Let P be any point on the parabola. 
Then its coordinates are (x, y). We see that PF is the hypotenuse of a right 
triangle whose sides are x and y - 3. Hence, by the Pythagorean theorem, 
PF = vx' + (y 
3)'. 
The perpendicular distance from P to d is y + 3. Thus, in algebraic terms, 
equation (6) states that 
yx' + (y - 3)' = y + 3. 
(7) 
Equation (7) is the equation of the parabola. 
Next we shall perform some algebraic manipulations to simplify the form 
of this equation. We begin by squaring both sides of the equation, an 
operation which amounts to multiplying equals by equals. Squaring the left 
side removes the radical, and squaring the right side yields y' + 6y + 9. 
Hence we now have 
x' + (y - 3) ' = y' + 6y + 9. 
We now write out in full the square called for on the left side and obtain 
x' + y' - 6y + 9 = y' + 6y + 9. 
Subtracting y' and 9 from both sides yields 
x' 
- 6y 
= 6y. 
We add 6y to both sides and obtain x' 
­ 12y or, as we prefer to write it, 
12y = x'. 
Dividing both sides by 12, we obtain 
_ 
1 
, 
Y 
- T2X ' 
(8) 
This equation is much simpler than (7) and yet expresses the same fact. 
We might note incidentally that the number 12 in the denominator is 
twice the distance from F to d. Had we called this distance a, the resulting 
equation would have read 
I 
, 
Y = - x .  
2a 
(9) 
In Fig. 12-9 we drew a curve which resembles a parabola, but we did not 
know at the time its position in relation to the axes we chose. To obtain a 

266 
COORDINATE GEOMETRY 
y 
(-5, p,) 
----"o:i-""--- X 
y 
d 
3 
-
-
----:;³ȇ:::-
-
-
- X 
o 
(0, -3) F 
Fig. 12-11. 
A parabola with focus below the 
directrix. 
Fig. 12-10 
y 
d 
F 
--+-'+-§--- X 
(3, 0) 
Fig. 12-12. 
A parabola with focus to the right of the 
directrix. 
rough idea of this posltlon, let us substitute into equation (8) any pOSItive 
value of x, say 5. Then y œH. This tells us that (5, H) is a point on the 
curve (Fig. 12-10). But if we substitute -5 for x, we obtain the same result 
for y. Thus ( -5, H) is another point on the curve. These two points are 
symmetrically situated with respect to the Y-axis. Moreover, no matter which 
abscissa and ordinate we calculate, the negative of that abscissa will always 
yield the same ordinate because the abscissa has to be squared. This means that 
to each point on the curve to the right of the Y-axis there corresponds a point 
symmetrically situated to the left of the Y-axis. Hence, once we have deter­
mined the shape of the curve to the right of the Y-axis, we automatically 
know what the curve looks like to the left. 
If we are interested only in the shape of the curve, it is now sufficient to 
observe that as x increases from zero to any value, x2 increases, and r/12 
also increases. This means that the points on the curve move out and 
up from the origin. Of course, there are many curves that meet this descrip­
tion. To obtain a more precise picture of the curve we need to calculate a few 
sets of coordinates. Thus, when x ¯ J, Y Ŕ.,;, so that (3, U are the coor­
dinates of a point on the curve. We should note, too, that the curve lies 
entirely above the X-axis except, of course, for the point at the origin. because 
for every value of x, y is zero or positive. 

THE PARABOLA 
267 
In work involving parabolas and their equations it is sometimes convenient 
to consider one whose focus lies below the directrix. If we now choose the 
axes as shown in Fig. 12-1 1, what is the equation of the parabola? We could, 
of course, obtain the answer by going through steps analogous to those con­
tained in equations (6) through (8). However, there is no need to do so since 
Figs. 12-9 and 12-1 1 differ only in the sign of the y-values: whereas the y­
values in the former are positive, the y-values in the latter must be negative. 
Hence the equation of the parabola in Fig. 12-11 is 
y = _n-X2. 
(10) 
Let us consider Fig. 12-11, but suppose now that distances downward on 
the Y-axis are chosen to be positive. How does this change affect the equation 
of the parabola? The suggested situation does not really differ from that shown 
in Fig. 12-9. If we imagine this whole figure rotated about the X-axis through 
180°, that is through half a rotation, we obtain the situation we have just 
proposed. Since the position of the curve in relation to the X- and Y-axes is 
exactly the same in Fig. 12-11 as in Fig. 12-9, the parabola has the equation 
y = n-X2. 
(11 ) 
Let us consider one more variation. Suppose that directrix and focus 
happen to lie as in Fig. 12-12. We choose the X- and Y-axes as shown, with 
the Y-axis halfway between focus and directrix. The upward direction on the 
Y-axis is positive. What is the equation of the parabola determined by this 
choice of focus, directrix, and axes? To answer this question we have but to 
compare Figs. 12-9 and 12-12. The X-axis in Fig. 12-9 plays the role of the 
Y-axis in Fig. 12-12, and the Y-axis in Fig. 12-9 plays the role of the X-axis 
in Fig. 12-12; in other words, the roles of abscissa and ordinate are exchanged. 
Hence the equation of the parabola in Fig. 12-12 is 
(12) 
These last few equations illustrate some of the various forms which the 
equation of the parabola can take. Which of these one should use is a matter 
of convenience in application, as we shall see in later chapters. 
EXERCISES 
1. Determine the shapes of the following parabolas by choosing a number of values 
of x, calculating the corresponding values of y, and plotting the points whose 
coordinates are thereby determined. 
a) y = 3x2 
e) x = !y2 
b) Y = J\x2 
f) Zx = y2 
c) y = _lx2 
d) x = Zy2 

268 
COORDINATE GEOMETRY 
y 
d 
_
_
_ őFŒ-1,",3'-1_ X 
o 
Fig. 12-13 
Fig. 12-15 
Fig. 12-14 
2. Compare the curves of Exercises l(a) and l(b). 
y 
y 
3. For the parabola shown in Fig. 12-13, the distance from focus to directrix is 6. 
What is the equation of the parabola? 
4. If the equation of a parabola is y = ir, what are the coordinates of the focus? 
Describe the position of the directrix. 
5. The following exercises specify the position of focus and directrix of a parabola 
in relation to a coordinate system. Find the equation of the parabola. 
a) Focus (0, 4); directrix parallel to, and 4 units below, the X-axis. 
b) Focus (0, 6); directrix parallel to, and 6 units below, the X-axis. 
c) Focus (0, -5); directrix parallel to, and 5 units above, the X-axis. 
d) Focus (4, 0); directrix parallel to, and 4 units to the left of, the Y-axis. 
6. Suppose that the designer of a bridge has decided to use the parabolic cable 
y = x2 for the range x = -5 to x = 5  (Fig. 12-14). The roadbed of the bridge is 
to be the X-axis. Compute the lengths of straight wire needed to suspend the 
roadbed from the cable at X =  I, 2, 3, 4, and 5. 
7. Suppose that the designer of a bridge has decided to use the parabolic cable 
y = x2 for the range x = -5 to x = 5  (Fig. 12-15). The roadbed is to have the 
shape y = -ToX2. Compute the length of straight wire needed to suspend the 
roadbed from the cable at X =  I, 2, 3, 4, and 5. 

FINDING A CURVE FROM ITS EQUATION 
269 
12-5 FINDING A CURVE FROM ITS EQUATION 
The great merit of the idea conceived by Fermat and Descartes is that it 
permits us to represent a curve algebraically and, as we shan see later, learn 
much about the curve by working with the equation. But another value of 
their idea, hardly secondary in importance, is that any equation in x and y 
determines a curve. Hence by merely writing down any equation we please 
and by finding out what curve belongs to the equation we can discover many 
new curves. Although we shall not, at this time, make any sensational discov­
eries, let us see how the process of determining the curve of an equation can 
be carried out. 
Suppose we consider the equation 
y = x2 - 6x 
(Il) 
and try to determine the curve which has this equation. A direct method 
would be to calculate coordinates of points on the curve and then plot these 
points. Thus, when x = 2, Y = -8, and so (2, -8) are the coordinates of a 
point on the curve. By calculating many such sets of coordinates and by 
plotting the corresponding points one can determine the shape of the curve. 
However, one often learns more by applying a little algebra. 
If equation ( 1 3 )  had been y = x2, we would know at once by comparing 
with equation (9) that it is a parabola with distance from focus to directrix 
equal to t. Let us see whether a little algebraic juggling with equation ( 1 3 )  
might bring it into a form which will permit us to identify the curve. By 
adding 9 to both sides of equation ( 1 3 )  we obtain 
y + 9 = x2 - 6x + 9. 
Now our knowledge of algebra tells us 
that the right side is (x - 3 )2. Hence we 
have 
y + 9 = (x - 3)2. 
(14) 
Suppose we introduce new letters x' and 
y' such that 
x' = x - 3 
and 
y' = y + 9. 
(15) 
Then substitution in equation (14) yields 
y' = x,2. 
( 1 6) 
Y 
Y' 
p 
4-+on-----r-x 
9 
-------40123--------x, 
3 
0' 
Fig. 12-16 
The curve corresponding to this equation is the parabola shown in 
Fig. 12-16, where it is graphed with respect to the X'- and Y'-axes. Of course, 
we wish to find the curve corresponding to equation ( 1 3), not that described 
by (16). However, equations ( 1 5) provide the necessary connection. The 

270 
COORDINATE GEOMETRY 
equation x' = x  - 3, or x =  3 + x', tells us that the abscissas x of points be­
longing to (13) should be 3 more than the abscissas x' of points belonging to 
(16). How can we increase by 3 the abscissas of each point in Fig. 12-16? 
The answer is simple. We draw a new Y-axis 3 units to the left of the 
Y' -axis. Then the x-value of a typical point such as P is 3 units more than 
its x'-value. We now use the second equation in (15), that is, y' = y + 9, 
or y = y' - 9. This equation says that the y-values of points should be 9 
units less than the y' -values. How can we reduce by 9 the ordinates of the 
curve in Fig. 12-16? We have already indicated the essential trick. We intro­
duce a new X-axis 9 units above the X'-axis. Now the y-value of P is 9 units 
less than the y'-value. Hence with respect to the X- and Y-axes, the points of 
the parabola y' = x" have the correct x- and y-values called for by equation 
( 1 3). Since we did not change the curve in any way by introducing the X­
and Y-axes, but merely changed the axes, the curve of equation (13) is a 
parabola placed with respect to the X- and Y-axes as shown in Fig. 12-16. 
We were a bit lucky in analyzing equation (13) because the introduction 
of new coordinates in equation (15) reduced equation (I3) to equation (16) 
whose curve we already knew. If this change to a familiar form is not 
possible, then the initial equation may indeed represent some new curve, 
and by analyzing the equation we might get to know the properties of this 
new curve. The results of such studies would be a further addition to the 
stock of knowledge about equations and their corresponding curves, a type 
of knowledge which the professional mathematician builds up for his work 
just as a writer may build up a bigger and bigger vocabulary. Thus through 
the notion of equation and curve, Fermat and Descartes opened up to 
mathematicians a vast variety of new curves. 
EXERCISES 
1. For equation (13) of the text calculate the coordinates of a number of points on 
the curve and plot the points. Then sketch in the curve. Does your graph look 
like the one in Fig. 12-16? 
2. Determine the curve whose equation is y = x2 - lOx. 
3. Determine the curve whose equation is y = _x2 + 6x. [Suggestion: Note that 
the given equation is the same as -y = x2 - 6x and use the results obtained for 
equation (13) of the text.] 
4. Sketch the curve whose equation is y = -x2 + 6x by finding and plotting the 
coordinates of a number of points on the curve. 
S. Knowing the curve which corresponds to y = x2 - 6x, can you determine the 
curve which corresponds to y = x2 - 6x + 9? 
6. What does one mean by the statement that a curve can be associated with any 
equation in x and y? 

7. Sketch the curves whose equations are given below. 
a) y = x3 
b) y = x3 + 9 
THE ELLIPSE 
271 
I 
c) y = ­x 
Does the sketch of part (c) suggest one of the conic sections? 
12-6 THE ELLIPSE 
Another very widely used curve is the ellipse. Let us review the definition 
given in Chapter 6. We start with two fixed points, F and F', called foci, and 
a constant quantity which is greater than the distance FF'. We now consider 
all points, the sum of whose distances from F and F' is the constant quantity. 
This set of points is called an ellipse. To be more concrete, suppose that the 
distance FF' is 6 and that the constant quantity is 10. If P is a point such that 
PF + PF' is 10, then P is a point on the ellipse. 
y 
p 
1---;3===3FX 
F' 
0 \ 
x 
Fig. 12-17. 
An ellipse on a rectangular 
Cartesian coordinate system. 
From the standpoint of coordinate geometry, the first thing of interest 
about the ellipse is its equation. Let us see whether we can find it. As in 
the case of the parabola, experience has taught mathematicians that the result­
ing equation will be simplest if the line FF' (Fig. 12-17) is chosen as the 
X-axis and the Y-axis is chosen to be the line perpendicular to the X-axis and 
halfway between F and F'. Let us consider the ellipse for which the length FF' 
is 6 units. Then the coordinates of F are (3, 0) and those of F' are (-3, 0). 
Now let P be any point on the curve and let us denote its coordinates by 
(x, y). If the constant quantity which determines the ellipse is 10, then the 
condition which any point P on the ellipse satisfies is 
PF + PF' = 10. 
(17) 
We wish to express this condition algebraically. The procedure IS straight-

272 
CORDlN ATE GEOMETRY 
forward. The distance PF is the hypotenuse of the right triangle PQF whose 
arms are x - 3 and y. Hence PFp V(x 
3)' + y'. The distance PF' is the 
hypotenuse of the right triangle PQF' whose arms are x + 3 and y. Hence 
PF' p V(x + 3)' + y'. Thus equation (17) amounts to 
v(x - 3)2 + y2 + v(x + 3)2 + y2 = 10. 
(18) 
We are now in the same position that we were in when we arrived at 
equation (7) for the parabola. We could maintain that (18) is the equation 
of the ellipse, for it is indeed the condition which the coordinates (x, ,Y) of 
any point on the ellipse satisfy. However, as for the parabola, a little algebra 
applied to (18) will simplify the equation. We shall not carry out the algebraic 
steps explicitly because they afC uninteresting, and it is not important for us 
to acquire great facility in algebra. The result is 
16x2 + 25y2 = 40. 
(19) 
We know what an ellipse looks like, But 
we do not know how our ellipse lies in relation 
to the axes chosen in Fig. 12-17. An analysis 
of equation (19) will supply the answer. First 
of all let us note that if (a, b) should happen to 
be the coordinates of a point which satisfy 
equation (19), that is, if 
1002 + 25b2 = 40, 
(20) 
y 
• 
• 
( -a, b) 
(a, b) 
-----o----x 
(-a, -b) 
(a, -b) 
• 
• 
Fig. 12-18 
then the sets of coordinates (-a, b), (a, -b), and (-a, -b) will also satisfy 
the equation, because the substitution of any one of these latter three pairs of 
coordinates will yield the same equation as (20). Figure 12-18 shows where 
the various points (a, b), (-a, b), (a, -b), and (-a, -b) lie in relation to 
the axes. We see, for example, that (a, b) and ( -a, b) are symmetrically 
placed with respect to the Y-axis. What we have learned so far is that if the 
ellipse contains a point (a, b) which lies in the first quadrant, it contains the 
point (-a, b) which is symmetrically situated with respect to the Y-axis; it 
contains the point (a, -b) which is symmetrically situated with respect to the 
X-axis; and it contains the point (-a, -b) which is symmetric to (-a, b) 
with respect to the X-axis. Hence, if we can determine which points lie on 
the ellipse in the first quadrant, we can, by symmetry, decide what the ellipse 
looks like in the other three quadrants. 
The shape of the ellipse in the first quadrant is easily determined. We have 
but to calculate the coordinates of a number of points in the first quadrant and 
plot the points carefully with respect to the coordinate axes. By symmetry 
we obtain the shape of the curve in the other three quadrants. The final graph 
is that shown in Fig. 12-17. 

THE EQUATIONS OF SURFACES 
273 
We could investigate the equations of other curves and the curves cor­
responding to other equations. Bur what we have done should make the 
primary idea clear. To each curve there corresponds an equation which 
describes that curve. The equation depends upon how we choose the axes, 
but once this choice is made, the equation is unique. Conversely, given an 
equation involving x and y, we can find the curve which this equation de­
scribes, namely the collection of points whose coordinates satisfy the equation. 
EXERCISES 
I .  For equation ( 19) of the text, calculate the coordinates of the points whose 
abscissas are 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Plot the points. 
2. Sketch the ellipse whose equation is 9x2 + 16y2 = 144. 
3. Calculate the length of the X-axis which is contained within the ellipse repre­
sented by equation ( 19). Does this length have any relation to any of the quan­
tities which determine the ellipse? This length is called the major axis of the 
ellipse. 
4. Suppose that the constant quantity which defines an ellipse, 10 in the example 
discussed in the text, is retained, but the distance between the foci F and F' is 0. 
What changes must one make in equation (IS)? Can you now simplify the equa­
tion and recognize the curve that it represents? 
5. Kepler's first law of planetary motion says that the path of each planet is an 
ellipse with the sun at one focus. Let us suppose that equation ( 19) of the text is 
the equation of some planet's path and that the sun is at F. What is the planet's 
distance from the sun when it crosses the positive X-axis and what is the distance 
when it crosses the negative X-axis? 
* 12-7 THE EQUATIONS OF SURFACES 
The mathematician has but to get hold of an idea, and he will develop it for 
all that it is worth. It had already occurred to Descartes that the idea of 
equations for curves might be extended to finding equations for surfaces. This 
possibility was soon explored. 
A curve can lie in one plane, but surfaces such as a sphere or the ellipsoid 
(of which the surface of the earth and the surface of a football are examples), 
do not lie in one plane. They exist in three-dimensional space. To pursue the 
idea of finding equations for surfaces, we must first introduce coordinates for 
points in space. This is readily done. One introduces three mutually perpen­
dicular lines (Fig. 12-19) as axes instead of the two lines used for points in the 
plane. These are called the coordinate axes. The X- and Y-axes determine a 
plane called the XY-plane. Similarly, the X- and Z-axes determine the XZ­
plane, and the Y - and Z-axes define the YZ-plane. 
The location of a point P in space is described by three numbers. For 
example, the point P of Fig. 12-19 is described by (3, 4, 5). The number 5 

274 
COORDINATE GEOMETRY 
z 
°± 
__
_
 I_2-² 
__
__
 
y 
Fig. 12-19. 
A three-dimensional rectangular 
Cartesian coordinate system 
/ 
x 
z 
I 
I 
I 
I 
+klm 
x / 
/ 
Y 
Q 
Fig. 12-20. 
y 
A sphere on a three·dimensional 
rectangular Cartesian coordinate system. 
describes the perpendicular distance of P above the XY -plane, while 3 and 4 
are the x- and y-coordinates of Q, the foot of the perpendicular from P to 
this plane. Alternatively one can say that if one proceeds a distance of 3 units 
along the X-axis, then a distance of 4 units along a parallel to the Y-axis, and 
finally travels upward a distance of 5 units along the perpendicular to the 
XY-plane, he will arrive at the point P. To represent all points in space, we 
must, as in the two-dimensional system, use negative numbers also. Thus points 
below the XY-plane have negative third coordinates. 
Let us now consider the problem of finding the equation of a surface. 
We shall use the sphere as an example. A surface, like a curve, has some 
defining property which states just which points belong to it. By definition, 
the sphere is the set of all points in space at a given distance, the radius, from 
a fixed point called the center. To be concrete let us suppose that all points 
of our sphere are 5 units from the center and that the sphere is located 
so that its center is at the origin of our three-dimensional coordinate system 
(Fig. 12-20). The general point on a surface is represented by threo letters, 
x, y, z. Thus the coordinates of the general point P are (x, y, z). Let us now 
express algebraically the fact that the distance of any point (x, y, z) on the 
sphere is 5 units from the origin. The lengths x, y, and z are shown in 
Fig. 12-20. Now x and y are the arms of a right triangle (lying in the XY­
plane) whose hypotenuse is OQ. Then by the Pythagorean theorem, 
x2 + y2 = OQ2. 
(21) 
Further OQ and z are the arms of the right triangle OQP, whose hypotenuse 

FOUR-DIMENSIONAL GEOMETRY 
275 
is OP or 5 units. Hence 
OQ2 + Z2 = 25. 
(22) 
But OQ' has the value given by equation (21). If we substitute this value in 
equation (22), we obtain 
x2 + y2 + Z2 = 25. 
(23) 
This is the equation of a sphere in the sense that the left side equals the 
right side when and only when the coordinates of a point on the sphere are 
substituted for x, y, and z. 
We could readily obtain the equations of a few other surfaces, such as 
plane, paraboloid, and ellipsoid. But we shall not do so because we shall 
not utilize three-dimensional coordinate geometry and the procedure involved 
is a more or less apparent extension of a familiar concept. 
EXERCISES 
1. Plot the points whose coordinates are given below. 
a) (1, 2, 3) 
b) (1, 2, -3) 
c) (
- I , 2, 3) 
d) (I, -2, 3) 
2. What geometrical figure does an equation in x, y, and z represent? 
3. Describe the surface whose equation is x2 + y2 + Z2 
= 49. 
4. We know that an equation such as x + y = 5 represents a straight line. What 
does the equation x + y + z = 5 represent? 
* 12-8 FOUR-DIMENSIONAL GEOMETRY 
Our experience is limited to figures lying in a plane and in space. But our 
intellects are not. The idea of a four-dimensional world and of figures in it 
had tantalized mathematicians such as Pascal at a time when coordinate 
geometry was still being fashioned. During the next 200 years the subject was 
mentioned occasionally, but it was not taken seriously until some startling 
developments (which we shall consider in Chapter 20) caused a number of 
mathematicians. notably Bernhard Riemann, to investigate it. Four-dimensional 
geometry proved to be more than a speculation, for some of the deepest 
developments in modern science, notably the theory of relativity, use this 
concept. Let us see how coordinate geometry can be employed to portray a 
four-dimensional world. 
We have seen that the equation of a circle of radius 5 in a two-dimensional 
coordinate system is 
x2 + y2 = 25, 
(24) 
and we have just seen that the equation of a sphere of radius 5 in a three-

276 
COORDINATE GEOMETRY 
dimensional coordinate system is 
(25) 
Even idle speculation would suggest that we at least write down the equation 
(26) 
and consider what meaning it might have. It would seem reasonable to 
interpret x, y, Z, and w as the coordinates of a point in four-dimensional space 
and, by analogy with equations (24) and (25), to interpret equation (26) as 
the equation of a hypersphere in four-dimensional space. This is exactly what 
mathematics does. However, mathematics does not suppose that there is 
anywhere a real four-dimensional space in which four mutually perpendicular 
axes can be set up. Nor do mathematicians claim that they, wise and farsighted 
as they think they are, can visualize figures in a four-dimensional space. It 
follows that no one else can either. 
Four-dimensional geometry is entirely a creation of the mind; it is a 
geometry without pictures. One speaks of the coordinates (x, y, z, w) as 
representing a point, and one uses the term hypersphere as though it were a 
real geometrical figure corresponding to equation (26), but these geometrical 
terms are merely a convenience and a carry-over from two- and three­
dimensional geometry. The words are suggestive but not descriptive of 
actual figures. 
Suppose it is agreed then that four-dimensional geometry is indeed a mental 
creation. Is it of any value? There is excellent reason to study this "geometry". 
and there is excellent use for it. We can understand these facts better if we 
backtrack a bir. Consider the equation x'- + y2 = 25. It represents, as we know, 
a circle. But where is this curve that knows no end, this "arc unbroken", the 
cherished figure of the Greeks? Every geometrical fact we know or can 
establish about the geometrical circle has its algebraic equivalent and can be 
derived algebraically from the equation of the circle. Hence the equations of 
the circle and of other curves in plane, or two-dimensional, geometry are a 
complete substitute for their geometrical counterparts, and we could. if we 
wished to, eliminate geometry altogether. In four-dimensional "geometry" 
we have only the equations, but we talk about them as though they represented 
figures in a four-dimensional world. The properties of these figures are com­
pletely specified by the equations. What is lacking is the possibility of actually 
constructing such figures. 
So far then we have tried to see what meaning this four-dimensional 
geometry has. Now we wish to know how it is used. One application is made 
in studying physical events wherein time plays a role. Consider for example, 
the motion of a planet. The location of a planet is described by three coordin­
ates x, y, and z. But the instant at which the planet occupies that location is 

SUMMARY 
277 
also important. An eclipse of the sun, for example, occurs because planet and 
sun are in certain positions at the same instant. Hence the full description of 
the position of a heavenly body requires four coordinates, the fourth being a 
value of time. The path of a celestial object is described by equations involving 
four letters, usually x, y, z, and t. 
But is there any value to thinking geometrically about equations involving 
four letters' There is. Let us consider the usual sphere for a moment. Some 
curves on this sphere, a circle of latitude, for example, lie in one plane, and 
hence only two-dimensional geometry is needed to visualize some curves which 
lie on a three-dimensional sphere. Similarly, the path on which a planet moves 
in the four dimensions of space and time may be a curve which can exist in 
three-dimensional space. This curve may be part of a "geometrical structure" 
which lies in four-dimensional space, just as the circle of latitude is part of a 
sphere and yet the curve can be visualized. This visualization aids the under­
standing. This same visualization might be possible for the paths of other 
planets and one can consequently better understand their motions. Yet the 
proper interrelationship of these several paths can be represented only in four­
dimensional space just as the relationship of the circles of latitude to one an­
other can be represented only in three-dimensional space. We see therefore 
that it is helpful to think in terms of geometrical figures lying in a four­
dimensional space. 
This brief presentation of four-dimensional geometry may give some 
further indication of the direction in which scientific thought has been moving 
with the aid of mathematics. Copernicus asked the world to accept a theory of 
planetary motions which violated some sense impressions for the sake of a better 
mathematical account. The utilization of a four-dimensional geometry which 
has no sensuous or visual content means complete reliance upon the mind. 
12-9 SUMMARY 
From the purely mathematical standpoint coordinate geomery offers a brand­
new thought, the representation of geometrical figures by equations. It also 
offers, as Descartes and Fermat had expected, a new mathematical method of 
deriving properties of figures from equations. For example, the fact that a 
curve is symmetric with respect to some line is readily seen from the equation, 
as we observed in the case of parabola and ellipse. 
But Descartes' and Fermat's union of algebra and geometry means far more 
than a new mathematical method of working with curves. The forms of all 
physical objects which are studied for any reason whatsoever are, at least when 
idealized, curves and surfaces. The fusilage of an airplane, the wings of an 
airplane, the hull of a boat, and the shape of a projectile are surfaces. The paths 
of all moving objects, a ball thrown by a child, an electron expelled from an 
atom, a ship on the ocean, a plane in the air, the planets in the heavens, and 

278 
COORDINATE GEOMETRY 
the tracks of light, are curves. These surfaces and curves can be represented by 
equations, and the shapes or motions studied by applying algebra to these 
equations. In other words, Descartes and Fermat made possible the algebraic 
representation and the study by algebraic means of the various objects and 
paths of interest to scientists. In addition, algebra supplies quantitative knowl­
edge. This method of working with curves and surfaces is so basic in science 
that Descartes and Fermat may very weIl be caIled the founders of mathemat­
ical physics. Part of Descartes' greatness and perhaps the largest part of his 
contribution was his vision of what his method accomplished; he said he had 
"reduced physics to mathematics." The investigation of nature which Renais­
sance Europe had determined to undertake was enormously expedited as we 
shall soon see. The story of coordinate geometry illustrates how an interest in 
geometric method became immensely valuable for science and engineering. 
EXERCISES 
1 .  In what sense does a four-dimensional geometry exist? 
2. What geometrical language would be appropriate to describe the figure whose 
equation is x + y + z + w = 5? 
3. Did Descartes and Fermat introduce a new method for working with curves? 
If so, describe it. 
4. Does coordinate geometry replace Euclidean geometry? 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
1. What is the x-coordinate of any point on the Y-axis? 
2. What is the y-coordinate of any point on the X-axis? 
3. If two points lie on a line parallel to the Y-axis, what can you say about their 
x-coordinates? 
4. Write the equation of a line whose slope is 4 and which 
a) passes through the origin, 
b) cuts the Y-axis at the point (0, 2). 
5. Write the equation of a line whose slope is -4 and which 
a) passes through the origin, 
b) cuts the Y-axis at the point (0, 2), 
c) cuts the Y-axis at the point (0, -2). 
6 .  Show that the point whose coordinates are (2. V2i) lies on the circle 
x' + y' 
= 25. 
7. Sketch the curves whose equations are given below. 
a) y = ix' 
b) y = 8x' 
c) y = -tx' 

8. Sketch the curves whose equations are given below. 
a) y = x2 + 6x 
b) Y = _x2 - 6x 
SUMMARY 
279 
c) y = x2 + 6x + 9, by relating the curve to the one in part (a). 
9. Plot the graph of 16x' + 25y' = 400 in the first quadrant by solving for y and 
then making a table of values. 
10. Plot the entire graph of the equation x2 - y2 = 4. Can you identify the curve? 
11. One can regard the quadratic equation x2 - 6x = 0 as a special case of 
y = x2 - 6x, 
the special nature being that the values of x which satisfy the first equation are 
those which correspond to y = 0 in the second one. Can you then suggest a 
graphical method of solving the quadratic equation? 
Topics for Further Investigation 
1. The life and work of Rene Descartes. 
2. The life and work of Pierre de Fermat. 
3. Four-dimensional geometry. 
Recommended Reading 
Asson, E. A.: Flatland, A Romance of Many Dimensions, Dover Publications, Inc., 
New York, 1952. 
DESCARTES, RENE: Discourse on Method, Penguin Books Ltd., Harmondsworth, 
England, 1960 (also many other editions). 
DESCARTES, RENE: La Geo1nitrie (the original French and an English translation), 
Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1954. 
HALDANE, ELIZABETH S.: Descartes, His Life and Times, J. Murray, London, 1905. 
MANNlNG, H. A.: The Fourth Dimension Simply Explained, Dover Publications, Inc., 
New York, 1960. 
SAWYER, W. W.: Mathematicians" Delight, Chap. 9, Penguin Books Ltd., Har­
mondsworth, England, 1943. 
ScOTI, J. F.: The Scientific Work of Rene Descartes, Taylor and Francis, Ltd., 
London, 1952. 
WHITEHEAD, ALFRED N.: An Introduction to Mathematics, Chaps. 9 and 10, Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, Inc., New York, 1939 (also in paperback). 

CHAPTER 13 
THE SIMPLEST FORMULAS IN ACTION 
When you can measure what you are talking about and express it in 
numbers, you know something about it. 
LORD KELVIN 
13-1 MASTERY OF NATURE 
We have already mentioned not only a revival of interest in the study of 
nature but a decided effort on the part of manufacturers, artisans, and engi­
neers to utilize materials effectively and to lighten the burden of labor. This 
more practical interest in exploiting knowledge of materials and of natural 
phenomena in behalf of economic and social needs was an incentive for scien­
tific activity which was adjoined to the older goal so strongly pursued by the 
Greeks, namely, the understanding of nature. The new motivation for scien­
tific work, mastery of nature for the welfare of man, was proclaimed and 
advocated by such prominent and respected thinkers as Francis Bacon (1562-
1626) and Rene Descartes. Bacon criticizes the Greeks. He says that the 
interrogation of nature should be pursued not to delight scholars but to serve 
man. It is to relieve suffering, to better the mode of life, and to increase 
happiness. Let us put nature to use. Knowledge should bear fruit in works; 
science should be applied to industry. In Bacon's words, let us ascend to knowl­
edge and descend to work. Man should reconstitute his knowledge to apply it 
to the relief of man's estate. "The true and lawful goal of science is to endow 
human life with new powers and inventions." Bacon foresaw that science could 
provide man with "infinite commodities" and minister to the conveniences 
and comfort of man. 
Descartes, too, is explicit about employing science for practical ends. He 
says, "It is possible to attain knowledge which is very useful in life, and instead 
of that speculative philosophy which is taught in the schools, we may find a 
practical philosophy by means of which, knowing the force and action of fire, 
water, air, the stars, heavens and all other bodies that environ us, as distinctly 
as we know the different crafts of our artisans, we can in the same way 
employ them in all those uses to which they are adapted, and thus render 
ourselves the masters and possessors of nature." 
280 

THE SEARCH FOR SCIENTIFIC METHOD 
281 
The founder of modern chemistry, Robert Boyle, expressed the same 
thought: "The good of mankind may be much increased by the naturalist's in­
sight into the trades." The mathematician and philosopher Leibniz, about 
whom we shall learn more later, proposed in 1669 the organization of a society 
devoted to making inventions in mechanics and discoveries in chemistry and 
physiology which would be useful to people. He, toO, wanted to put knowl­
edge to use. He called the universities monkish and said that they were ab­
sorbed in trifles. They possessed learning but no judgment. Instead he urged the 
pursuit of real knowledge, mathematics, physics, geography, chemistry, anat­
omy, botany, zoology, and history. To Leibniz the skills of the artisan and 
the practical man were more valuable than the learned subtleties of professional 
scholars. 
One should not conclude that science and mathematics became concerned 
exclu,ively with the solution of problems facing society. It is true that the 
scientists of the seventeenth century worked on many specific practical prob­
lems, the invention of a clock, the improvement in methods of determining 
longitude, the design of better lenses, and so on. And they focused even their 
more general theoretical effort on those fields of pure science-astronomy, 
motion, and optics-in which practical problems predominated or whose in­
vestigation gave promise of solving practical problems. But the desire to 
understand nature's ways was by no means lost; it remained the outstanding 
motivation for the truly great scientists and mathematicians. 
13-2 THE SEARCH FOR SCIENTIFIC METHOD 
We have tried to point out thus far that the scientific needs anJ interests of 
seventeenth-century Europe were great. But need and interest do not in them­
selves produce results. A need for money and an interest in money do not 
provide money. The question still remains, How did the European scientists 
go about solving scientific problems? How does one come l.0 grips with nature 
either to understand or subjugate her' One might be tempted to guess that the 
Europeans found the proper scientific method in the revived Greek literature. 
But this was not the case. 
We shall review a few principles of Greek science and late medieval 
science, such as it was, to appreciate the changes made in the seventeenth 
century. First of all most Greeks and medieval thinkers believed that the 
basic truths exist within the human rriind. They are already implanted at birth 
and are called upon when desired, or they are so clearly truths that when pro­
posed, the mind immediately rec'>gnizes them as such. Thus the axioms of 
Euclidean geometry were accepted by the Greeks as self-evident truths. The 
medievalists added revelation from God as another source of truth, but again 
a source communicated to man's mind. The task of science. then. was to 
determine the implications of these principles by reasoning. 

282 
THE SIMPLEST FORMULAS IN ACTION 
To this source of knowledge, Aristotle and his followers added observation 
and induction on the basis of observations. Although Aristotle, Galen, the 
celebrated physician, and astronomers such as Hipparchus and Ptolemy cer­
tainly made observations, inductive conclusions did not play a great role. Also, 
observational results were more likely to be forced to fit a preconceived notion 
than allowed to suggest some new conclusion. For example, the principle that 
heavenly motions must somehow consist of circular paths because only circular 
motion is complete and perfect dominated all Greek and medieval astronomy. 
Another methodological principle employed by the Greeks was classifica­
tion, an approach stressed by Aristotle and taken over by his medieval fol­
lowers. Thus one observed varieties of animals, flowers, fruits, and humans and 
classified them according to genus and species. This method is, of course, still 
used in biology and has some general applicability. It at least reduces the 
variety of organisms to a few major types and permits systematic study of 
whole classes in one swoop. It is relevant that Aristotle himself was a physician. 
The Aristotelians pursued another scientific doctrine which is best de­
scribed by the key words "qualitative study of nature." They believed that all 
phenomena could be explained in terms of the acquisition or loss of basic sub­
stances. Thus they and the Platonists believed that heat, coldness, wetness, 
and dryness were basic substances, and these substances, combined in different 
proportions, produced other substances. Heat and dryness produced fire; heat 
and wetness produced air; coldness and wetness produced waterj and coldness 
and dryness produced earth. The hardness or softness, coarseness or fineness 
of various substances was accordingly determined by the relative abundance 
of the four basic elements in them. Solids, fluids, and gases were also distin­
guished by the possession of special substances. Thus a fluid such as mercury 
possessed some quality, fluidity, which gold did not have. To change mercury 
into gold meant that one had to take away the fluidity and substitute a new 
quality which supplied rigidity. Today we recognize that solidity, fluidity, and 
gaseousness are states of the same matter. However, explanation in terms of 
special substances was employed right up to modern times. Early chemists, for 
example Robert Boyle, ascribed the fact that substances such as sulphur were 
easily set afire to the presence of a special substance called phlogiston. Until 
the nineteenth century heat was considered to be a substance called caloric 
which bodies lost or gained as they lost or gained heat. Electricity in the 
eighteenth century was conceived of as a fluid which flowed through metals. 
Aristotelian and medieval science also emphasized another objective for 
science, namely explanation. To explain meant to give the cause of a phenom­
enon. However, there were four distinct types of causes, each important in 
its own way. Suppose that an architect builds a church. The material cause 
of the church is the brick, stone, and mortar of which the church is constructed. 
The formal cause is the design which the architect has in mind. Then there 
is the effective cause, that is, the actual building process. The fourth type, 

THE SEARCH FOR SCIENTIFIC METHOD 
283 
called final cause, is the purpose which the entire project serves. In the present 
example, the purpose might be to provide a house of worship or to glorify 
God. Of these four types the final cause was considered most important be­
cause it supplied the meaning people usually seek. Thus when we ask why 
some one was killed and are told that the killer sought revenge, we are satisfied. 
An entirely different explanation might be furnished in terms of the physical 
and physiological processes which took place. But such an explanation is 
usually not of as much interest. 
In medieval thought, the final cause dominated. Rain falls to water the 
crops and supply drinking water. Plants grow to supply food for man. Balls 
fall to earth because all objects seek their natural place, and the natural place of 
heavy objects is the center of the universe which is the center of the earth. 
By the sixteenth century many scholars realized that science could not be 
advanced by such means. They recognized that new principles and entirely 
new methods were needed, but did not have a clear conception of what these 
should be. Prior to Galileo's work, one idea emerged distinctly from the writ­
ings of Aristotle's critics, namely the need for systematic experimentation. 
Francis Bacon issued the manifesto for the experimental method. He attacked 
preconceived philosophical systems, barren speculations, and idle displays of 
learning. Scientific work, he said, should not become entangled in a search for 
final causes which belonged to philosophy. In his Advancement of Learning 
( 1605) and in his N ovum Organum (1620) he points out the feebleness of 
efforts and the paucity of results in past studies of nature. Man, he observes, 
has put very little thought and labor into science. Let us come to grips with 
nature. Let us not have desultory and haphazard experimentation, but let it be 
thorough and directed. He then makes the acute and most important statement 
that the only hope for progress lies in a change of method for science. All 
knowledge begins with observations. But it must proceed by gradual and suc­
cessive inductions rather than by hasty generalizations. He contrasts the antici­
pation of nature with the interpretation of nature. The one skims; the other 
is orderly. We gain our ends only if we start with correct laws of nature. He 
criticizes the then current notions of substance, quality, action, being, heaviness, 
lightness, density, rareness, moistness, dryness, generation, corruption, attrac­
tion, and repulsion. The Aristotelian emphasis on form, he says, is fantastic 
and ill defined. Man masters nature by understanding her. 
Bacon's stress on experimentation and induction from experimental results 
did reflect what was beginning to take place in Europe. The work of the 
biologists Vesalius, Cesalpinus, and Harvey was mentioned in Chapter 9. 
Famous for his systematic experimentation is W,illiam Gilbert (1540--1603), 
physician to Queen Elizabeth. In his De Magnete ( 1600) he presents the de­
tails and results of his clear and fruitful work on magnetism, a phenomenon 
about which practically nothing was known. Gilbert states explicitly that we 
must start from experiments. Kepler's regard for observational facts has al-

284 
THE SIMPLEST FORMULAS IN ACTION 
ready been mentioned. Galileo, too, performed some key experiments on mo­
tion; about his results in this area we shall say more later. Moreover, he and 
his pupils, notably Evangelista Torricelli (1608-1647), having convinced them­
selves that air has weight, proceeded to carry out relevant experiments. Tor­
ricelli also investigated the flow of water through nozzles. Blaise Pascal and 
Robert Boyle (\627-1691) worked on the pressure of fluids. Boyle and the 
French priest Edme Mariotte (\620-1684) studied gases such as air. Otto von 
Guericke (1602-1686) invented the air pump and used it to demonstrate the 
pressure of air. Rene Descartes experimented in chemistry, biology, and optics. 
Robert Hooke was a famous experimenter, whose work on springs we shall 
discuss later, and Christian Huygens (1629-1695) obtained distinguished results 
from his experiments with the pendulum. Newton's work on light was one of 
the greatest experimental achievements of the seventeenth century. 
It is also true that the artists, engineers, and craftsmen, concerned with the 
practical problems of their trades or professions, did not wait for new scien­
tific methods to gain further knowledge of nature. They investigated mechan­
ical forces, the design of lenses, the chemistry of paints, the motion of cannon 
balls, and other phenomena and discovered new facts. To this class belongs the 
self-educated sixteenth-century mathematician Tartaglia, who worked on pro­
jectile motion and arrived at results which contradicted Aristotelian physics. 
The Dutch engineer Simon Stevin (\548-1620) learned about the pressure 
exerted by water on the walls of canals, and made precise observations of the 
nature of stable and unstable equilibrium of bodies. He also studied the motion 
of bodies on slopes. It was spectacle makers who, without discovering a single 
law of optics, nevertheless invented the telescope and microscope. Many of 
these men sought not ultimate meanings but common useful knowledge. 
There is no doubt that experimentation and practical investigations by tech­
nicians and engineers did produce new facts and even opened up new lines of 
inquiry, but the rise of experimentation was not the reason that science sud­
denly blossomed in the seventeenth century. The value and import of seven­
teenth-century experimentation has been vastly overrated. Modern science 
owes its origins and present flourishing state to a new scientific method which 
was fashioned almost entirely by Galileo Galilei. Galileo's method is doubly 
important to us because, as we shall see, it assigned a major role to mathematics. 
13-3 THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD OF GALILEO 
Galileo, born in Pisa in 1564, entered the university of his native city to study 
medicine. He also took private lessons in mathematics and was so strongly 
attracted to the subject that he decided to make mathematics his profession. At 
the age of 23 when his application for a teaching position at the University of 
Bologna was rejected because he did not seem worthy of an appointment, he 
accepted a professorship of mathematics at Pisa. Galileo was one of the men 

THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD OF GALILEO 
285 
who attacked Aristotelian science, and he did not hesitate to express his views 
even though these criticisms alienated his colleagues. He had also begun to 
write important mathematical papers which aroused jealousy in the less com­
petent. Galileo was made to feel uncomfortable, and left in 1592 to accept the 
position of professor of mathematics at the University of Padua. After 18 years 
at Padua he was invited to Florence by the Grand Duke Cosimo II. He ap­
pointed Galileo "Chief Mathematician" of his court, gave him a home and 
handsome salary, and protected him from the Jesuits who had gained domina­
tion of the Papacy and who had already threatened Galileo because of his 
defense of Copernican theory. In Florence Gali!eo had leisure to pursue his 
studies and to write. There he spent 23 years. In gratitude Galileo named the 
satellites of Jupiter, which he discovered in the first year of his service under 
Cosimo de'Medici, the Medicean stars. 
After his condemnation by the Roman Inquisition in 1633 he was forbidden 
to publish any more. But he undertook to write up his years of thought and 
work on phenomena of motion and the strength of materials. The manuscript, 
entitled Discourses and Mathematical Demonstrations Concerning Two New 
Sciences (also referred to as Dialogues Concerning Two New Sciences), was 
secretly transported to Holland and published there in 1638. Galileo defended 
his actions with the words that he had never "declined in piety and reverence 
for the Church and my own conscience." He died in 1642. 
Galileo began his investigation of the methodology of science by asking 
what is fundamental about the world of phenomena perceived by the senses, 
a question also considered by Descartes. Both agreed, as some philosophers had 
asserted earlier, that color, tastes, smells, sounds, and the various sensations of 
heat, hardness, and softness of objects are not distinct physical substances, but 
are effects which physically existing properties produce in human beings. 
What then does exist outside of man and is independent of man? The exten­
sion of objects, their shapes and sizes. and their motion are real and external to 
human perception. G.lileo says, 
If ears, tongues, and noses were removed, I am of the opinion that shape, quan­
tity [size], and motion would remain, but there would be an end of smells, 
tastes, and sounds, which, ab:;tractedly from the living creature, I take to be 
mere words. 
Descartes' famous words in this connection are. "Give me extension and motion 
and I will construct the universe." The idea advocated by these two men is 
known as the doctrine of primary and secondary qualities. The primary quali­
ties exist in the physical world, and their effects on the sense organs of human 
beings produce the secondary qualities. 
Thus in one sweeping blow Descartes and Galileo stripped away a thou­
sand phenomena and qualities to concentrate on matter and motion. But this 
was only the first step in the new approach to nature which Galileo was fash-

286 
THE SIMPLEST FORMULAS IN ACTION 
ioning. His next thought, one also voiced by Descartes and even by Aristotle, 
was that any branch of science should be patterned on the model of mathemat­
ics. This implies two essential steps. Mathematics starts with axioms, that is, 
clear, self-evident truths. From these it proceeds by deductive reasoning to 
establish new truths. So any branch of science should start with axioms or first 
principles and proceed deductively 
Galileo departs radically from the Greeks, medievalists, and even Descartes 
in the method of obtaining these first principles. As noted earlier, the pre­
Galileans believed that the mind supplies the basic principles. These men, we 
might say, first decided how the world should function and then fitted what 
they saw into their preconceived principles. Galileo decided that in physics as 
opposed to mathematics basic principles must come from experience and ex­
perimentation; they will be correct if attention is paid to what nature says 
rather than what the mind prefers. He openly criticized scientists and philos­
ophers who accepted principles which conformed to their preconceived ideas 
of how nature should and must behave. He said that nature did not first make 
men's brains and then arrange the worli:l so that it would be acceptable to 
human intellects. To the medievalists who kept repeating Aristotle and debat­
ing the meaning of his works, Galileo addressed the criticism that knowledge 
comes from observation and not from books. It was useless to debate about 
Aristotle. Those who did he called paper scientists who fancied that science 
was to be studied like the Aeneid or the Odyssey or by collation of texts. 
"When we have the decrees of nature, authority goes for nothing; . . .  " Of 
course some Renaissance thinkers and Galileo's contemporary, Francis Bacon, 
had also arrived at the conclusion that experimentation was necessary. With 
respect to this particular plank of his new method Galileo was not ahead of all 
others. Yet even a modernist as great as Descartes did not grant the wisdom 
of Galileo's reliance upon experimentation. The facts supplied by the senses, 
he said, can only lead to delusion. Reason penetrates such delusions. Particular 
phenomena of nature can be deduced from, and understood in terms of, the 
innate general principles. In much of his scientific work, Descartes did 
experiment and require that theory lit facts, but in his philosophy he was still 
tied to truths of the mind. 
The phenomena one observes are so numerous, so varied, so unlike each 
other that one can well despair of finding any principles at all in nature. 
Galileo decided that he must penetrate to the core of a phenomenon and 
begin there. He says in his Two New Sciences that it is impossible to treat 
the infinite variety of weights, shapes, and velocities. But he had observed 
that different objects fall with more nearly equal speeds in air than in water. 
Hence the thinner the medium, the smaller the difference in speed of fall 
among bodies. "Having observed this I came to the conclusion that in a 
medium totally devoid of resistance all bodies would fall with the same speed." 
What Galileo was doing here was to strip away the incidental or minor effects 

THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD OF GALILEO 
287 
in the effort to get at the essential or major one. He then imagined what would 
happen if all resistance were removed, that is, if bodies fell in a vacuum, and 
he obtained the principle that in a vacuum all bodies fall according to the 
same law. Thus Galileo did not just experiment and infer from experiments. 
He tried to discard the relatively unimportant and nonessential, and here he 
showed genius, for, as any card player knows, to recognize what to discard is 
wisdom. In other words, he idealized. He did just what the mathematician 
does in studying real figures. The mathematician strips away molecular struc­
ture. color, and thickness of lines. to get at some basic properties, and he con­
centrates on these. So did Galileo penetrate to basic physical principles. 
Of course, actual bodies do fall in resisting media. What could Galileo 
say about such motions? His answer was 
. . .  hence, in order to handle this matter in a scientific way, it is necessary to cut 
loose from these difficulties (air resistance, friction, etc.) and having discovered 
and demonstrated the theorems, in the case of no resistance, to use them and apply 
them with such limitations as experience will teach. 
Thus far Galileo had formulated a number of methodological principles, 
many of which were suggested by the pattern mathematics employed in 
algebra and in geometry. His next principle was to apply mathematics itself. 
Galileo proposed to seek for science axioms and theorems of a special kind. 
Unlike the Aristotelians and the medieval scientists, who had fastened upon 
the notion of fundamental qualities, studied the acquisition and loss of these 
qualities, or debated their meaning, Galileo proposed to seek quantitative 
axioms. The change is most important, and we shall see its full significance in 
several succeeding chapters. But an elementary example may help at the 
moment to demonstrate some of its implications. The Aristotelians said that a 
ball falls because it has weight and it falls to the earth because it, like every 
object, seeks its natural place, and the natural place of heavy bodies is the 
center of the earth. The natural place of a light body, such as fire, is in the 
heavens, and hence fire rises. These principles are qualitative. By contrast let 
us consider the statement that the speed (in feet per second) with which a 
ball falls is 32 times the number of seconds it has been falling. This statement 
can be expressed more briefly in symbols. If we denote by v the speed of the 
body and by t the number of seconds it has been falling, then the above 
assertion amounts to v = 32t. This simple statement illustrates many impor­
tant ideas. But the relevant one at the moment is that it is primarily quantita­
tive. It tells us the speed that a ball will acquire in a given number of seconds. 
In two seconds its speed will be 64 feet per second; in 3 seconds, 96 feet per 
second; and so on. In the expression vȞ 32t, the letters v and t stand for 
many values. We can substitute for t any number we please and calculate the 
corresponding value of v. Technically, v and t are called variables, and the 
relation vȟ 32t is called a formula. 

288 
THE SIMPLEST FORMULAS IN ACTION 
Galileo intended to adopt such formulas as his axioms, and he expected, 
by mathematical means, to deduce from them new formulas which would 
serve as theorems. Since formulas give quantitative knowledge, we can perhaps 
begin to comprehend the meaning of the statement that Galileo sought quan­
titative knowledge. Moreover we see that mathematics was to be the essential 
medium in his scientific reasoning. 
The decision to seek quantitative knowledge expressed in formulas en­
gendered another decision which was also radical, although at first contact it 
hardly reveals its full significance. As pointed out earlier in this chapter, the 
Aristotelians believed that one of the tasks of science was to explain why 
things happened, and explanation meant unearthing the causes of a phenom­
enon. The statement that a body falls because it has weight gives the effective 
cause of the fall, and the statement that it seeks its natural place gives the final 
cause. But the quantitative statement v = 32t, for whatever it may be worth, 
does not explain why a ball falls. It tells only how speed changes with time. 
In other words, formulas do not explain; they describe. And the knowledge 
of nature Galileo sought was descriptive. He says, for example, in his Two 
New Sciences that he will investigate and demonstrate some of the properties 
of motion without regard to what the causes might be. Positive scientific in­
quiries were to be separated from questions of ultimate causation. 
First reactions to this tl:ought of Galileo are likely to be negative. De­
scriptions of phenomena in terms of formulas hardly seem to be more than 
a first step. It would appear that the Aristotolians had really grasped the true 
function of science, namely, to explain why phenomena happened. Even 
Descartes protested Galileo's decision to seek descriptive formulas. He said, 
"Everything that Galileo says about bodies falling in empty space is built with­
out foundation: he ought first to have determined the nature of weight." Fur­
ther, said Descartes, Galileo should reflect about ultimate reasons. But we shall 
see more clearly in the space of a few chapters that Galileo's decision to aim 
for description was the most profound and the most fruitful thought that any­
one has had about scientific methodology. We merely wish to recapitulate here 
that the scientific knowledge which Galileo envisioned was to consist of a 
series of mathematical formulas deduced from a few fundamental ones. 
Since the laws Galileo proposed to find were to be quantitative, they 
obviously had to relate measures, sizes, or amounts of some physical quantities, 
just as v = 32t relates measures of speed and time. Here, too, Galileo made a 
fundamental contribution. Whereas the Aristotelians had talked in terms of 
qualities such as earthiness, fluidity, rigidity, essences, natural places, natural 
and violent motion, potentiality, actuality, and purpose, Galileo not only in­
troduced an entirely new set of concepts but chose concepts which were 
measurable so that their measures could be related by formulas. Some of his 
concepts, such as distance, time, speed, acceleration, force, mass, and weight, 
are, of course, familiar to us and so the choice does not surprise us. But to 
Galileo's contemporaries these choices and in particular their adoption as funda-

THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD OF GALILEO 
289 
mental concepts, were startling. However, these very ones did prove to be 
most instrumental in the task of understanding and mastering nature. 
We have described the essential features of Galileo's program. Some of 
his ideas had been espoused by others. Some were entirely original with him. 
But what establishes Galileo's greatness in the invention of this methodology 
is that he saw clearly what was wrong or deficient in the scientific efforts of 
his age, completely shed the older ways, and formulated the new steps-almost 
in so many words. Moreover, he applied his method to problems of motion 
and in this work not only managed to provide a lucid example of the procedure 
but succeeded in obtaining brilliant results. He showed, in other words, that it 
worked. Galileo was fully conscious of what he had accomplished. He says 
toward the end of his Two New Sciences, "So that we may say the door is now 
opened, for the first time, to a new method fraught with numerous and wonder­
ful results which in future years will command the attention of other minds." 
But others were also aware of Galileo's greatness. The seventeenth-century 
philosopher Thomas Hobbes said of Galileo, "He has been the first to open to 
us the door to the whole realm of Physics . . .  
" 
Since we are interested in the role of mathematics in the modern world. 
it may be worth while to emphasize one point. The scholars who fashioned 
modern science, Descartes, Galileo, and Newton, approached the study of 
nature as mathematicians. They proposed to find broad, profound, but also 
simple and clear mathematical principles either through intuition or through 
crucial observation and experiments and then expected to deduce new laws 
from these principles, entirely in the manner in which mathematics proper 
had constructed its geometry and algebra. Mathematical deduction was to 
take up the major share of scientific activity. Galileo says he valued a scientific 
principle, whether or not obtained by experimentation, far more because of 
the abundance of theorems which he could deduce from it than because of the 
knowledge afforded by the principle itself. 
What these great thinkers envisioned did in fact prove to be the profitable 
course. For the next two centuries, scientists formulated precise and sweeping 
mathematical laws of nature on the basis of slim, almost trivial, observations 
and experiments. The greatest progress in the seventeenth and eighteenth cen­
turies occurred in mechanics and in astronomy, and in both these fields experi­
mental results were hardly startling and certainly not decisive. The significant 
contribution, as we shall see, was the creation of vast branches of mathematical 
theory. 
The expectations of these scientists, seemingly rash, can be explained. These 
men were convinced that nature is mathematically designed and therefore saw 
no reason why they could not proceed. in scientific matters as mathematics had 
proceeded in the study of numbers and geometric figures. As Randall says in 
his Making of the Modern Mind, "Science was born of a faith in the mathe­
matical interpretation of Nature, held long before it had been empirically 
verified. " 

290 
THE SIMPLEST FORMULAS IN ACTION 
EXERCISES 
1. What properties of physical objects did Descartes and Galileo regard as funda­
mental and real? 
2. What is the distinction between a qualitative and a quantitative study of nature? 
3. Describe the essential principles in GaIileo's plan of scientific activity and contrast 
them with those of his predecessors. 
4. Contrast the Greek objectives in the study of nature with those advocated by 
Bacon and Descartes. 
5. How does mathematics enter into Galileo's scientific method? 
13-4 FUNCTIONS AND FORMULAS 
We intend to pursue the seventeenth-century developments initiated by Galileo 
and to pay particular attention to the role of mathematics in Galileo's method. 
Let us recall just what Galileo set out to do. He proposed to find fundamental 
quantitative physical principles or laws and to apply mathematical reasoning 
to these quantitative statements in order to deduce new physical laws. These 
physical laws would then provide the answers to a variety of scientific and 
practical problems. To express the physical principles in the manner he re­
garded as significant, Galileo introduced a new mathematical concept, the 
extremely important concept of a function. For the next two centuries mathe­
maticians devoted themselves to the construction of functions and to the study 
of their properties. But the purely mathematical aspect of these creations is in 
itself rather barren. It is merely the sketch of a picture. And the picture in 
the present case is precisely the physical world which Galileo set out to in­
vestigate. Hence, as we study functions, we shall also study the situations 
which gave rise to them and the good that was accomplished with them. In 
fact, it is artificial to separate the physical thinking from the accompanying 
mathematics, for the two were developed as one. The leading mathematicians 
of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were also the leading scientists. 
And the accomplishments of these two centuries were a triumph of mathe­
matics and science conjoined. 
Before proceeding with Galileo's work, we shall familiarize ourselves with 
the notion of a function. Let us consider the situation in which a ball is 
dropped from some point above the ground and let us suppose that we wish 
to describe the distance the ball falls with increasing time. (Why we should 
seek such a description and what we can do with it are questions we shall 
answer later.) It is understood that the distance is measured downward from 
the point at which the ball begins to drop, and the time of fall is measured 
from the instant the ball begins to fall. Then the correct description, which 
we can accept for the moment as a fact, says that the distance the ball falls, 
measured in feet, is 16 times the square of the number of seconds it falls. The 
italicized statement is an example of a function. As such it is important in two 

FUNCTIONS AND FORMULAS 
291 
respects. First of all, it deals with varying quantities or vll7iables. The number 
of seconds that the ball falls increases from zero to larger and larger values. 
The distance that the ball falls also increases from zero to larger and larger 
values. Secondly, the statement specifies exactly the relationship between the 
variables time and distance. What is characteristic of functions, then, is thar 
they are precise statements of relationships among variables. 
We know that verbal statements are clumsy to work with. Our experience 
with algebra teaches us that we can be more effective by introducing symbols. 
Let us then introduce the symbol t to stand for any number of seconds that 
the ball has been falling and the symbol d to stand for the distance that the ball 
falls in t seconds. In these symbols the italicized statement above says that 
d = 16t2• 
The algebraic expression of a functional relationship is called a formula. 
Several facts about formulas are important for their proper understanding and 
use. In the present case, for example, we must be sure to note that the letters 
d and t represent not just one particular value of distance and time but whole 
ranges of values. Thus, if the ball falls for 5 seconds, the variable t can repre­
sent any number from 0 to 5. The variable d can represent any distance which 
the ball may have fallen during the 5 seconds. Of course, the values of d are 
not independent of the values of t. In fact, the whole point of the formula 
is to tell us precisely what d is for a given t. Thus when t is 2, for example, 
d is 16 · 2', or 64. That is, by substituting a particular value of t in the formula, 
we can calculate the distance d that an object has fallen in that number of 
seconds chosen for t. The values of d depend upon the values of t and, for 
this reason, t is called the independent vll7iable and d, the dependent variable. 
One also says that the formula expresses d as a function of t. Since we can 
calculate d for millions of values of t, the formula is indeed a compact repre­
sentation of millions of bits of information. 
Suppose that the dropped ball falls for just 5 seconds. It then hits the 
ground and remains at rest. However, the formula d = 16t2 does not "stop" 
at the end of 5 seconds. We could substitute 6 for t and find that d is 16 · 36, 
or 576. Likewise, we could substitute 7, or 9!, or even -2 for t and in each 
case calculate the correponding value of d. Thus, the mathematical formula 
has meaning for all positive and negative values of t. However, if the ball 
falls for only 5 seconds, the formula represents the physical situation only for 
values of t from 0 to 5. In other words, the mathematical formula is more 
extensive than the physical situation. 
We used the letters d and t to represent the variables distance and time. 
We could have used y and x, in which case the very same formula would read 
y = 16x2• 

292 
THE SIMPLEST FORMULAS IN ACTION 
The letters d and t happen to be better because they suggest the physical 
meaning. But nothing would be altered mathematically if we used y and x. 
Discussion of a formula and of its physical significance is often aided by 
utilizing the ideas of coordinate geometry. We can think of d = 16t' as the 
equation of a curve. Since the choice of particular letters does not have any 
mathematical significance, we can introduce axes d and t (Fig. 13-\). The 
curve corresponding to d = 16t2 consists of those points whose abscissa and 
ordinate or whose t- and d-coordinates satisfy the equation. Thus, since for 
t = 1, we have d = 16, the point whose abscissa is 1 and whose ordinate is 
16 lies on the curve. (For convenience we use a smaller unit on the d-axis.) 
150 
120 
00 
60 
d 
(2,64) 
Fig. 13-1. 
The graph of d = 16t'. 
The curve need not be and is not here a picture of the physical motion. 
Nevertheless, it does show that compared with t, d increases very rapidly 
as t increases beyond the value O. Moreover, the curve reveals that the formula 
has mathematical meaning for all positive and negative values of t, whereas 
only that part of the curve which extends from t = 0 to t = 5 represents the 
physical situation. 
EXERCISES 
1. What is a function? 
2. Distinguish between a function and a formula. 
3. "Cook up" some mathematical formulas of your own, whether or not they have 
any physical significance. 
4. For the formula v = 32t, calculate the value of v when t is 0, 3, 7, 4t, and -6. 
5. ]n the formula A = '1Tr, which quantity would you regard as the independent 
variable and which as the dependent one? 
6. For the formula d= 16t2, calculate the value of d when t= 2!. -4, and 7. 
7. For the formula v =  32t, calculate the value of t when v=64, 80. 128. 
8. For the formula d= 16t2, calculate the value of t when d= 144. Are both 
answers physically significant? 

FORMULAS FOR MOTION OF DROPPED OBJECTS 
293 
9. For any given temperature, the relationship between readings in the fahrenheit 
scale and the centigrade scale is 
F=!C + 32. 
What is F when C=O? What is F when C= 100? Do these values of F and C 
have special physical significance? 
13-5 THE FORMULAS DESCRIBING THE MOTION OF DROPPED OBJECTS 
Galileo not only formulated the general program for science, but he put it into 
effect. And here, too, he showed immense wisdom. He did not try, as had 
scientists and philosophers before him, to tackle the whole universe or to em­
brace man and nature in one theory. He decided to concentrate on a few 
classes of phenomena, and principally on motions near the surface of the earth. 
Galileo possessed the restraint which proves the master. 
As we noted earlier in this chapter, Galileo thought as a mathematician, 
and he began his work by idealizing the problem he set out to solve. He, too, 
considered the motion of a ball, say rolling along the ground, and he asked, 
What if air resistance, friction between ball and ground, and any other hinder­
ing forces were not present' What would the ball do once it were set into 
motion? He concluded that the ball will continue indefinitely to move at a 
constant speed in a straight line. In more general terms, if no force acts on a 
body and the body is at rest, it will remain at rest; if no force acts and the 
body is in motion, it will continue to move at a constant speed in a straight line. 
This fundamental principle of motion or axiom of physics is now known as 
Newton's first law of motion. We should note that it contains two important 
assertions. The first, that a body in motion will continue to move in a straight 
line, is no innovation. It says that straight-line motion is the natural motion of 
bodies, the motion they will pursue unless they are forced to deviate from such 
a path. Bur the second assertion, that the body will continue to move at a con­
stant speed indefinitely, is a radical departure from Aristotle, for Galileo was 
saying that no force is needed to keep the body going once it is set into motion. 
Bur what if a force is applied to a body? Galileo answered that if the body 
is at rest, the force will set it in motion and change its speed from zero to some 
nonzero quantity. If the body is already in motion, the force will change the 
speed, the direction of the motion, or both. Thus, an object set into motion 
along a rough surface encounters friction. Friction is a force, and its effect 
is to reduce the speed of the object. Galileo's second principle, then, states that 
force produces change in speed or direction. In other words, Galileo said that 
force causes acceleration. 
Let us consider an object which moves along a straight line, but which is 
being accelerated. The acceleration is a gain or loss in speed per unit time. 
Thus, if an object has been moving at a speed of 30 feet per second and if in 

294 
THE SIMPLEST FORMULAS IN ACfIQN 
one second its speed increases to 40 feet per second, then the acceleration is 
10 feet per second for that one second, or 10 feet per second per second or, in 
scientific shorthand, 10 ft/sec2• If the increase in speed had been 10 feet per 
second over two seconds, then the acceleration would have been 5 ft/sec2. 
Now, as the Greeks had observed, a body which is dropped falls with 
increasing speed; its motion is accelerated. Since falling bodies possess accelera­
tion, that is, they do not move at a constant speed, it follows that some force 
must be causing the change in speed. By Galileo's time the concept of gravity 
had become more or less accepted. The earth exerts a force on any object and 
this force, if not offset by some other force, gives the object an acceleration. 
The surprising fact which Galileo discovered is that if one neglects air resis­
tance, then an object falls to earth with a constant acceleration, and, moreover, 
this constant is the same for all bodies, namely 32 ft/sec2• Thus if we let a 
stand for acceleration, the third fundamental law of motion, an axiom of 
physics, states that for all bodies falling to earth· 
a = 32. 
(1) 
We now have a few fundamental principles about motion. Let us see 
next whether, in accordance with Galileo's plan, mathematical reasoning can 
lead to new information. Let us consider the motion of an object which is 
dropped, that is, whose initial speed is zero. Galileo's third principle says that 
the object gains speed each second at the rate of 32 ft/sec. Hence, at the end 
of one second its speed is 32 ft/sec. At the end of two seconds its speed is 
2 times 32 ft/sec or 64 ft/sec. At the end of t seconds its speed is t times 
32 ft/sec.or 32t ft/sec. If we let v denote the speed at the end of t seconds, 
then 
v = 321. 
(2) 
We now have a formula which tells us the precise speed which a dropped 
body acquires in t seconds. It can, of course, be used to calculate v for any 
given value of t. Thus at the end of 6 seconds the speed of the body is 
192 ft/sec. 
Formula (2) is of some interest but hardly a surprise. Let us see whether 
we can obtain more significant conclusions by the further application of 
mathematics. We wish to determine the distance which a dropped body falls 
in t seconds. To be specific, let us consider for the moment that t = 6. Now 
the speed at the end of 6 seconds is 192 ft/sec. To obtain the distance traveled 
in 6 seconds, one is tempted to multiply 192 by 6, that is, the speed by the 
time. However, the object did not travel at 192 ft/sec throughout the 6 
seconds. In fact, it started with zero speed and only gradually increased its 
• This axiom applies only to objects near the surface of the earth. We shall say 
more about it in Chapter 15. 

FORMULAS FOR MOTION OF DROPPED OB]ECfS 
295 
speed to 192. Which speed should we use to compute the distance traveled? 
Presumably, the average speed. 
A reasonable guess would be that the average speed is the arithmetic 
average of the initial and final speeds, that is, (0 + 192)/2 or 96 ft/sec. Let us 
see whether we can establish the correctness of this guess. 
Suppose we calculate the speeds at the instants t = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. 
If we substitute these values of t in (2) we obtain the speeds 
0, 32, 64, 96, 1 28, 160, 192. 
If we take the average of these seven speeds, that is, 
0+ 32 + 64 + 96 + 1 28 + 160 + 192 
7 
we obtain 96 ft/sec. Of course, this calculation does not prove that the 
average speed is 96 because the object falls with varying speed even during 
the first second, the second second, and so forth. We might therefore average 
the speeds attained by the object after each half-second of fall, that is, the 
speeds at t = 0, t, I, t, 2, . . . .  , 6. These speeds are 
0, 16, 32, 48, 64, 80, 96, 1 12, 1 28, 144, 160, 1 76, 192. 
(3) 
If we average these speeds we again get 96 ft/sec. This calculation is no more 
of a proof that 96 is correct than the preceding one because even in each half­
second the object falls with a varying speed. Vet we continue to get the 
average of 96. Let us see whether we can find the reason that 96 results each 
time. 
We note that 96 is the speed the object attains when t = 3, because if we 
substitute 3 for t in (2) we get v = 96. Now it seems significant that the 
average speed occurs halfway through the time interval from ° to 6. This 
probably is the case because the speed at each instant before t = 3 and the 
speed at some corresponding instant after t = 3 average to 96. Indeed, if we 
examine the speeds in (3) we see that ° and 192, 16 and 176, J2 and 160, and 
so on, each averages to 96. In other words, if for each instant before t = 3, 
for example, t = It, and for the instant as far beyond t = 3, in our example 
t = 4t, the average speed is 96, then the average for all the instants will be 96. 
Just to check once more, at t= Ii the speed is 48 and at t=4t the speed is 144. 
The average of 48 and 144 is 96. 
This argument can be generalized. Let h be any interval of time. Then 
3 - h is some instant before 3 seconds, and, by formula (2), the speed of the 
falling body at the instant t = 3 - h is 32 (J - h) = 96 - 32h. At the instant 
t =  3 + h, which is h seconds after 3 seconds, the speed is J2(J + h) or 
96 + 32h. We see that the speed at t= 3 - h is 32h less than 96, and the speed 

296 
THE SIMPLEST FORMULAS IN ACTION 
at t = 3 + h is 32h more than 96. Hence the average speed for these two 
instants is 96 because 
96 - 32k + 96 + 32k 
2 
96. 
Since the object falls for as many instants during the interval from t = 0 to 
t = 3 as it does from t = 3 to t = 6, and since the pairing of instants equally 
far from t = 3 produces the average of 96, the average speed over the entire 
interval of 6 seconds is 96 ft/sec. It is important to note that this average 
speed is attained after one-half of the time of travel. 
If, instead of 6 seconds, we had used the general value of t seconds, then 
our conclusion would read that the average speed is attained after t/2 seconds. 
Since v = 32t, the average speed in the interval from 0 to t is given by 
average speed = 16t. 
The argument used to derive the average speed utilizes formula (2) and 
this is correct only when (1) holds. One should not, then, use the conclusion 
that the average speed is the speed attained at t/2 seconds in other kinds of 
motion. However. the argument does hold when the acceleration is constant, 
even if that constant is not 32. 
Now that we have the average speed of an object which is dropped and 
falls for t seconds, we can calculate the distance fallen. The average speed is 
that constant speed with which the object could have fallen to cover the same 
distance in t seconds. Since this average is a constant speed, we have but to 
multiply it by the time of travel to obtain the distance fallen. Then since 
161 . t = 16t', if we let d represent the distance fallen in t seconds, we have 
the new result: 
d = 16t'. 
(4) 
Formula (4) says, for example, that in 3 seconds the object falls 1 6 · 3', or 144 
feet. With a little mathematics we have derived an important law of falling 
bodies. It tells us the distance which any body that is dropped and freely 
falling travels in t seconds. 
We can derive a few significant consequences of formulas (2) and (4) by 
the application of simple algebra. Dividing both sides of formula (4) by 16 and 
taking the square root of both sides of the resulting equation, we obtain 
t=±>. 
This result tells us the time required for a dropped body to fall d feet. Of 

FORMULAS FOR MOTION OF DROPPED OBjECfS 
297 
course, of the two roots (one positive and one negative), only the positive 
value possesses physical significance because we are dealing with a physical 
situation in which t-ime is positive and measured from the instant the body 
begins to fall. Hence we shall forget about the negative root and consider that 
t = = . 
(5) 
If we now wished to calculate how long it takes an object to fall 1000 feet, we 
would substitute this value in formula (5) and calculate t. 
From formula (5) one can draw a most significant conclusion. The for­
mula does not tell us the name of the President of the United States, but this 
is not so surprising. However, it is surprising that the formula does not involve 
the weight or any other property of the falling body. This means that all 
bodies take the same time to fall a given distance, provided, of course that air 
resistance is neglected. A feather and a piece of lead take the same time to 
fall a given distance in a vacuum. This is the les:;on which Galileo is supposed 
to have learned by dropping various objects from the leaning tower of Pisa. 
Many people still hesitate to accept this conclusion because they observe bodies 
falling in air, and the resistance encountered by feathers is Quite different from 
that offered to lead. Undoubtedly it was this difference gleaned from actual ob­
servations which led the Aristotelians to the conclusion that heavier bodies 
fall faster. 
Fonnula (5) was derived by merely rearranging, so to speak, formula (4). 
But Galileo's plan envisaged also combining existing formulas to obtain new 
knowledge. To illustrate this process, suppose one takes the value of t given 
by (5) and substitutes it in the formula v = 32t. This yields 
v = 32 (d. 
'\f16 
Now the square root of a fraction is equal to the square root of the numerator 
divided by the square root of the denominator. Hence 
Vd 
v = 32 - = 8Vd. 
4 
(6) 
The new formula enables us to calculate the speed which a dropped body will 
acquire in falling d feet. While this information. is implicit in fonnulas (4) 
and (5), which yield (6), we now see clearly something we might not have 
appreciated before. We should note that formula (6) says that the speed 
increases as the square root of d. The predecessors of Galileo believed that 
the speed increased directly with distance. 

298 
THE SIMPLEST FORMULAS IN ACfION 
EXERCISES 
1. Was Aristotle wrong in asserting that, to keep an object moving at a constant 
speed in a real medium, a force must constantly be applied? 
2. Suppose that gravity does not exist and a man steps off the roof of a building. 
What would his subsequent motion be? What would it be in the presence of 
gravity? 
3. An automobile travels at the speed of 10 mi/hr for 59 min and at a speed of 
50 mi/hr for 1 min. What is its average speed? 
4. What is the speed of an object 4 sec after it is dropped? What is its average 
speed during the 4 sec? At what instant does the object actually possess this 
average speed? 
5. Distinguish between speed and acceleration. 
6. We may regard the formula v= 32t as an equation in v and t, and we may 
therefore plot t-values as abscissas and v-values as ordinates. Draw the curve of 
the formula v = 32t. 
7. Using the formula d = 16t2, calculate how far a body will drop in 5 sec, 6! sec, 
10 sec. Is the drop the same from one second to another? 
8. Apply the instructions of Exercise 6 to the formula d = 16t2• What is the name 
of the resulting curve? 
9. Graph the curve of d= 16t2• but let the downward direction of the vertical 
axis, that is the d-axis, be positive. 
10. A window washer at the 50th floor of a skyscraper (500 ft above the street) 
steps back to observe the results of his work. Describe mathematically his subse­
quent behavior. 
11. Using the fonnula v = 8#, calculate the speed with which an object dropped 
from the top of the Empire State Building (about 1000 ft above street level) hits 
the ground. 
12. If the relation between speed and distance were v=8d instead of v=8Vd, 
what difference would there be in the behavior of falling bodies? 
13. Suppose that we are considering the motion of an object which is dropped 
from a point near the surface of the moon. On the moon all objects also fall to 
the surface with a constant acceleration, and the value of this acceleration is 
5.3 ft/sec'. What change would you make in formulas (2) and (4) to have 
them represent speed acquired and distance traveled for objects falling to the 
moon's surface? Incidentally, the moon has no atmosphere, and hence air re­
sistance can surely be neglected. 
14. Suppose that an object is dropped and falls with a constant acceleration a. What 
would you propose as formulas for speed and distance faIlen in time t? 
15. Show first that formula (6) implies d=v'/64. Now suppose a dropped object 
acquires a speed of 88 ft/sec. What distance must it fall to acquire this speed? 
16. Suppose an object is traveling along a straight line with a speed of 88 ft/sec and 
then starts to lose speed, that is decelerates, at the constant rate of 32 ft/sec2• 
What distance must it travel for its speed to become zero? [Suggestion: The 

FORMULAS FOR MOTION OF OBJECTS THROWN DOWNWARD 
299 
distance it must travel to reach zero speed is the same as the distance it would 
travel if it starred with zero speed and accelerated at 32 ft/sec2 to attain a speed 
of 88 ft/sec.] 
17. As a direct generalization of the thought in Exercise 16, we may state that if 
an object is traveling in a straight line at a speed of v ft/sec and then loses speed 
at the rate of 32 ft/sec2, the distance d it travels before attaining zero speed is 
d=v/64. Suppose the deceleration is 11 ft/sec2. What formula gives the dis­
tance the object travels before attaining zero speed? 
18. Using the result of Exercise 17, answer the following question. An automobile 
is traveling at 60 mijhr (or 88 ft/sec), and the brakes are applied. The action of 
the brakes decelerates the automobile at the rate of 11 ft/sec2. How far will the 
automobile travel before stopping? The answer gives the minimum distance in 
which one can, even under most favorable road conditions, stop a car traveling 
at 60 mi/hr. However, it takes about 1 sec before a person who decides to apply 
the brakes actually does so. What distance will the automobile travel in that 
time? 
19. A man drops a stone into a well and listens for the sound of the splash. He 
finds that 6! sec elapse from the instant the stone is dropped until he hears the 
sound. How far below is the surface of the water? Assume that sound travels at 
1152 ft/sec. 
13-6 THE FORMULAS DESCRIBING THE MOTION OF OBJECTS THROWN DOWNWARD 
Thus far we have seen how simple formulas describe the motion of a body 
which is dropped. By employing slightly more complicated fonnulas Galileo 
was able to tackle further phenomena of motion. Suppose that instead of being 
dropped a ball is thrown downward. Now the ball does not start its motion 
with zero speed but with whatever speed the hand imparts to it. The problem 
we shall look into is, What is the subsequent motion of the ball? To be specific, 
suppose the hand imparts to the ball a speed of 96 ft/sec. Neglecting for the 
moment the action of the force of gravity, we can say that the ball will con­
tinue to travel downward in a straight line with a speed of 96 ft/sec. The basis 
for this assertion is, of course, the first law of motion. We know, however, that 
gravity will also act on the ball and give it a speed of 32t ftlsec in t seconds. 
Since both speeds will operate simultaneously to make the ball move down­
ward, the total speed, v, of the ball is represented by the formula: 
v = 96 + 32/. 
(7) 
Let us compare this formula with v = 32/. We see that the term 96 in 
formula (7) represents the speed given to the ball by the hand. Both formulas 
are said to be of the first degree in t because the independent variable, t, ap­
pears only to the first power. That is, the formulas contain 32t as opposed to 
32t', or 32t', or some other power of t. First-degree formulas are often called 
linear functions because the curve representing each is a straight line. 

300 
THE SIMPLEST FORMULAS IN ACTION 
We can also obtain the formula for the distance, d, which the ball will 
fall in 1 seconds. If there were no gravity, the ball would fall a distance of 961 
feet in 1 seconds because it would have the constant speed of 96 ft/sec im­
parted by the hand. But during the same 1 seconds, the force of gravity will 
exert an additional downward pull which, according to formula (4), will cause 
the ball to fall 16/2 feet. Since both forces, the hand and gravity, cause the 
ball to fall downward, the total distance, d, traveled in 1 seconds is 
d = 961 + 16t2• 
(8) 
Comparison of formula (8) with formula (4) shows that formula (8) contains 
a new term, 96t, which represents the contribution made by the action of the 
hand to the distance the ball falls. Formulas (4) and (8), incidentally, are of 
the second degree in 1 because the independent variable 1 occurs to the second 
power. Second-degree functions are also called quadratic functions. 
EXERCISES 
1. If a ball, instead of being merely dropped, is thrown downward with a speed of 
128 ft/sec, will its speed be greater in t seconds? Will the distance fallen in t 
seconds be greater? 
2. Write the formula representing the speed acquired and distance traveled in 
seconds by a ball which is thrown downward with a speed of 128 ft/sec. 
3. Suppose a ball is thrown downward with a speed of 96 ft/sec. What are the 
speed and distance traveled after 3 sec? after 4i sec? 
4. Graph formula (8) by plotting points whose coordinates satisfy the equation. 
What is the name of the resulting curve? 
5. Graph formula (8) by applying the method of change of coordinates presented 
in Chapter 12. 
13-7 FORMULAS FOR THE MOTION OF BODIES PROJECTED UPWARD 
A more interesting phenomenon both physically and mathematically is the 
motion of a ball thrown straight up into the air. Suppose, for example, that the 
ball is thrown upward with a speed of 96 ft/sec, and let us again consider the 
questions, What are the speed and distance traveled after 1 seconds of motion? 
If gravity is neglected, then the action of the hand will cause the ball to start 
upward with a speed of 96 ft/sec and, according to the first law of motion, it 
should continue to travel upward at that speed indefinitely. However, we 
know that the downward pull of gravity causes the ball to acquire in t seconds 
a downward speed of 32t ft/sec. Since the hand gives the ball an upward speed 
of 96 and gravity gives it a downward speed of 32/, the net speed, v, of the ball 
at the end of 1 secrmds is 
v = 96 - 3 2/. 
(9) 

FORMULAS FOR MOTION OF BODIES PROJECTED UPWARD 
301 
The minus sign in formula (9) takes care of the fact that the speed resulting 
from the action of gravity reduces the speed imparted by the hand. Formula 
(9) should be compared with formula (7). 
Let us turn to the second question: How far does the ball travel? Since the 
ball travels upward to some maximum height and then falls down, we shall 
instead ask the more pertinent question, What height above the ground does 
the ball possess at any time t1 If there were no gravity, the ball would move 
upward at the constant velocity of 96 ft/sec. Hence in t seconds it would 
travel upward 96t feet. However, we know that a ball moving above the 
surface of the earth for t seconds will experience a downward pull of gravity 
amounting to a distance of 16t' feet in t seconds. Hence the net height, d, 
reached by the ball is 
d = 96t - 16t'. 
(10) 
As in formula (9), the minus sign here represents the fact that the action of 
gravity offsets the action of the hand. 
We can now answer some questions about the motion of the ball. We 
know from experience that the ball will rise to some height and then fall back 
to the ground. How high will it go? We would expect the ball to continue 
to rise until its upward speed, which is continually decreasing, becomes zero. 
This fact can be put to use through formula (9). We now ask the question, 
What is t when v = O? Suppose we denote by t, this particular unknown value 
of t. Then we may say an the basis of formula (9) that 
o = 96 - 32t,. 
To find t, we have but to solve this simple equation. Clearly t, = 3. 
We have determined the time it takes the ball to reach its maximum height 
but not the height itself. However, formula ( 10) gives us the height at any 
time t. Suppose then that we substitute the value t, = 3 in (10) and calculate 
d" the height of the ball above the ground at this instant. Substitution of the 
quantity 3 for t in ( 10) yields 
d, = 96 ' 3 - 16 ' 32 = 144. 
Thus the maximum height above the ground to which the ball will rise is 
144 feet. 
We know that the ball will fall to the ground after reaching this maximum 
height. Will it take as much time to reach the ground from its maximum 
height as it did to travel from the ground to the maximum height' Those 
people who have lots of confidence in their intuition should answer this ques­
tion before we settle it by mathematical reasoning. 
To obtain an answer we must proceed somewhat indirectly. Our informa­
tion about the motion is contained in formulas (9) and ( 10). Of these two 

302 
THE SIMPLEST FORMULAS IN ACfION 
formulas, ( 10) offers some prospect of being useful because it relates time 
and height reached by the ball. There is one bit of information which might 
be used in connection with formula ( 10), namely, that when the ball reaches 
the ground, the height of the ball above the ground is zero. Let us therefore 
find the time at which the ball reaches the ground and then see what it suggesrs. 
We denote by I, the value of 1 at which the ball reaches the ground. 
Hence, by formula (10), 
o = 961, - 161؜. 
(II) 
Our problem now is to determine the value of I, which, according to ( I I), 
satisfies a second-degree equation. This equation is easily solved. We apply 
the distributive axiom to justify writing 
0 =  161,(6 - I,). 
(12) 
We are seeking the value or values of I, for which the right side of (\2) 
equals the left side. Clearly when I, = 0, one factor on the right side is zero, 
and hence the product is zero. Likewise, when t2 = 6, the product is zero. 
Hence, there are two values of I, namely 0 and 6, when d, the height above the 
ground, is zero. 
Why two values? Mathematically the two values result from the fact that 
we are solving a quadratic or second-degree equation. Physically the two 
values are readily understandable. The value I, = 0 is the value of 1 at the 
instant at which the ball is about to start out; I, = 6 is the value of 1 at the 
instant at which the ball hits the ground after traveling up and down. With 
respect to the problem in hand, the second value is the interesting one because 
it tells us that 6 seconds elapse during the upward and downward travel of 
the ball. Since we found earlier that the ball requires 3 seconds to reach its 
highest position, it is evident that only 3 seconds are required for the ball to 
return to the ground. Hence it takes exactly the same time for the ball to go 
up as it does to come down. 
We can now ask mathematics to answer another question for us. What 
speed does the ball possess when it strikes the ground? Is this speed the same, 
more, or less than the 96 fr/sec with which it was thrown up? The answer 
can be obtained at once. Formula (9) gives the speed of the ball at any instant 
of its flight. The ball strikes the ground at the instant 12 = 6. If we substitute 
6 for 1 in (9), we find that V2, the speed at the instant the ball strikes the 
ground, is 
v, = 96 - 32 ' 6 = -96. 
Thus mathematics tells us that the speed is 96 ft/sec, the very same speed with 
which it was projected upward. Obligingly, mathematics also tells us, through 
the minus sign, that the speed is in the opposite direction to that of the upward 
throw. 

EXERCISES 
FORMULAS FOR MOTION OF BODIES PROjECfED UPWARD 
303 
1. For a ball thrown upward with a speed of 128 ft/sec, what formula describes the 
relationship between the subsequent height above the ground and the time of 
travel? 
2. If a ball is thrown upward with a speed of 160 ft/sec, then the formula relating 
its subsequent height above the ground and the time of travel is d = 160t - 16t2, 
and the speed of the ball is given by the formula 
v = 160 - 321. 
a) How high is the ball after 4 sec? 
b) What is its speed at the end of the fourth second? 
c) How high will the ball go? 
3. If the height of a ball thrown upward is given by the formula d = 1441 - 161', 
what is d when t = 9? Interpret the result physically. 
4. If the height above the ground of a ball is representable by the formula 
d = 192t - 16t2, then its height after 4 sec is 512 ft, and its height after 8 sec is 
also 512 ft. Verify these heights and account for the fact that the height is the 
same after 4 additional seconds. 
5. If a gun capable of firing a bullet at the speed of 1000 ft/sec is fired straight 
upward, how high will the bullet go? 
6. Suppose that a ball is dropped from the top of a building 100 ft high. Let d 
represent the height of the ball above the ground and t the time of travel meas­
ured from the instant the ball is dropped. Write a formula representing the 
motion in terms of d and t. 
7. Since man seems to be preparing for experiences on the moon, it may be well 
to consider the following question. Suppose that a ball is thrown up from the 
surface of the moon with a speed of 96 ft/sec. How high will it go and how 
long will it take to reach its maximum height? Remember that on the moon the 
value of 5.3 ft/sec2 corresponds to the acceleration of 32 ft/sec2 which holds on 
the earth. 
8. Suppose that a bullet shot straight up into the air returns to the ground 60 sec 
later. What was the initial speed? [Suggestion: Use formula (10). However, 
the initial speed, which was 96 in formula (10), is now unknown.] 
9. A rocket is shot straight up into the air to a height of 50 mi at which point its 
velocity is 300 mi/hr. Its fuel is now exhausted, and hence the rocket receives 
no further acceleration from this source. Write a formula which describes the 
subsequent motion of the rocket. [Suggestion: You can choose the 50-mi point 
as the origin for height and zero time as the instant when the rocket is at that 
height.] 
10. A ball is thrown up into the air from the roof of a building with a speed of 
96 ft/sec. Write a formula for its subsequent height above the roof as a function 
of time. 
11. Using the data of Exercise 10 and the additional fact that the roof is 112 ft above 
the ground, find the time when the ball reaches the ground. 

304 
THE SIMPLEST FORMULAS IN ACfION 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
In all of the exercises below the units are feet and seconds. 
1. An object which is dropped near the surface of the earth acquires a speed in 
ft/sec of v = 32t in t sec. Calculate v when t is 
a) 7 
b) zt 
d) <Ii 
e) 9. 
2. An object falls and acquires the speed v = 32t in t sec. How long does it take to 
acquire a speed of 
a) IZ8 
b) 160 
c) 400 
d) 16? 
3. If an object acquires speed according to the formula v= 32t, what is its average 
speed during 
a) the first 5 sec of fall, 
b) the first 8 sec of fall? 
4. Suppose an object acquires speed according to the formula v = 32t. and we 
wished to compute the average speed during the eighth second of fall. Could 
we use the argument in the text (properly modified) to average the speed at 
t=7 and the speed at t = 8? 
5. Suppose an object is dropped and falls with a constant acceleration of g ft/sec2 
instead of 32 ft/sec2• What formula relates the speed and time of fall? 
6. Suppose an object is dropped and falls with a constant acceleration of g ft/sec2• 
Then in t sec it acquires a speed of v = gt ft/sec. One might convince himself 
that the argument given in the text where the acceleration is 32 ft/sec2 and the 
average speed proves to be 16t carries over to the case where the acceleration 
is g. Suppose the argument does carry over. 
a) What is the average speed for t sec of fall? 
b) What is the distance fallen in t sec? 
7. If an object is dropped near the surface of the earth, it falls d = 16t2 feet in 
t sec. Calculate d when t is 
a) 4 
b) 7 
c) 3t 
e) 5t. 
8. If an object falls according to the formula d = 16t2, how much is t when d is 
a) 64 
b) 96 
c) 144 
d) ZOO 
e) 169' 
9. If an object is thrown downward from a point near the surface of the earth 
with an initial speed of 64 ft/sec, the speed it acquires in t sec is given by the 
formula v = 64 + 32t. Calculate the speed when t is 
a) 3 
b) 3! 
c) 5 
d) 5t 
e) 7. 
10. If an object acquires speed according to 
does it take to acquire a speed in ft/sec of 
a) 96 
b) 100 
the formula v = 64 + 32t, how long 
c) 300 
d) 1 50? 
11. Suppose the constant acceleration of a falling object is g ft/sec2 and the object 
is thrown downward at speed of 100 ft/sec. Guess the formulas which represent 
a) the speed acquired in t sec, 
b) the distance fallen in t sec. 

FORMULAS FOR MOTION OF BODIES PROjECfED UPWARD 
305 
12. Suppose an object falls d ft in t sec where d = 128t + 16t'. How long does it 
take to fall 
a) 320 f[ 
b) 768 f[ 
c) 304 ft 
d) 156 f[? 
13. Suppose the constant acceleration of a faIling object is g ft/sec2 and the object 
is thrown upward with an initial speed of 128 ft/sec. Guess the formulas which 
represent 
a) the speed acquired in t sec, 
b) the height above the ground in t sec. 
14. If the height above the ground of an object 
IS given by the formula 
d = 96t - 16t2, how high is the object when t is 
a) 3 
b) 2! 
c) 5 
d) 5!? 
15. The height above the ground of an object is given by d = 96t - 16:2. Calculate 
the height when t = 7. What is the physical meaning of the result? 
16. If an object is thrown up from the roof of a building 200 ft high and the height 
of the object above the roof is given by d = 96t - 16t2, what is the height of 
the object when t = 7? What is the physical meaning of the result? 
17. If we had reason to believe that the acceleration of any object which is dropped 
near the surface of any planet, the sun, or the moon is a constant, could we carry 
over the mathematics of this chapter to motions of objects near the surface of 
these bodies? 
Topics for Further Investigation 
1. Galileo's scientific work. 
2. Huygens' scientific work. 
3. The importance of experimental work versus that of mathematical deduction 
from basic principles in seventeenth-century science. 
4. The scientific ideas espoused by Francis Bacon. 
Recommended Reading 
BELL, A. E.: Christian Huygens and the Development of Science in the Seventeenth 
Century, Edward Arnold and Co., London, 1947. 
BONNER, FRANCIS T. and MELBA PHILLIPS: Principles of Physical Science, pp. 37-65, 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Inc., Reading, Mass., 1957. 
BURTT, E. A.: The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Physical Science, 2nd ed., 
Chaps. 1 through 6, Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd., London, 1932. 
BUITERFIELD, HERBERT: The Origins of Modern Science, Chaps. 4 through 7, The 
Macmillan Co., New York, 1951. 
COHEN, I. BERNARD: The Birth of a New Physics, Chap. 5, Doubleday and Co., 
Anchor Books, New York, 1960. 

306 
THE SIMPLEST FORMULAS IN ACfION 
CROMBIE, A. C.: Augustine to Galileo, Chap. 6, Falcon Press Ltd., London, 1952. 
Also in paperback under the title: Medieval and Early Modern Science, 2 vols., 
Doubleday and Co., Anchor Books, New York, 1959. 
DAMPIER-WHETHAM, WM. C. D.: A History of Science and Its Relations with 
Philosophy and Religion, Chap. 3, Cambridge University Press, London, 1929. 
FARRINGTON, BENJAMIN: Francis Bacon: Philosopher of Industrial Science, Henry 
Schuman, Inc., New York, 1949. 
GALILEI, GALILEO: Dialogues Concerning Two New Sciences, pp. 147-233, Dover 
Publications, Inc., New York, 1952. 
HOLTON, GERALD and DUANE H. D. ROLLER: Foundations of Modern Physical 
Science, Chaps. 1, 2, and 13 through 15. Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Inc., 
Reading, Mass., 1958. 
KLINE, MORRIS: Mathematics and the Physical World, Chaps. 12 and 13, T. Y. Crowell 
Co., New York, 1959. Also in paperback, Doubleday and Co., New York, 1963. 
MOODY, ERNEST A.: "Galileo and Avempace: Dynamics of the Leaning Tower 
Experiment," an essay in PHILIP P. WIENER and AARON NOLAND: Roots of Scien­
tific Thought, Basic Books, Inc., New York, 1957. 
RANDALL, JOHN HERMAN, JR.: Making of the Modern Mind, rev. ed., Chaps. 9 and 
10, Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston, 1940. 
SAWYER, W. W.: Mathematician's Delight, Chaps. 8 and 9, Penguin Books Ltd., 
Harmondswonh, England, 1943. 
SMITH, PRESERVED: A History of Modern Culture, Vol. I, Chap. 6, Henry Holt & 
Co., New York, 1930. 
STRONG, EDWARD W.: Procedures and Metaphysics, University of California Press, 
Berkeley, 1936. 
TAYLOR, HENRY OSBORN: Thought and Expression in the Sixteenth Century, 2nd cd., 
Vol. II, Chaps. 30 rhrough 35, The Macmillan Co., New York, 1930. 
TAYLOR, LLOYD WM.: Physics, The Pioneer Science, Chaps. 3 through 7, Dover 
Publications, Inc., New York, 1959. 
WHITEHEAD, ALFRED N.: Introduction to Mathematics, Chaps. 2 through 4, Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, Inc., New York, 1939. 
WHITEHEAD, ALFRED N.: Science and the Modern World, Chap. 3, Cambridge Uni­
versity Press, London, 1926. 
WOLF, ABRAHAM: A History of Science, Technology and Philosophy in the 16th 
and 17th Centuries, 2nd ed., Chap. 3, George AIlen and Unwin Ltd., London, 
1950. Also in paperback. 

CHAPTER 14 
PARAMETRIC EQUATIONS AND CURVILINEAR MOTION 
I now propose to set forth those properties which belong to a body whose 
motion is compounded of two other motions, namely, one uniform and 
one naturally accelerated; these properties, well worth knowing, I propose 
to demonstrate in a rigorous manner. 
GALILEO 
14-1 INTRODUCTION 
We saw in the preceding chapter that simple functions can be used to express 
physical principles and that by applying algebra to the formulas which express 
the functions symbolically, we can obtain new physical knowledge. To some 
extent, then, we have come to recognize the broader significance and useful­
ness of functions and mathematical processes for science in general. However, 
we have hardly penetrated as yet the mathematical domain of functions nor 
have we learned enough applications to sense its real power. 
In this chapter we shall extend slightly the use of functions. In Chapter 
13, we represented the acceleration and speed attained and distance traveled 
by a falling body by using one formula for each physical quantity. We were 
enabled thereby to study motion along straight-line paths. We shall now ex­
amine motion along curved paths, for example, the motion of an object 
dropped from a moving plane, or the motion of a projectile shot out from a 
cannon. It was again Galileo who perceived the basic principle underlying the 
phenomenon of curvilinear motion. He presented the concept and its mathe­
matical treatment to the world in the Dialogues Concerning Two New 
Sciences, the very same book in which he treated motion in a straight line. 
Galileo's purpose in investigating curvilinear motion was to study the behavior 
of cannon balls, or projectiles in general. The cannon, introduced in the 
fourteenth century, had undergone such improvement by Galileo's time that 
it could fire a projectile over several miles. However, the theory of projectile 
motion was not we11 understood before Galileo's work because mathematicians 
and physicists had attempted to apply Aristotle's laws of motion, and these 
were nOt correct. 
307 

308 
PARAMETRIC EQUATIONS AND CURVILINEAR MOTION 
The problems that Galileo treated, e.g., the motion of cannon balls, un­
fortunately did not lose their importance in the succeeding centurie؝. In fact, 
they have become even more common and more complicated in our times, since 
such phenomena as the motion of bombs dropped from moving airplanes, the 
trajectories of death-dealing projectiles capable of traveling thousands of miles, 
and similar problems of modern "civilization," also fall within the puissance of 
Galileo's method. However, the value of this phase of Galileo's work is not 
limited to meting out death and destruction. Aside from using his results as 
an illustration of the power of mathematics, we shall see in the space of one 
chapter how an extension of Galileo's ideas on projectile motion led, in the 
hands of Newton, to the greatest advance in science which our civilization 
has achieved. 
14-2 THE CONCEPT OF PARAMETRIC EQUATIONS 
Let us suppose that a stone is thrown oUt hori­
zontally from the top 0 of a cliff (Fig. 14-1). 
We know from physical experience that the stone 
will travel out and down and follow the curved 
path OAB. If we introduce a set of coordinate 
axes on which the positive direction of the Y-axis 
is downward, then we know from our work in 
coordinate geometry that this curve can be repre­
sented by an equation. Let us suppose, for defi­
niteness, that this equation is y = x". Then it 
follows from equation (9) of Chapter 12 that the 
path is part of a parabola opening downward. 
We shall call y = x', which is, of course, also the 
fMmula that tells us how y changes when x 
changes, the direct relationship between x and y. 
() 
3 
X 
/ / 
/ 
/ 
I 
I 
I 
9 
I 
A 
y 
B 
Fig. 14-l. 
The path of a stone thrown 
out horizontally from the top 
o of a cliff. 
As the stone travels out and down, the horizontal distance and the down­
ward distance which it travels from the point 0 keep changing with time. 
Thus, at the point A, the horizontal distance traveled may be 3, and since 
y = x', the vertical distance must be 9. At the point B, the horizontal distance 
may be 4, in which case the vertical distance must be 16. 
The direct relationship between x and y is frequently useful, but it does 
not involve the time that the object is in motion. We may wish instead to 
utilize the equation which gives the relationship between horizontal distance 
traveled and time and the equarion which relates vertical distance and time. 
Let us mppose for t:,e moment that the stone travels straight out at the rate 
of J ft/sec. Then the relationship between horizontal distance and time is 
x= Jt. Since y = x', then in terms of t, y = (Jt)' or y =9t'. 

The two equations: 
THE CONCEPT OF PARAMETRIC EQUATIONS 
309 
x = 3t, 
y = 9t2, 
.(1) 
are called the parametric equations of the curve OAB. They describe the 
curve OAB just as well as does the single equation y = x', provided that we 
understand how parametric equations are to be used. For each value of t, 
equations (1) yield a value of x and a value of y. These values of x and y 
which belong to the sa.me value of t are the coordinates of one point on the 
curve OAB. Thus for t =  1, x= 3, and y = 9. Then (3, 9) are the coordinates 
of a point on the curve, namely, the point A, which we discussed earlier. For 
t = ė, x=4 and y = 16, and (4, 16) are the coordinates of the point B. 
We may also say that the two formulas x= 3t and y = 9t' are equivalent 
to the single formula y = x'. Whether we speak of equations of curves or 
formulas is really immaterial. The word formula emphasizes the idea of change 
because formulas are relationships among variables, and we often like to think 
of what happens to one variable as another, related variable changes. On the 
other hand, when a curve is given in its entirety, the concept of change may 
not be relevant, and then we speak of the equation of the curve. 
If the two formulas in (1) are entirely equivalent to the single formula 
y = x', why do we bother with two formulas instead of one? There are two 
reasons: (1) When one argues from physical principles, it is often easier to 
arrive at the parametric representation of a given phenomenon, and (2) it is 
easier to study the phenomenon by working with p·arametric equations. We 
shall recognize the utility of parametric representations as we study the next 
few sections. 
There is one more mathematical detail. Suppose that we find the para­
metric formulas describing a motion and we wish to determine the direct 
relationship between x and y. Can we do this? Yes indeed. For example, if 
x = 3t and y = 4t2 are the parametric formulas, we can solve the first one for 
t and obtain t = xj3. We substitute this value of t in y = 4t' and obtain 
Y = 4G)', 
or 
This is the direct relationship between x and y. 
EXERCISES 
or 
4x' 
y = -- .  
9 
1. If the parametric formulas representing a phenomenon are x = 2t and y = 3t, 
what is the direct relationship between x and y? What curve represents the 
parametric formulas or the cirect relationship? 
2. If the parametric formulas are x = 4t and y = 5t2, what is the direct relationship 
between x and y? What curve represents the direct re1ationship? 

3 10 
PARAMETRIC EQUATIONS AND CURVILINEAR MOTION 
3. Suppose the parametric formulas are x = 2t and y = lOt + 4t2• What is the direct 
relationship between x and y and what curve describes it? 
4. Suppose x =  3t and y = (!)t are the parametric equations of a curve. Sketch the 
the curve by using the parametric equations only. 
14-3 THE MOTION OF A PROJECTILE DROPPED FROM AN AIRPLANE 
Let us see now how parametric formulas arise in the study of physical phe­
nomena and how they can be useful in deducing new information about the 
phenomena. Suppose a bomb is released from an airplane which is flying 
horizontally at 60 miles per hour (an untealistic figure used for computational 
convenience). If there were no gravity, the bomb would continue to move 
forward alongside the airplane at the rate of 60 miles per hour. This fact 
seems surprising, but it is a consequence of the first law of motion, which states 
that if an object is in motion and no force is applied to alter that motion, then 
the object will continue to move indefinitely at the speed it already has. Since 
the bomb has been moving with the airplane, it already possesses a horizontal 
speed of 60 miles per hour. We have assumed that no forces are acting on 
the bomb and hence it will continue to move forward at that speed. There 
are more familiar analogous situations which may make the truth of what was 
just said a little more acceptable. Suppose that a person rides in an automobile 
which is moving at the rate of 60 miles per hour and the driver suddenly 
applies the brakes. The automobile's motion is then checked, but the passenger's 
motion is not, and he continues to move forward at 60 miles per hour, at least 
until he hits the windshield. 
Let us return to the motion of the bomb released from the plane. We had 
assumed that gravity was not acting. But it does act and it pulls the bomb 
downward at the same time as the bomb moves forward so that the bomb 
follows a curved path. Here Galileo made a discovery applying to projectile 
motion, namely, that one could study its horizontal and vertical motions as 
though they were occurring separately, and that the position of the bomb at 
any time could be determined by finding how far it had traveled horizontally 
and vertically. This idea was new and radical in Galileo's time. Aristotle had 
argued that one motion would interfere with the other, and that only one could 
operate at any given time. Thus he would have said that the violent motion 
imparted to the bomb by the airplane would prevail until the acting force was 
used up, and then the natural motion downward would take over and cause 
the bomb to fall straight down. 
Let us apply Galileo's way of analyzing the motion. The bomb moves 
horizontally at the constant speed of 60 miles per hour, or 88 feet per second. 
If we measure time from the instant the bomb is released from the plane, and 
if we measure horizontal distance from the point at which it is released, then 

MOTION OF PRO]ECfILE DROPPED FROM AN AIRPLANE 
3 1 1  
the horizontal distance x covered by the bomb in t seconds is given by the 
formula 
x = 88t. 
(2) 
This formula describes the horizontal motion. 
According to Galileo, the vertical motion downward takes place as though 
it were independent of the horizontal motion. But the vertical motion is due 
to gravity only, and we know that an object which falls straight down under 
the action of gravity and starts with zero speed falls 161' feet in t seconds. 
Hence, if we let y represent the distance downward from the point at which 
the bomb is released, then 
y = 1 6t2• 
(3) 
Formulas (2) and (3) together describe the entire motion. We observe 
that x and y, the horizontal and vertical distances traveled, are given in terms 
of a third variable, t. In fact, they are the parametric formulas for the morion 
in question. To draw the graph of the path described hy the bomb, we may 
adopt either of two methods. We can choose various values of t, say 
t = 0, 1, 2, 3, and so on, and calculate the values of x and y for each value of t. 
Thus when t = I, x = 88 and y = 16; then (88, 16) are the coordinates of one 
point on the curve. Calculating many such sets of coordinates will give us 
some idea of the shape of the curve 
(Fig. 14-2). 
Or we may proceed by the second 
method. that is, determine the direct 
relationship berween x and y. Solving 
equation (2) for t, we have t = x/88. 
Substituting this expression for t in 
(3) yields 
y = 16(;S 
or 
x2 
y = _ . 
484 
(4) 
Fig. 14-2. 
Path of a bomb released from an airplane 
flying horizontally. 
From formula (9) of Chapter 12 we know that the curve is a parabola. We 
have thus called upon our knowledge of curve and equation to determine that 
the curve is a parabola. If we had not been familiar with the curve of equation 
(4), we would have had to analyze the equation or plot points whose coordi­
nates satisfy (4) and thereby determine the curve. In other words, we would 
have been faced with a problem of coordinate geometry. 

312 
PARAMETRIC EQUATIONS AND CURVILINEAR MOTION 
We should note that only part of the parabola is of physical interest. The 
full parabola extends to the right and left of the Y-axis. However, only the 
part to the right, that is, the half corresponding tt) positive x-values, repre­
sents the motion of the bomb. And of this right-hand half, which mathe­
matically extends downward indefinitely, only an arc is of physical interest, 
namely the arc from 0 to the ground. 
We have learned so far that the path of the bomb released from an airplane 
traveling horizontally is an arc of a parabola. Let us now see whether we can 
use mathematics to derive more information about the motion of bombs or, in 
general, about objects which move outward and downward. Suppose that two 
airplanes flying horizontally at speeds of 60 and 120 miles per hour, respec­
tively, release bombs from the same point at the same instant of time. Which 
of these bombs would reach the ground sooner? The reader might try to 
answer this question by using his intuition before resorting to the use of 
mathematics. 
Both bombs must fall the same vertical distance to reach the ground. The 
vertical motion is independent of the horizontal motion and is governed by 
formula (3). Hence this formula applies to both bombs. When they reach the 
ground, the value of y will be the same for both bombs. It follows that the 
value of t will also be the same for both. That is, both bombs will reach the 
ground at the same time . 
.'I 
C 
Fig. 14-3. 
Paths of two bombs released 
iI!IlYiI!Ilil!llil!llil!llil!llil!llW!iZW!I!W!I!rl>TIflW!l!iii* 
from two airplanes with different 
y 
horiZontal speeds. 
How docs the difference in the speeds of the two airplanes affect the 
motion? The plane flying at 60 miles per hour gives its bomb a horizontal 
speed of 60 miles per hour, or 88 feet per second, and the plane flying at 120 
miles per hour imparts to its bomb a speed of 120 miles per hour, or 176 feet 
per second. Hence the bombs move with different horizontal speeds, and in the 
same time, t, the second one will travel farther horizontally. Thus OeD, the 
path of the second bomb, will be a wider parabola than OAB, the path traveled 
by the first bomb (Fig. 14--3) .  

EXERCISES 
MOTION OF PROJECTILES LAUNCHED BY CANNONS 
3 1 3  
1. Suppose that there were no force of gravity, and that an object is released from 
an airplane fiying horizontally at the rate of 100 mi/hr. Describe the subsequent 
motion of the object. 
2. One object is dropped from an airplane flying horizontally at the rate of 100 
mi/hr and another from a plane flying horizontally at 200 mi/hr. Both planes 
are at the same altitude. Compare the times required for the two objects to reach 
the ground. What principle is involved? 
3. From a cliff 500 ft high a stone is thrown horizontally with a speed of 100 ft/sec. 
How long does it take the stone to reach the ground below? What horizontal 
distance has the stone traveled by the time it strikes the ground? 
4. A gun installed in a plane which is flying in a horizontal line at a speed of 2000 
ft/sec fires a bullet in the direction of the plane's motion at the initial speed of 
1000 ft/sec. What is the horizontal speed of the bullet relative to the gra:und? 
5. A bullet fired horizontally hits a point on a wall 300 ft away. The point is 1 ft 
below the lovel at which the bullet is fired. What is the horizontal speed of the 
bullet? 
6. A plane is traveling in a horizontal line at a speed of 300 ft/sec and at an altitude 
of 1 mi. Where (at what horizontal distance from the target) should the gunner 
release a bomb to hit a given point on the ground? 
7. Suppose that a plane flying in a horizontal lir.e at the rate of 200 ft/sec releases a 
bomb and continues to fly horizontally at the same rate. Where is the plane in 
relation to the bomb when the bomb strikes the ground? 
14-4 THE MOTION OF PROJECTILES LAUNCHED BY CANNONS 
A slight extension of the mathematics just introduced to treat the motion of 
bombs dropped from airplanes will enable us to handle the motion of projec­
tiles shot out from cannons inclined at some angle to the ground. It was thi; 
latter problem which Galileo investigated in the seventeenth century. We shall 
see how neady mathematic, answers a variety of problems raised by such 
motions. 
Suppose that a cannon inclined at an angle of 3°" to the ground fires a 
shell with a velo؛ity· of 1000 ft/sec (Fig. 14-4). What is the subsequent 
motion of the shell? We know from intuition or experience with balls thrown 
at a similar angle of elevation that the shell will travel out and up along some 
cl.rved path and will then return to the ground. This qualitative knowledge 
is not, of course, sufficienr to answer significant questions about the motion. 
The initial velocity of the shell is in the direction which makes an angle 
of 3°" to the ground. To treat the motion of the shell, it is mathematically 
.. The terms speed and velocity are often used interchangeably. However, the word 
velocity implies that direction as well as magnitude of the speed are under discussion. 

314 
PARAMETRIC EQUATIONS AND CURVILINEAR MOTION 
y 
Fig. 14-4. 
Shell fired with an initial velocity of 
1000 ft/sec from a cannon inclined 
at an angle of 30° to the ground. 
simpler to consider its horizontal and vertical motions separately, that is, to 
obtain the parametric formulas. For this purpose we must know the horizontal 
and vertical velocities of the shell. 
Suppose that the shell travels for one second in the direction OR in which 
it is fired. How far will it travel horizontally and vertically in that second? 
Let us drop a perpendicular from R onto the X-axis and from R onto the 
Y-axis. Thus we determine the lengths OP and OQ, respectively. The length 
OP is the horizontal distance which the shell travels in one second and the 
length OQ is the corresponding vertical distance. Since OP and OQ are 
distances traveled in one second, they also represent the horizontal and vertical 
velocities. 
The horizontal and vertical velocities are then OP and OQ. What are 
their magnitudes? We see from Fig. 14-4 that 
or 
Similarly, 
or 
cos 30° = OP 
100 
OP = 1000 cos 30° = 1000(0.8660) 
PR 
sin 300 = 1000 
866 ft/sec. 
PR = 1000 sin 30° = 1000(0.5000) 
= 500 ft/sec. 
S;nce PR = OQ, the horizontal and vertical velocities of the shell are 866 ft/sec 
and 500 ft/sec, respectively. 
We now utilize the physical fact that the horizontal and vertical motions 
can be treated independently. Let us begin with the horizontal motion. The 
shell has an initial horizontal velocity of 866 ft/sec, and no force acts to ac­
celerate or decelerate the horizontal motion. Hence the shell will continue to 
move horizontally at a constant speed of 866 ft/sec, and the horizontal distance 
x traveled in time t is given by 
x = 866/. 
(5) 

MOTION OF PROJECTILES LAUNCHED BY CANNONS 
315 
Next we consider the vertical motion of the shell. Gravity gives the shell 
a constant acceleration downward of 32 ft/sec'. Since the upward direction 
has been chosen to be positive, the downward acceleration must be written 
a = - 32. 
(6) 
The downward velocity acquired in time 1 is -32t. However, the shell has an 
initial upward velocity of 500 ft/sec which, by the first law of motion, would 
continue indefinitely, were it not affected by gravity. The net velocity v is 
then (compare Section 13-7) 
v = 
- 32t + 500. 
(7) 
To obtain the distance traveled upward in any time t, we use the same 
reasoning as in the preceding chapter. If only the velocity of 500 ft/sec were 
acting, the distance traveled upward in t seconds would be 5001. But in that 
time gravity pulls the shell downward a distance of 161'. Hence y, the net 
height above the ground, is 
y = - 16t2 + 500t. 
(8) 
Fonnulas (5) and (8) give the horizontal and vertical distances from the 
starting point O. We note that once more motion is represented by parametric 
formulas. 
Several questions about the motion arise in practice. The first is, What 
path does the shell take? We may save ourselves the work of plotting the 
curve by determining the direct relationship between x and y, provided we 
recognize the curve of the resulting equation. Let us try this. Solving (5) for 
t yields t = x/866. We substitute this value of 1 in (8) and obtain 
or 
y =  _ 16(ؙ)2 + 500(ؚ) 
866 
866 
x2 
250 
Y = - 46,872 + 433 x. 
(9) 
In Section 12-5 we discussed equations of the form (9)-albeit by means of 
numerically simpler examples. We could have proved the quite general state­
ment that an equation of the form 
y = _ax' + bx, 
(10) 
where a and b are any positive numbers, represents a parabola which opens 
downward and passes through the origin. (See Exercise 3 of Section 12-5, 
which is a special case.) Hence with just a little more work in coordinate 

316 
PARAMETRIC EQUATIONS AND CURVILINEAR MOTION 
geometry, we could have proved what we shall now state without proof, 
namely, that equation (9) describes a parabola. Thus the parabola, as Galileo 
readily established, appears once more as the path of a projectile. 
What is the range of the shell? That is, how far from the starting point 
will the projectile strike the ground again? The answer is important because 
it tells us whether a given target on the ground can be reached. Unfortunately 
neither formula (5) nor formula (8) answers this question directly. However, 
when the shell reaches the ground, the value of y in (8) should be zero. Let us 
determine, then, the value of t, say t" when y = O. From (8) 
0 =  - 16tI + 500t,. 
(I I) 
Equation (II), which is of the second degree 10 t" is rather easy to solve. 
Applying the distributive axiom, we may write 
0 =  t,(- I6t, + 5(0). 
(12) 
The right side of (12) equals zero when either factor is zero, that IS, when 
t, = 0 and when 
-16t, + 500 = O. 
The second alternative leads to 
(Il) 
The first value, tl = 0, corresponds to the instant when the shell first starts 
its flight. Then the second value, 125/4, must be the time when the shell 
returns to the ground. 
To determine the range, one more step is necessary. Formula (5) tells us 
how far the shell travels horizontally in any time t. Since the shell travels 
125/4 seconds by the time it reaches the ground, we have but to substitute 
this value of t in (5) to get the range. If XI denotes the range, then (see 
Fig. 14-5) 
X, = 866 ȝ = 27,063 feet. 
(14) 
We might also like to know how high the shell will go in its flight and how 
long it takes to reach that height. These questions are readily answered. At 
the highest point in its flight, the vertical velocity is zero, else the shell would 
continue to rise. Formula (7) gives us the vertical velocity at any time t. Let 
us ask for the value of t, say t2, when v = O. Then 
0 =  -32t2 + 500 
or 
t2 = W = .if'- . 
(15) 

y 
A 
MOTION OF PROJECTILES LAUNCHED BY CANNONS 
317 
Y2 = 3906 
(OV======W======XBB X 
Fig. 14-5. 
Path of a shell shot from a cannon. 
X I =-27,063 
Hence it takes 125/8 seconds for the shen to reach the highest point. Now 
formula (8) tells us how high the shell is at any time t. Let us therefore 
find the height, Y2, when t =  125/8. We substitute 125/8 for t in (8) and 
obtain 
Y, = 
- 16 (.1f')' + 500 (.q.» 
or 
Y' = 3906 feet. 
(16) 
Hence the shell reaches a maximum height of 3906 feet above the ground. 
Another interesting question is whether the shell takes as long to travel 
from the cannon to its maximum height as it does to return from the latter 
position to the ground. Or, to fit the situation shown in Fig. 14-5, we may 
restate the question and ask, Does it take as long for the shen to travel from 
o to A as from A to B? We considered an analogous problem in the preceding 
chapter while discussing the motion of an object thrown straight up into the 
air and found that the two time intervals were equal. What does intuition 
suggest as the answer in the present case? 
We can show at once that the time required to get from 0 to A is the 
same as the time required to travel from A to B. Equation (1 3) supplies the 
time it takes the shen to reach B, that is, to travel the path OAB. Equation 
( 15) gives the time required to travel the path OA. We see at once that the 
value of t, is twice the value t,. Hence the time of travi:! along path AB 
must equal the time of travel along path OA. 
EXERCISES 
I. Suppose that a shell is fired in a direction making an angle of 400 with the ground 
and with a velocity of 300 ft/sec. What are the horizontal and vertical velocities 
of the shell? What are the parametric equations describing the motion? 
2. Suppose that the parametric formulas for the motion of a projectile are x = 20t 
and y = -16t2 + 30t. What is the direct relationship between x and y? What is 
the nature of the curve represented by the direct relationship between x and y? 
3. Suppose that the parametric formulas for the motion of a projectile are x = 3t 
and y = -16t2 + St. Working with these formulas, plot a few points of the path. 
4. Find the range of the projectile whose motion is described in Exercise 2. 

318 
PARAMETRIC EQUATIONS AND CURVILINEAR MOTION 
5. Find the maximum height of the projectile whose motion is described in Exer­
cise 2. 
6. What velocity does the shell whose motion is treated in Section 14-4 have on 
striking the ground? How does this terminal velocity compare with the initial 
velocity? 
* 14-5 THE MOTION OF PROJECTILES FIRED AT AN ARBITRARY ANGLE 
In the preceding section we saw how we could study the motion of a shell 
fired from a cannon which is inclined at an angle of 30° to the ground. The 
initial velocity of the shell in this direction was 1000 ft/sec. Since the angle of 
fire and initial velocity given in our example are representative values, the 
example teaches a great deal about the phenomenon of projectile motion. 
However, suppose that we sought to answer such questions as: What is the 
effect of the initial velocity on the range and on the maximum height attained 
by the projectile? What is the effect of the angle of fire on the range and on 
the maximum height of the projectile? At what angle should one fire a pro­
jectile to hit a given target? One could repeat the procedures pursued in the 
preceding section, using different initial velocities and angles of fire, and thus 
perhaps obtain answers to some of these questions. But the work would be 
considerable and still leave us with the problem of trying to infer a general 
conclusion from a number of special cases. The mathematician would not 
proceed in this way. He would suppose that the initial velocity is an arbitrary 
value, V, and that the angle of fire is an arbitrary angle, A, and then study the 
motion with these arbitrary values V and A. He might thereby obtain con­
clusions about all such motions because his results would hold for any initial 
velocity and any angle of fire. 
y 
Q 
- - - -, R  
I 
I 
v 
" 
[Of-\p-------X 
Fig. 14-6. 
Shell fired with an initial velocity of 
V ft/sec from a cannon inclined at 
an angle A to the ground. 
Let us pursue this general investigation of projectile motion. Suppose that 
a shell is fired from a cannon which is inclined at an angle A to the ground 
(Fig. 14-6), and that the initial velocity of the shell is V ft/sec. What is the 
subsequent motion of the shell? 
We shall follow the procedure of the preceding section. The first major 
point to remember is the physical principle that the horizontal and vertical 

MOTION OF PRO}ECfILES FIRED AT ARBITRARY ANGLE 
3 19 
motions of the projectile can be studied as though the motions were taking 
place independently. Hence let us find the initial horizontal and vertical 
velocities of the shell. By the very same argument that we used in Section 
14-4, we know that the components of the velocity OR in the horizontal and 
vertical direction (Fig. 14-6) are obtained by dropping a perpendicular from 
R onto the X- and Y-axes, respectively. Thus OP is the horizontal velocity, 
and OQ is the vertical velocity. Now 
Hence 
or 
Since 
and since OQ = PR, we have 
or 
OP 
cos A = OR 
OP = OR cos A 
OP = V cos A. 
sin A 
PR 
- ,  
OR 
00 = OR sin A 
00 = V sin A. 
(17) 
(IS) 
Formulas (17) and ( IS) give us the initial horizontal and vertical velocities, 
respectively. We must now see what happens when the shell is in motion. The 
horizontal motion is uniform; i.e., no force acts to speed it up or slow it down. 
The shell will therefore continue to travel indefinitely in the horizontal direc­
tion at the velocity given by (17). Let us use Vx to indicate the velocity in the 
X-direction. Then at any time t, 
Vx = V cos A. 
(19) 
Since the velocity in the horizontal direction is constant, the distance traveled 
is velocity multiplied by time. Then 
x = (V cos A) t. 
This expression is best written as 
x = Vt cos A, 
(20) 
so that there is no confusion about the fact that the quantity whose cosine is 
to be taken is A, whereas if we had written V cos At, one might think that 

320 
PARAMETRIC EQUATIONS AND CURVILINEAR MOTION 
the quantity is At. Formula (20) is a generalization of formula (5), for the 
866 in (5) is just 1000 cos 30°. 
To obtain the vertical velocity of the shell we must take into aCCount the 
fact that gravity does produce a vertical acceleration which affects the vertical 
velocity. This vertical acceleration is 32 ft/sec' and is downward. Since we 
have chosen the upward direction as positive, we have 
a = - 32. 
Because the acceleration is constant, the downward velocity gained by the 
shell in t seconds is -J2t. However the shell has an upward initial velocity of 
V sin A. Hence the net vertical velocity v, is 
v, = - 32/ + V sin A. 
(21) 
Next we use an old argument to determine the vertical height attained by 
the shell in t seconds. If only the velocity V sin A were acting, then in t 
seconds the shell would reach the height ( V  sin A)t or Vt sin A. However, 
in these t seconds gravity pulls the shell downward a distance of 161'. The 
net height, y, of the shell therefore is 
y = - 1612 + Vl sin A. 
(22) 
Formulas ( 19) through (22) supply the general equations of projectile 
motion. We are now in a position to answer with respect to the arbitrary 
values V and A the same questions that were discussed in the preceding section 
for a specific numerical example. Thus, by solving (20) for t and substituting 
this result in (22), we could find the direct relationship between x and y. We 
could then see that for any fixed value of V and any fixed value of A, the 
path is a parabola. Similarly, we could obtain general expressions for the 
maximum height reached by the shell, the time required to reach that height, 
and, say, the time required for the shell to return to the ground. In other 
words, we could reproduce for any V and A the results derived in the pre­
ceding section for special values of V and A. 
Let us turn instead to answering questions which we could not treat be­
fore. Let us study the effect of the initial velocity, V, and angle of fire, A, 
on the range of the cannon. To do this we must first determine the general 
expression for the range. The method is the same as the one used in the pre­
ceding section. 
We begin with the physical fact that when the shell strikes the ground, the 
y-value of its position is zero. Hence let t, be the value of 1 when y = o. 
Setting y = 0 in (22), we have 
0 =  - 161; + VI, sin A. 

MOTION OF PROjECfILES FIRED AT ARBITRARY ANGLE 
321 
We may apply the distributive axiom to write 
0 =  /,(- 1611 + V sin A). 
Now the right side is zero when 11 = 0 and when 
- 16/, + V sin A = O. 
(23) 
Sin"e II = 0 corresponds physically to the instant when the shell starts its 
motion, it follows that the value given by (23) is the value of I at the instant 
the shell strikes the ground. If we solve (23) for t" we find 
V sin A 
tl = 
--_
. 
1 6  
(24) 
To determine the shell's range, that is, its horizontal distance from the starring 
point at the instant when tl has the value just found, we use formula (20). 
Thus, if X, is the value of X when t has the value t" then 
or the range is 
V sin A 
x, 
= V cos A --,--
16 
Xl = V' 
- sin A cos A. 
16 
(25) 
Formula (25) answers one question immediately. If the angle A is held 
fixed, then the range depends upon V2. If V is increased, then Xl increases, 
and indeed XI increases rapidly because it depends upon V2 rather than upon 
just V. Also, if we wished to attain a given range with a given angle of fire, 
that is, if X, and A were specified, we could use (25) to calculate the necessary 
initial velocity, V. 
The more practical problem is to study the dependence of range upon 
angle of fire, for it is easier to change the angle of fire of a cannon than it is 
to change the initial velocity of the shells. Let us suppose, then, that the 
initial velocity V is fixed and ask the question, What is the maximum range 
that can be ob,.ined by varying angle A? Since V is fixed, our question, in 
view of (25), amounts to: For what value of A is the product sin A cos A a 
maxim am? A little mathematics provides the answer. 
'Ve know from our work on the trigonometric ratios that sin A and cos A 
are certain ratios of sides of a right triangle. The size of the right triangle 
. used to determine sin A and cos A J"es not matter because all possible right 
triangles containing a definite angle A are similar and therefore the ratio of 
two particular sides in any one of these triangles is always the same.· Hence 
• The reader can review this point in Chapter 7, where it was first made. 

322 
PARAMETRIC EQUATIONS AND CURVILINEAR MOTION 
let us choose a right triangle whose hypotenuse AB (Fig. 14-7) is the diameter 
of a definite circle. The vertex of the right angle of this right triangle must 
lie on the circle because a theorem of plane geometry states that the vertices of 
all right triangles with vertex C and hypotenuse AB must lie on a circle with 
AB as diameter. Let us denote the sides of the right triangle ABC by a, b, 
and c. We draw the perpendicular CD and denote it by h. Then, using the 
right triangle ADC, we obtain 
. A 
h 
Sin 
= _ . 
b 
From the right triangle ABC we have 
b 
cos A = - . 
c 
So far, then, we have found that 
. 
h b 
h 
sm A cos A = - . - = 
b
e
e 
c 
b 
A I"--c;:--!,.l- B 
(26) 
Fig. 14-7 
We may vary angle A and continue to regard it as an angle of a right 
triangle with hypotenuse AB because, as we noted above, the size of the right 
triangle is immaterial. Of course, variations in the angle A will produce 
changes in the position of C, but for the reason given earlier, C will continue 
to be a point on the circle with diameter AB. Hence we can consider all 
possible acute angles A by considering all triangles ABC with AB fixed and 
C varying on the circle. Let us now look at (26) again. Since the quantity c 
is fixed, sin A cos A will be a maximum when h is a maximum, and h is great­
est when it is the radius of the circle. But when h is the radius, C is directly 
above the center of the circle. Then AC = BC. In this case angle A = 45" 
because the right triangle ABC is isosceles. Hence 
sin A cos A 
is a maximum when angle A = 45°. 
We may now return to formula (25). We have found that when V is 
fixed, the maximum range, that is, the maximum possible value of Xl, is ob­
tained when A = 45". Since for A = 45", sin A = cos A = y'f/2, the maxi­
mum range is given by the formula 
maxImum Xl = v2 V2 V2 
_
.
_
.
_
-
16 
2 
2 
This famous result was first proved by Galileo. 
v2 
32 

EXERCISES 
SUMMARY 
323 
1. Formulas (20) and (22) give the parametric representation of the motion of 
a projectile. Find the direct relationship between x and y. 
2. Derive the formula in terms of V and A for the time it takes a projectile to reach 
its maximum height. 
3. What is the formula in terms of V and A for the maximum height reached by a 
projectile? 
4. Show generally that it takes as long for a projectile to return from its highest 
position to the ground as it does to travel from the cannon to the highest position. 
5. What is the range of a projectile which is fired with an initial velocity of 
2000 fe/sec and at an angle of 40° to the ground? 
6. What is the maximum range of a projectile fired with an initial velocity of 
800 ft/sec? 
7. How long does it take for a projectile fired with an initial velocity of 2000 ft/sec 
to reach a target located at maximum range? 
8. Show that the highest point which a gun can reach for all possible angles of fire 
but with the same initial velocity is attained by firing straight up. 
14-6 SUMMARY 
In this chapter we have seen how the simultaneous application of two simple 
formulas, the parametric formulas, makes it possible to represent an entire class 
of curves which phy'ically happen to be the paths of projectiles. The value 
of the parametric formulas is, then, that they enable us to answer readily a 
variety of questions about projectile motion. To appreciate how much mathe­
matics accomplishes in this area, one might consider how he would proceed 
experimentally to find, for example, the dependence of the range of a projectile 
on the angle of fire. One would have to fire at least dozens of projectiles at 
different angles, making certain that other factors, such as the velocity with 
which the projectiles are fired, the shape of the projectiles, and the state of the 
atmosphere, are constant, and accurately measure the range and angle each 
time. With all these precautions taken and the information secured, the ex­
perimenter might obtain some limited results. He might, for example, learn 
that as the angle of fire increases in 1°-degree steps from 1 °  to 40°, the range 
increases steadily, but he might miss the all-important fact that above 45" the 
range decreases. The dependence of range upon velocity would still be en­
tirely unknown and require further experimentation. But we have seen how a 
little mathematics costing only pencil and paper can supply the full story of 
the dependence of range upon angle of fire and initial velocity. 
Thus the present chapter, too, illustrates how the cotr.bination of mathe­
matics and simple physical axioms, such as the fact that the acceleration of 
bodies near the surface of the earth is 32 ft/sec', the first law of motion, and 
the independence of the horizontal and vertical motions, permits us to deduce 

324 
PARAMETRIC EQUATIONS AND CURVILINEAR MOTION 
a vast amount of knowledge about our physical world. The knowledge re­
ferred to at the moment concerns projectile motion under idealized conditions; 
that is, the resistance of air is neglected; the earth is assumed to be flat over the 
short distances which the projectiles cover; and the projectiles are limited to 
travel near the surface of the earth. One might regard the whole story as of 
minor interest because it deals with just one phenomenon and one which seems 
limited to bombs and guns. However, the study of this phenomenon has 
proved to be of immeasurable scientific importance. First of all, the deductions 
made from the physical axioms mentioned above can be checked experimen­
tally. If the deductions agree with experience we have some reason to believe 
that the axioms are correct. We must remember in this connection that phys­
ical axioms are generalizations from limited experience and that our confidence 
in them depends upon how well they continue to lead to new physical facts. 
Secondly, the study of motions near the surface of the earth, projectile motion 
in particular, led to the most important advance in science since 1600, namely 
Newtonian mechanics. The step to the broad science of mathematical mechan­
ics will be taken in the next chapter. 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
I. Sketch the curves whose parametric equations are given below. 
a) x = 31, 
Y = 71 
c) x = 312, 
Y = 51 
e) x = 5 cos 8, 
y = 5 sin 8 
b) x = 31, 
Y = 512 
d) x = 31 + 7, 
y = 51 + 9 
f) x = 21, 
Y = 512 + 3t 
2. Find the direct equations in parts (a), (b), (c), and (d) of Exercise l. 
3. Suppose a bomb is released from an airplane which is flying horizontally at a 
speed of 240 mph. 
a) Write the parametric equations of motion of the bomb. 
b) If the airplane is one mile above the ground, how long will it take the bomb 
to strike the ground? 
c) Suppose the airplane flies at 300 mph instead of 240. How long will it take 
the bomb to strike the ground? 
d) Suppose the airplane is 2 mi above the ground and flies at 240 mph. How long 
will it take the bomb to reach the ground? 
e) How far from the point on the ground directly below the point at which the 
bomb is released does the bomb strike the ground? 
4. Suppose a shell is shot from a cannon inclined at an angle of 450 with the ground 
and the shell is given an initial velocity of 2000 ft/sec. 
a) What are the horizontal and vertical velocities of the shell? 
b) Write the parametric equations of the motion of the shell. 
c) Find the range of the shell. 
d) What is the maximum height above the ground attained by the shell during 
its flight? 

Recommended Reading 
SUMMARY 
325 
GALlLEI. GALILEO: Dialogues Concerning Two New Sciences, pp. 234 through 282, 
Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1952. 
HOLTON, GERALD and DUANE H. D. ROLLER: Foundations of Modern Physical 
Science, Chap. 3, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Inc., Reading, Mass., 1958. 
KLINE, MORRIS: Mathematics and the Physical World, Chap. 14, T. Y. Crowell Co., 
New York, 1959. Also in paperback, Doubleday and Co., New York, 1963. 

CHAPTER 15 
THE APPLICATION OF FORMULAS TO GRAVITATION 
. . .  from motion's simple laws 
Could trace the secret hand of Providence 
Wide-working through this universal frame. 
JAMES THOMSON in his 
Memorial Poem to Newton 
15-1 THE REVOLUTION IN ASTRONOMY 
While Galileo was fashioning the new science of motion, Johannes Kepler was 
making dramatic contributions to one of the most far-reaching developments 
in the history of Western civilization. This development was begun by 
Nicolaus Copernicus and its essence was a radically new mathematical theory 
of planetary motions. 
Up to the sixteenth century the only sound and useful astronomical theory 
was the geocentric system of Hipparchus and Ptolemy which we examined 
in Chapter 8. This was the theory accepted by professional astronomers and 
applied to calendar reckoning and navigation. It was, however, a rather 
sophisticated creation in that its strength lay entirely in the mathematical 
effectiveness of the scheme. The deferents and epicycles had no physical sig­
nificance in themselves nor did the theory give any physical or intuitive rea­
sons that the planets should move on epicycles attached to deferents. 
The author of the next great celestial drama was Nicolaus Copernicus, who 
lived about 1400 years after Ptolemy. Copernicus was born in Poland in 1473 
and, after studying mathematics and science at the University of Cracow, de­
cided to go to Italy, the center of the revived Greek learning. At the Uni­
versity of Bologna, which he entered in 1497, he studied astronomy. Then for 
ten years he studied medicine and law and secured a doctor's degree in both 
fields. He also became learned in Greek and mathematics. In 1 500 Copernicus 
was appointed a canon of the Cathedral of Frauenberg in East Prussia, but he 
did not assume his duties until 1512 when he had finished his studies in Italy. 
The job, which entailed mainly the management of estates owned by the 
Cathedral, left Copernicus with plenty of time to make astronomical observa-
326 

THE REVOLUTION IN ASTRONOMY 
327 
tions and to think about the relevant theory. After years of reflection and 
observation Copernicus finally evolved a new theory of planetary motions 
which he incorporated in a classic work, On the l<ev% ,tions of the Heavenly 
Spheres. This appeared in 1543, the year in which Copernicus died. 
As we have already noted, when Copernicus began to think about astron­
omy, the Ptolemaic theory was the only sound and effective system in exis­
tence. This theory had become somewhat more complicated during the inter­
vening centuries in that more epicycles had been added to those introduced by 
Ptolemy, to make the theory fit the increased amount of observational data 
gathered largely by the Arabs. In Copernicus' time the theory required a total 
of 77 circles to describe the motion of the sun, moon, and the five planets 
known then. 
Copernicus had studied the Greek works and had become convinced that 
the universe was mathematically and harmoniously designed. Harmony de­
manded a more pleasing theory than the complicated extensions of Ptolemaic 
theory. Copernicus read that some Greek authors, notably Aristarchus, had 
suggested the possibility that the sun might be stationary and that the earth 
revolved about the sun and rotated on its axis at the same time. He decided to 
explore this possibility. He was in a sense overimpressed with Greek thought, 
for he, too, believed that the motions of heavenly bodies must be circular or, 
at worst, a combination of circular motions since circular motion was natural 
motion. Moreover, he also accepted the belief that each planet must move at 
a constant speed on its epicycle, and that the center of each epicycle must 
move at a constant speed on the circle which carried it. Such principles were 
axiomatic for him. Copernicus even adds an argument which shows the some­
what mystic character of sixteenth-century thinking. He says that a variable 
speed could be caused only by a variable power; but God, the cause of all 
motions, is constant. 
The upshot of such reasoning was that Copernicus used the scheme of 
deferent and epicycles to describe the motions of the heavenly bodies, with, 
however, the all important difference that the sun was at the center of each 
deferent, while the earth itself became a planet moving about the sun and 
rotating on its axis. Nevertheless, he achieved considerable simplification. He 
was able to reduce the total number of circles, deferents and epicycles, to 34 
instead of the 77 required under the geocentric view. 
However, the remarkable simplification was achieved by Johannes Kepler, 
one of the most intriguing figures in the history of science. In a life beset by 
many personal misfortunes and hardships occasioned by social and political 
events, Kepler had the good fortune to become in 1600 an assistant to the 
famous astronomer Tycho Brahe. Brahe was then engaged in making exten­
sive new observations, the first such major undertaking since Greek times. 
These observations, together with others which Kepler made himself, were 
invaluable to him in his later work. When Brahe died in 1601 Kepler suc-

328 
THE APPLICATION OF FORMULAS TO GRAVITATION 
ceeded him as Imperial Mathematician to the Emperor Rudolph II of Austria, 
King of Bohemia. 
Kepler's scientific reasoning is fascinating. Like Copernicus, he was a 
mystic and, like Copernicus, he believed that the world was designed by God 
in accordance with some simple and beautiful mathematical plan. This belief 
dominated all his thinking. But Kepler also had qualities which we now asso­
ciate with scientists. He could be coldly rational. His fertile imagination trig­
gered the conception of new theoretical systems. But he knew that theories 
must fit observations and, in his later years, saw even more clearly that em­
pirical data may indeed suggest the fundamental principles of science. Coper­
nicus, too, wanted his theory to fit observational data; yet he held to the 
heliocentric view, although the differences between theoretical predictions and 
astronomical data were greater than might be accounted for by experimental 
errors alone. Kepler, on the other hand, sacrificed his most beloved theories 
when he saw that they did not fit observational data, and it was precisely this 
incredible persistence in refusing to tolerate discrepancies which any other 
scientist of his day would have disregarded that led him to espouse radical 
ideas. He also had the humility, patience, and energy to perform extraordinary 
labor which mark great men. 
In his book 0" the Motion of the Planet Mars, published in 1609, Kepler 
announced the first two of his three famous laws of planetary motion. The 
first of these is especially remarkable, for Kepler broke with the tradition held 
for 2000 years that circles or spheres must be used to describe heavenly mo­
tions. Instead of resorting to deferent and several epicycles, which both Ptol­
emy and Copernicus had used to describe the motion of any one planet, Kepler 
found that a single ellipse would do. His first law states that each planet moves 
on an ellipse and that the sun is at one (common) focus of each of these 
elliptical paths (Fig. 15-1) .  The other focus of each ellipse is merely a 
mathematical point at which nothing physical exists. 
Kepler's first law utilizes a geometrical figure which had been introduced 
and studied by the Greeks of the classical period. Had the ellipse and its 
properties not yet been known, and had Kepler been faced with the double 
Phmet 
s. 
Fig. 15-1. 
Each planet moves in an ellipse about the 
sun. 
( 
s 
• 
Q' 
) 
P' 
Fig. 15-2. 
Kepler's law of equal areas. 

THE REVOLUTION IN ASTRONOMY 
329 
problem of abstracting the proper path from a multitude of data and con­
ceiving the ellipse, he might possibly have ended up in an impasse. By working 
out the properties of this curve Euclid, Apollonius, and Archimedes determined 
the course of our civilization just as decisively as if they had stood at Kepler's 
side. 
Kepler's first law is of immense value in comprehending readily the paths 
of the planets. But astronomy must go much further if it is to be interesting 
in itself and useful. It must tell us how to predict the positions of the planets. 
If one finds by observation that a planet is at a particular position, P say in 
Fig. 15-2, he might like to know when it might be at some other position, a 
solstice or an equinox, for example. What is needed is the velocity with which 
the planets move along their respective paths. 
Here, too, Kepler made a radical step. Copernicus, as we noted earlier, 
and the Greeks had always used constant velocities. A planet moved along 
its epicycle so as to cover equal arcs in equal times, and the center of each 
epicycle also moved at a constant velocity on another epicycle or on a deferent. 
But Kepler's observations told him that a planet moving on its ellipse does 
not move at a constant speed. Kepler searched hard and long for the correct 
law of velocities and found it. What he discovered was that if a planet moves 
from P to Q (Fig. 15-2) in, say one month, then it will also move from P' to Q' 
in one month, provided that the area PSQ equals the area P'SQ'. Since P is 
nearer the sun than P' is, the arc PQ must be larger than the arc P'Q' if the 
areas PSQ and P'SQ' are equal. Hence the planets do not move at a constant 
velocity. In fact, they move faster when closer to the sun. 
Kepler was overjoyed to discover this second law. Although it is not so 
simple to apply as a law of constant velocity, it nonetheless confirmed his 
fundamental belief that God had used mathematical principles to design the 
universe. God had chosen to be just a little more subtle, but a mathematical 
law clearly determined how fast the planets moved. 
Another major problem remained open. What law described the distances 
of the planets from the sun? The problem was now complicated by the fact 
that a planet's distance from the sun was not constant but varied from a least 
to a greatest value (see Fig. 15-2). Hence Kepler searched for a new principle 
which would take this fact into account. Now he believed that nature was 
not only mathematically but harmoniously designed and he took this word 
"harmony" very literally. Thus he believed that there was a music of the 
spheres which produced a harmonious tonal effect, not one given off in actual 
sounds but discernible by some translation of the facts about planetary motions 
into musical notes. He followed this lead and after an amazing combination of 
mathematical and musical arguments, arrived at the law that if T is the period 
of revolution of any planet and D is its mean distance from the sun, then 
T'= kD', 

330 
THE APPLICATION OF FORMULAS TO GRAVITATION 
where k is a constant which is the same for all the planets. This statement is 
Kepler's third law of planetary motion and the one which he triumphantly 
announced in his book The Harmony of the World (1619). 
15-2 THE OBJECTIONS TO A HELIOCENTRIC THEORY 
The work of Copernicus and Kepler is by far the most dramatic, startling, and 
influential development in the formation of modern culture. The first sur­
prising feature, and one which in itself makes their work astounding, is the 
sharp break from existing thought. Copernicus and Kepler were educated in a 
milieu which accepted the geocentric theory of Ptolemy as almost unquestion­
able truth. Moreover, both were scientifically cautious. Nor did either really 
have at his disposal any unusual observations which conflicted sharply with 
Ptolemy's theory. Copernicus, as a matter of fact, was not a great observer 
and did not seem to mind leaving his work somewhat at odds with observations. 
Kepler did have access to more numerous and more reliable data and showed 
greater tenacity in making the theory fit the data, but there was nothing in 
these observations which suggested that an entirely new theory must be in­
troduced. 
'''hile casting aside the weight of centuries, Copernicus and Kepler could 
give only token rebuttals to the numerous scientific arguments against a mov­
ing earth which Ptolemy had advanced against Aristarchus. How could the 
heavy earth be put into motion? That the other planets were in motion even 
according to Ptolemaic theory was explained by the doctrine that these were 
made of special light matter and therefore easily moved. About the best 
answer Copernicus could give was that it was natural for a sphere to move. 
Another scientific argument against the earth's rotation maintained that rotation 
would cause objects to fly off into space just as an object on a rotating platform 
will fly off. Copernicus had no answer to this argument. To the further ob­
jection that a rotating earth should itself fly apart, Copernicus replied weakly 
that since the earth's motion was natural, it could not destroy the body. Then 
he countered by asking why the sky did not fall apart under the very rapid 
daily motion which the geocentric theory called for. Vet another objection 
declared that if the earth rotated from west to east, an object thrown up into 
the air should fall back to the west of its original position because the earth 
moved on while the object was in the air. If, moreover, the earth revolved 
about the sun, then, since the velocity of an object is proportional to its weight, 
or so at least Greek and Renaissance physics maintained, lighter objects on the 
earth should be left behind. Even the air should be left behind. To the last 
argument Copernicus replied that air is earthy and so moves in sympathy with 
the earth. 
These scientific objections to a moving earth were weighty ones and could 
not be dismissed as the stubborness of doubters who refused to see the truth. 

THE ARGUMENTS FOR THE HELIOCENTRIC THEORY 
3 3 1  
The substance of the matter is that a rotating and revolving earth did not fit in 
with the physical theory of motion due to Aristotle and common in Coper­
nicus' and Kepler's time. 
Another class of scientific arguments against a heliocentric theory came 
from astronomy proper. The most serious one stemmed from the fact that 
the heliocentric theory regarded the stars as fixed. In six months the earth 
changes its position in space by 186 million miles. Hence if one notes the 
direction of a particular star at one time and again six months later, he should 
observe a difference in direction. But this difference was not observed in 
Copernicus' and Kepler's time. Copernicus answered that the stars are so far 
away that the difference in direction was too small to be observed. However, 
his explanation did not satisfy the critics, who countered that if the stars were 
that distant, then they should not be clearly observable. In this installce, 
Copernicus' answer was correct. The change in direction over a six-month 
period for the nearest star is an angle of 0.76", and this was first detected by 
the mathematician Bessel in 1838 who, of course, by that time had a good tele­
scope at his disposal. 
A further, powerful argument against a moving earth contended that we 
do not feel any motion despite the fact that the earth is presumably moving 
around the sun at 18 miles per second and that a person on the equator is 
rotating at the rate of about 0.3 miles per second. Our senses, on the contrary, 
tell us that the sun is moving in the sky. Of course, there are counterargu­
ments which would mean more to us today because we have the experience 
of traveling at high speeds. A pe,"on traveling in an airplane at 400 miles per 
hour does not feel the motion. But to the people of Copernicus' time the 
argument that we do not feel ourselves moving at the very high speeds called 
for by the new astronomy was convincing. 
15-3 THE ARGUMENTS FOR THE HELIOCENTRIC THEORY 
In view of the numerous and sound arguments against the heliocentric theory 
and the challenge it posed to the prevailing religious thinking of the times, 
what made Copernicus and Kepler take up this long-discarded thought and 
pursue it so courageously? For what most other men would call a mes' of pot­
tage, they broke with established physics, philosophy, religion, and common 
sense. 
Both were convinced that the universe is mathematically designed and 
hence that a true pattern of the motions was inherent. Moreover. this design 
was instituted by God, and God would surely have used a simple and har­
monious pattern. But Ptolemaic theory had become so encumbered in the 
sixteenth century that it was no longer simple or beautiful. Hence Copernicus 
and Kepler believed, when each found a more harmonious and simpler theory, 
that their work was indeed a description of the divine order of things. 

332 
THE APPLICATION OF FORMULAS TO GRAVITATION 
There are many passages in Copernicus' On the Revolutions of the H eav­
enly Spheres and in Kepler's writings which bear unmistakable testimony to 
this motivation as the central force in the search for a new theory and to their 
conviction that they had found the right one when it proved to be simpler. 
Copernicus says of his theory: 
We find therefore, under this orderly arrangement, a wonderful symmetry in 
the universe, and a definite relation of harmony in the motion and magnitude 
of the orbs, Of a kind that it is not possible to obtajn in any other way. 
Kepler remarks of his later work wherein he had already introduced the el­
liptical theory of motion, "I have attested it as true in my deepest soul and 1 
contemplate its beauty with incredible and ravishing delight." The work of 
Copernicus and Kepler is the work of men searching the universe for the 
harmony which their religious convictions assured them must exist and which 
must be describable mathematically and simply because God had so designed 
the universe. What distinguishes their religious convictions from those of their 
contemporaries is that they did not tie themselves to literal interpretations of 
the Holy Writings. They searched for the word of God in the heavens. 
The core of the argument which Copernicus and Kepler presented for the 
heliocentric theory was its mathematical simplicity. Their philosophical and 
religious convictions assured them that the world is mathematically and simply 
designed; accordingly the fact that a heliocentric view was mathematically 
simpler than the geocentric one determined their position. The mathematical 
simplicity of the new view was, in fact, the sole argument they could advance. 
Only persons possessed of the unshakable conviction that mathematics is the 
essence of the design of the universe and that the omnipotent mathematician 
would necessarily prefer simplicity would dare to advance such a radical theory 
and would have had the courage to defend it against the opposition it was sure 
to and did encounter in those times. 
The new theory appealed to astronomers, geographers, and navigators 
because it simplified their theoretical and arithmetical work. Hence many 
of these men adopted the new view just as a mathematical convenience, even 
though they were not convinced of its truth. While this feature of the new 
theory carried little weight with Copernicus and Kepler, it nonetheless had the 
effect of making more and more people think in terms of a heliocentric view, 
and, since one tends to accept as true what is familiar, there is no doubt that 
this practical aspect did, in the long run, help to gain adherents for the theory. 
Support for the new theory came from an unexpected development. Early 
in the seventeenth century the telescope was invented. and Galileo, upon hear­
ing of this invention, built one himself. He then proceeded to make observa­
tions of the heavens which startled his age. He detected four moons of 
Jupiter (we now can observe twelve), and this discovery shoy/ed that a 
moving planet can have satellites. Hence it was likely that the earth, toO, 

THE ARGUMENTS FOR THE HELIOCENTRIC THEORY 
333 
could be in motion and yet have a satellite, our moon. Galileo saw irregular 
surfaces and mountains on the moon, spots on the sun, and a bulge around 
the equator of Saturn (which we now call the rings of Saturn). Here was 
further evidence that the planets were like the earth and certainly not perfect 
bodies composed of some special ethereal substance, as Greek and medieval 
thinkers had believed. The Milky Way, which had hitherto appeared to be 
just a broad band of light, could be seen with the telescope to be composed of 
thousands of separate stars, each of which gave off light. Thus, there were 
other suns and presumably other planetary systems suspended in the heavens. 
Moreover, the heavens clearly contained more than seven moving bodies, a 
number which had been accepted as sacrosanct. Copernicus had predicted 
that if human sight could be enhanced, then man would be able to observe 
phases of Venus and Mercury, that is, to observe that more or less of each 
planet's hemisphere facing the earth is lit up by the sun, just as the naked eye 
can discern the phases of the moon. Galileo did discover the phases of Venus. 
All of Galileo's observations were made with a telescope of such limited 
power that, as has been said, it is remarkable he could find Jupiter, let alone 
the moons of Jupiter. Many of his discoveries were in direct support of a 
heliocentric theory; others served primarily to challenge current beliefs and 
to at least prepare some minds for a more objective examination of the new 
theory. Galileo, himself, though he lectured on Ptolemaic theory until 1605, 
had been converted to Copernicanism by a work of Kepler. In 1611 he openly 
declared for Copernicanism. His own observations convinced him that the 
Copernican system was correct, and in the classic Dialogue on the Great 
World Systems he defended it strongly. By the middle of the seventeenth 
century the scientific world was willing to proceed on a heliocentric basis. 
One word of caution regarding the work of Copernicus and Kepler: these 
men believed that the heliocentric theory was true for the reasons already 
cited. This is not the view we hold today. If the criterion is truth, then 
heliocentric theory is not to be preferred to Ptolemaic theory. Scientific 
theories, we now believe, are the work of man. The mind supplies the patterns 
which organize observations. We may indeed prefer the heliocentric theory 
because it is simpler and agrees better with observations, but we do not regard 
it as the last word. Another theory, which still may not be the truth, may be 
conceived and produce even better results. As a matter of fact, one was-the 
theory of relativity. We shall not anticipate too much. The evolution of the 
concept of truth as it applies to mathematics and mathematical theories of 
science will be a continuing concern. 
EXERCISES 
1. What is a geocentric astronomical system? a heliocentric astronomical system? 
2. Did Copernicus break completely with Greek astronomy? 
3. Is the sun at the center of the Keplerian system? 

334 
THE APPLICATION OF FORMULAS TO GRAVITATION 
4. What innovations did Kepler introduce into the Copernican system? 
5. To reconstruct Kepler's improvement on Copernicus, suppose that a planet P 
moves once around its epicycle while the center of the epicycle moves once 
completely around the sun. What path does the planet seem to follow in relation 
to the sun? Would it be simpler to accept this single path as opposed to the 
combination of epicycle and deferent? 
6. What scientific objections were there to an earth in motion? 
7. Why did Copernicus and Kepler advocate the new heliocentric theory? 
8. Why do you accept the heliocentric theory? 
9. State Kepler's first law of planetary motion. 
10. State Kepler's second law of planetary motion. 
1 1. If we take the earth's average distance from the sun, 93,000,000 mi, as the unit of 
distance and the earth's period of revolution, 1 year, as the unit of time, then 
Kepler's third law says that T'l=D3. If the average distance of Neptune from 
the sun is 2,797,000,000 mi, how long does it take the planet to complete one 
revolution around the sun? 
15-4 THE PROBLEM OF RELATING EARTHLY AND HEAVENLY MOTIONS 
In view of the fact that Galileo had discovered the laws which underlie ter­
restrial motions and Kepler had discovered the basic laws of planetary motion 
one would expect that the scientists of the seventeenth century would have 
regarded the theory of motion to be complete. But to scientists who seek the 
ultimate design of our universe, the two accomplishments we have just de­
scribed immediately suggested more profound problems. A comparison of 
these two classes of laws, namely Galileo's for terrestrial motions and Kepler's 
for heavenly motions, revealed several basic differences. In the first place, 
Galileo had started with clear physical principles, such as the first law of 
motion and the constant downward acceleration of objects moving near the 
surface of the earth, and had deduced the formulas which describe straight­
line and curvilinear motions. Kepler's three laws, though they fitted observa­
tions within the limits of observational errors, did not rest on physical prin­
ciples. They were merely accurate mathematical descriptions of collections of 
data. Moreover, the three laws were logically independent of one another. 
Secondly, for terrestrial motions, the parabola was found to be the basic path 
of curvilinear motion, whereas for planetary motion, the ellipse was the basic 
path. 
This comparison raised several questions. Could one establish any logical 
relationship among the Keplerian laws or were they really independent? What 
physical principles determined planetary motions? The mathematical laws, 
accurate and succinct as they were, presented after all only a rather bleak 
account, without giving any insight into, or rationale for, the motions. And 
why should parabolic paths prevail on earth and elliptical paths in the heavens? 

RELATING EARTHLY AND HEAVENLY MOTIONS 
335 
The overriding question, however, which bothered the leading scientists 
of the latter half of the seventeenth century was: Could one establish a con­
nection between the laws of terrestrial motion and the laws of planetary 
motion? Perhaps the very ,.me physical principles which Galileo had used 
to deduce the paths of objects moving near the earth could lead to the laws 
describing the motion of the planets. In this event, the fWO classes of laws 
would be united; the Keplerian laws would be related to each other by being 
deduced from a common basis; and the physical reasons for planetary motion 
would be revealed. 
The thought that all the phenomena of motion should follow from one 
set of physical principles might seem grandiose and inordinate to reasonable 
people, but it occurred very naturally to the religious mathematicians of the 
seventeenth century. God had designed the universe, and it was to be ex­
pected that all phenomena of nature would follo'v one master plan. One mind 
designing a universe would almost surely have employed one set of basic 
principles to govern as many related phenomena as possible. Since the scien­
tists of the seventeenth century were engaged in the quest for God's design 
of nature, it seemed very reasonable to them that they should seek the unity 
underlying the diverse earthly and heavenly motions. As phrased by Newton, 
this goal was 
to derive two or three general principles of motion from phenomena, and after­
wards to tell us how the properties and actions of all corporeal things follow 
from these manifest principles . . .  
A less cogent but to mathematicians nonetheless significant indication of the 
existence of some unity was f:lrnished by the fact that parabola and ellipse 
were both conic sections. The common mathematical origin of these curves 
warranted some belief that parabolic and elliptical motions were but special 
cases of some fundamental principle of motion. 
In the seventeenth century, there were other less weighty but perhaps 
more pressing reasons to pursue the study of motion beyond the stage 
reached by Galileo and Kepler. Another open question was how to relate 
heavenly and earthly motions in a more limited but practical connection. This 
was the problem described earlier of determining the longitude of a ship at sea. 
Although navigators had used the stars, sun, and moon to determine the loca­
tions of their ships, the positions of these celestial bodies at various times of 
the year had yet to be related more precisely to the longitudes of points on the 
earth. In the seventeenth century it seemed that the moon would be most 
suitable for the determination of longitude because its closeness permitted 
accurate observation of its position from points on the earth. Hence, more 
precise information about the motion of the moon around the earth was needed. 
This became a major scientific problem of the age. 

336 
THE APPLICATION OF FORMULAS TO GRAVITATION 
15-5 A SKETCH OF NEWTON'S LIFE 
Any great advance in mathematics and science is almost always the work of 
many men contributed bit by bit over hundreds of years. Then one man smart 
enough to distinguish the worthy ideas of his predecessors from the welter of 
suggestions and results and imaginative and audacious enough to fit the sig­
nificant ideas into a master plan makes the culminating and definitive step. In 
the problem of unifying all the phenomena of motion, the decisive step was 
made by Isaac Newton. 
He was born in 1642, premature and weak. His mother was already 
widowed and so preoccupied with running the family farm that she could 
pay no attention to the boy. The elementary education Newton received in 
local schools of a small English town could hardly have given him much of a 
start, and in his youth Newton showed no promise. His family sent him to 
Cambridge University, where he entered Trinity College in 1661. Here, at 
last, Newton got the opportunity to study the works of Copernicus, Kepler, 
and Galileo, and here he had at least one good teacher, the distinguished mathe­
matician Isaac Barrow. His university work was not outstanding and he had, 
in fact, such difficulties with geometry that he almost changed his course of 
study from science to law. However, Barrow did recognize that Newton had 
ability. 
Newton finished his undergraduate work; at that point an outbreak of the 
plague in the area around London led to the closing of the university. He, 
therefore, spent the years 1665 and 1666 in the quiet of the family home at 
Woolsthotpe. During this period Newton initiated his great work in me­
chanics, mathematics, and optics. He realized that the law of gravitation. 
which we shall examine shortly, was the key to an embracing science of 
mechanics; he obtained a general method for treating the problems of the 
calculus (see Chapters 16 and 17); and through experiments he made the epochal 
discovery that white light such as sunlight is really composed of all colors 
from violet to red. "All this," Newton said later in life, "was in the two 
plague years of 1665 and 1666, for in those days I was in the prime of my 
age for invention, and minded mathematics and philosophy [science] more 
than at any other time since." 
Newton returned to Cambridge in 1667 and was elected a Fellow of 
Trinity College. In 1669, Isaac Barrow resigned his professorship of mathe­
matics to devote himself to theology, and Newton was appointed in Barrow's 
place. Newton apparently was not a successful teacher, for few students at­
tended his lectures; nor did anyone comment on the originality of the material 
he presented. 
In 1684 his friend Edmond Halley, the astronomer of Halley's comet fame, 
urged him to publish his work on gravitation and even assisted him editorially 
and financially. Thus in 1687 the classic of science, the Mathematical Principles 
of Natural Philosophy, often briefly referred to as the Principia or the Prin-

NEWTON'S KEY IDEA 
337 
ciples, appeared. This book received much acclaim and, aside from three Latin 
editions, appeared in many languages. One popularization was entitled N ew­
tonial1ism for Ladies. The Principia is written in the deductive manner of 
Euclid; that is, it contains definitions, axioms, and hundreds of theorems and 
corollaries. Its conciseness makes it difficult reading. To excuse this aspect, 
Newton told a friend that he had made the Principia difficult on purpose "to 
avoid being baited by little smatterers in mathematics." He thereby hoped to 
avoid the criticisms heaped on his earlier papers on light. 
After about thirty years of creative activity which included some work in 
chemistry, Newton became depressed and suffered a nervous breakdown. He 
left Cambridge University to become Warden of the British Mint in 1696 and 
thereafter confined his scientific activities to the investigation of an occasional 
problem. He did, however, devote himself to theological studies, which he 
regarded as more fundamental than science and mathematics because the latter 
disciplines concerned only the physical world. In fact, had Newton been born 
two hundred years earlier he would almost surely have become a theologian. 
An example of his theological writing is The Chronology of the Ancient Kings 
Amended, in which he sought to determine the dates of Biblical events by 
utilizing astronomical facts mentioned in connection with these events. 
During his last years and posthumously he was honored in many ways. 
He was President of the Royal Society of London from 1703 to his death; he 
was knighted in 1705; and he was buried in Westminster Abbey. 
15-6 NEWTON'S KEY IDEA 
In his philosophy and method of science, Newton followed Galileo. He, too, 
believed that the universe was mathematically designed by God and that mathe­
matics and science should strive to uncover that glorious design. Like Galileo, 
he was convinced that fundamental physical principles should be quantitative 
statements about the real qualities of the world, space, time, mass, weight, and 
force. From these principles and with the axioms and theorems of mathematics, 
it should be possible to deduce the laws of nature. Newton expressed this phi­
losophy in the preface to his Principles: 
. . .  fOT the whole burden of philosophy [science] seems to consist in this­
from the phenomena of motion to investigate the fOTces of nature, and from 
these forces to demonstrate the other phenomena . . .  
By investigating the forces of nature, he meant to arrive at the basic laws gov­
erning the operation of these forces and to deduce the consequences. 
The first problem, then, in executing such a program is to discover the 
fundamental principles. Like Galileo, Newton insisted on obtaining these by 
direct study of the physical world rather than by searching one's mind for 
hypotheses that seemed to be reasonable or by accepting Biblical passages. 

338 
THE APPLICATION OF FORMULAS TO GRAVITATION 
Here, too, Newton is explicit. In another of his famous books, Opticks, first 
published in 1704, he says: 
Thus analysis consists in making observations and experiments and in drawing 
general conclusions by induction, and admitting of no objections against the 
conclusions, but such as are taken fTom experiments or other certain truths. 
What Newton sought to emphasize and what required emphasis in his time is 
that generalizations must be based on some experimental Of observational 
grounds, and that no hypothesis can be tolerated which is contrary to a single 
bit of physical evidence. Further, deductions made from the basic principles 
must also be ia accord with physical evidence, for only by continued agree­
ment between deductively established conclusions and experimental tests can 
one acquire confidence that the original generalizations afe correct. 
With such principles of scientific method clearly in mind, Newton turned 
to the problem of finding the physical principles which would lead to a 
unifying theory of earthly and celestial motions. He was, of course, familiar 
with the principles unearthed by GaIileo. But these were presumably not 
enough. It was clear from the first law of motion that the planets must be 
acted on by a force which pulls them toward the sun, for if no force were 
acting, each planet would move in a straight line. The idea of a force which 
constantly pulls each planet toward the sun had occurred to many men, 
Kepler, the famous experimental physicist, Robert Hooke, the physicist and 
renowned architect, Christopher Wren, Halley and others, even before New­
ton set to work. It had also been conjectured that this force exerted on a dis­
tant planet must be weaker than that exerted on a nearer one and, in fact, that 
this force must decrease as the square of the distance between sun and planet 
increased. But, prior to Newton's work, none of these thoughts about a 
gravitational force advanced beyond speculation. 
Newton adopted these ideas. However, in his attempt to tie in the action 
of the gravitational force with motions on the earth, a line of thinking oc­
curred to him which was highly imaginative and certainly original in his time 
but which is now an almost daily experience. He considered the problem of 
what happens when a projectile is shot out horizontally from the top of a 
mountain. As Newton knew and as we know from our study of Galileo's 
work, the projectile follows a parabolic path to earth (see Chapter 14, 
Fig. 14-3). If the horizontal speed of the projectile is increased, then the path 
is wider but remains parabolic. However, Galileo had assumed that the earth 
was Rat and that the projectiles were given moderate initial horizontal speeds 
such as a cannon might impart to shells. Newton then asked himself what 
would happen if the sphericity of the earth were taken into account, and if 
the horizontal speeds of tؗ.e projectiles were gradually increased. If the 
sphericity of the earth is taken into account, then projectiles with small hori­
zontal speeds will follow the paths PA and PB of Fig. 15-3. As the speed is 

NEWTON'S KEY IDEA 
3 39 
increased somewhat, the projectile might take a path such as PC. Suppose now 
that the speed is increased still more. Would the projectile fall off into space? 
Not necessarily. As the projectile travels into space, it is pulled toward the 
earth. But the pull of . spherical earth is directed toward the center, and hence 
the projectile, subjected to this continuous pull toward the center, need not 
fall off into space. It might, in fact, continue to circle the earth indefinitely if 
the earth pulled it in just enough so that it would not wander out into space 
and yet not fall to earth. 
And so Newton concluded in his Principles: 
And after the same manner that a projectile, by the force of gravity, may be 
made to revolve in an orbit, and go round the whole earth, the moon also, either 
by the force of gravity, if it is endowed with gravity, or by any other force, 
that impels it toward the earth, may be continually drawn aside towards the 
earth, out of the rectilinear [straight-line] way which by its innate force [inertia] 
it would pursue; and would be made to revolve in the orbit which it now 
describes; nor could the moon without some such force be retained in its orbit. 
If this force were too small, it would not sufficiently turn the moon out of a 
rectilinear course; if it were too great, it would turn it too much, and draw the 
moon from its orbit toward the earth. It is necessary that the force be of a just 
quantity, and it belongs to the mathematicians to find the force that may serve 
exactly to retain a body in a given orbit with a given velocity; . 
p 
Fig. 15-3. 
Projectiles shot out horizontally from the top 
of a mountain with increasing horizontal 
velocities. 
This argument which showed how the motion of the moon around the earth 
could be related to mؘtions occurring on earth was immediately extended to 
the motions of the planets about the sun. The planets, set into motion some­
how, are attracted by the sun and are presumably pulled in just enough to keep 
them from flying off into space or from crashing into the sun. 
Thus Newton had some reason to suppose that the same force which 
pulled projectiles to earth caused the moon to revolve around the earth and 
the planets to revolve around the sun. He had now to determine precisely how 
strong the force of gravitation is, that is, how it depends upon the bodies 
involved and upon the distances between the bodies. 

340 
THE APPLICATION OF FORMULAS TO GRAVITATION 
15-7 MASS AND WEIGHT 
Before we can understand Newton's law of gravitation we must distinguish 
two properties of matter, mass and weight. Newton's first law of motion says 
that if no force is applied, bodies continue at the speed they already have. 
Stated otherwise, the law says that bodies have inertia; they persist in the 
motion they already have unless compelled to do otherwise by the application 
of force. This inertia or resistance of matter to change in speed is called 
inertial mass or just mass. 
Do all objects have the same mass? Not at all. Since mass exhibits itself 
in an object's resistance to change in speed, we can appeal to experience to 
see that different objects may possess different masses. Suppose, for example, 
that a small and a large ball of lead are at rest on the ground and one wishes to 
start them moving. Experience tells us that we must exert more force to get 
the larger ball rolling than to get the smaller one rolling with the same speed. 
Since more force is required in the first case, the larger ball must possess more 
mass. Or we can imagine the force that might be required to stop these balls 
if they were rolling toward us at the same speed. Again, more force would be 
required to stop the larger one. Thus the masses of objects are not the same. 
We shall not present physical methods of measuring mass. It suffices to 
know that by adopting a unit of mass, just as we adopt a unit of length, we can 
compare all other masses with this unit and so determine exactly how much 
mass there is in any individual piece of matter. Mass is measured in pounds or 
grams, the pound being approximately 454 grams. 
Bodies falling to earth possess acceleration. Hence some force must be 
acting to produce this change in speed. The force, as Galileo and others 
realized, is the pull of the earth or the force of gravity. We feel this pull when 
we hold an object in our hands. This particular force applied to an object is 
called the weight of the object. Hence weight and mass are by no means the 
same. Mass is inertia or resistance fO change in speed, and weight is a force 
exerted by the earth. 
However, there is a remarkable, experimentally determined relationship 
between the mass and weight of an object, namely, near the surface of the 
earth the weight is always 32 times the mass; in symbols: 
w = 32m. 
(I) 
The quantity 32 is precisely the acceleration which all bodies falling to earth 
possess. Thus equation ( I )  says that the force, w, which the earth exerts on 
a mass, m, is the acceleration with which it causes the mass to fall times rhe 
mass. When the mass m is measured in pounds, the weight w is measured in 
poundals. Thus a mass of one pound has a weight of 32 poundals. For con­
venience, 32 poundals are called one pound of weight. Of course, a pound of 
mass and a pound of weight are not the same physical quantities; and it is con-

THE LAW OF GRAVITATION 
341 
fusing at times to use the same unit for both mass and weight. Yet, as we shall 
see in a moment, this confusion is not roo serious. (If the mass is measured in 
grams, the quantity which replaces 32 is 980, and the units are centimeters per 
sec'. Then instead of (I) we have 
w = 98Om, 
and the weight w is measured in dynes.) 
Because weight and mass are so intimately related, we do not trouble in 
ordinary life to distinguish between the two properties. Large masses have 
large weights, and so, even in those instances where we are actually concerned 
with the mass of an object, we often tend to think of weight. For example, if 
one were to try to start an automobile rolling by pushing it, he would have to 
exert considerable force. The average person relates this fact to the great 
weight of the automobile. However, weight plays no role here because the 
force of gravity acts downward and has no effect on motion along the ground. 
The forceful push is required because the mass resists change in speed. Hence, 
it is the mass of the automobile rather than the weight which calls for the 
exertion of great force. 
EXERCISES 
1. Why do people usually fail to distinguish between mass and weight? 
2. Let us assume that the relationship between weight and mass on the moon has the 
same mathematical form as on the earth; that is, the weight is a constant times 
the mass. The acceleration which the moon gives to all bodies falling toward its 
surface is 5.3 ft/sec2. If a man weighs 160 lb on the earth, what will he weigh on 
the moon? 
3. If the acceleration which the sun imparts to bodies falling toward its surface is 
27 times that imparted by the earth, what would a man whose weight on the eanh 
is 160 lb weigh on the sun? 
15-8 THE LAW OF GRAVITATION 
Newton adopted the conjecture already made by his contemporaries, namely, 
that the force of attraction, F, between any two bodies of masses m and M, 
respectively, separated by a distance r is given by the formula 
mM 
F =  G
-2 • 
r 
(2) 
In this formula, G is a constant; i.e., it is the same number, no matter what 
m, M, and r may be. The numerical value of this constant, which we shall 
determine later, depends upon the units used for mass, force, and distance. 

342 
THE APPLICATION OF FORMULAS TO GRAVITATION 
From the mathematical standpoint, formula (2) represents a new type of 
functional relationship. The quantity F is the dependent variable which 
depends upon three independent variables, m, M, and r, the quantity G being 
a constant. If we give values to m, M, and T, then the value of F is determined. 
Such a function is. of course, more complicated than, say the formula 
d = 96t - 16t2, which contains just one independent variable. t. and one 
dependent variable, d. When one is working in a situation in which m and M 
are fixed and only r can vary, then F is a function of just one independent 
variable. For example, if G were 1, m were 2, and M were 3. then the rela­
tionship between F and r would be F = 6/T'. This formula expresses the 
dependence of the gravitational force between two fixed masses on the distance 
between them. 
Newton had yet to show that formula (2) was the correct quantitative 
expression for this force. To apply formula (2) and to work with forces in 
general, Newton adopted a second quantitative physical principle which 
proved to be just as important as his law of gravitation. As we noted in the 
preceding section, near the surface of the earth the force of gravity of the earth 
gives to objects an acceleration of 32 ft/sec', and the force is 32 times the 
mass of the object. Newton generalized this relationship and affirmed that 
whenever any force acts on an object it gives that object an acceleration. 
Moreover, the relationship of force, mass of the object, and acceleration im­
parted to the object, is 
F = mao 
(3) 
In this formula F is the amount of force applied to the object of mass m, and 
a is the amount of acceleration imparted to the object. In the special case 
where F is the weight w, the value of a is 32 ft/sec'. Formula (3) is known as 
Newton's second law of motion. It applies to any force, whether or not it be 
the force of gravity. As in the case of formula ( 1 ), if m is measured in pounds 
and a in feet and seconds, then F is measured in poundals. Thus a force of 32 
poundals gives a mass of I pound an acceleration of J2 ft/sec'. The unit, 
pound, is also used for forces with the understanding that one pound of force 
equals 32 poundals. 
Let us see how Newton tested his law of gravitation. We shall write (2) 
in the slightly different form 
F =  
GM 
m
-- · 
r' 
(4) 
If we compare (3) and (4), we observe that the quantity GM/r' in (4) plays 
the role of a in (J); that is, the law of gravitation can be viewed as stating that 
the gravitational force F gives a mass m the acceleration GM/r'. In symbols, 
(5) 

FURTHER DISCUSSION OF MASS AND WEIGHT 
343 
Now let M be the mass of the earth and let m be the mass of a small body near 
the surface of the earth. Then there is the question of what r in (5) represents. 
I t is supposed to represent the distance between the two masses. Shall we take 
it then to be the distance from the mass m to the surface of the earth or to 
some point in the interior? If the two masses were separated by millions of 
miles, as are the earth and sun, one might idealize each mass and regard it as 
concentrated at one point because the size of each mass is small compared with 
the distance between them. But for objects near the surface of the earth, the 
value of r depends heavily upon what point in or on the surface of the earth is 
chosen as the position of the earth. Newton conjectured (and later proved) 
that for purposes of gravitational attraction the mass of the earth could be 
regarded as though it were concentrated at the earth's center. Hence, with 
respect to the earth's gravitational acceleration acting on a mass m near the 
surface of the earth, r in (5) can be taken to be 4000 miles or 2 1,120,000 feet. 
This value of r is essentially the same for all objects near the surface of the 
earth. Moreover, the mass M of the earth is constant, and so is G. Hence, for 
all objects near the surface of the earth, the entire right side of (5) is constant. 
Consequently, the acceleration which gravity imparts to all objects near the 
surface of the earth is constant. This is precisely what Galileo had found and, 
in fact, he had determined that the constant is 32 ft/sec'. Thus Newton's law 
of gravitation met its first test, for it yielded as a special case a well established 
fact. 
EXERCISES 
1. Suppose that the gravitational force varies with the distance between two definite 
masses according to the formula F = 6/r2. Show graphically how F varies with r. 
2. Knowing that the acceleration of objects near the surface of the earth is 32 ft/sec2, 
use fonnula (5) to calculate the acceleration which the earth exerts on objects 
1000 mi above the surface of the eanh. 
3. Suppose that an object falls to earth from a point 1000 mi above the surface. 
May we use the formula d = 16t2 to compute the time it takes to fall this distance? 
4. What is the mass of an object which weighs 150 Ib? (One pound of weight is 32 
poundals.) 
5. How much force is required to give an automobile weighing 3000 Ib an accelera­
tion of 12 ft/sec2? 
15-9 FURTHER DISCUSSION OF MASS AND WEIGHT 
With some support for the law of gravitation we can now, following Newton's 
example, adopt it as an axiom of physics and see what conclusions we may 
draw from this axiom and the other axioms of physics and mathematics. The 
law itself states that the force of gravitation F between any two masses m and 

344 
THE APPLICATION OF FORMULAS TO GRAVITATION 
M is given by the formula 
(6) 
where 7 is the distance between the masses. Formula (6) leads immediately 
to a better understanding of the relationship between weight and mass and to 
an extension of the concept of weight. Let M be the mass of the earth and let 
m be the mass of some other object. Since F is the force with which the earth 
attracts this object, we can regard F as the weight of the object, for this at­
tractive force is what we have meant by weight. However, we now see 
that the force or weight depends upon the distance 7 between the two masses. 
Hence, the weight of an object is not really a fixed number but varies with the 
distance of the object from the earth or, more precisely, from the center of 
the earth (see Section 15-8). If an object of mass m is at the surface of the 
earth, its weight is given by 
F, = G 
Mm 
, 
(400 . 5280) 2 
(7) 
but the same object taken 1000 miles above the surface of the earth will have 
the weight: 
G 
Mm 
F -
2 -
(5000 ' 5280) 2 
(8) 
The value F2 is considerably less than F, because the denominator in the 
second expression is much larger. We see, then, that the farther an object of 
mass m is from the surface of the earth, the less is its weight. On the other 
hand, the mass of the object, that is its resistance to change in speed, is the 
same at all locations. Thus we can see more clearly that the weight and mass of 
an object are quite different properties. 
The concept of weight can, and in the present scientific era must, be ex­
tended still further. So far we have considered the weight of an object to be 
the force with which the earth attracts the object. But now let us imagine that 
the object were taken to the moon and, for simpliciry, let us suppose that no 
matter other than the moon and the object exist in space. May we speak of 
the weight of the object on the moon? The law of gravitation applies to moon 
and object, and so the moon will attract the object. This attractive force will 
be the weight of the object on the moon. To calculate this weight, we have 
but to let M in (6) be the mass of the moon, m, the mass of the object, and 7, 
the radius of the moon. We know that the radius of the moon is 1080 miles or 
1080 · 5280 feet. The mass of the moon can be determined by methods similar 
to those used later (Section 15-10) to compute the masses of the earth and 

FURTHER DISCUSSION OF MASS AND WEIGHT 
345 
sun. The result of the ca\culation, which we may accept for present purposes, 
is that the weight of an object on the moon is i its weight on earth. 
We can extend the notion of weight still further. Suppose that an object 
is in space somewhere between earth and moon. According to the law of 
gravitation, the earth ar:rracts the object, and so does the moon. Since these 
attractions oppose each other, we may regard the weight of the object as the 
net am·action. If we now think of the object as moving from the earth to the 
moon, then the ar:rracrive force of the earth decreases while that of the moon 
increases. At the outset, the eanh's force is stronger, but at some point in the 
path to the moon the two forces will be equal and oppositely directed so that 
the net weight of the object will be zero. This point is located at a distance of 
about 24,000 miles from the moon along the line from the earth to the moon. 
All of the above considerations about weight are now no longer purely aca­
demic flights of fancy but are important factors in the process of determining 
the paths of rockets which are sent out to strike the moon. 
EXERCISES 
1. Suppose that a person weighs 150 lb at the surface of the earth where, of course, 
his distance from the center of the eanh is 4000 mi. What would this person 
weigh at a point 4000 mi above the surface of the earth? 
2. How does the law of gravitation enable us to further differentiate between the 
mass and weight of an object? 
3. Suppose that of two objects on the earth, one has twice the mass of the other. 
Show that the force with which the earth attracts the first one is twice the force 
with which the earth attracts the second. 
4. What would a man whose present weight is 150 lb weigh if the eanh's mass 
were one-tenth of what it is? 
5. Suppose that the earth's mass were twice as large as it is. What change would 
there be in the acceleration of falling bodies? Would a body which is dropped 
from a height of 1000 ft reach the ground sooner than it now does? 
6. It is stated in the text that all bodies near the surface of the earth fall with the 
same acceleration. Suppose that an object is several thousand miles from the 
surface of the earth. How would the acceleration of its fall to the earth compare 
with the acceleration of a body near the surface? 
7. Suppose that the mass of the moon were the same as the mass of the earth. 
The radius of the moon is about ! the radius of the earth. What would a man 
who weighs 150 lb on the earth weigh on the moon? 
8. The earth's attractive force acts quite differently on objects in the interior of 
the earth than on objects outside the earth. In the former case the force is given 
by the formula F=-=G11MT/R3, where 1n is the mass of the object, M the mass of 
the earth, R the rauiuˤ of the earth, and r the distance of the object from the 
center of the earth. Compare the variation of this attractive force as r varies, 
with the force given by formula (6). 

346 
THE APPLICATION OF FORMULAS TO GRAVITATION 
9. Suppose that the law of gravitation were F= GmM/r instead of formula (6). 
Compare the variation of weight with distance from the center of the earth 
according to this formula with the variation of weight according to (6). 
10. Consider all objects at a distance of 5000 mi from the center of the earth. Is 
the ratio of weight to mass the same for all these objects? 
15-10 SOME DEDUCTIONS FROM THE LAW OF GRAVITATION 
The essence of the scientific method created by Galileo and Newton is to 
establish basic quantitative physical principles and to apply mathematical reason­
ing to these principles. The law of gravitation and the first and second laws 
of motion are such physical principles. We shall see now that Newton was 
able to make some remarkable deductions from these principles. 
The law of gravitation contains the constant G. Many calculations based 
on the law of gravitation require that one know G. In principle, this quantity 
is easily measured. One has but to take two known masses, place them a 
measured distance apart, and measure the force with which the two masses 
attract each other. Then, since 
mM 
F = G -,- ' 
T 
(9) 
we see that every quantity in (9) is given except G, so that we have a simple 
algebraic equation for G. The actual experiments which have been made to 
measure G are a little more complicated because the force F is small for 
ordinary masses. However, the experiments have been performed, and the 
value of G turns out to be 1.07/10'. The notation 10' is scientific shorthand 
for the product in which 10 occurs as a factor 9 times, i.e., one billion. This 
value of G presupposes that masses are measured in pounds, distances in feet, 
and forces in poundals (practical English system). (In the centimer-gram-sec­
ond (cgs) system of unit;, G is 6.67/10'.) 
With the value of G known, it is a simple matter to calculate the mass of 
the earth. We may recall that formula (5), which is an immediate conse­
quence of the law of gravitation and the second law of motion, states that the 
acceleration which the earth imparts to any other mass is 
(10) 
where r is the distance between the two masses. We have also learned that 
when r is 4000 miles or 21,120,000 feet, then Q =  32. Let us substitute these 
values and the value of G in (10). Then 
1 .07 
M 
32 = - . -:-
-
---,-; 
10' (21,120,000) ' 
(1 1) 

SOME DEDUCTIONS FROM THE LAW OF GRAVITATION 
347 
and we have obtained a simple equation for the unknown M. To shorren 
the somewhat complicated arithmetic, let us approximate and write 2 1,120,000 
as 2 1,000,000 or as 2 1 · 10'. Then by a theorem on exponents (see Section 5-3) 
(21 ' 1 06)2 = (21)2 . (106)2 = 441 . 1012. 
Substituting the value just obtained in ( I I )  yields 
1.07 
M 
32 
= 10. ' 441 . 1012 
(12) 
The factors 10· and 1012 can be combined, for the first factor means 
1 0 ·  1 0 ·  10 · . " wherein 10 occurs 9 times, and the second factor means that 
10 occurs 12 times. Then in the product of these two factors 10 occurs 2 1  
times. Hence 
1 .07M 
32 = ---= 
441 . 1021 
(13) 
Multiplying both sides of this equation by 441 . 1021 and dividing both sides 
by 1.07, we obtain 
or 
M =  32 ' 441 . 1021 
1.07 
M = 1 3.1 . 1024 pounds. 
(14) 
Since there are 2000 pounds in one ton, we may divide the right side by 2000 
and write 
M = 6.5 . 1021 tons. 
(15) 
Hence some simple algebra applied to formula (10) was all that was needed 
to calculate the mass of the earth. Let us note clearly that this quantity is not 
the weight of the earth. Technically the earth has no weight since weight is, 
by definition, the force which the earth exerts on other masses. However, a 
mass of 6.5 · 1021 tons would weigh the same amount of tons, and so one can 
get some idea of the earth's mass. 
From the knowledge just obtained we can deduce some information abour 
the interior of the earth. The earth is approximately spherical in shape, and 
since the volume, V, of a sphere is 47rfJ /3, where r is the radius, we can compute 
the volume of the earth. Thus 

348 
THE APPLICATION OF FORMULAS TO GRAVITATION 
We shall approximate 2 1 12 by 2 1 · 10' and use the value of 3.14 for 1r. Then 
v = !(3.14) (21 . 102) 3 . 10 '2 = ƽ(3.14) (21)3 . 106 . 1OI2. 
Since (t) (3.14) (21)3 is about 39,000, we have 
V = 39,000 · 106 • 1OI2 = 39 · 1021 = 3.9 ·  1022 cubic feet. 
We next divide the mass of the earth, in pounds, by the volume to find the 
mass per cubic foot. Thus 
M 
V 
13.1 . 1 024 
1 310 . 1022 
3.9 · 1 022 -
3.9 · 1022 
1 3 10 
= -- =  
3.9 
336. 
(16) 
The mass per cubic foot of water is 62.5 pounds. We see then that the mass 
per cubic foot of earth is about 5.5 times the mass per cubic foot of water. 
This figure of 5.5, incidentally, is the density of the earth. 
Examination of the earth's surface shows that it consists mostly of water 
and sand. Since the quantity of rock visible on the surface does not account 
for the ratio 5.5, the conclusion follows that the interior of the earth must 
contain heavy minerals. 
Only a little more work is required to compute the mass of the sun. We 
shall again begin with the law of gravitation and the second law of motion. 
The two masses involved now are the mass of the sun, S, and the mass of the 
earth, E. Then the law of gravitation states that the force with which the 
sun attracts the earth is 
SE 
F =  G . , 
T 
(17) 
where r is the distance from the earth to the sun. According to Newton's 
second law of motion, the force which the sun exerts on the earth gives the 
earth an acceleration a such that 
F =  Ea. 
(18) 
Since the forces in ( 17) and (18) are the same, we may equate the right sides. 
Then 
SE 
Ea = G . ·  
T 
We may next divide both sides of ( 19) by E and obtain 
(19) 
(20) 

SOME DEDUCTIONS FROM THE LAW OF GRAVITATION 
349 
In this last equation we know G and r. If we knew a, the acceleration of the 
earth, we could calculate S. Let us see what we can do about calculating a. 
The acceleration which the sun imparts to the earth causes the earth to 
depart from a straight-line path, which it might otherwise pursue, and "fall" 
toward the sun just enough to keep it on its elliptical path. (The acceleration 
which the earth imparts to the moon has the same effect on the lunar orbit.) 
r 
H 
r 
s 
d 
Fig. 15-4. 
The sun's pull on the earth causes 
the earth to "fall" the distance QR 
in t seconds. 
We shall suppose, for the sake of simplicity, that the path of the earth is 
circular. Let us imagine that the earth is at the point P (Fig. 15-4) in its 
path around the sun. If there were no gravitational force, the earth would 
shoot straight out along the tangent at P into space in accordance with the 
first law of motion. Let us suppose that in time t, the earth would have 
reached the point O. The distance traveled would be the velocity of the 
earth in its path around the sun, v say, multiplied by I. Hence PO = vi. 
However, during that time t, the sun pulls the earth in a distance OR or d. 
Since SPO is a right triangle, 
(r + d)' = r' + (VI)'. 
Squaring r + d and substituting the result, we obtain 
r' + 2dr + d' = r' + v't'. 
We subtract r' from both sides of this equation and find that 
2dr + d' = v't'. 
Applying the distributive axiom on the left side permits us to write 
2d (r + <) = v't'. 
(21) 
Now d is the distance thar the earth falls in time I. Let us suppose that it 
falls with constant acceleration. (We shall soon let I become very small so 
that the acceleration can well be taken as constant.) If a body falls a distance 

350 
THE APPLICATION OF FORMULAS TO GRAVITATION 
d with constant acceleration a, then we know from our work in Chapter 13 
(Section 13-5, Exercise 14) that 
or 
2d = at'. 
Let us substitute this value of 2d in (21). Then 
at' (r + ;) = v't'. 
We now divide both sides of this equation by t' and obtain 
(22) 
(23) 
Thus far t was arbitrarily chosen, and d was the distance the earth fell toward 
the sun in time t. Our result so far, then, is valid for any value of t. If we 
now let t become smaller and smaller, d will also decrease. When t = 0, it 
follows from (22) that d = O. In this case, (23) becomes 
aT = v' 
or 
v' 
(24) 
a =  r 
This result states that the acceleration which the sun imparts to the earth at 
each point P of the earth's path is the square of the earth's velocity divided 
by the distance of the earth from the sun. This acceleration is called centripetal 
(i.e., center-seeking) acceleration, because it causes the earth to mOve toward 
the center of its path. 
We now have the quantity a which we needed in (20). Substitution of 
(24) in (20) yields 
We may multiply both sides by r and divide both sides by G to obtain 
v'r 
s = _ · 
G 
(25) 
Every term on the right side of this equation is known. The distance r is 
93,000,000 miles or 4.9 · 10" feet. The velocity, v, of the earth is the circum-

SOME DEDUCTIONS FROM THE LAW OF GRAVITATION 
351 
ference of the earth's path divided by the number of seconds in one year: 
Hence 
2rl.9 . 1011 
30.8 . 1011 
4 
V = ."..,==
-:.:.-,-, 
- :':""':-"":':'''7' = 9.8 ' 10 ft/sec. 
365 ' 24 ' 60 ' 60 
3.15 ' 10 
v2 = (9.8 ' 104) 2 = (9.8)2 .  lOB = 96 ' lOB. 
(26) 
In Section 15-10 we learned that G ] 1.07/10'. Thus, using these values of 
r, V, and G in (25), we have 
s =  
or 
96 ' lOB . 4.9 . 1011 
1 .07/10" 
96 ' lOB . 4.9 . 1011 . 10" 
1 .07 
s = 440 ' 102B = 4.40 ' 1030 
(27) 
Hence the mass of the sun is 4.40 · 10'10 pounds. Since the earth's mass was 
previously found to be 1.31 . 10" pounds, we see that the mass of the sun is 
3.36 · 10' or 336,000 times the mass of the earth. 
We can determine the mlSS per cubic foot of the sun in the same manner as 
we calculated the mass per cubic foot of the earth. The mass of the sun is 
now known, and the radius, computed in Chapter 7, is 432,000 miles, or 
2.28 · 10' feet. We shall not reproduce the calculations, but state the result: 
the mass per cubic foot proves to be 90 pounds. Since a cubic foot of water 
has a mass of 62.5 pounds, we see that the mass per cubic foot of the sun 
is about It that of water; that is, the density of the sun is about Ii. 
The examples given in this section further illustrate how mathematical 
reasoning can be applied to physical laws (in our case, to the second law 
of motion and the law of gravitation) in order to deduce fundamental knowl­
edge about the universe. We did, of course, also use some experimentally 
obtained facts such as the value of G and the acceleration of bodies near the 
earth's surface. However, mathematics has been the main tool, and it obtains 
for us such remarkable information as the mass of the earth and the mass of 
the sun. 
EXERCISES 
1. Suppose an object moves in a circle at a constant speed. Is the motion subject 
to an acceleration? 
2. Does the formula for the acceleration of the earth given in (24) depend upon 
the law of gravitation? 
3. If you whirl an object on a string of radius 5 ft, at the rate of 50 ft/sec, what is 
the centripetal acceleration acting on the object? What force exerts this cen­
tripetal acceleration? 

352 
THE APPLICATION OF FORMULAS TO GRAVITATION 
4. Use fonnula (24) with the understanding that v is the velocity of the moon and 
T is the distance of the moon from the earth, to calculate the acceleration of the 
moon. (The period of the moon's path around the earth is 27! days, and the 
distance of the moon from the earth is 240,000 mi.) 
5. Using the figures in the text for the mass and radius of the sun, calculate the 
ratio of the mass to the volume of the sun. 
* 15-11 THE ROTATION OF THE EARTH 
We have repeatedly used the quantity 32 ft/sec2 as the acceleration which the 
earth gives to objects near its surface. This figure is perfectly satisfactory for 
most purposes, but it is not strictly accurate even for motions riear the earth's 
surface. 
Actually, 
the acceleration of falling 
bodies decreases 
from 
32.257 ft/sec2 at either pole to 32.089 ftlsec' at the equator.· The discovery 
of this decrease was at first not surprising to the seventeenth-century scientists. 
Newton had already proved that the earth is not strictly spherical, but has the 
shape of a somewhat flattened sphere (Fig. 1 5-5); that is, for example, the 
lengths OA, OB, OC, and OD are not equal, but are successively larger. Since 
the general formula for the acceleration due to gravity [see (5) 1 is GMlr', 
where G and M are fixed and r is the distance from the center of the earth, 
this acceleration is less at C, say, than at B because r is larger at C than at B. 
Hence we should expect the acceleration due to 
gravity to decrease as the location varies from A 
to D. Now the values of G and M were known. 
Moreover, Newton and Huygens had computed 
lengths such as OA, OB, and so forth, and there­
fore were able to determine what the acceleration 
should be at points such as A, B, C, and D. These 
calculations based on the expression G M Ir', call 
for only a small percentage of the decrease actu-
ally measured. Thus precise measurement re­
vealed a discrepancy between the acceleration 
predicted by the law of gravitation and the actual 
acceleration of falling bodies. This discrepancy 
required explanation. 
II"--]D 
Fig. 15-5. 
The spheroidal shape of the 
earth. 
The problem was solved by Huygens. Objects on the surface of the earth 
would fly off into space if the earth did not pull them toward the center, just 
as an object whirled at the end of a string would fly off into space if the hand 
• The numerical values can, in principle, be obtained by measuring the accelerations 
with which bodies near the surface fall to earth. However, a more accurate method 
utilizes the formula for the period of a pendulum. 

THE ROTATION OF THE EARTH 
353 
at the center did not exert an inward pull. Thus the earth's gravitational force 
has two effects. Even if the earth did not rotate, it would pull all objects 
toward the center, simply because the earth's mass attracts the object. But 
since the earth does rotate, it must also exert an inward pull so that objects do 
not fly off into space but remain on or near the surface of the earth. This 
latter effect is a centripetal force. ]n a sense, the twO effects of the earth's 
gravitational force, that is, the force which causes objects to fall to the surface, 
or weight, and the centripetal force, are of the same nature. The centripetal 
force also pulls objects toward the earth's center, but pulls teem in just enough 
to keep them on a circular course. The weight, on the other hand, pulls objects 
toward the earth from the circular course to which they are kept by the 
centripetal force. 
Let us express quantitatively what we have just described. By Newton's 
second law, the centripetal force must produce an acceleration (centripetal 
acceleration) on the object. Now formula (24) gives the centrip·otal accelera­
tion which the sun exerts on the earth. However, this formula is really quite 
general, that is, if we replace sun and earth in the argument which led to (24) 
by the earth and an object on or near the earth's surface, then the argument 
still holds, provided that v is the velocity of the object and r is its distance 
from the center of the circle in which the object rotates. Newton's second 
law then tells us that the centripetal force must be the mass of the object 
times the centripetal acceleration, that is 'I1l'lfl./r. 
The force with which the earth pulls an object straight down, i.e., the 
weight, equals the mass of the object times the acceleration of its fall. It is 
this acceleration which we measure when we observe the fall of objects and 
which varies from pole to equator. We shall now denote it by g. Then the 
weight is mg. 
According to Huygens the gravitational force which the earth exerts on 
objects supplies both the centripetal force and the weight. The centripetal 
force must be directed toward the center of the circle of latitude on which 
the object rotates. However, the weight is directed toward the center of the 
earth. Hence we cannot write a simpJe formula which expresses precisely how 
the earth's gravitational force is apportioned to provide the centripetal force 
and the weight at any latitude. However at the extreme cases of latitude, 
that is, at the equator, and at the poles, the apportionme'lt is simple. At the 
equator the centripetal force must be directed toward the center of the earth. 
If we denote the radius of the earth by R, then at the equator 
GMm 
R2 = mv2 
T + mg. 
(28) 
At the North Pole, for example, an object does not travel in a circle as the earth 

354 
THE APPLICATION OF FORMULAS TO GRAVITATION 
rotates, and so no centripetal force is required to keep it rotating with the 
earth. Hence at that location, 
GMm 
R' =  mg. 
Clearly g is larger in (29) than in (28). 
(29) 
What can we say about the apportionment at intermediate latitudes? 
Formula (28) is no longer correct because the circle on which an object 
rotates does not have radius R, but has a smallf:r radius. Also the velocity, v, 
of the object depends on its latitude. Moreover, as we have already noted, 
the direction of the centripetal furce required to keep the object rotating 
with the earth must be directed toward the center of the latitude circle. The 
effect of all these factors is to decrease the cent! ipetal force required to keep 
the object rotating with the earth as the latitude increases, and this f('rce is zero 
at the poles. Hence more and more of the gravitational force is applied to the 
weight of the object, the quantity 11Zg, and since m is constant, g increases 
from the equator to the poles. Almost the full increase in g is due to the 
rotation of the earth, the balance being due to the shape of the earth. We can 
turn our argument around. We observe that g increases from the equator to 
the poles. This increase can be explained by assuming that the earth rotates. 
Hence we have reason to believe that the earth rotates. 
The numerical value of g, that is, the acceleration of falling bodies, has, 
of course, been of importance for centuries. But it has additional importance 
today. Let us consider a satellite which circles the earth once every hour. The 
circular paths of satellites do have the center of the earth as their center. Al­
though the satellite moves at a height of a few hundred miles above the surface 
of the earth, we shall ignore this distance and suppose that it travels very near 
the surface. What is significant is that the satellite covers 25,000 miles per 
hour. Hence the centripetal force required to keep it in its path is considerably 
greater than that required to keep an object which travels 25,000 miles in 24 
hours from flying off into space. We see this fact ؖrom the middle term in 
(28) which tells us that the centripetal force increases with the square of the 
velocity. Thus a great deal of the earth's gravitational force must be expended 
in centripetal force. In fact, since the satellite does not fall to earth, the value 
of g, that is, the acceleration with which it should fall to earth, must be zero. 
In other words, the full gravitational force of the earth is expended in keeping 
the satellite on its circular path around the earth, and the satellite neither flies 
off into space nor falls to earth. 
But the weight of any object is the product of its mass and the acceleration, 
g, with which gravity makes it fall to earth. Since for the satellite, g = 0, it 
follows that the satellite has no weight. Objects contained in the satellite 
would also be weightless and so would not experience any earthward pull. 

GRAVITATION AND THE KEPLERIAN LAWS 
355 
In view of the importance which satellites are likely to have in future 
scientific investigations, it is desirable to know the velocity which a satellite 
must possess if it is to stay in orbit at some desired distance from the center 
of the earth. This velocity is readily calculated from (28). Since the satellite 
does not fall to earth, the value of g for it must be zero. Then 
GMm 
ì = 
mv' 
T 
If we divide both sides by m and multiply both sides by T, we obtain 
GM 
v2 = -_ . 
T 
(30) 
We know G and M, the mass of the earth. When T, the distance of the 
satellite from the center of the earth, is chosen, then we know all the quantities 
on the right side of (30). The quantity GM can be calculated once and for 
all. Thus 
GM = 1 .0: (13.1) 1024 = 14 ' lOIS 
10 
The value of r must be in feet. We can now calculate v. 
EXERCISES 
I. Since the weight of an object is mg, how does a person's weight change as he 
travels from the North Pole to the equator? 
2. Suppose that a satellite stays close to the earth's surface. How fast would it have 
to travel to stay on its circular path and not fall to earth? [Suggestion: Use 
formula (30).] 
3. The moon is a satellite of the earth. Since the moon stays on its path and does 
not fall to the earth, we may conclude that the earth's entire gravitational force 
acts as centripetal force on the moon. Using the assumption that the moon's path 
is a circle and that it is 240,000 mi from the earth, calculate the velocity of the 
moon. [Suggestion: Use (30).] 
4. Using the result of Exercise 3, calculate the time it takes the moon to make one 
complete revolution around the earth. 
5. Calculate the speed required to maintain a satellite in an orbit 500 mi above the 
surface of the earth. 
* 15-12 GRAVITATION AND THE KEPLERIAN LAWS 
Thus far in this chapter we examined the evidence which convinced Newton 
that the law of gravitation was correct, and we have seen how it can be applied 
to answer a variety of questions about objects and motions on the earth and in 

356 
THE APPLICATION OF FORMULAS TO GRAVITATION 
the heavens. We should now recall that one of the major problems challenging 
seventeenth-century scientists was the question whether the same physical 
principles could account for terrestrial and celestial motions. Since the law of 
gravitation when applied to bodies falling near the earth's surface reduces to 
fall with constant acceleration (see Section 15-8), Newton's principles cer­
tainly encompassed earthly motions. As to heavenly motions, the three famous 
laws of Kepler, which he had inferred from observations, were seemingly 
independent of the law of gravitation. The truly great triumph of Newton 
was his demonstration that all three Keplerian laws were mathematical con­
sequences of the law of gravitation and the two laws of motion. 
We shall illustrate what Newton did by showing how the third Keplerian 
law can be deduced from the basic laws just mentioned. However, we shall 
simplify Newton's work and suppose that the path of a planet around the 
sun is circular, whereas the true path, as Kepler proved, is an ellipse. 
Let m be the mass of any planet, M the mass of the sun, and r the distance 
between them. Then the law of gravitation says that the force F exerted by 
the sun on the planet is 
F - GmM . 
-
r2 
(31) 
We also know that the sun's force causes any planet to depart from straight­
line motion and "fall" toward the sun with some acceleration. This accelera­
tion, a, is none other than the centripetal acceleration given by formula (24), 
that is vir. The derivation of (24) dealt with the sun and earth, but it applies 
to any planet, provided that v is the velocity of the planet and r is its distance 
from the sun. We may also assert, by the second law of motion, that the 
centripetal force F with which the sun attracts that planet is 
",2 
F =  m - '  
r 
(3Z) 
The velocity v of any planet is the circumference of its path divided by the 
time T of revolution around the sun; that is, v =  ZrrIT. Hence, from (32), 
(33) 
Now formulas (JI) and (JJ) yield two different expressions for the force 
with which the sun attracts any one planet.· Hence we may equate these 
• In the light of Section 15-11 we can say that the gravitational force equals the 
centripetal force because the sun does not cause any planet to fall toward the sun 
from the circular path. 

two expressions and obtain 
GRAVITATION AND THE KEPLERIAN LAWS 
357 
Dividing both sides of this equation by m eliminates that quantity. Multiply­
ing both sides by 1", we obtain 
If we now multiply both sides of this last equation by r'IGM, we find 
(34) 
The quantity +r'/GM is the same no matter what planet is being con­
sidered, because G is a constant, M is the mass of the sun, and 41"2 is a constant. 
Hence formula (34) says that 1" is the product of some constant, say K, and 
r'; in symbols, 
T2 = Kr3. 
(35) 
Thus the square of the time of revolution of any planet is a constant (i.e., the 
same for all planets) times the cube of that planet's distance from the sun. 
Formula (35) is, then, Kepler's third law of planetary motion. We have 
derived it from the two laws of motion and the law of gravitation by a purely 
mathematical argument. 
As we remarked earlier, Newton demonstrated that all three of Kepler's 
laws, which the latter had obtained only after years of observation and trial 
and error, were mathematical consequences of the laws of motion and gravi­
tation. Hence the laws of planetary motion, which prior to Newton's work 
seemed to have no relationship to earthly motions, were shown to follow from 
the same basic principles as did the laws of earthly motions. In this sense, 
Newton "explained" the laws of planetary motion. These facts were as much 
a consequence of basic physical laws as the straight-line motion of objects 
falling to earth from rest or of projectiles following parabolic paths. Newton's 
original conjecture that the parabolic motion of projectiles should be intimately 
related to the elliptical motion of the planets was gloriously established. 
Further, since the Keplerian laws agree with observations, their derivation 
from the law of gravitation constituted superb evidence for the correctness of 
that law. 
The few deductions from the laws of motion and gravitation which we 
have presented are just a sample of what Newton and his colleagues were able 
to accomplish. Newton applied the law of gravitation to explain a phenomenon 

358 
THE APPLICATION OF FORMULAS TO GRAV,IATION 
which heretofore had not been understood, namely the tides in the oceans. 
He showed that these were due to the gravitational forces exerted by the moon 
and, to a lesser extent, the sun on large bodies of water. From data collected 
on the height of lunar tides, that is, tides due to the moon, Newton calculated 
the moon's mass. Newton and Huygens calculated the bulge of the earth 
around the equator. Newton and others showed that the paths of comets are 
in conformity with the law of gravitation. Hence the comets, too, were recog­
nized as lawful members of our solar system and ceased to be viewed as ac­
cidental occurrences or visitations from God intended to wreak destruction 
upon us. Newton then showed that the attraction of the moon and the sun on 
the earth's equatorial bulge cause the axis of the earth to describe a cone over 
a period of 26,000 years instead of always pointing to the same star in the sky. 
This motion of the earth's axis causes a slight change each year in the time of 
the spring and fall equinoxes, a fact which had been observed by Hipparchus 
1800 years earlier. Thus Newton explained the precession of the equinoxes. 
Finally Newton solved a number of problems involving the motion of the 
moon. The plane in which the moon moves is inclined somewhat to the plane 
in which the earth moves. He was able to show that this phenomenon follows 
from the interaction of the sun, earth, and moon under the law of gravitation. 
As the moon travels around the earth, it cuts the plane of the earth's motion 
around the sun. The points in which it intersects are called the nodes. The 
nodes change in position, and this variation (regression of the nodes) also 
proved to be a consequence of the gravitational effect of the sun and earth 
on the moon. As the moon moves around the earth in an almost elliptical path, 
the point farthest from the earth, called the apogee, shifts about 20 per revolu­
tion. This effect. Newton showed, was due to the sun's attraction. Newton 
and his immediate successors deduced so many and such weighty consequences 
about the motions of the planets. the comets, the moon, and the sea, that their 
accomplishments were viewed as "the explication of the System of the World." 
Today we have almost daily evidenc" that Newton had found sound 
physical principles which govern the operation of the universe. By applying 
just those principles man can now create satellites which circle the earth. In 
fact, Newton's suggestion that projectiles shot out horizontally and with large 
velocities from the top of a mountain would circle the earth is, in essence, the 
one used to launch satellites. Strictly speaking, scientists do not operate from 
mountain tops because accessible peaks are not high enough to ensure that the 
satellite will clear other mountains, and because the air resistance at such al­
titudes is still considerable. Instead rockets project the satellite upward to a high 
altitude where the air resistance is negligible; there a mechanism turns the satel­
lite to a horizontal direction and another rocket gives it a horizontal velocity. 
Then the satellite follows an elliptical path. 
Newton went further in his speculations and conjectured that the planets 
must have been shot from the sun at some angle and, upon reaching their 

IMPLICATIONS OF THE THEORY OF GRAVITATION 
359 
present distances. must have retained enough "horizontal" velocity to start 
moving in their elliptical paths around the sun. This conjecture is still the 
accepted theory of the origin of our solar system. 
EXERCISES 
I. What reason would there be for calling Newton's law of gravitation a universal 
law? 
2. In what sense did Newton incorporate the Keplerian laws in his science of 
motion? 
3. What suppon did the heliocentric theory receive from Newton's work on 
gravitation? 
4. What support did Newton's principles derive from the heliocentric theory? 
* 15-13 IMPLICATIONS OF THE THEORY OF GRAVITATION 
The work on gravitation presented mankind with a new world order, a uni­
verse controlled throughout by a few universal mathematical laws which in 
turn were derived from a common set of mathematically expressible physical 
principles. Here was a majestic scheme which embraced the fall of a stone, 
the tides of the oceans, the moon, the planets, the comets which seemed to 
sweep defiantly through the orderly system of planets, and the most distant 
stars. This view of the universe came to a world seeking to secure a new 
approach to truth and a body of sound truths which were to replace the al­
ready discredited doctrines of medieval culture. Thus it was bound to give 
rise to revolutionary systems of thought in almost all intellectual spheres. And 
it did. But, for the moment, we wish to confine ourselves to the implications 
and consequences of the theory of gravitation for mathematics proper. 
Newton's work followed and considerably broadened the plan laid down 
by Galileo, who proposed to find basic quantitative physical principles and 
to deduce from them the description of physical phenomena. Galileo had 
discovered and utilized such axioms as the first law of motion, the constant 
acceleration of bodies moving near the surface of the earth, and the inde­
pendence of the horizontal and vertical motions of projectiles. His results 
were confined to terrestrial motions. Newton added to the axioms the second 
law of motion and replaced the principle of constant acceleration of falling 
bodies by the more general law of gravitation. He then found that the result­
ing set of principles enabled him to deduce the description of all motions of 
matter on earth and in the heavens. Thus the scientific method of Galileo and 
Newton involves mathematics not only in the expression of axioms and the 
laws which are deduced but also in the deductive process itself. Indeed, mathe­
matics offered not merely the vehicle for scientific expression but the most 
powerful tool for the real work of science, that is the acquisition of knowledge 

360 
THE APPLICATION OF FORMULAS TO GRAVITATION 
about the physical world and the organization of that knowledge in coherent 
systems. From the time of Newton, these roles of mathematics have been un­
questionably accepted and utilized. Hence, as the success of Newtonian 
mechanics spurred efforts in other physical domains, mathematics was con­
fronted with new challenges and received new suggestions for the creation of 
concepts and methods which in turn gave greater power to science. This 
interaction of mathematics and science has grown immensely since its begin­
ning in rhe seventeenth century and has become the outstanding feature of the 
intellectual life of our own century. 
The most surprising development of the theory of gravitation and one 
which established a new and unanticipated role for mathematics took place 
after Newton had deduced a number of conclusions about our solar system. 
Galileo and Newton had set about finding quantitative laws that related matter, 
space, time, forces, and other physical properties, but had wisely decided not 
to look into causal relationships; that is, they had deliberately avoided such 
questions as why bodies fall to earth or why planets move around the sun. In 
other words, they had concentrated on description. Nevertheless, they did 
utilize the force of gravitation, a concept which had been vaguely suggested 
even before Galileo's time-for example, by Copernicus and Kepler. Since the 
force of gravitation now assumed central importance, it was natural to ask, 
What is the mechanism that enables the earth to attract objects and the sun to 
attract planets? The heightened emphasis on this universal force could not 
but push such questions to the fore. The properties ascribed to the force of 
gravitation were indeed remarkable. It acted over distances of inches and 
millions of miles. It acted instantaneously and through empty space. Nor 
could the action of the force be suspended or blocked. Even when the moon 
was between the earth and the sun, the sun continued to attract the earth. 
Although he tried to provide some physical explanation for the action of 
gravity, Newton did not succeed, and he concluded, "I have not been able to 
deduce from phenomena the cause of the properties of gravity and I frame 
no hypotheses." In spite of his ignorance of the workings of gravitation, 
Newton insisted on adopting the laws of motion and gravitation. He says, 
But to derive two or three general principles of motion from phenomena, and 
afterwards to tell us how the properties and actions of all corporeal things 
follow from those manifest principles, 'Would be a very great thing though the 
causes of those principles were not yet discovered: and therefore 1 scruple not 
to propose the principles of motion above mentioned, they being of very general 
extent, and leave their causes to be found out. 
Concerning his work in his Principles, he says, 
But our purpose is only to trace out the quantity and properties of this force 
[gravitation] from the phenomena, and to apply what we discover in S01le 
simple cases as principles, by which, in a mathematical way, we may estimate 

IMPLICATIONS OF THE THEORY OF GRAVITATION 
361 
the effects thereof in more involved cases; for it would be endless and impossible 
to bring every particular to direct and immediate observation. We said, in a 
mathematical way [note Newton's emphasis on the mathematics], to avoid all 
questions about the nature or quality of this force, 'Which 'We 'Would not be 
understood to determine by any hypothesis; . . . 
Newton was indeed troubled that he could give no explanation. But all he 
could do to justify the introduction of this force is summed up at the end of 
his Principles, 
And to us it is enough that gravity does really exist, and act according to the 
la'Ws 'We have explained, and abundantly serves to account for all the motions of 
the celestial bodies, and of our sea. 
Contrary to popular belief, no one ever discovered gravitation, for the 
physical reality of this force has never been demonstrated. However, the 
mathematical deductit)ns from the quantitative law proved so effective that 
the phenomenon has been accepted as an integral part of physical science. 
What science has done, then, in effect is to sacrifice physical intelligibility 
for the sake of mathematical description and mathematical prediction. This 
basic concept of physical science is a complete mystery, and all we know 
about it is a mathematical law describing the action of a force as though it 
were real. We see therefore that the best knowledge we have of a funda­
mental and universal phenomenon is a mathematical law and its consequences. 
And it has become more and more true since Newton's days that our best 
knowledge of the physical world is mathematical knowledge. 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
1. '\tYrite as a decimal: 
1 
a) J03 
c) 
J08 
2 
d) JO' 
10' 
e) 106 
2. Express each of the following numbers as a number between 1 and 10 multi­
plied or divided by a power of 10: 
a) 58,000 
b) 58,790 
c) 63.4 ' J03 
d) 46.75 
e) 0.05 
f) 0.0074 
3. Express each of the following quantities as a number between 1 and 10 multiplied 
or divided by a power of 10: 
a) 
5 · J03 · I I · JO' 
b) 
6 '  10' 
c) 9 '  J04 . 12 ' JO' 
3 ·  10' 
3 ' 10"
5 ' 10 
3 ' JO"
5 ' IO' 
d) 4 . J03 . 3 . JO' 
e) 
10' 
f) 1012 . 3 . 108 
5 . JO' . I I  . 106 
J · IO' · 12 · J03 
5 · 10'9 

362 
THE APPLICATION OF FORMULAS TO GRAVITATION 
4. The frequency at which a frequency-modulation (FM) station broadcasts is 91 
million cycles per second. Write the frequency as a number between 1 and 10 
multiplied by a power of 10. 
5. The mass of the earth is 13.1 ' 1()24 lb. A gram of mass is 0.002205 lb. Find the 
mass of the earth in grams. 
6. The mass of the sun is 4.40 ' l()3o lb. Use the data of Exercise 5 to compute the 
mass of the sun in grams. 
In the foI1owing exercises you may use the fact that when M is the mass of the 
earth, GM= 32 · (4000)2(5280)2. 
7. Calculate the acceleration which gravity imparts to an object 
a) 2000 mi above the surface of the earth, 
b) 10,000 mi above the surface of the earth. 
8. Suppose a man weighs 200 lb at the surface of the earth. Calculate his weight 
when he is 
a) 2000 mi above the surface of the earth, 
b) 10,000 mi above the surface of the eanh. 
9. What does a man who weighs 200 lb on the earth weigh on the moon if the 
weight there is due only to the attraction of the moon. The acceleration which 
the moon impans to objects near its surface is 5.3 ft/sec2• 
Topics for Further Investigation 
1. The astronomical work of Copernicus. The books by Armitage, Dreyer. Koyre, 
Kuhn, Wolf. and any number of others listed in the Recommended Reading 
would be fine source material. 
2. The astronomical work of Kepler. The books by Caspar, Dreyer, Koyre. Kuhn 
and Wolf listed in the Recommended Reading would be fine source material. 
3. Show how the history of the heliocentric theory exemplifies the influence of 
mathematics on western European culture. The books by Kline in the Recom-
mended Reading will provide material. 
. 
Recommended Reading 
ARMITAGE, ANGUS: Sun, Stand Thou Still, Henry Schuman, New York, 1947. Also 
in paperback under the tirIe The World of Copernicus. 
ARMITAGE, ANGUS: Copernicus, W. W. Nonon and Co., New York, 1938. 
BAUMGARDT, CAROLA: Johannes Kepler, Life and Letters, Victor Gollancz Ltd., 
London, 1952. 
BELL, E. T.: Men of Mathematjcs, Chaps. 6, 9, 10, and 11, Simon and Schuster, New 
York, 1937. 
BONNER, FRANCIS T. and MELBA PHILLIPS; Principles of Physical Science, Chaps. 1 
and 4, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Inc., Reading, Mass., 1957. 

IMPLICATIONS OF THE THEORY OF GRAVITATION 
363 
BURTT, E. A.: The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Physical Science, rev. ed., 
Chap. 2 and pp. 202-262, Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd., London, 1932. 
BUITERFlELD, HERBERT: The Origins of Modern Science, Chaps. 2 and 8, The Mac­
millan Co., New York, 1951. 
CASPAR, MAX: Johannes Kepler, Abelard-Schuman, New York, 1960. 
COHEN, I. BERNARD: The Birth of a New Physics, Chap. 7, Doubleday and Co., 
Anchor Books, New York, 1960. 
DAMPIER-WHETHAM, WM. C. D.: A History of Science and Its Relations with 
Philosophy and Religion, pp. 160-195, Cambridge University Press, London, 
1929. 
DE SANTILLANA, GIORGIO: The Crime of Galileo, University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago, 1955. 
DRAKE, STILLMAN: Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo, Doubleday & Co., Anchor 
Books, New York, 1957. 
DREYER, j. L. E.: A History of Astronomy From Thales to Kepler, 2nd ed., Dover 
Publications, Inc., New York, 1953. 
DREYER, J. L. E.: Tycho Brahe, A Picture of Scientific Ufe and Work in the Sixteenth 
Century, Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1963. 
GADE, JOHN A.: The Life and Times of Tycho Brahe, Princeton University Press, 
Princeton, 1947. 
GALILEI, GALILEO: Dialogue on the Great World Systems, The University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago, 1953. Other editions of this work, originally published 
in 1632, ˣlso exist. 
HALL, A. R.: The Scientific Revolution, Chap. 9, Longmans, Green and Co., Inc., 
New York, 1954. 
HOLTON, GERALD and DUANE H. D. ROLLER: Foundations of Modern Physical Sci­
ence, Chaps. 4, 5, 8 through 12, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Inc., Reading, 
Mass., 1958. 
JEANS, SIR JAMES: The Growth of Physical Science, 2nd ed., Chap. 6, Cambridge 
University Press, London, 1951. 
JONES, SIR HAROLD SPENCER: "john Couch Adams and the Discovery of Neptune," 
in JAMES R. NEWMAN: The World of Mathematics, Vol. II, pp. 820-839, Simon 
and Schuster, Inc., New York, 1956. 
KLINE, MORRIS: Mathematics: A Cultural Approach, Chapter 12, Addison-Wesley 
Publishing Co., Inc., Reading, Mass., 1962. 
KLINE, MORRIS: Mathematics in Western Culture, Chap. 9, Oxford University Press, 
N.Y., 1953. Also in paperback. 
KOYRE, ALEXANDRE: From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe, Chaps. 1 
through 4, The johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1957. 
KUHN, THOMAS S.: The Copernican Revolution, Harvard University Press, Cam­
bridge, 1957. 
MASON, S. F.: A History of the Sciences, Chaps. 17 and 25, Routledge and Kegan 
Paul Ltd., London, 1953. 
MORE, LOUIS T.: Isaac Newton, Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1962. 

364 
THE APPLICATION OF FORMULAS TO GRAVITATION 
NEWMAN, JAMES R.: The World of Mathematics, Vol. I, pp. 254-285, Simon and 
Schuster, Inc., New York, 1956. 
SMITH, PRESERVED: A History of Modern Culture, Vol I, Chap. 2 and Vol. II, Chap. 
2, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., New York, 1934. 
SULLIVAN, JOHN WM. N.: Isaac Newton, The Macmillan Co., New York, 1938. 
TAYLOR, LLOYD WM.: Physics, The Pioneer Science, Chaps. 9, 10, and 13, Dover 
Publications, Inc., New York, 1959. 
WIGHTMAN, WM. P. D.: The Growth of Scientific Ideas, Chaps. 8, 10, and 11, Yale 
University Press, New Haven, 1951. 
WOLF, ABRAHAM: A History of Science, Technology and Philosophy in the Six­
teenth and Seventeenth Centuries, 2nd ed., Chaps. 2, 3, 6, and 7, George Allen 
and Unwin Ltd., London, 1950. Also in paperback. 

CHAPTER 16 * 
THE DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS 
No nature except an extraordinary one could ever easily formulate a theory. 
PLATO 
16-1 INTRODUCTION 
The mathematical ideas explored in the preceding chapters, arithmetic, algebra, 
Euclidean geometry, trigonometry, coordinate geometry, and the various types 
of functions, comprise a considerable amount of mathematics. Of course, the 
development of each of these ideas is far more extensive than we have indicated 
or than school courses usually cover. But the seventeenth century, which in­
spired and initiated the modern scientific movement, provided the problems 
and suggestions for new branches of mathematics which dwarf in extent, depth, 
and power the mathematics we have examined thus far. The most significant 
mathematical creation of that century and the one which proved to be most 
fruitful for the modern development of mathematics and science is the calculus. 
Like Euclidean geometry, it is a landmark of human thought. 
16-2 THE PROBLEMS LEADING TO THE CALCULUS 
The mathematicians of the seventeenth century who were gradually develop­
ing the ideas and processes which now comprise the calculus were beset by 
several problems. We have seen that the seventeenth century was primarily 
concerned with the study of motion, the motion of objects on or near the 
earth and the motion of heavenly bodies. In this study the problem of deter­
mining the speed and acceleration of moving bodies is, of course, quite impor­
tant. Now speed, we usually say, is the rate at which distance changes with 
time, but if an object moves with varying speed, then to determine its speed, 
one must compute the rate of change of distance with time at any instant, or 
its instantaneous speed. The same remarks apply to acceleration. We shall see 
that the determination of such instantaneous rates presents a new kind of diffi­
culty. It is true that we did determine and work with speed and acceleration 
of falling bodies, but we treated simple motions and so circumvented the 
365 

366 
THE DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS 
essential difficulty. The problem is no longer simple when, for example, one 
seeks the speed and acceleration of a planet moving on an elliptical path. 
The converse problem is equally important. Suppose one knows the ac­
celeration of a moving body at each instant of time. How does one find the 
speed and distance traveled at any instant? When the acceleration is constant, 
one can multiply the acceleration by the time of travel and obtain the speed 
acquired, but this procedure does not yield correct results when the accelera­
tion is variable. 
Another problem of motion is that of determining the direction in which 
an object is moving at any instant of its flight. Depending upon its direction, 
a projectile may make a direct hit on a target or merely strike a glancing 
blow. Also, the direction in which a projectile is fired determines the hori­
zontal and vertical components of its velocity (see Chapter 14). Hence it is 
desirable to know the direction in which an object is moving. Generally this 
direction varies from one instant to another, and therein lies the difficulty. 
The third major problem was that of finding the maximum and minimum 
values of a function. When a bullet is fired straight up, one may wish to know 
how high it will go. For simple motions near the surface of the earth, we 
were able to find the maximum height. But the methods used will not suffice 
to compute, for example, the maximum or minimum distance of a planet from 
the sun or from another planet. Nor do they suffice to discuss the motion of a 
rocket which travels sufficiently far up so that one must take into account the 
variation in the acceleration due to gravity. 
The fourth major problem confronting the seventeenth century was that 
of determining lengths, areas. and volumes. Let us consider, for example, the 
volume of the earth. The true shape of the earth is that of an oblate spheroid, 
a sphere flattened somewhat at the tOp and bottom." How does one find the 
volume of such a figure) Or let us consider the motion of a planet along its 
elliptical path. How does one find the length of the path over which the planet 
travels in a given period of time? This information is important if one wishes 
to predict the position of the planet at some future instant of time. One could 
also ask, What is the tOtal distance traveled by a planet in one complete 
revolution; in other words, What is the length of a given ellipse? 
All these questions and many others that we shall encounter in the present 
and later chapters bedeviled the mathematicians of the seventeenth century, 
and hundreds of capable men worked on them. When Newton and Leibniz 
made their contributions to the calculus, it became clear that all of the above 
problems and others tOo could be solved by means of one basic concept, the 
instantaneous rate of change of one variable with respect to another. Hence 
we shall begin with this concept . 
• Recent observations made from satellites indicate that this description is not quite 
accurate. 

THE CONCEPT OF INSTANTANEOUS RATE OF CHANGE 
367 
16-3 THE CONCEPT OF INSTANTANEOUS RATE OF CHANGE 
There are three closely related ideas: change, average rate of change, and 
instantaneous rate of change. These thne ideas should be carefully distin­
guished. The concept of change itself is by now a familiar one. When a ball 
is thrown up into the air, its height above the ground changes. The pursuit of 
physical problems involving functions soon obliges one to consider not just 
the mere fact of change but the rate of change of one variable with respect to 
another. In the case of a ball thrown up into the air, one might wish to know 
what initial speed will enable the ball to reach a height, say of 100 feet, or what 
speed the ball has on returning to the ground; that is, information about the 
speed, which is the rate of change of height with respect to time, is desirable. 
The statement that the earth travels around the sun in one year is a fact about 
rate of change rather than about mere change. Our great concern in this age ' 
for faster transportation and communication is a concern with rate of change. 
Circulation of the blood in one's body means quantity of blood per unit time 
passing through a specific artery or a collection of arteries, and here, too, it is 
rate of change which counts. The rate of physiological activity, that is the 
metabolic rate, measured in terms of the rate of consumption of oxygen per 
second, is a rate of change. To sum up: the rate of change of one variable 
with respect to another is a physically useful quantity in many situations. 
The rates of change which are of interest to laymen and even to many 
specialists are average rates. Thus, if a motorist travels 500 miles in 10 hours, 
the average speed, i.e., the distance traveled divided by the time of travel, is 
50 miles per hour. This average speed is what usually matters, and in most 
instances it is quite irrelevant that the driver may occasionally have stopped 
for food and thus had no speed at all during those periods of the trip. Most 
people like to increase their wealth and are satisfied if the rate of growth, that 
is the growth in wealth per month or per year, is appreciable. The increase 
of a country's population is usually measured per year because this average 
rate tells the story which is of importance for most purposes. 
However, the average rate of change is not the significant quantity in many 
practical and scientific phenomena. If a person traveling in an automobile 
strikes a tree, it is not his average rate of speed for the time he has traveled 
from the starting point to the tree that matters. It is his speed at the instant of 
collision which determines whether or nOt he will survive the accident. Here 
we have an instantaneous speed or instantaneous rate of change of distance 
with respect to time. 
There are fWO mathematical and physical facts involved in this event 
which require some elaboration. First of all there is the matter of time. As 
the person travels, time elapses. Mathematically this time is represented by a 
variable, t, say, and the values of t increase continually as the trip goes on. If 
time is measured from the instant at which the man starts out and if he has 
been traveling for 20 minutes, say, then t varies from 0 to 20. We also speak 

368 
THE DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS 
of the 20 minutes as an interval of time or an amount of time. We have, of 
course, referred to and used this mathematical representation of time right 
along. It is important now, however, to recognize that the collision of auto­
mobile and tree does not last an interval of time but occurs in what is called 
an instant. Many other events take place at an instant or are instantaneous. A 
lightning flash is instantaneous or at least happens so fast that we describe it as 
happening at an instant. The clock strikes at an instant. A bullet strikes a 
target at an instant. 
The mathematical representation of an instant is simple. Mathematically, 
we say that when t = 20 or some other value. we are dealing with an instant 
of time; that is, an instant is merely one value of t, whereas an interval is some 
range of I-values, as, for example, from 1 = 0  to 1= 20. Just as we have used 
the notion of an interval of time in past work, so have we used the notion of 
an instant. For example, we have spoken of the height of a ball at the end of 
the third second of flight, that is, when 1= 3. 
The second fact which must be clearly understood about the phenomenon 
of the automobile striking the tree is that the automobile has a speed at the 
instant of collision. This physical fact is apparent enough, and yet when we 
pursue the notion, we find that it presents difficulties. There is no difficulty 
in defining and calculating average speed, which is simply the distance traveled 
during some interval of time divided by that amount of time. But suppose we 
were to try to carry over this concept to instantaneous speed. The distance the 
automobile travels in one instant is zero, and the time that elapses during one 
instant also is zero. Hence the distance divided by the time is 0/0, and this 
expression is meaningless (Chapter 4). Thus, although instantaneous speed is 
a physical reality, there seems to be a difficulty in stating precisely what it 
means, and unless we can do so, we shall not be able to work with it mathe­
matically. 
16-4 THE CONCEPT OF INSTANTANEOUS SPEED 
The problem of defining and calculating instantaneous rates such as speed and 
acceleration attracted almost all the mathematicians of the seventeenth century. 
Descartes, Fermat, Newton's teacher Isaac Barrow, Newton's friend John 
Wallis, Huygens, and hosts of other scholars worked on this and related prob­
lems. The men who finally grasped, formulated, and applied the general ideas 
of the calculus, which their predecessors had only partially understood, were 
Newton and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, about whom we shall learn more 
later. The fact that every major mathematician of the century took up the 
problem of instantaneous rates of change is in itself of interest. It illustrates 
how even the best minds become absorbed in the problems of their times. 
Genius makes its contributions to the advancement of civilization, but the 
substance of its thoughts is determined by its age. 

THE CONCEPT OF INSTANTANEOUS SPEED 
369 
To explain the concept and method of finding instantaneous speeds and 
accelerations, we shall begin with the problem of determining the instan­
taneous speed of a falling body. Let us take the simplest case, that of a body 
which is dropped near the surface of the earth. Our method presupposes that 
we know the formula relating distance and time. We know from our work in 
Chapter 13 that this formula is d = 16t', where d is the distance fallen and t, 
the time elapsed. Let us seek the speed at the end of the fourth second of 
fall, that is, the speed at the instant t = 4. We have already pointed out 
(Section 16-3) that we cannot obtain this speed in the same manner in which 
we calculate the average speed over some interval of time since it is meaning­
less to divide the zero distance covered at t = 4 by the zero time elapsed. A 
practical solution of the difficulty might be to calculate the average speed 
during the fourth second. Though this solution will not yield the desired 
result, let us see what it yields. At the beginning of the fourth second, that is, 
when t = 3, the distance covered by the falling body is obtained by substituting 
3 for t in the formula d = 16t'. This distance is then 16 · 3', or 144. The dis­
tance covered by the end of the fourth second, that is, when t = 4, is 16· 4', 
or 256. Hence the ratio of distance covered during the fourth second to the 
time elapsed is 
256 - 144 
1 1 2  
or 
The average speed during the fourth second is then 1 12 ft/sec. 
As we have already stated, the average speed during the fourth second is 
not the speed at t = 4 itself, for during the fourth second the speed of the 
body keeps changing. Hence the quantity 1 12 can be no more than an ap­
proximation to the instantaneous speed. We may, however, improve the 
approximation by calculating the average speed in the interval of time from 
3.9 to 4 seconds, for during this interval the average speed can, on physical 
grounds, be expected to approximate more closely the speed actually possessed 
by the body at t = 4. We therefore repeat the procedure of the preceding 
paragraph, this time using the values 3.9 and 4 for t. Thus for t = 3.9, 
d = 16(3.9)2 = 16(15.21) = 243.36; 
and for t=4, 
d = 16 · 42 = 256. 
The average speed during the interval t = 3.9 to t = 4 seconds is then 
256 - 243.36 
0.1 
12.64 
0.1 
126.4 ft/sec. 
We note that the average speed during this one-tenth of a second IS quite 
different from the value 112 for the fourth second. 

370 
THE DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS 
Of course, the average speed during the interval t = 3.9 to t = 4 is not yet 
the speed at t = 4 because even during one-tenth of a second the speed of 
the falling body changes and the average is not the value finally attained at 
t = 4. We can obtain a still better approximation to the speed at t = 4 if 
we calculate the average speed during the one-hundredth of a second from 
t =  3.99 to t = 4, because the speed during this short interval of time near 
t = 4 ought to be almost equal to that at t = 4. Hence we shall apply our 
previous procedure once more. For t = 3.99, 
d = 16(3.99)2 = 16(15.9201) = 254.7216; 
and for t = 4, 
d = 16 . 42 = 256. 
Thus the average speed during the interval t = 3.99 to t = 4 is 
256 - 254.7216 
1 .2784 
- -- = 127.84 ft/sec. 
0.0\ 
0.0\ 
We could continue the above argument and process. The speed during 
the interval t = 3.99 to t = 4 is not the exact speed at t = 4 because the speed 
of the falling body changes even in one-hundredth of a second. We could 
therefore calculate the average speed in the interval t = 3.999 to t = 4 and 
expect that the average would be even closer to the speed at t = 4 than the 
preceding averages. The result incidentally would be 127.989 ft/sec. Of 
course, no matter how small the interval over which the average speed is 
calculated, the result is not the speed at the instant t = 4. How far then should 
the process be continued? The answer to this question is the core of the new 
idea supplied by the seventeenth-century mathematicians. The new thought 
is that one should compute average speeds over smaller and smaller intervals 
of time and note whether these average speeds get closer and closer to one 
fixed number. If so, this number is taken to be the i1l5tantaneous speed at t = 4. 
Let us pursue this idea. 
In our case the average speeds over the intervals of time I, 0.1, 0.01, and 
0.001 proved to be 1 12, 126.4, 127.84, and 127.989. These numbers seem to 
be approaching, or getting closer to, the fixed number 128. Hence we take 
128 to be the speed of the falling body at t = 4. This number is called the 
limit of the set of average speeds. We should note that the instantaneous 
speed is not defined as the quotient of distance and time. Rather it is the 
limit approached by average speeds as the intervals over which these average 
speeds are computed approach zero. 
Two objections to what we have done may occur. The first is, What right 
do we have to take the number approached by the average speeds to be the 
speed at t = 4? The answer is that mathematicians have adopted a definition 

THE METHOD OF INCREMENTS 
371 
which makes good physical sense. They argue that the smaller the interval of 
time bordering t = 4 over which the average speeds are computed, the closer 
must the behavior of the falling body be to that at t = 4. Hence the number 
approached by average speeds over the smaller and smaller intervals of time 
bordering t = 4 should be the speed at t = 4. Since mathematics seeks to repre­
sent physical phenomena, it quite naturally adopts definitions that seem to be 
in accord with physical facts. It can then expect that the results obtained by 
mathematical reasoning and calculations will fit the physical world. 
The second possible objection to our definition of instantaneous speed is a 
more practical one. Apparently, one must calculate average speeds over many 
intervals of time and attempt to discern what number these average speeds 
seem to be approaching. But there appears to be no guarantee that the fixed 
number chosen is the correct one. Thus, if in our above calculations one had 
obtained only the average speeds 1 12, 126.4, and 127.84, he might decide that 
these speeds are approaching the number 127.85, and his result would then be 
in error by 0.15 ft/sec. The answer to this objection is that we can generalize 
the entire process of obtaining the instantaneous speed, so that it can be carried 
out more quickly and with certainty. We shall now illustrate how the new 
method operates. 
16-5 THE METHOD OF INCREMENTS 
Let us again calculate the instantaneous speed of a dropped body at the end of 
the fourth second of fall, that is, at the instant t = 4. The formula which 
relates distance fallen and time of travel is, of course, 
d = 1612• 
(1) 
Again, as in our earlier work, we can calculate at once the distance fallen by 
the end of the fourth second. This distance, which we shall denote by 
d" is 16 . 42, or 
d. = 256. 
(2) 
The generality of our new process consists in calculating the average speed, 
not over a specific interval of time such as 0.1 of a second, but over an arbi­
trary interval of time. That is, we introduce a quantity h which is to represent 
any interval of time beginning at t = 4 and extending before or after t = 4. 
The quantity h is called an increment in t because it is some additional interval 
of time before or beyond t = 4. If h is positive, then it represents an interval 
after t = 4; if it is negative, then it denotes an interval before t = 4. 
We shall first calculate the average speed in the interval 4 to 4 + h seconds. 
To do this, we must find the distance traveled in this interval of time. We 
therefore substitute 4 + h for t in ( 1 )  and obtain the distance fallen by the 

372 
THE DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS 
body in 4 + h seconds. This distance will be denoted by d. + k. Here d. is 
the distance the body falls in four seconds, and k is the additional distance 
fallen, or the increment in distance, in the interval of h seconds. Thus 
d. + k = 16(4 + h)2. 
Multiplying 4 + h by itself gives 
d. + k = 16(16 + 8h + h2). 
Application of the distributive axiom of algebra yields 
d. + k = 256 + 128h + 16h2• 
(3) 
To obtain k, the distance traveled in the interval of h seconds, we have but 
to subtract equation (2) from equation (3). The result is 
k = 128h + 16k2• 
(4) 
The average speed in the interval of h seconds is the distance traveled in that 
time divided by the time, that is, k/ h. Let us therefore divide both sides of 
equation (4) by h. Then 
k 
k -
128k + 
k 
16k2 
(5) 
When b is not zero, it is correct to divide the numerator and denominator 
on the right-hand side of (5) by h. The result is 
k 
h = 128 + 16k. 
(6) 
Hence (6) is also a correct expression for the average speed in the interval h. 
To obtain the instantaneous speed at t = 4, we must determine the number 
approached by the average speeds as the interval h of time over which these 
speeds are computed becomes smaller and smaller. From (6) we can now 
readily obtain what we seek. If h decreases, 16h must also decrease, and when 
h is very close to zero, 16h is also close to zero. In view of (6), then, the 
fixed number which the average speed approaches is 128. This number is the 
speed at t = 4. 
The process we have just examined, called the method of increments, is 
basic in the calculus. It is more subtle than appears at first sight. One should 
not expect to note and appreciate the finer points on first contact, any more 
than one gets to know another person well on the basis of one meeting. As a 
step in the right direction, however, we shall make one or two observations. 
First we wish to emphasize the fact that we sought the number or limit ap-

THE METHOD OF INCREMENTS 
373 
proached by average speeds as the intervals of time during which the average 
speeds were computed became smaller and smaller and close to zero. The 
correct expression for the average speed in any time interval h is given by (5). 
Since h is not zero, we may divide numerator and denominator in (5) by h. 
The resulting expression for the average speed, namely (6), happens to be 
especially simple, and from (6) we can easily determine what the limit of the 
average speeds is; that is, we observe that as h approaches zero, so does 16h, 
and thus the number approached by the average speeds is readily seen to be 1 28. 
In the present case of the rather elementary function d = 161', we may let 
h be zero in (6) and find that the result is also 128. This agreement between 
the value given by the right side of (6) when h is zero and the number ap­
proached by k/ h as h gets closer to zero will show up in a number of fairly 
simple functions. However, let us not lose sight of the fact that what we seek 
is a limit of k/h as h approaches zero rather than the value of the expression 
for k/ h when h is zero. If the two values happen to be the same in some cases, 
as in (6), we are lucky, but let us not press this luck too hard.' The reader 
who wishes to tempt fate may substitute zero for h in simplified expressions 
such as (6). 
The main point that emerges from this section is the possibility of finding 
instantaneous speed by a general process, the method of increments. No tedious 
arithmetical calculations are necessary, nor is there any doubt about what the 
limit approached by the average speeds is. 
To appreciate what the limit process achieves we might consider an anal­
ogy. Suppose that a marksman seeks to hit a particular spot on a target. Even 
if he is a good shot, he is not likely to hit the given spot squarely, but will hit 
all around it and inaeed come close. A bystander observing the location of the 
hits will readily determine the exact spot at which the marksman is aiming, by 
noting the concentration of the hits. This process of inferring the precise 
location at which the marksman is aiming is analogous to determining the in­
stantaneous speed from a knowledge of the average speeds. We note what 
number the average speeds are approaching by 'examining (5) or the simplified 
form (6), and this limit is taken to be the instantaneous speed. 
EXERCISES 
1. Distinguish between the change in distance which results when an object moves 
for some interval of time and the rate of change of distance compared to time in 
that interval. 
2. Distinguish between average speed and instantaneous speed . 
• We could pursue the pointJurther and learn just when the limit approached by 
k/h must agree with the value of the expression for k/h when h is zero. But to do 
so would involve a long digression into theory which, at the moment, is of secon­
dary importance. 

374 
THE DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS 
3. What mathematical concept is used to define instantaneous speed? 
4. If the distance d, in feet, which a body falls in t seconds is given by the formula 
d = 16t2, calculate the average speed of the body during the first five seconds of 
fall and during the fifth second of fall. 
5. If the distance d, in feet, which a body falls in t seconds is d = 16t2, calculate the 
instantaneous speed of the body at the end of the fifth second of fall, that is, 
when t= 5. 
6. If the fonnula which relates the height above the ground and the time of travel 
of a ball thrown up into the air is d = 128t - 16t2, calculate the speed at the 
instant t = 3. 
1(H; THE METHOD OF INCREMENTS APPLIED TO GENERAL FUNCTIONS 
We have calculated the instantaneous speed at the end of the fourth second for 
an object which falls according to the law d = 16t". Obviously the process 
used would have limited value if it were applicable to just the fourth second 
and to the formula d = 16t'. Let us investigate the possibility of generalizing 
the procedure and see whether it might apply to any instant of time and per­
haps to other formulas. We begin by considering the formula 
, 
y = ax , 
(7) 
where a is some constant and y and x are any variables related by (7). (After 
all, the fact that d represented distance and t time in the formula d = 16t' 
played no role in the purely mathematical process of calculating the rate of 
change of d with respect to t at t = 4.) By using the letters y and x and the 
constant a we emphasize the fact that we are considering a strictly mathematical 
relationship, and we shall calculate the rate of change of y with respect to x at 
a given value of x. Such rates, incidentally, are also called instantaneous rates, 
even though x does not always represent time. The word "instantaneous" has 
been carried over because the original and many current applications of the 
calculus contain time as the independent variable. 
Let XI denote the value of x at which we are to compute the instantaneous 
rate of change of y compared to x. Thus XI is analogous to the value 4 of t 
used in the preceding section. To compute the desired rate of change, we 
shall repeat the process employed there. We first compute the value of y 
when x has the value XI' This value of y, which we shall call y" is obtained 
by substituting XI for X in (7). Then 
Yl = axê. 
(8) 
We now consider an increase or increment h in the value of x, so that the new 
value of X is XI + h. To compute the new value of y, which we shall denote 

METHOD OF INCREMENTS: GENERAL FUNCTIONS 
375 
by Y, + k, we must substitute the new value of x in (7). Then 
Yl + k = .(x, + h)z. 
Since 
(x, + h)z = x; + 2x,h + hZ, 
it follows that 
y, + k = ax; + Zax,h + ahz. 
(9) 
Our next step is to determine the change k in Y which results from the change 
h in x, by subtracting equation (8) from (9). Thus 
k = 2ax,h + ahz. 
(10) 
To arrive at the average rate of change of y in the interval h, we must find 
k/ h. Accordingly, we divide both sides of ( 10) by h and obtain 
k 
h - 2ax,h + ahz 
h 
(II) 
Equation (I I), which gives the average rate of change of y with respect to x 
in the interval h, is the generalization of equation (5). 
To secure the instantaneous rate of change of y compared to x at the 
value x, of x, we must now determine the limit of the right side of (I I) as h 
approaches zero. We are again fortunate in that we may divide the numerator 
and denominator of (I I) by h and obtain 
k 
h = 2ax, + ah. 
(12) 
As h becomes smaller and smaller, the quantity ah, which is merely a constant 
times h, also becomes smaller, and the quantity k/ h approaches the value 2ax,. 
This last quantity is the limit approached by the average rates of change, k/ h, 
and so is the rate of change of y with respect to x at the value x, of x. Just to 
check our result, we note that when a = 16 and x, = 4, the quantity 2ax, is 128, 
and this is the limit we obtained in the special case treated earlier. 
Since y and X are variables which have no physical meaning, we cannot 
speak of the limit 2axl as an instantaneous speed. Instead we must describe it as 
the instantaneous rate of change of y compared to x at the value x, of x. To 
avoid stating this lengthy phrase, the quantity is called the derivative of y with 
respect to x at the value x" We shall denote it by y, the notation used by 
Newton. (Leibniz devised the notation dy / dx. However, this notation, though 
suggestive of what takes place, can be misleading, for the instantaneous rate of 
change of y with respect to X is not a quotient but rather the limit approached 

376 
THE DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS 
by the quotient k/h.) Thus we have established that at the value XI of X 
j = Zaxl· 
(13) 
Actually, we have arrived at a more general result. The quantity XI was 
any value of x. Hence we may as well emphasize this fact by dropping the 
subscript and writing 
j = Zax. 
(14) 
Equation ( 14) states that when y = aX', the instantaneous rate of change of 
y compared to X at any value of X is 2ax, or the derivative of y with respect 
to x is 2ax. Since ( 14) holds at any value of x, it is a function; that is, the 
derivative of y with respect to x is itself a function of x. The process of de­
riving ( 14) from (7) is called differentiation. 
The result ( 14) holds regardless of the physical meaning of y and x. Hence 
in any situation in which the formula y = ax2 applies, we may conclude at 
once that the instantaneous rate of change of y compared to x is 2ax. The 
generality of this result is immensely valuable, since a general mathematical 
result can always be applied to many different physical situations. To illustrate 
this point for the derivative ( 14), let us first reconsider our old friend d= 16t2• 
In this case, d plays the role of y; t plays the role of X; and 16 is the value of a. 
Hence 
d = 2 ·  16t = 32t. 
(15) 
Now the instantaneous rate of change of distance compared to time is the 
instantaneous speed, and since speed occurs so often in applications, it is usually 
denoted by a special symbol, v; that is, d = v. Hence (15) says that 
v = 32t. 
(16) 
Knowing the formula which relates distance and time of a dropped object, 
we have derived the formula for the instantaneous speed. Thus from one 
formula we may derive another significant formula by applying the process 
of determining the instantaneous rate of change, i.e., by differentiation. 
Now let us apply (14) to the formula for the area of a circle, namely, 
A = 7fr2. Here A plays the part of y; r plays the part of X; and the constant 7f 
is the value of a. Formula ( 14) then tells us that 
A = z,rr. 
(17) 
The result, ( 17), has a very simple geometrical meaning (Fig. 16-1). It says 
that the instantaneous rate of change of the area of a circle with respect to the 
radius at any given value of the radius is the circumference. More loosely 
stated, the rate at which the area increases when r increases is the size of the 

METHOD OF INCREMENTS: GENERAL FUNCTIONS 
377 
circumference. 
This result is very reasonable. 
When the radius T is increased by an amount h, the 
area A of the circle increases by an amount k. 
Roughly speaking, we may think of k as a sum of 
circumferences and of h as the number of such cir­
cumferences. The ratio k/ h is then an average cir­
cumference in the region k. As h approaches zero, 
this average circumference approaches the circum­
ference for the radius T. This latter circumference 
is the instantaneous rate with which the area in-
creases at the given value of T. 
k 
T 
Fig. 16-1 
Of course, the process of finding the instantaneous rate of change can be 
applied to all functions and not just to the simple function y = ax'. For 
example, if y represents the pressure of the atmosphere and x represents the 
height above the surface of the earth, then y represents the rate of change of 
pressure with respect to height at a given height. If y represents the price 
level of a commodity and x represents time, then y represents the rate of 
change of price with respect to time at a given instant. Various other examples 
will be presented in the course of our subsequent work. 
To make effective use of the calculus, one must learn how to determine the 
instantaneous rate of change for many types of formulas, because the variety 
of functions occurring in applications is very great. Since our purpose is 
primarily to gain some idea of what the calculus has to offer, we shall limit 
ourselves to just the simplest ones. Thus if 
y = bx, 
(I S) 
where b is any constant, then by using the method of increments, we would 
find that the instantaneous rate of change of y with respect to x is 
y = b. 
(19) 
This result applies, for example, to a body which falls with the velocity 
v = 32t. 
(20) 
Formula (20) is just a special case of (IS) where y becomes v, x is replaced 
by t, and b is 32. Hence ( 19) tells us that 
v = 32. 
(21) 
Since v is the instantaneous rate of change of velocity with respect to time, 
it is the instantaneous acceleration. Hence (2 I) tells us that a body which 
falls with a velocity v = 32t has an acceleration at each instant of 32, that 
is, a= 32. 

378 
THE DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS 
Were we to go through the process of determining the instantaneous rate 
of change of y compared to x when 
where a is any constant, we would find that 
• 
2 
Y = 3ax . 
(22) 
(23) 
Occasionally we shall also treat a formula consisting of a sum of two terms 
instead of a single term. Thus suppose that the functional relationship between 
the variables y and x is given by the formula 
y = ax2 + br, 
(24) 
where a and b are constants. The method of increments can, of course, still be 
applied to find the instantaneous rate of change of y with respect to x. Ac­
tually the work amounts to treating simultaneously a formula such as (7) and 
a formula such as (18). The result can be anticipated. In view of the rate of 
change ( 14) which applies to y = ax' and the rate of change (19) which 
applies to y = bx, we should expect that 
j = 2ax + b. 
(25) 
This is the correct result. 
EXERCISES 
1. By going through the full process of finding the instantaneous rate of change, 
that is, the method of increments, prove that 
a) if y = bx, then y = b; 
b) if y = ax'l, then y = 3ax2; 
c) if y = c, where c is a constant, then y = 0. 
2. Apply the method of increments to find the instantaneous rate of change of 
y = x2 + 5 and compare the result with the instantaneous rate of change of y = x2. 
Does this example suggest a general conclusion? 
3. Find the derivative, or the instantaneous rate of change of the dependent varia­
able compared to the independent variable, for the following functions. [You 
may use formulas (14), (19), (23), and (25).] 
a) y = 2x2 
e) y = _2x2 
b) d = 2t2 
f) d = -16t2 
c) y = (!)x2 
g) h = -16t2 + 128t 
d) Y = 4x" 
h) h = 128t - 16t2 
4. If an object is thrown downward with the initial velocity of 100 ft/sec, then the 
distance it falls in t seconds is given by the formula d = lOOt + 16t2
• Calculate 
the speed of the object at the end of the fourth second of fall. [Suggestion: Apply 
formula (25).] 

THE GEOMETRICAL MEANING OF THE DERIVATIVE 
379 
5. ]n geometrical terms the instantaneous rate of change of the area of a circle 
compared to the radius is the circumference. 
a) What is your guess as to the geometrical interpretation of the instantaneous 
rate of change of the volume of a sphere compared to the radius? 
b) Now determine V mathematically by applying formula (2 J) of the text to 
the formula for the volume of a sphere, V = (ė)'iTr3, and check your answer to 
part (a). 
6. a) When y = ax2, then y =2axj when y = ax3, then y = 3ar. Now suppose 
y = ax4. What would you expect y to be? 
b) Verify your conjecture in part (a) by applying the method of increments to 
y = ax'. 
7. Find the rate of change of the area of a square with respect to a side at a given 
value of the side. ]s the result intuitively reasonable? 
8. The area of a rectangle is given by the formula A = /'W, where / and 'W are the 
length and width, respectively. Suppose that / is kept fixed. What is the rate of 
change of area with respect to width? Interpret the result geometrically. 
16-7 THE GEOMETRICAL MEANING OF THE OERIVATIVE 
The instantaneous rate of change of y with respect to x can be interpreted 
geometrically. This interpretation not only clarifies the meaning of such a 
rate, but at the same time points the way to new uses of the concept. Let us 
consider the function 
(26) 
and let us interpret geometrically the instantaneous rate of change of y with 
respect to x at x= 2. To find this rate of change by the method of increments 
we first calculate y at x = 2. This value of y, denoted by y" is 
y, = 2' = 4. 
The values 2 for x and 4 for y are, of course, the coordinates (2, 4) of a point, 
denoted by P in Fig. 16-2, on the curve which represents y = x'. The second 
step in the method of increments is to increase the independent variable by an 
amount h so that its value becomes 2 + h. The dependent variable then changes 
by an amount k so that its new value is 4 + k. Now the quantities 2 + h and 
4 + k can be interpreted as the coordinates of another point on the curve 
which represents y = x', because when x is 2 + h, y becomes 4 + k. The new 
point is shown as the point Q in Fig. 16-2. Next we calculate the average rate 
k/ h. As the figure shows, k is the difference in the y-values of P and Q, 
whereas h is the difference in the x-values of P and Q. The ratio k/h is the 
slope of the line PQ, which, as in plane geometry, is called a secant. Thus far, 
then, we see that for any value of h and the corresponding value k, the ratio 
k/ h is the slope of the secant through two points of the curve representing 
y =x'. 

380 
THE DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS 
Fig. 16-2. 
The secant PQ approaches the tangent at 
P as Q approaches P along the curve. 
y 
---r-u-----x 
(-2, -4) 
Fig. 16-3. 
The slope of the roadway of a bridge at 
x = -2. 
B 
Finally we consider the limit approached by the ratio k/h as h gets closer 
and closer to zero. As h decreases, the point Q on the curve of Fig. 16-2 
moves closer to the point P. The secant through P and Q changes position, 
always, of course, going through the fixed point P and the point Q, wherever 
the latter happens to be. As h approaches zero, the point Q approaches the 
point P, and the secant PQ comes closer and closer to the line which just 
touches the curve at P; that is, PQ approaches the tangent at P. Since k/h is 
the slope of PQ, the limit approached by k/ h must be the slope of the line 
approached by PQ. In other words, the instll1ltll1leous rate of change of y with 
respect to x at x = 2 is the slope of the tangent to the curve at P, the point 
whose coordinates are (2, 4). Of course, the value of 2 for x has been arbi­
trarily chosen to present a typical, yet concrete example. We could have been 
more general and have carried through the entire discussion for the value a, 
say, of x; that is, the rate of change of y with respect to x at any given value of 
x is the slope of the tangent to the corresponding curve at the point having that 
given value of x as abscissa. 
We see therefore that the derivative of a function has a precise geometrical 
counterpart: the slope. Since slope is the rise (or fall) of a line per unit of 
horizontal distance (Chapter 12), the geometrical meaning is a rather simple 
one. Thus, since the value of the derivative of y = x2 at x = 2 is 4, the slope of 
the tangent at x = 2 is 4; Fig. 16-2 does not show this because the scale on the 
Y-axis is not the same as that on the X-axis. 
From the standpoint of application, the fact that the derivative is the slope 
of the tangent is very significant. The slope of a curve at a point on that 
curve is, very reasonably, defined to be the slope of the tangent at that point. 
Knowing the slope of the tangent thus means knowing the slope of the curve. 

THE GEOMETRICAL MEANING OF THE DERIVATIVE 
381 
Just to get some idea of how useful this information is, let us consider for a mo­
ment the roadway of a bridge which is pictured as the arc AOB in Fig. 16-3. 
For the purpose of our illustration we can assume that this arc is part of 
the parabola y = -x'. Now the slope of the curve at x = -2 is given by the 
derivative. Since the derivative of y = -x2 at an arbitrary value of x is -2x, 
the derivative at x = -2 is +4. This then is the slope of the roadway at 
x = -2; that is, the roadway is rising at the rate of 4 feet for every foot of 
horizontal distance. This rate of climb is totally impractical, since no automo­
bile or truck has the power to climb at such a rate. Our example thus makes 
the general point that the derivative enables us to calculate the slope of a 
curved roadway and to determine whether the slope is or is not too steep for 
the vehicles that are to use that route. 
As another illustration suppose a projectile shot up and out from the point 
o (Fig. 16-4) is to strike the wall Be at the point B. Knowing the equation 
of the path of the projectile (Chapter 14), we can calculate the slope at the 
point B. This slope amounts to the direction that the projectile possesses at 
the point B, because the projectile is headed in the direction of the tangent.' 
One might want the direction of the projectile at B to be perpendicular to the 
wall because such an impact would damage the wall more effectively than a hit 
in a glancing direction. If necessary one could adjust the angle of fire and 
initial velocity to achieve the desired direction at B. 
A third example illustrating the usefulness of knowing the slope is furnished 
by the phenomena of reflection and refraction of light. Let us consider the 
Fig. 16-4. 
The slope of a projectile's path when it 
strikes a wall at B is the slope of the 
tangent at B. 
Fig. 16-5. 
The angles which light rays make with a 
curve are determined by the slope of the 
curve . 
• Sometimes the word direction is taken to mean the angle which the tangent to the 
curve makes with the horizontal. However the slope is an equally good indication 
of direction. 

382 
THE DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS 
case of reflection. Suppose one wishes to · design a mirror such that all rays 
of light coming from some source are reflected to one point. We know 
from Chapter 6 that when a light ray strikes a mirror, the angle of refleaion 
equals the angle of incidence. Suppose that we consider a plane section of the 
mirror which contains the incident and the reflected rays (Fig. 16-5). This 
plane section is a curve. The angle which the incident ray makes with the 
mirror is, in fact, the angle between the incident ray and the tangent. To 
discuss this angle as well as the corresponding angle of reflection, we must 
know the direction, and hence the slope, of the tangent. 
EXERCISES 
1. Suppose that an uphill path can be represented by the equation y = (Th)x'. 
(a) What is the slope of the hill at X =  3? 
(b) Is the slope steeper or more gradual at x = 3 or at x = 5? 
(c) Determine the slope at x = 0, and interpret the result geometrically. 
2. Suppose that the path of a projectile is represented by the equation y = 4x - Xl. 
(a) What direction does the projectile have when X =  I? 
(b) At what value of x is the direction of the projectile horizontal? 
y 
0JB 
--o----------x 
Fig. 16-6 
3. The variation of y with x of a certain function is illustrated in FIG. 16-6. De­
scribe how the derivative of y with respect to x varies as x increases from A to B. 
4. Can you explain geometrically why the functions y = x2 and y = Xl + 5 should 
have the same derivative at. say, x = 2? 
16-8 THE MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM VALUES DF FUNCTIONS 
We have had occasion to apply our elementary algebra and geometry to 
problems in which the objective was to maximize or minimize some important 
physical quantity. For example, in Chapter 6 we found the dimensions of the 
rectangle having maximum area among all rectangles with the same perimeter. 
In Chapter 13 we found the maximum height attained by an object thrown or 
shot up into the air. The methods used to solve these problems were rather 
limited; they worked for the problems in question, but could hardly be applied 

THE MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM VALUES OF FUNCfIONS 
383 
to other types. One of the advantages of the calculus is that the concept of 
instantaneous rate of change of a function proves to be the key to a general 
method of finding the maximum or minimum values of variable quantities. 
Let us reconsider the problem of determining the maximum height reached 
by a ball which is thrown up into the air. If the ball leaves the hand with a 
speed or velocity· of 128 ft/sec, then, according to Chapter 1 3, the formula 
which relates d, the height of the ball, and t, the time that the ball has been in 
motion, is 
d = 128t - 16t'. 
(27) 
During our earlier discussion of the motion represented by formula (27), we 
had to resort to an independent physical argument, to prove that the velocity 
of the ball at any instant is given by 
v = 1 28 - 32t, 
(28) 
whereas now the purely mathematical process of differentiation immediately 
yields (28) as the formula for the instantaneous speed of the ball. 
To determine the maximum height reached by the ball, we argued in 
Chapter 13 that the velocity of the ball at the highest point must be zero or 
the ball would continue to rise. Hence, to find the insrant t 1 at which v = 0, 
we set v equal to zero, that is, we set 
128 - 32t1 = 0, 
(29) 
and, by solving this equation for t" we found that t, = 4. We then substituted 
this value of t in (27) to arrive at the maximum value of d. 
We can now see that, translated into the language of the calculus, our 
above procedure of determining the maximul)l value of the variable d given by 
formula (27) consisted in setting the instantaneous rate of change, d, equal to 
zero and finding the value (or values) of the independent variable, t in the 
present case, at which the rate of change is zero. This example suggests a 
general procedure. If y is a function of x, and if we wish to find the maximum 
value of y, we set the instantaneous rate of change of y with respect to x 
equal to zerOj find the value of x for which this rate of change, or derivative. 
is zero; and then substitute this value of x in the formula for y. The resulting 
value of y is the maximum value of y. 
Of course, we really do not know that this general procedure is justified. 
For a ball thrown up into the air, we used the physical argument that the 
velocity must be zero at the highest point. This argument might be suitable 
• We remind the reader that the words speed and velocity are often used inter­
changeably. Strictly the word velocity includes the sign. 

384 
THE DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS 
y 
y 
-----'-----X 
25 
--;c:f-_--"-s 
_-'-
_--"s_--\,-X 
() 
Fig. 16-7 
Iii 
Fig. 16-8 
for the motions of balls, but it certainly is not applicable to formulas which 
represent quite different phenomena. However, we shall now introduce a 
geometrical argument which proves that the procedure is indeed justified. 
Let us use a specific function to illustrate the idea. The argument we shall 
give could be phrased in general terms. Suppose that we wish to find the 
maximum value of the function 
y = lOx - x2, 
(30) 
represented by the curve in Fig. 16-7. We observe that at the point on the 
curve where y has a maximum value, the tangent is horizontal; that is, the slope 
of the tangent is zero. Now the slope of the curve at any value of x is the 
value of the derivative, or instantaneous rate of change of y with respect to x 
at that value of x. Hence to determine the value x, of x at which the slope of 
the curve is zero, we find the derivative of y in (30), that is, we find y, and 
set this derivative equal to zero. Thus for formula (30), we have 
1 0  - 2x, = O. 
We see at once that x, = 5. To find the maximum y-value of (30), we sub­
stitute the value 5 for x and find that y" the maximum y-value, is 25. 
This geometrical argument proving that the derivative of a function is zero 
at the function's maximum value also applies to its minimum value. The 
minimum value of the function y = x2 - lOx is the length y, of Fig. 16-8. The 
slope of the curve at the point where y has this minimum value is zero. Hence, 
as before, at this point the derivative y must be zero, and we may use the 
process already described in connection with maxima of functions to determine 
minima also. 
The question arises, If the same process yields a maximum and a minimum, 
how do we know in a particular problem whether we are obtaining one or the 

THE MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM VALUES OF FUNCTIONS 
385 
other? For physical problems the answer is given by the sense of the problem. 
But there are also purely mathematical criteria which enable us to determine 
whether we have found the maximum or the minimum value of a function. 
EXERCISES 
1. Calculate the instantaneous speed at t = 4 of a body whose height d above the 
ground at time t is given by the fonnula d = 12St - 16t2• Interpret the result 
physically and geometrically. 
2. To illustrate the power of the calculus, Fermat showed how it can be used to 
prove that of all rectangles with the same perimeter the square has maximum area. 
Carry out this task. [Suggestion: Let p be the perimeter common to all the rec­
tangles. If x and y are the dimensions of any one of the rectangles, then 
2x + 2y = P or y = (P/2) - x. The area A of any rectangle is given by A = xy. 
Express A as a function of x only and apply the calculus.] Which method do 
you prefer, that of Euclidean geometry or the calculus? 
3. A farmer wishes to enclose a rectangular piece of land which borders on a river, 
so that no fence will be required along the bank. He has 100 ft of fencing at his 
disposal. What dimensions should he choose to obtain maximum area? [Sug­
gestion: If y is the side which parallels the river, then the amount of fencing re­
Quired is y + 2x. This must equal 100. The area A of the rectangle is A = xy. 
Replace y by its value from y + 2x = 100 and find the maximum value of A.] 
Do you prefer this method or the method of Euclidean geometry? 
4. A farmer wishes to use 100 ft of fencing to enclose a rectangular area and to 
divide the area into two rectangles by running a fence down the middle 
(Fig. 16-9). What dimensions should he choose to enclose the maximum tOtal 
area? 
h 
/-------.. 
r 
Fig. 16-9 
Fig. 16-10 
5. A manufacturer wishes to construct cylindrical tin cans (Fig. 16-10) such that 
each can is made of a fixed amount of tin, say 100 sq in, and has maximum volume. 
What should the radius r of the base and the height h of the cylinder be? [Sug. 
gestion: The amount of tin used equals the surface area of the can, that is the 
sum of the area of the side, 27TTh, and the area of the top and bottom, 27T,.2. 
Hence 
27rTh + hr2 = 100. 
(1) 
The volume V of the can is 
(2) 

386 
THE DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS 
Solving (1) for h, we have 
h = 50 - ,..,-2 . 
7rT 
If we substitute this value of h in (2). we obtain 
V = 'lrT2 (50 
Now apply the calculus.] 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
(3) 
SOT - ,..r'. 
1. If the distance d in feet which a body falls in t sec is given by the fonnuIa 
d = 16t2• calculate 
a) the average speed during the first 6 sec of fall, 
b) the average speed during the sixth second of fall, 
c) the instantaneous speed at the end of the sixth second of fall. 
2. Suppose you were asked to calculate the average speed of a body which falls 
according to the law d =  16t2 for the interval of time t= S.9 to t=6. How 
could you obtain an approximate answer quickly? 
3. If y = 1Ox2 what is the instantaneous rate of change of y with respect to x 
a) at x = 2, 
b) at x = l, 
c) at x = a? 
4. The instantaneous acceleration of a moving object is by definition the instan­
taneous rate of change of the speed with respect to the time. Suppose an object 
falls a distance d given by the formula d = 16t2, where d is in feet and t is in 
seconds. What is the instantaneous acceleration of the object at any time t? 
5. Find the instantaneous rate of change of y with respect to x for the functions 
below: 
a) y = x' + lOx 
at x = 2, 
c) Y = -x' + lOx at x = 2, 
b) y = x2 - lOx 
at x = 2, 
d) Y = -x' - lOx at x = 2. 
6. Find the slope of the curve y = x2 + 2x at x = 2. and illustrate the slope graph­
ically. 
7. Find the value of x at which the slope of the curve corresponding to 
y = x2 + 2x is O. 
8. Find the maximum or minimum values of the following functions and use the 
graphs of the functions to decide whether the calculated value is a maximum 
or a minimum. 
a) y = x' + lOx 
d) Y = -x' + 6x 
b) Y = x' - lOx 
e) y = -x' + 6x + 2 
c) y = -x' + lOx 

THE MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM VALUES OF FUNCTIONS 
387 
9. Find the value of x at which the derivative of y = x3 is 0 (see Exercise 1 of 
Section 16-6). Does the function have a maximum or a minimum at that value 
of x? Is the following statement correct? At a value of x for which the deriva­
tive of a function is 0, the function has a maximum or a minimum. 
10. A projectile is shot up into the air so that its height after t sec is given by the 
formula h = 144t - 16t2• What is the maximum height attained by the projectile 
and how long does it take to attain that height? 
II. An open box with a square base is to be made from 400 sq. in of lumber. What 
dimensions should be chosen so that the box has maximum volume? 
12. A box with a square base and a cover is to be made from 400 sq in of lumber. 
What dimensions should be chosen so that the box has maximum volume? 
Recommended Reading 
See the list at the end of Chapter 17. 

CHAPTER 17 * 
THE INTEGRAL CALCULUS 
More laws are vain where less will serve. 
ROBERT HOOKE 
17-1 DIFFERENTIAL AND INTEGRAL CALCULUS COMPARED 
The material examined in the preceding chapter belongs to the differential 
calculus. The basic process in this subject is to start with the formula relating 
two variables and to find the instantaneous rate of change of one variable with 
respect to the other. Suppose, however, that one began with the rate of change 
of one variable with respect to another and wished to find the formula which 
relates the two variables. For example, if we should happen to know that 
y = 2x, could we find the relation between y and x' One might expect that 
the answer is affirmative because it would seem that among the various func­
tions whose derivatives we have obtained, there should surely be one whose 
derivative is 2x, and this function is the answer to our question. Except for a 
minor difficulty which we shall consider later, this expectation is correct. In 
this connection one might also ask whether there is any point in determining 
functions whose derivatives are given. The answer decidedly is yes. As we 
shall see, in numerous physical problems the most readily available information 
is an instantaneous fate of change. whereas the information sought can be best 
obtained from the function which relates the variables in question. Hence the 
process of finding the function from its derivative is immensely valuable­
indeed, even more valuable than the basic process of finding derivatives from 
given formulas. 
The major idea characterizing the integral calculus is the inverse to that 
underlying the differential calculus: namely, instead of finding the derivative 
of a function from the function, one proceeds to find the function from the 
derivative. Of course, all really significant ideas prove to have extensions and 
applications far beyond what is immediately apparent, and we shall find this 
to be true of the integral calculus also. 
388 

FINDING THE FORMULA FROM THE RATE OF CHANGE 
389 
17-2 FINDING THE FORMULA FROM THE GIVEN RATE OF CHANGE 
The key concern, then, of the integral calculus is to determine the formula 
which relates rwo variables from the given instantaneous rate of change of one 
variable with respect to another. Before we can see how useful this idea is, we 
must examine and learn a few facrs about the mathematical process itself. 
Suppose we happen to know that the instantaneous rate of change of some 
variable y with respect to another variable x is 2x, that is :Y = 2x. What 
formula relates y and x? The mathematician's method of answering this ques­
tion is to survey all the rates of change of functions obtained in the past and 
to locate the function whose rate of change he has previously found to be 2x. 
In our case, his eye will soon light on the function 
y = r. 
Hence this function is the answer to the problem of finding the relation between 
y and x such that :Y = 2x. The function y = r is called the indefinite integral, 
or antiderivative, or often just the integral of the derivative :Y = 2x, and the 
process of obtaining it is called integration or antiditferentiation. 
However, the formula y =r is not the only integral of :Y = 2x. We had 
occasion to observe in the preceding chapter that the presence of a constant 
term in a formula has no effect on the instantaneous rate of change. For 
example, y = x' and y = r + 5 both lead to :Y = 2x. Hence y = r + 5 is as 
much an integral of y = 2x as y = r is. In fact, y = r + C, where C is any 
constant, is an integral of y = 2x. If C is chosen to be zero, we obtain y = X2, 
and if C is chosen to be 5, we obtain y = x' + 5. It may seem unforrunate that 
there should be more than one answer, but we shall see in a moment that the 
reverse is the case. 
The general problem of finding the formula relating y and x when we are 
given y as a function of x is handled by the method illustrated in our example 
of y = 2x; that is, we must examine the formulas whose rates of change we 
have previously determined and try to locate among these derivatives the rate 
of change we are concerned with. Since this rate of change has been previously 
derived from some formula relating y and x, that formula is the answer to our 
problem; in addition, we can add any constant to the formula and still have the 
correct answer. The process of searching among all formulas whose rates of 
change have previously been found may seem to be haphazard. But in practice 
mathematicians tabulate these formulas according to distinctive properties, so 
that a little experience with the tables usually enables one to find the desired 
formula. Since we are limiting the variety of formulas and their derivatives to 
a few cases, we shall not bother to become acquainted with a table. Instead we 
shall seek to recall the formulas and their derivatives which were calculated in 
the preceding chapter. 

390 
THE INTEGRAL CALCULUS 
EXERCISES 
For the following problems, find the formula which relates the variables whose in­
stantaneous rate of change is given: 
a) j = 3x' 
b) j = 5 
c) j = x 
d) j = 3x 
e) Ii = 2t 
f) Ii = 32t 
g) .;, = 32 
h) It = 2t + to 
i) Ii = -32t + 128 
j) v = -32 
k) .;, = l2t 
17-3 APPLICATIONS TO PROBLEMS OF MOTION 
We shall now present some examples of the usefulness of integration in 
physical problems. Galileo had found that all objects falling to earth from points 
near the surface of the earth possess the same acceleration, namely 32 ft/sec'. 
This acceleration is constant; that is, it is the same at each instant of the fall. 
Now the acceleration at any one instant is the instantaneous rate of change of 
velocity with respect to time. Hence, instead of writing a = 32, we can equally 
well write 
v = 32. 
(I) 
The physically important question is, What formula relates v and t? By re­
viewing the formulas for which we obtained rates of change [see formula (20) 
of Chapter 16j we find that v = 32t + C, where C is any constant. 
In a particular physical problem, the quantity C can be chosen to fit the 
situation. Thus suppose that the object is merely dropped to earth; that is, at 
the instant it begins to fall its velocity is zero. If time is measured from the 
instant the object begins to fall, then the velocity v at t = 0 is zero. Hence, to 
make the formula 
v = 321 + C 
(2) 
fit the physical fact that v must be zero when t = 0, we must have 
0 =  32 ' 0 + C, 
or C = O. Hence 
v = 32t 
(3) 
is the answer to this particular problem in which the object is dropped, and 
time is measured from the instant it begins to fall. 
Physical problems often require knowledge of the distance which an object 
falls in time t. Since the instantaneous velocity is the rate of change of distance 
with respect to time, then if d denotes the distance the object falls, d = v. In 
view of (3), which applies when an object is dropped, we may state that 
d = 321. 
(4) 

APPLICATIONS TO PROBLEMS OF MOTION 
391 
We now wish to find the formula which relates d and t. Again we appeal to 
our experience with formulas and their derivatives [see formula (IS) of 
Chapter 16] and note that the formula d= 161' has the derivative given by (4). 
However, the formula: 
d = 16t' + C, 
(5) 
where C is any constant, also has the derivative (4). Since we have no reason 
to ignore the constant, we must accept (5) as the formula for the distance 
fallen in time t. However, if we agree to measure the distance fallen from the 
point where the object happens to be at the instant it starrs to fall, and if time 
of fall is also measured from this instant, then it follows that d = 0 when t = O. 
Substituting these values in (5) yields 
0 =  16 ' 0 + C, 
and we see that C must be zero if formula (5) is to represent our situation. 
Hence 
d = 16t2 
(6) 
gives the distance the dropped object falls in time t if time is measured from 
the instant the object begins to fall and if distance is measured from the point 
where the object is at t = O. 
We have been able to reverse or invert the process of finding the rate of 
change of a function and thus proceed from a knowledge of acceleration to 
velocity as given by (3), and from velocity to distance fallen as given by (6). 
Before we comment further, let us consider some other situations. 
Suppose that an object is thrown downward and leaves the hand with a 
velocity of 100 ft/sec. The acceleration is still given by ( I). and so the speed 
is still given by (2). However, if time is measured from the instant the object 
leaves the hand, then at the instant t = 0, V = 100. To make the formula 
v = 32t + C 
fit this new situation, we must have 'v = 100 at t = 0, or 
100 = 32 ' 0 + C, 
or C = 100. Hence 
v = 32t + 100 
(7) 
is the final formula for the velocity of an object thrown downward with an 
initial speed of 100 ft/sec. 
Now let us seek the distance covered in time t. We know that the instan­
taneous velocity is the instantaneous rate of change of distance with respect to 

392 
THE INTEGRAL CALCULUS 
time. Thus, if we denote distance by d, we may write d = v. In view of (7), 
we have 
d = 3U + 100. 
(8) 
We must now ask, What formula relates d and t? By reviewing the deriva­
tives and the functions from which they were obtained, we find that the tenn 
32t in (8) must come from the term 16t' and the term 100 must come from 
lOOt. The formula for d therefore is presumably d = 161' + lOOt. However, 
we must recall that the formula 
d = 16t' + lOOt + C, 
(9) 
where C is any constant, also has the derivative (8). Hence, so far (9) is the 
general formula for distance fallen. If we agree to measure distance from the 
point at which the object happens to be when it begins to fall, and if time is 
measured from the instant the object begins to fall, then d = 0 when t = O. 
Substituting these values in (9), we have 
0 =  16 ' 0  + 100 ' 0  + C, 
whence C = 0, and 
d = 161' + lOOt 
is the final formula for our situation. 
(10) 
We see from the examples already presented that the occurrence of the 
constant C in the integration is not a disadvantage but rather an advantage. It 
permits us to adjust the formulas for velocity and distance to the specific 
situation we wish to describe, although the basic fact in all instances is v = 32. 
The applications of integration made thus far have involved proceeding 
from the constant acceleration of 32 ft/sec' to the formula for distance. But 
this we were also able to do in Chapter 1 3  without depending upon the calculus. 
It might seem that, thus far at least, the process of integration has not added 
at all to the power of mathematics. However. there are two points to be taken 
into consideration. The derivation of formula ( 10), for example, from the 
basic physical fact, a = 32, is much more readily done by integration than by 
the argument given in Chapter 13. But the second and more important point 
is that the method displayed here for the derivation of the formula for velocity 
from that for acceleration and of the formula for distance from that for 
velocity applies to all formulas, whereas the argument given in Chapter 1l is 
limited to constant acceleration. Thus, if an object should move with variable 
acceleration, as is the case when an object falls to the earth from a great height, 
then the method of Chapter 1 3  no longer applies, whereas integration does. We 
shall treat such problems later. 
Since the motions of objects thro'W1Z up into the air are very important, 
let us note that our present method applies to them also except for minor 

APPLICATIONS TO PROBLEMS OF MOTION 
393 
modifications. We shall again restrict ourselves to objects which do not rise 
very far from the surface of the earth, so that we can continue to use the 
physical fact that the acceleration is constant and equal to 32 ft/sec'. When 
we studied the motion of a freely falling object, we decided, for convenience, 
to consider the acceleration to be positive. As a consequence, the velocity at 
any instant of time and the distance fallen turned out to be positive. However, 
an object thrown up into the air will, of course, rise and then fall. Hence, if 
we regard the velocity in the upward direction to be positive, then we must 
take the acceleration to be negative because it causes speed in the downward 
direction. We start then with the basic fact that 
v = -32. 
(II) 
By integration we obtain 
v = - 321 + c. 
(i2) 
To fit the value of C to our situation, we shall use the physical fact that at 
t = 0, that is, at the instant at which the object is thrown upward, the hand 
or possibly a gun imparts to the object a velocity of, say 100 ft/sec. Thus at 
t = 0, v = 100. If we substitute these values in (12), we have 
loo = -32 · O + C. 
Hence C = 100, and the final formula for velocity is 
v = -32t + 100. 
(13) 
Since, as we know, instantaneous velocity is the instantaneous rate of 
change of distance with respect to time, we can now apply integration to find 
the distance traveled. Let us use d to represent the height above the ground 
reached by the object in time t. Then by integrating (13) we obtain [cf. (9) 1 
d = -16t2 + lOOt + c. 
(14) 
We now wish to adjust the value of C to fit the physical situation. At the 
instant t = 0, the object is about to be thrown up, and at this instant, d = o. 
If we substitute 0 for d and 0 for t in (14), we obtain 
o = - 16 '  0 + 100 ' 0 + C, 
and so C = O. Thus the final formula for height above ground is 
d = - 16t2 + lOOt. 
(15) 
Having obtained various formulas for velocity and distance such as (13) 
and (15) or (7) and (10), we can now proceed to solve problems of the type 

394 
THE INTEGRAL CALCULUS 
considered in Chapter 1 J. We shall not repeat this work here, but instead 
propose to show in the following sections how integration, or the inverse of 
differentiation, produces useful formulas from basic physical facts. 
EXERCISES 
In all of the following problems the motions involved take place near the surface 
of the earth. Hence you may assume that the acceleration is constant. 
1. Suppose that an object is thrown up into the air with an initial velocity of 
150 ft/sec. Derive the formulas for the velocity and height above the ground. 
2. Given that an object is dropped and falls to earth. Suppose that distance is mea­
sured from a point 50 ft above the point at which the object is dropped, but that 
time is measured from the instant the object begins to fall. What formula relates 
distance fallen and rime of fall? 
3. Suppose that an object is dropped from a point 75 ft above the ground. Derive 
the formulas for the velocity and height above the ground. 
4. Suppose that an object is thrown up into the air from the roof of a building 
50 ft high. The initial velocity is 100 ft/sec. Derive the formulas for the velocity 
and for the height above the ground. 
5. Suppose an object is thrown downward from the roof of a building 50 ft high 
and that the initial velocity is 100 ft/sec. Derive the formulas for the speed and 
height above the ground. 
17-4 AREAS OBTAINED BY INTEGRATION 
The derivation of formulas useful in the study of motion was one of the 
seventeenth-century problems which motivated the creation of the calculus. 
Another basic class of problems was concerned with finding the lengths of 
curves, the areas bounded by curves, and the volumes bounded by surfaces. 
In Section 16-2 of the preceding chapter, we mentioned a few problems 
which called for the determination of lengths, areas, and volumes. The ex­
pansion of science and technology has brought about literally thousands of 
new uses of curves and surfaces for which the very same quantities are re­
quired. The distance a ship travels along the spherical surface of the earth is 
the length of a curve. Cables and roadways of bridges are curves, and in 
planning the construction one must know the lengths of these cables and road­
ways. The weights of various objects employed in scientific and engineering 
projects are easily obtained once the volumes are known. For example, if a 
steel beam of some particular shape is to be used in the framework of a build­
ing, then, since the material is the same throughout the beam, the weight is 
merely the volume multiplied by the weight per cubic foot of the metal. 
Hence volume is the essential quantity to be determined. 

AREAS OBTAINED BY INTEGRATION 
395 
But problems concerning lengths of curves, areas, and volumes had already 
been solved in Euclidean geometry. Why should they then have presented 
special difficulties to the scientists of the seventeenth century? The answer is 
that Euclidean geometry is adequate only to treat figures bounded by straight 
line segments and by circles. This limitation is inherent in the subject. Exam­
ination of the axioms of Euclidean geometry shows that they state properties 
of lines and circles. Naturally the theorems which can be deduced readily 
must also be limited to such figures. Although the Greeks managed to com­
pute a few areas and volumes of figures bounded by other geometrical shapes, 
they were able to do so only with great difficulty and by introducing special 
methods limited to the figures in question. The variety and number of prob­
lems which arose in the seventeenth century demanded more general and more 
easily applicable methods. 
y 
---O+-D=+--E---X 
Fig. 17-1. 
The area under the curve is that 
swept out by the vertical line QP as 
it moves to the right. 
Though It IS by no means evident, the calculus proves to be the very 
mathematical tool which enables us to calculate the lengths of curves, the areas 
bounded by £urves, and the volumes bounded by surfaces. We shall illustrate 
this fact by treating the problem of area. Let us try to determine the area 
DEFG of Fig. 17-\. This area is bounded by the vertical line segtnents DG 
and EF, by the segment DE and by the arc FG of the curve whose equation is, 
say y  r-. We may think of this area as being swept out by a vertical line 
segment PO which starts at the position DG and moves to the right. Naturally 
the length of PO varies as it moves. Let us suppose that PO has reached the 
position shown in the figure. The area swept out by this moving segment 
depends, of course, upon the position it has reached. This position can be 
specified by the x-value of the point O. Hence the variable area, which we 
shall denote by A, is a function of x, the abscissa of the point O. We now pro­
pose to find the formula which relates A and x. Our procedure is as follows: 
We begin by determining the rate of change of A with respect to x at any 
given x and integrate this derivative to arrive at the desired formula. 

396 
THE INTEGRAL CALCULUS 
Our first task therefore is to find the rate of change of A with respect to x.· 
To do so, let us suppose that PO has moved a little farther to the position P'O'. 
The abscissa of 0' is, of course, somewhat larger than that of O. Let us denote 
the abscissa of 0' by x + h, so that the increase in the abscissa from 0 to 0' 
is h. Obviously, the variable area A also increases when PO moves to P'O'. 
Let us use k to denote this increase which geometrically is the area OO'P'P. 
It is immediately evident that the increase is equal to the area of a rectangle 
whose base is h and whose height is an ordinate, y, which is larger than PO 
and smaller than P'O'. (We do not know how large ji is, bur we shall see in 
a moment that this does not matter.) We have, then, 
k = Yh. 
Let us divide both sides of (16) by h. Then 
k 
_ 
h = y. 
(16) 
(17) 
Now k/ h is the average rate of change of area with respect to the abscissa in 
the interval h. By the very definition of an instantaneous rate, the rate of 
change of area with respect to abscissa at the x-value of 0 should be the limit 
of the average rate of change as h approaches zero. But as h approaches zero, 
y approaches the y-value of P, or the length PO. Thus 
A = y. 
(18) 
Since the y in (18) is the ordinate of the point P and P lies on the curve OGF, 
it follows that y = x'. Then 
(19) 
We now have the rate of change, with respect to x, of the variable area A. 
To find A itself, we must ask ourselves what formula has the derivative x'. 
A review of previously obtained derivatives tells us that the derivative of x' 
is 3x2, and that therefore A = x'/3. We know, however, that the integral may 
contain a constant term and that this will not affect the derivative, which will 
remain unchanged. Hence the full answer is: 
x3 
A = - + C. 
3 
(20) 
• At this stage. the reader might reconsider the example in the preceding chapter 
dealing with the rate of change of the area of a circle with respect to the radius and 
try to guess the answer to our present problem of rate of change. 

THE CALCULATION OF WORK 
397 
To determine the value of C, we make use of the fact that when PO is at 
DG, the area is zero because DG was the starting position of PO. Suppose 
that the x-value of D is 3. Then, by substiruting 0 for A and 3 for x in (20) 
we have 
or C = -9. Thus 
33 
0 =  
- + C 
3 
' 
x3 
A = - - 9, 
3 
(21) 
and this formula gives the area between DG and the variable position of the 
moving line segment PO. If we wish to determine the area from DG to EF, 
we may assume that PO has reached the position EF. Let us suppose that the 
x-value of E is 6. If we now substitute 6 for x in (21), we obtain the area 
DEFG. Hence 
63 
area DEFG = - - 9 = 72 
3 
9 = 63. 
(22) 
Thus we have found the area bounded by a curve through the process of 
integration. We have, of course, used the equation of the curve, which, thanks 
to Descartes and Fermat, should be known to us. 
In working problems, one can eliminate some writing by neglecting to 
introduce the constant C in (20) and using just the formula A = x"/3. We 
then substirute 6, which is the abscissa of the point E, in this formula; next, 
we substitute 3, which is the abscissa of the point D; and finally we subtract 
the second result from the first. These steps lead to the result given by (22). 
EXERCISES 
1. Find the area bounded by the curve y =x2, the X-axis, and the ordinates at 
x=2 and x=6. 
2. Find the area bounded by the curve y = x", the X-axis, and the ordinates at 
x= 4 and x=6. 
3. Find the area bounded by the straight line y = x, the X-axis, and the ordinates 
at x=4 and x=6. 
4. Find the area bounded by the curve y =x2 + 9, the X-.. xis, and the ordinates at 
X =  3 and x=6. 
17-5 THE CALCULATION OF WORK 
An important quantity for scientific and engineering purposes is the work done 
in various physical operations. When a person raises an object for some dis­
tance he does work. The definition of the word "work" as used in the physi-

398 
THE INTEGRAL CALCULUS 
cal sciences is the product of the force applied and the distance through 
which the force acts. This quantity is important, for example, in the operation 
of machinery. One must know how much work a machine is capable of doing, 
to decide whether it is suitable for a particular task. A train pulling a load over 
some distance and an airplane carrying freight or passengers do work, and 
again the capacity of these carriers and the fuel requirements must be known 
for proper design. 
We shall now consider how the calculus can be used to calculate work. 
Let us suppose that we wish to compute the work required to raise a 500-
pound load to a height of 100 miles. This problem arises, for example, in 
determining the quantity of fuel required to raise a rocket to some desired 
height. Now the force that will accomplish this goal must be great enough to 
offset the force of gravity, which pulls the object down. The force of gravity, 
as we know, is given by 
F
- GMm , 
-
r2 
(23) 
where G is the gravitational constant, M is the mass of the earth, m is the 
mass of the object, and r is the variable distance between the position of the 
object and the center of the earth. In our problem, we shall regard G, M, and 
m as constant, so that the only variables in (23) are F and r. (However, in 
actual rocket problems, the fuel itself is part of the load which must be raised, 
and, since the fuel is gradually burned up as the rocket rises, the mass m also 
is a variable.) Since the object is to travel a distance of 100 miles up, the force 
which must be applied varies over the distance. Hence it is not possible to 
calculate the work by merely multiplying the force by the distance. 
Let W be the work required to raise the object 
from the surface to some distance r from the 
center of the earth. Of course, W is a function of 
r and is unknown. Let us suppose that the object 
is raised an additional distance h, that is, from r to 
r + h (Fig. 17-2). The corresponding extra work, 
k, again depends upon the force which must be 
applied [given by (23) ]  and the distance, h, over 
which it operates. However, the force varies even 
as r increases to r + h. Let T be some value of r 
between r and r + h such that the corresponding 
force GMm/T' is the average force required dur­
ing the interval r to r + h. This last-mentioned 
force is entirely analogous to the quantity y intro­
duced in the treatment of area as an average ordi-
nate in the interval h on the X-axis. We shall see in 
a moment that the precise value of r plays no role. 
, 
Earth 
Fig. 17-2 

THE CALCULATION OF WORK 
399 
Then the work done in raising the mass m from r to r + h is 
GMm 
k = ---=2 h. 
r 
(24) 
Equation (24) yields the additional work required to raise the object the 
distance h. We shall determine next the average rate of change of work with 
respect to distance. This quantity, k/h, is obtained from equation (24) by 
dividing both sides by h. Thus 
We compute next the instantaneous rate of change of work with respect to 
distance. This rate is obtained by letting h approach zero and finding the 
limit approached by k/ h. However as h approaches zero, the quantity r must 
approach r because T is always intermediate between r and r + h. Then the 
instantaneous rate of change of work with respect to distance is given by 
. 
GMm 
W = --2- ' 
r 
(25) 
Since we now know W, we can find W by integration; that is,. we examine 
the various functions we have differentiated, to find one which yields (25) 
as its derivative. It so happens that in our work we did not encounter the 
rate of change given by (25), but we can take for granted now and check 
later that the function corresponding to this derivative is 
W = 
_ GMm + C. 
r 
(26) 
To determine the constant of integration, we recall that when r = 4000 
miles or 4000 · 5280 feet, the object is on the surface of the earth, and hence, 
W = O. Since we do not wish to manipulate large numbers at the moment, we 
denote the radius of the earth by R. Then when r = R, W = O. We substi­
tute these values in (26) and obtain 
or 
Hence 
0 = - GMm 
C 
-- + 
R 
c =  GMm . 
R 
W = _ GMm 
+ GMm . 
r 
R 
(27) 

40 
THE INTEGRAL CALCULUS 
We now have the function which expresses the work done in raising an 
object of mass m from the surface of the earth to a height r units from the 
center. By substituting the numerical data at our disposal we can calculate 
the work done in the example proposed at the outset. We know G and the 
mass M of the earth. The quantity R is 4000 · 5280 feet, and the value of r is 
4100 miles or 4100 · 5280 feet. The mass m, in our example, is the mass of an 
object which weighs 500 pounds or 500 · 32 poundals at the surface of the 
earth. Hence the mass m is 500 pounds. 
We can simplify the arithmetic somewhat since we know that the accelera­
tion due to the earth's gravitational attraction is [formula (5) of Chapter 15] 
and that when r = R, then 
Thus 
whence 
GM 
a = -2- '  
r 
a = 32 ft/sec'. 
GM 
32 = -2- ' 
R 
GM = 32R2. 
If we substitute this result in (27), we obtain 
or 
w = - 32R2m 
-- + 32Rm. 
r 
By applying the distributive axiom we may write 
w = 32Rm (I - :) . 
(28) 
(29) 
Formula (29) is the useful form for the calculation of the work, except for 
one detail. The unit of work is usually taken to be foot-pounds. However if 
the mass m is given in pounds, then the formulas we have employed here and 
elsewhere express the force in poundals. Hence formula (29) yields the work 
done in foot-poundals. To obtain an answer in foot-pounds we just ignore the 
factor 32 in (29). 

EXERCISES 
THE CALCULATION OF ESCAPE VELOCITY 
401 
1. Calculate the work done in raising the 500-Ib weight to a height of 100 mi. 
2. Suppose that one neglected the variation in gravitational force with height and 
assumed that the 500-lb weight remains constant over the 100 mi that it is raised. 
What is the work required to raise it? 
3. A cable weighing 2 lb/ft is suspended in a well 100 ft deep; a tool weighing 
300 lb is attached at the cable's lower end. Find the work done to raise the tool 
to the surface. [Suggestion: Let W be the work done to raise the tool x ft. Since 
now only lOO - x ft of cable remain, the work k done in raising the tool h feet 
more is k =  [300 + 2(100 - x)]h, where x is some value of x berween x and 
x + h. Now find lV, and then W. Determine the constant and compute the 
work done.] 
4. Use the method of increments to show that the function W = c/r, where c is 
any constant, has the derivative W = -C/T2, 
17-6 THE CALCULATION OF ESCAPE VELOCITY 
We can use the theory of the preceding section to answer a question which is 
of special interest today, namely, what velocity one must give to a rocket to 
ensure that it just reaches a specified height. The condition intended here is 
that the rocket will have zero velocity when it reaches this height, for if it 
still possessed some velocity, it would continue to rise. 
As the rocket travels upward, it loses velocity because the acceleration of 
gravity, which is directed downward, continualIy decreases the velocity. 
However, if the initial velocity V is properly chosen then the rocket will have 
zero velocity at the required height. We wish to determine V. 
In the preceding section we calculated the work done in raising an object 
to a height of d feet above the surface of the earth. However the result did 
not involve the initial velocity V. We shall therefore obtain another expres­
sion for this work. It is physically clear that the work done against gravity in 
the process of sending an object up with some initial velocity V to reach a 
height of d feet should equal the work done by gravity acting on the object 
when it falls d feet. Hence let us calculate the latter. We have an object 
which begins its fall with zero velocity and falls d feet. Since it gains velocity 
on the way down in just the reverse order in which it loses velocity on the way 
up, it strikes the ground with a velocity of V ft/sec. 
If an object falls from a great height above the surface of the earth, it does 
not fall with constant acceleration. However, there is some average accelera­
tion which would produce the same final velocity in any time of fall. Let us 
denote this average acceleration by a. In Section 1 3-5 we found the formula 
for the speed of and the distance fallen by an object which is dropped and 
falls to earth with an acceleration of 32 ft/sec'. If the acceleration were a 

402 
THE INTEGRAL CALCULUS 
instead of 32, the formulas would be (Exercise 14 of Section 1J-5) 
v = at 
and 
Now, if we take the value of t from the first formula and substitute it in the 
second one, we obtain the relationship between d and v. Thus since t = via, 
Then 
v' = 2ad, 
(30) 
wherein we have written V merely to denote that it is the final velocity after 
the object has fallen d feet. 
Since the object falls with a constant acceleration a, the force which gravity 
applies, by Newton's second law of motion, is ma, where m is the mass of the 
rocket. Then the work done by gravity is 
w =  mad. 
However by (30) we see that ad = V'/2. If we substitute this value in the 
formula for W we have 
mV' 
W = _ · 
2 
(Jl) 
Formula (Jl), then, is an expression for the work that gravity does in causing 
an object to fall a distance d and to acquire, at the end of the fall, the velocity 
V. As we have already noted, this is the work we must do to raise the object 
from the surface of the earth where it has velocity V to the point where it has 
velocity zero. 
Formula (29), namely, 
W = 32Rm (I - 9), 
also gives the work required to raise an object from the surface of the earth 
to the distance r from the center. Let r = R + d so that the object is raised 
to the height d above the surface. Then 
W = 32Rm(1 - R: d) · 
(32) 
We now have two expressions, formulas (31) and (32), for the work. We 

THE CALCULATION OF ESCAPE VELOCITY 
403 
equate them and obtain 
mV2 
2 
32Rm (I _
_ R_) . 
R + d  
--
=
 
Dividing both sides by m and multiplying by 2 yield 
v2 = 64R(1 _ _  
R_) . 
R + d  
(33) 
This then is the expression for the initial velocity required to send an object 
up so that it just reaches the height of d feet above the surface. In applica­
tions, the quantities occurring in formula (33) must be expressed in feet. 
Formula (33) has a very interesting consequence. If we wished to send 
an object farther and farther up so that d becomes indefinitely large, then, 
since R is fixed, the quantity R/R + d approaches zero. The result is 
v' = 64R 
or 
v = V 64R = 8VR. 
(34) 
This velocity is often described as the velocity required to reach infinity and 
is called the escape velocity. Of course, infinity is not a geographical location, 
and what is really meant is that the object will keep going out indefinitely 
and never return. If the initial velocity is less than the escape velocity, then 
the object will attain zero velocity at some finite, though possibly large, 
distance from the earth and fall back to earth. 
We can readily calculate the escape velocity. Since 
we have 
R = 400 ' 5280 = 21,120,00 ft, 
v = 8V21,120,000 = 8v'TITI ' VlO,OOO 
- 8 . 4600 = 36,800 ft/sec 
- 7 mi/sec, approximately. 
This is the velocity necessary to escape from our trouble-infested earth. 
EXERCISES 
1. Calculate the velocity required to send an object 240,000 mi up (this is the dis­
tance to the moon) and arrive there with zero velocity. [Suggestion: Use (33).] 
2. Does fonnula ( 34) give the escape velocity from the moon, that is, does it give 
the velocity required to send an object from the moon to infinity? If not, how 
should it be modified? 

404 
THE INTEGRAL CALCULUS 
17-7 THE INTEGRAL AS THE LIMIT OF A SUM 
In our discussion of integration as a means of finding areas bounded by curves, 
we mentioned that from Greek times up to the seventeenth century the efforts 
of mathematicians to determine such areas had not been very ؔuccessful. The 
reason, already noted, was that these men tried to use Euclidean geometry, 
and this geometry is limited in power. To prove theorems about the areas of 
figures bounded by curves, they had to overcome great difficulties by a special 
method known as the method of exhaustion. They approximated the area 
in question by figures bounded by straight lines-for such figures the area 
could readily be found-and then considered what happened as the approxi­
mation was improved more and more. Although, for the moment, it may 
seem that we are taking a step backward, we shall nevertheless reapproach 
the problem of area by adopting the Greek view. We shall find that our re­
examination will have fruitful results for a new and wide class of problems. 
Let us consider the problem [treated in Section 17-4] of finding the area 
DEFG (Fig. 17-3) which is bounded by the arc FG of the curve whose 
equation is y = x', by DE, and by the vertical line segments DG and EF. 
We subdivide the interval DE into three equal parts, each of length h, and 
denote the points of subdivision by D" D" and D3, where D3 is the point E. 
Let y" y" and Y3 be the ordinates at the points of subdivision. Now Ylh, Y2h, 
and y,b are the areas of three rectangles shown in Fig. 17-3, and the sum 
(35) 
is the sum of the three rectangular areas and thus an approximation to the 
area DEFG. 
y 
y\ Y2 
Ya 
Fig. 17-3. 
The area under a curve approximated by 
a sum of rectangular areas. 
y 
G 
Fig. 17-4. 
Decreasing the widths of the rectangles 
improves the approximation provided by 
the sum of the rectangular areas. 

THE INTEGRAL AS THE LIMIT OF A SUM 
405 
We can obtain a better approximation to the area DEFG by using smaller 
rectangles and more of them. To illustrate this point, suppose that we sub­
divide the interval DE into six parts. Figure 17-4 shows what happens to the 
middle rectangle of Fig. 17-3. This rectangle is replaced by two, and because 
we use the y-value of each point of subdivision as the height of a rectangle, 
the shaded area in Fig. 17-4 is no longer a part of the sum of the areas of the 
six rectangles which now approximates the area DEFG. Therefore the sum 
(36) 
is a better approximation to the area DEFG than the sum (35). 
We can make a more general statement concerning this process of ap­
proximation. Suppose that we divide the interval DE into n parrs. There 
would then be n rectangles, each of width h. The ordinates at the poinrs of 
subdivision are y" Y2, . . .  , Yno where the dors indicate that all intervening 
y-values at points of subdivision are included. The sum of the areas of the 
n rectangles is then 
Ylk + Y2k + .
. . + y.k, 
(37) 
and the dors again indicate that all intervening rectangles are included. In 
view of what we said above about the effect of subdividing DE into smaller 
intervals, the approximation to the area DEFG given by the sum (37) im­
proves as n increases. Of course, as n gets larger, h gets smaller because 
h=DE/n. 
We see so far how figures formed by line segments-rectangles in the 
present case--can be used to provide better and better approximations to an 
area bounded by a curve. Thus far we have utilized the Greek idea. We now 
depart from it somewhat and introduce the concept of a limit. Specifically 
the area DEFG is the limit approached by the sum of the rectangles as the 
number of rectangles becomes larger and larger, or, one says, as the number 
of rectangles becomes infinite. Thus the number of rectangles might be suc­
cessively 3, 6, 12, 24, 48, . . .  , where the dots indicate that we continue to 
double the number indefinitely. Of course, h, the width of each rectangle, 
approaches zero. In symbols, we write 
area DEFG = limit (y,k + Y2k + . . .  + y.k) ;  
(38) 
hǄO 
the symbol "limit" means that what we wish to obtain is the number ap­
hǅO 
proached by the sum in parentheses as h approaches zero. 
What have we accomplished? We seem to have made a simple thing 
difficult. The innocent area DEFG has been approximated by a sum of rec­
tangles and, as the number of rectangles increases (while each rectangle be-

406 
THE INTEGRAL CALCULUS 
comes thinner), the sum becomes a better and better approximation of the 
area DEFG. However, we know from Section 17-4 that the area DEFG may 
be obtained in the following way: If the equation of the curve FG is y =:.2, 
we find the formula whose derivative is :.2 or, in other words, we find the 
integral of x'. This happens to be :.2/3. We substitute the abscissa of the 
point E and obtain a number. We next substitute the abscissa of the point D 
and obtain a number. Finally, we subtract the latter result from the former. 
We see, then, that limits of the kind expressed in (38) can be determined by 
integration and the subsequent numerical work just described. 
Now insofar as obtaining areas is concerned, we do not seem to have ac­
complished very much. Actually, were we to pursue the subject of area a 
little further than we shall in this book, we would find the new point of view 
significant in this very connection. However, we shall go on to other applica­
tions in which the fact that a limit of the form (38) can be obtained by in­
tegration will be the key to the solution. 
It is helpful to shorten the writing of an expression such as (38). The 
notation used in calculus books is 
area DEFG = J.b Y dx. 
(39) 
This notation must not be taken too literally. The symbol f is an abbreviated 
S and is intended to denote that we are dealing with the limit of a sum. For 
areas this sum is a sum of rectangles. The y in (39) indicates that the heights 
of these rectangles are ordinates of some curve, and the dx indicates that the 
base of each rectangle is a small interval along the X-axis. The number a is 
the abscissa of the left-hand end point of the interval DE, and the number b 
is the abscissa of the right-hand end point. The entire expression on the right 
side of (39) is called the definite integ;ral of the function represented by y. 
The words "definite integral" denote that we are interested in the integral 
regarded as the limit of a sum. 
Whereas Newton had concentrated on finding the derivatives of given 
functions and on the inverse process, the recognition that limits of sums, such 
as that expressed by (38), can be obtained by reversing differentiation is due 
primarily to Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646-1716). Leibniz's career con­
trasts sharply with Newton's. Newton, as we know, had undertaken the study 
of mathematics and physics early in life and had pursued these two fields al­
most exclusively, although he did make minor contributions to chemistry and 
theology. His career as a professor gave him the opportunity to concentrate. 
Leibniz started by studying law at the University of Leipzig, the city in which 
he was born and lived as a youth. He secured a bachelor's degree at Leipzig 
and in 1666 a doctor's degree at the University of Altdorf. His first position 
was that of ambassador for the Elector of Mainz, and until 1672 his interest 

THE INTEGRAL AS THE LIMIT OF A SUJ\I 
407 
in mathematics was secondary. In 1672, during a trip to Paris on behalf of 
his employer, he met Huygens, who acquainted Leibniz with current scientific 
problems and activities. Leibniz's interests were deeply stirred and thereafter 
he devoted much time to mathematics. In 1676 he was appointed librarian and 
councillor to the Elector of Hannover and, although this position also entailed 
many administrative duties, he nevertheless had more leisure for academic 
pursuits. In 1700 he went to Berlin to work for the Elector of Brandenburg 
and, while there, founded the Berlin Academy of Sciences. What is amazing 
about the man is the vast quantity of first-rate contributions to many fields. 
Although his profession was jurisprudence, his work in mathematics and phi­
losophy ranks among the best the world has produced. He also did major 
work in mechanics, nautical science, optics, hydrostatics, logic, philology, and 
geology, and was a pioneer in historical research. Throughout his life he tried 
to reconcile the Protestant and Catholic faiths. We may recall also his pre­
viously noted activities--his efforts to organize a society devoted to the dis­
semination of the new scientific knowledge and to turn the German language 
into a suitable vehicle for the new ideas. No subject pursued by intellectuals 
of his age was neglected; only Leibniz himself went unrecognized and neg­
lected by his contemporaries. 
From our present point of view, Leibniz's emphasis on area as a limit of 
a sum may seem to be no blessing. But the full import of what he taught, 
namely that such limits can be evaluated by reversing differentiation, is of 
vast significance because limits of sums arise naturally in physical problems. 
Let us consider an example. In Newton's and Leibniz's time and for one 
hundred years thereafter, one of the major problems was to calculate the 
gravitational force exerted by one mass on another. If these masses are so 
compact that they can be regarded as concentrated at points, then the dis­
tance between them is the definite distance between these points, and the 
force of attraction is given by the usual formula. If, however, one mass is 
the earth and the other is some small object at, say a distance of a few hundred 
miles from the earth, then, although the latter may in many cases be con­
sidered as concentrated at a point, the earth itself cannot be so regarded. The 
difficulty is that the mass of the earth is distributed over an enormous volume 
and hence cannot be said to be separated from the mass m by a definite dis­
tance. 
We can, however, regard the volume of the earth (Fig. 17-5) as broken 
up into small cubes numbered from 1 to n." Since each cube is small, a good 
approximation of the distance of a cube from the mass m is the distance from 
the center of the cube to the mass m. Thus if this distance is r, for the first 
• Strictly speaking, there will be pieces left over since a sphere is nOt a sum of cubes. 
However, we shall see that these pieces become negligible. 

408 
THE INTEGRAL CALCULUS 
Fig. 17-5. 
The volume of sphere approximated by a sum of cubical volumes. 
cube, then the gravitational attraction exerted by the cube on the mass m is 
given by 
Gmh 
Fl = -2- ' 
T, 
where h now stands for the mass of the cube. The same applies to each cube 
up to the nth cube. Then the total gravitational attraction F of the n cubes is 
Gm 
Gm 
Gm 
- h + - h + . . . + - h. 
r2 
T2 
T2 
,
2 
n 
(40) 
Formula (40) is entirely analogous to (37). The quantity y, in (37) has now 
become Gm/r/; y, has become Gm/rؕ; and so forth. But (40) is not the 
exact expression for the attraction exerted by the earth because it assumes that 
each cube acts as though its mass were concentrated at its center. However, 
if we make each cube smaller, which means that h will be smaller, and increase 
the number of cubes, n, so that they continue to fill as much of the sphere as 
possible, the sum of attractions exerted by the n cubes will be a better approxi­
mation to the force of attraction exerted by the entire sphere. The reason is 
that the smaller the cube, the more appropriate it is to assume that its mass 
can be regarded as concentrated at its center. The exact value of F is 
F 
I· · (Gm h 
Gm h 
Gm h) 
= Imlt -
2 
+ -
2 
+ . . .  + -
2 
. 
h-+o 
TI 
T2 
Tn 
(41) 

SOME RELEVANT HISTORY OF THE LIMIT CONCEPT 
409 
Formula (41) is exactly like (38). It is now clear that to determine the total 
gravitational attraction exerted by a distributed mass, the earth in our discus­
sion, we must calculate the limit of a sum. We know that such limits can be 
calculated by reversing differentiation. The particular limit in (41) cannot be 
computed with the mathematics at our disposal. The reason is that h in (41 ) 
is three-dimensional (because it is mass per cubic foot times volume), whereas 
the h in (38) is a segment. Hence (41 ) is a little more complicated than (38). 
But our example makes the point that limits of sums arise in physical problems, 
and that we can evaluate them by reversing differentiation. 
As a matter of history, Newton solved the very problem we have been 
considering and proved that the earth attracts a small mass as if the entire 
mass of the earth were concentrated at its center. In other words, although 
the earth's mass is distributed over a large region, it happens to be true that 
a spherical mass attracting a small mass can be treated as if its mass were 
concentrated at its center. The solution of this problem enabled Newton 
to make further advances in the theory of gravitation. In our discussion of 
the law of gravitation, we also considered the quantity r to be measured from 
the center of the earth; that is, we made implicit use of Newton's result. 
17-8 SOME RELEVANT HISTORY OF THE LIMIT CONCEPT 
We could continue to study extensions and further applications of the calculus, 
but there are other features of this mathematical development which take 
precedence in view of the time we can devote to the subject. In the first place, 
it is most important to note that the calculus rests on a new concept, the con­
cept of the limit of a function. We employed this concept in two essential 
ways. In the differential calculus we introduced the instantaneous rate of 
change of a function. This rate is the limit of the average rate of change of 
speed, that is of k/ h, as h approaches zero. In the integral calculus we used 
the limit concept to speak of the quantity approached by the sum 
y,h + y,h + . . .  + Ynh 
as h approaches zero. This limit can represent area, the gravitational force 
exerted by an extended body, or other quantities, depending upon the physical 
or geometrical interpretation of the function relating y and x, and of h. Thus 
it is this new concept which distinguishes the calculus from the branches of 
mathematics previously studied. 
The limit was defined as the number approached by some function of " 
as h approaches zero. This description is admittedly vague. In particular, 
the word "approach" is suspect. If for smaller and smaller values of h the 
ratio k/" should have the values t, i, ill" ,H, . . .  , are these values approaching 
I? They are, in the sense of getting closer to 1, but it is also clear that they 

410 
THE INTEGRAL CALCULUS 
are always less than i, and so the limit might very well be i. In other words, 
how closely must the values of k/h approach a particular number before we 
can decide that that number is the limit of k/h? We shall not attempt to give 
a precise formulation of the limit concept. However, it may be a comfort to 
know that a precise definition can be given today. 
The history of the efforts of mathematicians to grasp this concept properly 
is instructive as to how mathematics develops. The trouble started early in 
the seventeenth century. We have already mentioned that many mathema­
ticians of that century made contributions to the calculus, even before NewtOn 
and Leibniz began to work on the subject. These forerunners realized that 
they were unable to give satisfactory expositions of their ideas and, in fact, 
hardly comprehended the significance of what they were creating. Despite 
the long tradition of rigorous proof in mathematics, the early workers in the 
calculus did not hesitate to advance their crude and imprecise ideas and de­
fended themselves in ways that seem strange for mathematicians. Rigor, said 
Bonaventura Cavalieri, a pupil of Galileo and professor at the University of 
Bologna, is the concern of philosophy and not of geometry. Pascal argued 
that the heart intervenes to assure us of the correctness of mathematical steps. 
Proper finesse rather than logic is what is needed to do the correct thing, just 
as, he added, the appreciation of religious grace is above reason. 
Although Newton and Leibniz made the most significant advances in the 
formulation of the ideas and methods of the calculus, neither contributed 
much to the rigorous establishment of the subject. They both realized that 
they had not presented clearly and precisely the basic ideas of instantaneous 
rate of change and the definite integral. Vet they were sure that their ideas 
were sound because they made sense physically and intuitively, and because 
the methods gave results which agreed with observations and experiments. 
Both gave many versions in the attempt to hit upon the precise concepts, but 
neither was successful. In some writings Leibniz went so far as to say that 
the methods of the calculus were only approximate, but since its errors were 
smaller than observational or measurable errors, the subject was useful. 
The work of Newton and Leibniz was criticized even by their contempo­
raries. Newton did not reply to the criticisms, but Leibniz did. In addition 
to defending the methods by an appeal to the agreement of the results with 
experience, he attacked the critics as overprecise-a strange stand for a mathe­
matician. He also said that we should not lose the fruits of an invention by 
excessive scruples. Of course, such replies did not provide the missing clarity 
and rigor. Some writers on the calculus proceeded as though there were no 
difficulties. Their attitude seemed to be that what was incomprehensible 
needed no further explanation. 
The successors of Newton and Leibniz attempted to supply better founda­
tions for the calculus. However their efforts were blocked in two ways. First 
of all, the formulations presented by Newton and Leibniz were different, but 

SOME RELEVANT HISTORY OF THE LIMIT CONCEPT 
41 1 
both yielded correct results; hence the rigorous construction of the calculus 
had to reconcile the two formulations. Secondly, the whole situation became 
complicated by an argument between Newton and Leibniz on the question of 
whether Leibniz had stolen ideas from Newton. Newton's friends, and English 
mathematicians in general, sided with him, while continental mathematicians 
defended Leibniz. The quarrel between the two groups became so bitter that 
they stopped corresponding with each other for about one hundred years. 
English mathematicians continued to talk about lIuents and lIuxions, Newton's 
terms for functions and their derivatives, whereas continental scientists talked 
about infinitesimals, Leibniz's name for h and k or, in his notation, dx and dy. 
Two of the greatest mathematicians of the eighteenth century, Leonhard 
Euler and Joseph Louis Lagrange, worked on the problem of clarifying the 
calculus, but without success. Both arrived at the conclusion that as it stood, 
the calculus was unsound, but that somehow errors were offsetting one an­
other so that the results were correct. A more drastic opinion was offered by 
the mathematician Michel Rolle (1652-1719). He taught that the calculus 
was a collection of ingenious fallacies. Voltaire called the calculus "the art of 
numbering and measuring exactly a Thing whose existence cannot be con­
ceived." Near the end of the eighteenth century the distinguished mathe­
matician Jean Ie Rond d' Alembert ( 1717-1783) felt obliged to advise his students 
that they should persist in their study of the calculus; faith would eventually 
come to them. All eighteenth-century attempts to supply rigorous foundations 
for the calculus failed. In the first quarter of the nineteenth century, Augustin­
Louis Cauchy (1789-1857), the leading French mathematician, gave the first 
satisfactory definitions of the derivative and definite integral. Gradually other 
concepts of the calculus, which we have not considered, were clarified. The 
differences in notation were also eliminated. 
This history of the development of the calculus is significant because it 
illustrates the way in which mathematics progresses. Ideas are first grasped 
intuitively and extensively explored before they become fully clarified and 
precisely formulated even in the minds of the best mathematicians. Gradually 
the ideas are refined and given the polish and rigor which one encounters in 
textbook presentations. In the instance of the calculus. mathematicians recog­
nized the crudeness of their ideas and some even doubted the soundness of the 
concepts. Vet they not only applied them to physical problems, but used the 
calculus to evolve new branches of mathematics, differential equations, differ­
ential geometry, the calculus of variations, and others. They had the con­
fidence to proceed so far along uncertain ground because their methods yielded 
correct physical results. Indeed, it is fortunate that mathematics and physics 
were so intimately related in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries-so 
much so that they were hardly distinguishable-for the physical strength 
supported the weak logic of mathematics. Of course, mathematicians were 
selling their birthright, the surety of results obtained by strict deductive rea-

412 
THE INTEGRAL CALCULUS 
soning from sound foundations, for the sake of scientific progress, but it is 
understandable that the mathematicians succumbed to the lure. 
It may be clear from this account of the difficulties that mathematicians 
experienced with the concept of limit that the two chapters devoted to the 
calculus do not provide a complete description of the concept and all its 
ramifications. The reader may justifiably feel some vagueness and uneasiness 
abour what has been presented. Further study of the calculus would eliminate 
these objections. We must also point out that in illustrating the ideas of the 
calculus we have confined ourselves to the simplest functions. The subject is 
a vast one and far more powerful than we can indicate with the technique 
employed here. Indeed an enormous number of new branches of mathe­
matics rest on the calculus. All of these, together with the calculus, constitute 
a division of mathematics, called analysis; which is considerably more extensive 
than algebra or geometry. Bur some glimpse of this mOSt significant mathe­
matical creation of modern times may in itself afford a rich enough reward. 
EXERCISES 
1. What essentially new idea does the calculus treat? 
2. Mathematicians are logical thinkers; they reason directly and flawlessly to the 
desired conclusions. Discuss this assenion in the light of the history of the 
calculus. 
17-9 THE AGE OF REASON 
The men of the Renaissance had turned to new sources of knowledge-nature, 
reason, and mathematics-but were rather vague as to the specific methods by 
which they were to reconstruct the various branches of thought. Fortunately, 
a series of developments and creations not only gave strong impetus to the 
urge to rebuild knowledge, but actually supplied the method by which positive 
truths were to be attained. Galileo formulated this method clearly and applied 
it to obtain the laws of motion of objects moving on and near the surface of 
the earth. Newton conclusively demonstrated the efficacy of Galileo's method 
and supplied the doctrine which was to be the keystone in any new system of 
thought: All bodies in the universe were subject to one set of physical axioms, 
and their behavior could be deduced from these axioms. Nature was mathe­
matically designed, and natural phenomena adhered strictly to universal mathe­
matical laws which described the behavior of a speck of dust and of the mOSt 
distant stars. 
The intellectual leaders of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries believed 
that they now had the tenets which vouchsafed a totally new outlook on the 
universe and which justified a reconstruction of all of mankind's systems of 
thought, institutions, and way of life. The right foundation in the form of a 
mathematical-mechanical explanation was available. New ideas, always far 

THE AGE OF REASON 
413 
more effective in determining the course of cultures than wars or political 
events, began to work their influence, and the growing use of books permitted 
the leaders to reach large groups of people. 
The intellectuals were confident that reason, based on the new truths made 
manifest by the mathematical and scientific work of the seventeenth century 
and cleansed of the metaphysical and theological presuppositions of the medi­
eval period, could rebuild philosophy, religion, literature, art, political thought, 
and economic life. They saw clearly that mathematics and science were offer­
ing not just a few theorems and isolated results, but a new approach to truths 
and a new interpretation of the universe. Thus thinking men were impelled 
to a sweeping reorganization of all knowledge and institutions. 
The eighteenth century has been called the Age of Reason. It was not 
the first period of history in which reason played a dominant role, but it was 
the first in which the intellectual elite emboldened by some successes in physical 
science dared to apply reason to the reconstruction of an entire civilization. 
The spirit and outlook of the leaders are indicated by their reference to their 
own age as the Enlightenment. 
We cannot examine in the text the new doctrines which the Age of Reason 
fashioned in the social sciences, humanities, and the arts. The reader who would 
like to pursue this subject will find several survey chapters in the books by the 
author listed in the Recommended Reading. Further references are given in 
those chapters. 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
1. Suppose an object is thrown up from the ground with an initial velocity of 
200 fe/sec. Using 32 ft/sec2 as the downward acceleration of gravity, 
a) find the formula for its height above the ground in t sec; 
b) calculate the maximum height to which the phjeer will rise; 
c) find the velocity with which the object will hit the ground. 
2. Suppose that an object is thrown upward from the roof of a building which is 
100 ft high and is given an initial velocity of 200 ft/sec. 
a) Find the formula for its height above the Toof in t sec. 
b) Find the formula for its height above the ground in t sec. 
3. The acceleration which the moon's gravity impans to objects near the surface of 
the moon is 5.3 ft/sec2• Suppose an object is thrown up from the surface with 
an initial velocity of 200 it/sec. Find 
a) the fonnula for the height of the object after t sec, 
b) the maximum height the object reaches. 
c) Comparing the answers to Exercises 1 (b) and J (b) should show that the 
object reaches a greater maximum height on the moon. Can you explain in 
physical terms why this must be so? 
4. a) Find the area bounded by the straight line y = 3x, the x-axis, and the ordinate 
at x = 4 by using the calculus method. 

414 
THE INTEGRAL CALCULUS 
b) The figure described in pan (a) is a triangle. Find its area by using the 
appropriate theorem of Euclidean geometry. Does your result agree with the 
answer to pan (a)? 
5. a) Find the area bounded by the straight line y = 2x + 7, the x-axis, and the 
ordinates at x=4 and x=6. 
b) The figure described in pan (a) is a trapezoid. According to a theorem of 
Euclidean geometry the area of a trapezoid is one-half the altitude times the sum 
of the bases. Calculate the area by this fonnuIa and see whether it checks with 
the answer to pan (a). 
6. Calculate the work required to raise an object whose mass is 200 Ib from the 
surface of the earth to a height of 100 mi. The variation in the eanh's gravita­
tional force must be taken into account. 
7. Suppose you wish to shoot a rocket up from the surface of the eanh to a height 
of precisely 100 mi. What initial velocity must you give the rocket? 
Topics for Further Investigation 
1. The predecessors of Newton and Leibniz in the creation of the calculus. 
2. The work of Newton on the calculus. 
3. The controversy between Newton and Leibniz on priority in founding the 
calculus. 
Recommended Reading 
BALL, W. W. ROUSE: A ShOTt Account of the HistOTY of Mathematics, Chaps. 16 
and 17, Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1960. 
BELL, ERIC T.: Men of Mathematics, Chap. 7, Simon and Schuster, Inc., New York, 
1937. 
COLERUS, EGMONT: From Simple Numbers to the Calculus, Chaps. 24 through 34, 
Wm. Heinemann Ltd., London, 1954. 
EVES, HOWARD: An Introduction to the History of Mathematics, 2nd ed., Chap. 11, 
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, N.Y., 1964. 
KASNER, EDWARD and JAMES R. NEWMAN: Mathematics and the Imagination, Chap. 
9, Simon and Schuster, Inc., New York, 1940. 
KLINE, MORRIS: Mathematics in Western Culture, Chaps. 16, 17 and 18, Oxford 
University Press, N.Y., 1953. Also in paperback. 
KLINE, MORRIS: Mathematics: A Cultural Approach, Chaps. 20 through 22, Addison­
Wesley Publishing Co., Reading, Mass., 1962. 
SAWYER, W. W.: Mathematician's Delight, Chaps. 10 through 12, Penguin Books 
Ltd., Harmondsworth, 1943. 
SAWYER, W. W.: What Is Calculus About? Random House, New York, 1961. 

THE AGE OF REASON 
4 1 5  
Scarf, ] .  F.: A History of Mathematics, Chaps. 1 0  and 1 1 ,  Taylor and Francis, Ltd., 
London, 1958. 
SINGH, JAGIT: Great Ideas of Modern Mathematics: Their Nature and Use, Chap. 3, 
Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1959. 
SMITH, DAVID EUGENE: History of Mathematics, Vol. II, Chap. 10, Dover Publica­
tions, Inc., New York, 1958. 
WIENER, PHILIP P. and AARON NOLAND: Roots of Scientific Thought, pp. 412-442, 
Basic Books, Inc., New York, 1957. 
WIGHTMAN, WM. P. D.: The Growth of Scientific Ideas, Chap. 9, Yale University 
Press, New Haven, 1953. 

CHAPTER 18 
TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCTIONS AND OSCILLATORY MOTION 
All the effects of nature are only mathematical results of a small number 
of immutable laws. 
P. S. LAPLACE 
18-1 INTRODUCTION 
In the seventeenth century one of the most pressing problems of the times was 
time itself. The increasing scientific activity, particularly in an age which had 
decided to measure and to seek quantitative laws, created the need for con­
venient, accurate methods of measuring time. Moreover, as we have already 
had occasion to mention in other connections, the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries were concerned with the very practical problem of improving the 
method by which ships determined their longitude at sea. Here a good clock 
is the simplest answer. Suppose that the longitude of a given place on land is 
known and that a ship has on board a clock set to agree with the time pre­
vailing at that given locality. Since the earth turns through 360' of longitude 
in one day, it turns through IS' in each hour. Hence for each IS' that a ship 
is west, say, of the fixed locale, midday occurs one hour later compared to the 
time at the fixed position on land. If a ship's officer notes (by means of the 
sun's position) when midday occurs at his position at sea and finds, for exam­
ple, that his clock reads 3 o'clock whereas it should, of course, read 12 o'clock, 
he knows that the longitude of his position is 45' west of the given reference 
locality on land. We can see then why scientists decided to search for a re­
liable and accurate clock. 
The thought which suggested itself almost at once was to look for some 
physical phenomenon which repeated itself regularly. The day contains 24 
hours; hence when the number of repetitions per day is known. the duration 
of each repetition is readily calculated. Where then could one find a repeti­
tive or periodic physical phenomenon? Two prospects attracted the attention 
of seventeenth-century scientists. The first of these was the motion of a mass, 
called a bob, attached to a spring and oscillating up and down, and the second 
was the motion of a pendulum, that is, a bob attached to a string and swinging 
to and fro. Now first reactions to the possibility of using the motion of a bob 
on a spring or a pendulum as a measure of time are apt to be negative. The 
416 

THE MOTION OF A BOB ON A SPRING 
417 
bob on a spring, for example, does go through each cycle, that is, each com­
plete up and down motion, in the same time so far as the eye can judge, but 
the motion soon dies down. The same is true for the pendulum. But, if air 
resistance could be minimized or perhaps compensated for, then these motions 
might become truly periodic and should therefore merit investigation. The 
scientist or mathematician who expects to see at once the solution of a problem 
he sets out to study will never accomplish much. The best he can hope for at 
the outset is an idea or a clue to pursue. 
In this chapter we shall examine first the physical problem of the motion 
of a bob on a spring, a prime example of oscillatory morion. To study such 
motions mathematicians created a new class of functions, the trigonometric 
functions. We shall then discuss these functions and see how they are used to 
derive some knowledge about the physical problem which morivated their 
introduction. Surprisingly, trigonometric funcrions proved to be admirably 
suited for the study of sound, electricity, radio, and a host of other oscillatory 
phenomena. Of these latter developments we shall learn more in the next 
chapter. 
18-2 THE MOTION OF A BOB ON A SPRING 
The problem of investigating the motion of a bob on a spring was undertaken 
by one of the greatest experimentalists in the history of physics, the English­
man Robert Hooke (1635-1703). Hooke was professor of mathematics and 
mechanics at Gresham College. His claim to fame also rests upon his success 
as an inventor. To his credit are a telescope moved by a clock mechanism and 
devices for measuring the moisture in the atmosphere, the force of the wind, 
2nd the amount of rainfall. He improved the microscope, the barometer, the 
air pump, and the telescope. One of his findings, namely, that white light 
passed through thin sheets of mica breaks into 
many colors, parallels Newton's work on light. 
He also discovered the cell structure of plants. 
Hooke was very much interested in designing a 
useful clock and thought that springs would fur­
nish the essential device. While working on the 
action of springs, he discovered a basic law, still 
known as Hooke's law, which we shall discuss 
later. 
Ler us follow Hooke in studying the motion 
of a bob on a spring. The upper end of the spring 
is attached to a fixed support, and a bob is attached 
to the lower end. Because gravity pulls the bob 
downward, the spring will be extended until the 
tension in the spring offsets the force of gravity. 
The bob then comes to rest in some position 
() 
Fig. 18-1. 
L. _ _ _ _  .l 
, 
' 
, 
' 
'-_ _ _ _ _  1 
A bob on a spring. 

418 
TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCfIONS AND OSCILLATORY MOTION 
which is called the rest or equilibrium position (Fig. IS-I). If one now pulls 
the bob downward some definite distance below the rest position and then re­
leases it, the bob moves up to the rest position, continues past that point to some 
highest position, and then moves downward. When it reaches the point to 
which it had been pulled down, it starts upward and repeats its former motion. 
Following Galileo's plan of idealizing the physical situation, let us suppose that 
air resistance is negligible. (Strictly speaking, energy is also lost in the expansion 
and contraction of the spring, but this loss is negligible.) Then the bob will 
continue to move up and down endlessly. 
To begin to get some mathematical description of this motion let us in­
troduce a Y-axis alongside the bob (Fig. IS-I) and suppose that y = 0 corre­
sponds to the rest position of the bob. When the bob is above or below the 
rest position, the bob is said to be displaced and the distance that it is above 
or below the rest position is called its displacement. To distinguish displace­
ments above from those below the rest position, we shall call the former 
positive and the latter negative. Each displacement may then be described by 
a value of y. Thus Y = -! means that the bob is t unit below the rest position. 
To study the motion of the bob mathematically, it would be most helpful 
if we could find the formula which relates the displacement of the bob and 
the time it is in motion. Let us therefore seek such a formula. 
18-3 THE SINUSOIDAL FUNCTIONS 
No one of the formulas that we have considered thus far would be useful to 
represent the motion of the bob, for the peculiariry of the present phenomenon 
is that after each up and down motion, or oscillation, has been completed. the 
displacements go through their former sequence of values. Hence we appar­
ently must seek a new type of formula which expresses the periodic character 
of the motion of the bob. We do not seem to have any clue, but a little 
imagination may supply one. 
Suppose a point P moves around a circle of unit radius at a constant speed. 
Let us denote some of its positions by P" P2, •
•
•
 (Fig. IS-2). We can, if we 
wish to, introduce a point Q on the vertical line through the center 0 such 
Qa ----
Pa 
P, 
Q2 ------
P2 
------
Q, 
QI --------
PI 
o ---------
s 
-----
Q 
Q, .E____ Po 
Fig. 18-2. 
Successive positions of a point P which moves 
around a circle at a constant velocity. and the 
corresponding positions of Q. 

y 
--+---o$%r--x 
Fig. 18-3 
THE SINUSOIDAL FUNCTIONS 
419 
y 
--+L--7.---r-x 
Fig. 18-4 
that 0 always has the same height that P has above or below the horizontal 
through O. The point 0 is called the projection of P on the vertical line. 
Thus to the position PI of P there corresponds 01; to P, there corresponds 0,; 
and so on. Why should we introduce the point O? Well, let us imagine P 
moving around the circle through many revolutions starting from the position 
S at the right. What does its "shadow" 0 do' It moves up from 0 to a 
highest position, moves down again to 0, moves past 0 to a lowest position 
on the vertical line, moves up again to 0, and then repeats this up and down 
motion. The motion of Q certainly seems to have the essential characteristics 
of the motion of the bob on the spring. Hence perhaps by pursuing further the 
motion of Q we may obtain the function we are seeking. 
Let us introduce coordinate axes as shown in Fig. 18-3. If P starts from 
the X-axis and reaches, say the position Ph then we may describe the position 
of P by the angle A shown in the figure. The height of 0 above the X-axis 
is the same as the y-value of P. Now 
sin A = l .  
1 
Hence 
y =  sin A. 
(1) 
Thus if the position of P is described by the angle A, then the position of the 
corresponding point 0 on the vertical line is given by (1). 
But now suppose P has moved to the position p. shown in Fig. 18-4. The 
angle A which describes the position of p. is the obtuse angle shown in the 
figure. This angle is no longer an acute angle of a right triangle, and we 
therefore have no right to speak of sin A. However, let us extend the mean­
ing of sine so that, by definition, sin A is the y-value of P4• Since the height 
of O. above 0 equals the y-value of p., we may continue to write y = sin A 
to describe the position of O. That is, the distance of 0 from 0 on the vertical 
line will be given by y = sin A. 

420 
TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCTIONS AND OSCILLATORY MOTION 
)' 
-+.--h-+-x 
Fig. 18-5 
r 
p 
--j--frk'-.+- x 
--r-5-L+--x 
Fig. 18-6 
Fig. 18-7 
Suppose next that P occupies the position P, shown II Fig, 18-5. The 
angle A which describes how far around the circle P has moved is now the 
angle shown. Let us agree again that by sin A we shall mean the y-value of 
P" which is also the distance below the X-axis of the point 05' Then we 
again may write y  sin A to describe the position of O. Note that y is now 
a negative quantity. 
If P reaches the position P, shown in Fig. 18-6, then its position is repre­
sented by the angle A shown, and if we again agree to mean by sin A the 
y-value of P" we shall be able to say here too that y \ sin A describes the 
position of Q. In this instance also. y is a negative quantity. 
As P returns to the X-axis and starts to repeat its revolution, the angle A 
which describes the position of P will now be 360' plus some additional angle 
(Fig. 18-7). It is only by including 360' for each revolution of P that we can 
keep track of the number of revolutions. However, let us note that the 
y-values of P will recur in precisely the same order in which they appeared 
on the first revolution. Despite the fact that on the second revolution the 
values of A are larger than 360', we shall continue to mean by sin A the 
y-value of P. Thus sin 390' will be the same as sin 30'. As P goes through 

y 
Fig. UI-8. The graph of y = sin A. 
THE SINUSOIDAL FUNCTIONS 
421 
its second revolution, Q repeats the motions of the first revolution. Hence it 
will still be true that y = sin A describes the position of Q on the vertical line. 
With each revolution of P, the y-values repeat, although the angle A increases 
by 360°. Since the motion of Q also repeats, its position on the vertical line 
will continue to be represented by y = sin A. 
If P were to revolve in the clockwise direction, then we would make only 
one change, i.e., call the values of A negative. The y-value of P, wherever 
it is, is still, by definition, sin A and this y-value would represent the position 
of Q. 
Let us survey what we have done. To describe mathematically the position 
of the point Q, we have introduced a new function: y = sin A. When A is an 
acute angle, as in Fig. IS-3, then sin A has the old meaning; that is, it is the 
ratio of the side opposite angle A to the hypotenuse of the right triangle in 
which A lies. (In the present case the hypotenuse is I.) But when A is larger 
than 90°, then the equation y = sin A is a definition of what we mean by 
sin A. Since there is a definite y-value for each value of A, positive or nega­
tive, we do indeed have a function. 
To appreciate the nature of this function let us graph it. Figure IS-S shows 
the graph. The values of A are plotted along the horizontal axis, and the 
corresponding y-values are plotted in the usual way. 
Do we know the precise numerical value of y for each value of A' We 
do. For values of A which are between 0° and 90°, the y-values are the 
ordinary sine values which we find in our trigonometric table. In the interval 
from 90° to ISO°, the values of sin A repeat, but in reverse order, the values 
which sin A has when A varies from 0° to 90°. This statement implies ,hat 
sin 1000 = sin 80°, sin 1 100 = sin 70°, and so forth. Stated in more general 
terms: 
sin A = sin (ISO° - A). 
(2) 
In the interval from 180° to 360°, sin A has the same numerical values as when 
A varies from 0° to 180°. However, now sin A is negative. Thus sin 

422 
TRIGONOYlETRTC FUNCTIONS AND OSCILLATORY MOTiON 
210° = -sin 30°; sin 220° = -sin 40°; and in general: 
sin A = -sin (A - 180°). 
(3) 
Since for each 360°-interval beyond the interval 0° to 360° sin A repeats the 
values that it has in the interval from 0° to 360°, sin 390° = sin 30°; sin 
400° = sin 400j and so on. In symbolic form, 
sin A = sin (A - 360°). 
(4) 
The values of sin A for negative values of A are also shown in Fig. 1 8-8. 
If we look at the figure, we see that for any negative A-value, sin A is 
the negative of the sine of the corresponding positive A-value. That IS, 
sin (-30°) = -sin (30°) ;  sin (-50°) = -sin (50°), and in general: 
sin A = -sin (-A) . 
(5) 
Thus we have arrived at a definition of the function y = sin A for all 
values of A. Since we know quantitatively what sin A is for values of A 
between 0° and 90°, formulas (2) through (5) enable us to calculate sin A 
for all other values of A. The function we have just introduced is called a 
periodic function because the y-values repeat themselves in every 360°-interval 
of A-values. The interval of 360° is called the period of y = sin A, and the 
entire set of y-values in one period is called the cycle of y-values. 
EXERCISES 
I. Using formulas (2) through (5) or Fig. 18-8, express the following sine values as 
sines of angles between 0° and 90°. 
a) sin 120° 
b) sin 150° 
e) sin 270° 
f) sin 300° 
i) sin -50° 
j) sin 750° 
c) sin 210° 
g) sin 350° 
2. What is the largest value of sin A? What is the smallest value of sin A? 
d) sin 260° 
h) 
3. At what value of A between 0° and 360° does the function y = sin A reach a 
maximum? 
4. Why is y = sin A called a periodic function? 
5. What purpose does the function y = sin A serve with respect to the location 
of Q, the projection of P? 
6. What is the relationship between the function y = sin A and the trigonometric 
ratio sin A studied in Chapter 7? 
7. Describe how sin A varies as A varies from 00 to 360°; from 360° to 7200. 
8. For how many values of A between 00 and 3600 is sin A = 0.5? 
9. Distinguish between the period and the cycle of y = sin A. 

THE SINUSOIDAL FUNCTIONS 
423 
Thus far we have described the size of angles in degrees. There is, how­
ever, no need to stick to this unit. Let us return to the motion of the point P 
in Figs. 18-3 through 1 8-7. The size of angle A can be specified by describing 
the arc length traversed by P from its starting point on the X-axis. This arc 
length is as much a measure of the size of angle A as the rather arbitrary 
agreement that a complete revolution of one side of A should be 360°. 
Suppose that we agree to use the arc length traversed by P as a measure 
of A. How do we express in this new unit an angle of 90°, for example? 
When A is 90°, P has traversed one-quarter of the entire circumference. But 
the entire circumference of a circle of unit radius is 271". Then the size of A 
in the new unit is Tr/2, that is about 1.57. We call this new unit radians. Thus 
an angle of 90° is also one of Tr/2 or 1.57 radians. 
The advantage of radians over degrees is simply that it is a more con­
venient unit. Since an angle of 90° is of the same size as an angle of 1.57 
radians, we now have to deal only with 1.57 instead of 90 units. The point 
involved here is no different from measuring a mile in yards instead of inches. 
If yards are just as good on other grounds, then it is far more convenient to 
speak of 1760 yards than 63,360 inches. 
y 
, 
- 11'"  
- "2 
0 
-----T-----------T----
-- A 
- 1 
Fig. 18-9. 
The graph of y = sin A when A is measured in radians. 
The fact that we measure angles in radians does not disturb at all the 
meaning of the function y = sin A. Instead of stating that sin 90° = 1, we 
simply say that sin ('Tr/2) = 1. The same applies to any other value of A in the 
sinusoidal function we have introduced. Suppose, for example, that we wished 
to find the value of y = sin A when A = Tr/6. Because our table is set up in 
degrees, we note first that an angle of Tr/6 is of the same size as 30°, for Tr/2 
radians is the same as 90°. Now from our tables we see that sin 30° = 0.5, and 
so sin (Tr/6) = 0.5. 
Since we shall be using radians a good deal, we may as well become familiar 
with the function y = sin A when A is expressed in radians. Figure 18-9 
shows the same function as Fig. 18-8 except that the units of A are now 
radians. 

424 
TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCTIONS AND OSCILLATORY MOTION 
EXERCISES 
1. Express the sizes of the following angles in radians: 90°, 30\ 1800, 2700, 360\ 4200. 
2. The sizes of the foHowing angles are in radians. Express the same angles in 
degrees. 
3. Find the value of 
a) sm 7r 
d) sin (3"./2) 
b) sin ("./2) 
e) sin 37r 
c) sin ("./3) 
f) sin (5"./2). 
4. Describe how sin A varies as A varies from 0 to 27T, as A varies from 27T to 47T. 
The function y = sin A has a maximum value of + 1 and a minimum value 
of -1. The maximum y-value, incidentally, is called the rnplitude of the 
function. Such a function, even if it were suitable in all other respects, could 
not represent the motion of a bob whose maximum displacement is 2 or 3, 
say. This difficulty is easily obviated. Now that we have y 
= sin A, we can 
readily manufacture hundreds of new functions whose amplitudes are whatever 
we choose to make them. Consider, for example, y = 2 sin A. How does this 
function behave compared to y = sin A? The anSwer is immediate. For any 
value of A, y = 2 sin A is twice as much as y 
= sin A. Thus when A = rr/4 
or 45", sin A 
= 0.71 , and 2 sin A is 1.42. Figure 18-10 shows how y 
= 2 sin A 
looks compared to y = sin A. If we want a sine function with amplitudes 3, t, 
or any other number, we can write one down immediately. As is evident from 
the nature of the function y = 2 sin A, the function 
y = D sin A 
has amplitude D. 
Before we can use functions such as y = sin A or y 
= 3 sin A to represent 
the motion of a bob On a spring, we must clear one more hurdle. The func­
r 
2 
y = 2 sin A 
-2 
Fig. 18-10. Comparison of y = sin A and y = 2 sin A. 

I 
2 
THE SINUSOIDAL FUNCfIONS 
425 
Fig. 18-11. The graph of y - sin 2"t. 
tion we seek shouid represent a relationship between displacement and time. 
The y-values of our functions do indeed represent the displacement of a 
point Q which moves up and down on a line, but our independent variable 
is an angle. Suppose, however, that the point P revolves around the .circle f 
times in one second. Then, since for each revolution the angle A increases by 
27T radians, the size of the angle which describes the amount of revolution 
of P in one second is 271"f. If the point P revolves for t seconds and makes f 
revolutions per second, it will make ft revolutions in t seconds. The angle 
generated during these ft revolutions will be 27Tft. Hence, the value of A In 
t seconds will be 271"ft. Thus the func:ion y = sin A becomes 
y = sin hit. 
(6) 
This function requires some study. Suppose the point P makes one revo­
lution per second. Then f = 1. The function (6) then is y = sin 2m. As t 
increases from 0 to 1, the quantity 27Tt will increase from 0 to 27T. We must 
now ask, How will sin 2m vary as 271"t varies from 0 to 27T? Since the angle 
which 27Tt describes now varies from 0 to 271", the function will go through 
the entire cycle of sine values. However, if we now label our horizontal axis 
with time values, we obtain the graph shown in Fig. 18-11. 
Next let us consider a slightly more difficult case. Suppose the point P 
makes 2 revolutions per second so that f = 2. As t increases from 0 to i, 
271" ' 2t will increase from 0 to 271" and sin 271" ' 2t will go through the entire 
cycle of sine values. As t increases from i to 1, 27T' 2t increases from 27T to +n-. 
Then sin 271" ' 2t takes on the values corresponding to angles from 27T to +n-. 
But in this range the sine function takes on the same values as it does in the 
range from 0 to 271". Hence in the entire interval 0 to 1 for t, the graph will 
be as shown in Fig. 18-12. The conclusion, which emerges clearly from the 
graph, is that 
y = sin 2" . 2t 
goes through 2 complete cycles in one second or, as one says, it has a frequency 
of 2 cycles per second. 

426 
TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCTIONS AND OSCILLATORY MOTION 
, 
- ,  
() 
- I  
y 
Fig. 18-12. The graph of y = sin 21r • 2t. 
We can now anticipate what happens for any f. The function 
y = sin hit 
will go through f cycles in one second, or it has a frequency of f cycles per 
second. 
To increase the amplitude of any of these functions, we have but to 
introduce the factor D. Thus the function 
y = D sin hit 
(7) 
will have a frequency of f cycles per second and an amplitude of D. Let us 
note that while f is the number of revolutions per second of P, it is also the 
number of oscillations per second of Q. 
The y-values of formula (7) oscillate above and below the zero value as t 
varies. We can make the number of oscillations per second what we please 
by merely inserting the proper value of f and we can do the same with respect 
to the amplitude by inserting the proper value of D. Of course, we do not 
know the proper values of f and D which fit the motion of a bob, but we shall 
see in the next section that it is not difficult to determine them. 
Let us summarize what we have accomplished. We sought to represent 
the motion of a point which oscillates back and forth on a straight line. We 
were able to do so by introducing a point Q which is the projection of a 
point P moving around a circle at a constant velocity. Because the y-value 
of P equals the displacement of the oscillating point Q and because the y-value 
of P is expressible as a sinusoidal function, we can represent the motion of the 
oscillating point Q by such a function. That the approach to the oscillating 
point Q through the circle should be successful may be surprising, but, as 
Aristotle pointed out, "There is nothing strange in the circle being the origin 
of any and every marvel." 
EXERCISES 
I. Find the value of 2 sin A when A is 30°, 90°, 7T/2, 7T/3. 
2. What is the maximum value of 3 sin A? the minimum value? 
3. What is the amplitude of y = 4 sin A? 

4. Find the value of 
ACCELERATION IN SINUSOIDAL MOTION 
427 
a) sin 2t when t = 1('/4, 1('/2, 31('/4, 1('i 
b) sin 31 when 1 = ,,/6, rr/3, ,,/2, 2rr/3. 
5. What is the shape of the graph of y = sin 27T ' 2t as t varies from 1 to 2 ?  
6. Graph the function y = sin 2 7T  . 3 t  as t varies from 0 to 1. 
7. Graph the function y = 2 sin 27T ' 2t as t varies from 0 to I. 
8. What is the frequency (in one second) of y = sin 27T ' lOt? 
9. Find the value of 
a) y = sin 21(' . 2t when t = i, i, !i 
b) Y = sin 2" . 41 when 1 = t, é, 1 ;  
c) y = 2 sin 2" . 31 when 1 = t, i, -t .... 
18-4 ACCELERATION IN SINUSOIOAL MOTION 
What we have seen in the preceding article is that if a point P moves around a 
circle of unit radius at a constant speed and makes f revolutions per second, 
then the projection Q of P onto the vertical diameter moves up and down this 
diameter, and the displacement y of Q from its central position at 0 can be 
represented by formula (6), namely, 
y = sin hft. 
(8) 
Moreover, if we wished to represent the same kind of oscillatory motion but 
with an amplitude D instead of 1, we have merely to modify (8) to read 
y = D sin hft. 
(9) 
Our goal, however, is to represent the motion of the bob on the spring. 
Before we can do this we must learn one more fact about the motion of Q, 
namely, the acceleration of Q. The motion of Q, as we approached it, was 
determined by the motion of P which travels around the unit circle at a 
constant speed, say v. If an object moves along a circular path, then we know 
from our work in Chapter 15 that it must be subject to a centripetal accelera­
tion, and by formula (24) of Chapter 1 5  this centripetal acceleration is v2/r, 
where r is the radius of the circle. ]n our case, since P moves on a circle of 
unit radius, r =  1, and so the centripetal acceleration of P is v. This accelera­
tion is directed toward the center of the circle. 
We are, however, interested not in the motion of P, but in the motion of 
Q, which moves in the same way as the vertical motion of P. Hence we should 
seek the vertical acceleration of P. We learned in Chapter 14 that even though 
an object moves along a curve, "Ie can study its motion by considering the 

428 
TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCTIONS AND OSCILLATORY MOTION 
horizontal motion and the vertical motion separately. By Galileo's principle 
these two motions are independent of each other. What we should like then is 
the vertical acceleration of P. When we considered the motion of a shell shot 
from a cannon inclined at an angle A to the ground, we found the horizontal 
and vertical velocities by dropping perpendiculars from the end point of the 
line segment representing velocity onto the horizontal and vertical axes 
(Section 14-4). 
Fig. 18-13. 
Determination of the vertical 
acceleration of P. 
Now acceleration, like velocity, is a directed quantity or a vector. More­
over, the acceleration determines the velocity. Hence we should compute the 
vertical acceleration of the point P in the same manner as we computed 
the vertical component of the velocity of the shell. Figure 18-13 shows the cen­
tripetal acceleration v2 of P as a line segment directed toward the center of the 
circle. If we drop a perpendicular from the end point of this line segment onto 
the vertical line through P, we obtain the vertical component of the acceleration. 
Angle A in the figure determines the position of P. We see, then, that the 
vertical component of the acceleration, which we shall denote by d, is 
a = v2 sin A. 
We know, however, from ( I )  that 
sin A = y, 
where y is the ordinate of P. Hence 
a = ",2y. 
However, since the acceleration is directed downward when y is positive, we 
must write 
(10) 
If now the movmg point P makes f revolutions per second, then P covers f 

MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS OF MOTION OF THE BOB 
429 
circumferences per second; that IS, v = 27rf and v" = 47r'f'. We substitute 
this result in ( 10) and obtain 
(II) 
as the acceleration of the vertical motion of P or of its shadow Q on the Y-axis. 
What we have shown then is that the motion of Q, which is described by 
the formula 
y = sin brft, 
(12) 
is subject to an acceleration of 
a = -4,,2f2y. 
(1 J) 
18-5 THE MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS or THE MOTION or THE BOB 
We may now undertake to represent mathematically the motion of the bob on 
the spring. We know that this motion is periodic and has a definite frequency 
and amplitude. However, we do not know that the motion is really sinusoidal; 
that is, as t varies, do the displacements of the bob follow precisely the 
variation of y in a function of the form 
y = D sin 2"ft? 
(14) 
If, for example, the motion of the bob should be faster on the upper half of 
its path than on the lower half, it could stiIl have the same period for each 
complete oscillation and perform a fixed number of osciIlations per second. 
Yet the motion would not be of the form ( 14). We need a little more insight 
into the motion of the bob than we now have. 
This insight into the action of bobs on springs was supplied by Robert 
Hooke. The principle he discovered, still known as Hooke's law, is very 
simple. We all know that if we stretch or compress a spring, the spring seeks 
to restore itself to its normal length; that is, when stretched or compressed the 
spring exerts a force. Hooke's law says that the force is a constant times the 
amount of compression or extension. In symbols, if L is the increase or de­
crease in length of the spring and F is the force exerted by the spring, then 
F = kL, where k is a constant for a given spring. The quantity k is called the 
spring or stiffness constant and it represents the stiffness of the spring. If k is 
large, the spring exerts considerable force even for small L. 
We shall now see what we can deduce from Hooke's law. Suppose that a 
bob of mass m is attached to a spring. Then we know that gravity pulls the 
bob downward some distance d where the bob comes to rest (Fig. 18-14). 
The rest position is reached when the force of gravity acting on the bob, or 
the weight of the bob, just offsets the upward force exerted by the spring. 
Now the force of gravity is 32m, and, according to Hooke's law, the upward 
force exerted by a spring which is pulled downward a distance d is kd. Since 

430 
TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCTIONS AND OSCILLATORY MOTION 
y 
d 
o 
!I 
Fig. 18-14. 
A bob on a spring in the rest 
position (center) and pulled 
down a distance y (right). 
at the rest position these two forces just offset each other, we have 
32m = kd. 
(15) 
Now suppose the spring is pulled downward an additional distance y. If we 
use the convention agreed upon in Section 18-2 that displacements above the 
rest position are to be positive and below the rest position negative, then the 
tOtal extension of the spring is now d - y because y itself is negative. The 
force that the spring exerts in an upward direction is, by Hooke's law, 
k(d - y) 
or 
kd - kyo 
(16) 
However, the weight of the bob, or 32m, exerts a constant downward force. 
Hence the net upward force is kd - ky - 32m. In view of equation (15) the 
net upward force is -kyo We now apply NewtOn's second law of motion, 
which says that when a force is applied to a mass, the force equals the mass 
times its acceleration. Thus we have 
111 = -ky 
or, by dividing both sides of this equation by m, 
k 
a = - - y. 
m 
(17) 
(18) 
Formula ( 18) is the basic law governing the motion of the bob on the 
spring. For, suppose the bob is pulled down some distance and then released. 
The spring exerts a force which pulls the bob back tOward its rest position. 
The acceleration created by this force is precisely that given by (18). The 
acceleration now determines the velocity of the bob and the velocity deter-

MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS OF MOTION OF THE BOB 
43 1 
mines the distance covered by the bob in any specified interval of time. The 
argument we are presenting here is in principle the same as the one we used 
in Chapter 1 3, where we discussed the motion of a body which is raised some 
distance from the surface of the earth and then dropped. In this situation, 
gravity immediately exerts an acceleration of 32 ftlsec', and thereafter the 
velocity and distance fallen by the object are determined. Of course, in the 
present case the acceleration is a more complicated expression. and the subse­
quent motion is not simply in one direction, but the argument is of the same 
nature. 
We should now compare formula (13), namely, 
and formula ( 1 8), 
a = _ 4  .. 2/2y 
k 
a = 
- - y. 
m 
(19) 
(20) 
In both cases the acceleration is a constant times the displacement. The con­
stant is 47T2f in the former case and kim in the latter. When the acceleration 
is given by ( 19), the motion itself [see ( 12) and (1 3) 1 is represented by 
y = sin 2 .. /1. 
(21) 
Since the acceleration (20) is precisely of the same form as ( 19), except for 
the label of the constant, and since the acceleration determines the motion, the 
motion of the bob must also be representable by a formula of the form (21). 
However we do not know what f is in the case of the bob. But kim in the 
case of the bob plays the role of 47T'F in the case of the motion of the point 
Q. That is 
so that 
and 
or 
/ = 
/ = ë rI .  
z'r '\j;; 
(22) 
In other words, if we let f in (21) be the value given by (22), we can write 
the formula for the bob's motion in terms of the quantities k and m. Thus if 

432 
TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCflONS AND OSCILLATORY MonON 
we substitute this value of f in (21), we obtain 
y =  . ( I 
sI0 211" -
2,.. 
or 
. 
I k 
Y = sm ,t;;/· 
(23) 
We made one misleading statement in the preceding discussion. We said 
that the acceleration of the bob determines the motion of the bob, and so the 
formula of the bob's motion must be of the form (21). The acceleration does 
determine the essential characteristics of the motion. but the initial velocity 
and initial displacement do have some effect. This point may become clearer if 
we compare the present case with the vertical motion of objects. All bodies 
rising or falling near the surface of the earth are subject to an acceleration of 
32 ft/sec2, and this fact determines the essential nature of the motion. But if a 
body is thrown up into the air, the final formula depends also on the initial 
velocity given to the object and on the position from which it is thrown up. In 
the case of the bob, if it is pulled down to a distance D below the rest position 
and then released, this initial position must enter into the formula for the morion. 
To complete our determination of the formula we are obliged, with the limited 
mathematics at our disposal, to call upon observation, which tells us that in 
each oscillation the bob will rise to a height of D above the rest position and 
then descend a distance D below it. That is, the amplitude of the motion, D, is 
determined by the initial displacement. Thus the final formula for the motion 
of the bob is 
y = D sin .J! t. 
(24) 
We can now draw several conclusions about the motion of the bob. F or­
mula (22) gives the frequency of the bob's motion in terms of k and m. We 
see that the spring constant k, which represents the stiffness of the spring, and 
the mass m of the bob determine the frequency of the motion. If we wished 
to have the bob make, for example, two complete oscillations per second, we 
could pick values of k and m so that f in (22) should be 2. The period of 
the bob's motion, that is, the time required to make one oscillation, is 
or 
2,..
..;:;;jk 
2,...;:;;jk 
Vf7i, Vm/k = V(k/m) . (m/k) 
(25) 

MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS OF MOTION OF THE BOB 
433 
As Hooke observed, this formula for the period is immensely significant. 
The period is independent of the amplitude of the motion; that is, whether one 
pulls the bob down a great distance or a short distance and then releases it, the 
time for the bob to go through each complete oscillation will be the same. 
This fact is immensely useful. At the very outset of our treatment of the 
bob's motion we pointed out that the resistance of the air and internal energy 
losses in the spring will cause the motion to die down. At the time we decided 
to ignore this fact and to suppose that there was no loss of energy. But there 
is. Suppose, however, that we were to give the bob a little upward push every 
time it reached its lowest position, i.e., add energy to the motion and keep the 
bob moving. Such an action might alter the amplitude, but would not affect 
the period, and each successive oscillation of the bob would therefore continue 
to take the same amount of time. Hence the oscillations of the bob on the 
spring can be used to measure time or to regulate the motion of some hands 
on a dial which would show time elapsed. 
Of course, the motion of a bob on a spring is not quite the practical device 
for a clock. The device actually used can be found in every modern pocket 
or wrist watch. There a spring coiled in a spiral and carrying a weight called 
the balance wheel expands and contracts regularly. Each second the wheel is 
given a little "kick" which restores the energy the spring loses on each oscilla­
tion. (The energy comes from a mainspring which is wound up by hand 
usually once a day.) The spiral spring regulator was invented and patented by 
Christian Huygens in 1675. The first chronometer which was sufficiently 
accurate to be used by ships to determine longitude was invented by John 
Harrison, who in 1772 won a prize of £ 20,000 offered by the British govern­
ment for such a device. 
EXERCISES 
1. If a mass of 2 Ib pulls a spring down 6 in., what is the spring constant? [Sug­
gestion: Use (15) 1 
2. Suppose that one attaches a mass of 2 Ib to a spring whose stiffness constant is 
50. Calculate the number of oscillations per second which the mass would make 
if set into vibration. 
3. What is the period of a mass vibrating at a rate of 100 oscillations per second? 
4. Suppose a mass is set to vibrating on a spring at the rate of 50 oscillations per 
second. If the mass has a maximum displacement of 3 in., what formula describes 
the motion? 
5. Suppose a mass of 3 lb is attached to a spring whose stiffness constant is 75. The 
mass is pulled down 3 in. below the rest position and then released. Write a 
formula relating displacement and time. 
6. Suppose that you are given a spring with a stiffness constant of 50. Calculate 
the mass that you would have to place on the spring to produce a period of os­
cillation of one second. 

434 
TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCTIONS AND OSCILLATORY MOTION 
7. Suppose that a mass oscillates on a spring so that the relation between displace­
ment and time is 
a) y = 4 sin 2". ' 5, 
b) Y = 4 sin 101. 
Describe the motion of the mass for (a) and (b). 
8. Suppose that you wished to decrease the number of oscillations per second which 
a mass makes on a given spring. How would you alter the mass? 
9. Suppose that a tunnel is dug through the earth and a man of mass Tn steps into 
the tunnel. Inside the earth the force of gravity on a mass m at a distance r 
from the center is F = GmMr/R3, where M is the mass and R is the radius of 
the earth. This force is directed toward the cen-
ter. To distinguish distances above and below the 
center, let r be positive above and negative below 
the center. Then the acceleration acting on the 
mass Tn is a =  -GMr/R3. Discuss the subsequent 
motion of the man (Fig. 18-15). 
Fig. 18-15 
18-6 SUMMARY 
R 
. . 
. ' 
\' 
t+r 
0 .- 8 -r 
The mathematical objective of this chapter was to introduce a new type of 
mathematical function, the sinusoidal function. There is not just one sinusoidal 
function, for all functions of the form y = D sin 21Tfl, no matter what D and f 
may be, are sinusoidal. The sinusoidal functions are also called trigonometric 
functions because they are obtained by extending the concept of the sine of 
an angle, a concept which was first created and studied in trigonometry. Other 
trigonometric functions can be derived from an extension of the concepts of 
cosine and tangent of an angle and other trigonometric ratios which we did 
not study. All trigonometric functions are highly useful in scientific work. 
The creation of trigonometric functions was motivated by the study of 
vibratory or oscillatory motion. We have used the motion of a bob on a 
spring to illustrate such a motion, and we have shown how the mathematical 
description of this motion can be used to deduce information about it. We 
have yet to see some of the major uses of sinusoidal functions. 
Topics for Further Investigation 
1. The mathematics of pendulum motion. 
2. The trigonometric function y = cos A. 

Recommended Reading 
SUMMARY 
435 
BROWN, LLOYD A.: "The Longitude," in James R. Newman: The World of Mathe­
matics, Vol. II, pp. 780-819, Simon and Schuster, Inc., New York, 1956. 
KUNE. MORRIS: Mathematics and the Physical World, Chap. 18, T. Y. Crowell Co., 
New York, 1959. Also in paperback, Doubleday and Co., New York, 1963. 
RIPLEY, JULIEN A., JR.: The Elements and Structure of the Physical Sciences, Chap. 
15, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 1964. 
TAYLOR, LLOYD WM,: Physics, The Pioneer Science, Chap. 15, Dover Publications, 
Inc., New York, 1959. 
WHITEHEAD, ALFRED N.: An Introduction to Mathematics, Chaps. 12 and 13, Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, Inc., New York, 1939. 

CHAPTER 19 * 
THE TRIGONOMETRIC ANALYSIS OF MUSICAL SOUNDS 
Motion appears in many aspects-but there are two obvious kinds, one 
which appears in astronomy and another which is the echo of that. As the 
eyes are made for astronomy so are the ears made for the motion which 
produces harmony: and thus we have two sister sciences, as the Pythag­
oreans teach, and we assent. 
PLATO 
19-1 INTRODUCTION 
In this chapter we intend to show how trigonometric functions have given 
man his first real insight into the nature of musical sounds, and how this 
knowledge is utilized in the design of such devices as the telephone, the phono­
graph, the radio, and sound films. 
The mathematical study of musical sounds did not start with the applica­
tion of trigonometric functions. Indeed, it goes back to the very first emer­
gence of any real mathematics and science, namely the beginning of the 
classical Greek period. For example, the Pythagoreans discovered that the 
lengths of two equally taut plucked strings whose sounds harmonize are related 
by simple numerical ratios such as 2 to I, 4 to 3, and 3 to 2. The lower note 
in each case originates with the longer string. They also designed musical 
scales whose notes, as measured quantitatively by the lengths of the vibrating 
strings, possessed precise numerical values. From Pythagorean times onward, 
mathematicians and scientists were convinced that musical sounds had impor­
tant mathematical properties, and music, along with arithmetic, geometry, and 
astronomy, became part of the quadrivium. These four subjects were studied 
together right through the medieval period. Although Greek, Arab, and 
medieval mathematicians continued to investigate musical sounds and wrote 
books on music, their work was essentially limited to the construction of new 
systems of scales for instrumental and vocal music. 
It was the mathematicians and scientists of the seventeenth century who 
initiated other investigations and made ؓhe next series of important discoveries. 
Familiar names, such as Galileo, his French pupil and colleague Father Marin 
Mersenne ( 1588-1648), Hooke, Halley, Huygens, and Newton, obtained sig-
436 

INTRODUCTION 
437 
nificant new results. Whereas the Pythagoreans had studied strings of different 
length but equal tension, Mersenne studied the effect of changing tension and 
mass of a string and found that an increase in mass and a decrease in tP-osion 
produce lower notes in a string of given length. This discovery was very 
important for stringed instruments such as the violin and the piano; to secure 
the range of pitch which these instruments possess by variations in length only 
would require exceedingly long strings. Galileo and Hooke demonstrated 
experimentally that each musical sound is characterized by a definite number 
of air vibrations per second, a statement which will mean more to us in a few 
moments. The determination of the velocity of sound (about 1100 feet per 
second in air) was another achievement. It is of interest that the clocks which 
some of these men designed and constructed were essential to the progress 
made in the study of sound because, as we can see from the results cited, the 
ability to measure small intervals of time was an indispensable condition for 
any work in this field. 
The best mathematicians of the eighteenth century, Leonhard Euler, Daniel 
Bernoulli (1700--1782), Jean Ie Rond d'Alembert (1717-1783), and Joseph 
Louis Lagrange, studied vibrating strings, such as the violin string, and vig­
orously disputed whether trigonometric functions were adequate to represent 
the vibrations. The mathematical analysis of sound waves soon followed and 
proved to be the chief tool in the theoretical mastery of musical sounds. We 
can readily see why mathematics was invaluable in these investigations, for 
observation of the air, even of air in the process of propagating sound. reveals 
nothing. 
Before we undertake to study just what the nineteenth-century mathe­
maticians and scientists learned, we must make some distinctions. The first 
is a matter of terminology. We shall be interested in the analysis of musical 
sounds as opposed to noise. However, in the present context, the term "mu­
sical sound" is used in a technical sense and includes not only those sounds 
commonly understood to be music, but also the sounds of ordinary speech. 
As a matter of fact, the physicist's meaning might be more appropriately 
represented by the term intelligible sound. Just what is meant by either phrase 
will be clear in a few moments. 
The second distinction one must make is between sound as a motion of 
air and sound as a sensation which human beings experience. The former is a 
physical phenomenon which takes place in space and whose physical and 
mathematical properties are fixed. On the other hand, the sensations which 
human beings may receive because moving air strikes their ears and stimulates 
certain nerves depend upon their auditory mechanism and may vary from one 
person to another. There are, for example, physical sounds which humans 
cannot hear at all. Though we shall have something to say about the per­
ception of sound, our first and main concern will be to understand the 
physical phenomenon. 

438 
THE TRIGONOMETRIC ANALYSIS OF MUSICAL SOUNDS 
19-2 THE NATURE OF SIMPLE SOUNDS 
The variety of sounds given off by musical instruments, the human voice, 
phonographs, radios, and whirring machinery, for example, is so great that one 
cannot hope to study all of them in one swoop. Hence it would seem wise to 
start one's investigation with simple sounds. But which sounds are simple? If 
we rely upon our ears to decide this question, then the sounds given off by 
tuning forks seem to be simple. The ear may, indeed, be deceived here, but 
let us follow up this suggestion. 
If either prong of a tuning fork is struck, both prongs will move inward 
and then outward very rapidly and will repeat this motion for a long time. 
Let us consider one prong, say the right one shown in Fig. 19-1. Before the 
prong is struck, it occupies what we might call the rest position. After being 
struck, the tip is displaced some distance to the right. It then moves to the 
left, to a position somewhat to the left of the rest position, and then moves to 
the right. The sequence then repeats itself many times. The displacement of 
the tip varies with time, and the first question one might raise is, What is the 
relationship between displacement and time? There are two considerations 
which suggest that the formula is sinusoidal: First of all, the prong resembles 
a spring-and-bob arrangement. The spring is the prong itself, though the 
motion is a sidewise oscillation rather than an expansion and contraction. The 
mass which corresponds to the bob is the mass of the 
prong itself, though admittedly this mass is not con­
centrated in one place as it is in the case of a bob on a 
spring. The second consideration is that as the tip of 
the prong moves farther and farther out from the rest 
position, the force which the prong exerts to return to 
the rest position may be expected to increase with the 
displacement. The simplest assumption one might make 
in this case is that the force increases directly with the 
displacement. From formula (17) of the preceding 
chapter we can see that this is indeed the mathematical 
law which underlies and determines the sinusoidal mo­
tion of the bob. Hence it seems reasonable to expect 
that the relation between displacement of the tip of 
either prong and time is sinusoidal. The amplitude of 
this relation is the maximum displacement of the tip, 
and the frequency is the frequency per second with 
which the prong oscillates. 
Fig. 19-1. 
A vibrating tuning fork. 
Of course, we are not so much interested in the motion of the tuning fork 
as we are in the sound it creates. Hence what matters next is, How does the 
air respond to the vibration of the tuning fork' The fundamental fact about 
the behavior of air which is of importance in this connection is that air 
pressure seeks to become uniform everywhere. This means that if the air 

THE NATURE OF SIMPLE SOUNDS 
439 
, 
, , 
" ,è, \ \ 
,'''" ' \  \ \ 
"
"
"
\
,
'
\ 
, \ \ '\\\ \ \ \ ' 
"" , 
, \ \\,\ \ \ \ \ 
," " 
, 
, 
\ \\\\ \ \ 
"\'\\\\ \ \ \\\\
1 
,, \ \ \ \\\\ \ 
\../ 
,ƣ
,\\ \ \ \ ) 
Condensation 
. \\,\Ƥ 
i 
Rarefaction 
, 
, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
, 
I 
Fig. 19-2. 
Motion of air molecules under 
pressure of a vibrating tuning fork. 
pressure for any reason should become high in one place, the air will spread 
out from that place into neighboring regions where the pressure is lower and 
so try to equalize the pressure in the entire region under consideration. With 
this physical fact in mind, let us see what happens when the right prong of 
the tuning fork moves, say to the right. The prong pushes the molecules of 
air near it to the right and thus crowds them into a place occupied by other 
molecules. The pressure becomes high in this place, and since the molecules 
of air cannot move to the left because the prong is there, they will move off 
farther to the right (and in other directions) in order to equalize the pressure. 
But this motion means that the crowding now occurs a little farther away 
from the tuning fork and again, to equalize the pressure, the molecules move 
farther to the right. The process continues, and the crowding, or condensation, 
as it is usually called, moves off to the right. 
The prong, having moved as far to the right as it can, will now move 
back not only to its rest position but farther to the left. This motion leaves 
an empty region-the place that the prong had occupied-and so the molecules 
of air on the right rush into this empty space. Molecules still farther to the 
right also move to the left because the pressure has become less to their left. 
Thus a state of low pressure, or rarefaction, as it is called, moves to the right 
as molecules move to the left to equalize the pressure in their neighborhood. 
With each successive vibration of the prong, a condensation and rarefaction 
move off to the right (Fig. 19-2). The successive condensations and rarefac­
tions also move out in other directions, but it is sufficient for our purposes to 
follow what happens in one direction. 

440 
THE TRIGONOMETRIC ANALYSIS OF MUSICAL SOUNDS 
The action of the air is somewhat complicated because it consists of billions 
of molecules, and they do not all behave in exactly the same way. However, 
there is an '.lverage effect. It is convenient to speak of a series of typical mole­
cules to the right of the prong which represent the average behavior of the 
entire collection. If we consider the action of any one typical molecule, say 
one near the prong, then what it does is to move to the right when the prong 
moves to the right. When the prong moves to the left, the typical molecule 
will also move to the left because the air pressure has been lowered. Like the 
prong, it will move past its rest position, and continue to the left. Then, as the 
prong moves to the right, the molecule will be pushed to the right, will pass 
its rest position, go farther to the right, and, from this time on, it will continue 
to oscilla teo 
08 0 0 • 0 0 00 
• 
) 
Fig. 19-3. 
Motion of a typical molecule. 
(---. 
• 
Typical molecules farther to the right will behave like the typical molecule 
near the prong; however, their reaction will be slightly delayed since con­
densations and rarefacrions reach them a little later. Figure 19-3 illustrates the 
motion of a typical molecule reacting to a series of prong oscillations. 
Two important facts emerge from the above discussion. The first is that 
the average, or typical, molecule follows, in effect, the motion of the prong. 
Any one molecule acts as if it were attached to the prong by a spring. When 
the prong moves to the right, it contracts the spring. The latter seeks to 
restore its length and so pushes the molecule to the right. While the molecule 
moves to the right, the prong moves to the left, and hence the spring is ex­
tended. It now seeks to contract and so pulls the molecule to the left. The 
molecule moves to the left, and the spring contracts. But now the prong is 
ready to move to the right, and consequently the motion of prong and mole­
cule repeats itself. The action of air pressure is indeed like the action of the 
spring. In fact, Hooke used the phrase, "the spring of the air," to describe the 
effect of air pressure. 
The second fact is that the sound wave which moves from the prong to 
some person's ear, say, consists of the series of condensations and rarefactions 
induced by the prong's morion. Each molecule merely oscillates about its 
rest position, but in doing so it produces the increase and reduction of pressure 
which cause the neighboring molecules to oscillate. 
The nature of the sound wave may perhaps be made clearer by comparing 
it with a water wave. If the end of a stick is quickly moved back and forth 
in still water, a series of waves will spread out from the end of the stick. 

THE NATURE OF SIMPLE SOUNDS 
441 
However, the individual water molecules do not move out. Each oscillates 
about its original position, but the increase and decrease in pressure which the 
stick creates cause the molecules farther away to duplicate the motion of 
the molecules near the stick. 
Since the motion of any typical molecule whether near or far from the 
prong is the same, let us study the motion of any one of these molecules. 
Specifically, let us seek the relationship between the displacement from rest 
position and the time that the molecule is in motion. What formula relates 
displacement and time? We have already produced two crude physical argu­
ments suggesting that for the prong, displacement and time are related by a 
sinusoidal formula. Since the motion of any typical air molecule duplicates the 
action of the prong, the formula which relates displacement and time for the 
typical air molecule should also be sinusoidal. Actually these physical argu­
ments do not really prove that the formula is sinusoidal. However, this fact 
can be established either by a rather complex mathematical analysis of air 
motion or, experimentaIly, by converting the air pressure to electric current 
(by means of a microphone, for example) and by then displaying the current 
on a cathode-ray tube (television tube). 
We shall take for granted that for a typical air molecule, the formula 
relating displacement and time is sinusoidal. Hence, if y is the displacement 
and t is the time, then. in view of what we have learned in the preceding 
chapter, the formula is 
y = D sin brft, 
(I) 
where D is the amplitude, or maximum displacement, and f is the number of 
oscillations, or the frequency of cycles per second. We wish to emphasize 
that the formula applies to the sounds produced by tuning forks or to what 
we have reason to believe are simple sounds. 
To use formula (I), we must know D and f. The value of f is the fre­
quency with which the tuning fork oscillates. A frequency commonly used to 
standardize the pitch of sounds is 440 per second. This then is a typical value 
of f. The value of D, the amplitude of the motion of a typical air molecule, 
is not the amplitude of the prong's motion, but depends upon the medium 
in which sound spreads out or is propagated. It depends, so to speak, on the 
"springiness" of the medium. ]n air, 0.001 inch can be considered to be a 
reasonable value for D. Hence a typical formula for a simple sound is 
y = 0.001 sin 2". . 44Ot. 
(2) 
Thus, a typical air molecule oscillating in accordance with formula (2) 
shuttles back and forth about its mean, or rest, position 440 times per second 
or, as we say, it goes through 440 complete cycles in one second. The farthest 
distance from the mean position that it reaches, that is, the amplitude of its 
motion, is 0.001 inch. 

442 
THE TRIGONOMETRIC ANALYSIS OF MUSICAL SOUNDS 
y 
Fig. l9-4. 
Graph of displacement versus time of a typical molecule 
executing 400 oscillations per second. 
Figure 19-4 illustrates the relationship between displacement and time for 
a simple sound such as formula (2) represents. Of course the typical molecule 
shuttles backward and forward, but on the graph its displacements are plotted 
as ordinates and the time elapsed is shown by the corresponding abscissas. 
Although formula (2) represents only simple sounds-we have yet to 
discuss the formulas describing more complicated sounds-it enables us to 
understand what we meant earlier by the phrase "intelligible sounds." We 
see that a simple sound has a regularity or periodicity. The motion of the 
air molecules repeats itself a number of times a second. When the ear receives 
many cycles of this motion, it can identify the sound. If, on the other hand, 
the motion of the air molecule is not regular but varies irregularly with time, 
the ear still hears sound, but sound that does not convey any meaning, i.e., noise. 
EXERCISES 
1. What is the basic mathematical formula which represents simple sounds? State 
the physical meaning of the various letters in the formula. 
2. State the formula which describes the relationship between displacement and 
time for a simple sound whose frequency is 300/sec and whose amplitude is 
0.0005 in. 
3. If y = 0.002 sin 27T . 540t is the mathematical description of a sound, what are 
the frequency and amplitude of this sound? 
4. If a sound has a frequency of 400 cycles/sec, how many cycles would the ear 
receive in 1/20 sec? 
19-3 THE METHOO OF AODITION OF ORDINATES 
We have now a good mathematical representation of simple sounds. But in­
teresting musical sounds, whether vocal or instrumental are, as a rule, not 
simple, and the really significant contribution of mathematics to the under-

THE METHOD OF ADDITION OF ORDINATES 
443 
standing of musical sounds lies in the analysis of more complex sounds. To 
comprehend this contribution, we must first examine a relevant mathematical 
idea. Instead of considering simple sinusoidal functions such as (2), let us 
take the function 
y = sin hI + sin 41r/. 
(3) 
What sort of relationship between y and I does formula ( 3 )  represent? 
A good way to investigate this question is to draw a graph of the above 
function. Since we wish to obtain merely some general idea of how y varies 
with I, we shall seek only a sketch rather than a very accurate graph. We 
could proceed by selecting values of t, calculating the corresponding values 
of y, and then plotting the points whose coordinates have thus been deter­
mined. However, there is a quicker method which is also more perspicuous. 
Let us consider the two functions: 
and 
y, = sin Z,rl 
Y2 = sin 411'/. 
(4) 
(5) 
We have used the notation y, and y, to distinguish the dependent variables 
in (4) and (5) from the y in formula ( 3 ) .  Formulas (4) and (5) are easily 
graphed. Formula (4) is the ordinary sine function which goes through the 
regular cycle of sine values in each unit of t. Formula (5) has a frequency 
of 2 in each unit of t; that is, the y-values go through the complete cycle 
of sine values twice in each unit of I. Let us sketch both functions on the 
same set of axes (Fig. 19-5) .  
y 
- 1  
Fig. 19-5. 
sin 21ft + sin 4Jrt 
,\ 
- \ 
. \ 
\ , 
\ 
The graph of y = sin 211"t + sin 411'"t obtained by addition of ordinates. 

444 
THE TRIGONOMETRIC ANALYSIS OF MUSICAL SOUNDS 
Now the y of formula (3) is clearly the sum of y, and y,. Hence adding 
the values of y, and y, at various values of t will yield y. Since we are in­
terested only in a sketch, let us perform the addition by using Fig. 19-5 to 
obtain the values of y, and y,. Thus for t = 0, the graphs show that y, and 
y, are both zero. Hence y, the sum of y, and y" also is zero. At t =  t, we 
see from the graph that y, is about 0.7 and y, is 1. Hence y = 1.7 when 
t = k- At t = t, we find that y, = 1 and y, = O. Hence y = 1 when t = t. 
At t = !, y, is about 0.85 and y, is about -0.85. In adding the last two values 
for Yl and Y2, we must take into account that one is positive, the other negative, 
and their sum zero. Hence at t = t, y = o. By selecting a few more values of 
t and estimating the corresponding Yl- and Y2-vaIues, we can obtain more 
y-values. Finally, we join the various points which belong to the graph of 
formula (3) by a smooth curve. The result is the heavy-lined curve shown 
in Fig. 19-5. The method just described for graphing y as a function of t 
provides a rough sketch. If one wishes to obtain a more accurate graph, he can 
calculate the value of y for each value of t. 
How far need we carry this process of determining y-vaIues corresponding 
to various t-values? We note that the function Yl = sin 21T't repeats itself when 
t becomes larger than 1. The function y, = sin 4rt goes through two full 
cycles in the interval from t = 0 to t = 1 and begins its third cycle of sine 
values as soon as t increases beyond 1. Thus at t = 1 both functions begin to 
repeat the values which they had taken on at t = 0 and, in the interval from 
t = 1 to t = 2, both functions will repeat the behavior exhibited in the interval 
from t = 0 to t = 1. Since y, and y, repeat their former behavior, it follows 
that y, which is the sum of y 1 and y" will also repeat its former behavior. In 
other words, in the interval from t = 1 to t = 2, Y will behave precisely as it 
did in the interval from t = 0 to t = 1. And in each succeeding unit interval 
of t-values, the function will repeat the behavior exhibited in the interval from 
t = 0 to t = 1. If we therefore determine the behavior of y in the interval 
from 0 to 1, we know how it behaves for all larger values of t. 
There are several major facts to be learned from this example. First of 
all, since the function (3) repeats its behavior in every unit of t-vaIues, it 
is periodic. Moreover, because the term sin 4rt goes through two cycles of 
sine values in exactly the t-interval in which sin 21T't goes through one cycle, 
the entire function repeats itself with the frequency with which y = sin 2m 
repeats itself. Hence the frequency of formula (3) is one cycle per unit of t. 
Thirdly, the shape of the graph of formula (3) shows that the formula is not 
sinusoidal even though it is periodic. In other words, the sum of two sine 
functions can yield a function whose shape is quite different from that of a 
sine function, but the sum can nevertheless repeat itself. 
We might expect that functions built up of three or more sine functions 
could have quite strange shapes and yet be periodic if the summands all began 
to repeat at some value of t, say t = 1, the values they had taken on at t = o. 

EXERCISES 
THE ANALYSIS OF COMPLEX SOUNDS 
445 
1. By following the method described in the text sketch the graph of 
a) y = sin 27rt + sin 67rt, 
b) Y = sin 27rt + ! sin 4n-t, 
c) y = sin 27rt + sin 37rt. 
2. What is the frequency, in one unit of t, of the function 
a) y = sin 27rt + sin 87rt, 
b) Y = 2 sin 27rt + sin 4n-t, 
c) y = sin 27rt + sin 41ft + sin 67rt, 
d) Y = sin 27r . lOOt + sin 27r . 200t + sin 27r . 300t? 
19-4 THE ANALYSIS OF COMPLEX SOUNDS 
We have already mentioned that the sounds given off by almost all musical 
instruments and by the human voice are not simple sounds; that is, they are not 
representable by functions of the form (1). Vet these sounds are intelligible, 
which means that they must be periodic or that the pattern of displacement 
versus time must repeat itself. The shapes of the curves which represent such 
sounds are. however, quite varied. In fact, to each sound there corresponds a 
characteristic shape. For example, Fig. 19-6 shows the shape corresponding to 
the sound of a piano note C. To obtain this graph, the sound is converted to 
electric current and the vibration of the current is made visible by means of 
a cathode-ray tube. In view of the variety of musical sounds it may seem that 
we have reached an impasse in our attempt to analyse all such sounds mathe­
matically. But by a stroke of good luck mathematics provided the very 
theorem which gives us remarkable insight into all complex sounds. The stroke 
of good luck was the mathematician Joseph Fourier ( 1768-1830). 
y 
Fig, 19-6. 
Displacement versus time of a 
typical molecule for the note C 
on a piano. 
Fourier was the son of a French tailor. While attending a military school 
he became intrigued with mathematics. Since he realized that his low birth 
would not permit him to become an army officer, he let himself be persuaded 
by members of the Church to study for the priesthood. However, he aban­
doned the priesthood to accept a professorship of mathematics at the military 

446 
THE TRIGONOMETRIC ANALYSIS OF MUSICAL SOUNDS 
school that he had attended. Later he became a professor at the Ecole Normale 
and at the Ecole Poly technique, universities founded by Napoleon. 
Fourier's main interest was mathematical physics, and his most important 
work in that domain concerned the conduction of heat; for example, he 
studied how heat travels along metals. His chief contribution, a book entitled 
The Analytical Theory of Heat (1822), is one of the great classics of mathe­
matics. In the development of the theory of heat Fourier established a mathe­
matical theorem whose value extends far beyond the physical application for 
which it was intended. Our interest in the theorem lies in what it does to 
analyze complex musical sounds. 
Fourier's celebrated theorem says that any periodic function is a sum of 
simple sine functions of the form D sin 2·Tlft. Moreover, the frequencies of 
these component functions are all integral multiples of one frequency. To 
illustrate the significance of this theorem, let us suppose that y is a periodic 
function of t. Then the formula which relates y and t must be of the form 
y = sin 2 .. . lOOt + 0.5 sin z". . 200t + 0.3 sin 2 .. . 300t + . . . 
(6) 
The numbers in this formula depend, of course, on the choice of the initial 
periodic function, but let us suppose that they are correct and see what they 
stand for. The numbers I, 0.5, 0.3 are the amplitudes of the respective 
sinusoidal components of the entire periodic function. The lowest frequency 
per second, that of the first term, is 100. The second term has frequency 200, 
or twice the lowest frequency. The third term has frequency 300, or three 
times the lowest frequency, and so on. The dots at the end of formula (6) 
imply that we might need additional terms like the ones shown, to represent 
any given periodic function. In accordance with the theorem, all frequencies 
occurring in such additional terms must be multiples of 100. 
Before we consider the significance of Fourier's theorem for the study of 
musical sounds, we should satisfy ourselves that formulas such as (6) do 
represent periodic functions. In this connection, two results of our work 
in Section 19-3 should be helpful. We learned there that the sum of two sine 
functions can produce a rather peculiarly shaped but nevertheless periodic 
graph. Moreover, because the second term in formula (3) had twice the 
frequency of the first one, the frequency of the emire function was the lower 
of the two frequencies. The situation in (6) is very much the same. It is a 
sum of sine terms, and the graph of this sum may indeed have a peculiar or 
irregular shape. But the shape will repeat itself because during the time that 
the first term goes through one cycle, namely the interval t 
= a to t 
=rlo, the 
second term will go through two cycles, and the third term through three, so 
that the entire function will repeat itself as soon as the first term does. Since 
the frequency of the first term is 100 in one unit of t, the entire function 
has the frequency of the first term. 

THE ANALYSIS OF COMPLEX SOUNDS 
447 
And now what does Fourier's theorem have to do with the analysis of 
musical sounds? The application of this theorem to music was made by a 
German, Georg S. Ohm, a teacher of mathematics and physics, who lived in 
the first half of the nineteenth century. As pointed out earlier in this section, 
every musical sound is a periodic function; that is, the relation between dis­
placement and time of a typical air molecule oscillating under the pressure 
exerted originally by the source of the sound is a periodic function of t. But 
Fourier's theorem says that every such function is a sum of simple sine func­
tions of the type illustrated in (6). Each simple sine function corresponds to 
a simple sound such as is given off by a tuning fork. Hence one arrives at the 
important conclusion that every musical sound is a sum of simple sounds. 
Moreover, the frequencies per second of these simple sounds are all multiples 
of one lowest frequency. To put the matter differently, every musical sound 
can be duplicated by a combination of tuning forks, each vibrating with the 
proper frequency and amplitude. 
The musical sound whose graph is shown in Fig. 19-6, for example, is a 
sum of five simple sounds. The frequencies of these sounds and their respective 
amplitudes are tabulated below. The amplitudes are expressed in terms of the 
first one entered, which is chosen to be 1. 
Frequency 
512 
1024 
1536 
2048 
2560 
Amplitude 
0.2 
0.25 
0.1 
0.1 
We should note that the frequencies are all multiples of the lowest one, which 
is 512. The formula representing this sound is then 
y = sin 2". . 5 1 2t + 0.2 sin z". . 1024t + 0.25 sin z". . 1 536t 
+ 0.1 sin z". . 2048t + 0.1 sin 2". ' 2560t. 
The assertion that every musical sound is no more than a combination of 
simple sounds is so surprising that, although it is backed by unassailable 
mathematics, one wishes to see it confirmed by experimental evidence. Such 
evidence is available. First of all, a trained ear can recognize the simple sounds 
present in a complex sound. Secondly, if one releases the dampers on the 
strings of a piano and then strikes a note, a number of other strings will also 
begin to vibrate, namely those whose basic frequencies are the same as the 
component frequencies present in the note struck. The physical explanation 
is that the note struck gives off several frequencies-the frequencies of its 
component simple sounds. Each of these frequencies sets off air vibrations 
which in turn force into vibration all other strings whose basic frequencies arc 
the same as those of the simple sounds. 
Perhaps the best experimental evidence is furnished by some specially 
designed instruments. The distinguished nineteenth-century physician, physi-

448 
THE TRIGONOMETRIC ANALYSIS OF MUSICAL SOUNDS 
cist, and mathematician Hermann von Helmholtz ( 1821-1894) gave two kinds 
of demonstrations. In the first one he designed special pipes, called resonators, 
each of which selected and rendered audible only that frequency which was 
suited to the dimensions of the pipe. A resonator in the neighborhood of a 
complex sound will pick up and render audible any component of the sound 
whose frequency excites the resonator. By using resonators of different sizes 
Helmholtz was able to show that the frequencies present in the complex 
sound were just those called for by Fourier's theorem. Then Helmholtz 
demonstrated the reverse. He set up electrically driven tuning forks of the 
proper frequency and amplitude such that the combination of simple sounds 
duplicated a given complex sound. A modern version of this latter device is 
the electronic music synthesizer. 
There is no question, then, that any musical sound is no more than a sum 
of simple or sinusoidal sounds. The simple sound of lowest frequency is 
called the fundamental, or first partial, or first harmonic. The simple sound 
whose frequency is twice that of the lowest one is called the second partial or 
second harmonic; and so on. The frequency of the entire complex sound is 
the frequency of the first harmonic for the reason already given in our dis­
cussion of Fourier's theorem. The amplitudes of the individual sine terms are 
the amplitudes or strengths of the harmonics present. 
EXERCISES 
1. State Fourier's theorem. 
2. Suppose that a complex sound is representable by the function 
y = 0.001 sin 21r • 24QI + 0.003 sin br . 4801 + 0.01 sin 2,. . 7201. 
What is the frequency of the complex sound? What is the amplitude of the third 
harmonic? 
3. Write the formula for a musical sound whose frequency is 500/sec and whose 
first, second, and third harmonics have amplitudes of om, 0.002, and 0.005, 
respectively. 
4. If the relationship between displacement and time for the fundamental of a 
musical sound is y = 3 sin 2'1" ' 720t, what is the frequency of the third hannoruc? 
5. Explain why the frequency of a complex musical sound is always that of the 
first harmonic. 
19-5 SUBJECTIVE PROPERTIES OF MUSICAL SOUNOS 
Musical sounds as received by the ear seem to possess three essential properties; 
that is, the ear recognizes what are commonly called the pitch, the loudness, 
and the quality of a sound. One of the major values of the mathematical analy­
sis of musical sounds is that it clarifies and makes precise just what we mean 
by these properties. We shall consider them in turn. 

SUBJECfIVE PROPERTIES OF MUSICAL SOUNDS 
449 
In our subjective judgment, sounds vary from low or deep tones to high 
or piercing ones. Verbal descriptions of the pitch of sounds are, of course, 
qualitative and vague. If one experiments with tuning forks of different pitch, 
he readily discovers that high pitch means high frequency of fork vibration 
and therefore high frequency of oscillation of the air molecules. Correspond­
ingly, low pitch means that the fork and the air molecules vibrate with low 
frequencies. Prior to the availability of the analysis examined in the preceding 
section, the notion of pitch was not clear for complex sounds. But we now 
know that all musical sounds have a definite frequency, namely the frequency 
of the fundamental. Thus, although complex sounds contain other frequencies, 
that is, the frequencies of the higher harmonics, it is the over-all frequency of 
the composite sound which determines whether it appears high- or low-pitched 
to the ear. For example, as one strikes the notes on a piano going from left to 
right, the fundamental frequency steadily rises. 
The loudness of a musical sound is determined by the amplitude of the 
corresponding molecular motion, but the relationship between loudness and 
amplitude is not quite so simple as that between pitch and frequency. Let us 
note, first of all, that amplitude means the maximum displacement of the 
typical air molecule or the largest y-value of the corresponding graph. Physi­
cists call the square of this amplitude the intensity of the sound. Thus intensity 
is still a physical or objective property of a musical sound. Among sounds of 
a given frequency, the more intense sound will seem louder to the ear. How­
ever, this is no longer true if the frequencies of the sounds differ. The average 
ear is most sensitive to a frequency of about 3500 per second and less so to 
frequencies above and below this value. Hence a very intense sound at a 
frequency of 1000 per second may sound softer to the ear than a less intense 
one at a frequency of 3500 per second. As a matter of fact the average human 
ear does not hear at all sounds above about 16,000 vibrations per second. no 
matter how intense they are. Loudness depends not only on the intensity and 
the frequency of the sound but also on the shape of the graph within any one 
period. Two sounds may possess the same frequency and the same amplitude, 
but may have differently shaped graphs. Such sounds will, in general, not sound 
equally loud to the ear. 
The most interesting and from an aesthetic standpoint the most important 
aspect of musical sounds is their quality. It is this property which determines 
whether or not a sound is pleasing. The quality of a sound depends upon 
which harmonics are present in the sound and the amplitudes of these har­
monics. Thus a sound emitted by a piano and a sound of the same frequency 
emitted by a violin create different effects on the ear because they differ in 
the harfP.onics present and in the amplitudes of these harmonics. Since the 
harmonics and their amplitudes determine the shape of the graph, it follows 
that, mathematically, the quality of a sound is the shape of the graph within any 
one period. 

450 
THE TRIGONOMETRIC ANALYSIS OF MUSICAL SOUNDS 
Sounds or tones vary greatly with respect to harmonics and their ampli­
tudes. Some sounds, for example, the sounds of tuning forks, some notes on 
the flute, and sounds produced by wide-stopped organ pipes, possess only a 
few harmonics or, in effect, merely the first. On the other hand, most in­
struments give off sounds containing many harmonics, but some of these may 
have small or almost zero amplitude. For example, the sounds of organ pipes 
are, in general, weak in the higher harmonics. The sounds of a violin possess 
a great number of harmonics and are usually strong in the first six harmonics. 
The relative amplitudes of the harmonics present in violin sounds are about 
the same for all notes; however, there are enough differences for the ear to 
distinguish, say the A- from the D-string, even though both are sounded at 
the same frequency. The uniformness of quality may explain why the sounds 
of a violin are so pleasing. The sounds of a piano also contain many harmonics, 
but the relative amplitudes of the harmonics in any one sound depend upon the 
velocity with which the hammer strikes the string. 
The vowel sounds of the human voice are rich in harmonics. For example, 
the sound of "00" as in tool, expressed at a fundamental frequency of 125 
vibrations per second, has as many as 30 detectable harmonics. The relative 
amplitudes of the first six are 0.4, 0.7, I ,  0.2, 0.2, and 0.2, respectively. The 
higher harmonics, though present, have lower amplitudes. However, not only 
do the number of harmonics present and their relative amplitudes vary con­
siderably from one vocal sound to another. but even the same sound issued at 
two different pitches will have different harmonics and amplitudes. 
The physical reason for the differences in quality among the many types 
of musical instruments is. of course, the nature of the device itself. The piano 
and violin both use vibrating strings, but piano strings are struck whereas 
violin strings are bowed. The clarinet, oboe, and bassoon are operated by 
forcing air against vibrating reeds. Air is forced past the edge of an opening 
in the organ pipe also, but here the edge or lip is rigid. In addition, each 
instrument possesses a resonance device which emphasizes certain harmonics. 
The sounding board of the piano, the hollow box of the violin, and the pipes 
of an organ are resonance devices. 
Although two people may not quite agree about their reactions to sounds, 
it is on the whole true that the qualities of sounds which we describe by such 
words as soft, piercing, rich, dull, braying, hollow, bright, and the like, are 
due to the harmonics and their relative amplitudes. Sounds which contain only 
the first harmonic are soft but dull. For brightness and acuteness the higher 
harmonics are essential. Sounds which possess the first six harmonics are 
grand and sonorous. If harmonics beyond the sixth or seventh are present and 
have appreciable amplitudes, the tones are piercing and rough. In general, the 
amplitudes of harmonics decrease as the frequencies increase. However, if the 
amplitudes of higher harmonics are too large compared with that of the funda­
mental, the tone is described as poor rather than rich. 

EXERCISES 
SUBJECTIVE PROPERTIES OF MUSICAL SOUNDS 
451 
1. Suppose that two sounds are represented respectively by y = 0.06 sin 21T ' 200t 
and y = 0.03 sin 27T · 250,. Which one is louder? Which one is higher pitched? 
2. Explain in mathematical tenns the meaning of a simple sound. 
3. What is the mathematical criterion of a musical sound as opposed to noise? 
4. Which mathematical properties of the formula for a complex musical sound 
represent the pitch of the sound and the quality of the sound? 
5. Discuss the assertion that music is basically just mathematics. 
Topics for Further Investigation 
I. The construction of musical scales. Include, in particular, the work of J. S. 
Bach on the equal-tempered scale. 
2. The human voice as a source of musical sounds. 
3. The functioning of the human ear. 
Recommended Reading 
BENADE, ARTHUR H.: Horns, Strings and Harmony, Doubleday and Co., New York, 
1960. 
FLETCHER, HARVEY: Speech and Hearing, D. Van Nostrand Co., Princeton, 1929. 
HELMHOLTZ, HERMANN VON: On the Sensations of Tone, Dover Publications, Inc., 
New York, 1954. 
JEANS, SIR JAMES H.: Science and Music, Cambridge University Press, London, 1937. 
MILLER, DAYTON c.: The Science of Musical Sounds, 2nd ed., The Macmillan Co., 
New York, 1926. 
OLSON, HARRY F.: Musical Engineering, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 
1952. 
REDFIELD, JOHN: Music, A Science and an Art, A. A. Knopf, Inc., New York, 1926. 
SEARS, FRANCIS W. and MARK W. ZEMANSKY: University Physics, 3rd ed., Chaps. 21 
to 23, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Inc., Reading, Mass., 1964. 
TAYLOR, LLOYD WM.: Physics, The Pioneer Science, Chaps. 24 to 28, Dover Pub­
lications, Inc., New York, 1959. 
VON BERGEJjK, WILLEM A., JOHN R. PIERCE and EDWARD E. DAVID, JR.: Waves and 
the Ear, Doubleday and Co., New York, 1960. 
WOOD, ALEXANDER: The Physics of Music, 6th ed., Dover Publications, Inc., New 
York, 1961. 

CHAPTER 20 
NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRIES AND THEIR SIGNIFICANCE 
One must do no violence to nature, nor model it in conformity to any 
blindly formed chimaera; . . .  
JOHN BOLYAI 
20-1 INTRODUCTION 
The most significant revolutions in this world are not political. Political 
revolutions hardly change the daily life of man or, if they do, exert a short­
term effect which may even be reversed by subsequent revolutions. The 
significant upheavals are caused by new ideas; these far more effectively, 
powerfully, and lastingly alter the lives of civilized human beings. For exam­
ple, the beliefs in the importance of the human being and in his right to life, 
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness have permanently and radically changed 
the lives and aspirations of hundreds of millions of human beings. Indeed, 
many political revolutions were inspired by the desire to realize these ideas. 
The two concepts which have most profoundly revolutionized our intellec­
tual development since the nineteenth century are evolution and non-Euclidean 
geometry. The theory of evolution is generally well recognized as a prime 
influence, but non-Euclidean geometry. despite its more fundamental and more 
far-reaching effects, seems to escape attention. 
In this chapter we shall examine the nature of non-Euclidean geometry, 
its value for science, its implications for the nature of mathematics, and, 
finally, its influence on our culture. 
20-2 THE HISTORICAL BACKGROUNt. 
Euclidean geometry, as well as developments such as arithmetic, algebra, and 
calculus, rests upon axioms. The Greeks, who formulated the axioms of 
Euclidean geometry, believed that human minds immediately recognized some 
truths about the geometrical properties of physical objects and of space. Thus, 
it seemed indubitable that two points determined one and only one line, and 
that equal line segments added to another pair of equal line segments gave 
equal sums. For two thousand years the entire intellectual world accepted the 
Greek doctrine that the axioms of Euclidean geometry and of mathematics in 
452 

THE HISTORICAL BACKGROUND 
453 
general, were truths about the physical world, truths so clear and so evident 
that no one in his right mind could question them. Of course, since the axioms 
of geometry were truths. and since the theorems were logically necessary 
consequences of the axioms, the entire body of Euclidean geometry constituted 
a collection of indubitable truths about idealized objects and phenomena of the 
physical world. 
One slight blemish seemed to mar the collection of axioms. Euclidean 
geometry deals with parallel lines. By definition, two lines in the same plane 
are parallel if they do not meet, that is, if they do not contain any point in 
common. This last statement expresses what we mean by parallel lines and so 
is not objectionable. In itself it does not assert that there are any parallel lines. 
But Euclidean geometry contains an axiom which implies the existence of 
parallel lines, and our present discussion centers about the nature of this axiom. 
As stated by Euclid, the axiom asserts that if two lines m and I (Fig. 20-1 ), 
meet a third line, n, so as to make the sum of angles 1 and 2 less than 180°, 
then the lines m and I meet on that side of the line n on which the angles 1 
and 2 lie. Euclid then proves, for example, that if the sum of angles 1 and 2 
is 180°, then m and I are parallel. This axiom is a bit involved, and there is 
some reason to believe that even Euclid himself was not too happy about it. 
Neither he nor later mathematicians up to the nineteenth century really 
doubted the truth of this axiom; that is, they had no doubt that it was a correct 
idealization of the behavior of actual or physical lines. What bothered Euclid 
and his successors was that the axiom was not quite so self-evident as the axiom, 
say, that any two right angles are equal. 
m 
p 
m 
Fig. 20-l. 
Fig. 20-2. 
Euclid's parallel axiom. 
Playfair's parallel axiom. 
From Greek times on mathematicians sought to replace this axiom with 
an equivalent one. An equivalent axiom is one which, together with the other 
nine axioms of Euclid, will make it possible to derive the same body of 
theorems that Euclid deduced. Many equivalent axioms were proposed. One 
of these, known as Playfair's axiom [it was adopted by the mathematician 
John Playfair (I 748-1819)]' is the one we usually learn in high school. Play­
fair's axiom states that, given a line I (Fig. 20-2) and a point P not on that 

454 
NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRIES: THEIR SIGNIFICANCE 
line, there is one and only one line m in the plane of P and I which passes 
through P and does not meet I. From Play fair's parallel axiom and the other 
nine axioms of Euclid one can deduce all the theorems of Euclidean geometry. 
Playfair's axiom appears intuitively convincing. That is, it does seem as 
though straight lines in physical space possess the property asserted. However, 
mathematicians were not satisfied with Playfair's axiom or other proposed 
equivalents of Euclid's parallel axiom. They recognized that every proposed 
substitute involved directly or indirectly an assertion about what happened 
far off in space. Thus, Playfair's axiom asserts that the line m through P will 
not meet I even in the very distant space to which these lines extend. As a 
matter of fact, Euclid's axiom is superior in this respect because it does not 
assert that lines will not meet, but states conditions under which they will 
meet at some finite distance. 
What is objectionable about axioms which assert what happens far out 
in space? The answer is that they transcend experience. The axioms of 
Euclidean geometry are supposed to be immediately convincing statements 
about the properties of space. But how can one be sure of what happens 
millions of miles away? How can one be sure that it is possible to extend 
straight lines indefinitely far out into physical space, without the lines ever 
being forced to meet? Thus the efforts made to find a simpler statement than 
Euclid's did succeed insofar as simplicity of statement was concerned, but bred 
doubts about the truth of any assertion regarding the existence of parallel lines. 
By the eighteenth century some mathematicians decided to try a new tack. 
Euclid's set contained ten axioms. Perhaps nine sufficed; that is, perhaps one 
could prove an assertion about parallel lines by deduction from the other nine 
axioms. If this should be possible, then there would be no further problem, 
because the assertion about parallel lines would be a necessary consequence of 
the nine entirely acceptable axioms. However, all these efforts failed. 
One of these efforts, though, deserves special attention. The Jesuit priest 
Girolamo Saccheri (1667-1733) decided to apply the indirect method of 
proof. Euclid's parallel axiom asserts, in effect, the existence of one and only 
one line through P and parallel to I. To establish the truth of this statement by 
contradiction, two alternatives are available: no line parallel to I through P 
or more than one. Saccheri's plan was to assume in turn that each alternative 
to Euclid's parallel axiom was true and, with this alternative and the other 
nine axioms of Euclid, show that deductions would lead to a contradiction. 
He could then proclaim that the only questionable assumption, namely the 
alternative to Euclid's parallel axiom, must be false. After doing this with 
each of the two alternatives, he could then assert that the only remaining 
possibility, Euclid's axiom, must be true. As a matter of history, the alternative 
asserting that there were no parallels to I through P produced a contradiction. 
However, from the second alternative (there is more than one parallel to I 
through P) Saccheri derived a number of strange theorems but no contradic­
tion. 

THE HISTORICAL BACKGROUND 
455 
The strangeness of the theorems he obtained was enough to convince 
Saccheri that this second alternative could not be true, and hence that Euclid's 
parallel axiom must be true because it was the only possible alternative. And 
so in 1733 he published a book entitled Euclid Vindicated From All Defects. 
Of course, strangeness of theorems and logical contradiction are quite different 
matters, and Saccheri was not justified in substituting one for the other. But 
he was tied to his time and, in drawing rhe conclusion that Euclid's assertion 
on parallel lines was a necessary consequence of the other nine axioms, he 
showed merely that if a man sets out to establish something of which he is 
already convinced, he will satisfy at least himself that he has proved its truth 
regardless of the facts. 
The first to draw the conclusion which Saccheri should have drawn was 
Karl Friedrich Gauss (1777-1855). Gauss was one of the greatest mathe­
maticians of all times. His father was a bricklayer who expected his son to 
adopt the same trade. However, Gauss showed his precocity in elementary 
school, and his teachers saw to it that he received a good education. At the 
University of Giittingen his teachers were hard put to keep up with him. At 22 
Gauss submitted his doctoral thesis to the University of Helmstedt. In this 
thesis he proved what is often called the fundamental theorem of algebra, 
namely, that every algebraic equation of any degree has at least one root. At 
the age of 30 he was appointed professor of astronomy at the University of 
Giittingen. He discouraged students from attending his lectures. 
Gauss's scientific interests, like those of Archimedes and Newton, were 
unbelievably broad. He was, for example, a great inventor. He designed 
many instruments for use in geodesy and was one of the inventors of the 
electric telegraph. He devised methods of making maps, was an excellent 
astronomical observer, and set up systems of insurance. At the request of 
the Elector of Hannover he made a survey of the principality. In addition to 
devising instruments for the measurement of the earth's magnetic field, he 
himself studied the variation in the strength of this field over the earth. The 
unit now used to measure the strength of magnetic fields is called the gauss. 
Inspired by his scientific and practical interests, Gauss contributed to a 
number of major branches of mathematics. In fact, he would not think of 
separating mathematics from its application to science. Though his greatest 
achievements were in mathematics and he is therefore most often described 
as a mathematician, it would be more appropriate to call him a student of 
nature. His motto read: 
Thou, nature, art my goddess; to thy Jaws 
My services are bound . . .  
A famous phrase, Mathematics, Queen of the Sciences, is due to him. 
One of Gauss's greatest creations and certainly the most momentous from 
the standpoint of its implications is his non-Euclidean geometry. Gauss started 
his thinking on this subject as a boy and, like others before him, he began by 

456 
NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRIES: THEIR SIGNIFICANCE 
trying to replace Euclid's parallel axiom by a more acceptable one, that is, one 
which did not involve any assertion about what must happen far off in space. 
But he did not succeed. He also appreciated at the age of 15, as he told his 
friend Schumacher, that one could not hope to prove an assertion about parallel 
lines on the basis of the other nine axioms. That is, he realized that these nine 
axioms did not in themselves dictate the form of the parallel axiom. Gauss was 
too brilliant a man to overlook the implication of this fact. If there was some 
freedom in the choice of a parallel axiom, then one might choose an axiom 
different from Euclid's and build a new kind of geometry. Gauss did just this. 
He pursued the logical implications of a system of axioms which included the 
assumption that more than 012e parallel to a given line passed through a given 
point, and thus created non-Euclidean geometry. 
(Gauss himself finally 
adopted the term non-Euclidean after having calJed his system anti-Euclidean 
geometry, and later astral geometry.) 
Though Gauss realized that such a geometry could conceivably apply to 
physical space and hence was indeed significant, he did not publish his results. 
Gauss was far ahead of his times in concluding that Euclidean geometry was not 
necessarily the correct description of physical space and that some non-Euclid­
ean geometry might prove as accurate. Hence he feared that he would be 
laughed at. In a letter written in 1829 to his friend, the mathematician Friedrich 
Wilhelm Bessel, Gauss confessed that he feared the clamor of the Boeotians, a 
figurative reference to the dull-witted, for the Boeotians had been one of the 
more simple-minded Greek tribes. Gauss's work on non-Euclidean geometry 
was found among his papers after his death in 1855. 
The men who usually receive credit for creating non-Euclidean geometry 
because they published their results are Nicholas l. Lobachevsky (1793-1856) 
and John Bolyai (1802-1860). Lobachevsky, born to a poor family and dis­
playing brightness even as a youngster, attended the University of Kazan in 
Russia. One of his teachers was the German mathematician J. M. C. Bartels, 
a friend of Gauss, and it is very likely that the problem of the parallel axiom 
was called to Lobachcvsky's attention by Bartels. Lobachevsky became a 
professor at Kazan at the age of 23 and continued to work on the problem. 
By 1823 he realized that there can be other geometries and that Euclidean 
geometry need not be the correct description of physical space. He said later 
that two thousand years of fruitless attempts to put the parallel axiom on an 
unquestionable basis had led him to suspect that it could not be done. From 
1829 on Lobachevsky published books and papers in which he expounded the 
theorems that hold in his non-Euclidean geometry. Despite valuable services 
to mathematicS', his university, and the Russian government, he was dismissed 
in 1846, but continued to work in his field until his death. 
Bolyai, a Hungarian, was an Austrian army officer. He learned mathe­
matics from his father, Wolfgang Bolyai, who set his son thinking about the 
parallel axiom. In 1823 John arrived at the same conclusion that had been 

THE HISTORICAL BACKGROUND 
457 
reached by Gauss and Lobachevsky, namely, that the Euclidean parallel axiom 
cannot be proved and that. in fact, it was but one alternative. He proceeded 
to develop a non-Euclidean geometry and published his work as an appendix 
to his father's book on mathematics which appeared in 1833. Knowing Gauss's 
interest in the subject of non-Euclidean geometry, Wolfgang sent a copy of 
his son's work to Gauss. The latter replied, 
If 1 commenced by saying that 1 am unable to praise this work, you would 
certainly be surprised for a moment. But 1 cannot say otherwise. To praise it 
would be to praise myself. Indeed, the whole contents of the work, the path 
taken by your son, the results to which he is led, coincide almost entirely with 
1I1y meditations, which have occupied my mind partly for the last thirty or 
thirty-five years. 
Though Wolfgang was pleased to learn that his son's thinking paralleled that 
of the great Gauss, John was not, for, like others who had found that Gauss 
had beaten them to a discovery, he felt cheated of the glory. The irony of the 
situation was compounded further. Although Lobachevsky and Bolyai are 
now credited with the discovery of non-Euclidean geometry because they were 
the first to publish on the subject, the mathematical world of the 1830's and 
1840's ignored their publications until Gauss's notes on non-Euclidean geom­
try were found among his papers after his death. The name of Gauss attached 
to the idea made the mathematical world grant the proper importance to the 
subject. 
On the surface, the history of non-Euclidean geometry seems remarkable 
because after two thousand years of futile work, three men suddenly saw 
the parallel axiom and Euclidean geometry in the proper light. However, 
while such coincidences of history are by no means uncommon, the present 
one is perhaps less remarkable than is ordinarily believed. Gauss did not 
hesitate to tell his mathematical friends of his radical views on the parallel 
axiom and of his doubts about the necessary truth of Euclidean geometry. 
Both Bartels and Wolfgang Bolyai were in this circle of friends, and they 
may have communicated Gauss's views to their respective charges. The mere 
derivation of theorems from new parallel axioms, though a considerable tech­
nical achievement, goes back to Saccheri, and numerous minor and major 
mathematicians had done similar work in the intenrening one hundred-year 
period. But the correct evaluation of the significance of these logical develop­
ments was a new step, and this seems to have been made first by Gauss. How­
ever, Wolfgang Bolyai, perhaps to defend the originality of his son's thoughts, 
said of the work by the three men, 
. . .  because it seems to be true that many things have, as it were, an epoch in 
which they are discovered in several places simultaneously, just as the violets 
appear on all sides in the springtime. 

458 
NO÷-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRIES: THEIR SIGNIFICANCE 
EXERCISES 
1. What is the definition of parallel lines? 
2. What objection did Euclid's successors have to Euclid's axiom on parallel lines? 
3. What objections were there to axioms such as Playfair's which replaced Euclid's 
parallel axiom by simpler assumptions? 
4. Describe Saccheri's plan to establish the truth of Euclid's parallel axiom. 
5. Did Saccheri arrive at the concept of a non-Euclidean geometry? 
6. What advances did Gauss, Lobachevsky, and BoIyai make over Saccheri with 
respect to the nature of geometry? 
20-3 THE MATHEMATICAL CONTENT OF GAUSS'S NON· EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
To appreciate the significance of what Gauss, Lobachevsky, and Bolyai created, 
we must look into the specific mathematical facts of their work. For brevity 
we shall, at present, refer to their geometry as Gauss's geometry. The main 
idea conceived by the three men asserted that one was logically free to adopt 
a parallel axiom which differs fundamentally from Euclid's, and that one 
could construct a new geometry which would be as valid as Euclid's and 
which might even be a good description of physical space. 
What was the new parallel axiom' Euclid's parallel axiom, at least in the 
equivalent form which Playfair had given, stated that given a line 1 and a 
point P, there is one and only one line in the plane of I and P which passes 
through P and does not meet 1 (Fig. 20-2). Gauss, Lobachevsky, and Bolyai 
assumed that there are two lines, m and n, through P (Fig. 20-3) which are 
parallel to I, that is, these two lines through P do not meet I, and that any 
line through P falling within the angle MPN does meet I. Of course, any line 
such as q which passes through P and lies within the angle NPR cannot meet 
I because to do so, q would have to cross m or n and therefore meet m or 1l 
in a second point. But since two lines can intersect in at most one point, it 
follows that all lines through P which lie within the angle NPR will not meet 
I. Hence the assumption that there are at least two parallels to I implies that 
there is an infinite number of parallels. 
The term parallel lines was reserved by Gauss, Lobachevsky, and Bolyai 
for m and n, whereas lines such as q were called nonintersecting lines. For 
m 
l' 
Fig. 20-3. Gauss's parallel axiom. 
Fig. 20-4 

MATHEMATICS OF GAUSS'S NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
459 
this reason, their geometry is often described as a geometry with rwo parallel 
lines, although, in the Euclidean sense of the term parallel lines (two lines 
in a plane which have no point in common), it contains an infinite number 
of parallels. We shall use the terminology chosen by Gauss, Bolyai, and 
Lobachevsky. 
Before proceeding to draw conclusions from this new parallel axiom and 
the other nine Euclidean axioms, let us dispel in advance any doubts about 
the common sense of the material we are about to present. We are so ac­
customed to Euclidean geometry (those of us who did not take our high­
school geometry very seriously may be in a better position) that the idea of 
adopting a new parallel axiom and of proving theorems seems ridiculous. 
Euclid's geometry is truth to us, and to defy the truth and pursue the con­
sequences of this folly seem a waste of time. There are two counterarguments. 
We can admit that from a practical standpoint the effort required to develop 
such a new system is pointless. Nevertheless, we should be able to comprehend 
that it is logically possible to investigate the consequences of a new set of 
axioms. What we are about to do is analogous to changing one of the articles 
in the Constitution of the United States while retaining the others, just to see 
what changes might follow in our laws. Thus we might decide to replace an 
elected president by a monarch and yet continue to elect congressmen and 
retain the institution of a Supreme Court. The second counterargument is 
based on the fact that Gauss, BolYli, and Lobachevsky doubted the truth of 
Euclidean geometry and were ready to consider an alternative geometry as a 
description of physical space. To what extent their doubts were justified and 
whether the new geometry could serve in physical applications will be clearer 
when we know what theorems actually resulted from the new set of axioms. 
We shall describe, but not prove, the theorems of the new geometry. The 
methods of proofs are precisely the same as in Euclidean geometry; however, 
one must be careful to use only the new axioms to support any assertions. 
Many theorems of the new geometry are precisely the same as those of 
Euclidean geometry. Indeed those theorems of Euclidean geometry which 
are proved with the aid of only the first nine axioms of Euclid, that is, those 
theorems which do not depend upon the Euclidean parallel axiom, must also 
be theorems of the new geometry because these nine axioms are retained in 
the new system. Thus the theorems which assert when two triangles are 
congruent, the theorem asserting that the base angles of an isosceles triangle 
are equal. the theorem stating that an exterior angle of a triangle is greater 
than either remote interior angle. and the theorem postulating that from a 
point off a line, there is one and only one perpendicular to that line, are all 
valid in the new geometry. 
But now let us examine some theorems of the new geometry which are 
different from those of Euclidean geometry. Suppose that the point P and 
the line I (Fig. 20-4) are given. In the new geometry, the paralIel axiom 

460 
NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRIES: THEIR SIGNIFICANCE 
states that there are twO lines, m and n, through P which are parallel to I. 
Let us now drop a perpendicular p from P to I. Then in this new geometry 
the angle A between p and n is no longer a right angle, although n and 1 are 
parallel lines. Angle A is in fact an acute angle. Moreover, the size of angle 
A depends upon the length of p. The shorter p is, the larger does angle A 
become, and as p approaches zero, angle A approaches 90" in size. Of course, 
in Euclidean geometry angle A is a right angle and this holds no matter how 
large p is. A key theorem of the new geometry asserts that the sum of the 
angles of a triangle is always less than 180", whereas it is exactly 180" in 
Euclidean geomerry. Further, in the new geomerry the sum of the angles of 
a triangle varies with the area of rhe triangle. The smaller the area, the 
closer is the angle sum to 180". A very surptising theorem of the new geom­
etry states that if the three angles of one triangle equal, respectively, the three 
angles of another, the triangles are congruent. Of course, in Euclidean geom­
etry two such triangles would be similar, and one could be very much larger 
than the other. There are many more interesting consequences of the new 
axioms, but we have seen enough to obtain some indication of the nature of 
the new geometry. 
EXERCISES 
I .  Describe the parallel axiom adopted by Gauss, Bolyai, and Lobachevsky. 
2. Distinguish between the Euclidean use of the term parallel lines and the usage in 
Gauss's geometry. 
3. State three theorems which are common to Euclidean geometry and Gauss's non­
Euclidean geometry. 
4. State three theorems of Gauss's geometry which do not hold in Euclidean 
geometry. 
5. Suppose that one triangle has an angle sum of 170° and another, of 175°. Which 
has the larger area in Gauss's geometry? 
6. Given two triangles, one with angles of 30°, 40°, and 100° and another with angles 
of 35°, 45°, and 900. What does Gauss's geometry say about their area? 
7. Suppose that the angles of one triangle are equal, respectively, to the angles of 
another. What may you conclude about these triangles on the basis of Gauss's 
geometry? 
20-4 RIEMANN'S NON·EUCLIOEAN GEOMETRY 
We saw in the preceding section that it is possible to investigate a new set of 
geometrical axioms and to deduce logical consequences. Perhaps we are not 
satisfied as yet that such an investigation is of value, but we shall reserve our 
final judgment until we have looked into one more mathematical creation in 
the field of non-Euclidean geometry. 

RIEMANN'S NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
461 
Investigations of the parallel axiom had led mathematicians to question its 
truth because it made assertions about what must happen in physical space far 
beyond man's experience. Having become aware of this shortcoming, mathe­
maticians examined the remaining axioms and soon found another which suf­
fered from the same failing. Euclid's second axiom asserts that a straight line 
extends indefinitely far in either direction. This axiom attracted the attention 
of the nineteenth-century mathematical giant, Georg Friedrich Bernhard Rie­
mann (1826-66). Riemann, the son of a Lutheran pastor, was born sickly and 
precocious. He became a student of Gauss at the University of Gottingen, 
and was later appointed professor at the same institution. Like Gauss, and most 
mathematicians for that matter, he was keenly interested in science and in the 
applicability of mathematics to the physical world. 
Riemann observed that experience suggests not the infinite extent of the 
straight line but rather its endlessness. He accordingly distinguished berween 
endlessness, or unboundedness, and infinite length. The simplest example of that 
distinction is furnished by the circle. One can traverse the circle endlessly, 
yet its length is finite. Hence Riemann proposed to replace the Euclidean 
axiom that a straight line extends indefinitely far by the axiom that it is un­
bounded. 
Riemann also observed that experience does not vouch for the existence 
of any parallel lines. Within the limits of experience, we could equally well 
assume that any two lines meet. Hence Riemann proposed this axiom as an 
alternative to Euclid's parallel axiom. It may be recalled that Saccheri had 
considered the same possibility, but had found that it led to contradictions. 
However, Saccheri had combined this axiom with the other nine Euclidean 
axioms, whereas Riemann proposed an additional change, namely the un­
boundedness of the straight line, and had therefore reason to believe that he, 
unlike Saccheri, would not encounter any contradictions. 
Since Riemann did retain some of Euclid's axioms, he arrived at some 
theorems identical to those of Euclidean geometry. Thus the theorem that 
two triangles are congruent when rwo sides and the included angle of one 
are equal to the corresponding parts of the other is a theorem of Riemann's 
geometry, as are other familiar congruence theorems. 
The striking theorems of Riemann's geometry are, of course, those which 
differ markedly from Euclid's results. One Riemannian theorem asserts that 
every straight line has the same finite length. Another asserts that all perpen­
diculars to a line meet in one point. In Riemann's geometry the sum of the 
angles of a triangle is always greater than 1800• Moreover the sum varies with 
the area of the triangle and decreases to 1800 as the area approaches zero. Two 
similar triangles are necessarily congruent (this is also the case in Gauss's 
geometry). These theorems are, of course, just a representative selection from 
a vast number. 

462 
NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRIES: THEIR SIGNIFICANCE 
EXERCISES 
1. Why did Riemann Question the Euclidean axiom that a straight line extends in­
definitely far in either direction? 
2. What axiom on parallel lines did Riemann adopt? 
3. Some theorems of Gauss's and Riemann's non-Euclidean geometries are identical 
with Euclidean theorems. Why does this occur? 
4. Which of the two non-Euclidean geometries would you expect to have more 
theorems in common with Euclidean geometry and why? 
5. Compare the Euclidean, Gaussian, and Riemannian theorems about the sum of 
the angles of a triangle. 
6. State three theorems peculiar to Riemann's geometry. 
7. What is non-Euclidean geometry? 
8. What happens to the Euclidean distinction between congruent and similar tri­
angles in non-Euclidean geometry? 
20-5 THE APPLICABILITY or NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
The very fact that there can be geometries other than Euclid's, that one can 
formulate axioms fundamentally different from Euclid's and prove theorems, 
was in itself a remarkable discovery. The concept of geometry was consid­
erably broadened and this suggested that mathematics might be something more 
than the study of the implications of the self-evident truths about number and 
geometrical figures. However, the very existence of these new geometries 
caused mathematicians to take up a deeper and more disturbing question, one 
which had already been raised by Gauss. Could any one of these new geom­
etries be applied? Could the axioms and theorems fit physical space and per­
haps even prove more accurate than Euclidean geometry' Why should one 
continue to believe that physical space was necessarily Euclidean? 
At first blush the idea that either of these strange geometries could pos­
sibly supersede Euclidean geometry seems absurd. That Euclidean geometry 
is the geometry of physical space, that it is the truth about space is so ingrained 
in people's minds that any contrary thoughts are rejected. The mathematician 
Georg Cantor spoke of a law of conservation of ignorance. A false conclusion 
once arrived at is not easily dislodged. And the less it is understood, the more 
tenaciously is ir held. In fact, for a long time non-Euclidean geometry was 
regarded as a logical curiosity. Its existence could not be denied, but mathe­
maticians maintained that the real geometry, the geometry of the physical 
world, was Euclidean. They refused to take seriously the thought that any 
other geometry could be applied. However, they ultimately realized that their 
insistence on Euclidean geometry was merely a habit of thought and not at all 
a necessary belief. Those few who failed to see this were shocked into the 
realization when the theory of relativity actually made use of non-Euclidean 
geometry. 

THE APPLICABILITY OF NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
463 
It is important to see how and why a non-Euclidean geometry can fit 
physical space. Let us recall, first of all, why Gauss, Bolyai, and Lobachevsky 
doubted the truth of the Euclidean parallel axiom. They realized that this 
axiom and all of the simpler forms which might serve as substitutes contained 
assertions about what happens in space far beyond the range of man's experi­
ence. Hence experience does not support such axioms. As a matter of fact, if 
the lines m and 11 of Fig. 20-3 and all lines, such as q, falling within the angle 
NPR should have almost the direction of I, then they would certainly not meet 
1 within a short distance from the point P. Hence Gauss's axiom is as much in 
accord with experience as Euclid's. Our intuition is seemingly violated by such 
a thought, but this intuition may be conditioned by our familiarity with 
Euclidean geometry. In other words, insofar as experience is concerned, one 
can adopt Gauss's or Riemann's alternative axioms. 
In view of our inability to decide a priori which of the several alternative 
axioms fits physical space, we might consider another approach to the problem. 
The theorems of any geometry are logical consequences of the axioms. Perhaps 
it would be easier to discriminate among these geometries by seeing how well 
their respective theorems fit physical space. This thought had already occurred 
to Gauss. He noted that in his geometry the sum of the angles of a triangle 
must be less than 180·, whereas in Euclidean geometry it is exactly 180·. 
Hence he had three observers stand on three mountain peaks and directed 
each one to measure the angle between his lines of sight to the other two ob­
servers. The sum of the angles of the triangle formed by the three peaks 
turned out to be 170°59'58"; that is, it was within 2" of 180°. 
This result might be interpreted as a victory for Euclidean geometry, but 
the situation is not so simple. In Gauss's geometry the sum of the angles 
of a triangle increases as the area of the triangle decreases, and the sum ap­
proaches 180° as the area approaches zero. In Riemann's geometry, the sum 
of the angles of a triangle is always larger than 1 80·, but the sum again 
appproaches 180· as the area of the triangle decreases. Hence for small 
triangles, all three geometries call for an angle sum close to 180·. Had Gauss's 
measurement of the angles formed by the mountain peaks been exact, he 
might have been able to assert that his result was less than, equal to, or more 
than 180°, and so his test would have been decisive. However, every measure­
ment contains an error because the eye and hand are not precise. We may 
safely suppose that the error in Gauss's measurement was more than 2". Thus, 
in view of his result, the true angle sum could have been anything from a little 
more than 180· to a little less. Hence the result was consistent with any one 
of the three geometries. 
For a large triangle, the angle sum should be significantly less than 180· 
in Gauss's geometry and significantly more in Riemann's. Hence, by using 
a large triangle, say one formed by three celestial bodies at some instant, one 
might be able to obtain a result which would fit only one of the three geom-

464 
NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRIES: THEIR SIGNIFICANCE 
etries, provided the error of measurement were kept small. Thus, a result of 
175°, with an error of measurement of less than 5°, would certainly establish 
the physical correctness of Gauss's geometry. However, in the nineteenth 
century, no such result was obtained. Gauss, Lobachevsky, and Bolyai realized 
that, at least in their day and with the instruments at their disposal, meaSlire­
ment would not decide the question. 
Since a test based on the sum of the angles of a triangle does not succeed 
in establishing which of the geometries fits physical space, one might cast 
about for another theorem which would serve the purpose. He might then 
hit upon the theorem which holds in both non-Euclidean geometries, namely 
the theorem stating that two similar triangles must be congruent. Here a 
decisive test seems likely, for it appears quite obvious that one can construct 
a small and a large triangle and make them similar. One only has to ensure 
that the angles of the small triangle equal the angles of the large one, and the 
similarity of the two triangles necessarily follows. Only Euclidean geometry 
fits this physical situation. The argument, however, has a flaw since one cannot 
be sure that the corresponding angles of the two triangles are really equal. 
After all, measurement is approximate, and at least one angle of one triangle 
might differ from the corresponding angle of the other triangle. If this 
happened, the triangles would not be similar. 
The substance of the above arguments is that there is no simple test which 
points to one geometry rather than to another. However, if an application 
involved a truly large triangle, as astronomical investigations do, one might 
be able to determine which geometry fits better. As a matter of fact, this 
possibility has been realized. In the theory of relativity, Einstein employed a 
non-Euclidean geometry (though one more complicated than those we have 
studied), and the agreement between his predictions and observations was 
better than the result obtained by means of Euclidean geometry. 
EXERCISES 
I. Does measurement help us to show that objects in physical space are better 
described by the theorems of one rather than another geometry? 
2. Could we use Gauss's or Riemann's non-Euclidean geometry for engineering and 
architecture? 
3. Why did Gauss's measurement of the sum of the angles of a triangle fail to show 
that space is or is not Euclidean? 
20-6 THE APPLICABILITY OF NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
UNDER A NEW INTERPRETATION OF LINE 
Thus far we have considered the applicability of non-Euclidean geometry to 
our physical space, with the understanding that the physical meaning of a 
straight line is the stretched string or the ruler's edge. Even when we visualize 

A NE'V INTERPRETATION OF LINE 
465 
a straight line so long that we could never construct it, for example, a line 
from the earth to the moon, we picture a long taut string or an imaginary 
long straight stick. However, we must now realize that the mathematical 
straight line is not limited to this physical or geometrical figure. Let us con­
sider an example. 
Suppose that we begin with a flat sheet of paper which can be imagined 
to extend indefinitely far in all directions. Now let us suppose that the paper 
is bent so that it curves upward to the right and to the left (Fig. 20-5) and, 
of course, continues to extend indefinitely far out in an directions. In mathe­
matics, incidentally, this shape is known as a cylindrical surface. (One can 
form a limited cylindrical surface by merely bending upward the sides of a 
sheet of paper.) As a consequence of the change from a plane to a cylindrical 
surface, many of the straight lines of the plane become curves on the surface. 
Thus AC in Fig. 20-5 is an arc of a curve which, if the surface were flattened, 
would become a segment of a straight line. Curves which derive from straight 
lines we shall continue to call lines. Angles in the plane become, under the 
bending, angles on the surface. A triangle in the plane corresponds to a triangle 
formed by arcs of curves on the surface. A circle in the plane becomes a new 
curve on the surface which we shall continue to call a circle. 
JI7C 
B 
Fig. 20-5. 
Euclidean geometry on a cylindrical 
surface. 
Now let us note that the bending of the plane into the cylindrical surface 
does not change lengths or angles, because the plane neither stretches nor 
contracts as one forms the surface. Hence a distance between two points 
measured along the surface is the same as the distance between the two points 
when on the plane. 
Since lengths and angles do not change, it follows that if the figures in the 
plane satisfy the axioms of Euclidean geometry, then so do the figures on the 
surface, provided the meaning of lines, angles, and circles on the surface is as 
specified above. And since theorems are logical consequences of axioms, it 
follows that the Euclidean theorems, too, retain their validity for figures on the 
surface. Thus the sum of the angles of triangle ABC in Fig. 20-5 is 180°. 
These last few assertions appear at first to be incredible. Our triangles are no 
longer formed by straight line segments, and yet the Euclidean theorems con­
tinue to hold. How is it possible to apply the word line of the Euclidean 
axioms and theorems to the curves that are no longer straight lines? 

466 
NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRIES: THEIR SIGNIFICANCE 
The answer to this question involves a major point about geometry and 
indeed about mathematics in general. In our review of Euclidean geometry in 
Chapter 6, we briefly mentioned that Euclid's definitions of point, line, plane, 
and other concepts were not quite satisfactoty. The full story is that his defi­
nitions of these concepts are meaningless. He defined curve as length without 
breadth, but he did not say what he understood by length and breadth. He 
then defined the straight line as a curve which lies evenly between the ends, but 
he did not indicate what "lies evenly" meant. Euclid was relying on our in­
tuitive understanding of these terms, but intuitive understanding cannot be 
part of a logical treatment. Mathematics does not rest logically on physical 
meanings. What then is the alternative? It is not possible to begin the process 
of developing any new branch of mathematics by defining the initial notions, 
for definition requires that one provide descriptions in terms of other concepts 
whose meaning is already established. But obviously the initial concepts can­
not be defined in terms of prior ones since there are no prior ones. The point, 
then, is that the initial concepts cannot be defined. They must remain un­
defined. 
This assertion raises another question. If point, line, plane, and other 
basic concepts are undefined, how shall we know what we mean by them and 
how shall we know how to treat them' The answer is that the axioms of 
Euclidean geometry tell us what properties these concepts possess. These 
ptoperties and only these may be used in establishing the proofs. The concepts 
are therefore limited only to the extent that they must satisfy the axioms. 
Now, as far as we can determine, physical straight lines, such as rulers' 
edges and stretched strings, do oatisfy the axioms of Euclidean geometry. In 
fact, historically, the axioms were formulated by observing the properties of 
rulers' edges and stretched strings. What :s surprising, howeverؐ is that one 
may encounter other "lines" which also satisfy the axioms. If they do, they 
are legitimate interpretations or realizations of the axioms and hence of the 
theorems. This is the case for the lines of our cylindrical surface. We know 
that they satisfy the Euclidean axioms because in deforming the plane into the 
cylindrical surface, we did not disturb any of the properties asserted by the 
axioms. Consequently, Euclidean geometry as a whole applies to the points, 
lines, triangles, polygons, circles, and other figures on the cylindrical surface. 
The significance, then, of the entire discussion about the cylindrical surface 
is that it is possible to associate a totally new picture with Euclidean geometry. 
In other words, we see that Euclidean geometry applies to more physical 
situations than we had previously suspected. But if one can put Euclidean 
geometry to new uses by adopting a new view of the straight line, perhaps one 
can do the same for the non-Euclidean geometries, and hence these, too, may 
be more valuable and more meaningful than we have hitherto suspected. We 
shall now show that it is possible to give a very simple and practical interpreta­
tion of Riemann's non-Euclidean geometry. 

c 
Flg. 2().6. 
A spherical triangle formed by arcs of great 
circles. 
A NEW INTERPRETATION OF LINE 
467 
Fig. 20-7. 
A circle on a sphere. 
Let us consider the surface of the earth and let us suppose that we were 
assigned the task of developing a geometry that would fit the surface of the 
earth. We would, of course, choose as points the idealization of the usual 
physical points. We would most likely cast about next for the figure which 
would play the role of the straight line. Now straight lines in the usual sense 
do not exist on the surface of the earth because the surface is curved. Hence 
our line cannot be the rulers' edge or a stretched string. The most useful curve 
to choose would be the curve which connects two points by the shortest path. 
The shortest path between any two poinrs on a sphere is the shorter arc of the 
great circle through these points.· Hence it seems reasonable to choose great 
circles on the sphere as our lines. A triangle on the sphere would be the figure 
formed by three arcs of three great circles (Fig. 20-6). A circle on the sphere 
would be the set of all points at a given distance from a fixed point (Fig. 20-7). 
(This distance between the fixed point and any point on the circle would, of 
course, be measured along the great circle through the two points.) We could, 
in fact, describe a variety of geometrical figures in terms of points and lines on 
the sphere. 
The next step in the construction of our geometry would be to determine 
the axioms which our points, lines, and geometrical figures satisfy. Now our 
lines are great circles. These lines are not infinite in extent. However, each is 
unbounded; that is, there is no beginning or end. Hence our axiom should 
assert merely that a line is unbounded. We note next that two points which 
are not on opposite ends of a diameter determine a unique great circle. How­
ever two points which are on opposite ends of a diameter do not determine a 
unique great circle. Consequently we cannot adopt the axiom that any two 
points determine a unique line. Let us look next into the subject of an axiom 
on parallel lines. Any two great circles on a sphere do meet; in fact, they meet 
at two points which are diametrically opposite. Hence the parallel axiom should 
read that any two lines meet; that is, there are no parallel lines. We shall not 
• The concept of great circle was explained in Chapter 7. 

468 
NON-EUCLIDEAN GEO,\lETRIES: THEIR SIGXIFICANCE 
go further in selecting axioms for our system of geometry, for the conclusion 
toward which we are heading is now obvious. The axioms we would have to 
adopt to make our geometry fit the surface of the sphere would be exactly 
those which Riemann adopted for his non-Euclidean geometry. 
Since the axioms of Riemann's geometry hold for the sphere, the theorems 
must also hold. Hence the geometry on the surface of a sphere is an appli­
cation of Riemann's non-Euclidean geometry. Merely to satisfy ourselves, let 
us see whether a few theorems of Riemann's geometry really do apply. Let 
us consider the theorem that all perpendiculars to a line meet in a point. 
Figure 20-8 illustrates this theorem, and we see at once that it does apply. An­
other theorem asserts that the sum of the angles of a triangle is always greater 
than 180°. To verify that this theorem holds for every triangle on a sphere, we 
would have to call upon a theorem proved in spherical geometry which asserts 
that the sum of the angles of any spherical triangle is always between 180° and 
5400, However, we can see at once in particular cases that Riemann's theorem 
does apply. Let us consider triangle ABC of Fig. 20-8. Angles A and B are 
each 90°. Hence, whatever the size of angle C, the sum of the three angles is 
larger than 180°. We could, of course, verify that all theorems of Riemann's 
geometry hold for the sphere. 
C 
Fig. 20-8. 
The sum of the angles of a spherical triangle is 
greater than 180°, 
C' 
I 
I 
I 
J 
A 
/ 
/ 
I 
/ǃ 
/ 
Fig. 20-9 
c 
B 
The major point, then, which emerges from our discussion of the geometry 
on a sphere is that we have found a new use for Riemann's non-Euclidean 
geometry. It applies directly to the surface of a sphere, provided that straight 
line means great circle on the sphere. 
Consideration of this last fact does lead to a question: Since Riemann's 
geometry applies so naturally to the surface of a sphere, why did not mathe­
maticians hit upon non-Euclidean geometry in Greek times? Why did the 
realization that there can be non-Euclidean geometries take so long to strike 
home? The answer is that the Greeks, no doubt influenced by the Egyptians 

A NEW INTERPRETATION OF LINE 
469 
and Babylonians, had chosen the stretched string or ruler's edge as the physical 
straight line and the Euclidean axioms as the basis for their geometry. Such 
choices were very natural for people whose experiences were limited to a small 
part of the earth's surface. When they came to consider the sphere among the 
various surfaces, they had to approach it through concepts and axioms already 
adopted and hence described its properties in Euclidean terms. Thus great 
circles were treated as curves. As we have already noted in another connection, 
the Greeks and all mathematicians up to 1800 were so sure that Euclidean 
geometry was the true geometry of physical space that the idea of approaching 
the sphere directly and building a special geometry for it would have seemed 
nonsensical. They already possessed the true geometry and could not break 
what we can now see clearly was just a habit of thought. 
It is possible to exhibit a surface to which the axioms and theorems of 
Gauss's non-Euclidean geometry apply, provided that the curves chosen as 
the lines on that surface are, as in the case of the sphere, those which connect 
two points by the shortest path. However, this surface is not widely used, and 
so we shall not devote any time to it. It will be more profitable to turn to the 
reconsideration of our familiar physical space. 
We have grown accustomed to the idea that the reasonable and convenient 
physical interpretation of the straight line is the ruler's edge or a stretched 
string. Even with this interpretation we found that experience in limited 
regions did not enable us to exclude the non-Euclidean geometries as possible 
descriptions of physical space. We should now note that the ruler's edge and 
stretched string are, indeed, not the major physical interpretation of the 
mathematical straight line, and that we commonly and necessarily use another. 
Let us consider how surveyors determine distances. They begin by adopting 
a convenient base line AB (Fig. 20-9) whose length is measured by actually 
applying a tape measure. To determine the distance AC, a surveyor measures 
angle A by sighting point C in his telescope stationed at A and then swings the 
telescope around until he sights point B. On his theodolite he has a scale which 
tells him how much he has rotated his telescope, and hence he knows angle A. 
In a similar manner, he measures angle B. By means of trigonometry he can 
now calculate AC and Be. The surveyor proceeds on the assumption that the 
light rays which travel from C to A and from B to A follow the straight-line 
(stretched string) paths between those pairs of points, and, since the axioms 
of Euclidean geometry fit stretched strings, he applies Euclidean geometry or 
trigonometry to calculate AC and Be. However, the surveyor may be 
mistaken. The light ray from C to A may have followed the broken-line 
path shown in Fig. 20-9, and the surveyor at A would have to point his 
telescope tangentially to the light ray in order to receive the light. Hence 
the telescope would really be pointed to C' although the surveyor sees the 
point C in his telescope. Consequently, the angle he actually measures is C' AB 

470 
NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRIES: THEIR SIGNIFICANCE 
and not CAB. Thus the use of Euclidean geometry may have led to erroneous 
results for AC and Be. 
What then should he have done? He should have applied a geometry 
whose axioms fit the behavior of light rays since these are the straight lines 
he really used. But do not light rays follow truly straight paths? We cer­
tainly know of situations in which they do not. We have had occasion to note 
(Chapter I) that when light from the sun passes through the earth's armosphere, 
it is bent by the refractive effect of the atmosphere. Hence there is some 
question of what path light rays do follow. Observation and measurement 
show that over short distances along or near the earth's surface light rays fol­
low straight paths closely enough, but over larger distances this is certainly 
not true. 
The above example may serve to suggest a major point. In astronomical 
measurements we necessarily depend entirely on light rays to measure angles. 
Since these rays travel over long distances, the paths they follow may not be 
truly straight, and we cannot check the true paths by laying down a tape 
measure or ruler. Hence we cannot be sure whether we should use Euclidean 
geometry. 
We could try to solve this difficulty in one of two ways. We could attempt 
to determine by physical investigations what paths light rays follow, and, even 
though we may find that these are curved, treat them as if they were curves 
in Euclidean geometry. This is what physicists do when they srudy the be­
havior of light near the surface of the earth. The law of refraction tells us 
how light behaves, and all the reasoning in formulating and in applying this 
law is based on Euclidean geometry. Alternatively we can regard the paths 
of light rays as lines and construct a geometry which fits the convention that 
the light rays are to be the lines of that geometry. How to construct such a 
geometry is not obvious. One would have to determine some facts about the 
behavior of light rays, which would become the axioms of that geometry, and 
then deduce theorems. The resulting geometry might very well be non­
Euclidean and might even differ from those developed by Gauss and Riemann. 
All discussion of the possibility of applying non-Euclidean geometry is in 
a sense outdated. One of the basic current theories of science, the theory of 
relativity, does presuppose that our space is non-Euclidean and on this basis 
obtains better agreement between theory and experiment than the older theory 
of Newtonian mechanics based on Euclidean geometry was able to do. For 
reasons too lengthy to be discussed in this brief survey of the applicability of 
non-Euclidean geometry, the theory of relativity requires that the position as 
well as the time of events be treated together so that an object or event is 
described not only by the coordinates x, y, and z which denote position, but 
also by the value of the time t at which the object or event occurs at position 
x, y, z. In other words, the relevant geometry is four-dimensional. This fact 
in itself does not imply that we must resort to a non-Euclidean geometry. 

NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY AND MATHEMATICS 
471 
However, in attempting to explain the phenomenon of gravitational attraction, 
it is necessary to regard the four-dimensional space-time as a nonhomogeneous 
geometry. This means that the nature of space-time varies from region to 
region, just as a two-dimensional mountainous surface changes its geometrical 
character from region to region. In the geometry of general relativity, it is 
also the presence of physical masses which determines the character of the 
geometry in any region, these masses being the earth, the moon, the sun, and 
other heavenly bodies. Moreover. the geometry is constructed in such a way 
that the "straight lines" are the shortest "paths" of that space-time. Light rays 
do take the shortest "paths" in the space-time system. Hence, while the 
straight line is not defined in terms of light rays in the non-Euclidean geometry 
of relativity, it is nevertheless significant that light rays do take such paths. 
EXERCISES 
1. Can you explain how it is that Euclidean geometry applies to a cylindrical surface 
even though the lines of that geometry do not have the shape of stretched strings? 
2. Why must there be undefined concepts in the initial stages of any branch of 
mathematics? 
3. Under what conditions does Riemann's non-Euclidean geometry prove to be the 
correct geometry on the surface of a sphere? 
4. Should we distinguish between the geometries created by mathematicians and the 
geometry of physical space? 
5. Does science really use the stretched string as its physical model of the mathe­
matical straight line? 
6. Imagine people living in a mountainous region who wish to construct a geometry 
for that region. They agree to consider the shonest path between two points as 
the line of that geometry. What kind of geometry might they arrive at? 
7. Imagine people living in a mountainous region who wish to construct a geometry 
for that region. Since they travel by foot, using the shortest path to get from one 
place to another might require more time than some indirect path, because the 
shortest path may involve difficult mountain climbing. These people therefore 
agree to take as the line joining two points the path requiring least travel time. 
What kind of geometry might these people arrive at? 
20-7 NON·EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY AND THE NATURE OF MATHEMATICS 
The existence of non-Euclidean geometries which can fit physical space, to say 
nothing of the actual use of one of these non-Euclidean geometries in the 
theory of relativity, has had profound implications for mathematics itself, for 
science, and for some segments of our culture. In this section we shall discuss 
the implications for mathematics. 
The most important effect of this creation has been the realization that 
mathematics does not offer truths. The Greeks adopted the axioms of 

472 
NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRIES: THEIR SIGNIFICANCE 
Euclidean geometry because they believed that they were self-evident truths 
about our physical space. The axioms appealed to their minds as necessary 
truths which anyone must grant. even without experience. Since theorems 
are obtained by deductive reasoning and so are inescapable consequences of 
the axioms, the Greeks believed that the theorems, too, were truths. The 
observed agreement between the theorems deduced from these axioms and 
experience reinforced their certainty that the axioms were truths. The belief 
that mathematics offers truths was firmly held by every thinking being until 
the creation of non-Euclidean geometry. But if several geometries which con­
tradict one another all fit physical space, then it becomes very obvious, indced, 
that all of these cannot be the truth, and, worse yet, one can no longer be 
sure that any of these is the truth. 
We see more clearly now that one must distinguish between mathematical 
space and physical space. Mathematicians and scientists believe that a physical 
world exists outside of and independently of human beings, and they seek to 
understand it by adopting axioms which seem to fit this physical space and then 
deducing theorems from these axioms. We now recognize that we have no 
reason to identify the mathematical construction with physical space. Indeed, 
several different mathematical theories may fit equally well. Mathematical 
theories of space are like any scientific theories; that is, the mathematical sys­
tem used is the one which at the time best fits experience. If, as experience 
widens, it becomes clear that another geometry will fit experience better, then 
the oldcr theory of space is discarded, and a new one adopted. This is pre­
cisely what happened when the theory of relativity sought to account for 
phenomena to an accuracy which would surpass that of the older scientific 
work. 
The remarks we have made thus far about truth in mathematics and the 
provisional character of mathematical theories have been based on the develop­
ments in geometry. But the reader may have an objection. He may admit that 
geometry no longer offers truths, but continue to be convinced that our 
arithmetic, algebra, and other developments based on our number system do 
constitute truths. We shall devote Chapter 21 to this point and perhaps then 
see more clearly that with respect to truth the domain of number does not 
differ from geometry. 
If the various branches of mathematics have only a more or less useful 
correspondence with physical experience. does then mathematics differ in any 
way from science' Mathematics had always been distinguished from science 
because mathematical axioms were regarded as truths, whereas the axioms of 
science were clearly recognized to be generalizations from limited experience 
or experiments. Scientists recognized that their researches produced only 
theories which did not provide a veridical description of what occurred in 
nature, but which might have to be altered to fit new facts. Is this not precisely 
what we now perceive to apply also to mathematics? 

NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY AND MATHEMATICS 
473 
Insofar as the study of the physical world is concerned, mathematics has 
the same character as any of the sciences. It offers nothing bur theories. And, 
as in science, new mathematical theories may replace older ones when experi­
ence or experiment shows that a new theory provides closer correspondence 
than an older one. As Einstein put it, 
So for as the theories of mathematics are about reality, they are not certain; so 
for as they are certain, they are not about reality. 
Yet there are basic distinctions between mathematics and science. Mathe­
matics confines its work to numbers, geometrical figures. and relationships 
which obtain among numbers and among geometrical figures. All other con­
cepts and relationships of mathematics are derived from numbers and geometry. 
Science deals with mass. velocity. force. energy, molecular structure, chemical 
processes, the structure of plants, animals, and humans, and hundreds of other 
concepts. That is, the subject matter of mathematics differs from that of 
sCience. 
A second difference is that mathematics will always insist on deductive 
proof, whereas the sciences, even though they aim to be deductive, will con­
tinue to utilize any experimental or observational fact as a basis for conclusions; 
that is, the sciences do not insist on a thoroughly deductive structure based on 
a fixed number of axioms stated at the outset. There are many hypotheses of 
mathematics, such as. for example, that every even number is the sum of two 
primes, for which the inductive evidence is most conclusive. No scientist 
would hesitate to use an assertion so well supported by evidence. But the 
mathematician continues to search for a deductive proof. This difference be­
tween mathematics and science is perhaps one of degree or method of opera­
tion. Having chosen his axioms, the mathematician proceeds to derive as many 
conclusions as possible from them. The scientist will not hesitate to introduce 
new axioms if such a step seems warranted by inductive evidence. 
A third difference between mathematics and science was, peculiarly, ac­
centuated by the creation of non-Euclidean geometry. Mathematics, like 
science, had been devoted primarily to the exploration of nature. Vet mathe­
maticians had always felt free to develop the implications of the axioms of 
number and Euclidean geometry even though there was no immediate appli­
cation for any of the results pursued. Number and Euclidean geometry were 
regarded as so important in the study of nature that almost any information 
about them was welcomed. However, non-Euclidean geometry, which, at the 
outset and for a long time thereafter. seemed to concern axioms which could 
not possibly apply to the physical world, had finally proved useful in the study 
of the physical world. Thus history teaches us that mathematicians should feel 
free to investigate axioms which have no immediate or obvؑous bearing on the 
physical world. Consequently, mathematics has been given a new dimension 
of freedom, the freedom to explore what the mind wishes to explore, and has 

474 
NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRIES: THEIR SrGNIFICANCE 
been released from bondage to the axioms of number and Euclidean geometry. 
One could say that the creation of non-Euclidean geometry had the effect of 
divorcing mathematics from science. By the end of the nineteenth century, 
Georg Cantor, one of the great mathematical minds of modern times and the 
creator of a strange and revolutionary theory, the theory of transfinite num­
bers, was able to say, "The essence of mathematics is its freedom." The enor­
mOllS expansion in mathematical activity in the last century is partly the con­
sequence of the new freedom.· 
EXERCISES 
1. Why does the existence of non-Euclidean geometry show that mathematics does 
not offer truths? 
2 .  What distinction should one make between a mathematical space and physical 
space? 
3. Is it proper to regard mathematics as one of the sciences? 
20-8 THE IMPLICATIONS OF NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
FOR OTHER BRANCHES OF OUR CULTURE 
In view of the role which mathematics plays in science and the implications of 
scientific knowledge for all of our beliefs, revolutionary changes in man's 
understanding of the nature of mathematics could not but mean revolutionary 
changes in his understanding of science, doctrines of philosophy, religious and 
ethical beliefs, and, in fact, all intellectual disciplines. 
Let us consider first the effect on scientific thought. Although scientists 
had more or less recognized that their theories in various branches of science 
were not the final word, in the back of their minds they continued to believe 
that true accounts of the various phenomena of nature were possible and that 
they were working toward these goals. Indeed, in the fields of astronomy and 
mechanics, the eighteenth-century thinkers proclaimed with certainty that 
they had found the true laws of nature. The influence of Newtonian mechanics 
on almost all thought was profound, precisely because the intellectual le.ders 
of the eighteenth century were convinced that the mathematical account of 
nature's behavior was correct. The creation of non-Euclidean geometry 
affected sc;entific thought in two ways. First of all, the major facts of mathe­
matics, i.e., the axioms and theorems about triangles, squares, circles, and other 
common figures are used repeatedly in scientific work and had been for cen­
turies accepted as truths-indeed, as the most accessible truths. Since these 
facts could no longer be regarded as truths, all conclusions of science which 
depended upon strictly mathematical theorems also ceased to be truths. Or, to 
broaden our statement, since scientific structures were and are in large part just 
• However, see Section 24-4. 

CULTURAL IMPLICATIONS OF NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
475 
series of mathematical chains of reasoning, the appearance of non-Euclidean 
geometries raised doubts about the very framework of these structures. 
Secondly, the debacle in mathematics led scientists to question whether 
man could ever hope to find a true scientific theory. The Greek and Newtonian 
views put man in the role of one who merely uncovers the design already in­
corporated in nature. However, scientists have been obliged to recast their 
goals. They now believe that the mathematical laws they seek are merely 
approximate descriptions and, however accurate, no more than man's way of 
understanding and viewing nature. 
Even on the level of engineering a serious question emerged. Since bridges, 
buildings, dams, and other works were based on Euclidean geometry, was there 
not some danger that these structures would collapse' Acrually there is no 
guarantee that they will not. But this thought did not alarm the scientists and 
engineers of the nineteenth century, who, despite the existence of non­
Euclidean geometry, did not believe that the geometry of physical space could 
be other than Euclidean. The other geometries they dismissed as logical 
curiosities. The behavior of these scientists anrl even mathematicians illustrates 
what has been called the law of inertia in the world of ideas. Just as a body 
at rest or in motion exhibits inertia or unwillingness to change its velocity, so 
do human beings ball: at changing their ideas. However, the advent of the 
theory of relativity drove home the point that Euclidean geometry is not 
necessarily the best geometry for applications. Why then do engineers con­
tinue to use Euclidean geometry for ordinary projects? They do so because 
on the basis of experience Euclidean geometry ha$ been known to be reliable. 
This is t!leir only assurance. For engineering involving motion with high 
velocities such as modern accelerators of electrons or neutrons develop, the 
theory of relativity is used. 
In the realm of philosophy, all doctrines built on science were necessarily 
affected. The most majestic development of the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries, Newtonian mechanics, fostered and supported the view rhat the 
world is designed and determined in accordance with mathematical laws. The 
discovery of more laws in fields such as electricity and light during the early 
nineteenth century reinforced the belief in a highly mechanistic and deter­
ministic universe. But once non-Euclidean geometry destroyed the belief in 
mathematical truth and revealed that science offered merely theories about how 
nature might behave, the strongest reason for belief in determinism was shat­
tered. 
Perhaps even more devastating to philosophy was the realization that man 
can no longer be sure of his ability to acquire truths. Through philosophy man 
has sought knowledge of ultimate realities, knowledge which would enable 
him to live wisely, and knowledge which would answer irrepressible questions 
about the meaning and purpose of his existence on this earth. All people, prior 
to non-Euclidean geometry, had shared the fundamental belief that man can 
obtain certainties. The solid basis for this belief had been that man had already 

476 
NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRIES: THEIR SIGNIFICANCE 
obtained some truths-witness, mathematics. No system of thought has ever 
been so widely and completely accepted as Euclidean geometry. To preceding 
generations it was the "rock of ages" in the realm of truth. Tradition buttressed 
self-evidence, and experience bolstered "common sense." Men such as Plato 
and Descartes were convinced that mathematical truths were innate in human 
beings. Kant based his entire philosophy on the existence of mathematical 
truths. But now philosophy is haunted by the specter that the search for truths 
may be a search for phantoms. 
The implication of non-Euclidean geometry, namely, that man may not 
be able to acquire truths, affects all thought. Past ages have sought absolute 
standards in law, ethics, government, economics, and other fields. They be­
lieved that by reasoning one could determine the perfect state, the perfect 
economic system, the ideals of human behavior, and the like. The standards 
sought were not just the most effective ones, but the unique, the correct ones. 
This belief in absolutes was based on the conviction that there were truths in 
the respective spheres. But in depriving mathematics of its claim to truth, the 
non-Euclidean geometries destroyed the shining knight of truth and shattered 
man's hope of ever attaining any truths. When the anchor of truth was lost, 
all bodies of knowledge were cast adrift. Apparently the intellectual process 
does not lead to certainties. In Henri Bergson's words, "One can always reason 
with reason." 
Our own century is the first to feel the impact of non-Euclidean geometry 
because the theory of relativity brought it into prominence. It is very likely 
that the abandonment of absolutes has seeped into the minds of all intellectuals. 
We no longer search for the ideal political system or ideal code of ethics but 
rather for the most workable. It is almost commonplace to hear people say 
that one cannot expect perfection. This attitude contrasts sharply with those 
of the eighteenth century and the Victorian age. 
Perhaps the greatest import of non-Euclidean geometry is the insight it 
offers into the workings of the human mind. No episode of history is more 
instructive. The view that mathematics is a body of truths, which obtained 
prior to non-Euclidean geometry, was accepted at face value by every thinking 
being for 2000 years, in fact, practically throughout the entire existence of 
Western culture. This view, of course, proved to be wrong. We see therefore, 
on the one hand, how powerless the mind is to recognize the assumptions it 
makes. It would be more appropriate to say of man that he is surest of what 
he believes, than to claim that he believes what is sure. Apparently we should 
constantly re-examine our firmest convictions, for these are most likely to be 
suspect. They mark our limitations rather than our positive accomplishments. 
On the other hand, non-Euclidean geometry also shows the heights to which 
the human mind can rise. In pursuing the concept of a new geometry, it defied 
intuition, common sense, experience, and the most firmly entrenched philosoph­
ical doctrines just to see what reasoning would produce. 

EXERCISES 
CULTURAL IMPLICATIONS OF NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 
477 
1. What would you regard as the most serious implication of the creation of non­
Euclidean geometry? 
2. How does the existence of non-Euclidean geometry affect the goals of scientists? 
3. Develop the analogy between different systems of geometry and different bodies 
of law. 
4. Does the existence of non-Euclidean geometry augment the power of science to 
provide rational comprehension of natural phenomena? 
Topics for Further Investigation 
1. The history of attempts to find a simpler parallel postulate. 
2. The work of Girolamo Saccheri. 
3. The life of Carl Friedrich Gauss. 
4. The use of non-Euclidean geometry in the theory of relativity. 
Recommended Reading 
BELL, ERIC T.: Men of Mathematics, Chaps. 14 and 16, Simon and Schuster, Inc., 
New York, 1937. 
BONOLA, ROBERTO: Non-Euclidean Geometry, A Critical and Historical Study of 
Its Development, Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1955. 
CARSLAW, H. S.: Non-Euclidean Plane Geometry and Trigonometry, Chelsea Pub­
lishing Co., New York, 1959. 
DUNNINGTON, G. W.: Carl Friedrich Gauss: Titan of Science, Exposition Press, 
New York, 1955. 
DURELL, CLEMENT V.: Readable Relativity, G. Bell and Sons Ltd., London, 1931. 
FRANK, PHILIPP: Philosophy of Science, Chap. 3, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood 
Cliffs, N.J., 1957. 
GAMOW, GEORGE: One Two Three . . .  Infinity, Chaps. 4 and 5, The New Amer­
ican Library, Mentor Books, New York, 1947. 
KLINE, MORRIS: Mathematics in Western Culture, Chap. 27, Oxford University 
Press, New York, 1953. 
POINCARE, HENRI: Science and Hypothesis, Chaps. 3 to 5, Dover Publications, Inc., 
New York, 1952. 
RUSSELL, BERTRAND: The ABC of ReLativity, Harper and Bros., New York, 1926. 
SoMMERVILLE, D. M. Y.: The Elements of Non-Euclidean Geometry, Dover Publi­
cations, Inc., New York, 1958. 
WOLFE, HAROLD E.: Introduction to Non-Euclidean Geometry, The Dryden Press, 
New York, 1945. 
YOUNG, JACOB W. A.: Monographs on Topics of Modern Mathematics, Chap. 3, 
Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1955. 

ARITHMETICS AND THEIR ALGEBRAS 
21-1 INTRODUCTION 
And wisely tell what hour 0' the day 
The clock doth strike, by Algebra 
SAMUEL BUTLER 
CHAPTER 21 
We have seen that mathematics contains several geometries and that the very 
existence of these geometries has profound implications for the narure of 
mathematics and for the relationship of geometry to our physical world. It is 
therefore only natural to ask whether there are also many algebras, and whether 
the existence of these algebras has comparable implications for mathematics and 
its relation to the physical world. This question is vital not only because algebra 
plays a most important role in physical applications but because, after non­
Euclidean geometry had taught mathematicians that geometry does not offer 
truths, many turned to the ordinary number system and the developments built 
upon it and maintained that this part of mathematics still offered truths. The 
same thought is often expressed today by people who, wishing to give an 
example of an unquestionable truth, quote 2 + 2 = 4. 
Examination of the relationship between our ordinary number system and 
the physical situations to which it is applied will show that it does not offer 
truths. We shall then see that other algebras do exist and are useful, just as 
non-Euclidean geometries are useful. 
21-2 THE APPLICABILITY OF THE REAL NUMBER SYSTEM 
Mathematicians are, of course, free to introduce the symbols I, 2, 3, 4, . . .  , 
where 2 means 1 + I, 3 means 2 + 1, 4 means 3 + 1, and so on. Moreover, as 
we pointed out in Chapter 4, experience suggests that for any three numbers 
a, b, and c, (a + b) + c = a + (b + c), and so this associative property is 
adopted as an axiom. We may now prove readily that 2 + 2 = 4 because, first 
of all, by the very meaning of 2, we have 
2 + 2 = 2 + (1 + 1). 
478 

THE APPLICABILITY OF THE REAL NUMBER SYSTEM 
479 
From the associative axiom it follows that 
2 + (I + 1) = (2 + 1) + 1 .  
According to the definition of 3, 
(2 + 1) + 
3 + 1, 
and, according to the definition of 4, 
3 + 1 = 4. 
And now, by applying the axiom that things equal to the same thing are equal 
to one another, we can assert that 2 + 2 = 4. 
Thus by a purely logical process which employs definitions and axioms 
we have proved that 2 + 2 = 4. But the question we seek to answer is not 
whether the mathematician can set up definitions and axioms and deduce 
conclusions. We grant that arithmetic is a valid deductive system. We wish 
to know whether this system necessarily expresses truths about the physical 
world. 
A possible denial might be entered at once on the ground that the only 
justification for the associative axiom was limited experience with simple 
numbers, whereas the axiom asserts something about all whole numbers. There 
is force to this argument because a generalization on the basis of limited 
experience may be erroneous. However. there are many thinkers who would 
assert that whether or not the associative axiom was suggested by experience, it 
is clearly a truth. Of course, the burden of proof then rests on those who 
proclaim truths. We shall not insist on this point, since there are weaker links 
between arithmetic and the physical world. 
If a farmer has two herds consisting of 10 and 25 heads of cows, respec­
tively, he knows by adding 10 and 25 that the total number of cows is 35. 
That is, he need not count the cows. Suppose, however, he brings the two 
herds of cows to market where they are selling for $ 100 apiece. Will a herd 
of 10 cows which might bring in $1000 and a herd of 25 cows which might 
bring in S2500 together bring in $3500? Every businessman knows that when 
supply exceeds demand, the price may drop, and hence J5 cows may bring in 
only $3000. In some idealized world the value of the cows may continue to 
be $3500, bur in actual situations this need not be true. 
Let us consider next whether some of the slightly deeper results of arith­
metic apply to the physical world. Certainly the statement that 2 · !  = 1 is 
arithmetically correct. Bur do two half-sheets. of paper make one whole sheet 
and do two half-shoes make one whole shoe? Clearly two physical halves 
never make one whole unless they can be joined in such a way that the halves 
merge into one whole. Two half-dollars, in general, equal one whole dollar in 
purchasing power, bur in areas where silver is preferred to bills two half-dollars 

480 
ARITHMETICS AND THEIR ALGEBRAS 
are worth more. To know whether the arithmetic is applicable, we must ex­
amine the physical situation. 
Let us consider the addition of velocities. If a river flows at the rate of 3 
miles per hour and a man capable of rowing at 5 miles per hour in still water 
rows downstream, his velocity relative to some fixed point in the river is the 
sum of 3 and 5, that is, 8 miles per hour. But if Mr. A walks along a road at 
the rate of 3 miles per hour and Mr. B walks along at the rate of 5 miles per 
hour, then B's velocity relative to some fixed point is not 8 miles per hour. Of 
course not, we would say. But why do we add the 3 and 5 in one case and not 
in the other? It is the physical situation which tells us when to add and when 
not to do so. 
In all of the above examples we must examine the particular physical 
situation to determine whether the mathematical result fits. But if we must 
resort t9 experience to decide when the results of our arithmetic apply, then 
it is not the truth of arithmetic on which we rely. 
Let us test further the applicability of arithmetic. Suppose that we 
measure two boards and find them to be 3 and 4 feet long, respectively. If we 
place these boards end to end, will the result be 7 board feet? Probably not. 
All measurement is approximate, and our statement that the individual hoards 
are 3 and 4 feet long merely means that we are unable to detect any difference 
between the actual lengths of the boards and the 3- and 4-foot marks on our 
measuring device. But the first may be 3.01 feet, and the second 4.01 feet. 
Together they are then 7.02 feet, and we may be able to detect a difference of 
0.02 feet. One may object here and say that the trouble is due to the limitations 
of our senses. This is indeed true; however, can we continue to claim that 
3 + 4 = 7 applies to the physical world, insofar at least as situations involving 
measurement are concerned? 
We learn in chemistry that when one mixes hydrogen and oxygen, he 
obtains water. More precisely, if one takes 2 volumes, say 2 cubic centimeters, 
of hydrogen and I volume of oxygen, he obtains 2 volumes of water vapor. 
Likewise I volume of nitrogen and 3 volumes of hydrogen yield 2 volumes of 
ammonia. We happen to know the physical explanation of these surprising 
arithmetic relationships. By Avogadro's hypothesis, equal volumes of any gas, 
under the same conditions of temperature and pressure, contain the same 
number of particles. If, then, a given volume of oxygen contains 10 molecules, 
the same volume of hydrogen will also contain 10 molecules. Then there are 
20 molecules in 2 volumes of hydrogen. Now it happens that the molecules of 
oxygen and hydrogen are diatomic; that is, each contains two atoms. Each of 
these 20 diatomic hydrogen molecules combines with one atom of oxygen to 
form 20 molecules of water or 2 volumes of water.- The chemistry is interest-
• This phenomenon is clearly explained in Francis T. Bonner and Melba Phillips: 
Principles of Physical Science, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Inc., 1957, p. 149. 

BASEBALL ARITHMETIC 
481 
ing, but the main point we wish to make is that ordinary arithmetic fails to 
describe correctly the result of combining gases by volume. 
Suppose, next, that one raindrop is added to another raindrop. Do we 
now have two raindrops? If one cloud is joined to another cloud do we now 
have two clouds? One may protest that in these examples the merged objects 
have lost their identity, and that the addition process of arithmetic does not 
contemplate such loss. And precisely for this reason, arithmetic in the normal 
sense no longer applies. 
All of the above examples lead to two general conclusions. One is that 
there are many physical situations where ordinary arithmetic does not apply; 
that is, ordinary arithmetic is unable to express proper quantitative truths about 
these situations. The second conclusion is tؒat even though there are a few 
situations to which ordinary arithmetic does apply, such as, for example, 
adding herds of cattle, we must depend upon experience with those very 
situations to know this fact. If herds of cattle behaved like volumes of gases 
or like raindrops, then the arithmetic would not apply, and it is only through 
experience that we learn how they do behave. Hence we have no guarantee 
that arithmetic per se represents truths about the physical world. 
EXERCISES 
I. If we place the length of one IO-ft ladder on top of the length of another, do we 
obtain a 20-ft ladder? What is the point of the question? 
2. Since measurement is approximate, can we say that pouring twO lO-lb packages 
of flour into one bag will produce one 20-lb package of flour? 
3. If we balance two objects in the pans of a scale and then add 5 lb to each pan, 
wiIl the scale still balance? What axiom of arithmetic is applicable 1:0 this situa­
tion? 
4. If an object is thrown downward with a velocity of 100 ft/sec and acquires a 
velocity due to gravity of Ht ft/sec. is its total downward velocity (100 + 32t) 
ft/sec? Justify your answer. 
5. If we superimpose a sinusoidal sound wave of frequency 100 cycles per second 
on one which has a frequency of 50 cycles per second, do we obtain a sound 
wave of frequency 150 cycles per second? 
6. If one mixes two equal volumes of water, one having a temperature of 40°F and 
the other of 50°F, what is the temperature of the mixture? 
21-3 BASEBALL ARITHMETIC 
Mathematics does not have at its disposal special arithmetics to treat all of the 
situations in which ordinary arithmetic fails. For example, there is no arithmetic 
which tells us how volumes of gases combine. Each distinct combination must 
be analyzed on the basis of physical knowledge about the molecules involved. 
But there are situations which warrant the introduction of special arithmetical 

482 
ARITHMETICS AND THEIR ALGEBRAS 
concepts and operations. If an arithmetic, that is, the concepts and operations, 
accurarely describes physical events and permits prediction of furure behavior, 
just as ordinary addition predicts the result of combining two herds of cattle, 
then it is worth creating. 
Our first example of an arithmetic different from the ordinary arithmetic 
does not serve any deep scientific purposes, but it does fill a need which many 
millions of Americans experience. These people seem to be very much excited 
by the batting averages of baseball players. Let us look into this matter. Sup­
pose a player goes to bat 3 times in one game and 4 times in another. How 
many times in all did he go to bat' There is no difficulty here. He went to 
bat a total of 7 times. Suppose he hit the ball successfully, that is, got to first 
base or farther, 2 times in the first game and 3 times in the second. How many 
hits did he achieve in both games. Again there is no difficulty. The total 
number of hits is 2 + 3 or 5. 
What the audience and the player himself are usually most interested in 
is the batting average, that is, the ratio of the number of hits to the number 
of times at bat. In the first game this ratio was 2/3; in the second game the 
ratio was 3/4. And now suppose the player or a baseball fan wishes to use 
these two ratios to compure the batting average for both games. One would 
think that all one had to do would be to add the two fractions. That is, 
" + " _ l l 
3 
4 - 12"' 
Of course this result is absurd. The player could not get 17 hits in 12 times 
at bat. Evidently the ordinary method of adding fractions does not give the 
batting average for both games by adding the batting averages for the separate 
games. 
How can we obtain the correct batting average for the two games from 
those of the separate games? The answer is to use a new method of adding 
fractions. \Ve know that the average for both games is 5/7 and the separate 
batting averages are 2/3 and 3/4. We see that if we add the numerators and 
add the denominators of the separate fractions and then form the new fraction, 
we get the correct answer. That is, 
} + ! = t, 
provided this plus sign means adding the numerators and adding the denomina­
tors. 
We now have the makings of a new arithmetic. The addition of integers 
will be the usual one. However, the addition of fractions is to obey the 
definition 
3 
C 
a + C 
- + - = -_ . 
b 
d 
b + d 

BASEBALL ARITHMETIC 
483 
We can introduce subtraction of one integer from another and subtraction of 
one fraction from another. In the latter case, the definition is 
a 
b 
c 
d 
a - c 
b - d 
Though we have no significant physical interpretation for negative integers 
and negative fractions, at leost in terms of the baseball situation, there would 
be no objection mathematically to introducing them. Likewise, though the 
physically significant fractions so far as baseball is concerned would be less 
than 1 or I, we could introduce any quotient alb even when a is greater than b. 
One could even introduce the usual multiplication of fractions and all of the 
ideas associated with this operation. 
The laws of this new arithmetic would, in many instances, be the familiar 
ones. As to the basic operation of addition, whether of integers or fractions, let 
us note that the commutative law (see Section 4-5) holds, that is, 
a
c
e
 a 
- + - = -
+
- ; 
b 
d 
d 
b 
the associative law holds, that is 
5 + G + J) = G + 6) + J; 
and, if we were to introduce the usual multiplication of fractions, then the 
distrib:ltive law holds, that is 
Nevertheless, the arithmetic will have some peculiarities. Let us note a 
few of these. Ordinarily t = l However in adding two fractions, say, 
it would not do to replace ç by t, for the answer in one case is i and in the 
other -fIr, and these two answers are not equal. Further, in the normal arith­
metic, fractions such as f and t behave exactly as do the integers 5 and 7. How­
ever, if we add f and t as fractions in the new arithmetic, we do not obtain 
¥ but ¥. 
We shall not pursue further this arithmetic of baseball because it does not 
have any broad mathematical significance. What we should learn from it is 
that given a physical situation we can invent an arithmetic to fit it. The 
arithmetic is man-made. Moreover, when we apply this arithmetic to any 

484 
ARITHMETlCS AND THEIR ALGEBRAS 
physical situation we have no guarantee in advance, any more than we do in 
the case of ordinary arithmetic, that the arithmetic will work, that is, will 
predict what happens. Insofar as the arithmetic has been designed to fit a 
particular situation, the computation of batting averages, it will work, but 
this is not surprising or due to any inherent truth in arithmetic. 
EXERCISES 
1. ]s a batting average of i the same as t or -h for the purpose of computing the 
batting average for several games? 
2. Show that under the definition of addition of fractions discussed in the text and 
the usual product definition, the distributive law holds. 
3. What fraction added to 1 gives 0 in this baseball arithmetic? 
4. Suppose a salesman selling vacuum cleaners on a house-to-house basis makes 3 
sales in 10 calls on one day. 4 sales in 11 calls the next day, and so on. Could he 
compute his "batting average" by adding fractions in the manner described in 
the above text? 
21-4 
MODULAR ARITHMETICS AND THEIR ALGEBRAS 
An entirely different arithmetic from the normal one or the arithmetic of 
baseball is suggested by our system of recording the time of the day. Six hours 
after 10 o'clock is not 16 o'clock but 4 o'clock; that is, in this system, 
10 + 6 = 4. 
Similarly, 6 hours before 3 o'clock is 9 o'clock; that is, 
3 - 6 = 9. 
The idea which this system of telling time suggests is that if two numbers 
differ by 12 or a multiple of 12, then they are equal. Thus 26 = 2 because 
26- 2=2·12, and 9=-3 because 9 - (-3) = 12. Clearly the equality 
sign here does not mean the same as in ordinary arithmetic; hence we use the 
symbol == and write our new equations, which are now called cong;ruences, as 
follows: 
26 == 2, modulo 12; 
9 == -3, modulo 12. 
The phrase "modulo 12" after each equation repeats, in shorthand form, the 
condition stated above, namely, that the equation holds if and only if we neglect 
multiples of 12. 
In this arithmetic, which is usually limited to whole numbers, any number 
larger than 12 is congruent to some number less than 12 because we can always 
subtract from the larger number some multiple of 12 to obtain a number less 

MODULAR ARITHMETICS AND THEIR ALGF.8RAS 
485 
than 12. Thus, if we start with 35, we can subtract 2 . 12 and obtain 1 1. Then 
35 == 1 1, modulo 12. 
The number 12 itself is congruent to 0 because 12 - 0= 1 · 12. Hence 
12 == 0, modulo 1 2. 
Similarly, any negative number is congruent to some positive number less than 
12. For example, -25=1 1 because 11 - (-25)=3 ·12, or if one prefers, 
-25 - 1 1  = -3·12. Thus in the arithmetic modulo 12 we need deal only 
with positive integers from 0 to 1 1 .  We also regard any positive integer less 
than 12 to be congruent to itself because the difference of the two integers is 
zero times 12. Thus 
7 == 7, modulo 12. 
Let us see what the results of simple addition and multiplication are in this 
modular arithmetic. For example. 
9 + 6 == 3, modulo 1 2. 
Also 
9 + 3 
S 0, modulo 1 2, 
and 
9 X 4 == 0, modulo 12. 
Here, then. is an arithmetic in which the sum and the product of two positive 
numbers can be zero, although the summands and the factors are not zero. 
We see that addition and multiplication are possible in this arithmetic 
modulo 12. It is mathematically significant to ask, Do the inverse operations 
exist? That is, can one subtract any number from another or divide one number 
by another in this arithmetic? In discussing the answers to these questions let 
us keep in mind that the only numbers we need to consider are from 0 to 11. 
Let us consider subtraction. We should like to know, given a and b, 
whether there is some quantity x such that 
a - b == x, modulo 12 
or, by the meaning of subtraction as the inverse of addition, 
a == b + x, modulo 1 2. 
If we take x to be 12 - b + a, then we shall have 
a == b + 1 2  - b + a 
or 
a == 1 2  + a 
or 
a-a. 

486 
ARITHMETICS AND THEIR ALGEBRAS 
Just to see what this means, suppose aπ 3 and b R 7. Then x= 12 - 7 + 3 or 
8. Hence 
3 
- 7 == 8, modulo 1 2  
which is certainly correct because -4 = 8 modulo 12. Thus we can subtract 
any number from any other in the system of numbers 0 to II, modulo 12. 
And now let us consider division. Here we ask, given a and b with b not 
zero, is there a number in our collection such that 
a 
b == x, modulo 12 
or, by the meaning of division as the inverse of multiplication, 
a == bx, modulo 12? 
If we were to try to prove that there always is such an x ,  we would not 
succeed. Indeed we can show by an example, that such an x does not always 
exist. Consider 
I == 3x, modulo 12. 
The possible values of x are 0 to II, and trial of all these values shows that not 
one will satisfy the equation. Thus we cannot divide I by 3. 
This example does not prove that division is never possible. For example, 
it is possible to divide 3 by 9 because 
3 == 9' 3, modulo 12, 
so that 3 divided by 9 is 3, modulo 12. Let us also note that 
3 == 9' 7, modulo 12, 
so that in this case of 3 divided by 9 there ate at least two answets: 7 and 3. 
Modular arithmetics are numerous. Another one is suggested by the fact 
that there are 7 days in the week. If one wanted to know what the day of the 
week will be 26 days from a Wednesday, say, he could of course determine it 
by pursuing the sequence, Thursday, Friday, etc., until he had counted 26 days. 
However, he could recognize that every 7 days brings him back to Wednesday 
and that all he need to do is count 5 days from Wednesday. In other words, 
so far as days of the week are concerned, any multiple of 7 can be neglected. 
This fact suggests an arithmetic modulo 7. 
Thus we have 
5 + 4 - 2, modulo 7 
and 
5 . 4 == 6, modulo 7. 

MODULAR ARITHMETICS AND THEIR ALGEBRAS 
487 
In the system of arithmetic modulo 12, it was necessary to consider only the 
numbers from 0 to 11. Analogously, in the system modulo 7 it is necessary to 
consider only the numbers from 0 to 6. The properties of this latter system 
are very similar to those of the former but they differ in one essential respect. 
It was not possible to divide any specific number by any other given number 
in the modulo 12 system and where division was possible the answer was in 
some cases not unique. It is possible to divide any number from 0 to 6 by any 
other from 1 to 6 (division by 0 is excluded) in the modulo 7 system and the 
answer IS umque. Thus 2 divided by 5 is 6 because 
2 == 5' 6, modulo 7. 
The fact that division is always possible is easy enough to check by actual 
trial and so we shall not prove the general fact. We note that the operation of 
division behaves more normally in the modulo 7 system than in the modulo 12 
system. The difference is due to the fact that 7 is a prime number, whereas 
12 is not. 
When a mathematician investigates an arithmetic and its algebra he attempts 
to ascertain what basic properties the members of the system obey. We have 
already done some of this. For example, we have investigated subtraction and 
division for the modular systems. The mathematician would also investigate 
whether the basic operations of addition and multiplication are commutative 
and associative and whether multiplication is distributive with respect to addi­
tion. We shall leave some of these matters to the exercises and consider others. 
We know that in ordinary arithmetic we can add one equality to another 
and the sums are equal. Is this true for congruences? Thus if 
a == b, modulo m 
(1 ) 
and 
c == d, modulo m, 
(2) 
is it true that 
a + c == b + d, modulo m? 
Let us see if we can prove this. 
The statement that a ο b, modulo m means that 
a - b = pm, 
where p is some whole number. Likewise the statement that c = d, modulo m 
means that 
c-d=qm, 
where q is some whole number. If we add these two ordinary equations we 

488 
ARITHMETlCS AND THEIR ALGEBRAS 
find that 
a-b+c-d=pm+qm 
or 
a + c - (b + d) = (p + q)m. 
This last statement says that the difference between a + c and b + d IS a 
multiple of m. But this can be written as 
a + c == b + d, modulo m. 
(3) 
Thus we can add congruences with respect to the same modulus. 
It is likewise possible to prove that if 
a= b, modulo m 
and 
c = d, modulo m, 
then 
ac == bd, modulo m. 
(4) 
We shall leave this proof to an exercise. 
We can use these two simple theorems on addition and multiplication of 
congruences to make an application to ordinary arithmetic. We know that 
lO == I, modulo 9. 
(5) 
Multiplying this congruence by itself, we obtain 
1 00 == I, modulo 9. 
(6) 
Multiplication of the two above congruences yields 
lOOO == I, modulo 9. 
(7) 
Obviously we could continue to higher and higher powers of ten. 
Now let us consider any number, say 457. This number actually IS 
4· 100 + 5· 10 + 7. We may certainly state that 
Since 
7 == 7, modulo 9. 
(8) 
5 == 5, modulo 9, 
(9) 
we can multiply equations (9) and (5) and obtain 
5 . lO == 5, modulo 9. 
(10) 

j\:IODULAR ARTTHi\tETICS AND THEIR ALGEBRAS 
489 
Similarly, from 4 = 4, modulo 9, and from (6), we obtain by multiplication 
of congruences: 
4· 100 == 4, modulo 9. 
(II) 
Statement (J) says that we can add congruences, modulo the same number; 
hence, let us add the congruences (8), ( 10), and (II). The result is 
4 ' 100 + 5 ' 10 + 7 == 4 + 5 + 7, modul09, 
or 
457 == 4 + 5 + 7, modulo 9. 
What this result says is that a number and the sum of its digits are congruent. 
Hence a lIumber minus the sum of its digits must be a multiple of 9. To test 
this statement for the number 457 itself, we note that 457 - (4 + 5 + 7), or 441, 
is 49 times 9. 
This result is, of course, of interest to those who like to play with numbers, 
but it also provides a useful method of checking the ordinary arithmetic 
operations of addition, subtraction, and multiplication. For example, let us 
consider the product of 457 and 892. We know that 
457 == 4 + 5 + 7, modulo 9, 
and 
892 == 8 + 9 + 2, modulo 9. 
Moreover, 4 + 5 + 7, or 16, is congruent to 7, modulo 9, and 8 + 9 + 2, or 19, 
is congruent to 1, modulo 9. Hence 
457 == 7, modulo 9, 
and 
892 == 1, modulo 9. 
In view of (4), we may multiply these congruences and state that 
457' 892 == 7' 1, modulo 9. 
Then the product of 457 and 892 is congruent to 7, modulo 9. That is, the 
actual product and the product of the sums of the digits in the two factors are 
congruent. But the actual product is also congruent to the sum of its digits. 
Hence the sum of the digits in the product is congruent to the product of the 
sums of the digits in the factors. We have therefore a check on the correctness 
of the multiplication, which is known as the rule for casting out nines.- But 
• If two numbers are congruent modulo 9, then they must have the same remainders 
upon division by 9, for the difference must be an exact multiple of 9. Hence the rule 
for casting out nines is sometimes stated as follows: the product of two numbers and 
the product of the sums of the digits must have the same remainder upon division 
by 9. 

490 
ARITHMETICS AND THEIR ALGEBRAS 
we did not prove and so cannot conclude that if the congruence does hold, then 
the multiplication is correct. 
We shall not pursue further the subject of modular arithmetics. These are 
studied extensively in the branch of mathematics known as the theory of 
?lumbers, wherein they are often classified under congruences. Our objective 
in studying them is primarily to see that there are alternative arithmetics and 
their algebras. We have also been concerned to see that there is no one 
necessary arithmetic whose applicability to the physical world is guaranteed. 
Let us note that in arithmetic modulo 4, 2 + 2 = O. Hence 2 + 2 does not 
always make 4. 
EXERCISES 
1. Make up the addition table for the arithmetic, modulo 7. 
2. Make up the multiplication table for the arithmetic, modulo 7. 
3. By trials with actual numbers decide whether it is possible to subtract any 
whole number from another and obtain an answer in the arithmetic, modulo 7. 
4. Are there any answers to the problem of dividing 4 by 2 in the arithmetic, 
modulo 6? of dividing 3 by 2? 
5. Answer the same questions as in Exercise 4, but applied to the arithmetic, modulo 
7. Does any significant conclusion suggest itself. from a comparison of the 
answers in this exercise with those of Exercise 4? 
6. Solve the equation x + 5 == 2 in the arithmetic, modulo 12. 
7. Prove that if a == b, modulo m, and c == d, modulo m, then 0 - c == h - d, 
modulo m. 
8. Prove that if 0 == h, modulo m, and c == d, modulo m, then oc == hd, modulo m. 
[Suggestion: Since 0 == h, modulo m, 0 = h + pm.] 
9. We know that 16 == 4, modulo 6, and 4 == 4, modulo 6. By dividing the first 
congruence by the second one, we obtain 4 == 1, modulo 6. What conclusion do 
you draw? 
10. What is the analogue for congruences of the usual axiom that things equal to 
the same thing are equal to each other? 
11. Check the addition of 578 and 642 by the rule of casting out nines. 
12. Check the multiplication of 578 and 642 by the rule of casting OUt nines. 
13. a) Does the commutative law of addition hold for congruences modulo m, 
that is, is 0 + h == h + 0, modulo m? 
b) Does the associative law of addition hold for congruences modulo m? 
c) Does the distributive law of multiplication with respect to addition hold for 
congruences modulo m? 
14. What is the answer to each of the following division problems in the arithmetic 
modulo 7? 
a) ! 
b) ! 
c) i 
e) ! 

THE ALGEBRA OF SETS 
491 
15. Obtain all possible solutions of the following equations in the arithmetic system 
modulo 6. 
a) 2x == 2 
b) lx == 0 
c) lx == J 
21-5 
THE ALGEBRA OF SETS 
We shall now examine still another algebra. Suppose that a man has inherited 
two different libraries of books. It would be very natural for him to merge 
them into one library in which, contrary to the case of inheriting dollar bills, 
he would not want any duplicates. He is, then, combining the two libraries and 
hence, mathematically speaking, he is adding one to the other. However, since 
he will reject any duplicates, he will not add in the usual arithmetic sense. For 
example, if there are 100 books in one library and 200 in the other, the com­
bined library may contain fewer than 300 books. Indeed, if there are 50 titles 
in one of the collections that duplicate titles in the other, the unified library 
will contain only 250 books. Thus, to represent the operation of combining 
two libraries, we need an addition which permits 100 + 200 to equal 250. 
Mathematicians have devised an arithmetic and algebra whose addition 
processes represent precisely what happens in the combining of the two 
libraries. The system is called the algebra of sets. The arithmetic and algebra 
are both so simple that we may as well discuss the algebra at once. 
Let A and B be any two sets of objects. Thus A and B might be the two 
libraries discussed above. To indicate the addition of B to A in the sense in 
which the libraries were to be joined, that is, an object common to A and B 
is to be taken only once, we write A U B and this combination of A and B is 
called the union of A and B. The operation we have just introduced implies: 
a book is in A U B if it is in A, or in B, or in both, but if it is in both, it is 
counted only once. 
/' 
"-
'" 
I 
\ 
A 
B 
\ 
/ 
"-
/'''-
/' 
Fig. 21-1. 
The union of two sets. 
Before proceeding, let us illustrate what the new operation of addition 
amounts to. Let us suppose that the books in library A are represented as 
points, and that the entire library consists of all points inside some curve. The 
set of books in library B can also be represented as the set of points inside some 
other curve (Fig. 21-1). Since the two libraries contain duplicate titles, these 
two regions will overlap. The union A U B in the sense defined above will then 

492 
ARITHMETICS AND THEIR ALGEBRAS 
be represented by the collection of points inside both curves, i.e., by the entire 
shaded area in Fig. 2 1-1. Of course, the points common to the two regions, the 
crosshatched area in Fig. 2 1-1, count only once in the union, but this just means 
that the union is represented by the points in the entire shaded area. 
We thus have a new concept, the union of sets. Just as' in the case of 
ordinary addition, for any A and B, 
AUB=BuA 
because the same collection is formed whether we add collection B to col­
lection A or A to B, that is, the commutative property (Chapter 4) holds for 
this new operation of union. 
Further, the associative property holds for the union of sets. Thus if we 
have three collections, A, B, and C, we may form A U B and then add C to 
A U B to obtain (A U B) U C, or we may begin with B U C and add this 
sum to A to obtain A U (B U C). Both procedures yield the same total col­
lection. In other words, for this new concept of addition, we have 
(A U B) U C = A U (B U C), 
whether or not the sets overlap (Fig. 2 1-2). 
It is because these familiar properties of commutativity and associativIty 
hold for the new concept of union that some people use the term addition and 
the usual plus sign, although the operation of combining the two libraries while 
rejecting duplicate titles is not the same as the usual combination of collections 
of cows or dollars. Wo should, however, note that there are essential differences 
between the new concept of union and the usual addition. Suppose, for exam­
ple, that ali titles in library B are also in A. Then our new concept of union 
requires that (Fig. 2 1-3) 
Au B = A. 
Moreover, if we add collection A to itself, we obtain A. That is 
A uA = A. 
The algebra of sets also has a concept somewhat analogous to multiplication. 
Suppose that the man combining the two libraries were interested in deter­
mining how many titles were common to the two libraries. For example, he 
might wish to know how many books can be sold. The set of titles common 
to the two libraries A and B is called the intersection of A and B and is denoted 
by A n B or simply, as in ordinary algebra, by AB. If the books in the sets A 
and B are again pictured as the points inside two curves (Fig. 21-4), then the 
intersection is represented by the area common to the sets of points A and B, 
the sbaded area in the figure. 

/' 
/ 
/' 
"-
/ 
'\ 
A \/' 
A 
\ 
/ 
"-
./ 
"-
Fig. 21-2 
A 
Fig. 21-4. An B. 
" 
"-
B 
" / 
X 
C 
/ 
./ 
B 
THE ALGEBRA OF SETS 
493 
Fig. 21-3. A U B Q A. 
Fig. 21-5 
This concept of intersection differs from the ordinary concept of multi­
plication in that intersection in set algebra usually produces a much smaller 
set than is contained in either of the factors A or B. 
Yet the fundamental 
properties of the intersection of sets are the same as for ordinary multiplication. 
For example. it is certainly tfue for the intersection of sets that 
A n B= Bn A  
because the same final set, for example, the books common to both libraries, is 
obtained whether we consider the objects common to A and B or to Band A. 
Similarly, it is tfue that 
(A n B) n C = A n (B n C) 
for, if we select the objects common to A and B (Fig. 2 1-5) and then those 
common to A n Band C, we surely obtain the same set as if we selected the 
objects common to Band C and then the titles common to A and B n C. In 
either case, we obtain the set of objects in all three sets, A, B, and C. Thus the 
commutative and associative properties hold for this new concept of intersection. 

494 
ARITHMETICS AND THEIR ALGEBRAS 
There are, however, essential conceptual differences between the inter­
section of sets of objects and the product for ordinary numbers. If in our 
library example the set B consists of titles which are all in A, then (Fig. 21-3) 
An B = B, 
because the books common to A and B are those in B. Also, the intersection of 
A and A is A; that is, 
A n A = A. 
Finally, suppose that A and B have no objects in common. What is the set 
of objects common to A and B? Physically, there is none. Mathematically we 
introduce the symbol 0 to represent an empty set of objects' and write 
An B = o. 
The symbol 0 possesses many of the usual properties of the number zero. 
Thus, by the above definitions of union and intersection for sets, it is true that 
A uo = A 
and 
A n  0 = o. 
There are other interesting concepts and operations in the algebra of 
sets. For example, one may be concerned with all books that exist in the world. 
Then this entire collection of books is called the universe of discourse, and the 
entire collection is denoted by I. It follows, unlike ordinary algebra, that 
AUI = 1. 
On the other hand, as in ordinary algebra, we have 
Ani = A. 
We need not explore the entire theory of the algebra of sets to appreciate 
that this algebra is quite distinct from the algebra of ordinary numbers. How­
ever, we shall note that while there is a concept of subtraction, it is not the 
inverse of addition. Normally 7 - 4 is a number which when added to Ŏ gives 
7, and we say that subtraction is the inverse of addition because the result of 
the subtraction when added to the subtrahend or the quantity subtracted gives 
the original quantity. Given any fWO sets A and B, the difference A - B is, by 
definition, the set of objects in A which are not in B. Thus if A and B are the 
• Some books use the symbol ¢J. 

THE ALGEBRA OF SETS 
495 
twO sets of points enclosed by the respective circles in Fig. 21-6, A - B con­
sists of the shaded portion of A. If we join B to A - B, the union is not A bur 
A u B. Thus the concept of subtraction is not the usual one. As for division 
of one set by another it is not possible to make a definition which will yield a 
quotient for any twO sets A and B. 
/' 
" 
-
/ 
V 
A--j 
B 
"-
/ 
"-
/' 
-
Fig. 21-6 
Historically, one of the motivations for the study of the algebra of sets was 
provided by the study of logic. Mathematicians, notably Descartes and Leibniz, 
were so much impressed by the usefulness of ordinary algebra that they con­
ceived the idea of inventing an algebra for reasoning in all fields of thought. 
The concepts of ethics, politics, economics, and philosophy would be the ana­
logues of numbers, and the relationships among these concepts would be the 
analogues of the operations of arithmetic. They referred to this plan as a uni­
versal algebra. The work of Descartes and Leibniz was not successful because 
they undertook too much. (One can hardly imagine learned Republican and 
Democratic algebraists sitting down to calculate the solution of a vexing politi­
cal problem by means of some system of algebra. ) It is not likely that the ideas 
of disciplines such as philosophy and economics can be compactly represented 
by symbols and the reasoning performed by suitable algebraic operations. How­
ever, about 1850, George Boole, one of the founders of mathematical logic, 
showed that the reasoning processes themselves, which are studied in logic, can 
be formalized and carried out by an algebra of logic which is identical with the 
algebra of sets. 
Boole's first idea was that in ordinary reasoning we deal with classes or sets 
of objects. The Statement that all students are wise deals with the class of 
students and the class of wise people. Moreover, the statement itself says that 
the class of students is included in the class of wise people. If we let A be the 
class of all students and B the class of all wise people, then the statement that A 
is included in B can be expressed by the fact that the intersection of A and B is 
A. Thus the symbolic equivalent is 
An B = A. 
(12) 
The statement that no wise people ignore mathematics can also be expressed 
symbolically. We let C denote the class of people who ignore mathematics. 
Since the statement says that there is no person common to the class B of wise 

496 
ARITHMETICS AND THEIR ALGEBRAS 
people and the class C of those who ignore mathematics, then, in symbols, the 
statement says 
B n C = o. 
(13) 
These two premises should lead to a conclusion about students and people who 
ignore mathematics. Hence let us derive an equation involving A and C. Since 
the left and right sides of ( 12) and ( 1 3 )  are identical sets, we have 
(A n B) n (B n C) = A n O. 
(14) 
The associative property of intersection tells us that we may arbitrarily group 
any two factors, just as in the product ( 3  . 4) (5· 6) we may group the 4 and 5 
and write 3 ( 4 . 5 )  6. Then 
(A n B) n (B n C) 
A n (B n B) n C. 
However, B n B = B. Hence 
(A n B) n (B n C) 
AnBnC. 
Bur by (12) An B=A. Therefore 
(A n B) n (B n C) 
AnC. 
(15) 
From (14) and (15) it now follows that 
An C = o. 
(16) 
Translated into words, this conclusion states that the class of students and the 
class of people who ignore mathematics have no members in common, or no 
student ignores mathematics. We have thus arrived at a conclusion by purely 
algebraic means. 
This example illustrates how Boole used the symbols and algebraic opera­
tions of the algebra of sets to perform ordinary reasoning. With his algebra of 
logic Boole hoped not only to facilitate reasoning but to impart precision to the 
logical methods of reasoning. His ideas were taken up by others and became 
the basis of the subject now known as symbolic logic. 
The algebra of sets and symbolic logic will not be pursued further. 
Neither is central in mathematics. The algebra of sets is used in a few advanced 
branches of mathematics, although even there it is a subsidiary notion. Symbolic 
logic is another very specialized field, somewhat apart from the main body of 
mathematics. It is used mainly by logicians who are seeking to clarify problems 
of logic and the relationship of mathematics to logic. The algebra of sets has 
been presented here only to help illustrate the variety of algebras in mathematics. 

EXERCISES 
MATHEMATICS AND MODELS 
497 
1. If A and B are sets and A U B = B, what may you infer about the objects in A 
and B? 
2. If A and B are sets and A n B = A, what may you infer about the objects in A 
and B? 
3. The operation of union of sets has a different meaning from the addition of 
ordinary numbers. Why might one use the word addition and the symbol "+" 
for sets? 
4. Evaluate in the algebra of sets: A U (A n A). 
5. Suppose A and B contain no objects in common. Evaluate: A n (B U A). 
6 .  Given the premises that all professors are intelligent and that no students are 
intelligent, translate these premises into the algebra of sets and deduce a con­
clusion about the relationship of srudents to professors. 
7. Show that the distributive law A n (B U C) = A n B U A n C applies to set 
multiplication and addition. 
8. Show that for any two sets A and B, 
a) A U (A n B) = A, 
b) A n (A U B) = A, 
c) (A -B) U B = A U B. 
9. Show that if A and B are any two sets, it is impossible to find a set X such that 
A/B=X orA=B n X. 
21-6 
MATHEMATICS AND MDDELS 
Our study of non-Euclidean geometries and of exotic algebras may have pre­
pared us to see that mathematics is a somewhat different activity from what 
man had presumed on the basis of the study of ordinary arithmetic and Eucli­
dean geometry alone. The development of the latter two subjects had given 
rise to the belief that mathematics takes over certain truths about the physical 
world, adopts these as axioms, and then proceeds to study the physical world 
by deducing the implications of the axioms. Men did not question that 
the axioms were truths about the world but tried instead to account for their 
possession of truths by theories of knowledge or by crediting God with im­
planting these truths in human minds. However, as mathematicians undertook 
to study and encompass new classes of physical phenomena or to represent 
more accurately a previously studied phenomenon such as physical space, they 
were forced to recognize the need for new concepts and new sets of axioms. 
The mathematician really creates models of reality. The concepts, axioms, 
and theorems of an algebra or a geometry are a model with which to think 
about some aspect of the physical world. Each model has a limited applicability. 
Moreover, one must distinguish between the mathematical model and the physi­
cal world or between mathematical theories and physical reality. 

498 
ARITHMETICS AND THEIR ALGEBRAS 
Topics for Further Investigation 
1. Modular arithmetics. 
2. The properties of the algebra of sets. 
3. The algebra of logic. 
4. The nature of symbolic logic. 
Recommended Reading 
BELL, ERIC T.: Men of Mathematics, Chap. 23, Simon and Schuster, Inc., New York, 
1937. 
BOOLE, GEORGE: An Investigation of the Laws of Thought, Chaps. 1 to 7, Dover 
Publications, Inc., New York, 1951. 
CoURANT, R. and H. ROBBINS: What is Mathematics?, pp. 31-40, 108-116, Oxford 
University Press, New York. 1941. 
LANGER, SUSANNE K.: An Introduction to Symbolic Logic, 2nd ed., Dover Publica­
tions, Inc., New York, 1953. 
NEWMAN, JAMES R.: The World of Mathematics, Vol. 1\1, pp. 1852-1900 (selections 
on symbolic logic), Simon and Schuster, Inc., New York, 1956. 
SAWYER, W. W.: PreLude to Mathematics, Chaps. 7. 8, 13, and 14, Penguin Books 
Ltd., Harmondswonh, England, 1955. 

THE STATISTICAL APPROACH TO THE 
SOCIAL AND BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES 
People who don't count won't coum. 
ANATOLE FRANCE 
22-1 
INTRODUCTION 
CHAPTER 22 * 
The success of the deductive approach employed by mathematics and the 
physical sciences depends upon the acquisition of correct and significant basic 
principles. In mathematics proper these principles afe the axioms of number 
and geometry. In the physical sciences they are, for example, the laws of 
motion and gravitation. Though the social scientists sought such principles, 
they did not succeed in finding them. 
The social scientists' inability to find fundamental principles is undoubtedly 
due to the immense complexity of the phenomena that they wish to study. 
Human nature is a more complicated structure than a mass sliding down an 
inclined plane or a bob vibrating on a spring. A phenomenon such as national 
'prosperity is even more complicated j not only are millions of human wills and 
rapacities involved, but so arc natural resources, relationships with other nations, 
the disruptions of war, and a dozen other major factors. The difficulties which 
harass the social scientists are also encountered by the biologists. Although the 
physical sciences have provided some insight into the functioning of the eye, 
the ear, the heart, and into muscular action, and although chemistry is making 
rapid advances in the study of complex molecular structures, the operation of the 
human body and the brain remains, on the whole, a great mystery. 
If one attempts to simplify these problems by making assumptions about 
some of the factors involved or by neglecting what appear to be minor factors, 
just as Galileo, for example, neglected air resistance, one is likely to make the 
problem so artificial that its solution no longer has any bearing on real situations. 
Very fortunately the social and biological sciences have acquired a totally 
new mathematical method of obtaining information about their respective 
phenomena-the method of statistics. By resorting to numerical data and by 
applying techniques which distill the essential content of those data, these 
sciences have made striking progress in the past one hundred years. However, 
the use of statistical methods has also given rise to the problem of determining 
499 

500 
STATISTICS IN SOCIAL AND BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES 
the reliability of the results, and this aspect of statistics is treated by means of 
the mathematical theory of probability. In the present chapter we shall survey 
some of the concepts of statistics and in the next one we shall study the concept 
and applications of probability. 
22-2 
A BRIEF HISTORICAL REVIEW 
The realization that statistics could serve as a method of attack on major social 
problems came first to a prosperous seventeenth-century English haberdasher, 
John Graunt ( 1620-74). Purely out of curiosity Graunt studied the death 
records in English cities and noticed that the percentages of deaths due to acci­
dents, suicides. and various diseases were about the same in the localities studied 
and scarcely varied from year to year. Thus occurrences which superficially 
seemed to be a matter of chance possessed surprising regularity. Graunt also 
was the first to discover the excess of male over female births. On this statistic 
he based an argument: since men are subject to occupational hazards and war 
service, the number of men available' for marriage approximately equals 
the number of women, and so monogamy has natural sanction. He also noticed 
the high mortality rate of children and the higher death rate in urban as com­
pared to rural areas. In 1662 Graunt published his Natural and Political Ob­
servations . . .  upon the Bills of Mortality, a book which might be said to 
have launched the trend toward scientific method in the social sciences and 
which certainly founded the science of statistics. 
Graunt's work was followed and supported by his friend Sir William 
Petty (1623-85), professor of anatomy at Oxford, professor of music at Gresham 
College, and later an army physician. Petty wrote on medicine, mathemat­
ics, politics, and economics. His Political Arithmetic, written in 1676 and 
published in 1690, did not contain any more striking facts than Graunt's work, 
but is of particular significance because it calls specific attention to the method 
of statistics. The social sciences, he insisted, must become quantitative. He says, 
The method 1 use is not yet very usual; for, instead of using only comparative 
and superlative words, and intellectual arguments, I have taken the course . . .  
to express myself in terms of number, weight, and measure; to use only argu­
ments of sense, and to consider onLy such causes as have visible foundations in 
nature. 
To the infant science of statistics he gave the name of "Political Arithmetic," 
defining it as "the art of reasoning by figures upon things relating to the 
government." In fact, he regarded all of political economy as just a branch of 
statistics. 
The work of Graunt and Petty was followed by studies of population and 
income and by extensive studies of mortality rates among which those made by 
the astronomer Edmond Halley are famous. Life insurance companies formed 
at the end of the seventeenth century and in the eighteenth century explored 

A BRIEF HISTORICAL REVIEW 
501 
further data on mortality. However, though the subject of statistics did come 
to be known in the eighteenth century as data for statesmen, no mathematical 
methods for extracting significant implications from the data were developed. 
Undoubtedly it was the aggravated social ills brought on by the Industrial 
Revolution in Europe which prompted a number of men to wade farther into 
important statistics, such as birth and death records, national and individual 
incomes, mortality, unemployment, and incidence of diseases, and to seek solu­
tions for major problems through statistical methods. The man who revived 
Graunt's and Petty's basic thought that statistical methods might produce 
significant laws for the social sciences was a Belgian, L. A. J. Quetelet ( 1796-
1874). Inspired by the successes of the physical sciences and conscious of the 
failure of the deductive approach to the social sciences, Quetelet undertook to 
construct and apply statistical methods suitable for social and sociological in­
vestigations. Quetelet was professor of astronomy and geodesy at the Ecole 
Militaire and in 1 820 became director of the Royal Belgian Observatory, which 
he founded. In 1835 he published his Essay on Social Physics. In 1848 he pre­
sented to the Royal Belgian Academy a memoir, On Moral Statistics, which con­
tained conclusions on the science of government. Ironically, the publication of 
this memoir coincided with the outbreak of the revolution of 1 848 in Paris. 
Prince Albert of Belgium remarked that the law governing the causes which 
led to revolutions had unfortunately come a little late. 
In the latter half of the nineteenth century a number of well-known 
scientists, attracted by the already evident power of statistical methods, entered 
the field. We must content ourselves with mentioning Francis Galton ( 1822-
191 1 )  and Karl Pearson ( 1857-1936). It so happened that statistical techniques 
were already proving to be highly important in astronomy and in the theory of 
gases, and so the physical and social scientists accelerated the creation and appli­
cation of statistical methods. 
Before we examine the mathematics of extracting information from data, 
we should be clear as to how the method of statistics differs from the deductive 
approach. To put the matter crudely, the statistical approach to a problem is 
first of all a confession of ignorance. When crucial experiments, observation, or 
intuition fails to give us fundamental principles which can be used as premises 
for a significant chain of reasoning, we turn to data and seek to cull whatever 
information we can from what has happened. If we lack the knowledge which 
permits us to deduce what a new medical treatment should achieve, we apply 
the treatment, note results, and then attempt to draw some conclusions. Even if 
we come to the conclusion that the treatment is remarkably successful and 
should be widely applied, we still do not know what physical or chemical 
factors are operative. Perhaps the most important difference between the de­
ductive approach and statistical methods is that the latter tell us what happens 
to large groups and do not provide definite predictions about any one given 
case, whereas the former predicts precisely what must happen in individual 
instances. 

502 
STATISTICS IN SOCIAL AND BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES 
22-3 
AVERAGES 
The task of the science of statistics is to summarize, digest, and extract informa­
tion from large quantities of data. Our illustrations and discussions of various 
statistical techniques will be based on somewhat artificial and limited classes of 
data. Real problems usually involve large collections of data whose handling 
the" becomes so encumbered by arithmetic that one loses sight of the essential 
mathematical idea. 
About the simplest mathematical device for the distillation of knowledge 
from data is the average. A housewife who buys a 5-pound bag of potatoes 
once a week at prices which vary throughout a year can add the sums spent and 
divide by 52. She then has an average, known as the arithmetic mea", which 
represents fairly well what potatoes cost during that year. 
Such an average can be meaningful in some situations and quite misleading 
in others. Suppose that we wish to study the wages of workers in an industry, 
that we have selected 1000 people as our representative sample, and that we have 
listed the wages of each worker. Suppose further that the mean wage turns out 
to be 51 200. This figure gives some information about the earnings of the 
people, but not too much. For example, 990 people of the 1000 could be earning 
SI 100 each; 10 people could be earning $1 1,000 each; and the mean of these 
earnings would be 51200. Hence our mean figure tells us nothing about the 
inequalities in the distribution of these wages. 
Another type of average commonly used is caIied the mode. In a study of 
wages, for example, it is that wage which is earned by most people. Suppose 
that the distribution of wages is such that 25 people happen to receive the wage 
of 51 1 50, whereas any other salary, larger or smaller, is received by fewer than 
25 people. In this case, the mode is $1 1 50. What does this figure tell us about 
the wage distribution if we do not know what the remaining 975 people earn? 
Are these others receiving wages near $100,000 a year or near SIOO a year' 
Obviously, the mode may not be the average to represent such a situation. 
A third type of average is called the meditl1l. Let us examine its meaning 
with the help of the following table: 
Salary 
1,000 
1,100 
1,200 
1,300 
10,000 
20,000 
50,000 
Number of People 
I 
3 
4 
2 
2 
2 
The table lists a total of 15 salaries. The median salary is the salary of the 
middle man, so to speak, or the eighth person; that is, there are as many who 

DISPERSION 
503 
earn less than this middle person as there are who earn more. Since the eighth 
person occurs among the four who earn $1200, the median salary is $1200. To 
obtain the median of a set of data, one must arrange the data (salaries in the 
above example) in order of increasing magnitude and then find the datum which 
occurs in the middle. Of course, one must take into account how many times 
each datum occurs. Determining the median is a clumsy procedure. But more 
objectionable is the median's failure to provide any information about the 
level of the salaries above and below the median. 
Although not one of the three averages we have discussed, or others we 
could discuss, is particularly informative, the mean is nevertheless the best one, 
for it, at least, takes into account the actual salaries earned by al! the people 
involved. As we shal! see later, the mean also proves to be the most useful 
concept in other statistical techniques. 
EXERCISES 
1. State the meanings of mean, mode, and median. 
2. Calculate the mean and mode for the salaries listed in the above tahle. 
3. A das, of 20 students was graded as follows: 
Number of Students 
6 
2 
3 
3 
3 
2 
Grade 
10 
8 
7 
5 
4 
3 
2 
What are the mean, median, and mode of chese data? Which average best repre­
sents the data? 
4. The following weekly wages were paid to the employees of a company: 
Number of Employees 
Wages 
4 
50 
Answer the same Question as in Exercise 3. 
18 
40 
10 
9 
13 
35 
30 
10 
5. Criticize the assenion, "Obviously there must be as many people with abo"e­
average intelligence as there are with below-average intelligence." 
6. Is it safe for an adult to step into a pool whose mean depth is 4 ft? 
22-4 
DISPERSIDN 
We have already pointed out that no one of the averages provides detailed in­
formation about a set of data. Insofar as the mode and median are concerned, 
we can certainly change the salaries above and below either of these averages 
as much as we want to without affecting them. The mean has similar short-

504 
STATISTICS IN SOCIAL AND BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES 
comings. For example. the numbers 3, 5, and 7, each taken once, have a mean 
of 5, bur so do the numbers 0, 5, and 10. Thus one may again change the data, 
though not at will, and still obtain the Same mean. 
To obtain further information about a set of data, statisticians seek to 
measure how closely the data are grouped about the mean; i.e., they seek to 
determine the dispersion of the data about the mean. Thus the data 0, 5, 10 are 
more widely dispersed about the mean of 5 than are the data 3, 5, 7. Various 
measures of dispersion might be introduced, bur the one which has proved to 
be the most useful and also the best from the point of view of mathematical 
manipulation is the standard deviation. 
Let us note first what is meant by a deviation. Suppose that the grades of 
six students in a class are: 
Number of Students 
Grade 
J 
4 
5 
6 
8 
10 
We calculate first the mean grade; that is, we multiply each grade by the 
number of students earning that grade and divide by the number of students. 
In the present example, the mean grade is 6. The deviation of any grade from 
the mean is merely the difference between that grade and the mean. Thus the 
deviations for the above set of grades are 
3, 2, 1, 0, 2, 4. 
To obtain the standard deviation, one squares each deviation, calculates the 
mean of these squares, and then takes the square root. The squares of the 
deviations are 
9, 4, 1, 0, 4, 16. 
To compute the mean of these squares, we must add them taking each with 
the frequency with which it occurs, and divide by the tOtal number of data. 
Thus 
9 + 4 + I + 0 + 4 + 16 - 5.66. 
6 
The standard deviation, denoted by cr (sigma ), is the square root of this mean. 
Then 
u = V5.6 = 2.4. 
The standard deviation of 2.4 is merely a convenient and yet somewhat 
arbitrary measure of how close the various grades are to the mean. Had the 

THE GRAPH AND THE NORMAL CURVE 
505 
grades of the six students been 
Number of Students 
2 
2 
2 
Grade 
2 
6 
10 
the mean would again be 6, but the standard deviation would turn out as 
follows. The deviations are 
4, 0, 
4. 
The squares of these deviations are 
16, 0, 16. 
The mean of these squares is 
2 ·  16 + 2 '  ° + 2 · 16 
6 
and the standard deviation is 
U = v'1O.66 = 3.3. 
10.66, 
In other words, the fact that more grades in this latter distribution are farther 
from the mean of 6 is reflected in the change of the standard deviation from 
2.4 to 3.3. 
EXERCISES 
1. The grades of eight students on a Quiz were 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 9, 9, 10. Calculate the 
standard deviation of this distribution of grades. 
2. Calculate the standard' deviation of the grades listed in Exercise 3 of Section 
22-3. You may take the mean to be 6. 
3. Calculate the standard deviation of the wages listed in Exercise 4 of Section 22-3. 
4. Suppose that the mean height of men in a cerrain city is 5 ft 7 in. and the stan­
dard deviation is 2 in., while in another city the mean is the same but the standard 
deviation is 3 in. What fact is revealed by the difference in standard deviation? 
5. Suppose that a student made a grade of 75 in an examination for which the mean 
grade was 65 and the standard deviation of the grades was 5, and another student 
made the same grade in an examination for which the mean was also 65, but the 
standard deviation was 15. Which student did better? 
6. What is the significance of the standard deviation? 
22-5 
THE GRAPH AND THE NORMAL CURVE 
A better knowledge about some collections of data than the mean and standard 
deviation afford can be obtained by means of a graph. Consider, for example, 
the wages paid in an indu,try. In this case, the graph might show the wages 

506 
STATISTICS IN SOCIAL AND BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES 
P 
1l 6 
" 
-0 
" 5 
, 
-" 
.5 
ņ 4 
« 
E 
• 
¬ 
3 
¬ 
" 
• 
• 
'0 2 
ņ 
¬ 
.D 
S 
, 
Z 
55 
FIg. 22-l. 
75 
95 
Salaries 
115 
135 
'0 
" 
II 
ŌL=ō 
______ νξ ______ μ=-
Z 
Length 
Fig. 22-2. 
The normal frequency curve. 
Frequency distribution of numbers of employees earning different salaries. 
paid as the abscissas and the numbers of people earning those wages as the 
ordinates. Although there may be thousands of different salaries, it is not 
necessary to plot that many points. One might group the salaries in $1O-inter­
vals, and enter into onc interval all those earning from $50 to $60, in the next 
interval those earning from $60 to $70, and so on. One might then regard all 
those grouped in the first interval as earning $55, those in the second as earning 
$65, and so forth. Thus one point on the graph will have an abscissa of 55 and 
and an ordinate equal to the number of people whose salary is somewhere be­
tween $50 and $60 or, to be precise, from $50 to $59.99. When a smooth 
curve is drawn through the points plotted, its shape clearly exhibits the gradual 
variation in the number of people earning salaries from $50 to the maximum 
salary paid (Fig. 22-1 ) .  
Of course, the process of lumping together all those with earnings from 
$50 to $60 and using a representative figure of $55 has introduced some element 
of error into the data and graph. If this error should matter for the purposes 
of the study, it might be necessary to use a smaller interval of, say $5 or $2, 
instead of $10. The smooth cune may also be misleading. The graph in 
Fig. 22-1, for example, seems to show that to every possible salary in the range 
from $50 to the maximum there correspond some wage earners. Actually the 
graph represents only the number of people earning salaries of $55, $65, $75, 
and so on. However, the shape of the graph is reasonably accurate with re­
spect to the relative frequencies. For example, the smooth curve shows more 
people earning $60 than, say $55; that is, it shows a distribution which very 
likely reflects the actual situation, especially if the number of wage earners is 
large. 

THE GRAPH AND THE NORMAL CURVE 
507 
The value of the graph is apparent. The mean and standard deviation of 
the salaries involved would not reveal the rather sharp drop in number from 
medium- to high-salaried employees and the small number of people earning 
very high salaries. Graphs, then, do provide a useful picture. A person who 
reads the newspapers and magazines can hardly fail to observe how commonly 
they are employed. Not all of these graphs are smooth curves. Bar graphs and 
pie charts are also frequently used. 
The variables whose relationship is represented by a graph may be time 
and stock prices, production and consumption of coal, or hundreds of other 
similarly related data. The relationship which plays a central role in statistical 
work is called a f;'equency distribution. Thus the graph plotting wages versus 
the number of people earning the various wages illustrates a frequency distribu­
tion. The heights of people and the numbers of people possessing these various 
heights, for example, or intelligence quotients and the numbers of people pos­
sessing the various quotients, or grades on an examination and the numbers of 
students earning those grades are all frequency distributions. 
Among frequency distributions one type is of particular importance. Con­
sider the rather simple problem of measuring a length. A scientist interested in 
the exact length of a piece of wire, say, measures it not once but, if need be, 
fifty times. Partly because no measurement is exact and partly because en­
vironmental conditions such as temperature affect the length, these fifty meas­
urements will differ from each other, sometimes perceptibly and sometimes 
imperceptibly. A graph plotting the results of all fifty measurements against 
the number of times that each measurement occurs will look like the curve in 
Fig. 22-2. In fact, the more measurements that are made, the more nearly will 
their frequency distribution follow this curve. 
The graph in Fig. 22-2 has been well known to physical scientists since 
about 1 800 because it is obtained from almost all measurements of physical 
quantities. ͟he measurements cluster about one central value, just as the shots 
of a rifleman at a target will, if he is a marksman, cluster about the bull's-eye. 
The similarity of the two situations, the measurement of a length and shots at 
a target, suggests that the exact length should be the central value. The other 
lengths apparently represent random or accidental variations from the true 
length just as the shots near, but not on, the bull's-eye represent accidental 
errors in marksmanship. Because the shape of the graph in Fig. 22-2 occurs 
repeatedly in connection with errors of measurement, it has come to be known 
as the error curve or the normal frequency curve. Its very existence affirms the 
seemingly paradoxical but nonetheless true conclusion that accidental errors in 
measurements do not follow any chance pattern, but always follow the error 
curve. Humans may not even err at will. 
The normal frequency curve is not just one curve but a class of curves 
possessing common mathematical properties, just as the parabola is not a single 

508 
STATISTICS IN SOCIAL AND BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES 
l\lean 
(a) 
l\Icun 
(b) 
Fig. 22-3. Three different normal frequency curves. 
j\lcan 
(c) 
curve but a class of curves which can be defined geometrically as the loci of 
points which are equidistant from a fixed point and a fixed line, and which are 
algebraically represented by the equation y ® (I /2a)x' (for the proper choice of 
coordinate axes). The precise definition of the class of normal frequency curves 
will not be stated because the formula contains a function we have not studied. 
But we can characterize this class of curves well enough for our purposes. 
Figure 22-3 shows three different normal frequency curves. Their shapes re­
semble bells, and the curve is therefore often described as bell-shaped. Each 
curve is symmetric about a vertical line. The abscissa of the base point of this 
vertical line is the mean of the data which are plotted as abscissas, for example, 
lengths. The means of the three curves will generally be different values. In 
fact one may be a mean length; another, a mean height; and so on. It is almost 
apparent from the symmetry of these curves that the mode and median coin­
cide with the mean of each distribution, and the different widths indicate that 
each has its own standard deviation. The left-hand curve (22-3a) evidently has 
the largest standard deviation of the three because the data are more widely 
dispersed. 
Despite these differences, all normal frequency curves are characterized by 
their mean and standard deviation. Regardless of the value of the mean and of 
the standard deviation, 68.2% of the data lie within cr on either side of the 
mean (Fig. 22-4) ; 95.4% of the cases lie within 2cr of the mean; and 99.8% of 
the cases lie within 3cr of the mean." Thus if the curve of Fig. 22-4 represented 
the heights of 100,000 men, if the mean were 67 inches, and if cr were 2, then 
68,200 men would have heights falling within the range 65 to 69 inches; 95,400 
men would have heights between 63 and 71 inches; and so forth. If the standard 
deviation were I instead of 2, the curve would have a sharper hump around the 
middle because the dispersion would be smaller. But it would still be true that 
68.2% of the population would lie wirhin cr of the mean; i.e., 68,200 men would 
have heights between 66 and 68 inches. Thus knowing that some frequency 
• The normal frequency curve. as a mathematical curve, extends indefinitely far to 
the right and to the left of the Y-axis although its so-called tails come closer and 
closer to the X-axis. However, these tails play almost no role since only 0.1% of 
the measured events can occur beyond 3(1 to the right or to the left of the mean. 

13.6% 
,'\ ' 
2.2% 
THE GRAPH AND THE NORMAL CURVE 
509 
34.1% 
34.1% 
13.6% 
U 
Mean 
U 
, 7-
' 
2.270 
Fig. 22-4. The normal frequency curve. 
distribution is normal and knowing the mean and standard deviation of this 
distribution, we can draw a great number of conclusions about the data. 
About 1833 Quetelet decided to study the distribution of human traits and 
abilities in the light of the normal frequency curve. He took many of his data, 
incidentally, from the thousands of anatomical measurements made by the 
Renaissance artists, Alberti, Leonardo, Ghiberti, Dlirer, Michelangelo, and 
others. He found what hundreds of successors have since confirmed. All 
mental and physical characteristics of human beings follow the normal fre­
quency distribution. Height, the size of any one limb, head size, body weight, 
brain weight, intelligence <as measured by intelligence tests), the sensitivity of 
the eye to the various frequencies of the visible portion of the electromagnetic 
spectrum, all these properties are normally distributed within one genus, which 
may be race or nationality. The same is true of animals and plants. The sizes 
and weights of grapefruits of any one variety, the lengths of the ears of corn of 
any one species, the weights of dogs of any one breed, and so forth, are 
normally distributed. 
Quetelet was struck by the fact that human traits and abilities follow the 
same distribution curve as do errors of measurement. He concluded that all 
human beings, like loaves of bread, are made in one mold and differ only be­
cause of accidental variations arising in the process of creation. Nature aims at 
the ideal man, but misses the mark and thus creates deviations on both sides of 
the ideal. The differences are fortuitous, and, for this reason, the law of error 
applies to these distributions of physical characteristics and mental abilities. On 
the other hand, if there were no general type to which men conform, measuring 
their characteristics, height, for example, would not reveal any particular sig­
nificance in the graph or any definite numerical relationships in the data. 
The typical man, according to Quetelet, emerges as the result of a great 
number of measurements. The mean of each of the characteristics, that is, the 
value having the largest ordinate, belongs to this typical, or "mean," man, who is, 
incidentally, the center of gravity around whom society revolves. The more 
measurements Quetelet made, the more he noted that individual variations are 
effaced and that the central characteristics of mankind tend to be sharply defined. 

510 
STATISTICS I N  SOCIAL AND BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES 
These central characteristics, he then declared, proceed from underlying forces 
or causes which fashion mankind. More than that, his results led him to believe 
that he had found decisive evidence for the existence of eternal laws of human 
society and of design and determinism in social phenomena. 
Let us content ourselves, for the moment, with the observation that the 
applicability of the error curve to social and biological problems has led to 
knowledge in these fields and to laws. Indeed, the conviction that the distribu­
tion of any physical or mental ability must follow the normal curve is today so 
firmly entrenched that any measurements on a large number of people which 
do not lead to this result are suspect. If, for example, a new test given to a 
representative group does not lead to a normal distribution of grades, it is not 
the conclusion about the distribution of intelligence which is challenged; the 
test is declared invalid. Similarly, if measurements of velocity, force, or distance 
failed to follow a normal distribution, the scientist would blame his measuring 
instruments. 
Another use of the normal frequency distribution occurs in manufacture. 
For example, manufactured wire is continually tested for quality. Suppose that 
100 samples are taken each day from the day's production and tested for tensile 
strength. A graph can be drawn showing strength against the number of 
samples having that strength. Such graphs usually are normal distributions. 
Now if the distribution resembled the curve in Fig. 22-3(a), it would imply a 
wide variety in strength of samples and hence nonuniform production. On the 
other hand, a distribution such as the curve in Fig. 22-3(c) shows uniform pro­
duction. The two distributions differ in dispersion, and therefore in their 
standard deviations. If uniformity is important-and often it is more important 
than superior quality because a defective piece of wire in an electric circuit 
may do a lot of damage-then a graph such as the left-hand one indicates the 
need for some change in the manufacturing process. 
One must not presume, however, that all, or practically all, distributions 
follow the normal frequency curve. The distributions of incomes of families 
or individuals and the number of families owning 0, I, 2, 3 or 4 cars are nOt 
normal. The failure of incomes to follow a normal curve raises an interesting 
point because physical and mental abilities are normally distributed and these 
qualities should determine income. 
EXERCISES 
1. What is a frequency distribution? 
2. Describe the normal frequency curve. 
3. Given a normal frequency distribution, what percentage of the data lie within a 
range of 2(1 on both sides of the mean? 
4. Suppose that the heights of 1000 coIIege freshmen are measured and found to 
foIIow a normal frequency distribution, with a mean of 66 in. and a standard 

FITTING A FORMULA TO DATA 
511 
deviation of 2 in. What percentage of the students has heights between 66 and 
70 in.? between 60 and 72 in.? 
5. The United States Army gives a well-designed intelligence test to all prospective 
soldiers and then rejects all those whose scores fall, say below one (I to the left of 
the mean. Draw a graph showing the frequency distribution of intelligence of the 
men accepted for service. 
6. Where would the mean income of the distribution of incomes shown in Fig. 22-1 
lie in relation to the modal income? 
7. Suppose you measured the weights of 1000 grapefruits and made a frequency 
distribution of the various weights. If the resulting curve foHowed the solid line 
shown in Fig. 22-5, what would you conclude about the homogeneity of the 
species of grapefruit? 
Weight 
Fig. 22-5 
22-6 
FITTING A FORMULA TO DATA 
We have seen that a great deal of information can be extracted from data by 
the application of averages, standard deviation, and graphs. When graphical 
methods are employed, we are particularly fortunate if the graph happens to be 
a normal frequency distribution. However, the major techniques of mathe­
matics used to derive new information from given facts are designed to apply 
to formulas. If the data that we happen to be studying present a functional 
relationship, for example, the .variation of population with time in some region, 
then it is extremely desirable to obtain a formula for this function. 
Now the compression of data into formulas is usually possible, and the 
process is fraught with meaning which we shall examine later. For the present, 
we shall limit ourselves to illustrating the procedure and, for this purpose, we 
shall consider first a somewhat specialized and slightly oversimplified problem. 
By measuring the velocity of a falling body at various instants of time Galileo 
obtained the following data: 
Time, in 
0 
2 
3 
4 
seconds 
Velocity, 
0 
32 
64 
96 
128 
in ft/sec 

512 
STATlSTlCS I N  SOCIAL AND BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES 
Fig. 22-6. 
25 
The graph of population versus 
years for a particular town. 
2
3
4
5
6
7 
Years 
By inspecting this table Galileo could see that the formula relating velocity and 
time is 
v = 32/. 
(I) 
Let us treat next the problem of obtaining a formula for data when the 
result is not obvious by inspection. Most towns, cities, and even the country 
at large are concerned with studying population changes to predict the needs 
for housing, water, sewers, schools, and so on. Suppose a town has the follow­
ing record of growth: 
Year 
1951 
1952 
1953 
1955 
1957 
Population 
3000 
3200 
3400 
3800 
4200 
Can one find a formula to fit these data? 
To simplify the graphing and calculation. let us count years from 1950 and 
population in hundreds. Thus 1951 will be regarded as the year 1 and the 
population for that year as 30. The graph of the data is shown in Fig. 22-6. 
A straightedge placed along the plotted points shows that they lie on a straight 
line. We know from our work on coordinate geometry (see Exercise 13, Sec­
tion 12-3) that the formula or equation of a linear graph is of the form 
y = mx + b. 
(2) 
Let y represent the population of the town and x the year. Since the straight 
line is the curve which fits our data, let us project the straight line backward to 
the point where it crosses the Y-axis. At this point, we see from the graph that 
the value of y is 28 and, of course, x=O. Since formula (2) is to fit the graph, 
then for x = O, y must be 28. If we substitute these values in (2), we have 
28 = m '  0 + b, 
and we see that b = 28. So far, then, our formula is 
y = mx + 28. 
(3) 

FITIING A FORMULA TO DATA 
5 1 3  
The quantity m is unknown. However, the graph tells us that when x N 5, 
Y ® 38. Let us therefore substitute these values in (3). We obtain 
38 = m '  5 + 28 
or 
5m = 10 
or 
m = 2. 
Hence the final equation relating y and x is 
y = 2x + 28, 
(4) 
and we have found a formula which fits the data of the above table. 
With this formula we can now predict the population of the town, say for 
the year 1970. For 1970, x O 20. Then, substituting 20 for x in (4), we obtain 
y = 2 . 20 + 28 = 68. 
The formula predicts that the population in 1970 will be 68, that is, 6800 
people. Of course, we are assuming that the factors which led to the increase 
in population from 195 1  to 1957 will not only continue to operate, but will 
operate on the same level. Here we encounter one of the serious limitations in 
the use of statistics for social and economic phenomena. Since we do not know 
the fundamental forces which control such phenomena (although we may have 
some qualitative information). we cannot be at all certain that the population 
will continue to increase after 1957 in the same way as it did before. In fact, we 
can be fairly sure that it will not. Local, national, or global events slow down 
or accelerate the growth of a population. For example, during a financial de­
pression young people cannot afford to marry and have children. By contrast, 
the study of physical phenomena reveals that :he forces operating in nature are 
invariahle. 
As a matter of fact, there is a fundamental difference between ͛he formulas 
obtained from data of the physical sciences and formulas derived from data of 
biology, psychology, the social sciences, and pedagogy. One may say that, in 
general, a formula developed from data of the first class continues to hold as 
added data are gathered. Three hundred years ago Kepler deduced his laws 
from observational data, and they are still correct. On the other hand, for 
problems of the second class, it does not happen very often that formulas con­
tinue to hold without corrections as additional data are gathered. We must 
constantly refit the formula to the enlarged collection of data. This incon­
stancy need not he interpreted to imply that lawlessness prevails in the social 
and biological sciences, for we have already encountered instances of what ap­
pear to be well-established laws in these areas. 

514 
STATISTICS IN SOCIAL AND BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES 
The above example shows data which led to a linear function. But suppose 
that the graph were not a straight line or sufficiently close to one to be ap­
proximated by a straight line. An example will show that we can nonetheless 
fit a formula to nonlinear graphs. Suppose that, beginning with the year 1951, 
the profits of a business concern were as follows: 
Year 
Profits, in 
million dollars 
195 1  
0.125 
1952 
0.5 
1954 
1956 
1958 
2 
4.5 
8 
To find a formula fitting these data, we first plot the data. Let us record years 
after 1950 as abscissas and profits as ordinates. Figure 22-7 shows the graph. 
The points plotted are connected by a smooth curve whose ap?earance 
suggests a parabola. We know from our work on coordinate geometry that 
parabolas placed with respect to the axes as shown in the figure have equations 
of the form [see Chapter 12, formula (9) 1 
1 
2 
Y = - x 
2a 
(5) 
Let x in (5) stand for time and let y 
denote the profits. To fit formula (5) 
to our data, we must first determine 
the value of a. We choose the coor­
dinates of any one point on the curve. 
Thus in 1954 the profits were 2. The 
corresponding point on the curve has 
coordinates x =  4, y = 2. Substituting 
these values in (5), we obtain 
1 
2 
= 
- . 16. 
2a 
Then a = 4, and formula (5) becomes 
y = ix2. 
(6) 
8 
7 
6 
3 
2 
o 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Years 
Fig. 22-7. 
7 
8 
The graph of profits versus years for a 
given firm. 
Of course, in classifying the curve as a parabola, we judged by appearance. 
Hence we should check whether (6) fits other data on the graph. Thus, for 
example, the coordinates of the point corresponding to 1956 are x = 6  and 
y = 4.5. If we substitute these values in (6), we see that the left side does indeed 
equal the right side, and so we have verified that the parabola does fit the data. 
If, for example, the profits for the year 1956 had been 4.6 instead of 4.5, then 
the result of substituting 6 for x in (6) would not have yielded the exact figure. 

FITTING A FORMULA TO DATA 
515 
However, one might still accept formula (6) as a good approximation to the 
data. If the substitution into (6) of one or more x-values of points on the graph 
had not yielded good approximations to the corresponding y-values, then 
our judgment about the parabolic nature of the graph would have been wrong, 
and we would have had to fit a different type of formula to the data. There are 
techniques which aid in deciding what formulas to try, but these are valuable 
only for the specialist. 
These few examples, obviously chosen for their simplicity, show how 
formulas can be fitted to data. At the same time we see that the procedure 
presupposes a knowledge of coordinate geometry, that is, the relationship be­
tween equation and curve. 
EXERCISES 
1. The following data are given for two variables, x and y: 
x 
o 
2 
3 
4 
y 
7 
10 
1 3  
16 
19 
Find by inspection a formula of the fonn y = mx + b relating x and y. 
2. When a spring is stretched, it exerts a force which opposes the stretching force. 
To determine the relationship between F, the force exerted by the spring, and d, 
the amount of stretch or displacement, the following data are available: 
d, in inches 
2 
3 
4 
F, in pounds 
4 
8 
11.9 
16.2 
Graph these data and find a formula which relates F and d. The result is Hooke's 
law (Chapter 18) for the particular spring. 
3. Suppose that experimentation has yielded the following data on the distance 
fallen by a body in various time intervals: 
t, in seconds 
2 
d, in feet 
16 
36 
64 
100 
Though you undoubtedly know the answer, graph the data, and fit a formula 
relating d and t to the graph. 
4. People are constantly concerned with the rise of prices. These are measured by 
an index number which represents an average cost of vital commodities and 
services. Suppose that the index numbers for a number of years are as follows: 
Year (Y) 
195 1 
1953 
1955 
1957 
1959 
Index number (N) 
7 
8.9 
1 1.1 
13 
15.2 

516 
STATISTICS IN SOCIAL AND BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES 
Find a formula relating the index number N and the year Y. Check the formula 
obtained by trying it out on those data of the table that are not used to determine 
the constants. 
5. The profits of a concern for the years following 1950 are: 
Years after 1950 (t) 
Profits, in thou­
sands of dollars (P) 
6 
2 
12 
Fit a formula of the form P = at2 + b to the data. 
3 
22 
4 
5 
36 
54 
6. The volume of a given quantity of water will vary with temperature because, as 
we have had occasion to learn in the past, water expands or contracts with tem­
perature. Hence suppose you had gathered the following data on the volume in 
cu. in. of a fixed quantity of water at various temperatures (in degrees centi­
grade): 
T 
o 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
v 
2.3 
1 .3 
1.3 
2.2 
3.7 
5.8 
8.3 
Determine the formula relating T and V. 
[Suggestion: Try the fonnula 
V = a + bT + cT2, which, of course, represents a parabola. Then since you 
know V for T = 0, you can immediately find a. Next use two sets of data to 
determine b and c by solving twO equations in two unknowns.] 
7. What are the advantages of fitting a formula to data? 
8. How would a knowledge of coordinate geometry be helpful to a scientist who 
is attempting to fit a formula to data? 
22-7 
CORRELATION 
The process of fitting a formula to data is useful in that it summarizes data and 
may permit further mathematical work with the formula. However, it is not 
always possible to fit a formula to data. The very notion of a functional rela­
tion demands that there be a unique value of y for each value of x in the range 
studied. Many types of data do not meet this condition. Suppose, for example, 
one wished to study the relationship between height and weight of men. To 
any one height there correspond many weights, or if one starts with weight, to 
any one weight there correspond many heights. Hence one cannot ask for a 
formula which relates weight and height. Nevertheless there is some correspon­
dence between these two variables, and one might wish to determine the extent 
and nature of this relationship. 

CORRELATION 
517 
Sir Francis Galton, a cousin of Charles Darwin and founder of the science 
of eugenics, faced the above problem in his study of human characteristics. 
Galton was a doctor who used statistics to study heredity. In particular, in his 
famous Natural Inheritance, Galton undertook to investigate the relationship 
between the heights of fathers and the heights of their sons. It is immediately 
apparent that to any given height of a father there correspond many heights of 
sons. Galton introduced a notion now known as correlation. This mathematical 
concept permits one to measure the closeness of the relationship between two 
sets of data which may not be functionally related. 
Galton found a close relationship between the heights of fathers and their 
sons. Tall parents have tall children. He also discovered, incidentally, that the 
mean height of all the sons of tall fathers was closer to the mean of the entire 
population than was the mean of all the fathers. Thus, while the trait of tallness 
or shortness is on the average inheritable, succeeding generations regress toward 
a norm. He also found that the same conclusions appl y to intelligence. Talent is, 
on the average, inherited, but the children afe more mediocre than the parents. 
(Hence parents know better what is good for their children than do the chil­
dren themselves! ). After finding that the same law also holds for other human 
characteristics, Galton concluded, first, that human physiology is stable and, 
secondly, that all living organisms tend towards types. Leaving aside Galton's 
broad inferences, we find in his work examples of biological laws obtained 
solely by the use of statistics and the simplest of mathematics. Moreover, it was 
possible to establish these conclusions without any knowledge of the mechanism 
of heredity. 
The precise mathematical measure of correlation which is widely used today 
was formulated by Karl Pearson. His formula yields a number which lies be­
tween - 1  and 1. A correlation of 1 indicates that the given variables are 
directly related; when one variable increases or decreases, so does the other; 
when one of the variables assumes a high numerical value, so does the other. A 
correlation of - 1  means that the behavior of one variable is directly opposite to 
that of the other; as the values of the first variable increase, those of the second 
decrease, and conversely. A correlation of zero means that the behavior of 
one variable has nothing to do with the behavior of the other; they proceed 
independently of each other. A correlation of three-fourths, say, indicates that 
the behavior of one variable is similar to, but not identical with, that of the 
other. 
A knowledge of correlations can be extremely valuable. If stock prices 
correlate highly with industrial production, one can use a knowledge of the 
former to study and predict the behavior of the latter. This approach has a 
definite advantage since stock prices are much more easily compiled than data 
on industrial production. If general intelligence correlates highly with ability 
in mathematics, then a. person with good intelligence can expect to do well in 

518 
STATISTICS I N  SOCIAL AND BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES 
mathematics. If the total earnings of a nation's wage earners correlate highly 
with prosperity as measured by the total profits of business concerns, then in­
dustry in its own interest ought to consider the prudence of diverting a larger 
share of its earnings to its employees. If the correlation between the frequencies 
of occurrence of two diseases is high, the successful analysis of one may be 
expected to lead to an equally favorable result for the other. Knowledge of 
the correlation between success in high school and success in college or between 
success in college and financial success in later life can be extremely valuable in 
predicting the future of groups of individuals. 
EXERCISES 
Suppose that a study of 1000 students reveals a very high correlation between 
general intelligence and ability in mathematics. A panicular student is known to 
be very intelligent. What would you expect his ability in mathematics to be? 
22-8 
CAUTIONS CONCERNING THE USES or STATISTICS 
Since statistics are now widely employed in our society to bolster arguments 
on both sides of controversial issues, it might be advisable on this account as 
well as for a general understanding of the nature of statistically established 
conclusions to become aware of the pitfalls in applying statistical methods and 
in interpreting the mathematical results. One of the first difficulties in applying 
statistics is to decide the meaning of the concepts involved. Suppose that one 
wished to make a statistical study of unemployment, say over a period of years. 
Who are the unemployed? Should the term include those people who do not 
have to work, but would like to' Or people who are employed two days a week 
and are looking for full-time employment' Or the well-trained engineer who 
cannot find a job corresponding to his qualifications and has to drive a cab? Or 
the man unfit for employment? Should a study of passenger cars include taxis, 
station wagons, and passenger cars used by salesman for business purposes? 
After one has decided what objects or groups of people are to be included 
in a given term, the question of whether the data are reliable arises. For example, 
any study of crime rates must take into account that police departments oc­
casionally change their practices of recording and classifying crimes. A study 
of the incidence of mental diseases among men and women must take into 
account that women are less frequently hospitalized than men. 
The clear delineation of the problem to be investigated is also often a diffi­
cult marrero Suppose that one wishes to compare deaths due to automobiles in 
the United States and Great Britain. The number of deaths is certainly larger 
in the United States but so are the population and the number of automobiles. 
Should one compute the number of deaths per inhabitant, per automobile, or 
per mile of automobile travel? 

CAUTIONS CONCERNING THE USES OF STATISTICS 
519 
The largest single problem which arises in the process of using statistics is 
the problem of sampling. To study the incidence of tuberculosis in the United 
States, for example, one does not examine every person; rather a group of people 
believed to be typical of the whole population is selected for study. This group 
is called a random sample. Similarly, all physiological and mental characteris­
tics of human beings are studied by sampling. The level of retail food prices is 
gauged by selecting a few important food items which are considered to be 
representative of all foods. The study of wages in an industry is conducted by 
selecting a random sample of workers. The doctor studies a person's blood by 
sampling a small quantity which he believes to be typical because the blood is 
continually circulating throughout the body. A sociologist interested in the 
life of families with a given income will study a selected, typical group rather 
than the entire class. The Gallup poll studying the country's attitude towards 
public questions and the astronomer studying the number and sizes of stars in a 
region of the sky use sampling. 
Since the conclusions of a statistical study are based on the sample, it is 
evident that the sample should be chosen with care. If one is studying the out­
put of a machine by sampling its products, it is essential that the products be 
picked at various times during the day rather than all at one time. In the morn­
ing, before there is any chance of overheating, the machine may do better 
work than in the afternoon 
Given a truly random sample, the next question concerns the extent to 
which the information derived from the sample can be trusted to be indicative 
of the entire population. This problem involves probabilities, and we shall 
discuss this subject in the next chapter. 
The evaluation of statistical results presents problems of its own. Let us 
suppose that the meanings of terms are satisfactorily established and that repre­
sentative samples have been chosen, or that the entire population has been 
covered so that the questions raised by sampling do not enter. Statistics do show 
that graduates of Harvard make more money later in life than graduates of any 
other university. What shall we conclude? Does Harvard's education ensure 
greater success for the average student there as opposed to the average student 
at some other university? Hardly. Many of the students at Harvard come from 
well-established families who take their sons into the family business or pro­
fession. 
Statistics show that in 1954 among fatal accidents due to automobiles 
25,930 occurred in clear weather, 370 in fog, 3640 in rain, and 860 in snow. Do 
these statistics show that it is safest to drive in fog? Obvious I y not. Fogs occur 
more often at night when fewer cars are on the road. When fogs occur, many 
people refrain from driving, and others drive more cautiously. Finally, fogs are 
rare. 
To see more clearly the danger of drawing hasty conclusions from statistics, 
one might resort to some extreme and even ridiculous examples. It has been 

520 
STATISTICS IN SOCIAL AND BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES 
noted that among people who sit in the front rows of burlesque houses bald 
heads predominate. May one conclude that close observation of burlesque 
shows produces baldness? 
These difficulties in the compilation and evaluation of statistics are real 
enough. They have led to false inferences and to derogatory remarks such as 
that there are romances, grand romances, and statistics, or to the definition of 
statisticians as men who draw precise lines from indefinite hypotheses to fore­
gone conclusions. One must indeed be careful in the uses of statistics. Especially 
where sampling is involved, statistics do not prove anything; they tend to 
show. They give us guides to action. Almost always statistical results do not 
tell us anything certain about an individual, but they indicate what is very 
likely to hold among a class of individuals as, for example, the distribution of 
intelligence. 
However, the difficulties are easily overshadowed by the effectiveness of 
the statistical approach in studies of population changes, stock market operations, 
unemployment, wage scales, cost of living, birth and death rates, extent of 
drunkenness and crime, distribution of physical characteristics and intelligence, 
and incidence of diseases. Statistics are the basis of life insurance, social security 
systems, medical treatments, governmental policies, educational studies, and the 
numbers racket. Modern business enterprises are using statistical methods to 
locate the best markets, test the effectiveness of advertising, gauge the interest 
in a new product, and so forth. Pure speculation, haphazard guesses, and the 
captiousness of individual judgments are being supplanted by statistical studies. 
Indeed statistical methods have been decisive in turning undeveloped and back­
ward fields into sciences, and they have become a way of approaching problems 
and thinking in all fields. 
EXERCISES 
1. Compare the methodology of the deductive approach to a field of investigation 
with the statistical approach. 
2. Why have economists not succeeded in finding a deductive approach to the 
economic system of a country? 
3. Assuming a reasonable definition of an unemployed person, suppose that statistics 
show rising unemployment in the United States for a period of five years. Do 
these statistics imply that the economic condition of the country has been getting 
worse during those years? 
4. Statistics show that every year more people die of cancer than in preceding years. 
Is cancer caused by factors which are becoming more common in our civilization? 
5. Statistics show that cancer occurs much more frequently among men who smoke 
heavily than among men who smoke little or not at all. Is smoking a cause of 
cancer? 
6. It has been shown statistically that older fathers produce more intelligent children. 
Do these statistics imply that men should have children later rather than earlier? 

CAUTIONS CONCERNING THE USES OF STATISTICS 
5 2 1  
7. The average age at death of people with false teeth is higher than that of people 
possessing natural teeth. Do false teeth enable you to live longer? 
Topics for Further Investigation 
1. The work of Sir William Petty. 
2. The work of John Graunt. 
3. The work of Sir Francis Galton. 
4. The concept of correlation. 
5. The deductive approach to the social sciences. 
Recommended Reading 
ALDER, HENRY L. and EDWARD B. ROESSLER: Introduction to Probability and Sta­
tistics, Chaps. 1 to 4, W. H. Freeman & Co., San Francisco, 1960. 
FREUND, JOHN E.: Modern Elementary Statistics, 2nd ed., Chaps. 1 through 6, Prentice­
Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, 1960. 
HUFF, DARRELL: How to Lie with Statistics, W. W. Norton & Co., New York, 1954. 
KLINE, MORRIS: Mathematics in Western Culture, Chap. 22, Oxford University 
Press, New York, 1953. 
KLiNE, MORRIS: Mathematics: A Cultural Approach, Chap. 28, Addison-Wesley Pub­
lishing Co., Reading, Mass., 1962. 
NEWMAN, JAMES R.: The World of Mathematics, Vol. III, pp. 1416-1531 (selections 
on statistics), Simon and Schuster, Inc., New York, 1956. 
REICHMANN, W. J.: Use and Abuse of Statistics, Chaps. 1 through 13, Oxford Uni­
versity Press, New York, 1962. 
WOLF, ABRAHAM: A History of Science, Technology and Phjlosophy in the Six­
teenth and Seventeenth Centuries, 2nd ed., Chap. 25, George Allen and Unwin 
Ltd., London, 1950. Also in paperback. 

CHAPTER 23 * 
THE THEORY OF PROBABILITY 
Life is the art of drawillg sufficient cOIle/usions from illsufficient premises. 
SAMUEL BUTLER 
23-1 
INTRODUCTION 
Mathematics has been created by man to help him understand the universe and 
utilize the resources of the physical world. But the physical world of civilized 
man also includes such activities as throwing dice, playing cards. betting on 
horse races, playing roulette, and other forms of gambling. To understand and 
master these very phenomena, a new branch of mathematics, the theory of 
probability, was created. However, the theory now has depth and significance 
far beyond the sphere for which it was originally intended. 
The first look on the subject was written by the Renaissance roue Jerome 
Cardan. Cardan, being a mathematician as well as a gambler, decided that if 
he were to spend time on gambling, he might as well apply mathematics and 
make the game profitable. He thereupon proceeded to study the probabilities of 
winning in various games of chance and in a rare moment of altruism decided 
to let others profit by his thinking on the subject. He compiled his results in his 
Liber De Ludo Aleae (The Book on Games of Chance), which is a gambler's 
manual with advice on how to cheat and detect cheating. 
In 1653 another gambler and amateur mathematician, the Chevalier de 
Mere, became equally interested in using mathematics to determine bets in 
games of chance. Since his own talent was limited, he sent some problems on 
dice to Pascal, and the latter in collaboration with Fermat decided to develop 
further the subject of probability. Whereas Cardan solved just a few problems 
of probability, Pascal envisioned a whole science. He aimed 
to reduce to an exact art, with the rigor of mathematical demonstration, the 
incertitude of chance, thus creating a new science which could justly claim the 
stupefying title: the mathematics of chance. 
Cardan, Pascal, and Fermat were attracted to probability by problems of 
gambling. The subject was taken up by others, notably Laplace, whose inter­
ests, equally impractical. were in the heavens. In attempting to solve major 
astronomical problems, Laplace found himself compelled to consider the ac-
522 

INTRODUCTION 
523 
curacy of astronomical observations. As we shall soon see, this problem leads 
to the theory of probability. 
The theory might have remained a minor and largely amusing branch of 
mathematics were it not for the fact that the use of statistical methods made 
recourse to probability a necessity. Perhaps the most significant statistical prob­
lems which call for probabilistic thinking arise from the process of sampling. 
Statistical studies must, as a practical matter, proceed by sampling, and sampling 
unavoidably involves the possibility of error. If a survey of wages in the steel 
industry is based on data collected in two or three supposedly representative 
mills, we cannot be sure that we shall obtain exact facts about the entire industry 
from a study of this sample. If the output of a machine is tested by sampling, 
the conclusion derived from the sample may not hold for the entire output. To 
decide upon the efficacy of a new medical treatment doctors try it on a small 
group of patients. Now no treatment is perfect because its effect often depends 
upon other factors; a good therapeutic procedure for diabetes may be disastrous 
to a patient with an unusually weak heart. Suppose that the new treatment 
cures 80% of the people on whom it is tried, whereas some older therapy 
effected cures in 60% of the patients. Is the new treatment really better or is 
the difference in percentage an accident due to the particular sample on which 
it was tried? 
All scientific work depends upon measurement. However, all measurements 
are approximate. Scientists attempt to eliminate this inaccuracy by making 
many measurements of a given quantity and then taking the mean of the values 
obtained. It is true that measurements of a quantity form a normal distribution, 
and we have good reason to believe that the mean of the entire distribution is 
the tfue value. But a scientist cannot obtain the entire distribution of measure­
ments in order to find the mean. He can perform twenty or even fifty mea­
surements of a quantity and determine their mean value, but this value is not the 
mean of the entire distribution. How reliable is the mean computed from the 
actual measurements? 
Although the absence of certainty in some phases of scientific work is de­
plorable, it is not an insuperable obstacle. As a matter of fact, very litrle of 
what we look forward to in our futures is certain. How do we proceed in the 
face of uncertainty? Descartes stated the course which we all consciously or 
unconsciously follow: "When it is not in our power to determine what is true 
we ought to act in accordance with what is most probable." In our daily evalua­
tion of probabilities, we are satisfied with rough estimates; i.e., we merely wish 
to know whether the probability is high or low. Crossing the street involves 
uncertainties, but we do cross because without calculation we know that the 
probability of doing so safely is high. In scientific and large business ventures, 
however, we must do better. We can no longer accept rough estimates, but 
must calculate probabilities exactly, and here the mathematical theory of 
probability serves. 

524 
THE THEORY OF PROBABILITY 
23-2 
PROBABILITY FOR EQUALLY LIKELY OUTCOMES 
Suppose that we wished to calculate the probability of throwing a three on one 
throw of a die. One could resort to experience, as many people do anyway, 
and throw a die 100,000 times. He would find that threes show up on about 
one-sixth of the throws and conclude that the probability of throwing a three 
is !. However, resorting to experience as a means of determining a probability 
is burdensome and sometimes not even possible. Pascal and Fermat suggested 
the following approach. In the case of throwing a die, there are six possible 
outcomes (if we exclude the possibility of the die's coming to rest on an 
edge). Each of these possible outcomes is equally likely, and of these six, one 
is favorable to the throw of a three. Hence the probability that a three will 
show is i. 
If we were interested in the probability that a three or a four will turn up 
in the throw of a die, we would still have six possible outcomes. but now two of 
the six would be favorable. In this instance, Pascal's and Fermat's approach 
would lead to the conclusion that the probability of obtaining a three or a four is 
t. If the problem were to calculate the probability of not throwing a three, the 
answer would be ͜, because in this problem there are five favorable outcomes 
out of the six possible ones. 
In general, the definition of a quantitative measure of probability is this: 
If, of n equally likely outcomes, m are favorable to the happening of a cer­
tain event, the probability of the event happening is min and the probability 
of the event failing is (n - m)/n. 
From this general definition of probability it follows that if no possible 
outcomes were favorable. that is. if the event were impossible. the probability 
of the event would be O/n, or O. If all n possible outcomes were favorable, that 
is, if the event were certain, the probability would be n/n, or I .  Hence the 
numerical measure of probability can range from 0 to 1, from impossibility to 
certainty. 
As another illustration of this definition consider the probability of selecting 
an ace in a draw of one card from the usual deck of 52 cards. Here we have 
52 equally likely outcomes, of which 4 would be favorable to the drawing of 
an ace. Hence the probability is to or ŋ. 
There is often some question concerning the significance of the statement 
that the probability of drawing an ace from a deck of 52 cards is ,\i. Does it 
mean that if one draws a card 1 3  times (each time replacing the card drawn), 
then one draw will be an ace? No, it does not. One can draw a card 30 or 40 
times without obtaining an ace. However, the more times one draws. the better 
will the ratio of the number of aces drawn to the total number of draws ap­
proximate the ratio I to 1 3. This is a reasonable expectation because the fact 
that all outcomes are equally likely means that in the long run each outcome 
will occur its proportionate share of times. 

PROBABILITY FOR F.QUALLY LIKELY OUTCOi\lES 
525 
Suppose that a coin has fallen heads five times in a row, and one now asks 
for the probability that the sixth throw will also be a head. Many people would 
argue that the probability of a head showing up on the sixth throw is no longer 
t, but is less. The argument generally given is that the number of heads and 
tails must be the same, and so a tail is more likely to show up after 5 throws of 
heads. But this is not so. Undoubtedly in a large number ͝f throws, the 
number of heads will about equal the number of tails, but no matter how many 
heads have appeared already, the probability of a head on the next throw is 
still t. The goddess of fortune has no desire to atone for past misbehavior. 
Let us consider another illustration of the definition of probability. Suppose 
that two coins are tossed up into the air. What are the probabilities of (a) twO 
heads, (b) one head and one tail, and (c) two tails? To calculate these proba­
bilities we must note first that there are four different, but equally likely, ways 
in which these coins can fall, namely: two heads, twO tails, a head on the first 
coin and a tail on the second, and a tail on the first coin with a head on the 
second one. Of these four possible outcomes only one is favorable to obtaining 
two heads. Hence the probability of a throw of twO heads is t. Likewise the 
probability of two tails is t. The probability that one head and one tail will 
show is i because two of the four ways in which the coins can fall produce this 
result. 
We consider next the probabilities of tossing heads and tails on a throw 
of three coins. The possible outcomes are: 
HHH 
HHT 
HTH 
HIT 
THH 
THT 
ITH 
TTT. 
We see that there are eight possible outcomes. To calculate the probability of 
throwing three heads, we observe that only one possible outcome is favorable. 
Hence the probability of three heads is i- The probability of throwing two 
heads and one tail is, however, i, for of the eight possible outcomes three are 
favorable. Likewise, the probability of two tails and one head is i, and the 
probability of three tails is i. 
Let us note that instead of considering the probability of throwing, say 
three heads on one thrO'W of three coins, we could equally well consider the 
probability of throwing three heads on three consecutive throws of one coin. 
When three coins are tOssed, each falls independently of the other twO; hence 
the fact that they are thrown simultaneously is irrelevant; they could be 
thrown successively, and the result would be the same. Further, if we let the 
first coin take the place of the second and then of the third, the result would 
still be the same because one coin is just like another. Hence three throws of 
one coin should lead to the same probability as one throw of three coins. We 
know that the probability of three heads on one throw of three coins is t. On 
the other hand, the prObability of a head on a throw of one coin is t. If we 

526 
THE THEORY OF PROBABILITY 
multiply the three probabilities of heads on the three throws of one coin, that 
is, if we form ! . i ·  !, we can obtain the result of .g. This example merely illus­
trates a general result: the probability of many separate events all happening, if 
the events are independent of one another, is the product of the separate proba­
bilities. 
The definition of probability we have been illustrating is remarkably 
simple and apparently readily applicable. Suppose that one were to argue, 
however, that the probability that a person will cross a street safely is t because 
there are two possible outcomes, crossing safely and not crossing safely, and 
of these two, only one is favorable. If this argument were sound, people in 
large urban centers could not look forward to long lives. The fallacy in the 
argument is that the two possible outcomes, crossing and not crossing safely, 
are not equally likely. And this is the fly in the ointment. The definition given 
by Fermat and Pascal can be applied only if one can analyze the· situation into 
equally likely possible outcomes. 
One of the most impressive applications of the above concept of probability 
can now be made on the basis of some work done by Gregor Mendel (1822-
1884), abbot of a monastery in Moravia, who in 1865 founded the science of 
heredity with his beautifully precise experiments on hybrid peas. Mendel started 
with twO pure strains of peas, yellow and green. After cross-fertilization, the peas 
of the second generation, despite the mixtu." of green and yellow, proved to 
be all yellow. When the peas of this second generation were cross-fertilized, 
three-quarters of the resulting crop of peas were yellow and one-quarter, green. 
Such proportions had been observed before in the breeJing of two pure species, 
but the explanation of the rather surprising results had eluded biologists. 
Mendel supplied the interpretation. He argued that the gamete, or germ 
cell, of the pure yellow pea contained only a yellow particle, now called a 
gene,· and the germ cell of the pure green pea contained only a green gene. 
When the two germ cells were mated, seed developed which contained two 
genes, one from each parent. Thus each seed contained a yellow gene and a green 
gene. Why, then, were the peas of this second generation all yellow' Because, 
said Mendel, yellow was the dominant color. What happens when the hybrid 
peas are mated' The gamete of the hybrid pca contains only one gene of the 
pair deter͞jning color, and hence may contain a yellow gene or a green gene. 
Either of these mates with the gamete of another hybrid pea which may contain 
either a yellow or a green gene. The seed of the offspring contains twO genes, 
one from each parent. Hence the seed may contain one of the following com­
binations: yellow-yellow, yellow-green, green-yellow, or green-green. All 
seeds which contain a yellow gene will give rise to yellow peas because yellow 
is the dominant color. Hence, if all combinations are equally likely, three-
• The genes are contained in chromosomes, but here we wish to concentrate, in 
particular. on the particles which determine color. 

PROBABILITY FOR EQUALLY LIKELY OUTCOMES 
527 
fourths of the third generation should be yellow; this is precisely the proportion 
Mendel obtained . .  
Let us now look at Mendel's results from the standpoint of probability. 
The gamete of a hybrid pea of the second generation can be yellow or green. 
This is analogous to head and tail of a coin. "Vhen two such gametes mate, 
the combinations are analogous to the combination of heads or tails on two 
coins. The probability of obtaining at least one head on the two coins is 
three-fourths because the outcomes of head-head, head-tail, tail-head, and tail­
tail are equally likely. The probability of throwing at least one head is the 
same as that of breeding seed with at least one yellow gene. Hence the laws of 
probability predict the proportion of yellow pedS tha, will appear in the third 
generation. 
The theory of probability may now be used to predict the proportion of 
yellow peas in the fourth generation or the proportions of various strains which 
will result when several different pairs of characteristics, such as yellow and 
green, tall and short. smooth and wrinkled, are simultaneously interbred. 
Needless to say, the theory predicts precisely what happens. 
This knowledge is now used with excellent practical results by specialists 
in horticulture and animal husbandry to create new fruits and flowers, breed 
more productive cows, improve strains of plants and animals. grow wheat free 
of rust, perfect rhe stringless string bean, and produce turkeys with plenty of 
white meat. 
The use of the theory of probability in the study of human heredity is 
especially valuable. Scientists cannot control the mating of men and women, 
and even if they could do so, it would not be possible to obtain experimental 
results quickly and easily. Hence they must deduce the facts of heredity from 
just such considerations as were illustrated above. Moreover, because prejudices 
frequently enter into judgments of human characteristics, the objectiveness of 
the mathematical approach is far more essential in the study of human heredity 
than in studies of plants and animals. 
EXERCISES 
1. What is the largest value that the probability of an event can have? What does 
this probability mean? 
2. What is the smallest value that the probability of an event can have? What 
does this probability mean? 
3. What is the probability of throwing a two on a single throw of a die? What is 
the probability of throwing a three? What is the probability of throwing a 
three or a larger number? 
4. The probability that Mr. X will live one more year is t because there are twO 
possible outcomes, namely, that he will be alive or dead at the end of the year, 
and only one of these possibilities is favorable. Do you accept this reasoning? 

528 
THE THEORY OF PROBABILITY 
5. There are 4 caramels and 6 pure chocolate pieces in a box of candy. 1f a piece 
of candy is picked at random, what is the probability that it will be pure 
chocolate? 
6. What is the probability of picking a diamond when one card is drawn from the 
usual deck of 52 cards? 
7. What is the probability of throwing 3 heads and 1 tail on a throw of 4 coins? 
S. The probability of throwing 4 heads and 1 tail on a throw of 5 coins is h. What 
is the probability of not throwing exactly 4 heads and 1 tail? 
9. What is the probability of throwing a four or higher on a single throw of a 
die? 
10. 1f the probability of an event is one in a million, is the event improbable? Is it 
impossible? 
11. What is the number of possible outcomes in throwing two dice? [Suggestion: 
A three on one die and a five on the other is not the same as a five on the first 
die and a three on the second.] 
12. How many of the outcomes in throwing two dice yield a total of 5 on the two 
faces? 
13. What is the probability of throwing a five on a throw of two dice? 
14. In Chapter 4 we found that the number of possible variations in the genetic 
make-up of any one child a husband and wife may have is 248. What is the 
probability that two children (not identical twins) will be exactly alike? (Iden­
tical twins come from the same fertilized ovum.) 
15. Since it is correct to regard a single throw of three coins as equivalent to three 
successive throws of one coin, present an argument proving that the probability 
of tossing 2 heads and 1 tail in successive throws is also i. 
16. A young man who dates two girls has to travel by a northbound train to see 
one, and by a southbound train to visit the other. He argues that since these 
trains run equally often in both directions. he can take the first one that comes 
along and. over many trips, will see both girls equally often. But suppose that 
at his station the train schedule is as follows. 
Northbound: 
8:00 
Southbound: 
8:04 
8:05 
8:09 
8: 10 
8: 14 
8: 15 
8: 19 
Suppose, further, that the young man usually enters the station at any time 
during the 5-min intervals. Show that the probability that the "girl in the 
south" is favored ( ? )  is !. The moral of this problem is not to let chance 
determine your dates. 
17. A term frequently used in discussions of probability is "odds," which means the 
ratio of the probability in favor of an event to the probability against the event. 
What are the odds in favor of throwing a head on a single throw of a coin? 
IS. What are the odds in favor of throwing at least one head on a single throw of 
two coins? 

PROBABILITY AS RELATIVE FREQUENCY 
529 
23-3 
PROBABILITY AS RELATIVE FREQUENCY 
The concept of probability which we have examined presupposes that we can 
recognize equally likely outcomes and then take into account those that are 
favorable to a certain event. But what is the probability that Jones, now forty 
years old, will live to be sixty? 
One cannot say that the two possible outcomes, life or death at age sixty. 
are equally likely. One might then try to determine the probability that a 
person of age forty will die of cancer by the age of sixty, perform similar 
calculations to determine the probability of death due to other causes, such 
as heart disease, diabetes, fatal accidents, etc" and. assuming that these proba­
bilities could be determ'ned, somehow manage to combine these partial findings 
to obtain the final probability that an individual of age forty will live 20 more 
years. This approach would hardly be successful. Vet the probabilities that, 
starting from a given age, a man will live any specified number of years are of 
vital importance to insurance companies. Hence these companies had to find 
ways of determining life expectancies and mortality rates and they went about 
it as follows. They collected the birth and death records of 100,000 people, 
and found, for example, that of 100,000 people alive at age ten, 78,106 people 
were still alive at age forty. They then took the ratio 78,106/100,000 or 0.78 
as the probability that a person of age ten will live to be forty. Of the 78,106 
alive at age forty, 57,917 were alive at age sixty. The probability of living 
from forty to sixty was then taken to be the ratio 57,917/78,106, or about 0.74. 
This approach to probability is a basic one. It is, in essence, an appeal to 
experience to determine the favorable outcomes out of the total number of 
possible outcomes. Of course, the probabilities so obtained are not exact, but 
a sample of 100,000 people is large enough to ensure fairly reliable probabilities. 
The reliance upon experience may seem quite different from the calculation of 
probabilities based on equally likely outcomes, but the difference is not nearly 
so great as it may appear to be. Why do we decide that each face on a die is 
equally likely to show up? Actually it is experience with dice which makes us 
accept the intuitively appealing argument that all faces are equally likely to 
appear. 
Even though probabilities of life expectancies, accidents of various kinds, 
and the incidence of diseases are obtained from data based on past experience, 
once they are obtained, mathematics can be employed to calculate with these 
probabilities. We saw earlier that the probability of throwing two heads on 
one throw of two coins or two successive throws of one coin is ! ' t or i. If an 
insurance company is asked to insure the lives of a husband and wife for a 
twenty-year period, it is important to know the probability that both will be 
alive twenty years from the date on which the policy is issued. Let us suppose 
that both are fifty years old. Now the probability that one person of age fifty 
will live to be seventy is about 0.55 because of about 70,000 people alive at age 
fifty, 38,500 are alive at age seventy. The probability that both will live to be 

530 
THE THEORY OF PROBABILITY 
seventy can be determined in the same way as the probability of throwing two 
heads on two throws of one coin, namely, 0.55 · 0.55, or about 0.30. Thus, once 
the probability that a person of age fifty will live to be seventy has been ob­
tained, mathematics can be employed to calculate the probability that two fifty­
year old people will both live to be seventy. The foregoing is a fairly simple, 
run-of-the-mill problem. As might be expected, mathematics is employed for 
the solution of far more complicated probability problems arising in insurance. 
Thus the theory of probability, which was first developed to solve problems of 
gambling, takes the gamble out of the insurance business. 
EXERCISES 
1. How would you determine the probability that a person of age 40 will live to 
be 6O? 
2. Of 100,000 ten-year old children, 85,000 reach the age of 30 and 58,000 reach 
the age of 60. What is the probability that a person of age 10 will live to be 30? 
What is the probability that a person of age 30 will live to be 60? 
3. Suppose that the probability that any one person of age 40 will live to be 70 is 
0.5. What is the probability that three particular people of age 40 will live to be 
70? 
4. Suppose that it is known from long experience that 50% of the people afHicted 
with a cenain disease die of it, say within one year. A doctor who believes that 
he has devdoped a new treattnent tries it on 4 people and all 4 recover (do not 
die within one year). How much reliance would you place on the treatment? 
[Suggestion: What is the probability that 4 people having the disease will recover 
without any treaonent?] 
23-4 
PROBABILITY IN CONTINUOUS VARIATION 
For the problems of probability considered so far, the number of possible out­
comes was finite. Thus, for example, the number of possible outcomes in 
throwing three coins is 8, and the number of people who, out of a total 
sample of 100,000, may live 20 more years can vary from 0 to 100,000. Let 
us consider, however, the heights of human beings even if limited to values 
between 4 ft 6 in. and 8 ft 6 in. The number of possible heights in this range 
is infinite, since any two heights can differ by arbitrarily small amounts. More­
over we know from experience that all possible values in the range from 4 ft 6 in. 
to 8 ft 6 in. are not equally likely heights of human beings. What, then, is the 
probability that a man selected at random is between 70 and 71 in. tall? 
The theory of probability can treat such problems. We shall consider the 
most important case, namely, where the frequencies of the various possibilities 
form a normal distribution (Chapter 22). Since we are now thinking in terms 
of probability rather than, as in the preceding chapter, of a frequency distribu­
tion of some quantity such as height or income, we should restate the normal 

PROBABILITY IN CONTINUOUS VARIATION 
531 
frequency distribution in terms of probability. Let us consider the possible 
heights of men from the standpoint of the probability of various heights oc­
curring. In our earlier discussion of normal frequency distributions we said 
that 34.1 % of the cases lie within one (J\ that is, one standard deviation, to the 
right of the mean. What this means is that if, for example, the frequency dis­
tribution of 1000 heights is normal, then 341 heights wo.uld fall within one (7' 
to the right of the mean. If the mean should be 67 in. and (7' should be 2 in., 
then 341 out of the 1000 men would have heights between 67 and 69 in. Then 
the probability that a man chosen at random out of the thousand has a height 
between 67 and 69 in. is 341/1000 or 0.341 because the probability is the ratio 
of the favorable possibilities or outcomes to the total number of possibilities 
(Fig. 23-1 ). Likewise, since in a normal frequency distribution 1 3.6% of all 
cases (or, one says, of the entire population) lie between (7' and 2(7' to the right 
of the mean, it follows that the probability of any individual's height being 
between (7' and 2(7' to the right of the mean is 0.1 36. In other words, every 
percentage which appears in the normal frequency distribution becomes a 
probability under the latter point of view. Thus the normal frequency curve 
can also be regarded as giving the probabilities of events whose possibilities are 
normally distributed, and it is therefore also known as the normal probability 
curve. 
/ 
u 
0.001 
0.022 
0.341 
0.341 
0.136 
0.136 
u 
u 
l\·fean 
u 
u 1--
0.022 0.001 
Fig. 23-1. The normal probability curve. 
We can now answer questions about the probability of events when the 
frequencies of the various possibilities are normally distributed. For example, 
given that the heights of men are normally distributed with a mean of 67 in. 
and a standard deviation of 2 in., what is the probability of finding a man with 
height greater than 73 in.> Since 73 in. is 3(7' to the right of the mean, a height 
greater than 73 in. is more than 3(7' to the right and, as Fig. 23-1 shows, the 
probability that a height will fall more than 3(7' to the right is 0.001 ;  that is, 
about one man in a thousand is taller than 73 in. 
Note that in dealing with infinite populations, we do not ask for the 
probability of a particular value, for example, the height 69 in. This probability 
is zero because it is one possibility in an infinite number of possibilities. But the 

532 
THE THEORY OF PROBABILITY 
• 
• 
(f 
670 
68.5 .... 
Fig. 23-2 
question is not too significant. All measurements yield approximate values only. 
Let us suppose that the accuracy of measurement is 0.5 in. Then all we should 
be concerned with is a height between 68.5 in. and 69.5 in.; that is, if we are' 
interested in men with a height of 69 in. and our accuracy of measurement is 
0.5 in., then the practical problem we should set is finding the probability that 
a height falls between 68.5 and 69.5 in. To answer the question, What is the 
probability that a man chosen at random is between 68.5 and 69.5 in. tall, we 
would first nOte that this height lies between 3<7"/4 and 5<7/4 to the right of the 
mean. We would next determine what percentage of the entire population in 
a normal frequency distribution lies between 3<7/4 and 5<7/4 (Fig. 23-2). We 
shall not bother to calculate the percentages or the corresponding probabilities 
which lie within fractional parts of a o--interval because we wish to restrict 
our discussion to the simpler percentages or probabilities. However, the proba­
bility of a height falling within any given range can be calculated by a method 
of the calculus. 
EXERCISES 
1. Suppose that the heights of all Americans are normally distributed, that the mean 
height is 67 in., and that the standard deviation of this distribution is 2 in. What 
is the probability that any person chosen at random is between 67 and 73 in. tall? 
between 63 and 71 in. tall? 
2. A manufacturer of electric light bulbs finds that the life of these bulbs is nonnally 
distributed and that the mean life is 1000 hr with a standard deviation of 50 hr. 
What is the probability that any bulb chosen at random will fail to burn at least 
950 hr? 
3. Given the data of the preceding problem, what is the probability that any bulb 
chosen at random will bum at least 1100 hr? 
4. The grades obtained by a large group of students in an examination were 
normally distributed with a mean of 76 and a standard deviation of 3. What is 
the probability that a student had a grade between 76 and 79? 
5. The weights of a large number of grapefruits were found to be normally dis­
tributed with a mean of 1 lb and a standard deviation of 3 oz. What is the 
probability that any one grapefruit has a weight between I Ib 3 oz and 1 Ib 6 oz? 

23-5 
BINOMIAL DISTRIBUTIONS 
BINOMIAL DISTRIBUTIONS 
533 
Let us return for a moment to the subject of tossing coins. When one coin is 
tossed, there are two possible outcomes: one head and one tail. When two coins 
are tossed (or one coin is tossed twice), there are four possible outcomes: one 
yielding two heads, two yielding one head and one tail, and one yielding twO 
tails. When three coins are tossed (or one coin is tossed three times), there are 
eight possible outcomes: one yielding three heads, three yielding two heads 
and one tail, three yielding one head and two tails, and one yielding three tails. 
We could now calculate the total number and distribution of outcomes in 
tossing four coins, five coins, and so on. 
Thinking about this problem of tossing many coins led Pascal to make use 
of the following "triangle" (now named after him) : 
4 
5 
6 
1 5  
2 
J 
J 
6 
10 
10 
20 
4 
5 
1 5  
6 
Each number in this triangle is the sum of the two numbers immediately above 
it (zero must be supplied where one of these two numbers is missing). Thus 
4 in the fifth row down is the sum of 1 and J, and 6 is the sum of J and J. 
Pascal discovered how well this triangle represents the probabilities of getting 
heads or tails in throwing coins. Take the case of three coins, for example. 
The number of possible outcomes is 8, and this is the sum of the numbers in 
the fourth row. The probabilities involved: ͘, t, t, ͙, are obtained from the 
individual numbers in the fourth row, namely 1, J, J, 1. Similarly, the proba­
bilities of the various alternatives which can arise in the process of flipping five 
coins will be found in the sixth row of the triangle, and so on. (The number 1 
in the first row tells us that the probability of winning on a throw of zero coins 
is I. This is the only case in which one is certain to win.) 
The numbers which appear in the second row. for example, are the co­
efficients of a and b in a + b, that is, 1 and 1. The numbers which appear 
in the third row are the coefficients of (a + b)'; for since 
(il + b)' = a' + 2ab + b', 
we see that the coefficients are 1, 2, 1. The numbers which appear in the fourth 
row are the coefficients of (a + b)' for 
(a + b)' = a' + Ja'b + Jab' + b'. 

534 
THE THEORY OF PROBABILITY 
The relationship holds generally. The coefficients of (a + b)n are the numbers 
in the (n + 1 )-row. The quantity a + b is called a binomial because it consists 
of twO terms. Hence distributions which follow any one row of Pascal's triangle 
arc called binomial distributio1lS. 
If one wished to calculate the probabilities of the various outcomes in 
tossing 50 coins, he could employ some standard reasoning in the theory of 
probability or he could extend Pascal's triangle to the fifty-first row. It is, 
however, clear that this latter process is laborious and, as a. matter of fact, 
calculating the various probabilities by means of the formulas of the theory 
would be equally laborious. There is an alternative. Let us observe the seventh 
row of Pascal's triangle. The numbers in this row refer to the throw of six 
coins, and their sum is 64. Hence they tell us, for example, that the probability 
of six heads is s'4; that of five heads and one tail, 0\; that of four heads and 
two tails, H; and so on. If we plot the number of possible heads as abscissas 
and the probabilities of these various numbers of heads as ordinates and draw a 
smooth curve through the points, we obtain the graph shown in Fig. 23-3. 
The shape of this graph suggests the normal probability curve. And, indeed, 
were we to calculate the tenth and the twentieth lines of Pascal's triangle and 
plot the corresponding graphs, we would find that as the number of coins 
increases, the graph of the probabilities of the various outcomes approaches the 
normal probability curve. For a large number of coins, 20 or more, the ap­
proximation is so good that we may as well use all the knowledge we have 
about the normal probability curve and abandon the calculation of the prob­
abilities by special formulas or by extending Pascal's triangle. 
To apply the normal probability curve, we must know the mean and the 
standard deviation. A glance at Pascal's triangle shows that the number of 
1Q 
.. 
15 
" 64  
Ŋ 
.-' !Q 
£ 
64 
5 
iH 
Fig. 23-3. 
o 
2 3 
4 
Number of heads 
Data plotted: 
o I 1 1 2 1 3 I 4 1 5 1  
6 
- - - - - - -
I 
6 
I S  
20 
I S  
6 
I 
64 
64 
46 
64 
64 
64 
64 
5 
6 
Graph of the number of possible heads appearing on a throw of six coins 
versus probability. 

BINOMIAL DISTRIBUTIONS 
535 
heads which has the highest frequency, and therefore the highest probability, 
is the middle number (or one of the two middle numbers if there is no one 
middle number). Thus in the seventh row the outcome of J heads has the 
greatest probability. Now this number J is the probability of throwing a head, 
namely, t, multiplied by the number of coins thrown, that is, 6. This example 
illustrates a general result which we shall state but not prove. If n coins are 
tossed, the mean number of heads is n/2.· 
The standard deviation could be determined by applying the procedure 
for finding the standard deviation of a frequency distribution to the frequencies 
involved in tossing coins. We would find that 
Both of these results hold for the throw of 11 coins and do not depend upon 
our approximating the frequencies of the various numbers of heads by the 
normal frequency distribution. However, if we do make the approximation, 
we can use the mean and standard deviation just indicated in connection with 
the normal frequency curve or with the normal probability curve. 
The reader may have the impression that mathematicians have become 
overly absorbed in coin-tossing and accept this extensive interest as another 
quirk of queer minds. But, in fact" coin-tossing is merely a useful and concrete 
example which paves the way for more serious applications. Suppose that the 
probability of death from a certain disease is t; that is, half the people who 
contract the disease die within some definite period of time. A new medical 
treatment is given to 20 afflicted people and only J die within that crucial 
,period. Is the treatment really effective or is it just chance that only J out of 
this group of 20 died' After all, to say that the probability of death from a 
disease is t does not mean that in any one group of 20 people [0 will die. It 
means, as does any probability, that in the long run or in a large number half 
of those afflicted will die. How should we decide whether the medical treat­
ment is effective? 
The possible outcomes, that is, the possible numbers of those remaining 
alive without treatment among 20 afflicted people, are precisely the same as 
the possible outcomes in a throw of 20 coins. Just as the number of heads 
which may show up can vary from 0 to 20, so among the 20 people, none may 
live beyond the specified period, one may, and so on up to 20. Since the 
probability that any one person will remain alive is the same as that of tossing 
a head on a single throw, the probabilities of the various outcomes will be the 
• In books on probability, this result is stated in more general form. One may. for 
example, be dealing with dice, and the probability of throwing ones on each die. 
This probability is i and the mean number of ones is nj6 or, in general, if p is the 
probability of the single event, the mean number in n repetitions is np. 

536 
THE THEORY OF PROBABILITY 
same in the two situations. Hence the mean number of those remaining alive is 
0) . 20, or 10. The standard deviation of this distribution is eT = !vn. In our 
case, 
u = h!20 = !(4.47) 
= 2.24. 
Then 3eT to the right of the mean is 10 + 6.72, or 16.72. If we now use the 
normal probability approximation to our distribution of probabilities (Fig. 23-1), 
we can say that the probability that more than 1 6.72 out of 20 afflicted 
people remain alive without treatment is less than 0.001. But actually 17 people 
out of the 20 treated remained alive. The probability of this happening in any 
group of 20 afflicted people is so small that we must credit the treatment with 
the remarkable record in this group of 20. 
Thus when the theory of probability developed for coin-tossing is applied 
to a serious medical problem, it produces a highly useful conclusion. As a 
matter of fact, it is precisely this theory which is used to determine the effec­
tiveness of most medical treatments such as the Salk vaccine for poliomyelitis. 
Let us consider another application. There is a common belief that boy 
and girl babies are equally likely or that the probability of a boy being born 
is t. Suppose that in 2500 births 1310 proved to be boys. Are these data 
consistent with the accepted probability of one boy in two births? We can 
answer this question. The possible numbers of boys in 2500 births are precisely 
the same as the possible numbers of heads in a throw of 2500 coins (or 2500 
throws of one coin). Then the mean number of boys is (t)2500, or 1250. The 
standard deviation of the distribution of frequencies of these various numbers 
of boys is eT = tv'''' In our case, 
u = h/TIO = t ·  50 = 25. 
Now if we use the normal probability distribution as a good approximation 
to our binomial distribution, we may say that the normal probability curve has 
a mean of 1250 and a standard deviation of 25. Then 2eT to the right of the 
mean is [ JOO. An examination of Fig. 2 3-1 shows that the probability of [ JOO 
or more boys is 0.023. This means that in only 23 cases out of 1000, on the 
average, will there be [JOO boys or more in 2500 births. 
We are now faced with a problem rather than a conclusion, namely with 
the occurrence of a very improbable number of births. An event which is 
very improbable can, of course, occur. However. the entire reasoning is based 
on the assumption that boy and girl babies are equally likely or that the prob­
ability of a boy is i. It seems far more reasonable to question this hypothesis. 
As a matter of fact, more extensive records show that the ratio of boys to girls 
is 51 to 49 instead of 50 to 50. This slight difference in ratio makes a lot of 
difference in the result. Though our theory does not cover this case, we could 
show that substituting the probability frk for t leads to the probability of about 

BINOMIAL DISTRIBUTIONS 
537 
it that 1300 or more boys will occur in 2500 births. That an event should occur 
whose probability is t is by no means surprising. 
In concluding that the medical treatment was effective and in rejecting 
the hypothesis of equally likely boy and girl births, we relied upon a prob­
ability. In the first case we decided that the occurrence of an event whose 
probability is less than 0.001 implied that the treatment was effective. In the 
second case we decided that the occurrence of an event whose probability is 
0.023 discredited the belief that boy and girl babies are equally likely. The 
question of what probability to accept as evidence for or against a hypothesis 
must be decided by the individual concerned, and his judgment will undoubt­
edly be influenced by the consequences that are likely to arise from his decision. 
A recent and most interesting application of the above theory has been 
made to "prove" the possibility of extrasensory perception, that is, the ability 
of some people to discern undisclosed facts by extraordinary mental power, 
for example, to read hidden cards. In the actual tests made by Professor J. B. 
Rhine and others, subjects were asked to name certain cards held face down, 
and these people were able to give the correct answers a far greater number of 
times than the mathematical probabilities of sheer guesses would predict. Thus 
suppose that the 4 sixes of a deck were held face down on a table. If a subject 
were asked to select the six of diamonds, he should be able, on the basis of 
sheer guess, to do so about t of the times. But suppose that the subject selects 
the right card ͚ of the times in a large number of trials. Such an unexpectedly 
large ratio of correct choices is interpreted by Rhine to mean an unusual 
mental faculty, i.e., extrasensory perception. Of course, the argument here 
centers about the interpretation of the results in the light of the theory of 
probability. Rhine's claim is that his experiments also point to telepathy, 
clairvoyance, prescience, and psychokinesis (the power of the mind to control 
material objects). 
EXERCISES 
1. Form the eighth row in Pascal's triangle and calculate from it the probability 
of throwing 4 heads and 3 tails in a throw of seven coins. 
2. What is the probability of 2 heads in a toss of 6 coins? 
3. Suppose that 6 coins are tossed 2000 times. Approximately how often will 2 
heads appear? 
4. What is the probability of getting at least 5100 heads in a toss of 10,000 coins? 
5. Suppose that 50% of people afflicted with a certain disease die. A medical treat­
ment is tried on 100 people, and 65 survive. What is the probability that the 
treatment is effective? 
6. Suppose that the conditions in Exercise 5 are changed to 1000 people of whom 
650 survive. Does the probability of the treatment's effectiveness change? Justify 
your finding by a qualitative argument. 

538 
THE THEORY OF PROBABILITY 
7. Suppose 860 boys are born in 1600 births. Do these facts suppOrt or discredit the 
hypothesis that boys and girls are equally likely? 
8. Suppose 860 heads turn up in a toss of 1600 coins. What conclusion would you 
draw? 
9. The probability that a person of age 40 will live to be 70 is t- Out of 400 people 
in a certain industry who were forty years old, 150 were alive at the age of 70. 
What may you conclude about the death rate of workers in this industry? 
23-6 
THE PROBLEMS OF SAMPLING 
When one knows the distribution of the probabilities of some variable, one 
can calculate the probability that a particular value or a range of values will 
occur and draw a conclusion from this probability. Thus if one knows the 
distribution of the probabilities of various heights, one can calculate the prob­
ability of finding a man with a height, say, between 69 and 70 in. Likewise, if 
one knows the distribution of the probabilities of the various numbers of heads 
on a throw of, say 1000 coins, one can calculate the probability of obtaining, 
for example, 600 or more heads on a particular throw. 
In situations of this kind one knows the probabilities of the various al­
ternatives and calculates the probability of a particular one. Now let us con­
sider the following problem. A manufacturer turns out millions of units of the 
same product each year. He sets up a standard for his product which depends 
upon the use to which it is put, the price at which it is to sell, the kind of 
machine which makes it, and other factors. Thus he might decide what, for 
example, the standard or mean size of his product should be. It is desirable, of 
course, that all articles produced by one machine be exactly alike, but even 
under the remarkable accuracy of modern machine performances, complete 
uniformity cannot be achieved. Hence he also allows for variations, and fixes 
the standard deviation from the mean which his machinery should hold to. 
However, machines deteriorate and wear out, or some part may function poorly 
and affect the Output, and the manufacturer therefore checks the output. Since 
it is too expensive to test each item, he resorts to sampling. Let us say that he 
examines a sample of 100 units each day. But a sample may have accidental 
variations which may not be representative of the entire product, just as the 
mean height of 100 people chosen at random is not necessarily the mean height 
of all people, even if these people were members of an ethnically homogeneous 
group. By applying the theory of probability he can decide whether, on the 
basis of the sample, his machinery is functioning properly, that is, is producing 
articles with the intended mean and standard deviation. 
For the problem of quality control just described, the mean and standard 
deviation of the entire distribution or population are known, and one judges 
from a sample whether the mean, say, of the population is being adhered to. 
There are, however, many problems of sampling in which the mean and 

THE PROBLEMS OF SAMPLING 
539 
standard deviation of the original population are not known, and one is asked 
to determine them by sampling. For example, a manufacturer of electric light 
bulbs uses new materials or a new process to make the bulbs and wishes to 
know how long they will burn on the average. He could test 10,000 bulbs 
and obtain an answer, but this is not at all necessary. He can test 100 bulbs 
and find the mean life of this sample. By applying methods of probability 
theory, which we shall not present, to the mean of his sample, he can determine 
the mean life of the entire output. The estimate he obtains for the mean of 
the entire population will not be a precise figure but will lie between certain 
limits with a probability of almost 1. If he wishes to obtain a better estimate, 
he can use a larger sample, but the surprising fact is that rather small samples 
give good estimates of the mean of the entire output. 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
1. Let us consider a game in which there are 38 possible outcomes (this is true of 
roulette). Let us suppose that these are numbered 1 to 38. Find the probability 
a) that an even number will win, 
b) that an odd number will win, 
c) that a multiple of four will win. 
2. Consider the usual deck of 52 cards. What is the probability in choosing a single 
card that it will be 
a) an ace? 
b) a diamond? 
c) an ace or a diamond? 
3. What is the probability of throwing a 3 or a 5 on a single throw of a die? 
4. There are 4 red balls and 3 black baIls in an urn. If one ball is drawn, what is the 
probability that it wiIl be 
a) black? 
b) red? 
c) red or black? 
5. An urn contains 4 red balls, 3 black ones, and 2 white ones. Find the probability 
that a single ball drawn from the urn will be 
a) black, 
b) red, 
c) red or black. 
6. a) What is the probability of throwing 2 ones on a single throw of 2 dice? 
Remember that there are 36 possible outcomes on a throw of 2 dice. 
b) What is the probability of throwing an ace twice in two successive throws of 
a single die? 
7. Out of 100,000 people alive at the age of 10 about 70,000 reach the age of 50 and 
65,000 reach the age of 55. 
a) What is the probability that a IO-year-old child will reach the age of 55? 
b) What is the probability that a 50-year-old person will reach the age of 55? 
c) Would you conclude from your answers to parts (a) and (b) that the proba­
bility of living to the age of 55 is much better at the age of 50 than at the 
age of 10? 
8. Suppose that the heights of American women are normally distributed and that 
the mean height is 64 in. and that the standard deviation is It in. What is the 
probability that the height of a woman chosen at random is less than 61 in.? 

540 
THE THEORY OF PROBABILITY 
Topics for Further Investigation 
1. Probability applied to games of chance. 
2. The evidence for extrasensory perception. 
3. The tests of hypotheses by sampling. 
4. Probability applied to the study of heredity. 
5. The statistical view of nature. 
Recommended Reading 
ALDER, HENRY L. and EDWARD B. ROESSLER: Introduction to Probability and Sta­
tistics, Chaps. 5 through 9, W. H. Freeman & Co., San Franciso, 1960. 
BOHM, DAVID: Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, Routledge & Kegan Paul 
Ltd., London, 1957. 
BORN, MAX :  Natural PhiLosophy of Cause and Chance, Oxford University Press, 
New York, 1949. 
COHEN, MORRIS R. and ERNEST E. NAGEL: Introduction to Logic and Scientific 
Method, Chaps. 15 and 16, Harcourt Brace and Co., New York, 1934. 
FREUND, JOHN E.: Modern Elementary Statistics, 2nd ed., Chaps. 7 through 11, Pren­
tice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, 1960. 
GAMOW, GEORGE: One Two Three . . .  Infinity, Chaps. 8 and 9, The New Ameri­
can Library Mentor Books, New York, 1947. 
KASNER, EDWARD and JAMES R. NEWMAN: Mathematics and the Imagination, Chap. 7, 
Simon and Schuster, Inc., New York, 1940. 
KLINE, MORRIS: Mathematics in Western Culture, Chap. 24, Oxford University 
Press, New York, 1953. 
LAPLACE, P. S.: A Philosophical Essay in Probabilities, Dover Publications, Inc., 
New York, 1951. 
LEVINSON, HORACE c.: The Science of Chance, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 
New York, 1950. 
MORONEY, M. J.: Facts from Figures, Chaps. 1 through 14, Penguin Books Ltd., Har­
mondsworrh, England, 1951. 
ORE, OYSTEIN: Cardano, The Gambling Scholar, pp. 143-241, Princeton University 
Press, Princeton, 1953. 
REICHMANN, W. J.: Use and Abuse of Statistics, Chaps. 14 through 17, Oxford Uni­
versity Press, New York, 1962. 
RHINE, J. B.: Parapsychology, Frontier Science of the Mind, Thomas and Co., 
Springfield, 1957. 
SCHRODINGER, ERWIN: Science and the Human Temperament, W. W. Norron & 
Co., New York, 1935. Reprinted under the title Science, Theory and Man, 
Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1957. 
WEAVER, WARREN: Lady Luck, Doubleday and Co., Inc., Anchor Books, New York, 
1963. 

CHAPTER 24 
THE NATURE AND VALUES OF MATHEMATICS 
This, therefore, is Mathematics: she reminds you of the invisible forms of 
the soul; she gives life to her own discoveries; she awakens the mind and 
purifies the intellect; she brings to light our intrinsic ideas; she abolishes 
oblivion and ignorance which are ours by birth . . .  
PROCLUS DJADOCHUS 
24-1 
INTRODUCTION 
We have been studying the ideas, technical content, scientific applications, and 
cultural influences of mathematics. ]n OUf concentration on details we may 
have failed to note a few broader features. Also, much of what we said at the 
outset about the nature of mathematics was deliberately limited to ideas which 
would be helpful in undertaking the study of the subject. Bur, as we now 
know, both the nature and the content changed radically during the centuries. 
It may profit us therefore to survey the subject as mathematicians see it raday, 
in order to gain some insights which could not be attempted at the beginning 
of our study. 
24-2 
THE STRUCTURE OF MATHEMATICS 
Mathematics, viewed as a whole, is a collection of branches. The largest branch 
is that which builds on the ordinary whole numbers, fractions, and irrational 
numbers, or what, collectively, is called the real number system. Arithmetic, 
algebra, the study of functions, the calculus, differential equations, and various 
other subjects which follow the calculus in logical order are all developments of 
the real number system. We shall refer to this branch as the mathematics of 
number. A second branch is Euclidean geometry. Projective geometry and 
each of the several non-Euclidean geometries are branches as are various other 
arithmetics and their algebras. Were we to pursue mathematics still further, we 
would find that it contains many more divisions. 
Each branch has the same logical structure. It begins with certain concepts, 
such as the whole numbers in the mathematics of number, and such as point, 
line, and triangle in Euclidean geometry. These concepts must obey explicitly 
stated axioms. Some of the axioms of the mathematics of number are the 
541 

542 
THE NATURE AND VALUES 01' MATHEMATICS 
associative, commutative, and distributive properties and the axioms about 
equalities. Some of the axioms of Euclidean geometry are that two points 
determine a line, all right angles are equal, and the axiom on parallel lines. The 
non-Euclidean geometry of Gauss, Lobatchevsky, and Bolyai contains the same 
axioms as Euclidean geometry does, except for the parallel axiom. From the 
concepts and axioms, theorems are deduced. Hence, from the standpoint of 
structure, the concepts, axioms, and theorems are the essential components. We 
shall discuss these in turn. 
The basic concepts of the elementary branches of mathematics are abstrac­
tions from experience. Whole numbers and fractions were certainly suggested 
by obvious physical counterparts. But it is noteworthy that many more con­
cepts are introduced which are, in essence, creations of the human mind with 
or without partial help from experience. Irrational numbers, such as VI, were 
forced upon mathematicians to represent all the lengths occurring in Euclidean 
geometry, for example, the length of the hypotenuse of a right triangle whose 
arms are both one unit long. The notion of a negative number, though perhaps 
suggested by the need to distinguish debits from credits, is nevertheless not 
wholly derived from experience, for the mind had to conceive of the notion of 
an entirely new type of number to which operations such as addition, multipli­
cation, and the like can be applied. The notion of a variable to represent the 
quantitative values of some changing physical phenomenon, such as temperature 
or time, is also at least one mental step beyond the mere observation of change. 
The concept of a function, or a relationship between variables, is almost entirely 
a mental creation. The farther one proceeds with the mathematics of number, 
the more remote from experience are the concepts introduced and the larger is 
the creative role played by the mind. The derivative of a function, for example, 
the instantaneous rate of change of distance compared with time, is a wholly 
man-made and, one might also say, an ingenious construction. We do not 
experience instants or instantaneous velocities but, rather, small intervals of 
time and speeds over small intervals of time. 
The gradual introduction of new concepts which more and more depart 
from forms of experience finds its parallel in geometry. Though point, line, 
triangle, circle, and a few other elementary concepts are no more than abstrac­
tions from experience, this is not true of most of the curves which geometry 
considers. The approach to the conic sections as sections of a cone made by 
a plane or by the locus definitions (Chapter 6) subsequently used to define 
parabola, ellipse, and hyperbola was conceived by the mind. The notions of 
projection and section of projective geometry and many of the specific con­
cepts of projective geometry such as cross ratio are entirely mental creations. 
This brief review of the origin of mathematical concepts may serve to 
emphasize several major facts. The first of these is growth. As mathematicians 
continue to work in any given branch, they discover new concepts which are 
worth introducing and developing. Secondly, as their work advances, the new 

THE STRUCTURE OF MATHEMATICS 
543 
concepts are less and less drawn from experience and more and more from the 
recesses of human minds. Moreover, the development of concepts is progres­
sive, later concepts being built on earlier ones. These facts have unfortunate 
consequences. Because the more advanced ideas are purely mental creations 
rather than abstractions from immediate experience and because they are de­
fined in terms of prior concepts, it is more difficult to comprehend them. At 
least, one cannot usually find simple and familiar physical pictures or experi­
ences to illustrate their meanings. 
Axioms constitute the second major component of any branch of mathe­
matics. The axioms of the mathematics of number and of Euclidean geometry 
were suggested by experience. Up to the introduction of non-Euclidean geom­
etry, the idea that man chose axioms suggested by experience would have been 
regarded as absurd. Axioms were understood to be basic, self-evident truths 
about the concepts involved. While minor variations in the choice and wording 
were tolerated, the universal belief was that man had to accept what was clearly 
true. These truths were supposed to be written into the universe and were 
considered to be inescapable. Some philosophers, such as Plato and Descartes, 
believed that these truths were already planted in our minds by God. We 
know now that this view must be discarded. The seemingly self-evident nature 
of the axioms of the mathematics of number and of Euclidean geometry is 
really the consequence of limited experience and relatively superficial ob­
servation. In the simpler uses of numbers and in the limited regions of the 
universe accessible to man until recent times, the well-known axioms of num­
ber and Euclidean geometry seemed inescapably true. But we can choose other 
axioms and produce other geometries and even other number systems. Though 
we can make arbitrary choices, we do not do so because we wish our new 
axioms to yield systems of mathematics as significant and as useful as the older 
systems. Were we able to continue our study of mathematics proper, we would 
find that there are many other systems of axioms which lead to important 
branches of mathematics. 
The fruit of mathematical activity consists of the theorems deduced from 
a set of axioms. The theorems offer new knowledge by no means immediately 
discernible in the axioms. Whether or not the reader may prize the knowledge, 
he learns by pursuing the implications of the Euclidean axioms that the sum of 
the angles of a triangle is 180" and that the area of a circle is 'Tr times the square 
of the radius. The amount of information that can be deduced from some sets 
of axioms is almost incredible. Euclid deduced about 500 theorems from his 
set. The axioms of number give rise to the results of algebra, properties of 
functions, the theorems of the calculus, the solutions of various types of dif­
ferential equations, and many other results we have not surveyed. 
Mathematical theorems, as we know, must be deductively established. 
Since observation, measurement, induction, and a variety of other methods of 
obtaining knowledge are available and are used in all other scientific pursuits, 

544 
THE NATURE AND VALUES OF MATHEMATICS 
the requirement that theorems be deductively established is very stringent. We 
have pointed out in Chapter J why the Greeks insisted on deductive arguments 
in mathematics. We are now in a position to see how much has been gained by 
exploring the implications of axioms. The development of precise and reliable 
methods of doing arithmetic, the solution of equations for unknowns, and the 
results of Euclidean geometry were but a first step. Simple deductive argu­
ments about right triangles and admittedly some physical data enabled man to 
determine the sizes and distances of the heavenly bodies and thus obtain the 
first real knowledge of the solar system. By adding to mathematical axioms such 
physical axioms as Newton's laws of motion and gravitation, man was able to 
calculate the motions of projectiles, planets, the moon, and even artificial 
satellites. Equally valuable results were deduced about the behavior of light 
and sound from mathematical and physical principles. The decision to explore 
deductively the axioms of a non-Euclidean geometry led to the construction 
of totally new geometries, one of which has actually been applied to the study 
of physical phenomena. A brief review of the contents of the preceding 
chapters will recall many other achievements of the deductive process. The 
Greeks themselves would have been astonished by the rich results which de­
duction produced and which the more common methods of obtaining knowl­
edge could not have yielded. Thus much of our deepest knowledge, which we 
would otherwise not have had, was obtained by deductive reasoning. 
The restriction of mathematics to results deduced from explicit axioms 
has had several other major values. It obliged human beings to apply their 
reasoning faculty. Though, as we pointed out in Chapter J, imagination and 
invention play key roles in suggesting what to prove and how to prove it, the 
mathematician's goal is not any new knowledge whatever but knowledge 
which he has some reason to believe can be deduced from axioms. Hence it 
is the deductive requirement which has caused man to explore and utilize his 
own mental capacities to an extent which no other subject has demanded. 
The third major value of the deductive process is that it enables man to 
predict. In a sense all reasoning enables man to predict. If one measures the 
angles of a dozen triangles and finds in each case that the sum of the angles 
is 180", he can then predict that the sum of the angles in any other triangle 
is also 180". But, as we have often emphasized, conclusions obtained by induc­
tion or analogy are not certain, whereas mathematical predictions are. Equally 
important is the recognition that predictions which amount to merely applying 
a general result to a special case are logically shallow. The predictions of 
mathematics are themselves general results; they are the outcome of dozens of 
hard-won and by no means obvious deductive arguments and are therefore 
profound facts which most likely could not be otherwise obtained. 
The fourth value of the deductive process is its power to organize knowl­
edge. If all the results now available in Euclidean geometry had been obtained 
by a multitude of observations, inductions. or measurements, they would make 

THE STRUCTURE OF l\IATHEMATICS 
545 
an unwieldy mass that could not be assimilated. The value of the information 
would hardly be realized. But deductive organization permits the mind to 
survey the whole readily, grasp what is fundamental and what is subordinate, 
and see the interrelationships of the many conclusions. Comprehension is 
vastly aided. 
We have been discussing the components of mathematical branches and 
the values of the deductive structure. There is another feature of mathematics 
which a backward glance reveals, namely growth. There is no doubt of the 
growth of mathematics, but there is some disagreement among mathematicians 
as to just what it is that they are adding to their structures. Succinctly 
phrased, the issue might be called one of discovery versus creation. Do the 
concepts. axioms, and theorems exist in some objective world and are merely 
detected by man or are they entirely human creations' 
In Greek times the axioms of mathematics were regarded as necessary 
truths. Accordingly, mathematical theorems were also believed to be truths 
about the universe already incorporated in the design of the world. Hence 
each new theorem was regarded as a discovery, a disclosure of what already 
existed. That the alternate interior angles of parallel lines are equal was pre­
ordained. Mathematicians were merely uncovering theorems. but because 
human minds were limited, they had to labor hard and long to recognize what 
really lay open before them. To the mind of God all this knowledge was 
immediate. One might say that from this standpoint mathematics was like a 
mine whose riches were all there from the beginning, but had to be brought 
to the surface by patient digging. The existence of these riches was as inde­
pendent of man as the stars and planets appear to be. This view of mathematics 
was undoubtedly the dominant one until well into the eighteenth century and 
is held by some even today. 
The contrary view holds that mathematics, its concepts, axioms, and 
theorems, are created by man. Man distinguishes objects in the physical world 
and invents numbers. for example, as a way of representing one aspect which 
he has singled out from experience. Axioms, too, are man's generalization of 
how physical lines and figures seem to behave, with no guarantee given that 
figures actually behave this way or that the axioms really incorporate funda­
mental facts. Theorems may very logically follow from the axioms, but one 
could hardly claim more reality for them than for the axioms. Mathematics, 
according to this view, is a human creation in every respect. It is a consequence 
of what human beings are and how they think rather than what the physical 
world or some objective ideal world really contains. 
Is then mathematics a collection of diamonds hidden in the depths of the 
universe and gradually ur.earthed one by one or is it a collection of synthetic 
stones manufactured by man but nevertheless so brilliant that it bedazzles those 
mathematicians who are already partially blinded by pride in their own c.ea­
tions? Several considerations incline us to the latter point of view. HistoricalIy, 

546 
THE NATURE AND VALUES OF MATHEMATICS 
mathematics has not had an invariable character. To the pre-Greeks it was a 
practical tool. To the Greeks it was a body of pre-existing truths. It was 
practical and mystical knowledge in medieval Europe. The seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries identified it in subject matter and method with science. 
Non-Euclidean geometry not only forced a separation but revealed the arbi­
trariness inherent in the axioms. It thus seemed to establish that mathematics is 
not an idealized account of the physical world but has only a correspondence 
with the physical world. As scientific knowledge increases, new mathematical 
creations are suggested and employed. It would appear as though mathematics 
is the creation of human, fallible minds rather than a fixed, eternally existing 
body of knowledge. The subject seems very much dependent upon the creator. 
As Alfred North Whitehead put it, "The science of pure mathematics may 
claim to be the most original creation of the human spirit." Only the reiativeiy 
universal acceptance of mathematics <as opposed to the acceptance of religious, 
political, and ethical doctrines) may lure us into granting that subject an 
objective existence. 
EXERCISES 
1. Whac are the fundamental components of a branch of mathematics? 
2. Would you distinguish between whole numbers and irrational numbers in respect 
to derivation from experience? 
3. Why are axioms necessary in a deductive system? 
4. Criticize the statement: Mathematics is a fixed body of thought created in Greek 
times. 
5. Name some branches of mathematics. 
6. What are the factors that make possible the growth of mathematics? 
7. What can research in mathematics mean? 
8. What advantages has the requirement that man reason deductively yielded to 
the mathematical sciences? 
24-3 
THE. VALUES OF MATHEMATICS FOR THE STUDY OF NATURE 
Mathematics proper, as we have often emphasized, deals with numbers, geo­
metrical figures, and generalizations or extensions of ideas involving numbers 
and geometrical figures. Mathematics proper does not deal with forces, weight, 
velocity, light, or the planets. The task of the so-called pure mathematicians 
is to find and establish the implications of the axioms about mathematical 
concepts, that is, to prove theorems. There is much to be said for the study of 
mathematics itself, and we shall discuss it in a later section. However, the 
primary value of mathematics is not so much what the subject itself offers but 
what it helps man to achieve in the study of the physical world. 

VALUFS OF MATHEMATICS FOR THE STUDY OF NATURE 
547 
The greatest mathematicians from Greek times onward were interested in 
the physical world and in the use of mathematics to study the physical world. 
Although many of these men surely liked mathematics and tackled questions of 
mathematics proper, without thinking of immediate or even potential applica­
tion, it is fairly certain that they were willing to devote time to such problems 
only because they were already convinced of the value of the subject for 
science. Actually many of the greatest mathematicians were also the greatest 
physicists and astronomers of their ages, and, until very recent times when the 
increase in knowledge forced spet.:ialization, almost all mathematicians con­
tributed to science. One finds among the supreme mathematicians men, such 
as Newton, Lagrange, and La;:>loce, who even cared little or nothing for 
mathematics proper, but felt compelled to take up mathematical problems in 
order to solve physical prohlems. 
We shall not review the facts of history to substantiate the above assertions. 
Rather we wish to summarize the ways in which mathematics works with 
science and the values which science derives from this collaboration. 
Of course, the study of numbers and geometrical figures is to some extent 
physical knowledge. Quantity is an important physical fact as are the prop­
erties of geometrical figures since these are but forms of physical objects. 
Geometry is, moreover, a study of space. Although the belief that Euclidean 
geometry expresses the laws of space has been proved wrong, the various 
geometries that men have constructed are at least possible and, in some cases, 
useful descriptions of physical space. 
However, the greater importance of mathematics for science lies in the 
fact that the physical universe is explored so effectively with mathematics. To 
the Greeks, who first proclaimed that the universe is mathematically designed, 
and to scientists up to 1600, applying mathematics to nature meant searching 
for geometrical patterns in nature. This quest in itself yielded Ptolemaic the­
ory, some laws of light and mechanics, and the heliocentric theory. A more 
powerful mathematical approach to nature was forged by Galileo when he 
decided that science must seek to establish quantitative laws. Such laws as 
Newton's second law of motion, the law of gravitation, and Hooke's law, 
though they belong to science, are quantitative relationships among variables, 
or mathematical formulas. AE we saw in earlier chapters, mathematical processes 
can be applied to these formulas to deduce new ones. When these new formulas 
are interpreted physically, new physical information is revealed. 
Mathematics serves, then, to express physical laws, and the processes of 
mathematics are used to derive new physical information from the basic phys­
ical laws. But mathematics does far more for science. The goal of scientific 
efforts is not a collection of facts, whether obtained experimentally or deduced 
from other already established facts. The "ver-all goal is the formulation of 
theories, such as the theory of motion, the theories of light, sound, and electro­
magnetic waves, the theory of relativity, and quantum theory. These theories 

548 
THE NATURE AND VALUES OF MATHEMATICS 
are mathematical structures. When fully developed, they are entirely analogous 
to the mathematics of number or to Euclidean geometry. The foundations on 
which any scientific theory rests are concepts and axioms, though the latter 
are usually called physical principles. The heart of any scientific theory is a 
series of results mathematically deduced from basic principles. Thus Kepler's 
laws are deduced from the laws of motion and gravitation and are, since 
Newton's work, an integral part of the theory of motion. In other words, 
mathematical deduction provides the structure of any scientific theory; it is 
the bond between one law and another. A scientific theory is a comprehensible 
and consistent collection of facts, and it is comprehensible and consistent be­
cause the facts are arranged in the form of a series of mathematical deductions. 
In discussing earlier the value of deduction, we pointed out that, among 
other advantages, it permits prediction. Since science utilizes mathematical 
deduction, it too can predict. The predictions of the height or range of pro­
jectiles, of eclipses, and of radio waves are remarkable juSt because they are 
beyond the capabilities of any other method. The value of prediction cannot 
be overemphasized. On the practical side, it underlies all large-scale engineer­
ing ventures. The waste that would be entailed if inferences had to be drawn 
solely from models or from experiments would be enormous in even such 
relatively simple projects as building a bridge or a skyscraper. From the stand­
point of pure science, prediction is valuable in that it confirms the scientific 
principles on which the predictions are based. The principles stand or fall on 
their predic:ive value. and mathematical arguments are the necessary link 
between the basic principles and the predictions. 
The abstractness of mathematically formulated scientific principles has 
great value for science. Because the same abstract mathematical laws may gov­
ern two entirely different physical situations, the scientist may discover some 
unsuspected relationship between the two situations. Thus, for example, the 
trigonometric functions apply to all wave motions, sound, radio, light, water 
waves, waves in gases, and many other types of wave motions. The person 
who understands trigonometric functions and their properties understands in 
one swoop all the phenomena governed by these functions. He has but to 
interpret the variables to suit the physical situation, and he can immediately 
comprehend a host of facts about the phenomenon because he knows the 
mathematical properties of the functions. So, too, can knowledge of the 
normal law of distribution be applied to heights, intelligence, the sensitivity of 
the ear to frequencies, and to other biological phenomena. We see, then, that 
the mathematics of such related areas provides an integrative value; it features 
the common contents. Only the names, so to speak, of the different phenomena 
are different. Herein lies one great value of mathematics. Abstract mathe­
matical relationships, seemingly outside the realm of physical reality, are the 
key to large classes of physical phenomena. 

VALUES OF MATHEMATICS FOR THE STUDY OF NATURE 
549 
Another value of mathematics for science has already been treated in our 
presentation of gravitation. Quantitative physical principles, such as the law 
of gravitation, described purportedly physical concepts such as the force of 
gravitation. But closer examination revealed that these concepts were physical 
mysteries and that all we knew about them were cerrain quantitative laws and 
their mathematical consequences. The force of gravitation could be and un­
doubtedly is a fiction. Hence our only precise knowledge about these sup­
posedly real phenomena consists of a number of mathematical formulas. 
Mathematics, then, is the essence of our best scientific theories. Those who, 
admitting the paradox, deplore the fact that to achieve success, the physical 
sciences have to pay the price of mathematical abstractness must reconsider 
what it is they would look for in the ultimate scientific exposition of the nature 
of the physical world. 
Science is indebted to mathematics in many ways and not the least of these 
is that mathematics provides concepts to represent physical notions. A func­
tion is a mathematical concept, but it provides the very tool for the representa­
tion of physical laws. The derivative and integral of the calculus are im­
mensely effective in studying physical processes. The conic sections are the 
curves which proved ro be just right for projectile motion and astronomy. 
Over and above concepts, mathematics provides entire theories with which to 
systematize and express scientific results. A non-Euclidean geometry is a 
complete theoretical system into which one can fit facts about space and the 
behavior of figures in space; such a geometry enabled Einstein to formulate his 
theory of relativity. This major function of mathematics is sometimes described 
by the statement that mathematics provides models for the scientific description 
of reality. The concepts and models are what really determine the thinking 
and theories of science. for scientists seeking to represent their ideas in precise 
language and ro organize their findings readily adopt convenient mathematical 
ideas. 
It is highly important that many of these models, developed on behalf of 
some physical problems, turned out to be just the right ones for totally new 
applications. The conic sections were probably created on behalf of investi­
gations of light and ro answer basic questions in the already significant 
Euclidean geometry. Given the conic sections and their properties, Kepler 
saw the right use for them. It seems unlikely that Kepler would have had 
the strength and inspiration to create the mathematics of conic sections and 
determine that they were the correct paths of the planets. The same applies 
to Galileo and the parabola. In recent times Einstein, in developing his theory, 
rook full advantage of the already existing non-Euclidean geometry. The con­
ception and development of such a geometry climaxed. as we saw, the work 
of hundreds of men and required, in addition, the genius of Gauss ro perceive 
the true significance of these efforts. 

550 
THE NATURE AND VALUES OF MATHEMATICS 
EXERCISES 
1. Describe some of the values which mathematics offers to science. 
2. Why is reasoning about concepts, such as numbers, formulas, and geometric 
figures, likely to be more fruitful than reasoning about concrete physical 
phenomena? 
24-4 
THE AESTHETIC AND INTELLECTUAL VALUES 
We have asserted that the primary value of mathematics is the assistance it 
renders in the study of nature, and we have summarized the ways in which 
mathematics supports and even molds science. This is not to deny that many 
of these mathematical concepts, methods, and results were suggested by phys­
ical thought. But mathematicians often carry the development of a theme or 
a whole branch of their subject far beyond the needs of science. The conic 
sections and non-Euclidean geometry are examples of such activity. If there 
was little or no scientific use for these extensions, why were they explored? 
A partial answer is that mathematicians, already convinced of the extra­
ordinary usefulness of some ideas, for example, the whole numbers and simple 
geometrical figures, were satisfied that almost any results concerning these 
concepts would be worth having for their potential applicability. Many men 
who earn enough money to satisfy their needs strive to earn more because they 
know that money is helpful and that uses for the surplus earnings will arise. 
When non-Euclidean geometry proved to be useful despite its strange, seem­
ingly inapplicable nature, mathematicians were all the more reinforced in their 
proclivity to pursue their own themes. Although nature is the womb from 
which most basic mathematical ideas are born, mathematicians have always felt 
free to amplify and extend these ideas without regard for applicability to 
nature, confident that at some time the extensions will prove their worth. 
However, immediate need in science and potential usefulness have not 
been the only motivations for mathematical creations. The individual may 
well recognize that mathematical activity is guided by physical needs, bur he 
himself may study mathematics simply because he likes it. He may be content 
to know that the subject he has chosen for investigation is important. for the 
understanding or mastery of nature and yet care little himself abour the scien­
tific bearing of the mathematics. He may even choose some problem of his 
own fabrication and pursue it (see Chapter 3). 
In other words there are men who pursue mathematics for its own sake; 
they are attracted by the fact that mathematics is an art. Among the branches 
of mathematics that we have examined, the subject of projective geometry and 
the subject of congruences (Chapter 2 1 ) ,  a topic in the branch of mathematics 
called the theory of numbers, were motivated largely by aesthetic interests. 
What artistic qualities do some men find in mathematics? Though ex­
perience, observation, measurement, and even guesswork suggest some results, 

THE AESTHETrC AND INTELLECfUAL VALUES 
551 
imagination, intUitlon, and insight are required for major creations, and the 
exercise of such talents is one of the attractions offered by an art. Indeed the 
mathematician must be able to discern possible conclusions and methods of 
proof where the average person would see no hint at all. Though reason 
enters, on the one hand, as a guard to ward off far-fetched hypotheses and, on 
the other, as a guide and prompter, creation is hardly a matter of logic. If we 
may borrow the words of Rheticus, the man who prepared for publication the 
major work of Copernicus: 
The mathematician . . .  is surely like a blind man who, with only a staff to 
guide him, must make a great, endless, hazardous journey that winds through 
innumerable desolate places. What 'Will be the result? Proceeding anxiously 
for a 'While and groping his way 'With his staff, he wjJl at some time, leaning upon 
it, cry out in despair to heaven, earth, and all the gods to aid him in his misery. 
God will permit him to try his strength for a period of years, that he may in 
the end learn that he cannot be rescued from threatening danger by his staff. 
Then God compassionately stretches forth His hand to the despairing man, and 
with His hand conducts him to the desired goal. 
Since persistence is required for all creative work, the mathematician, too, 
must have the stamina to wrestle with a problem until he has succeeded in 
solving it. He must have confidence in his powers. He may be driven to 
creative activity, as is the poet or paioter, by pride in his reasoning faculty, the 
spirit of exploration, and the desire to express himself, but he must persist. The 
greatest mathematicians have stressed the concentration and time they have 
devoted to problems. Gauss said, perhaps over-modestly but sincerely, "If 
others would but reflect on mathematical truths as deeply and as continuously 
as I have, they would make my discoveries." 
Perhaps the best reason for regarding mathematics as an art is not so much 
that it affords an outlet for creative activity as that it provides spiritual values. 
It puts man in touch with the highest aspirations and loftiest goals. It offers 
intellectual delight and the exaltation of resolving the mysteries of the universe. 
Many who accept the above described values of mathematics nevertheless 
insist that an art form provide emotional satisfactions. Actually a true art 
appeals primarily to the mind; in fact, some arts-witness modern abstract 
painting-can hardly have emotional import. However, mathematics meets 
this criterion too. There are positive and negative emotional responses to 
mathematics. On the negative side, there are the intense feelings of dislike 
which many have for the subject. On the positive side, there are pleasures 
ranging from the quiet satisfaction felt by many laymen who read in the 
subject, to the thrill of success which even young students experience when 
they have solved a problem, and to the real delight which mathematicians who 
do original research derive from their work. There are satisfactions, much 
like those offered by great paintings, to be obtained from surveying orderly 
chains of reasoning. This order and harmony can be found in the development 

552 
THE NATURE AND VALUES OF MATHEMATICS 
of mathematical themes, and there is the harmony which mathematics imposes 
on nature and which minds such as Ptolemy, Copernicus, Kepler, Newton, and 
Einstein fashion. Coleridge has said that the essence of beauty is the discovery 
of unity within and beyond obvious variety. The mathematicians are artists 
who use nature as their model and provide their own orderly and unifying 
interpretations. 
Somewhat distinct from the aesthetic value of mathematics is the intellectual 
challenge. Mathematicians respond to this challenge much as business men 
respond to the excitement of making money. Mathematicians enjoy the excite­
ment of the quest, the thrill of discovery, the sense of adventure, the satisfac­
tion of mastering difficulties, the pride of achievement or, if one wishes, the 
exaltation of the ego, and the intoxication of success. Mathematics is partic­
ularly attractive to people who enjoy such challenges because it offers sharp, 
clear problems. The fields of political theory, economics, and ethics are far 
more complex, and it is more difficult not only to isolate and formulate the 
problems but to be at all sure that one has the information which can lead to a 
decisive solution of these problems. By contrast an exercise in geometry, though 
it may contain no impressive results, offers a clear and circumscribed problem. 
EXERCISES 
1. What are the motivations for mathematical activity? 
2. Defend or attack the thesis that mathematics is an art. 
3. What is commonly meant by pure and applied mathematics? 
4. Are mathematicians free to create what they wish to? 
24-5 
MATHEMATICS AND RATIDNALISM 
Among the values which mathematics offers is one which transcends the subject 
and its relationship to the physical sciences. Mathematics has been the advocate, 
essence, and embodiment of rationalism. Rationalism is not a whim. It is a 
spirit which stimulates, invigorates, challenges, and drives human minds to 
function at the highest mental level in exploring and establishing the deepest 
implications of knowledge already at hand. It calls for the courage to discard 
one's dearest and most cherished beliefs if these do not satisfy rational criteria. 
Mathematics also holds forth the ideal of detachment and of objective judg­
ment. It has fostered independence of thought, adherence to the dictates of 
reason, careful scrutiny of arguments. and a spirit of criticism. 
Mathematicians have set the highest standards of reasoning by their per­
sistence and indomitableness. We have seen that they have worked for centuries 
to prove what intuition or experience would have us believe is unquestionable. 
For two thousand years mathematicians sought an exact method of trisecting 
an angle, squaring the circle, and doubling the cube, though practical construc-

THE LIMITATIONS OF MATHEMATICS 
553 
tions of as great an accuracy as desired were theirs for the asking. In this case 
the long-sought methods proved to be nonexistent; that is, it is not possible to 
perform these constructions with straightedge and compass. But the important 
point at the moment is the search. Likewise for twO thousand years mathema­
ticians sought to replace the parallel axiom of Euclid by a more reliable state­
menL Though in this instance, too, the outcome of their search was a surprise, 
the important point again is the magnitude and persistence of the effort and the 
ultimate rejection of many substitute statements which re-examination showed 
would not do. To reason mathematically is to seek perfection in reasoning. The 
commonly used phrase "mathematical exactness" pays homage to this ideal of 
mathematicians. 
As man's greatest and most successful intellectual experiment, mathematics 
demonstrates manifestly how powerful our rational faculty is. It is the finest 
expression of man's intellectual strength. His reason has, for example, far out­
stripped his imagination. He can think about stars so distant that only numbers 
convey any meaning, about spaces which cannot be pictured, and about elec­
trons too small to be seen with the most powerful microscopes. 
Rationalism and exact thought patterned after mathematics can be applied 
to many fields. In this broader sense at least and often more concretely mathe­
matics has penetrated almost all domains of inquiry and has served as the model 
of all intellectual enterprises. In Plato's time the word mathematics meant 
rational systematic knowledge, the modern equivalent of which is the German 
term Wissellschaft. Later with Aristotle it came to mean the specific subjects 
we study in mathematics courses. It is Plato's meaning which the subject of 
mathematics really encompasses today, even though the word itself stiII retains 
the more limited meaning. 
24-6 
THE LIMITATIONS OF MATHEMATICS 
Yet there are some limitations on what mathematics and mathematical methods 
seem to be able to achieve. Some aspects of the physical world and of human 
behavior have not yielded to either. Thus, touch, taste, and smell are sense 
perceptions which, unlike seeing and hearing, have defied mathematical analysis 
or even measurement, though the sense organs involved are physiologically 
simpler than the eye and the ear. Human character, desires, motivations. and 
emotions are more successfully studied by advertising men than by mathema­
ticians. Neither axioms nor theorems have been found which would furnish a 
model of man's behavior, of the operation of his mind, and of the economic and 
political systems most beneficial to human society. Numbers and geometrical 
forms do not seem to be the applicable concepts. Only inanimate nature and, 
in fact, merely portions of that have yielded to mathematical analysis.)t is true 
that statistical methods have given us some ability to predict human character­
istics and behavior, but statistical conclusions wipe out all individual nuances 

554 
THE NATURE AND VALUES OF MATHEMATICS 
and yield only gross effects. There is, of course, still hope that current research 
on mathematical models may serve other domains of inquiry and in particular 
solve the problems of society. 
One should also question the extent to which mathematics really represents 
the physical world. The discipline has been effective in treating some abstrac­
tions: space, time, mass, velocity, weight, force, the frequency of light and 
sound, and other such concepts. It treats those physical concepts which can be 
represented by numbers or geometrical figures. But physical objects possess 
other properties as well. We do not usually think of human beings as chunks 
of matter moving in space and time. Nor would a poet or an artist be content 
to say that the mathematical laws of planetary motion represent the essence of 
the planets. We have become so accustomed to the analysis of the physical 
world in terms of space, time, form, mass, and the like, that we tend to overlook 
the fact that these concepts represent just some properties and narrow ones at 
that. They cause us to look at the world with blinders. The mathematical ap­
proach may not be the deepest possible or the most illuminating; it certainly 
does not answer the question of whether the solar system is designed for any 
special ends. Scientists may say that this question does not fall within the 
province of science, but it is nevertheless a question which human beings would 
like to see answered. The refusal of scientists to consider it does not wipe out 
the question, but only reveals a limitation of the mathematical approach. 
The plight of man is pitiable. We are wanderers in a vast universe, helpless 
before the havocs of nature, dependent upon nature for food and other neces­
sities, and uninformed as to why we were born and what to strive for. Man is 
alone in a cold and alien universe. He gazes upon the mysterious, rapidly 
changing, and endless world about him and is confused, batRed, and even 
frightened by his own insignificance. As Pascal put it, 
For after all what is man in nature? A nothing in relation to infinity, all in 
relation to nothing, a central point between nothing and all and infinitely far 
from understanding either. The end of things and their beginnings are impreg­
nably concealed from him in an impenetrable secret. He is equally incapable 
of seeing the nothingness out of which he was drawn and the infinite in which 
he is engulfed. 
Montaigne and Hobbes said the same thing in other words. The life of man is 
solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short. He is the prey of trivial happenings. 
Endowed with a few limited senses and a brain, man began to pierce the 
mystery about him. By utilizing what the senses reveal immediately or what 
can be inferred from experiments man adopted axioms and applied his reason­
ing powers. His quest was the quest for order, his goal, to build sound 
knowledge as opposed to transient sensations. Amid the chaos of life and his 
environment, he has sought patterns of explanation and systems of knowledge 
that might help him to attain some mastery over his environment. The chief 

THE LIMITATIONS OF MATHEMATICS 
555 
tool proved to be the product of man's own reason, and its accomplishments 
were described by Fourier. 
It brings together the most diverse phenomena and discovers hidden conformities 
which unite them. If matter evades us, such as the air and light, because of its 
extreme thinness, if objects are located far from us in the immensity of space, if 
man wishes to understand the performance of the heavens for the successive 
periods which separate a large number of centuries, if the forces of gravity and of 
heat be at work in the interior of a solid globe at depths which will be forever 
inaccessible, mathematical analysis can still grasp the laws of these phenomena. It 
renders them present and measurable and seems to be a faculty of the human 
reason destined to make up for the brevity of life and for the imperfection of the 
senses; and what is more remarkable still, it follows the same method in the study 
of all phenomena; it interprets them in the same language, as if to affirm the unity 
and simplicity of the pJan of the universe, and to make still more manifest the 
immutable order which presides over all natural events. 
Over the centuries man has created such grand structures as Euclidean 
geometry, Ptolemaic theory, the heliocentric theory, Newtonian mechanics, 
electromagnetic theory, and in recent times the theory of relativity and quan­
tum theory. In all of these and in other significant and powerful bodies of 
science, mathematics, as we now know, is the method of construction. the 
framework, and indeed the essence. Mathematical theories have enabled us to 
know something of nature, to embrace in comprehensive intelligible accounts 
varieties of seemingly diverse phenomena. Mathematical theories have revealed 
whatever order or plan man has found in nature and have given us mastery or 
partial mastery over vast domains. 
It may be that man has introduced some limited and even artificial concepts 
and only in this way has managed to institute some order in nature. Man's 
mathematics may be no more than a workable scheme. Nature itself may be 
far more complex or have no inherent design. Nevertheless, mathematics re­
mains the method par excellence for the investigation, representation, and 
mastery of nature. In those domains where it is effective it is all we have; if it is 
not reality itself, it is the closest to reality we can get. 
Mathematics then is a formidable and bold bridge between ourselves and 
the external world. Though it is a purely human creation, the access it has given 
us to some domains of nature enables us to progress far beyond all expectations. 
Indeed it is paradoxical that abstractions so remote from reality should achieve 
so much. Artificial the mathematical account may be, a fairy tale perhaps, but 
one with a moral. 
In the last analysis it is the picture which an age forms of its world which 
is its most valuable possession, for man seeks primarily to kuow himself, and this 
understanding is inseparable from his understanding of the cosmos. ",-he knowl-

556 
THE NATURE AND VALUES OF MATHEMATICS 
edge so gleaned filters through philosophy, literature, religion, the arrs, and 
social thought. It thereby fashions the whole culture and provides whatever 
answers man has to the major questions he raises about his own life. 
Recommended Reading 
BRONOWSK!, J. and B. MAZLISH: The Western Intellectual Tradition, Harper and 
Row, New York, 1960. 
BURY, j. B.: The Idea of Progress, Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1955. 
ELLIS, HAVELOCK: The Dance of Life, Chap. 3, The Modern Library, New York, 
1929. 
HARDY, G. H.: A Mathematician's Apology, Cambridge University Press, London, 
1940. (Keep a copious quantity of salt on hand while reading this book.) 
KLINE, MORRIS: Mathematics in Ulestern Culture, Chap. 28, Oxford University Press, 
New York, 1953. 
NEWMAN, JAMES R.: The World of Mathematics, Vol. III, pp. 1756-1795, Vol. IV, 
pp. 2051-2063, Simon and Schuster, Inc., New York, 1956. 
POINCARE, HENRI: The Value of Science, Chaps. 1 to 3, Dover Publications, Inc., 
New York, 1958. 
POINCARE, HENRI: Science and Method, Chaps. 1 to 3, Dover Publications, ]nc., 
New York, 1952. 
RANDALL, JOHN HERMAN, JR.: The Making of the Modern Mind, rev. ed., Houghton 
Mifflin Co., Boston, 1940. 
RUSSELL, BERTRAND: Our Knowledge of the External World, George Al1en & Unwin 
Ltd., London, 1926 (also in paperback). 
RUSSELL, BERTRAND: Mysticism and Logic, Longmans, Green and Co., New York, 
1925. 
SAWYER, W. W.: Prelude to Mathematics, Chaps. 1 to 3, Penguin Books Ltd., 
Harmondswonh, England, 1955. 
SPENGLER, OSWALD: Decline of the West, Vol. ], Chap. 2, A. A. Knopf, ]nc., New 
York, 1926. 
SULLIVAN, j. W. N.: Aspects of Science, Second Series, pp. 80-105, A. A. Knopf, 
Inc., New York, 1926. 

APPENDIX 
TABLE OF TRIGONOMETRIC RATIOS 
Angle 
Sine 
Tangent 
Cotangent 
Cosine 
0" 
0.0000 
0.0000 
1.0000 
90" 
1 
0.0175 
0.0175 
57.290 
0.9998 
89 
2 
0.0349 
0.0349 
28.636 
0.9994 
88 
3 
0.0523 
0.0524 
19.081 
0.9986 
87 
4 
0.0698 
0.0699 
14.300 
0.9976 
86 
5 
0.0872 
0.0875 
11.430 
0.9962 
85 
6 
0.1045 
0.1051 
9.5144 
0.9945 
84 
7 
0.1219 
0.1228 
8.1443 
0.9925 
83 
8 
0.1392 
0.1405 
7.1154 
0.9903 
82 
9 
0.1564 
0.1584 
6.31 38 
0.9877 
81 
10 
0.1736 
0.1763 
5.6713 
0.9848 
80 
I I  
0.1908 
0.1944 
5.1446 
0.9816 
79 
12 
0.2079 
0.2126 
4.7046 
0.9781 
78 
13 
0.2250 
0.2309 
4.JJ 15 
0.9744 
77 
14 
0.2419 
0.2493 
4.0108 
0.9703 
76 
15 
0.2588 
0.2679 
3.7321 
0.9659 
75 
16 
0.2756 
0.2867 
3.4874 
0.9613 
74 
17 
0.2924 
0.3057 
3.2709 
0.9563 
73 
18 
0.3090 
0.3249 
3.0777 
0.9511 
72 
19 
0.3256 
0.3443 
2.9042 
0.9455 
71 
20 
0.3420 
0.3640 
2.7475 
0.9397 
70 
21 
0.3584 
0.3839 
2.6051 
0.9JJ6 
69 
22 
0.3746 
0.4040 
2.4751 
0.9272 
68 
23 
0.3907 
0.4245 
2.3559 
0.9205 
67 
24 
0.4067 
0.4452 
2.2460 
0.9135 
66 
25 
0.4226 
0.4663 
2.1445 
0.9063 
65 
26 
0.4384 
0.4877 
2.0503 
0.8988 
64 
27 
0.4540 
0.5095 
1.9626 
0.8910 
63 
28 
0.4695 
0.5317 
1.8807 
0.8829 
62 
29 
0.4848 
0.5543 
1.8040 
0.8746 
61 
30 
0.5000 
0.5774 
l.7321 
0.8660 
60 
31 
0.5150 
0.6009 
1.6643 
0.8572 
59 
32 
0.5299 
0.6249 
1.6003 
0.8480 
58 
JJ 
0.5446 
0.6494 
1.5399 
0.8387 
57 
34 
0.5592 
0.6745 
1.4826 
0.8290 
56 
35 
0.5736 
0.7002 
1.4281 
0.8192 
55 
36 
0.5878 
0.7265 
1.3764 
0.8090 
54 
37 
0.6018 
0.7536 
1.3270 
0.7986 
53 
38 
0.6157 
0.7813 
1.2799 
0.7880 
52 
39 
0.6293 
0.8098 
1.2349 
0.7771 
51 
40 
0.6428 
0.8391 
1.1918 
0.7660 
50 
41 
0.6561 
0.8693 
1.1504 
0.7547 
49 
42 
0.6691 
0.9004 
1.1106 
0.7431 
48 
43 
0.6820 
0.9325 
1.0724 
0.7314 
47 
44 
0.6947 
0.9657 
1.0355 
0.7193 
46 
45" 
0.7071 
1.0000 
1.0000 
0.7071 
45" 
Cosine 
Cotangent 
Tangent 
Sine 
Angle 
557 


ANSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES AND 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
Chapter 3 
Sectitm 3-4 
7. (a) No 
(d) No 
(g) Yes 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
5. (a), (b) 
Chapter 4 
Srctill1l 4-3 
Second Set: 
I. (a) v'J + VI 
(d) -2a 
(g) 2 
(j) 2 
_ 
2. (a) 5V2 
Stctiun 4-4 
I .  -2 
4. -5 
Srctitm 4-f 
3. (a) 12a 
(d) -2a 
(g) a2 + ab 
(j) a2b 
4. a2 + 5a + 6 
7. Yes 
Section 4-6 
First sec: 
1. No, 4! hr 
3. 1 5a + lOb 
6(a + b) 
Second set: 
1 .  16 
(b) Yes 
(e) No 
(h) No 
6. None 
7. No 
2. 12 
(b) -:rz + -0 
(e) v'2T 
(h) .2 - ab 
(k) -V;S 
(b) IOV2 
2. -1J 
5. 500, 500 
(b) 12a 
(e) 6a + 12b 
(h) a2 - ab 
5. n2 + 2n + 1 
8. Yes 
4. No 
2. No 
3. 12 
5 59 
(c) No 
(I) Yes 
(i) No 
9. Nothing 
(c) -:rz + -V;7 
(I) ?'l6 
(i) V9 
(c) 5Vl 
3. +3 
(c) 5a + V2a 
(I) 28a + J5b 
(i) 16a 
6. Yes 
9. No 
5. b of a ditch per day 
4. 36 

560 
ANSWERS TO 
SELECTED EXERCISES 
Third set: 
4. I l, 14, 20, 100, 120, 244 
6. 0.3 
7. ft 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
1. (a) ¥S 
2. (b) -,\ 
l. (a) 140 
4. (a) ŉ 
5. (c) b 
6. (a) 4,,12 
9. (b) False 
10. (b) 1 1  
1 1 .  (b) 5 
Chapter 5 
Section 5-2 
5. (a) lx + 4 
Section 5-3 
First set: 
1 .  (a) 510 
l. (a) False 
Second set: 
1 .  (a) ll' 
2. (a) 100,000 
l. (c) False 
Stction 5-4 
1 .  (a) 1 5x' 
(d) x' - 9 
(b) ir; 
(c) ,\ 
(b) 4ab 
(b) 1 + 2a 
(e) l 
(c) 6,,12 
(d) False 
(c) 101 
(d) I l 
(d) x5 
(c) 58 
(b) 6 
(e) False 
2. (a) (x + 5) (x + 4) 
(d) (x + l)(x - l) 
Section 5-5 
1 .  1 1 77 ft 
4. 50 
Section f-6 
First set: 
1 .  (a) 6, 2 
Second set: 
(b) -9, 2 
I .  (a) 4 + ,,16, 4 - ,,16 
(c) l + lv2, l - lv2 
(e) 4, 4 
5. 5, 6, 8, 12, 36 
8. l 
9. 6 
(c) -ir; 
(e) ů 
(f) H 
(g) -H 
(h) ad + be 
bd 
bd 
(d) 6 xy 
(e) b + c 
(f) 4 
(f) !V2 
(e) False 
(e) 100 
(e) 9 
(i) 2 
(h) v¥: 
(h) Nb 
(f) False 
(g) 10,01 1 
(k) I 
(n) ii 
(h) False 
(b) lx' + 4 
(e) 53 
(g) x' 
(c) False 
(d) 10· 
(c) i 
(f) False 
(b) x' + 9x + 20 
(e) x' + 5x + ¥­
(b) (x + 2) (x + l) 
(e) (x + 4) (x - 4) 
2. 22 mi/hr 
5. 80 
() ň 
(k) 1 
1 
53 
(e) False 
(f) 10' 
(d) ab3 
(c) lx' + 19x + 20 
(f) x' - ¥-
(c) (x - 2) (x - l) 
(f) (x + 9)(x - 2) 
l. 7l 
6. 1250 
l. (a) -6 ± lVJ 
(b) 6 ± lVJ 
(b) -4 + ,,16, -4 - ,,16 
(d) - l, - I  
(I) 5 

REVIEW EXERCISES 
I. (b) x2 + 5x + 6 
(e) x2 + 5x + ¥ 
2. (a) (x + 3)(x - 3) 
(i) (x - 6)(x - I) 
4. (e) 
5. 12ů 
7. (a) 5 and I 
8. (b) 9 and I 
9. (a) -6 ± V27 
Chapter 6 
Stction 6-2 
8. 103 ft 
Stction 6-3 
2. 418,500 mi 
5. 25 by 50 
9. 63 mi 
S.ctiun 6-5 
2. 2 
Chapter 7 
S<ctiun 7-2 
3. I to 0 
(d) 2 
ANSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES 
561 
(e) x2 + 5x - 14 
(f) 2x2 + 5x + 2 
(e) (x + 3)2 
(1) (x + 8) (x - 2) 
(e) JI 
6. 95 
(b) 7 and - I  
(e) - 5  ± V1l-
(e) -6 ± ,.142 
10. 21r ft 
3. 100 by 100 
7. V2Rh + h2 
4. 5 
(f) (x + 6) (x + l) 
(m) (x + 9)(x - 3) 
(g) * 
(h) b - 2 
a 
(f) 7 and -2 
(e) 6 ± 51 
(e) -3 ± V6 
4. 0 to unlimitedly larger and larger values 
Stction 7-3 
I .  445 ft 
4. Yes, by 19 ft 
S<ctiun 7-4 
I .  30° 
StCticm 7-5 
I .  93,(X)(),OOO mi 
3. 1065 mi 
S<ctiun 7-6 
1. 32° 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
3. (a) -h, H, Ň 
V3 
5. - , V3 
2 
2. 14,265 ft 
5. 3944 mi 
5. 139 mi 
6. 263 mi 
2. 428,()(X) mi 
3. 11,500 ft 
7. 18,960 mi 
4. 36,00,000 mi 
) ./3
2 
V3 
(e 
V'f, 0 '  -2-
7. 83.91 ft 
4. 172,000 milsee 
(d) V3 , v'6, v! 
3 
3 

562 
ANSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES 
I I . 2384 ft 
13. 10711'" mi, approximately 
Chap ter 11 
Stcti(J1l 11-2 
4. ! 
Chapter 12 
¥ctilJ1l 12-3 
3. (a) y = 2x 
(d) y = 4x 
5. Yes 
I I .  (0, 7) 
Stcti(J1l 12-4 
3. x = --hy2 
(b) y = -fix' 
6. 1, 4, 9, 16, 25 
¥ctilJ1l 12-6 
3. 10 
¥ctilJ1l 12-7 
2. A surface 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
I. ° 
5. (a) y = -4x 
Chap ter 13 
¥ctilJ1l 13-4 
4. 0, 96, 224, etc. 
B. +3, -3 
¥ctilJ1l 13-J 
3. IO! mi/hr 
7. 400 ft; 676 ft, 1600 ft 
H. 121 ft 
18. 352 ft, 88 ft 
¥ctilJ1l 1 3-6 
12. 3682 mi, 211'" . 3682 mi 
15. 32°, approximately 
I 
(b) y = v) x 
(e) y = -4x 
8. Yes 
12. (0, b) 
4. (0, 2) 
(c) Y = -.,fox' 
(c) y = -4x 
lO. m 
1 3. m; (0, b) 
5. (a) y = ftx' 
(d) x = fty' 
7. In,., -Ii, 910, 17Ű, 27! 
5. 2, 8 
3. A sphere 
4. (a) y = 4x 
(b) Y = -4x + 2 
6. 100, 256, 784 
9. 32, 212 
16. 121 ft 
19. 576 ft 
4. A plane 
(b) y = 4x + 2 
(c) Y = -4x - 2 
7. 2, 2ű, 4 
4. 128 ft/sec; 64 ft/sec; t = 2 
I I .  256 ft/sec, approximately 
17. d = v'/22 
3. 192 ft/sec, 432 ft; 240 ft/sec, 756 ft 
¥ctilJ1l 13-7 
2. (a) 384 ft 
3. ° 
8. 960 ft/sec 
(b) 32 ft/sec 
5. 1 5,625 ft 
1 1 .  7 sec 
(c) 400 ft 
7. 870 ft, 1B.I sec 

REVIEW EXERCISES 
2. (a) 4 
3. (a) 80 
5. v = gt 
6. (a) gt/2 
8. (a) 2 
(e) ¥ 
(b) 5 
(b) 128 
(b) gt'/2 
(b) v'6 
ANSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES 
563 
(c) 12Ų 
(d) -! 
(c) 3 
(d) V¥ 
10. (a) I 
(b) i 
(c) 7i 
(d) 2H-
I I .  (a) v = 100 + gt 
(b) d = lOOt + gt'/2 
12. (a) 2 
(b) 4 
13. (a) v = 128 - 32t 
(b) d = 128t - 16t' 
15. - 1 12; the result is physically meaningless. 
16. -1 12; the object is 1 1 2  ft below the roof. 
Chapter 14 
Sectilm /4-2 
I .  Y = 3x/2 
Seetilm 14-3 
2. Y = 5x'/16 
3. Y = 5x + x' 
3. 5.5 sec, approximately; 550 ft, approximately 
4. 3000 ft/sec 
5. 1200 ft/sec 
6. 5450 ft, approximately 
Stction 14-4 
I .  230 ft/sec, 193 ft/sec 
4. 37.5 ft 
6. 100 ft/sec 
Seetilm /4-j 
I .  Y = -16x'/V' cos' A + x sin A/cos A 
2. Y = -x'/25 + 3x/2 
5. 14.1 ft, approximately 
2. V sin A/32 
3. V' sin' A/64 
5. 123,00 ft, approximately 
6. 20,000 ft 
7. (62.5)v'z sec 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
2. (a) y = 7x/3 
(c) x = 3y'/25 
(f) Y = (5x'/4) + 3x/2 
3. (a) x = 240 · 5280t, Y = 16t' 
(c) v'TIO sec 
(e) 240 · 5280 v'6o ft 
4. (a) loooV2, 1000v'z 
(c) 125,000 ft 
Chapter 15 
Seetilm 15-3 
I I .  165 years 
(b) y = 5x'/9 
(e) x' + y' = 25 
(b) v'TIO sec 
(d) v'6o sec 
(b) x = looov'z t, Y = looov'z t - 16t' 
(d) 1I,250 ft 

564 
ANSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES 
SfCtill1l 1 ;-7 
2. 848 poundals or 26! Ib 
&ctill1l / ;-8 
2. 20.5 ft/sec2, approximately 
&ction / ;-9 
I .  37.5 1b 
4. 1 5 1b 
&ction / ;-/0 
3. 500 fthee2 
&ctill1l Jj-1I 
2. 26,00 ft/sec, approximately 
4. 27.8 days, approximately 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
I .  
2. 
3. 
(a) 0.001 
(d) 0.00002 
(a) 5.8 ' 10' 
(e) 5/102 
1.833 . . . . 10" 
2.18 
. 
I 
(d) - ,  approxImate y 
10 
4. 9.1 . 107 
7. (a) 14.2 ft/see2 
8. (a) 2840 poundals 
9. 1060 poundals 
Chapter 16 
&ction 16-; 
4. 80 ft/see, 144 ft/see 
6. 32 ft/see 
&ctill1l /6-6 
3. (a) 4x 
(d) 12x2 
(g) - 32t + 128 
4. 228 ft/sce 
7. A = 2x 
Smill1l /6-7 
I .  (a) !o 
2. (a) 2 
&ctill1l /6-8 
5. 
3. 4320 Ib 
4. 150 lb 
5. 1l25 1b 
7. 2400 Ib 
10. Yes 
4. 0.00897 ft/see2, approximately 
3. 3300 ft/sec, approximately 
5. 24,(X) ft/sec, approximately 
(b) 0.00001 
(e) 0.00001 
(e) 0.001 
(b) 5.879 ' 10' 
(e) 
6.34 ' 10' 
(b) 4/10' 
(e) 7.2 
5.97 ' 1027 gm 
6. 1 .98 · 1033 gm 
(b) 2.6 ft/see2 
(b) 520 poundals 
(b) 4t 
(e) -4x 
5. 160 ft/see 
(h) 128 - 32t 
5. (b) Ii = 47rr2 
8 . .Ii = / 
(e) 0 
(b) 2 
(e) x 
(f) -32t 
6. (a) j = 4ax3 
1. 0 
3. 25 by 50 
4. 25 by ¥ 
5. r = v50/3", h = 2r 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
I .  (a) 96 ft/see 
(b) 176 ft/sec 
(c) 192 ft/sec 

3. (a) 40 
(b) 60 
4. 32 ft/sec2 
5. (a) 14 
(b) -6 
6. 6 
A NSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES 
565 
(c) 6 
7. - I  
(c) 20a 
(d) -14 
8. (a) -25, minimum 
(b) -25, minimum 
(c) 25, maximum 
9. 0, no, no 
11. 20/Vl, 20/Vl, IO/Vl 
Chapter 17 
I. (a) x3 
(b) 5x 
(e) ,2 
10. 324, ! sec 
(c) 
x2/2 
(f) 
16,2 
(d) 3x2/2 
(g) 32, 
(j) -l2' 
(h) ,2 + 10, 
(k) 1 6,2 
(i) - 1 6,2 + 128, 
Stetion /7-3 
1. 1 50 - 32" I SO' - 16,2 
3. -32,, 75 - 16,2 
5. - 100 - l2', 50 - 100' - 1 6,2 
Section / 7-4 
I. 69ų 
Sect;un 17-f 
2. 50ft 
2. 1 6,2 + 50 
4. 100 - 32" 100, - 16,2 + 50 
3. 10 
4. 90 
I .  257,561,000 ft-Ib 
Section /7-6 
2. 264,000,000 ft-Ib 
3. 40,000 ft-lb 
I .  36,500 ft/sec, approximately 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
I. (a) d = 200, - 16,2 
(b) 625 ft 
(c) -200 ft/sec 
2. (a) d = 200, - 1 6,2 
(b) d = 100 + 200' - 16,2 
(a) 
5.3 2 
(b) 3585 ft, approximately 
3. 
d = 200' - - ' 
2 
6. 3297 · 10· poundals 
7. 5700 ft/sec, approximately 
Chapter 18 
S(ctiun /8-3 
First sec 
I. 
(a) 
sin 60° 
(b) sin 30° 
(c) -sin 30° 
(d) -sin 80° 
(e) -sin 90° 
(f) -sin 60° 
(g) -sin 10° 
(h) sin 10° 
(i) -sin 50° 
(j) sin 30° 
2. I ,  -I 
3. 90° 
8. 2 
Second set: 
I. 7r/2 or 1 .57, approximately; 7r/6 or 0.52, approximately; 7r, 37r/2, 27r, S7r/3 
2. 90°, 120°, 450°, 540°, -90°, 57°, approximately 
3. (a) 0 
(b) I 
(d) - I  
(e) 0 
(c) Vl/2 
(f) I 

566 
ANSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES 
Third' set: 
I .  1, 2, 2, Vl 
4. (a) 1, 0, - 1 , 0 
2, 3, -3 
3. 4 
(b) 1, 0, - 1 , 0 
8. 10 
9. (a) 1 , 0, -Vl/2 
Srctiun /8-$ 
I. 128 
4. Y = 3 sin 2?r . 50t 
Chapter 19 
Section 19-2 
(b) -Vl/2, 0, 0 
2. 5/2'1f 
5. Y = 3 sin 51 
2. Y = 0.0005 sin 2'1f ' 300, 
3. 540, 0.002 
4. 20 
Section 19-3 
2. (a) 1 
(b) 1 
(c) 1 
Section 19-4 
2. 240, om 
(c) 0, -2, 2 
3. 0.01 sec 
6. 50/47f' 
(d) 100 
3. y = 0.01 sin (2'1f 500,) + 0.002 sin (2'1f 100') + 0.005 sin (2'1f 1500,) 
4. 1160 
Chapter 21 
Section 21-3 
- 1  
3. ­
- 2  
Sectiun Zl-4 
4. Yes 
6. 9 + any positive or negative multiple of 12 
14. (a) 5 
(b) 3 
15. (a) 1, 4 
(b) 0, 2, 4 
Srctiun 2/-$ 
4. A 
Chapter 22 
Section 22-3 
2. 81 1 3, 1200 
Section 22-4 
I .  3.24 
Srctiun 22-$ 
3. 95.4 
Section 22-6 
I .  Y = 3x + 7 
3. d = 16" 
5. P = 2,' + 4  
3. 6.1, 5, 10 
2. 3 
(c) 6 
5. A 
4, 31, 35, 40 
3. 12.8 
4. 47.7, 99.8 
2. F = 4d 
4. N = Y - 1944 
6. V = 2.l - 0.675T + 0.0875T' 

ANSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES 
567 
Chapter 23 
Srction 23-2 
3. t, t, t 
5. * 
6. :l 
7. :l 
8. !ŏ 
9. -} 
II. 36 
12. 4 
13. !s 
17. l to l  
18. 3 to I 
Srction 23-3 
2. 0.85, 0.68 
3. 1 
SrctiflTl 23-4 
I .  0.499, 0.954 
2. 0.159 
3. 0.023 
4. 0.341 
5. 0.136 
Srction 23-j 
I. ilh 
2. ii 
3. 2OOO(ii) 
4. 0.977 
5. 0.999 
7. Discredit 
REVIEW EXERCISES 
I .  (a) h 
(b) h 
(c) Ill" 
2. (a) h 
(b) i 
(c) H 
3. ! 
4. (a) if 
(b) ņ 
(c) I 
5. (a) i 
(b) t 
(c) t 
6. (a) ir; 
(b) ir; 
7. (a) No 
(b) * 
(c) Yes 
8. 0.023 


Additional Answers 
and Solutions for 
MATHEMATICS FOR THE 
NONMATHEMATICIAN 
The following chapter contains the complete text of 
the Instructor's Manual originally published for use 
with this work. It contains additional solutions and 
answers to the problems in the text. 

CONTENTS 
PART I .  
PLANS OF COURSES BASED ON nus TEXT 
PART II. 
SUGGESTIONS FOR PRESENTING INDIVIDUAL CIAPTERS 
571 
573 
PART III. SOLUTIONS AND ANSWERS 
579 
1. Why Mathematics ? 
579 
2 .  A Historical Orientation 
579 
3. Logic and Mathematics 
580 
... Number : the Fundamental Concept 
583 
S. Algebra, the Higher Arithmetic 
587 
6. The Nature and Uses of Euclidean Geometry 
590 
7 .  Charting the Earth and the Heavens 
593 
8 .  The Mathematical Order of Nature 
596 
9. The Awakening of Europe 
597 
10. Mathematics and Painting in the Renaissance 
597 
11. Projective Geometry 
597 
12. Coordinate Geometry 
598 
13. The Simplest Formulas in Action 
601 
1... Parametric Equations and Curvilinear Motion 
605 
15. The Application of Formulas to Gravitation 
607 
16. The Differential Calculus 
611 
17. The Integral Calculus 
614 
18. Trigonometric Functions and Oscillatory Motion 
616 
19. The Trigonometric Analysis of Musical Sounds 
618 
20. Non-Euclidean Geometries and Their Significance 
619 
21. Arithmetics and Their Algebras 
622 
22. The Statistical Approach to the Social and 
Biological Sciences 
625 
23. The Theory of Probability 
627 
2l+.. The Nature and Values of Mathematics 
630 

PART 
I 
PLANS OF COURSES BASED ON THIS TEXT 
This text is addressed to liberal arts students and to other students 
who do not intend to major in mathematics or science. 
The audience 
then may consist of liberal arts students who take mathematics as part 
of their cultural preparation for work in the social sciences , the 
arts and the humanities ; prospective elementary school teachers who 
should have a broader background on which to base their teaching of 
arithmetic and simpler facts of geometry ; and prospective high school 
teachers in nonscientific subj ects . 
For the general liberal arts student and the prospective teacher a 
course based on the material as arranged in this text would seem to 
the author to be most suitable, for the book presents mathematics as 
an integral component of western culture . 
From a purely pedagogical 
standpoint , the presentation of mathematics as a development inti­
mately involved with other branches of our culture may awaken interest 
in a subject which has failed notoriously to attract the nonscientist. 
Even for a broad liberal arts mathematics course this text may contain 
more material than can be covered in the time allotted. 
However, many 
of the chapters as well as sections in chapters are not essential to 
the logical continuity . 
These chapters and sections have been starred. 
Thus Chapter 10 on painting shows historically how mathematicians were 
led to projective geometry (Chapter 11), but from a logical standpoint , 
Chapter 10 is not needed in order to understand the succeeding chapter. 
Chapter 19 on musical sounds is an application of the material on the 
trigonometric functions in Chapter 18 but is not essential to the 
continuity. 
The two chapters on the calculus are not used in the 
succeeding chapters . 
Desirable as it may be to give students some 
idea of what the calculus is about , it may still be necessary in some 
classes to omit these chapters . 
The same can be said of the chapters 
on Ïtatistics (Chapter 22) and probability ( Chapter 23) .  
There is also the possibility of covering most or all of the chapters 
by omitting certain sections within chapters. 
Chapter 6 on Euclidean 
geometry may well serve as an illustration. 
The mathematical material 
of this chapter is intended as a review of some basic ideas and theo­
rems of Euclidean geometry and as an introduction to the conic sections. 
Some of the familiar applications are given in Section 6-3 (see the 
Table of Contents) and probably should be taken up. 
However,the appli­
cations to light in Sections 6-Ņ and 6-6 and the discussion of cultural 
influences in Section 6-7 can be omitted. 
Some of the material, whether or not included in the recommendations 
for particular groups, can be left to student reading. 
In fact , the 
first two chapters were deliberately fashioned so that they could be 
read by students. 
The objective here, in addition to presenting in­
trinsically important ideas , was to induce students to read a mathe­
matics book, to give them the confidence to do so, and to get them into 
the habit of doing so. 
It seems necessary to counter the students' 
57 1 

572 
ADDITIONAl. ANSWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
impression. resulting no doubt from elementary and high school instruc­
tion in mathematics. that whereas history texts are to be read. mathe­
matics texts are essentially reference books for for.ulas and homework 
exercises. 
For a one-semester liberal arts course, the basic content can be as 
followS": 
Chapter 2 
Chapter 3 
Chapters 4 and 5 
Chapter 6 
Chapter 7 
Chapter 12 
Chapter 13 
Chapter 14 
Chapter 15 
Chapter 20 
Chapter 21 
on a historical orientation, 
on logic and mathematics, 
on the number system and elementary algebra, 
through Section 6-5. on Euclidean geometry , 
through Section 7-3, on trigonometry, 
on coordinate geometry, 
on functions and their uses, 
through Section 14-4. on parametric 
equations • 
through Section 15-10, on the further use 
of functions in science, 
on non-Euclidean geometry, 
on different algebras . 
Any additional material would enrich the course but would not be needed 
for continuity. 
Colleges concerned primarily with the training of prospective elementary 
school teachers may feel that they must give preference to topics that 
these students will soon be obliged to teach. 
It is possible to choose 
material that will meet such objectives. 
For #$% 
one 
and use Chapters 3 
Chapter 21 on different algebras . 
To pursue the development of this 
theme into the area of functions one can include Chapters 13 and 15. 
Courses emphasizins geometry can utilize Chapters 6 .  7 ,  11, 12. and 20 
on Euclidean geometry, trigonometry, projective geometry , coordinate 
geometry, and non-Euclidean geometry respectively. 
Some algebra, that 
reviewed in Chapter 5, is involved in Chapters 7 and 12. 
If knowledge 
of the material of Chapter 5 cannot be presupposed, this chapter must 
precede the treatment of geometry . 
The essence of the two preceding suggestions may be diagramed thus : 
Chapters 3. 4. 5 
Algebra 
Geometry 
Chapters 21, 13, 15 
Chapters 6 ,  7 ,  11. 12, 20 
Of course, starred sections in these chapters are optional. 
If the 
essential material is covered. other chapters can, of course, be included. 

PART 
I I  
SUGGESTIONS FOR PRESENTING INDIVIDUAL CHAPTERS 
Chapter 1 
There is rather little that one should teach, in the formal sense of 
teaching , of the contents of this chapter. 
The purpose of the chapter 
(and to a large extent of the next one) is to combat and hopefully 
eradicate dislike and fear of mathematics which many students have 
acquired in their elementary and high school experiences . 
By openly 
debating the question of whether mathematics is worth studying ann by 
offering material that the student can read easily there is the 
possibility that he will find the approach at least disarming and 
perhaps refreshing and inviting. 
Moreover, because he can read and understand the material he may be 
encouraged to tackle the later chapters with equal success and so 
overcome the psychological handicap which hinders many college student s .  
There i s  some effort to at least name the values of mathematics, the 
material benefits of mathematics to engineering , the value in aiding 
man to understand natural phenomena , the uses in the social sciences ,  
the importance for philosophy as, for example,in finding truths , the 
uses in the arts of painting and music, and the values of mathematics 
proper . 
The latter are mathematics as an art and as an intellectual 
challenge . 
Puzzles are a good example of an intellectual challenge on 
a low level. 
Chapter 2 
Though, aÐ already noted, this chapter too may serve to encourage the 
student that he can master mathematics because he finds that he can 
read the material, there is more positive content to be advanced than 
in Chapter 1 .  
The student should learn that mathematics was not created 
once and for all in some ancient time but that there have been suc­
cessive periods of development and these have been tied to and stimulated 
by problems and movements of various civilizations . 
The civilizations 
which should be discussed are the Egyptian and Babylonian, the classical 
Greek , the Alexandrian Greek , the Roman, the Hindu and Arabic, the 
medieval , and Western European since about 1400 . 
The Roman and medieval 
civilizations are singular because despite achievements in other areas , 
they were nonproductive in mathematics . 
These exceptional cases could 
provoke a discussion of what factors in a civilization promote mathe­
matical activity. 
The question cannot be answered at this stage but 
students might be asked to keep this in mind and to note that the answer 
is important because it would tell us what we must do in our civilization 
to foster mathematics. 
573 

574 
ADDITIONAL ANSWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
Chapter 3 
Though this chapter does emphasize that mathematics is distinguished 
from other fields by its insistence on deductive proof , the teacher 
should make sure that the students see that the creation of mathe­
matics is not deductive . 
The important implication for the learning 
of mathematics is that students should be encouraged to guess, con­
jecture, experiment and pursue ideas even though they see no immediate 
prospect of success. 
They must be assured that even the greatest 
mathematicians were baffled for years in their efforts to solve 
problems . 
Chapter IJ 
This chapter is largely a review of arithmetic. 
It is the author's 
contention that students should learn to operate with numbers on the 
basis of the physical meanings of numbers. 
Thus -2+(-5) is -7 because 
two debts of 2 dollars and 5 dollars amount to a debt of 7 dollars . 
Moreover these operations must ultimately become automatic and the 
mind freed for thinking about more advanced and more complicated mathe­
matics . 
The axiomatic approach is presented in order to assure 
students that mathematics does live up to the standard of ultimately 
proving all its results deductively . 
But in the case of numbers we 
know so surely what is correct on intuitive grounds that we do not 
need to cite axioms to argue that 3+5=5+3. 
There are three distinct applications of numbers in Section 1J-6. 
These 
are not essential to the continuity but they may be intriguing and they 
may convince students that even a knowledge of numbers is significant 
for applications . 
One of these applications deals with the subject of 
other bases for the number system, a topic receiving much emphasis 
today. 
Chapter 5 
This chapter is largely a review of algebra . 
Most students have for­
gotten (or never really learned) their high school algebra and for them 
it is important to review. 
The topics covered suffice for all uses of 
algebra in later chapters . 
If the course were to be devoted to ele­
mentary algebra the author would use a different organization and 
presentation. 
But to help students recall earlier work it seems 
necessary to use the presentation to which they are accustomed. 
The 
method of obtaining the quadratic formula is novel but the reason for 
using it is that it is possible to motivate its discovery. 
To keep 
the notion of proof in algebra before the students ,  they should be 
asked to cite axioms on equalities , such as equals added to equals . 
Chapter 6 
This chapter is also largely review work. 
effort to show that Euclidean geometry can 
practical as well as scientific problems . 
However, there is a decided 
be useful in solving 
The high school geometry 

i\DDITIOAL :\NSWERS .-\;\JD SOLVT10,"\;S 
575 
courses are usually purely mathematical, and students do not see why the 
many theorems should be learned. 
The starred sections can of course be 
omitted but some applications should be taken up . 
The emptiness and 
pointlessness of mathematics, as far as the student is concerned, must 
be combated and one can do so here with rather simple applications . 
Moreover, the major thesis that mathematics is vital to the study of 
nature can already be supported substantially. 
Chapter 7 
Though many students now take trigonometry in high school, this chapter 
undertakes to treat the subject as new to the student and the presenta­
tion is more detailed. 
That is, the review goals of Chapters  ,  5 ,  and 
6 are now dropped. 
Here too some applications should be included. 
Many 
of these , such as finding the distance to the moon and the radius of the 
moon, demonstrate the remarkable power of even simple mathematics. 
Chapter 8 
This chapter supplies historical continuity. 
It also puts together the 
evidence which the Greeks acquired for concluding that nature is mathe­
matically designed. 
In addition the chapter serves as a breather . 
Students who fear mathematics and are scared of symbolism may find once 
again that there is something here they can grasp . 
The chapter can be 
left to student reading. 
Chapter 9 
This chapter sets the stage for the appearance of mathematics in 
Western Europe. 
It is remarkable that though civilization in Europe 
(apart from Greece and Rome) can be said to date from Roman times and 
certainly from the fifth century of our era, no mathematics of conse­
quence was developed in Europe until about IŅOO A.D. 
What trifles 
were known prior to that time were taken from the poor Roman texts. 
The Europeans became interested in mathematics when they learned. 
through a series of historical events which are related in the chapter, 
of the Greek works . 
Other events in Europe, for example, the geo­
graphical explorations and the breakdown of the totally religious out­
look, encouraged the study and development of mathematics in Europe . 
This chapter can be read by the students and need not be discussed in 
class if the time does not permit it. 
Chapter 10 
This chapter on painting, though of course intrinsically important as 
a major example of how mathematics has been applied to and determines 
painting styles, is also intended to stimulate interest in mathematics 
by students who like the arts and fail to see values in mathematics. 
The use of mathematical perspective is basic in the Renaissance paint­
ings and one who would appreciate these creations must know something 

576 
ADDITIONAL A:-.;rSWf.RS ANU SOLUTIONS 
about the mathematical structure. 
The relationship then of the two 
fields is not incidental but fundamental. 
The chapter can, of course, 
be recommended as just interesting reading and not made part of the 
course. 
Chapter 11 
Since the entire text cannot be covered in the usual 6-point course, 
this chapter on projective geometry could be omitted for prospective 
elementary school teachers . 
It can be of interest to liberal arts 
students in that it shows how some mathematical problems arise from 
ideas that were first explored in behalf of realistic painting. 
The 
chapter is descriptive and so does not call upon any detailed prior 
knowledge of geometry. 
Chapter 12 
Coordinate geometry is fundamental in mathematics and should be 
included in almost any course. 
The graphing of simple equations and 
the relationship between curve and equation is used in later chapters . 
The application of this chapterfs material is made in later chapters . 
Chapter 13 
Here is an introduction to functions and a treatment of simple linear 
and quadratic functions. 
The study of functions as a topic of pure 
mathematics is rather pointless . 
Hence the attempt has been made to 
introduce these functions in connection with definite and concrete 
physical situations . 
Historically the physical phenomena considered 
were precisely the ones which led to the introduction of functions . 
Chapter 14 
This chapter on parametric equations makes fUrther use of functions 
and also introduces another idea of coordinate geometry, namely, the 
representation of a curve by two parametric equations instead of one 
direct relationship between x and y .  
The motion of projectiles was 
studied intensively in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries (it 
still is today ) and, as the next chapter will show, suggested to 
Newton how to unify in one theory the motions that take place on 
earth and the motions of the heavenly bodies. 
Chapter 15 
This chapter, on the mathematical side , is still concerned with 
functions , notably the inverse square function . 
However, as noted in 
connection with Chapter 13 , the study of mathematical functions 
appears empty to young people and so the chapter shows how functions 
can be used to determine the mass of the earth and the mass of the 

ADDITIONAL ANSWERS AND SOLUTlO;\lS 
577 
sun, to establish Kepler' s  laws , and in other applications . 
These few 
examples given in the chapter are necessarily simple but they are taken 
from the greatest mathematical and scientific work of our era - the 
work of Newton in establishing the laws of our solar system. 
This work 
gave enormous prestige to mathematics and stimulated the most important 
mathematical developments of the eighteenth century . 
A few physical 
concepts are utilized in the applications but these are fully discussed 
in the chapter. 
No prior knowledge of science is presupposed. 
Chapters 16 and 17 
The two chapters on the calculus can do no more than give students an 
inkling of what the calculus is about. 
To some the mere thought that 
they can study ideas of the famous calculus is thrilling. 
Others will 
not get the ideas in this brief treatment and the attempt to present 
them will fail. 
Chapters 18 and 19 
These two chapters present trigonometric functions . 
Again to relieve 
the boredom of studying functions as an end in themselves ,  Chapter 18 
tries to motivate the topic by seeking to learn about the motion of a 
bob on a spring . 
This physical motivation is, from the student 's 
standpoint, not an exciting one, though at least it is concrete. 
The 
application that is scientifically important and that appeals to many 
students is the analysis of musical sounds. 
The latter can be ap­
proached on the basis of what is done with the bob on the spring. 
The introduction of the subject of musical sounds is another effort 
to show students that seemingly bare and uninviting mathematical 
functions enable man to understand another extensive area of our 
physical world , the area of musical sounds . 
Chapter 20 
Non-Euclidean geometry does attract students because it challenges 
ideas they understand and are convinced of. 
In the intellectual 
development of Western man it is , next to the very founding of mathe­
matics itself, the most significant and portentous development . 
This 
creation forced the realization that mathematics is not portraying 
laws inherent in the design of the universe but is merely providinĹ 
man-made schemes or models which we can use to deduce conclusions 
about our world only to the extent that the model is a good ideal­
ization. 
Chapter 21 
The realization that geometry does not offer truths forced the reali­
zation that arithmetic likewise fails to do so. 
Mathematicians were 

578 
ADDITIONAL '\:"'S\\'[RS AND SOlUTIQ:-.lS 
obliged to recognize that there are many arithmetics and the corre­
sponding algebras. 
This chapter , too, arouses interest because it 
challenges ideas the students had thought unquestionable . 
Chapters 22 and 23 
Though a few applications to social phenomena appear earlier in the 
text, there is little opportunity to consider such applications until 
one takes up the mathematical topics of statistics and probability. 
These topics are important in the modern world and, though the chap­
ters have been starred because they are not essential for the mathe­
matical continuity, they are valuable in giving students some idea 
of how social and biological phenomena are approached . 
Chapter 21J 
This is a summarizing chapter . 
It is possible at the end of the 
course to characterIze mathematics, its values for science. and the 
limitations of mathematics meaningfully because the students now have 
some experience with the subject on which to draw. 
One can refer to 
earlier material to illustrate what one means by a deductive structure , 
mathematical models, and so on. 

PART 
I I I  
SOLUTIONS AND ANSWERS 
Chapter 1. page 10 
1 .  
The oarsman takes the goat across (the wolf does not eat cabbage) .  
He comes back and takes the wolf across and takes the goat back. 
He 
leaves the goat on the original shore and takes the cabbage across. 
Then he goes back and brings the goat over . 
2 .  
The man fills the 5-pt jar and then fills the 3-pt jar from the 
5-pt one. 
He empties the 3-pt jar, and then pours the 2 pt remaining 
in the 5-pt jar into the 3-pt jar. 
He now fills the 5-pt jar and pours 
enough into the 3-pt jar to fill it . 
Since there were 2 pt in the 3-pt 
jar, one pint is drawn out of the 5-pt jar, leaving 4 pt in it . 
3 .  
Refer to the two couples as Mr. and Mrs . A and Mr. and Mrs . B .  
Hr .  A takes Mrs. A across .  
He comes back and takes Mr. B across . 
Mrs . A now goes back and brings Mrs . B across . 
Chapter 2, page 28 
1. 
Egyptian, Babylonian. classical Greek, Alexandrian Greek, Hindu , 
Arab and Western European ( from 1500 on) 
2. 
The methods and formulas gave results which worked; that is , the 
results were correct as far as experience showed. 
Thus if they cal­
culated the area of a rectangular field by using length times width, 
a larger rectangular area would grow more crops . 
3 .  
The pre-Greek Egyptian and Babylonian civilizations thought in 
physical terms. 
A rectangle was a piece of land. 
Even in the case of 
whole numbers and fractions, though these civilizations did work with 
pure numbers, they did not consciously think of numbers as entities 
in themselves and seek to understand them as such. 
The Greeks thought 
of numbers and geometrical forms as ideas existing as such and even 
superior to the concrete interpretations of numbers and geometrical 
figures. 
4. 
To start with assured premises and to establish to conclusions 
deductively 
5 .  
They preserved the Greek works and took over ideas from the Hindus . 
The Europeans learned Greek and Hindu mathematics from Arabic works 
(though later the Europeans also acquired Greek manuscripts) . 
6. 
The Greeks were the first to think of mathematics as an independent 
discipline. and to formulate standards for obtaining mathematical con­
clusions. 
They also built up a large body of geometry . 
579 

580 
ADDITIONAL A:'\'SWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
7 .  
We see from the survey in the chapter that far more was created 
after Greek times than during that period. 
Chapter 3t page 
38 
1. 
Arithmetic tells us only that  • 5 = 20. 
Whether the answer is 
to be interpreted as 20 men or 20 trucks depends entirely on the 
physical situation to which the numbers are applied. 
2. 
One cannot multiply a number of pennies by a number of pennies 
whether in the form of 25¢ or 0.25 dollar. 
One can multiply 25 by 25 
or 0.25 by 0.25. 
Whether the answer makes physical sense depends on 
whether there is any physical sense in the original problem. 
There 
is no physical point to 25¢ by 25¢. 
There is physical point in asking, 
for example, how much money will 25 times 25¢ amount to. 
This problem 
cannot be reformulated as 0.25 times 0.25 because the first 25 is a 
number of times and not 0.25 dollar. 
3. 
Justice , liberty , democracy , good and evil 
4. 
One cannot divide 30 books by 5 people. 
One can divide 30 by 5. 
Whether the answer i s  6 books can be decided only on physical grounds. 
5. As in Exercise 2, one cannot multiply dollars by dollars or cents 
by cents . 
One can multiply 6 by 1 or 600 by 100. 
The correct mathe­
matics in this situation is 6 times 1 where physically the 6 means 6 
repetitions and the 1 means 1 dollar. 
For this physical interpreta­
tion the 6 cannot be replaced by 600. 
6. 
Mathemat ics deals with the concepts themselves and not the physi­
cal interpretations or realizations . 
Thus mathematics can deal with 
3 • 5 but not with 3 people times 5 books . 
Likewise mathematics deals 
with the concept of a triangle but not with a triangularly shaped 
piece of land. 
7 .  
The abstract concepts are general and the reasoning at""t them 
can be applied to hundreds of situations . 
Furthermore , it is easier 
to work with abstractions, at least to the extent that irrelevant 
details are ignored. 
The Greeks also thought that the abstract con­
cepts were the essence of knowledge. 
Chapter 3 ,  page 39 
1. Abstraction refers to selecting the key or basic properties of 
some physical object, as the rectangular shape of a piece of land. 
The fact that the boundary and surface are formed by particles of 
earth is ignored. 
In idealization we ignore some significant fact 
for the sake of a simpler model. 
Thus regarding the earth as a 
point in astronomical work is contrary to the fact that the earth is 
an extended body but the idealization is good enough for some 
scientific work. 

ADDITlO:\'AL AS\\'[RS A:\'O SOLL'TIO:'\S 
581 
2 .  
ror some purposes it is correct to regard the lines to the sun 
as parallel . 
Thus two shadows of two nearby objects may be regarded 
as formed (outlined) by parallel lines of light from the sun. 
How­
everö if A and B are far apart on the earth ' s  surface then the lines 
to the sun may usually not be taken as parallel. 
The direction of 
the sun will differ and this difference may be important (as in 
calculating the distance of the sun from the earth) .  
3. 
Yes . 
The thickness would not usually matter. 
If i÷: did one 
might have to regard the pole as a cylinder or as a tapering cylinder 
( cone ) .  
Chapter 3 λ  page 44 
1 .  
That the coin will always fall heads 
2 .  
Deductive reasoning consists of those ways or modes of combining 
premises so that the conclusion is necessary or indubitable . 
3. It can often be done more readily, less expensively; and in some 
cases it is the only method available . 
Above all the conclusions are 
certain , whereas they are not in induction and analogy . 
4. No. 
One may not have the premises with which to reason. 
S. 
One could do this by adopting suitable premises. 
(It is interest­
ing to get students to suggest premises . )  However, not all people 
would agree to the premises. 
6. The answers are in the answer section of the textbook. 
case , drawing circles to represent the classes of objects or 
involved will show whether or not the conclusion must hold. 
it must is the reasoning valid. 
7. At least one of the premises must be false . 
In each 
people 
Only if 
8. 
The reasoning may be correct but the conclusion untrue because 
at least one of the premises may be untrue . 
Chapter 3, page 49 
1. 
The Egyptians and Babylonians relied on the usefulness of the 
result to accept the mathematical procedure or formula. 
The Greeks 
insisted on deductive proof. 
2. The scientist uses induction from observations or experiments and 
reasoning by analogy as well as deductive reasoning. 
The mathematician 
uses only deductive reasoning to prove his conclusions . 
3 .  
The Egyptian and Babylonian reliance upon adopting formulas and 
procedures if they were good enough for daily use is an empirical basis . 

582 
:\DDITlO:-.lAL A:-.IS\\'ERS .-\:-.ID SOLL1TIOS 
The Greeks started with axioms and reasoned deductively. 
Hence they 
were sure of their conclusions ȉithout having to test them at all. 
4. (a) 
(b) 
The argument is valid. 
However, the first premise is not true . 
Valid and in this case also true 
5 .  
No. 
From the information given, the square of an even number 
could also be odd. 
6. 
The argument relies on induction. which is not acceptable in 
mathematics. 
It is not obvious that the square of any larger number 
is even. 
7 .  
Yes. 
If the square of a number is even and the number itself 
were odd. then by the first premise the square of the number would be 
odd. 
But we are given that the square is even. 
B. 
Primarily because they wished to be sure that the conclusions 
were correct 
9. 
If the sides are a. b .  c and the opposite angles are A ,  B ,  C then 
because a ; b ,  A = B. 
Because b = c, B = C. 
Then A = B = C because 
things equal to the same things are equal to each other. 
10 . 
By reasoning deductively from the known truths .  
Since conclusions 
established deductively are indubitable, there would be new truths . 
Chapter 3, page 51 
1 .  
The Greeks believed the axioms were truths . 
2. 
They adopted abstract mathematical concepts ; they insisted on 
deductive proof ; and they chose axioms which they believed were truths . 
3. 
Yes. 
The insistence on obtaining truths . as opposed to useful or 
approximate results, is the position of philosophers . 
Historically 
the early Greek mathematicians were philosophers and these were the 
men who set the standards for mathematics. 
One could argue that mathe­
matics began with the Egyptians and Babylonians. who were not philoso­
phers . 
But the distinguishing features of mathematics were imposed 
by philosophers. 
Chapter 3 ,  page 54 
1 .  
I t  seems as though the triangles should be congruent. 
2. 
It seems as though EFGH shoUld be a parallelogram. 
(It is. 
EF 
joins the midpoints of two sides of triangle ABC. 
Hence EF is parallel 
to and equal to one half of AC. 
Likewise GH is parallel to and equal 
to one half of AC as a side of triangle ADC. 
Hence EF is parallel to 
GH and equal to GH . )  

ADDITIONAL A;\,SWERS AD SOLUTIONS 
583 
3. 
No. 
The proof is inductive and as a matter of fact2the con­
clusion is not true . 
When n = 41, the formula yields 41 
and this is 
not prime. 
4. 
If corresponding sides are equal and if one angle of one equals 
the corresponding angle of the other, the quadrilaterals are congruent . 
5 .  
13 + 23 + • . • + n 3 = ( l  + 2 + • • •  + n) 2 . 
Chapter 3 ,  page 55 
1. 
The results were useful. 
2 .  
On the whole the Egyptians and the Babylonians 
the physical meanings of the mathematical concepts. 
of the abstract concepts as objects in themselves. 
thought in terms of 
The Greeks thought 
3. 
To start with truths (the axioms ) and to deduce further truths 
4 .  
The distinguishing features of mathematics as we understand the 
subject today were imposed or set by the Greeks . 
5. 
(a) and (b) follow necessarily from the premises . 
6 .  
No one of the conclusions stated necessarily follows . 
7 .  
No. 
All quadrilaterals need not be parallelograms . 
8 .  
John will not be successful .  
ª .  
Nothing. 
Smith might go to the movies even when it does not rain. 
10. 
The statement "I go to the movies only if it rains" means that 
"if I go to the movies, it must rain . "  
Since Smith went to the movies , 
it must have rained. 
Chapter 4, page 65 
1. 
The position of a digit in a number determines the quantity repre­
sented by the digit. 
2. 
Because otherwise we would not be able to distinguish the meaning 
of 5, say, in 507 and 57 
3 .  
We can operate with it as we operate with all other numbers . 
There is one exceptional fact: 
We cannot divide by O .  
4 .  
As a quotient of integers or as decimals 
5. 
The definitions must give results which agree with experience. 

584 
ADDITIONAL A:'\lS\'v'ERS AND SOLUTIONS 
Chapter 4, page 66 
1. 
Any ńven nømber 
Then (2m) 
= 4m 
= 2 
(2m) 2 is even. 
can Ņ written as 2m, where m is an integer. 
• 2m . 
Since the (2m)2 contains 2 as a factor, 
2. 
If we multiply any number ending in 1, 3, S, 7, or 9 by itself, 
the product ends in 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9 and so must be odd. 
3. 
If a were 
given as even. 
2 
odd, then by Exercise 2 ,  a 
would be odd. 
But a2 is 
Hence a cannot be odd. 
4. 
The assertion is false because, for example, 22 + 32 
13 is not a square . 
13 and 
Chapter 4, page 72 
1 .  
The answers are given i n  the answer section of the textbook. 
2. 
The answers are given in the answer section of the textbook. 
3 .  
The argument is false . 
It is true that no irrational can be 
expressed with a finite number of decimal places. 
But there may be 
and there are other numbers which cannot be expressed with a finite 
number of decimal places. 
Chapùer 4, page 75 
1 to 5. 
The answers are given in the answer section of the textbook. 
Chapter 4, page 81 
1. 
The only basis for belief other than actual calculation in this 
case is that the principle holds for small numbers where actual calcu­
lation shows it is correct . 
2. 
We can prove that the principle is correct . 
a (b - c) 
= 
a[b + (-c)] = ab + a(-c) by the distributive axiom (Axiom 9). Then 
ab + a(-c) = ab + (-ac) because the product of a positive and a 
negative quantity is negative. 
Then ab + (-ac) = ab - ac because to 
add a negative quantity is equivalent to subtracting the corresponding 
positive quantity. 
3 .  
The answers are given in the answer section of the textbook. 
4. 
(a + 3)(a + 2) = (a + 3)a + (a + 3)2 = 
2 
3a + 2a + 6 = 
a 
+ 
a2 + Sa + 6. 
5. 
( n  
l)(n + 1) 
(n + l)n + (n + 1)1 
2 + n + n + 1 
2 + 2n + 1. 
+ 
n 
n 

ADDITIONAL ANSWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
585 
6. 
Equals divided by equals give equals . 
7. 
Subtract 2 from both sides; equals subtracted from equals give 
equalS. 
B. 
Yes, by the distributive axiom 
9 .  
No. 
To show that it is false for all a, b and c we have but to 
find one case where it is false. 
Let a = 2, b = 3 ,  c = 4. 
Chapter 4, page B3 
1. 
The average speed is the speed that would enable him to do the 
entire trip in the same time as under the actual speeds. 
One tends 
to think that the speed upstream and the speed downstream can be 
averaged. 
But these speeds are used for different periods of time , 
3 hr on the way up and 1 1/2 hr on the way down. 
Hence they cannot 
be averaged to obtain the average speed. 
2. 
The correct average price should be that which produces the same 
money as if the apples and oranges were sold separately. 
The correct 
average price will depend upon how many of each are sold. 
Thus if he 
sells 12 apples and 12 oranges at 5 pieces for lO¢, he receives 
(24/5)(10) or 4B¢. 
But if he sells 12 apples at 2 for 5¢ he receives 
30¢ and for 12 oranges at 3 for 5¢ he receives 20¢ or a total of 50¢. 
Hence the average of 5 pieces for 10¢ is wrong . 
3. 
As noted in Exercise 2 ,  the correct average price depends on how 
many of each are sold. 
a apples should bring a(5/2) .  
b oranges 
should bring in b(5/3 ) .  
Hence the total income should be ( 5a/2) + 
( 5b/3). 
Then the average price should be [(5a/2) + ( 5b/3)]/(a + b ) .  
4. 
As the answer t o  Exercise 3 shows , the average price depends on 
a and b. 
It is not possible to simplify the average price so as to 
eliminate a and b. 
5 .  
The first man digs 1/2 of the ditch per day and the second 1/3 of 
the ditch per day. 
It is correct to say that together they dig 5/6 of 
the ditch in one day. 
Then the average per man is 5/12 because the 2 
men would dig twice this much in one day . 
Chapter 4, page 84 
1. 
Each ace can be paired with any one of 4 kings . 
Hence 16 pairs 
in all. 
2 .  
Each choice of color can be made with each choice on the heater 
and with each choice on the radio. 
Thus 3 • 2 
• 2. 
3. 
The reasoning is the same as in Exercise 2. 
4 .  
Each of 6 numbers on one die can be paired with 6 on the other. 
Hence 6 • 6. 

586 
ADDITIONAL ANSWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
Chapter 4, page 88 
1. When the sums are 6 or more one must convert them to base six. 
Thus 3 + 2 = 5 in base 6. 3 + 4 = 11 in base 6. 5 + 5 = 14 in base 
six; etc. 
2. When the products are 6 or more one must convert them to base 6. 
Thus 3 
4 20 in base six. 
3. 
0 + 0 = 0 ,  0 + I = 1 ,  I + 1 = 10. 
o ·  0 = 0, 0 . 1 = 0, 1 
• 1 = 1. 
4-7. 
These are answered in the answer section of the textbook. 
8 .  Let the base be b. Then 1 
b2 + a 
• b + 1 = 10 . Then b = 3. 
9 .  To express any number from 0 to 63, we can use base 2, ʞase 3, 
etc. If we use base 2 and have separate weights for I, 2, 2 , 23, 24, 
and 25 we shall need six weights and we know that we can handle all 
weights in question because all numbers from a to 63 can be expressed 
with a or 1 in the six places a, b, c, d, e, f. If we use base 3 or 
some higher base we need mUltiples of the sepaʟate powers. Thus to 
represent 53 in base 3 we write 1 • 33 + 22' 3 + 2 • 3 + 2. Thus we 
would need a weight for 33, 2 weights of 3 , etc. This in itself 
requires 7 weights. Thus to use base 3 or a higher base we need more 
weights. If we seek to build up a set of weights which do not corre­
spond to writing numbers in any base,we find that we must have 1, 2, 
4 or 2 two's, 8 ,  etc. and end up with more weights. 
Chapter 41 pase 91. Review Exercises 
The answers to follow complete the set of answers given in the hack of 
the textbook. 
(d) 23 
7 
(il ad - bc 
( j )  ad + bc (k) 2 + x 
1-
36 
(e) - 36 
bd 
bd 
"""2i<" 
2. (a) 4 
(d) 4 
(f) 
c 
(g) 1 
(h) _ 2.£ 
IS 
IS 
h 
bd 
( j )  14 
(1) 2 
(m) ad 
(0) 4 
9 
bc 
3. (c) 6ab 
(e) 24xyz 
4. (c) a + 2b 
(d) 2x + 4y 
5. (a) 7 
(b) 11 
(d) 9 
(g) 2/2 
" 
6. (b) 413 
(d) 2/2 
(e) 3 
( g) 313 
"2 
-2-
294 
(b) 3742 
(c) 
B 
(d) 3 
7. (a) 1000 
10000 
100 
1000 

ADl)JTIO:\L AS\\'[RS A="O SOI.UTlOS 
587 
8. (a) 1.7 
(b) 2 . 2  
(c) 2 . 5  
9 .  (a) Correct 
(c) Correct 
(g) Correct 
(i) False 
10. (a) 1 
(d) 111 
(f) 10,000 
11. (a) 1 
(c) 6 
(e) 9 
ChaEter 52 Ease 97 
1. 
Symbols are used to secure brevity and generality as in the case 
of ax + b and often to avoid ambiguity by using different symbols for 
different meanings of a word as in the use of 
and = for the word 
equal. 
The symbol = is to be used !n x + 4 = 7 whereas the symbol = 
is to be used in ( x  + l)(x - 1 )  = x
- I .  
2 .  
The statement i s  vague . 
In physical characteristics? 
Equal in what respects? 
In political rights? 
In intelligence? 
3 .  
As an example of the use of words , consider ( c ) .  
We must say: 
The product of some number times the sum of that number multiplied by 
itself and the product of that number and another number. 
4. 
Yes 
5. 
(a) 3x + 4 
ChaEter 52 Eage 100 
1. 
The answers 
(b) 610 
( 1 )  105 
to those parts 
(c) 109 
not in the 
(f) 103 
back of the text 
(h) 1/103 
are: 
2. 
Yes. 
We have but to remember the meaninƍ of positive integral 
exponents to see that the statement is correct . 
3. 
(a) False 
(b) Correct 
(c) False 
(d) Correct 
(e) False 
ChaEter 51 Ease 101 
1. 
(a) 312 
(b) 312 
( c )  58 
(d) lOb 
(e) 1012 
( f) 10' 
(g) 310 
(h) 30' 
2. 
(a) 105 or 100,000 
(b) 64/63 or 6 
(c) 85/86 or 118 
(d) a3b3/a2 or ab3 
(e) a3b3/a2b2 or abo 

588 
ADDITIO:"l.\L ANSWERS .\D SOLl!TIOS 
3. 
(a) Correct 
(e) False 
(b) Correct 
(f) False 
(c) False 
(d) Correct 
ChaEter 5 ! Eage 104 
l. 
The answers are given in the answer section of the textbook . 
2 .  
The answers are given in the answer section of the textbook . 
3 .  
Use the distributive axiom and the theorems on exponents. 
4 .  
Try numbers for x and y .  
If for these numbers the left side 
does not equal the right side , the equality is false. 
But if for 
specific numbers the left side does equal the right, the statement 
is merely verified but not proved . 
6 .  
The answer is correct but the reasoning is not . 
7. 
The flaw lies in the step of dividing both sides by a-b . 
Since 
a = b, the divisor is O .  
Chapter 51 page III 
1 .  
Let x be the length of the rod. 
Then (x/llOO) - (x/16,850) 
1. 
Solving for x gives 1177 ft. 
2. 
BƎ 
( 2641) 
73 ft 
2 
2 
the PythƏgorean theorem x 
+ ( 2640) 
= 
- ( 2640) 
= ( 2641 - 2640) ( 2641 + 2640) 
(2641)2. 
= 5281. 
Thus x2 = 
x = "5281 = 
3. 
800/(200 + x) = 640/(200 - x). 
Multiply both sides by 
( 200 + x ) ( 200 
x ) .  
Then x 
22 mi/hr. 
4 .  
Let x be the number of years . 
Then 10,000 + 600x 
Solving for x gives x = 50 years. 
5. 
Let x be the height of the staff. 
Then (x + 2)2 
Solving for x gives x 
= 80 ft. 
20.000 + 400x. 
6. 
Let x be the number of copies. 
Then 5000 + x = 5x. 
Solving for x 
gives x = 1250 copies. 
7. 
The mathematical equation must relate numbers only. 
Hence as a 
mathematical equation 1/4 = 25 is incorrect . 
8. 
The same reason as in Exercise 7 
Chapter 5, page 115 
1 .  
( a )  (x - 6)(x - 2) 
o 
(b) (x + 9)(x - 2) 
o 

:\DDlTIO;-"::\L :\S\\'ERS AD SOI.UTIO:,\S 
589 
2. (a) Since the sum of the roots is -8 we form a new equation in y 
where y = x - 4. Then x = y + 4. Substitute in the original equation. 
(y + 4)2 
_ 8(y + 4) + 12 = 0 or y2 - 4 = O .  Hence y = +2 and ʠ2 and 
x = 6,2. 
(b) Let y = x + (762). Then x = y 
given equation yields y - (121/4) = o .  
x = 2,-9. 
- (7/2). Substituting in the 
Then y = 11/2, -11/2 and 
3. (a) Let y = x + 6. Then x = y - 6. Substituting in ʡhe original 
equation gives y2 
_ 27 = O .  Then y = m, - m. Then x = m - 6, 
- il - 6. Of course m = 313. 
(b) Let y = x - 6. Then x = y + 6. Substituting in the original 
equation gives y2 
_ 27 = O .  Then y 
127. - 127. x = 6 + 127, 6 - 127. 
Chapter 5, page 118 
1. In each case we first make sure that the coefficient of x2 
If it is not, as in (a). we divide through by that coefficient. 
then substitute ŧhe values of p and q in (30). The answers are 
back of the text. 
Chapter 52 page 121. Review Exercises 
is 1. 
We 
in the 
1. The answers noʢ given in thĪ ansʣer secŧion of the textbook are: 
(a) Sx + 18. (d) x - 9, (g) x - y . 
2. 
(b) 
(g) 
The answers not 
(x - 4)(x + 4), 
(x + l)(x + 4), 
3. 
2x = -2; x = -1. 
given in 
(e) (x -
(h) (x -
the answer section of the 
a)ʤx + a), (d) (a - b)(a 
3) , (k) (x - 3)(x - 4). 
textbook are: 
+ b), 
4 .  The answers not given in the answer section of the textbook are: 
(a) x = 3/2, 
(b) x = -3/2, 
(f) x = liS, 
(i) x = (c + b)/a. 
5. Let x = number of grams of acid to be added. The number of grams 
of water in the 50 grams is 0.75(50) = 37.5 gr. Then 37.5/(50 + x) = 
O . SO. Clear of fractions and solve for x. x = 12 1/2 gr 
6. Let x be the unknown grade. Then ( SO + 70 + x)/3 = 75. Then x 
95. 
7. (a) (x 5)(x 1) 0 
(b) (x - 7)(x + 1) = 0 
(e) (x 6)(x 1) 0 
(d) (x + 9)(x - 3) = 0 
(e) (x 4)(x 
3) 
0 
(f) (x 7)(x + 2) 
0 
8. (a) Let y x + 5. Answer: -9 and -l. 
(b) Let y x 5. Answer: 9 and 1. 
( e) Let y = x + 5. Answer: -5 :t 17S/4 
(d) Let y x - 5. Answer: 5 :t 17S/4. 

590 
AOOITIO:"-i.\L A:o.:SWERS :\:\,1) SOLL'TIO:-':S 
ee) Let y = x - 6 .  
(f) Let Y = x + 6 .  Answer: 6 :t m 
Answer: -6 :t 121 
9. The answers not given in the answer section of the textbook are: 
(a) -6 :t 130, 
(g) -5 • 13. 
(b) 6 :t 130, 
(d) 6 • 142, 
(f) -% t f-f.  
10 . Let t be the number of hours both ships travel until they meet. 
Then the ship at B travels 2t miles in t hours. The ship at A travels 
St mi12s in t hours. Theʜ_by the Pythagorean theorem 2St2 
= 10 2 + 4t2 
or 2lt 
= 100 and t = Ń. This is the time it takes the two 
ships to meet. In the text, x was the distance BC. But BC = 2t . 
Hence x 
= 2 /100/21 = ,'400/21. Thus we get the same answer. 
Chapter 6, page 130 
1. Axioms are statements whose truth we accept as evident. Theorems 
are proven on the basis of the axioms. 
2 .  Because they seemed to be self-evident truths 
3. Using the construction suggested in the 'text we have O A = ACʝB, 
because they are base angles of the isosceles triangle AC'B. Now O AC'B 
is an exterior angle of triangle ACC'. Hence O AC'B > O C. Then O A > 
W C. But angle A is given equal to O C. Hence BC is not greater than 
BA. Likewise if we assume BC less than BA we can obtain the same 
contradiction by laying off BC on BA. 
4. Use the figure and the suggestion in the text. If we draw GH so 
that O l' = O 2 then GH is parallel to CD by Theorem 2. But AS is given 
parallel to CD. By Axiom 5 there can be just one line through the 
point where AB and GH intersect which is parallel to CD. Hence O 1 can­
not be greater than W 2. If we assume O 1 is less than O 2 we can 
repeat the argument by drawing a line through the intersection of CD 
and EF so as to introduce an angle 2' equal to O 1. 
5 .  Referring to Fig. 3-7, we have that O 1 = O 2 because they are 
alternate interior ansles of parallel lines. Likewise O 3 = O 4. But 
O I + O A + O 3 = 180 because they form a straight angle. Then O 2 + 
O A + O 4 = 1800 because we have replaced O I and . 3 by equal angles. 
6 .  If two adjacent sides and the included angle of one equal the 
corresponding sides in the other 
7 .  If the ratio of two adjacent sides in one equals the ratio of the 
corresponding sides in the other 
8. Let x be the other arm. Then x2 + (S280) 2 = ( 5281)2 or x2 
(S281) 2 - ( 5280)2 = 1(5281 + 5280) .  Then x 
= 103 ft. 
9. The areas of two similar triangles are to each other as the square 
of the ratio of any two corresponding sides. In the present case the 

ADDlTIO:-.l.-\L A:'\'SWERS A:"I"O SOLUTlO:,\S 
591 
ratio of corresponding sides is 3 .  
Hence the ratio of the areas is 9 
or one area is 9 times the other . 
But the price of the larger plot 
is only 5 times that of the smaller one . 
Hence the larger plot is 
the better buy. 
10. 
The circumference of the roadway is 2Ĵ( 21,120,000 + 1 )  = 
2Ĵ (21 ,120,000) + 2ĵ. 
Hence the circumference of the roadway exceeds 
the circumference of the earth by 2ĵ ft. 
11. 
Parallel lines do not meet by the very definition of parallel 
lines. 
Euclid 's assumption is Axiom 5 which is a quite different 
statement . 
Chapter 6 ,  page 137 
1. 
If we draw the lines AE and BE we have two triangles ACE and BCE. 
These are congruent by s 
• a 
s 
= s 
• a 
s .  
Hence AE = BE. 
2. 
We have similar triangles and AD/OD 
A'D'/OD Ó .  
We know that aD = 
93, 000,000 mi, 00' = 1 ft, and 0'0' = 0 . 00ú5 ft. 
Then we can · calculate 
AD .  
One must convert the miles to feet. 
AD = ú18,500 mi. 
3. 
By the argument in the text the rectangle of maximum area should 
be a square . 
Hence the dimensions are 100 by 100. 
Ķ. 
The rectangle must be a square . 
Hence p/4 by p/Ƌ 
5. 
Use the idea that is discussed on p. 134. 
Suppose the farmer had 
to enclose a rectangular area on both sides of the lake edge with 
200 ft. of fencing. 
This rectangle must be a square with dimensions 
of 50 ft by 50 ft. 
Then the half which lies on one side of the edge 
has dimensions 25 by 50. 
6. 
Think of a rectangle with dimensions a and b which add up to 12. 
The perimeter is 2Ķ. 
This rectangle is largest when a = b = 6 .  
7. 
By the Pythagorean theorem , (R + h) 2 = R2 + x2. 
Hence x = 
12Rh + h2• 
8. 
2 
Since h is small compared to R, we can drop h 
compared to 2Rh. 
9 .  
Wp can use the result of Ex. 8 .  
x = I2Rh = (2 
• 4000 
• (1/2) = 
63 miles, approx. 
10. 
Suppose A and B are two rectangles with the same area and A is a 
square . 
If the perimeter of A is not less than B, replace A by a 
square AÓ which has the same perimeter as B does. 
Then the area of 
AÓ will be greater than that of B .  
Since A and B have the same area, 
A' has more area than A. 
But A has more perimeter than B ,  and A '  has 
the same perimeter as B. 
Hence A has more perimeter than A   but less 
area. 
This is impossible because if p is the perimeter of a square 
the area is p2/16 . 

592 
ADDITIONAL ANSWERS A;-"'O SOLl'TIOS 
Chapter 6, page 141 
1. 
The mirror image of A is on a perpendicular from A to the mirror 
and as far behind the mirror as A is in front . 
2. 
The physical problem can be translated into light rays. 
If a 
light ray goes from A to point P on m to A, the shortest path is the 
one for which AP and AP make equal angles with m .  
As pointed out on 
page 141, this is a geometrical fact . 
Hence it applies to the 
location of the pier also. 
3. 
He should aim at the point P on m for which AP and AP make 
equal angles with m. 
4. 
Since billiard balls behave like lights rays , the final direction 
will be parallel to the original one . 
S .  
As the text suggests ,  if W 1 # • 2 ,  then pick P   so that there 
• l = • 2  .  
Then AP + PƌA is the shortest path from A to the 
mirror to A. 
But APA is given as the shortest path. 
Hence W 1 must 
equal . 2 .  
Chapter 6, page 144 
1 .  
The circle is an ellipse for which the two foci coincide . 
Then 
PF = PF and this is the radius . 
2 .  
Since PF + PF = 10 and PF 
Hence PF = 2 .  
PF + FF 
6, PF + PF + 6  
10 . 
3. 
Because PF + PFis the sum of two sides of the triangle PFF. 
This sum must always be greater than the third side. 
4 .  
The point on the axis must be equidistant from focus and 
directrix. 
Hence it is 5 units from the focus (and directrix). 
Chapter 6, page 148 
1. 
QP + QFl > PF1 because the sum of 2 
greater than the third side. 
Hence QP + 
sides 
PF2 + 
of a triangle is 
QFl :> PF2 + PFI ' 
1, 
Now 
is any point 
:> PF2 + PFl• 
on t other than P, then by Exercise 
Hence the shortest path from F2 to t to Fl is 
F2P t PFI. 
By Exercise 5 of Section 6-4, F2P and FIP must make equal 
angles with t .  
3 .  
Each light ray will strike some point P on the ellipse, such as P 
in Fig. 6-32 and be reflected to FI, because, as proven in Exercise 2, 

:\DDITlO:"\AL A:-.'S\\'[RS ..\.:-.'U SOLu'no:-.'s 
593 
F2P and FlP make equal angles with t ,  and light is reflected in 
accordance with just this equality of angles .  
4 .  
The lengths FIP and F2P become coincident radii. 
Then since 
both FlP and F2P make equal angles with t and the total angle is 180° , 
the radii are perpendicular to the tangent. 
Chapter 6 ,  page 150. 
Review Exercises 
1. 
Consider ń ACO and ń ABE. 
AC = AB;  A is common; and AD = AE .  
Hence the triangles are congruent and s o  BE = DC. 
Then triangles CBO 
and BCE are congruent. so that  OBC = W BCE. 
From this, the base 
angles of ABC are equal because they are supplements of equal angles . 
2. 
(a)  3 
 3 =  2 .  1  
 1 because they are vertical angles. 
Then because 
=  2 and so we have alternate interior angles equal. 
(b) Since  1 is also supplementary 
supplements of the same angle are equal. 
alternate interior angles. 
3 .  
The theorem on p. 141 applies here . 
to κ 4,  1 =  2 because 
But then we have equal 
4. 
It should take the path of a parabola whose focus is at A and 
directrix is m. 
Then the ship is as far as it can get from any gun 
at A or on the shore (simultaneously) . 
5 .  
Let P be the center of any circle T and let us use CȀ and Dķ to 
denote the centers of circles C and O. 
Then if we draw a radius from 
C to the common point E of tangency of circles C and T ,  this line 
must pass through P because CE and PE must both be perpendicular to 
the common tangent at E .  
Then i f  r i s  the radius o f  T ,  CȁP = c 
M r .  
Similarly the lines from P and D ;  to the common point F of tangency 
of T and D must form one straight line because PF and o;r are both 
perpendicular to the common tangent . 
Then PD; = r + d. 
Now pe T PO; = 
c - r + r + d = c + d. 
This quantity is the same no matter where T is. 
Hence the points P satisfy the definition of an ellipse. 
Chapter 7. page 162 
1. 
sin 450 = 12/2, cos 450 = 12i2, tan 450 = 1 
2. 
(b) sin 700 = 0 . 9397 
Cd) cos 550 
= 0 . 5736 
(f) tan 800 
& 5 .6713 
3. 
cos A varies from 1 to O .  
4 .  
tan A varies from 0 t o  unlimitedly large values. 
5 .  
sin A = BC/AB, cos B = BC/AB, etc. 
6 .  
90o-A is the other acute angle B. 
Hence we are back t o  Exercise S .  

594 
ADDlTIOAL A;'\.'SWERS AND SOLL'TlO:-.'S 
. 2 
2
2
2 
2 
2 
.
2
2 
7. 
sĸn 
A = ȂC /AB ; cos 
A = AC /AB
. 
Then sĸn 
A + cos 
A 
= 
(BC2 + AC2 )/AB . 
But by Pythagorean theorem the numerator equals 
the denominator. 
If we know sin A, we can compute cos A or vice 
versa. 
8. 
sin D 
FE/FD, cos D 
ED/FD, tan D 
FE/ED 
Chapter 7, page 164 
1. 
Use tan A = BC/AC. 
Then A = 560 and AC = 300. 
Answer : 
445 ft 
2 .  
Let x = distance from the observer to the bldg. 
Then tan 5° = 
1248/x or x = l248/tan 5°. 
Answer: 14,265 ft 
3 .  
Let x 
= the length. 
Then sin 5° = 1000/x or x 
x = 11,500 ft. 
1000/sin 5°. 
4. 
ship 
tan 50° = 380/x. 
is 19 feet beyond 
Then x = 380/tan 50°. 
the rocks. 
x " 319 ft. 
Hence the 
5 .  
tan A 
= 75/100 and tan B = 100/75. 
6. 
From the given equation we have (r + 3) sin 87046' = r or (r + 3 )  
( 0 . 99924) = r. 
Then 0 . 9 9924r + 2 . 99772 = r . "  Hence 0 . 00076r = 2 . 99972. 
Then r = 3944 mi. 
Chapter 7, page 170 
1. 
The angle POV equals the measured angle of 30°. 
To see this, 
drop a perpendicular from P to OV. 
Hence the latitude is 30°. 
2 .  
From 90° south latitude to 0° at the equator and then from 0° to 
90° north latitude at the North Pole 
3 .  
The longitude increases from 0° to 180° west longitude . 
Then he 
crosses the 180° longitude line and the lonĹitude becomes east 
longitude and decreases from 1800 to 0° . 
4. 
The 300 circle 
5 .  
He travels 2/360 of the earth ' s  circumference or (2/360 )( 25,000) 
or 139 miles, approximately. 
6. 
The radius of the 41° latitude circle is computed on p. 168 and 
is 3019 miles . 
Then the man travels 5/360 of the circumference or 
(5/360) 2ȃ(3019) which is 263 miles, approximately. 
7. 
He travels the full circumference of the 41° latitude circle. 
Since (Exercise 6) the radius is 3019, the circumference is 18,960 mi. 

Chapter 7, page 175 
ADDITlO7'.lAL ANSWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
595 
1. 
cos E = 4000/ES. 
Then ES 
4000/cos E 
4000/0. 000043 
93,000,000 mi . 
2 .  
sin 16° 
RS/ES. 
RS 
ES sin 16' 
L Ȅ3,000,000 (0.0046) 
428,000 mS 
3 .  
From the given equation we have (241,000 + r)sin IS' = r or 
( 241,000 + r)(0.0044) = r. 
Solve for r .  
r 
= 1065 mi 
4 .  
Using Fig. 7-23(b) with H replacing V, we have sin E 
= HS/ES . 
Then HS = ES sin· E = 93,000 ,000 sin 230 = 36,000,000 mi . 
Chapter 7, page 184 
1. 
sin 450/sin r = ȅ/3. 
Then sin r = (3/4) sin 45°. 
r = 32° 
2. 
sin i/sin r = 263. 
Then sin i 
( 2/3)sin r .  
The largest value 
possible for r is 90 
Then sin r = 1 and the largest value for 
sin i = 2/3 = 0 . 6666 . 
Then the largest i value is about 42° . 
3. 
Let i and r be the angles of incidence and refraction at the 
air-to-glass boundary. 
Then sin i/sin r 
= vI/v 
where vI and v2 are 
the velocities of light in air and glass. 
Now łhe angle of 
incidence at the glass-to-air boundary is r .  
Call the angle of 
refraction r Ó .  
Then sin r/sin r Ó  = v2/vl ' 
If we multiply this 
equation by the preceding we have sin i/ sin rÓ 
= 1 or sin i = sin r ĺ  
or i = rȆ. 
Then the initial and final rays are parallel. 
4. 
sin SO/sin 45 = vl/v2 . 
to be 172,000 mi/sec. 
Chapter 71 pase 184. 
Review 
l .  
(aJ 19° 
(bJ 2So 
vI is 186,000. 
Solve for v2 which proves 
Exercises 
(c) 71° 
(d) 62° 
2 .  
The hypotenuse i s  2 .  
Then sin 45° = /2/2 .  cos 45° = 12/2 ,  tan 
450 = 1. 
3 .  
The answers not given in the back of the textbook are : 
(bJ 12/13; 5/13; 1215 
(eJ 1/110; 9/110; 1/9 
4. 
4/5; 3/4 
5. 
13/2; 13 
6 
3/m; s/m 
7. 
tan 40° = AB/IOO j  AB 
100 tan 40° 
83.91 ft 

596 
ADDITIONAL ANSWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
8 .  
Let Ů 
15 tan 20 
height of the pole. 
Then tan 20° 
5 . '+6 ft. 
x/IS or x 
9 .  
Let the angle be denoted by A .  
Then cos A = '+0/60. 
Then A = 48° . 
10. 
Let x be the distance. 
Then tan 35° = x/60 or x = 60 tan 35° 
42 ft. 
11. 
x = 
Let x be the distance from target to gun. 
2000 
tan 50° = 2384 ft. 
Then tan 50° = x/2000 . 
DEp 
=
F C1!n
3
Łh: F;G(g.HIOJ) 168 we have 
= 3682 mi . 
cos 23° = OĺP/OP. 
Then 
This is the radius. 
The 
circumference is 2(3682)w. 
13. 
In Exercise 12 we have the circumference of the 23° latitude 
Then the man travels (5/360) 2w • 3682 = 107 miles, approxi-
circle. 
mately. 
14. 
Again following the method of p. 168 we have cos 67° 
Then OĻP = OP cos 670 = '+000( 0 . 3907) = 1,560 miles . 
O·P/OP . 
15. 
sin ilsin r 
.. /3. 
Angle i = ,+50 • 
Then r = 32° approximately. 
16. 
sin ilsin r 
3/ ... 
Then sin r = (4/3) sin i. 
Here i = 300 • 
Then sin r = .. /6 and r = '+20 approximately. 
Chapter 8, page 195 
1. 
The pre-Greek views were unscientific. 
The planets were associ­
ated with gods who ruled the affairs of men. 
The Greek views offer 
mathematical schemes which show regular patterns of planetary motion. 
2 .  
All reality reduces to numbers and relationships among numbers . 
3. 
All motions take place about a fixed earth. 
4. 
Deferent and epicycle (see p. 191) 
5. 
If the planet moves clockwise on the epicycle while the epicycle 
moves anticlockwise on the deferent , the path is practically an ellipse. 
6. 
Nature follows a rational pattern, a pattern obtained by human 
reasoning. 
With the Greeks each of the several domains of nature which 
they studied had a mathematical pattern . 
7. 
The planets follow a plan or pattern which is described by mathe­
matics. 
Presumably the universe was designed so that the planets 
would follow this pattern. 
8. 
The properties of space and 
described by Euclidean geometry . 
and the objects were designed to 
from the axioms of geometry . 
of objects in space were found to be 
Again the presumption is that space 
possess the properties which follow 

Chapter 9, page 207 
ADDITIONAL ANSWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
597 
1. 
Mathematics seems to flourish in civilizations that are interested 
in the physical world. 
2 .  
The rediscovery of the Greek works ; a revived interest i n  the 
physical world stimulated by the 
Greek works ; the geographical 
explorations ; the employers' and laborers ' interest in materials; a 
freer intellectual atmosphere brought about by the Reformation; new 
inventions such as gunpowder and lenses which led to mathematical 
problems . 
3. 
God designed the universe mathematically. 
Chapter 10, page 230 
1. 
The artists were impelled to portray nature as human beings saw 
it . 
To do so they had to create a mathematical system of perspective. 
2 .  
A conceptual system uses principles and conventions which may 
have very definite meaning but which are not what one actually sees 
in the real world. 
Thus the use of a gold background on which angels are 
portrayed is intended to suggest that the angels live in heaven . 
An 
optical system portrays what the eye actually sees in real scenes . 
3 .  
Alberti, Uccello, Piero della Francesca, and Leonardo da Vinci 
 .  
The eye sees what a section of the projection actually contains . 
5. 
See the italicized statements on pp. 220 and 221. 
A fourth 
theorem (p. 222) is that horizontal lines making a 450 angle with 
the canvas must be drawn so as to pass through a diagonal vanishing 
point. 
Chapter 11, page 238 
1. 
(a) It will be a triangle . 
(b) 
It will be a quadrilateral. 
2 .  
Because the figure and the section look alike to the eye 
3 .  
( a )  The two triangles lie in one plane . 
(c) Desargues' theorem holds for any two triangles whether they 
lie in different planes or the same plane. 
4. 
5/4 
5. 
The geometrical property which holds for some figure will also 
hold for the figure obtained by a section of a projection of that 
figure from some point. 
6. 
DA and DB become infinite and so their ratio approaches 1 .  
Then 
C becomes the midpoint of AB. 

598 
ADDITIONAL ANSWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
Chapter II. pase 2ļ2 
2 .  
The three points of intersection lie on one line. 
Chapter II, page 2ú6 
1 .  
Four lines . no three of which pass through the same point 
2. 
We can interchange the words point and line in a theorem about 
figures lying in one plane and obtain a new theorem . 
3 .  
Four lines all passing through one point . 
ļ. 
Interchange point and line and draw the figure. 
5 .  
If one dualizes a theorem then, according to the principle of 
duality, he automatically obtains a new theorem . 
Chapter II, page 2ȇ8 
1 .  
To discover geometrical properties cammon to a figure and a 
section of a projection of that figure, or common to two different 
sections of the same projection of that figure, or two sections of 
two different projections 
2. 
Projective geometry is concerned with properties that are 
invariant or remain the same under any projection and section. 
These 
properties usually deal with intersections of points and lines . points 
lying on a line. and the property of being a conic section. 
Euclidean 
geometry is concerned with congruence and similarity of figures . 
These properties hold only under special projections and sections . 
3 .  
The theme is that projective geometry arose from the work on 
realistic painting. 
Chapter 12. page 256 
1. 
He took over the axiomatic, deductive method of mathematics . 
2. 
See the middle paragraph of p .  252. 
3. 
The Europeans needed some efficient and more effective methods , 
especially for new and more complicated curves coming into mathematics . 
4. 
The new astronomy , the design of a clock, paths on maps , the 
design of lenses, projectile motion 

ADDITIONAL ANSWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
599 
Chapter 12, Page 263 
1. 
Two numbers which locate the position of the point with respect 
to two perpendicular lines 
2. 
It is an equation in x and y which is satisfied by the coordinates 
of any points on the curve and only these points. 
3. 
See answer section of textbook. 
4 .  
( a )  For example, x = 51, Y = 10. 
( b )  For example , x 
5. 
Yes, because (_3)2 
+ 2(5)2 
59. 
6. 
Since (3)2 + (_2)2 = 4 • 3 + I, the answer is yes. 
0, y 
6. 
7. 
(a) A straight line with a slope of 3, cutting the y-axis at (0,7) 
( b )  A circle with center at the origin and radius of 7 
(c) A circle with center at the origin and radius of f20 
(d) Write the equation as y = -(x/2) + 3. 
Hence a straight line 
with slope of -1/2, cutting the y-axis at (0,3) 
(e) Same as (c) 
8. 
Yes. 
These coordinates have a different geometrical meaning but 
serve to locate points with respect to the equator and the 00 -longitude 
(hali) circle. 
9. 
Yes. 
If its position with respect to the coordinate axes is 
different, the same curve will have a different equation. 
10. 
Yes, the slope is m. 
11. 
(0,7) 
12. 
(O,b) 
13. 
Slope of m; (O ,b) 
14. 
There are no values of x and y which belong to both equations. 
Hence it is meaningless to subtract one equation from the other. 
The 
X i S  and yls of one are not the same as the X i S  and y ' s  of the other. 
Chapter 12, page 267 
Exercises 3 to 7 are answered in the answer section of the textbook. 
Chapter 12. page 270 
2. 
Write the given equation as y 
and yķ such that xÓ = x 
- 5 and yĻ 
on pp. 269-270. 
+ 25 = (x 
Y + 25. 
- 5) 2 and introduce x K 
Follow the text procedure 

600 
ADDlTlO:'\!.\L A:'\'SW[RS AND SOLUTIONS 
3 .  The curve of y = _x2 
+ 6x is tɪe same as the curve of _y = x2 - 6x. 
The latter curve differs from y = x - 6x in that for the same x-valueɫ 
each y-value is the negative of the other y-value. Hence the curve is 
reversed with respect to the x-axisĆ or one ca9 say the curve is the 
reflection in the x-axis of the curve of y = x - 6x which is shown in 
Fig. 12-16. 
5. ɬach point on y = x2 - 6x + 9 is 9 units higher than the point on 
y = x - 6x with the same x-value. 
6. 
One can always find the pairs of x_ and y-values which satisfy 
the equation, and the points having these pairs of values form a 
curve. (One could poɭnt oɮt that in odd cases the curve may consist 
0; one point, e.g. , x + y 
= 0 ,  or there may be no curve, e.g., 
x + y2 = -9. 
7 .  (c) This is one form of the hyperbola. 
Chapter 12) page 273 
3 .  The length in question is determined by letting y = 0 .  Then x 
&5. 
Hence the total length is 10. 
4. 
This Equation (18) becomes .Jx2 
+ y2 + 
represents a circle. 
25. 
S. We calculated in Exercise 3 the coordinates of the point where 
the path crosses the positive x-axis. These are ( 5 , 0 ) .  Hence the 
distance from (3,0) is 2. Likewise the point where the path crosses 
the negative x-axis has coordinates (-5,0 ) .  The distance of this 
point from ( 3 , 0 )  is 8. 
Chapter 12) page 275 
The answers are given in the answer section of the textbook. 
Chapter 12, p. 278 
1. We can write equations in four letters and speak about them as 
though they represented figures in a four-dimensional space. But 
there is no implication that a real four-dimensional space exists. 
2. 
A hyperplane 
3 .  Yes. They introduced the idea of representing a curve by an 
equation in x and y and applying algebra to the equation to deduce 
facts about the curve. 
4 .  To an extent. We still need the older, purely geometric Euclidean 
geometry for basic facts about simple figures such as lines. triangles, 
and circles. Beyond that we can use either geometric proofs or 
coordinate geometry to establish other geometrical facts. Sometimes 
one approach is simpler than the other. 

ADDITIONAL ANSWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
60 I 
Chapter 12, page 278. Review Exercises 
1 .  0 
2. 0 
3. The x-coordinates are the same. 
4 and 5 .  See answers in back of text. 
6. Because ( 2 )2 + (/:2:1)2 = 25Ȉ the point lies on the circle. 
7 .  These curves are all parabolas. See Section 12-4. 
8. These curves are all parabolas but displaced from the standard 
position. See Section 12-5. 
9. See Eq. (19) and Fig. 12-17 . 
10. The curve is a hyperbola. 
11. Given ax2 + bx + c = 0, graph y = ax2 
+ bx + c and find where 
the graph cuts the x-axis. 
Chapter 13, page 290 
1. Shapes and sizes of objects and motion 
2 .  
A qualitative explanation is one which deals with physical concepts 
such as heavinessĆ rising, fallingʥ motion, heat, cold, natural place, 
force, attractionĆ and the like. A quantitative explanation relates 
the measures of varying quantities. It is really a description rather 
than an explanation. 
3. To isolate the primary qualities and not try to treat both primary 
and secondary ones; to idealize a physical phenomenon, as in neglecting 
the friction of air in studying motion, rather than to tackle the full 
physical problem with all factors included; to obtain basic physical 
principles from observation and experiment rather than to accept those 
which the human mind thinks must hold; and to seek quantitative de­
scription rather than physical explanation. 
4. The Greeks sought to understand the workings of nature. Bacon and 
Descartes sought to use scientific knowledge to help men secure the 
necessities of life. maintain health, and even secure comforts. 
5 .  Galileo sought quantitative description. The description would 
use mathematical formulas. MoreoverĆ he planned to deduce other formu­
las from known ones by mathematical means. 
Chapter 13, page 292 
1. A relationship between variables 
2. 
A formula is a symbolic representation of a function by an equatkn 
involving the variables. 

602 
ADDITIONAL ANSWERS A:-':O SOLUTIONS 
4. 0, 96, 224, etc. 
5. r is the independent variable and A, the dependent one. 
6 and 7. See answer section of textbook. 
8. t = t3. The negative value does not have physical significance 
if the formula represents the distance a dropped body falls in t 
seconds. 
9. When C = 0, F = 32. This is the freezing temperature of water. 
When C = 100, F = 212. This is the temperature at which water boils. 
Chapter 13. page 298 
1. No. A force is needed to overcome the friction of air. 
2. With no gravity, the man would stay in the same place. With 
gravity, he is accelerated downward. 
3. In 59 min it travels {59/60)10. In 1 min it travels {1/60)50. 
The total distance is 64/6 mi in 1 hr and so the average speed is 
10 2/3 mi/hr. 
4. From v = 
or 6" ft/sec. 32t we have v = 128. The average speed is {O + 128)/2 
This is the actual speed at t = 2. 
5. Acceleration is the rate of change of speed. 
6. The graph is a straight line through the origin with a slope of 32. 
7. "00; 676; 1600 ft 
8. The graph is a parabola. 
9. The parabola opens downward. 
10. He falls according to the formula d = 16t2. 
11. v = a/lOOO = 256 ft/sec approximately 
12. They would attain larger velocities as they fell (when d is greater 
than 1). 
13. v 5.3t; d 
(5.3/2lt2 
14. v at; d 1l/2),t2 
15. Square both sides in (6) . Then 2 
v 
6"d. Hence d 
v J 88, d = 121 ft. 
16. We can, following the suggestion, use v = 32t and ask what is t 
when v = 88. Answer: 2 3/" sec 

ADDITIONAL ANS\\.'ERS AND SOLUTIO;-.lS 
603 
17. 32 is replaced by 11. Henc,e d = v2/22. 
18. We have d = v2/22. This is the distance traveled wgen the 
velocity starts from a and the acceleration is 11 ft/sec . When 
v = 88, d = ŀ52. If the object starts with 88 ft/sec and decelerates 
at 11 ft/sec , it will travel 352 ft before reaching 0 velocity. In 
one second the automobile travels 88 ft. 
19. Let d be the depth of the well (to the water). Then d = 16t2 
relates the time and distance of fall. t = Id/16 is the time for the 
stone to fall. d/1152 is the time it takes the sound to reach the 
man. Then 'd/16 + (d/1152) = 6 1/2. To solve this for d, write 1d/4 
(13/2) - (d/1152). Now square both sides and we obtain a quadratic 
equation in d. However, the coefficients are large. A simpler 
solution is obtained by le;ting tl be the time it takes the stonĪ to 
reach the water. Then 16tl is the distance to the water and 16tl/1152 
is the time it takes the sound to come back. Consequently t 
+ 
(16t/1152)= 13/2. This quadratic in tl is easy to solve iflwe first 
replace 16/1152 by 1/72. Then tl = 6. 
Chapter 13. page 300 
1. The speed and distance will be greater because the ball has the 
speed of 128 ft/sec in addition to the speed acquired by the action of 
gravity. 
2. v = 128 + 32t; d = 128t + 16t2• 
3. Substitute the t values in (7) and v = 192 and 240 ft/sec. 
Substitute the t-values in "(8) and d = 432 and 756 ft. 
4. The curve is a parabola opening upward. 
5. Write d 
16(t2 + 6t 
2 
16(t 
+ 6t). Now complete the square. Then d + 144 
+ 9) = 16(t + 3)2. Let t' = t + 3 and d' = d + 144. 
Chapter 13. page 303 
1. Cf. (10); d = l28t _ l6t2. 
2. (a) 
(c) When t = 4, d = 384 ft; 
We must first find t when 
t = 5, d = 400 ft. 
(b) When t = 4, v = 32 ft/sec. 
v = O .  This t-value is 5. When 
3. d = O. This means the ball has just returned to the ground. 
4. 
The height of 512 ft is reached on the way up and 4 sec later on 
the way down. 
5. v = 1000 - 32t; d = 1000t - 16t2. v = 
tute this value of t in the formula for d. 
a when t = 1000/32. Substi­
d = 15,625 ft 

604 
ADDITIONAL A¸SWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
6. d 
100 - 16t2 
7. v = 96 - 5.3t, d = 96t - (5.3/2)t2• v = 0 when t = 96/5.3 = 
18.1 sec, approximately. Substitute this value of t in the formula 
for d. d = 870 ft, approximately. 
8. d 
when t Vt lSt2, where V is the intial speed. We know that d 
60. Hence 0 = SOV - 16 60 . Then V = 960 ft/sec. 
9, The initial velocity at the suggested orĿgin is 300 mi/hr or 
300 • 5280 ft/hr. Then d = 300 • 5280t - 1St . 
10. v = 96 - 32t; d = 96t _ 16t2 
11. Since the origin in Exercise 10 is at the roof, when the ball 
returns tɯ the ground, d = -112. Substitute this value of d in d = 
96t - 1St and solve for t. t = 7 sec 
Chapter 13, Page 30ij. Review Exercises 
1. 
(0) 22' 
2. 
(0) ' 
(b) 80 
(b) 5 
(c) 112 
(c) 12 1/2 
(d) 155 
(d) 1/2 
(e) 288 
3. 
(0) (0 • 160)/2 or 80 
(b) (0 + 256)/2 = 128 
4. Yes. At t = 7, v = 224; at t = 8, v 
during the eighth second is (224 + 256)/2 
5. v = gt; d = gt212. 
6. (a) Average v = gt/2 
7. (a) 256 
8. 
(0) 2 
9. 
(0) 160 
10. (a) 1 
11. v = 100 + 
(b) 78. 
(b) 16 
(b) 176 
(b) 9/8 
gt; d = lOOt + 
(b) d = gt2/2 
(c) 196 
(c) 3 
(c) 22' 
(c) 7 3/8 
gt2/2. 
256. The average speed 
240 ft/sec. 
(d) 225 
(d) 125/2 
(d) 332 
(d) 2 11/16 
( 0 )  13/4 
(e) 288 
a 
12. In each case we let d be the given distance and solve the result-
ing quadratic equation in t. 
(a) 2 
(b) • 
(c) 1.9 sec, approximately 
(d) 1.1 approximately 
13. (a) 
128 
(b) 
d = l28t 
2 
v = 
- gt 
- (gt /2) 
H. 
(0) 
1" 
(b) 100 
(c) 80 
(d) •• 

ADDITIONAL ANSWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
605 
15 and 16. See answers in back of text. 
17. Yes. The only change would be that the acceleration due to 
gravity, which is 32 ft/sec2 on the earth, would have to be replaced 
be the value that fits the particular body. Thus on the moon, 32 is 
replaced by 5.3. 
ChaEter 141 Ease 309 
l. Since t = x/2, y = 3x/2. This represents a straight line. 
2. Since t xl4. y 
5x2/16. This represents a parabola. 
3. Since t x/2. 
5x + x 2 This represents a parabola. 
y 
4. Give values to t and calculate the corresponding x and y. Plot 
the x and y. The graph is a straight line. 
ChaEter 14, page 313 
1. The object would have the horizontal speed of the airplane in any 
case. Without gravity the object would move horizontally at the 
velocity 6peed) of 100 mi/hr and stay alongside the plane. (This is 
similar to the astronaut's walk in space except that the motion there 
is not in a straight line.) 
2. The time reɰuired will be the same because the vertical motion is 
given by y = 16t in both cases. 
3. The equations x = lOOt and y = l6t2 describe the motion. When 
y = 500, t 
515/2. This is the time to reach the ground. When t = 
515/2, x = 100(515/2) = 550 ft, approximately. 
4. The bullet has the speed of the plane plus the speed with which 
it is fired or 3000 ft/sec. 
5. The equations describing the motion are x = Vt, and y = l6t2 when 
x and y are measured from the point of fire and y is positive downward. 
ɱe=ɲɳ;2ɴhaɵh:n=t3ɶ01ɷɸdaɹd=vl=aɺɻ0ɼoɽ;ɾ!c:alues. Hence 300 = Vt and 
6. The 
When y = 
Hence it 
target. 
bomb falls 5280 ft. The vertical motion is given bɿ = 16t2• 
5280. t = 1:3:30. In this time the bomb travels 300130 ft. 
should be released 3001:3:iO ft before the plane reaches the 
300{30 = 5450 ft, approximately. 
7 .  The plane is directly over the place where the bomb strikes the 
ground because both have the same horizontal motion. 

606 
ADDITIONAL ANSWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
Chapter 14, page 317 
1. Horizontal velocity 
300 cos 400 = 230 ft/sec; vertical velocity 
300 sin 400 
= 193 ft/sec. 
2. 
Since t = x/20, Y = (_x2/2S) + (3x/2) .  I t  i s  a parabola opening 
downward. 
3. 
Make a table of values by letting t = 0, 1, 2, etc. 
4. 
When the projectile strikes the ground y = O. 
The t 
30/16. 
Hence x 
20(30/16) = 37.5 ft. 
5. 
At the maximum height the vertical velocity is O. The vertical 2 
velocity is given by v = 32t + 30. 
(The 30 which appears in y = 
- l6t 
+ 
30t is the vertical velocity. 
Compare (7) and (8) . )  v 
= 0 when t 
= 
30/32. 
At this value of t, y = 14.1 ft, approximately. 
6. 
When the shell strikes the ground, y in (8) is O .  Then t = 
500/16. 
The vertical velocity at this value of t is given by ( 7 ) .  At 
t = 500/16, v = -500. 
The horizontal velocity is always the same and 
is 866 ft/sec. 
We see that the terminal velocity is the same as the 
initial velocity except that the vertical component is directed down­
ward. 
The magnitude of the terminal velOCi;y is {(866)2 + (500)2 = 
1000 ft/sec. 
See Fig. 14-4, where OR = {COp 2 + (00)2. 
Chapter l4! page 323 
1. 
From (20) we hŴve t 
= x/V cos A. 
If we substitute this in (22). 
we obtain y = -(16x /V2 cos2 A) + x(sin A/cos A). 
2. 
From (21), when Vy = 0 .  we have time = V sin A/32. 
3. 
We sUbstitute the value of t obtained in Exercise 2 in (22). 
Then max y = v2 sin2 A/64. 
4. 
When the projectile reaches the ground, y = O. 
From (22 ) .  the 
time equals V sin A/16. 
If we look at the time to reach maximum height 
(see Exercise 2) we see that it takes twice as long to reach the ground 
again. 
5. 
We must use (25), where now A 
= 400 and V 
2000. 
Then Xl = 
123. 000 ft. 
6. 
We can use the result on p. 322. 
Max Xl = V2/32 
20.000 ft 
2 
2 
7 .  The maximum range is given by max Xl = V /32 = ( 2000) /32. 
The 
angle of fire must be 450• 
Now for any x and t .  x = Vt cos A (see Eq. 
(20»). Hence let x = (2000)2/32, A = 45°, V = 2000 and solve for t. 
t = (62.5)12 sec 

"l,DDTTIONAL ANS\\"ER$ AND SOLUTIONS 
607 
Ő. Iʀ Exercise 3 we found that the max y for any angle of fire is 
V sin A/64. For fixed V, this quantity is a maximum when A = 900. 
Chapter 14, page 324. Review Exercises 
1. The sketches are made by making a table of valUes. One can find 
the direct equation and check. 
2 .  See answers at the back of the text for (a). (b). and (c). As 
for (d), t (x - 7)/3 and y = 5[(x - 7)/3] + 9 = (5x/3) - (8/3). 
3. 
4. 
2 
(a) x 
240 ' 5280t. Y = l6t 
(b) Let y = 5280 and solve for t. t = 130 sec 
(c) Same time as in (b) because the vertical motion is the same 
(d) Let y = 2 
• 5280 in y = 16t2 and solve for t. t = Ii6ISO sec 
(e) Since it takes {6ID sec to fall, the bomb will travel 
x = 240 • 5280 • Ii6ISO ft. 
(a) 200012/2 and 200012/2 
(b) x = 100012t; y = -16t2 + 1000fit 
(c) Use (25) or since the 450 angle of fire gives maximum range. 
use V2/32. Answer: 125.000 ft 
(d) In Exercise 3 of the preceding list we found that the maxʁum 
height is given by y2 sin2 A/64. Here Y = 2000 and A = 45 • 
Answer: 31.250 ft 
Chapter IS, page 333 
1. In a geocentric system the earth is fixed and the motions of the 
other bodies are described as they appear from the earth. In a 
heliocentric system the sun is regarded aa fixed and the motions are 
described in relation to the sun. 
2. No. He continued to use the deferent and epicycle scheme. 
3. The sun is at one focus of each ellipse. 
4. His main innovation was to replace each system of deferent and 
epicycles for any one planet by an ellipse. He also gave three new 
laws of mot ion. 
5. If the planet moves counterclockwise while the epicycle moves 
clockwise. the path is a crude ellipse. The main point is that a 
single curve. if reasonably simple. say an ellipse. is easier to 
comprehend and work with than a combination of curves. 
6. See pp. 330-331. 
7. Because the scheme was mathematically simpler 
8. The student would have to admit that he accepts it because he 
was taught to do so. 

608 
AODITIONAL A´SW[RS AND SOLUTIONS 
9 and 10. See pp. 328-9. 
11. Let D be the given distance and calculate T from T2 
D3. Then 
T = 165 yr. 
Chapter IS, pase 341 
1. Because one is a constant times the other so that a large mass 
feels heavy 
2. The man's mass is also 160 pounds (of mass). His weight on the 
moon is 5.3 times his mass or 5.3(160) = 848 poundals. This is also 
848/32 pounds of weight. 
3. The man's mass is 160 lb. His weight on the sun is 27 • 32 • 160 
poundals or 27 • 160 pounds of weight. 
Chapter IS. page 343 
2. The accelerľtion is a = GH/(5000 • 5280)2. We 
GH/(4000 • 5280) . If we divide the first equation 
have a/32 =2(4000 • 5280)2/(5000 • 5280)2 = 16/25. 
20.5 ft/sec approximately. 
do know that 32 = 
by the second, we 
Than a = (16125(32) = 
3. Strictly speaking, no, because the formula d = a6t2 was derived 
on the assumption that the acceleration is 32 ft/sec all along the 
path. 
4. 150 lb (of mass) 
5. The mass of the automobile is 3000 lb. Then, by (3), F 
3000 • 12 = 36,000 poundals = 36000/32 Ib (of force). 
Chapter 15. page 345 
1. The weight or forĽe of gravity is given by (6). Then F = 
GM • 150/(8000 • 5280) . We knļw that 150 ' 3Ļ = GM ' 150/(4000 ' 5280)2, 
Then r/150 • 32 = (4000 • 5280) /(8000 • 5280) = 16/64 = 1/4. Hence 
r = 150 • 32(1/4) poundals or 150(1/4) pounds of weight. 
2. The law shows how the same mass m has a weight which varies with 
distance from the center of the earth. 
3. Let the ĺwo masses be m and 2m. Then the two forces are GHm/r2 
and GH • 2m/r . The latter is twice the former. 
4. The man's weight is given by r = GMm/r2 where H is the mass of the 
earth. If H were one tenth as much, then F would be one tenth as much 
or 15 lb. 

ADDITION.-\L ANSWERS AND SOLUTlO:-.JS 
609 
5. By (5) the acceleration would be twice as much. The body would 
acquire more velocity each second and reach the ground sooner. 
6. By (5) the acceleration of the body higher up would be less. 
7. In place of F = GMm/(4000 • 5280)2 we would have F2 = GHm/ 
(1000 5280)2. Since F = 150, we have F2/150 
(4000 , 5280)2/ 
(1000 5280)2 
= 16. Hence F2 = 16 • 150 lb. 
8. In the case of F = Hmr/R3, the 
In the case of F = GHm/rĹ, the force force increases linearly with r. 
decreases as the square of r. 
9. The weight would still decrease as the distance from the center 
of the earth increased but it would not decrease so much. 
10. Yes. By (6), F/m = GM/r2 and for a fixed r, this ratio is the 
same for any mass m and its weight F .  
Chapter 15. page 351 
1. Yes. According to Newton's first law of motion, if no force acts 
on an object, the object remains at rest if it is at rest or it moves 
at a constant speed in a straight line if it is in motion. If an object 
does not move in a straight line, a force must act on it and this force, 
by Newton's second law, causes an acceleration. 
2. No. We have but to review the derivation to see that it does not. 
3. By (24), a = (50)2/5 = 500 ft/sec2• The force is exerted by the 
hand. 
4. The moon's velocity is given by 2w '2240000 • 5280/(26/3) • 
24 • 60 ' 60 in ft/sec. We now compute v /r where v is the valʂe just 
given and r = 240,000 • 5280. The result is a = 0.00897 ft/sec 
approximately. 
5. The mass of the ʃun is 4.40 • 1030 lb. The volume of the sun is 
(4/3)(432,000 • 5280) . The ratio of mass to volume is about 90. 
Chapter 15. page 355 
1. We cannot consider the formula for the variation of mg with 
latitude. All we can say is that as the latitude increases, more 
centripetal force is required to keep an object rotating with the 
earth. Hence less gravitational force is available to supply the 
weight, and weight decreases as one moves from either pole to the 
equator. 
2. By (30), v2 
= GH/r. If2the satelltse is close to the earth r a R. 
Also GM = 14 ' 1015• Then v = 14 • 10 /4000 , 5280. Then v = 
26000 ft/sec, approximately. 

610 
ADDITIO:-.JAL A:-.ISWERS A:-.IO SOLL'TIO:-.JS 
3. 
2 
By (30), v 
= GM/240,000 • 5280 = 14 • 1015/240,000 • 5280. 
v = 3300 ft/sec, approximately. 
Then 
4. The circumference of the moon's path is 2w 
• 240,000 • 5280. The 
velocity, by Exercise 3, is 3300 ft/sec. Then the time is the distance 
divided by the velocity or approximately 27.8 days. 
5. We use (30), in which r = 4500 • 5280 ft and GM = 14 • 105. Then 
v = 24,000 ft/sec, approximately. 
Chapter 15, page 359 
1. It applies to all masses in the universe insofar as all uses of it 
show. The calculations based on it agree with experience. 
2. He derived them mathematically from his laws of motion and 
gravitation. 
3. Since Kepler's laws proved to be mathematical consequences of the 
laws of motion and gravitation -- laws that applied to all other 
motions -- it was more likely that the heliocentric view, which gives 
rise to Kepler's laws, is correct. 
4. A check on the correctness of physical principles is that one can 
derive from them conclusions which agree with experience. Since 
Newton's principles lead to Kepler's laws and the latter are known to 
be observationally correct. Newton's principles are likely to be 
correct 
Chapter 15, page 361. Review Exercises 
1. See answers in answer section of textbook. 
2. See answers in answer section of textbook for (a), (b), (c), and 
Ie). Id) 4.675 • 10 
If) 7.4/103 
3. See answers in answer section of textbook for (a), (b), (c), and 
Id). Ie) 2.8/103 
If) 6 
4, 5, and 6. Answers are given in the answer section of the textbook. 
7. Sa) By (5), a = GM/(6000 
5280) . Hence a/32 = (4000 • 
a = 32(16/36) = 14.2 ft/sec2. 
5280)2. We know that 
5280)2/16000 • 5280)2 = 32 = GMf( 4000 
16/36. Then 
(b) The reasoning is the same except that 14,000 replaces 6000. 
Then a = 2.6 ft/sec2• 
8. (a) A man who weighs 200 Ib at the surface has 200 lb of mass. 
When `e is 2000 miles above the surface of the earth, then GM/(6000 
5280) 
= 14.2. Hence the pull of gravity F is m times this latter 
amount or F = 14.2(200) = 2840 pounda1s or 2840/32 lb. 
(b) Use 7(b) and argue as in 8(a). Answer: 520 poundals 

:\I)OITIO:,\:\1. .\%S\\'ERS :\:'\D S()LL'TlO:'\S 
611 
9. The man's mass is 200 lb .  On 
mass of the moon and r its radius. 
1060 poundals = 1060/32 lb. 
the moon a = GH/r2, where H is the 
Now a = 5.3. Hence r = 200(5.3) = 
Chapter 161 page 373 
1. The rate of change of distance compared to time is the change in 
the distance divided by the interval of time in which that change 
takes place. 
2. Average speed is the average over some interval of time or the 
distance traveled in that interval divided by the interval of time. 
Instantaneous speed is the speed at an instant of time as opposed to 
the average over an interval of time. 
3. The notion of limit 
4. The distance fallen in 5 seconds is 16 • 52 or 400 ft. The 
averagĪ speed is 400/5 or 80 ft/sec. After 4 sec the body falls 
16 • 4 or 256 ft. Hence during the fifth second the body falls 
400 - 256 or 144 ft. The average speed during this second is 144/1 
ft/sec. 
5. Repeat the process on pp. 371-372 with t = 5 instead of t 
4. 
In step (6) we obtain k/h = 160 + 16h. The limit of k/h as h 
approaches 0 is 160. 
6. At t = 3, d3 = 128 • 3 - 16 • 32. At t = 3 + h, d3 
+ k = 
128(3 + h) - 16(3 + h)2 = 128 • 3 + 128h - 16 • 9 - 16 • 6h - 16h2• 
Then k = 128h - 96h - 16h2. k/h = 32 - 16h. As h approaches 0, 
k/h approaches 32. 
Chapter 16? page 378 
1. 
2. 
(a) y = bxl; Y + k = b(x 
+ h). Then k = bh and k/h = b. 
SInce b is !onstant, tĸe limit of k/h or y = b. 
( ) 
3 
(
)3 
3 
2 
2 ah3. 
b Yl = axl; Yl 
+ k = a xʄ 
+ h 
= axl + 3axlh + 3axlh 
+ 
Then k = 3axBh + 3axlh 
+ ah3 and k/h 3ax@ + 3axlh + ah2• 
2 
As h approaches O. 3axlh and ah appʅoach 0 and k/h approaches 
3ax@. Hence y = 3axA and since this holds for any x, y = 3ax2• 
(c) Yl = c, Yl + k = c; k = 0; hence k/h = 0 and the limit of 
k/h = O. That is, y = O. 
2
2
2 
2 
Yl = Xl + 5; Yl 
+ k = (Xl 
+ h) 
+ 5 = Xl + 2xlh + h 
+ 5. Then 
2 
k = 2xlh + h and k/h = 2xl 
+ h. The limit of k/h as h approaches 
o is 2xl or y 
= 2x1• The example suggests that the constant in 

6 1 2  
ADDITIONAL ANSWERS AND SOLUTIOµS 
the original function makes no contribution to the derivative. 
3 .  The answers are given in the answer section of the textbook. 
4. 
If we apply (25), we get d 
100 + 32t. 
At t = 4, d = 228 ft/sec. 
5. 
(a) 
(h) 
The instantaneous rate of change of the volume with respect 
to the radius ķs the surface of the sp`ere. 
If V = (4/3)wr , then by (23), * = 4wr and this is the 
expression for the area of the surface of the sphere. 
6. 
y should be 4ax3• 
7 .  
If A = x2, then A = 2x. 
The result 
is intuitively reasonable because if we 
think of a square and think of a slightly 
larger one (see figure alongside) then 
the rate at which the area increases 
depends on the length of 2 adjacent sides 
AB and Be or we could say that the 
actual increase for an increase h in x 
is 2xh + h2 and the rate for the increase 
h in x is 2x + h. 
For very small h the 
rate of increase in area is 2x. 
A 
x 
xh 
h' 
B 
xh 
x 
c 
8. 
A = l .  Geometrically, for a small change h in w, the increase 
in area is l/h. 
Then the average rate is 1 and in this case 1 is also 
the instantaneous rate. 
Chapter 16, page 382 
1. 
(a) y = (l/lOO)2x. 
At x = 3, Y = 6/100. 
This is the slope. 
(b) At x = 5ŵ Y 
10/100. 
The slope is steeper at x = 5. 
2. 
(c) At x = 0, y = O. The tangent to the curve is horizontal at 
x 
= O. 
(a) y 
4 - 2x. 
At x 
tangent which has a 
(b) We must finŶ when y 
I, Y = 2. 
The direction is that of the 
slope of 2. 
= o. 
Since y = 4 - 2x, Y = 0 when x = 2. 
3. At A the slope and therefore the derivative is some positive 
number. 
The slope and therefore the derivative decreases to 0 at the 
peak then the derivative becomes more and more negative. 
About halfway 
toward the lowest point the derivative becomes less negative and then 
becomes 0 at the lowest point. 
After that it becomes more and more 
positive. 
4. 
y = x2 and y = x2 
+ 5 have the same graph except that the latter 
is 5 units higher. 
Then at any given value of xŷ the slopes are the 
same. 
Hence the derivatives must be the same. 

ADDITIO:-.lAL A;\:SWERS A:"IIO SOLUTlO;\,S 
6 1 3  
Chapter 16, page 385 
1. 
a = 128 - 32t. At t = 4, d or v is O. 
This means physically that 
the body has reached the highest point of its motion. 
Geometrically it 
means that the graph of d = 128t - 16t2 has the slope 0 at t = 4 or the 
tangent is horizontal there. 
2 
2 .  
A = xy. 
Y = (p/2) - x. 
Then A = x[(p/2) - xl = (px/2) - x . 
Then A = (p/2) - 2x. 
When A = o. x = p/4. 
Then y = p/4. 
The rectaŸ 
is a square. 
The calculus method is direct. 
We know how to proceed. 
It would take more fumbling to find the geometrical proof. 
3. 
A = Źy. 
y + 2ź = 100 or y = 100 - . 2x. 
Then A 
= 
100x - 2x . 
Hence A = 100 - 4x. 
When A = 0, x = 25. 
Here too, the calculus method is more direct. 
x(1Oo 
2x) = 
Then y = SO. 
4. 
Let y be the vertical dimension and x, the horizontal one. 
Then 
A = xy. 
But 3y + 2x = 100 or y = (100 - 2x)/3. 
Then A 
x(lOO - 2x)/3 = 
(100/3)x - (2/3)x2. 
A = (100/3) - (4/3)x. 
When A = 0 ,  x = 25 . 
Then 
y = 5013. 
5. As the text shows, V = 50r _ wr3 . 
0 ,  r = {SO/3w . 
If we substitute this 
we get 2(SO/3w)/r = 2 {SO/3w = 2r. 
Chapter 16, page 386. 
Review Exereises 
Then 
value 
• 
2 
• 
V = SO - 3wr . 
When V = 
of r in h = (SO _ wr2)/wr 
1. 
(a) When t = 6, d = 576. 
Hence the average speed is 576/6 or 
96 ft/sec. 
(b) When t = 5, d 
400. 
Hence during the sixth second the 
average speed is (576 
400)/1 = 176 ft/sec. 
(e) d = 32t. 
At t 
= 6, a = v = 192 ft/sec. 
2. 
Calculate the instantaneous speed at t 
= 6. 
This , by Exercise 1 
(c), is 192 ft/sec. 
This value must be close to the average speed in 
the interval from 5.9 to 6. 
3. Y = 20.. 
Hence: (a) 40 
(b) 60 
(e) 20a 
4. 
v = d 
= 32t. 
Hence a 
v 
32. 
5. The answers are given in the answer section of the textbook. 
6. y 
2x +  2 and at x = 2, Y 
6. 
7. Y 
2x +  2. 
When y 
0 ,  x = -1. 
B. 
(a) y 
2x + 10. 
When y = 0 ,  x = -5 and y = -25. 
A minimum 
(b) y 
2x - 10. 
When y 
0, x = 5 and y = -25. 
A minimum 
(e) y = -2x + 10. 
When y = 0, x = 5 and y = 25. 
A maximum 
(d) y 
-2x + 6. 
When y 
0, x = 3 and y 
9. 
A maximum 
(e) y = -2x + 6. When y = 0 ,  x 
= 3 and y = 11. 
A maximum 

6 1 4  
ADDITIONAL ANSWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
9 .  Y 
= 3x2• 
At x = 0, y 
= O .  
The function does not have a minimum 
or a maxbnum at x 
O. 
10. h = 14 - 32t. 
When h = 0, t = 9/2 sec. and h = 324 ft. 
1a. 
Let x 
= a side 
x 
+ 4xy = OĶ or y 
ι = 100 - (3x /4) . 
of the basŇ and y, the height. 
= (OO - x }/4x. 
Then V = 100x 
When V = 0, x 
= {400/3 = 20/13. 
2 
Then V 
= x y. 
But 
- (x3/4) .  
Hence 
Then y 
= 10/13. 
12. 
UsiQg x and y as in Exercise 11, we have V = x2y and 2x2 
; 4xy = 
400 or x2 + 2xy ; OO. 
Then y = (200 - x2)/2x. 
V = 100x - (x /2). 
Then V = 100 - (3x /2). 
When V = 0 ,  x = nOO/3. 
Then y = hOO/3. 
Hence the box is a cube. 
Chapter 17. pae 390 
1. 
See answer section of textbook . 
Chapter 17. page 394 
1. 
v = -32. 
Thus v : -2t + C. 
-3Zt + 150. 
Now d • -1St 
+ 150t 
C • 0 and d = -16t2 + 150t. 
When t : 0, V = 150. 
Hence v = 
+ C. 
But d 
I 0 when t 
= O. 
Then 
2 .  
Let distance be measured downward from the point 50 ft above 
where the object is dropped. 
v 
= 32 and so v = 32t + C. 
When t 
= 0, 
v : O .  
Then C = a and v : 3t .  
Hence d : lSt2 + C. 
When t 
= 0, d = 
50. 
Then C = 50 and d = 1St 
+ 50. 
3. 
Since the distance is measured upward from the ground, v = -32 
and v = -32t + 2C ,  
Now v : 0 when t : O .  
Then C 
= 0 and v 
= -32t. 2 
Hence d = -1St 
+ C. 
When t = 0 ,  d = 75. 
Then C = 75 and d = -16t 
+ 75. 
4. 
Since distance is measured upward from the ground, v 
: -32; v 
= 
-32t + C. 
Wheň t 
= 0, v = 100. 
Then C : 100 and v : -32t + 100. 
Next, d = -16t 
+ lOOt + C. 
When t = 0, d = 50. 
Hence C : 50 and 
d 
= _16t2 + lOOt + SO. 
5. 
Distance is measured upward from the ground. 
Then v 
; -32 and 
v 
= -32t + C. 
When t = 0, v = -100. 
Hence C = -100 and v 
= -32t -
100. 
Then d : _16t2 - lOOt + C. 
When t = 0 ,  d = 50. 
Then C : 50 and 
d = _16t2 - lOOt + 50. 
Chapter 17. page 397 
1. 
A = x2• 
Then A = 
Hence A 
• (x3/3) -8/3. 
(xa/a) + C. 
When x = 2, A = O .  
When x = 6, A = ( 63/3) -(8/3) 
Then C 
= -8/3. 
69 1/3. 
2ŉ 
As in Exercise I, A 
(x /3) - (64/3 ) .  
When x 
(xa/3) + C. 
When x = 4, A 
O. 
Then A 
6, A = (216/3) - (64/3) 
= 50 2/3. 

ADDITIONAL ANSWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
615 
3. A 
= x. 
Then A 
= (x2/2) + C. 
When x = £, A = O. 
Then C = -8 and 
A = (x2/2) - 8. When x 
= 6, A 
= 10 . 
4. 
A = x2 + 9. 
Then A = x3/3) + 9x + C. 
When x 
= 3, A = O. 
Then C = -36. 
Hence A 
= (x 13 ) + 9x - 36. 
When x = 6 ,  A = 90 . 
Chapter 17, page 401 
1. 
We may use (29). The SOO-lb 
Hence W 
= 32(4000 • 5280)500 ( 1 -
lb. 
32(4000 • 5280)500(1/41). 
If we neglect the factor 32, the answer in ft-lb is about 257,000,000. 
2. 
If the gravitational forcŻ were always what it is at the surface 
of ĵhe earth it would be GHm/R 
(see Eq. (23)]. 
However (p.£OO) ,  GH = 
32R . 
Hence the force would be 32m. 
Hence the work would be 
32 
• 500 
• 100 
• 5280. 
If we neglect the 32 to keep the answer in 
ft-lb, the result is 26£,OOO,OOO. 
3. 
From k 
= [300 + 2(100 - x)]h we have that k/h = 300 + 2(100 - x) . 
When h approaches 0, k/h approaches θ and x appżaches x. Hence W = 
300 + 2(100 - x) = 500 - 2x .  Then W = 500x - x 
+ C. 
When x = 0, W = O .  
Hence W = 500x - x2• 
To raise the tool completely x 
= 100. 
Then 
W = 40,000 ft-lb. 
4. 
W1 
= c/r1. 
W1 + k 
= c/(r1 + h). Then k = [c/(r1 + h)] - [c/r1] = 
2 
2 
-ch/(rl 
+ h)rl 
= -ch/(rl + rlh). 
Hence k/h = -c/(rl + rlh). When h 
approaches 0, W = -c/r or for any r, η = _c/r2. 
Chapter 17, page 403 
1. 
Use (33) with R = 4000 
• 5280 and d 
36,500 ft/sec, approximately. 
240,000 
• 5280. 
Then V 
2. The derivation of (34) applies to escape velocity from the earth. 
However, the only place in which we used a value Which applies 
specifically to the earth was in deriving (29) where we used the fact 
that GM = 32R2. 
For H the mass of the moon, GH 
= 5.3R2 where R is the 
radius of the moon. 
Then (34) becomes, for the moon, V = 12(5.3)R. 
Chapter 17, page £12 
1. 
The basic new idea is the limit concept. 
2. The history of the calculus shows that mathematicians go through 
a period of thinking and fumbling before they arrive at the correct 
logical approach. 

6 1 6  
ADDITIONAL ANSWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
Chapter 17, page 413. Review Exercises 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(a) 
(b) 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(a) 
(b) 
Starting with v = -32, we have v = -32t + C ang 
200 when t = o .  v = -32t + 200. Then d = -16t 
But d = 0 when t = O .  Hence d = _16t2 + 200t. 
since v 
+ 200 + C. 
At the maxiʆum point a or v = O .  Hence t = 200/32 and d = 
-16(200/32) 
+ 200(200/32) = 625 ft. 
When the object hits the ground. d = O. Then t = 200/16. 
Substitute this value of t in v = -32t + 200 and we obtain 
-200 ft/sec. 
The height above the roof s obtained exactly as in (a) of 
Exercise .l. Then d = -16t + 200t. 
2 
The height above the ground is d = -16t + 200t + 100. 
v = -5.3. Hence v = -5.3t + C. When t = 0, v = 200. 
Hence C = 200 and v = -5.3t + 200. Then d = -(S.3/2)t2 + 
200t + C. When t = 0, d = O. Then d = _(5.3/2)t2 + 200t. 
The maximum height is attained when a or v is O. Then t = 
200/5.3. Substitute this value of t in the formula for d 
and we obtain d = 3585 ft. 
The object loses less velocity per second as it rises 
because the downward aʇceleration is only 5.3 ft/sec2 on 
the moon and 32 ft/sec on the earth. Hence it takes 
longer for the velocity to become O .  
A 
= 3x. Then A = (3x2/2) + c. When x = 0, A 
o .  Hence 
C = o and A = 3x2/2. When x = 4, A = 24. 
The triangle is a right triangle with arms of 4 and 12. 
Hence the area is (1/2)(4)(12) = 24. 
5. (a) A = 2x + 7. Then A = x2 + 7x + C. When x = 4. A = O .  Then 
C = -44. Hence A = x2 + 7x - 44. When x = 6, A = 34. 
(b) The area of the trapezoid is (1/2)(2)(15 + 19) = 34. 
6. Use (29) with m = 200, R = 4000 • 5280 and r = 4100 
W = 3297 • 106 poundals. 
5280. Then 
7. Use (33) with R =·4000 • 5280 and d 
ft/sec, approximately. 
100 • 5280. Then V = 5700 
Chapter 18, page 422 
1. Answers are given in the answer section of the textbook. 
2 and 3. Answers are given in the answer section of the textbook. 
4. Because every 3600 the function repeats the values it takes on 
in the preceding 3600 interval 
5. It describes the height of Q above or below O .  
6. The function y = sin A first of all emphasizes the relation 
between two variables, A and y. Moreover, the function is defined 
for all values of A. 

ADDITIONAL .. \NS\"'ERS AND SOLUTIONS 
6 1 7  
7. 
I t  starts from g, rises to 1 at 90° , falls 6° 0  at 180°, falls 
farther to -1 at 270 
and then rises to 0 at 360 . 
Thereafter it 
repeats this behavior every 360° . 
8. 
Two values. 
9 .  
The period is 360°. 
The cycle refers to the set of y-values 
going from 0 to 1 to -1 to O. 
Chapter 18, page 424 
1, 2 ,  and 3. 
The answers are given in the answer section of the 
textbook. 
4. 
The variation of A from 0 to 2w produces the same variation in 
sin A as when A goes from 0 to 360° . 
Hence see Exercise 7 of the 
preceding list. 
Chapter 18, page 426 
I, 2, 3, and 4. 
See the answer section of the textbook . 
S .  
The shape i s  the same as when t varies from 0 to 1. 
See Fig. 18-12. 
6. 
ThŊ shape is similar to that of Fig. 18-12 except that there are 
3 full cycles of y-values in the interval from t = 0 to t = 1. 
7. 
The shape is that of Fig. 18-12 except that all y-values are 
twice as large (or as small when y is negative). 
8. 
Comparing with (7), we see that f = 10 . 
9. 
See the back of the textbook. 
Chapter 18, page 433 
1. 
From (15) we have 32 
• 2 = (1/2)k or k = 128. 
2. 
Use (22). 
f 
(1/2.) 150/2 = 5/2. 
3. 
T = l/f = 0 . 01 sec 
4. 
By (21), y = sin 2wft provided the amplitude or maximum displace­
ment is 1. 
If it is 0, then y = 0 sin 2wft. 
[Cf. Eq. (24)]. 
In our 
case f = 50 and 0 = 3 in. 
S. 
Use (24). 
D 
3 in. 
= 1/4 ft. 
k = 75 and m = 3. 
Hence y = 
3 sin St or, in feet, y = (1/4) sin St. 
6. 
In (25), T 
= 1 and k = SO. 
Hence m = 50/4w2 lb. 

618 
ADDITIO¹AL A¸SWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
7 .  
( a )  
The mass makes 5 oscillations or has a frequency f of 5 and 
it moves 4 units above and below its equilibrium position. 
(b) 
2wf 
10. 
Hence f = 5/w. 
The amplitude is again 4. 
8 .  
By (22), f 
= (1/2w) 1Jk/Jn. 
Make m larger to decrease f. 
3 
9 .  
Compare a 
= - (GH/R )r with (IS) where a 
= -(k/m)y. 
In each case 
the acceleration is a constant times the displacement . 
Now (IS) leads 
to (24). 
Hence by the very same steps , except that r replaces y and 
GM/R3 replaces kim, we get r = D sin viGM/R3 t. 
Thus the man oscil­
lates back and forth in the tunnel. 
Since D is the initial displacement, 
the man will go from one end of the tunnel to the other and back again 
repeatedly. 
Chapter 19, page 442 
1. 
Y = D sin 2wft. 
Here the D is the amplitude or the maximum 
displacement which a typical air molecule undergoes .  
f i s  the number 
of times per second that the typical molecule makes a complete oscil­
lation or a complete back-and-forth motion about its mean or rest 
position. 
2 .  
Y = 0 . 0005 sin 2w • 300t. 
3 .  
The frequency is 540 and the amplitude i s  0 . 002 in. 
4. 
400/20 or 20 cycles/sec 
Chapter 19, page 445 
1. 
(a) y = sin 2wt has a frequency of 1 in one second along the 
t-axis and y 
= sin 6wt has a frequency of 3 .  
Both have 
an amplitude of 1. 
Sketch both on the same axes and add 
ordinates as is done in Fig. 19-5. 
(b) y 
= sin 2wt has a frequency of 1 in one second along the 
t-axis and an amplitude of 1. 
y 
= (1/2)sin 4wt has a 
frequency of 2 and an amplitude of 1/2. 
Sketch both on 
the same set of axes and add ordinates as is done in Fig. 19-5. 
(c) y 
= sin 2wt has a frequency of 1 in one second. 
y = sin 3wt 
has a frequency of 1 1/2. 
This means that the graph will go 
through 1 1/2 cycles in one second. 
The amplitude is 1. 
Graph both on the same set of axes and add ordinates as is 
done in Figure 19-5. 
2. 
( 2 )  y 
= sin Swt repeats its behavior 4 times in one second. 
Hence the entire function will repeat when y 
= sin 2wt 
repeats ,  that is, after one second. 
The frequency of the 
entire function is 1. 
(b) The frequency of y = 2 sin 2wt is 1 and that of y = sin 4wt 
is 2 .  
Hence the two together will repeat when the first one 
does ; that is, the frequency of the entire function is 1 .  

."DDITlO:"o!:\L .\NSWI:I{S :\:'\'D SOLUTIOl\"S 
619 
(c) As in (b), all three functions will repeat when the first one 
does .  
Hence the frequency of the entire function i s  1 .  
( d )  The respective frequencies of the three terms are lOa, 200. 
and 300. 
The entire function repeats when the first one does, 
that is, after 1/100 of a second. 
The frequency of the 
entire function is 100. 
Chapter 19. pķge 448 
1 .  
See p. 446, lines 1 1  to 13. 
2. 
The frequency of the entire sound is 240. 
The amplitude of the 
third harmonic is 0.01. 
3 .  
See answer section of textbook. 
4. 
The third harmonic has a frequency three times that of the 
fundamental or 3 • 720. 
5 .  
The harmonics beyond the first one (the fundamental tone) repeat 
their behavior many times in each cycle of the first harmonic. 
Hence 
the entire sound repeats when the first harmonic does. 
If this one 
repeats itself, say 100 times a second or has a frequency of 100, 
then the others certainly repeat themselves each time the first one 
does; so the entire sound repeats when the first one does. 
Chapter 19, page 451 
1. 
The first has a larger amplitude and so is louder. 
The second 
one has a larger frequency and so is higher pitched. 
2. 
A simple sound is one in which the motion of a typical air 
molecule can be represented by y = D sin 2wft. 
3. 
A musical sound repeats its behavior many times a second or is 
periodic. 
Noise is aperiodic or irregular. 
Hence the musical sound 
can be represented by a sum of sine functions according to Fourier's 
theorem . 
4. 
The pitch of a complex sound is set by the frequency of the 
first harmonic. 
The quality depends on which harmonics are present 
and their amplitudes. 
5 .  
Musical sounds can be represented mathematically but music appeals 
to the ear, and the physiological processes and individual reactions 
are not contained in the mathematics. 
Chapter 20, page 458 
1. 
See p. 453, line 8 .  

620 
AOOITIQ:-.'AL :\;\:SWERS :\:-.'0 SOLLTTlO:\'S 
2. Euclid's parallel axiom is a somewhat complicated statement. and 
therefore was not as self-evident a truth as axioms were supposed to 
be. 
3. The alternative axioms such as Playfair's made assertions about 
what happens far out in space beyond manls experience. As mathe­
maticians began to appreciate this fact, they became dissatisfied with 
such assertions as axioms. 
ī. Saccheri proposed to take the two alternative possibilities -- no 
parallel lines to a given line and more than one parallel line to a 
given line -- and show that when each of these is used as an axiom in 
conjunction with Euclid's other axioms (of course, aside from Euclid's 
parallel axiom), then a contradiction can be deduced. Thus the only 
remaining possible state of affairs, the existence of one and only 
one line parallel to a given line, would have to be true. 
5. No. Saccheri did not arrive at a contradiction when he assumed 
that there could be more than one parallel line to a given line. but 
he did deduce such strange theorems that he, nevertheless, decided 
that such a geometry was impossible. He did arrive at a contradiction 
by assuming that no parallel lines exist. His conclusion was that 
Euclid's geometry is the only possible geometry. 
6. They realized that an alternative geometry was possible (there 
was no contradiction in it) and that such an alternative geometry could 
apply to physical space. 
Chapter 20, page 460 
1. See p. 458, middle. 
2. In Euclid's geometry, parallel lines are lines (in the same plane) 
which have no point in common. In Gauss's geometry, the term parallel 
lines is reserved for the two lines (m and n on p. 458) which separate 
those lines through point P which do meet a given line 1 from those 
which do not. 
3 .  See p. 459, the next-to-the-last paragraph. 
4. See p. īS9, the last paragraph. 
5. The triangle with angle sum of 1700• 
6. 
Both triangles have an angle sum of 1700 . Their areas must be 
ťiu:!aʈʉʊʋu:ʌ;aiʛoʍʎʏ ::: ;ťʐa=:a!ʑeʒʓʔ:nsʕecʖŦʗ:ʘ'tŦhʙ8ʚE:angle 
7. The triangles are similar. 
Chapter 20. page ī62 
1. Riemann pointed out that experience tells us only that a line is 
endless, not that it is infinite. 

.\DOITIO:-':AL A:\'SWERS AND SOLUTlO:-':S 
62 1 
2. 
There are no parallel lines. 
3. 
Theorems which can be derived from those axioms which are alike 
in Gĸuss ' s ,  Euclid's and Riemann ' s  geometries will be the same. 
4. 
Gauss 's geometry is more like Euclid's because only one axiom is 
changed 
'
-- the axiom on parallel lines. 
5 .  
In Euclid 's geometry the sum is 1800; in Gauss ' s ,  the sum is always 
less than 1800; and in Riemann ' s  geometry the sum is always more than 
1800• 
6. 
See p. 461, last paragraph. 
7. 
A geometry whose axioms differ from Euclid's and, consequently. 
whose theorems differ from Euclid ' s  
8 .  
I t  i s  obliterated. 
Similar triangles must be congruent. 
Chapter 20, page 464 
1 .  
Not if one uses figures of ordinary or small size. 
2. 
Yes, because all agree to within possible measurements 
3 .  
Because the sum of 1790 59' 58" was subject to experimental error 
so that the true sum could be more , equal to,or less than 1800 
Chapter 20, page 471 
1. 
The concept of line in Euclidean geometry is undefined and must 
mereJy possess the properties stated in the axioms. 
This is true of 
the "lines" on a cylindrical surface. 
2. 
Definitions presuppose other concepts in terms of which the 
definitions are made. 
Hence one must start with undefined concepts. 
3 .  
If we interpret line to be great circle on the sphere . 
4. 
Yes. 
The geometries created by mathematicians are intended to 
fit or describe physical space and do so rather well, but no one of 
them may be the precise description of the geometrical properties of 
physical space. 
5. 
In some instances ,  yes. 
Builders and carpenters often do, but 
surveyors and astronomers use light rays. 
6. 
The character of the geometry would almost certainly be some kind 
of non-Euclidean geometry. 

622 
ADDITIO:'\'AL A¶SWERS :\µD SOLl'T10:'\'S 
7. 
Same answer as Exercise 6. 
Chapter 20. page ij7ij 
1 .  
Since several geometries which differ from one another all fit 
physical space , we can no longer decide which is the true one . 
We 
are forced to conclude that mathematics is not necessarily a body of 
truths . 
2. 
The mathematical space merely has some correspondence with 
physical space . 
The former is constructed by human beings; the latter 
is fixed in the real world and independent of human beings. 
3. 
Yes, in the sense that the applicability of its results must be 
checked. 
Yet mathematics differs primarily in the concepts with 
which it deals and in its insistence on deductive proof. 
Chapter 20. pase 77 
1 .  
That mathematics is not a body of truths about the physical world 
2 .  
It caused scientists to face the fact that scientific theories 
are not truths and that science cannot seek truths because these may 
be unattainable . 
Scientists can construct useful theories. 
3 .  
In both cases, law and mathematics. fundamental axioms or principles 
are assumed and consequences are deduced. 
But the principles of two 
different legal systems will differ, and so will the consequences. 
This 
is the case in geometry also. 
4. 
Yes. 
If one recognizes that all science can do is provide a 
theory which agrees with experience, the existence of non-Euclidean 
geometries gives more latitude in the formation of useful theories. 
Chapter 21. pase ij81 
1. 
No. 
From the standpoint of what happens physically. 10 + 10 does 
not give 20. 
2. 
No. 
We may to the best of our ability to measure decide that the 
smaller bags each contain 10 lb. 
But when we put them together, we 
may ζ able to measure the error and find that the total weight is more 
or less than 20 lb . 
3 .  
If we assume that the 5-lb weights are very accurate , the scale 
will still balance. 
The axiom involved is that equals added to equals 
give equals. 
ij. 
If we assume that the 100-ft/sec velocity and the 32t-ft/sec 
velocity are precise figures, then the two velocities add. 

ADDITIONAL ANSWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
623 
5. 
No. 
The frequencies do not add. 
The readers who covered Chapter 
18 would recognize that the combination of the two sound waves would 
have a frequency of 50 cycles/sec. 
6. 
The mixture has a temperature of 450 • 
Chapter 21. page 484 
1. 
No. 
We have seen (p. 483Ä bottom) that in adding batting 
averages. we cannot replace 2/3 by 4/6 or 8/12. 
2. 
We must 
or 
or 
or 
show that 
a (? + 
b 
t) 
ac 
ae 
bd + bf 
a (c + e) 
ac + ae 
b 
d+f 
bd + hf 
a(c + e J  
ac + ae 
bid + f) 
bd + bf 
ac + ae 
ac + ae 
bd + bf 
bd + bf 
3 .  
Any fraction whose numerator is -l. 
Thus 1/2 + -1/2 
• 0/. 
". 
Yes. 
ChaE:ter 21. E:ase 
"90 
l. 
As examples of entries in the addition table , we have 5 + 4 
6 + 1 - 0, 6 + 2 - 1 ,  6 + 3 -
2, etc. 
2. 
As examples of entries in the mUltiplication table we have 
5 . " - 6, 5 . 5 - ", 6 
1 - 6, 6 
2 - 5 ,  6 . 3 -
", etc. 
3. 
Yes. 
• o .  
- 2, 
4 .  
To divide 4 by 2 we need some number x such that 4 = 2x. modulo 6 .  
The possible values of x are 0 . 1 . 2 , 3 , 4 ,  and 5 .  
For x = 2 ,  we have 
4 = 4, modulo 6 and this is correct. 
Hence one answer is 2 .  
To divide 3 by 2 we need an x such that 3 = 2x. modulo 6 .  
Again 
the possible values are 0,1,2,3,4, and 5 .  No one of these numbers 
serves as an answer . 
5 .  
To find an x such that 4 = 2x, modulo 7 ,  we 
an x such that 3 = 2x, modulo 7 ,  we have x = 5 .  
prime number, we can always divide one number by 
modular arithmetic. 
have x = 2 .  
To find 
If the modulus is a 
another in that 

624 
:\DDlTlO´AL A·'S\\,ERS A:\'D SOLUTIONS 
6. 
9 or 9 i any multiple of 12 
7. 
a = b, modulo m, means a 
= b + pm and c = d, modulo m ,  means c = 
d + qm. 
Then a - c = b - d + (p - q)m. 
Since (p - q)m is a multiple 
of m. a - c = b - d. modulo m .  
B .  
b d  + 
ac = 
a = b + pm; c = d 
(bq + dp + pqm)m. 
bd, modulo m. 
2 
+ qm. 
Then ac = bd + bqm + dpm + pqm 
We see that ac - bd is a multiple of m. 
9 .  
We cannot always divide one congruence by another. 
Hence 
10. 
Two numbers each congruent to a third , modulo m, are congruent to 
each other. modulo m .  
11. 
The sum is 1220. 
The sum of the digits in this sum is 5 .  
The sum 
of the digits in 578 is 20 or 2 ,  modulo 9. 
The sum of the digits in 
642 is 12 or 3 .  modulo 9 .  
We see that the sum of the sums of the digits. 
that is, 2 + 3 ,  is congruent to the sum of the digits in 1220. 
12. 
The product is 371,076. 
The sum of the digits in this product 
is 24 or 6, modulo 9. 
The sum of the digits in 578 is 2, modulo 9 .  
and the sum of the digits in 642 i s  3 ,  modulo 9 .  
The product of these 
sums , that is, 2 • 3 ,  equals the sum of the digits in the original 
product. 
13. 
(.) Yes. 
(. + b) - (b + . ) 
= 0 and 0 is a multiple of m. 
(b) Yes. 
s + (b + c) 
= (a + b) + c, modulo m, because • + 
(. + b )  + c . 
(c) Yes. 
• (b + c) = ab + .c, modulo m ,  because a(b + c) 
14. 
(.) 5 
(b) 3 
(c) 6 
(d) 2 
(e) 4 
(f) 
15. 
(. ) 1, 4 
(b) o .  2, 4 
(c) I, 3 ,  
Chapter 21. page 497 
1 .  
Since the .union i s  B ,  all the objects in A are in B .  
2 .  
All the objects in A must also be in B. 
3 
5 
(b + c) = 
ab + ac. 
3 .  
Because many of the properties of addition , e.g. , the commutative 
and associative properties, hold for union as well as ordinary addition 
4. 
A r. A = A and A v A = A. 
5 .  
The objects comon to A and B v A are just those in A. 
Hence 
the answer is A. 
6 .  
Let A be the set of all professors, B the set of all intelligent 
persons, and C the set of all students. 
The premise that all professors 
are intelligent becomes A r. B = A. 
The premise that no students are 

:\DDlTlOµ:\L :\µS\\"[RS :\µD SOLUTIO:XS 
625 
intelligent becomes B n C = O .  
Then by "multiplying" the two equations 
(see p .  q.96. Step H) we have (A n B ) n ( B n C ) 
= A n O  or A n B n C  = 0 
or, since A n  B = A, A n  C 
= O .  
This conclusion means that no prof'essors 
are students. 
7 .  
An object is in A n  (B v C )  if it is in A and in B or C. 
Such an 
object is then in A n  B or in A n  C .  
Hence it is in (A n B) v (A '"' C ) .  
Conversely, if an object is in ( A  n B )  v ( A  n C ) ,  it must be in 
A n B  or A n C  or both. 
If it is in A n B , it is in A and in B. 
Hence 
it will be in B v C  and in A n (B v C ) .  
Thus, any object in one side 
of the given equation is in the other and the two sides must be co­
extensive. 
8 .  
(a) A n  B can contain no more than i s  in A .  
Then A v (A n B) is A .  
( b )  A v B surely contains all the objects in A .  
Then A n (A v B) 
is A. 
(c) A - B contains all the objects in A that are not in B. 
Then 
(A - B) v B contains what is in A but not B and what is in 
B, the latter also containing the rest of A .  
Then ( A  - B )  v B :: 
A v B . 
9 .  
We have to show that for at least some A ' s  and 
such that A = B n X. 
Suppose B is contained in A. 
B n X cannot be greater than B .  
Hence B n X cannot 
contains objects not in B. 
Chapter 22, page 503 
1. 
See p. 502. 
2. 
8113; 1200. 
B ' s  there is no X 
No matter what X is , 
equal A because A 
3 .  
6.1; 5 ;  10. 
The mean is the best representative because it takes 
into account that 6 students got a grade of 10. 
If only 1 has a grade 
of 10 and 6 a grade of 8 ,  the median would be the same but the mean 
would change. 
q.. 
31; 35; 40. 
Here it is more difficult to say which average best 
represents the data. 
The mean or median would be a reasonable choice . 
5. 
If the word average means median than the statement is auto­
matically correct by the definition of median and so affirms nothing . 
If the word average means mean or mode (assuming there is some measure 
of intelligence ) ,  then it need not be true. 
6 .  
No, because the depth may be 1 0  ft in one area and still there 
may be a mean depth of q. ft . 

626 
ADDITlO´AL A´S\\'[RS A:-.:D SOLUTIO´S 
Chapter 22. page 50S 
1. 
3 . 24 
2 .  
3 
3 .  
12 . 8  
4. 
The variations from the mean height are greater in the city where 
the standard deviation is 3 in. 
S. 
A grade of 75 where the standard deviation is 5 means that the 
student did much better than most of the students because most grades 
were grouped more closely about 65 in this case. 
6. 
The standard deviation is a measure of how closely the data are 
grouped about the mean or how much they depart from the mean. 
Chapter 22. page 510 
1. 
It is a graph or table which shows a set of data (scores, grades, 
wages) and how many people. for example, are associated with each one 
of the data. 
2 .  
See p. 508. 
3 .  
95 .4\ 
4. 47.7\; 99. 8\ 
S .  
The graph is a normal frequency curve with the portion to the 
left of one a to the left of the mean chopped off. 
6 .  
The modal income is 95 . 
The mean would lie to the left because 
the number of people earning salaries that are smaller than 9S is much 
larger than the number of people earning larger salaries. 
7. 
There are two different species, each with its own mean and 
variations from that mean . 
Chapter 22, page SIS 
1 and 6. 
See answer section of textbook. 
7. 
The formula is a concise representation of the data. 
Moreover, 
we can use the formula to calculate values of the dependent variable 
for given values of the independent variable (these values may not be 
in the given data) .  
Of course, to do so assumes the formula has a 
validity beyond that in the given data. 
8 .  
He would know a good deal about what types of equations fit 
curves of given shapes and so be able to select the form of the 
equation to fit a given curve. 
Chapter 22, page 518 
1. 
One would expect high ability in mathematics. 

ADDITIO;\JAL A;\JSWERS A:"ID SOLUTIONS 
627 
Chapter 22. page 520 
1. 
The deductive approach starts with 
the field and then deduces conclusions .  
starts with data and uses techniques to 
information from the data. 
axioms that seem to apply to 
The statistical approach 
obtain more or less reliable 
2 .  
The phenomena of economics are so complex that one cannot find 
basic axioms . 
3 .  
No. 
The population may be increasing and the percentage of 
unemployed may actually be decreasing. 
OrÄ if women lose jobs, their 
husbands may be earning more and so the families can be better off. 
4. 
No. 
The records of what deaths are due to cancer may be more 
accurate or the identificƊtion of cancer as the cause of death may be 
surer. 
5. 
10. 
The cause may be some physiological or neurological factor 
which prompts men possessing it to smoke . 
6. 
No. 
The intelligence of the children may be due to the greater 
intelligence of the parents. 
More intelligent parents may marry late 
because they enter professions requiring a lot of schooling. 
Hence 
it may not be the age of the parents but their intelligence. 
7. 
No. 
The people who live longer may have better physical consti­
tutions, but because they live so long get to need false teeth. 
Chapter 23, page 527 
1. 
One. 
It means the event is certain to happen . 
2. 
Zero. 
It means the event is impossible. 
3. 
The probability of a 2 is 2/6. 
The probability of a 3 is 3/6. 
The probability of 3 or more is 4/6. 
4. 
No. 
The two possible outcomes. living or dying , are not equally 
likely. 
5. 
6/10 
6. 
13/52 
7. 
Distinguish the coins as, say, penny, nickel, dime, quarter. 
There are 16 possible ways in which they can fall. 
Four of these would 
be 3 heads and a tail. 
Hence 4/16 
B .  
1 - (5/32) or 27/32 
9. 
3/6 
10. 
It is improbable but not impossible. 
11. 
6 '  6 or 36 in all 

628 
ADDITIONAL ANSWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
12. 
4 and 1; 1 and 4; 2 and 3; and 3 and 2. 
Hence 4 
13. 
4/36 in view of Exercises 11 and 12. 
15. 
On p. 525 we find that the probability of 2 heads and a tail on 
a single throw of three coins is 3/8. 
But, as pointed out on p. 525, 
to throw one coin 3 times is the same as throwing three coins 
simul taneoualy. 
16. 
During the five-minute interval from 8 to 8 : 05, say, there are 
four minutes for which the first train will be southbound and only 
one minute for which the first train will be northbound. 
If the young 
man enters the station at any time during the five-minute interval he 
will be 4 times as likely to get there between 8 and 8:04 as between 
8:04 and 8:05. 
Hence the probability of getting a southbound train is 
4/5. 
17. 
1/2 
1/2 or 1. 
18. 
The probability of two 
one head is 3/4. 
Hence the 
Chapter 23, page 530 
tails is 1/4; the probability 
3/4 
3 
odds are 1/4 = T . 
of at least 
1. Take the number of people alive at age 40 and divide it into the 
number of people alive at age 60. 
2. 
85/100; 58/85. 
3. 
The problem is the same as the probability of 3 heads in a throw 
of three coins. 
Hence 1/8. 
4. 
The probability that all four will recover without any treatment 
is the same as the probability of 4 heads in one throw of four coins. 
This is 1/16. 
This is not very unlikely. 
Hence it is not clear that 
the treatment is really the reason that 41 four recovered. 
Chapter 23, page 532 
1. The probability of a height falling within 30 to the right of the 
mean is 0.499. 
The probability of a height falling within 20 on either 
side of the mean is 0.954. 
2. 
The probability of a bulb falling beyond 10 to the left of the 
mean is 0.159. 
3 .  The probability of falling beyond 20 to the right of the mean is 
0 . 023. 

ADDITIONAL ANSWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
629 
4. 
The probability of falling within 10 to the right of the mean is 
0.341. 
5. 
The probability of falling between 10 and 20 to the right of the 
mean is 0.136. 
Chapter 23, pase 537 
1. 
The eighth row is 1, 7, 21, 35, 35, 21, 7, 1. 
The sum is 128. 
The probability of 4 heads and 3 tails is 35/128. 
2. 
From the seventh row of Pascal' s  triangle we obtain 15/64. 
3. 
The probability of two heads (Exercise 2) is 15/64. 
Hence 
(15/6")2000. 
4. 
The mean number of heads is 10,000/2 or 5000. 
The standard 
deviation of the frequency distribution of heads is ( 1/2) frl or SO. 
To get 5100 heads or more . one must get a number of heads which lies 
more than 20 to the right of the mean. 
This probability is 0.023. 
5. 
The mean number of those who normally survive out of 100 i s  S O .  
The standard deviation of the probability curve which shows the 
probability of I, 2, 
• . •  , 100 surviving is (1/2) II150 = 5 .  
The chance 
of 65 or more surviving is the probability of a number more than 30 
to the right of the mean. and this is 0.001. 
The likelihood of 65 
or more surviving without treatment is very small. 
Hence the likelihood 
that the treatment is effective is high. 
6. 
Here the mean is sao and the standard deviation of the probability 
curve of 1, 2 ,  
. • • •  1000 people surviving is (1/2) {lOOO = 15.5, 
approximately. 
The probability of 650 people surviving is the proba­
bility of something which lies about 100 to the right of the mean. 
This probability is very small. 
Since under treatment 650 did survive. 
the likelihood that the treatment was effective is very great. 
7. 
The mean number of boys, on the hypothesis that boys and girls 
are equally likely, is BOO, and the standard deviation of th, proba­
bility curve of the various possible number of boys is (1/2) 1600 = 20. 
The number 860 lies 30 to the right of the mean, and the probability 
of at least 860 boys is 0.001. 
Hence the hypothesis is to be discredited. 
B. 
If the coins are unbiased, the mean number of heads is 800 and the 
standard deviation of the number of heads is (1/2) 11600 = 20. 
The 
probability of at least 860 heads is 0.001. 
Hence the hypothesis that 
the coins are unbiased is very unlikely. 
However, one must be more 
cautious in this case because there is , after all, the possibility of 
860 heads in a toss of 1600 coins. 
9 .  
The mean number of those who should be alive at the age of 70 if 
the probability of living is 1/2. is 200. 
The standard deviation of 
the probability distribution that I, 2. 3 ,  
. . •  people will be alive at 
age 70 is (1/2) 1400 = 10. 
Since only 150 were alive, the number of 

630 
ADDITIONAL ANSWERS AND SOLUTIONS 
those alive is 50 below the mean. 
The probability of an event So or 
more below the mean is very small. 
Hence under the sot death rate , 
the probability that only 150 should be alive at age 70 is very small. 
One must conclude that the death rate in that industry is not 1/2 but 
much greater. 
Chaster 231 2ase 539. 
Review Exercises 
1-
(a) 1/19 
(b) 1/19 
(e) 9/38 
2. 
(a) 4/52 
(b) 13/52 
(e) 16/52 
3. 
216 
4. 
(a) 3/7 
(b) 4/7 
(e) 1 
5. 
(a) 3/9 
(b) 4/9 
(e) 7/9 
6. 
(a) 1/36 
(b) 1/36 
7. 
(a) 65/100 
(b) 65/70 
(c) Yes 
8. 
Since 61 inches is 20 below the mean, the probability of a height 
20 or more below the mean is 0.023. 
Chapter 24, page 546 
1. 
Concepts, axioms, and theorems. 
2. 
Yes. 
The whole numbers are direct abstractions from experience 
with individual objects. 
The irrational numbers were created to 
provide ideally exact lengths . 
Such numbers are not arrived at by 
the experience of measurement. 
3. 
We must start with some premises in order to make deductive proofs . 
4. 
The growth of mathematics since Greek times has been enormous. 
Moreover, our understanding of what the Greeks produced differs radi­
cally from what the Greeks took mathematics to be. 
5. 
Algebra . Euclidean geometry, projective geometry, trigonometry, 
non-Euclidean geometries, etc. 
6. 
A willingness to tackle problems suggested by phenomena of nature. 
As more phenomena are explored, more problems are suggested. 
There 
must be support for men who spend their time in solving such problems, 
and communication among mathematicians so that all can take advantage 
of what has been created. 
7. 
The formulation and solution of new problems whether suggested by 
scientific work or devised by minds speculating about numbers or 
geometrical figures 

ADDlTIO .. \L ANSWERS AD SOLUTIONS 
631 
8. 
Reliability of the conclusions ; the discovery by reasoning alone 
of implications of the axioms; prediction of physical events 
Chapter 24. page 550 
1. 
Concepts and rational schemes or theories to represent physical 
phenomena; comprehension to the extent that such schemes explain; an 
ordering of physical knowledge; prediction of physical events. 
2. 
Because the concepts embody the essential features and are not 
encumbered by irrelevant physical properties. 
Moreover, the same 
concepts and results apply to many different physical phenomena or 
situations. 
Chapter 24. page 552 
1. 
The study of nature , the aesthetic values , and intellectual 
activity 
2. 
The arguments for mathemat ics as an art are given on pp. 550-552. 
One could attack the thesis on the ground that an art must appeal to 
the senses or at least through the senses. 
3. 
Pure mathematics is concerned with ideas and problems that are 
investigated primarily because they are aesthetically or inteliectually 
attractive . 
Applied mathematics is concerned with ideas and problems 
directed to the investigation of nature. 
4 .  
yps . 
However, to produce worthwhile mathematics they mu st  offer 
either usefulness to science and engineering or aestheticallly valuable 
material. 


INDEX 
Aaboe. Asger, 186 
Abbott, E. A., 279 
Abel, Niels Hendrik. 27, 120 
Abscissa, 256 
Abstraction, 15, 30 if. 
Acceleration, 294, 342. 352 ff. 
centripetal, 350, 352 ff. 
instantaneous, 365 if. 
in sinusoidal motion, 427 
Adams, Oscar S., 186 
Addition of ordinates, 442 ff. 
Advanctmmt oj Learning. 283 
Aesthetics, 24, 550 
Age of Reason, 24 f., 240, 4 1 1  f. 
Air, motion of, 438 fT. 
Alberti, Leone Baaisr:l, 216, 229, 509 
Alder, Henry L., 521, 540 
Alexander the Great, 17. 1 53 f. 
Alexandria, 1 7  if., 1 36, 1 5 3  
Alexandrian Greeks; Itt Greeks 
Alexandrian library, 154 
Algebra, 12, 17, 22 If., 52 £.,253, 255, 478 If. 
as language, 94 if. 
of logic, 495 f. 
modular, 487 If. 
of sets, 491 ff. 
Algebraic transformations, 102 ff. 
AI-Khowarizmi, 19 
A/magrs!, 19, 158, 161, 192 
Amplitude, 424 
An.logy, 40 f. 
Analysis, 24 
Analytic geometry; see Coordinate geometry 
Analytical Theory of Hrat, 446 
Anatomy, 202, 214 
Angle, critical, 180 
exterior, 127 
interior, 127 
Amiderivative, 389 
Apollonius, 18, 19, 142, 148, 1 55, 329 
Approximation, 7 1  
Arabs, 1 9  if., 27, 57, 96, 194, 198, 200 
Archimedes, 1 8  if., 1 55 if., 228, 329, 455 
Architecture, 37 r. 
Area, 1 29, 1 3 1  if., 366 
by integration, 394 if. 
Aristarchus, 327 
Aristotle, IS, 19, 47, 149, 194, 200, 228, 
282, 286, 307 
Arithmetic, 12, 20 r., )0 if., 52 if., 58 if., 
199, 478 If. 
modular, 484 if. 
Arithmetic mean, 502 r. 
Armitage, Angus, 362 
AT! Magna, 203 
Art; Ire Mathematics 
as an art, Music, 
Painting 
Associative axiom. 76 r., 479, 483, 492 f. 
Astrology, 14, 199 
Astronomy, 1 3  if., 18, 23, 85, 1 24, 1 55, 
1 57 f., 1 7 1  If., 188 If., 199, 253 f., 
289, 326 ff.; see also Heliocentric theory, 
Ptolemaic theory 
Athens, IS, 1 7  
Atomic weight, 88 ff. 
Atoms, 88 ff. 
Augustine, Saint, I, 9, 198 
Average, 82 f., 502 ff. 
Avogadro, A., 88 
Axioms, 16, 26, SO f., 75 ff., 126, 541 ff. 
of Euclid, 126 f., 452 If. 
of physics, 
324; see also Gravitation, 
Newton's laws of motion, Parallelism 
Babylonia, 1 2  ff., 1 7  ff., 3 1  ff., 45, 61, 68, 
85, 96, 1 18, 1 7 1 , 188, 199 
Bacon, Francis, I, 23, 280, 283 
Bacon, Roger, 205 
633 

634 
INDEX 
Ball, W. W. Rouse, 29, 93, 122, 1 52, 186, 
208, 414 
Barrow, Isaac, 336, 368 
Base, 61, 85 ff. 
Baseball arithmetic, 481 ff. 
Baumgardt, Carola, 362 
Bell, A. E., 305 
Bell, Eric T., 29, 56, 249, 362, 414, 477, 
498 
Benade, Arthur H., 451 
Bernoulli family, 24, 437 
Bessel, FriedrichWilhelm, 456 
Binoculars, 181 
Biology, 26, 83. 499 ff., 526; rtf also Anat-
omy, Eye 
Blunt, Anthony, 230 
Bohm, David, 540 
Bolyai, John, 452, 456 If. 
Bonner, Francis T., 91, 305, 362, 480 
Bonola, Roberto, 477 
Boole, George, 495 r., 498 
Born, Max, 540 
Boyle, Robert, 281, 284 
Boys, C. V., 152 
Brahe, Tycho, 206, 327 
'Brianchon, Charles J, 242, 245 f. 
Bronowski, J, 556 
Brown, Lloyd A., 186, 435 
Brunelleschi, 215 
Bunim, Miriam, 230 
Burtt, E. A., 305, 363 
Bury, J. B., 55 6 
Bunerfield, Herbert, 305, 363 
Byzantine Empire, 19, 21, 198, 200 
Cajori, Florian, 208 
Calculus, 24, 242, 253, 336, 365 ff. 
history of, 409 ff. 
of variations, 24 
Calendar, 1 3, 124, 1 57 f., 199 
Camera, 182 
Cannizzaro, S., 88 
Cantor, Georg, 462, 474 
Card an, Jerome, 22, 27, 1 1 9  f., 203, 205, 
208, 255, 522 
Camot, L. N. M., 243 
Carslaw, H. S., 477 
Caspar, Max, 363 
Casting out nines, 488 ff. 
Catholic Church, 20, 198 If., 206 r. 
Cauchy, Augustin Louis, 411 
Cause, 282 f. 
Cavalieri, Bonaventura, 410 
Cavallini, 210 
CesaJpinus, Andrew, 204, 283 
Chamberlin, W., 186 
Chasles, Michel, 242 
Chemistry, 89 ff., 155, 480 
Childe, V. Gordon, 29 
China, 12 
Christianity, 19 f., 194, 198, 206, 227 f. 
Cimabue, 210 
Circle, 129, 1 56, 241, 254 
equation of, 262 f. 
Clagen, Marshall, 57, 195 
Clark, Kenneth, 230 
Clock, 254, 416, 433 
Cohen, I. Bernard, 305, 363 
Cohen, Morris R., 57, 540 
Cole, Rex V., 230 
Colerus, Egmom, 93, 122, 414 
Columbus, Ouistopher, 1 36 
Commutative axiom, 76 f., 483, 492 f. 
Compass, 21, 201 
Complex numbers, 26 
Computers, 86 ff. 
Condensation, 439 
Cone, 241 
Congruence, 129 
arithmetic, 484 ff. 
Conic sections, 142 ff., 241, 255; rtf a/so 
Ellipse, Hyperbola, Parabola 
Cunic Sectiuns, 142 
Construction problems, famous, 148 
Coolidge, Julian L., 57, 230 
Coordinate geometry, 22, 242, 250 ff. 
Coordinates, 257, 308 ff. 
Copernicus, Nicolaus, 21, 192, 206 f., 253, 
326 If., 551 
Correlation, 516 ff. 
Cosine, 1 59 ff. 
Courant, Richard, 1 52, 498 
Crombie, A. c., 208, 306 
Cross ratio, 238, 247 
Curve of an equation, 269 ff. 
Curve fining, 5 1 1  ff. 

Curvilinear mOt"ion, 307 
Cylinder, 1 56 
Cylindrical surface, 465 
Da Vinci, Leonardo, 202 ff., 208 f., 21 5 f., 
225 If., 229 f., 509 
D'Alembert, Jean Ie Rond, 24, 4 1 1 ,  437 
Dalwn, John, 88 
Darnp;er-Whetharn, W.e. D., 195, 208, 306, 
363 
Dantzig, Tobias, 93 
David, Edward E., Jr., 451 
Davis, Philip J., 93 
De Magntu, 283 
Dr prospettiva pingmdi, 223 
De Santillana, Giorgio, 363 
Decimal system, 85 
Deduction, 30, 41 ff., 128 
Deductive method, 45 ff., 128, 1 50 
Deetz, Charles H., 186 
Deferent, 192, 327 
Definitions, 5 1  
Della Francesca, Piero, 216, 229 
Della PitlUra, 216 
Derivative, 375 
Desargues, Girard, 234 ff., 239, 242, 244, 
246, 248 
Descartes, Rene, 22 f., 1 76, 205 ff., 240, 
242, 250 If., 255, 257, 273, 277 If., 
284 f., 288, 368, 476, 495, 523, 543 
Description versus explanation, 288 
Dialogue on 1M Great World Systems, 333 
Dialogues Conct17lmg Two New ScimctS, 285, 
307 
Dido, problem of, 1 3 5  
Differential equation, 24 
Differential geometry, 24 
Differentiation, 376 
Dimensions, three, 273 if. 
four, 275 If. 
Diophamus, 1 8  
Direct equation, 308 
Directrix, 142 f. 
Discourse on Method, 240, 252 f. 
Discourses ttnd Mathnl1tical Dnwnstrations 
Conct17lmg T'WO New ScimctS, 285 
Dispersion of data, 503 if. 
Displacement, 418 
INDEX 
635 
Distributive axiom, 78, 103 f., 483 
Donne, John, 202 
Drake, Stillman, 363 
Dreyer, J. L. E., 195, 363 
DuaHty, 242 If. 
Duccio, 210 if. 
Dunnington, G.W., 477 
DUrer, Albrecht, 216 if., 509 
Durrell, Clement V., 477 
Earth, acceleration of, 350 
circumference of, 1 36, 165 
density of, 348 
distance from moon, 1 7 1  f. 
shape of, 352, 366 
volume of, 348 
Eastern 
Roman 
Empire; 
Stt 
Byzantine 
Empire 
Easton, Stewart c., 208 
Eclipse, 7, 174 
Economics, 7, 24, 26, 33, 476 
Egypt, 12 If., 17 If., 1I If., 45, 68, 96, 1 1 8, 
153 If., 1 7 1 ,  188, 199 
Einstein, Albert, 90, 549 
Electricity, 25 
Electromagnetic waves, 25; Stt also Radio 
Eiemmts of Euclid, 1 7, 125 if., 142 
Ellipse, 142 f., 222, 241, 253, 271, 328 if., 
334 
equation of, 272 f. 
Ellis, Havelock, 556 
Energy, 33, 90 
Enlightenment; see Age of Reason 
Ep;cycle, 192, 327 
Equation of a curve, 258 if. 
Equations, solution of, 106 if., 255 
first degree, 107 
higher degree, 1 1 9  if. 
linear, 107 
quadratic, 107 if., 1 1 2 if. 
second degree, 107 if., 1 12 ff. 
Equator, 165 
Equilibrium position, 418 
Equivalent figures, 129 
Eratosthenes, 1 36, 1 54, 1 5 7  
Error curve, 507 
Escape velocity, 401 ff. 
Essay on Conic &ctWns, 239 

636 
INDEX 
Ethics, 24, 476 
Euclid, 1 7  r., 19, 125 If., 142, 1 54, 1 5 5  f., 
200, 228, 329, 453 
Euclid Vindicated from All Dr/tetl, 455 
Euclidean geometry. 
17 r., 
25, 
123 ff. 
149 r., 1 59, 193 f., 247 f., 281 f., 395, 
452 If. 
Eudoxus, 1 7, 125, 190 
Euler, Leonhard, 24, 4 1 1 ,  437 
Eves, Howard, 29, 93, 1 52, 414 
Evolution, theory of, 452 
Experimentation, 4, 40, 283 f. 
Exponents, 96 fr. 
Extrasensory perception, 537 
Eye, 1 8 1  f., 234 
Factoring, 104B 
Farrington, B., 195. 306 
Fermat, Pierre de, 1 ,  22, 182 f., 240, 242, 
250, 252, 255, 257, 277, 368, 522 
Ferrari, Lodovico, 1 19 
Fletcher, Harvey, 451 
Focus, 142 if. 
Force, 33, 193 
centripetal, 353 
of gravitation, 326, 341 tf. 
Foreshortening, 213, 221 
Formula, 287 fr., 291 
Fourier, Joseph, 445 r., 555 
Fourier's theorem, 446 if. 
Fraction, 62 ff. 
Frank, Philipp, 477 
Frequency distribution, 507 
binomial, 533 f. 
normal, 507 
Frequency of sinusoidal motion, 425 
Freund, John E., 521, 540 
Function, 23, 290 ff. 
linear, 299 
periodic, 422 
quadratic, 300 
Fundamental tone, 448 
Gade, John A., 363 
Galen, 1 56, 204, 282 
Galilei, Galileo, 23 ff., 205 ff., 240, 251, 
254, 283 tr., 306, 307 tr., 325, 332, 334, 
J43, 363, 390, 412,436 f., 499, 547, 549 
Galois, avariste, 27, 120 
Galton, Sir Francis, 501, 517 
Gamow, George, 93, 477, 540 
Gases, 1 5 5  
Gauss, Karl Friedrich, 25, 27, 455 tr., 549 
Genetics, 83 f., 526 
Geocentric theory; 
Stt Ptolemaic theory 
GtOgraphica of Eratosthenes, 157 
Grographica of Ptolemy, 1 58 
Geographical explorations, 200 
Geography, 1 5 7  f., 332 
Geometry, 12, 17 tr., 24, 32, 36, 123 tr., 
199; Itt also 
Coordinate 
geometry, 
Euclidean 
geometry, 
Non-Euclidean 
geometry, Projective geometry 
fourbimensional, 275 ff. 
Geometry of Descartes, 2ft f. 
Germanic tribes, 20, 197 
Ghiberti, 229, 509 
Gibbon, Edward, 2 
Gilbert, Wm., 283 
Giofto, 213 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang, 2 
Goldbach, Cltristian, 46 
Graunt, John, 500 
Gravitation, 294, 326 tr., 336, 341 ff., 360 f., 
407 If. 
law of, 341, 547 
Great circle, 1 69, 254 
Greek art, 37 
Greek science, 21, 1 38, 153 tr., 171 ff., 
1 76, 1 8 7  If., 281 If., 288 
Greeks, 2, 14 tr., 21, 23, 27, 31, 46 tr., 
58 If., 68 f., 96, 123 If., 148 If., 153 If., 
187 If., 200, 203, 205, 213, 250, 452 f., 
468 f. 
Gunpowder, 21, 201 
Haldane, E. S., 279 
Hall, A. R., 363 
Halley, Edmond, 336, 338, 436, 500 
Hamilton, Edith, 57 
Hardy, G. H., 556 
Harmonics of a musical sound, 448 
Harrison, John, 433 
Harvey,Wm., 204, 283 
Heat, 24 
Heath, Sir T. L., 1 52, 186 

Hebrews, 14 
Heliocentric theory, 21, 23, 253 f., 
326 If. 
Hellenistic world; Sf( Greeks 
Helmholtz, Hermann von, 231, 448, 
451 
Heron, 1 39, 155 
Hexagon, 241 
Hilbert, David, 25 
Hindus; Sf( India 
Hipparchus, 18 f., 21, 158, 161, 165, 170, 
190 If., 282 
Hippias, 125 
Hippocrates. 125 
Hofmann, J. E., 208 
Holton, Gerald, 91, 306, 325, 363 
Hooke, Robert, 254, 284, 338, 417, 433, 
436 f., 440 
Hooke's law, 417, 429, 547 
Huff, Darrell, 521 
Huygens, Christian, 254, 284, 352, 368, 
411, 436 
Hyperbola, 142 f., 222, 241, 253 
Hypersphere, 276 
Idealization, 38 f. 
Ideas of Plato, 34 ff. 
Increment, 374 
Indefinite integral, 389 
India, 12, 19 ff., 27, 61, 72, 96, 200 
Indirect method of proof, 128 
Induction, 40 ff., 45 
Inertia; srr Mass 
Infinite series, 24 
Infinity, 236 f. 
Instant, 368 
Instantaneous rate of change, 367 ff. 
Integer, 58 ff. 
Integral, 389 
as a limit, 404 ff. 
Integration, 389 
Intersection of sets, 492 
Interval of time, 368 
Invariant, 238, 247 f. 
Ionia, 47, 188 
Irrational numbers, 65 ff., 124 
Isotope, 89 f. 
Ivins, Wm. M., Jr., 231, 249 
INDEX 
637 
Jeans, Sir James, 57, 196, 363,451 
Johnson, Marrin, 23 I 
Jones, Burron W., 93 
Jones, Sir Harold Spencer, 363 
Kant, Immanuel, :476 
Kasner, Edward, 414, 540 
Kepler, Johannes, 21, 192, 206 f., 253, 283, 
326 If., 549 
Kepler's laws, 328 If., 114 If., 355 If., 5 1 3, 
548 
Koyre, Alexandre, 363 
Kuhn, Thomas S., 196, 363 
La Hire, Philippe de, 242 
Lagrange, Joseph Louis, 24, 411, 437 
Langer, Susanne K., 498 
Language of mathematics, 94 ff. 
Laplace, Pierre Simon, 24, 522, 540 
Latitude, 166 ff. 
Law, 476 
Lawson, Philip ]., 231 
Legendre, Adrien Marie, 24 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 24, 206, 240, 
242, 281, 366, 368, 375, 406 f., 410 If., 
495 
Length of curve, 366 
Lens, 181 f., 202, 254, 284 
Leonardo da Vinci; ser Da Vinci 
Levinson, Horace c., 540 
Life insurance, 500, 529 f. 
Light, 2, 16, 24, 138 ff., 144 ff., 1 55, 193, 
202, 2 1 5, 254, 284, 469 f. 
reAection of, 1 38 f., 144 ff., 179, 381 f. 
refraction of, 4, 1 55, 176 ff., 254, 381 f. 
total reAection of, 179 f. 
velocity of, 176 
Limit, 372, 404 ff., 409 ff. 
Line curve, 245 
Line, equation of, 258 ff. 
at infinity, 237 
Lobachevsky, Nicholas I., 456 ff. 
Logarithms, 22 
Logic, 30 If., 149 f., 495 f. 
symbolic, 495 f. 
Longitude, 1 58, 165 ff. 
Lorenzetti, Ambrogio, 21 3 

638 
INDEX 
Loudness of a sound, 448 ff. 
Luther, Martin, 201 
Mac Curdy, Edward, 208 
Magnetism, 25 
Manning, H. A., 279 
Map, 1 69, 254 
Mariotte. Ednre, 284-
Martini, Simone, 210 
Mason, S. F., 363 
Mass, 33. 340 
of earth, 347 
of sun, 351 
Mastery of nature, 23, 280 
Mathematical creation, 5 1  tr.t 552 
Mathematical logic, 495 f. 
Mazhmuztical Principles of Natural Philos­
ophy, 336 If., 360 f., 
Mathematics, and art, 8, 37, 209 If. 
as an art, 8 if., 550 ff. 
and engineering, 23 ff., 1 10 r., 155 f., 
475 
and human beings, 27 f. 
and nature, 16, 1 50, 187 ff., 205, 208 tr.t 
329, 359 If., 412, 462 If., 471 If., 
479 If., 497 f., 542 If. 
nature of, 3 if., 30 if., 194, 471 if., 541 if. 
prehistoric, I I  
and science, 5 if., 21, 23 ff., 46 if., 1 10, 
4 1 1 ,  462 If., 47l If., 547 If. 
and science compared, 33 ff., 1 10, 473 r. 
and superstitions, 5 
and theology, 2, 199 f., 3 3 1  
Matrices, 26 
Maxima and minima, 1 3 i  tr.t 3 17, 366, 
382 If. 
Maxwell, James Clerk, 25 
Mazlish, B., 556 
Mechanics, 289 
Median, 502 f. 
Medicine, 1 55 f. 
Medieval civilization, 20, 39, 197 ff. 
Medieval painting, 210 
Medieval science, 198 tr., 281 if., 288 
Mendel, Gregor, 526 
Mendeleev, Dimitri I vanovich, 89 
Mere, Chevalier de, 522 
Merserme, Marin, 239, 436 f. 
Method, of exhaustion, 404 
of increments, 372 
Michelangelo, 229, 509 
Microscope, 202, 254 
Middle Ages, 2, 229 
Miller, Dayton c., 451 
Mode, 502 f. 
Mohanunedans; see Arabs 
Monge, Gaspard, 242 f. 
Moody, E. A., 306 
Moon, 335, 344 
distance from eanh, 171 C. 
motion of, 335, 339, 358 if. 
radius of, 172 f. 
More, Louis T., 364 
Moroney, M. J., 540 
Mortimer, Ernest, 249 
Motion, 193, 254, 287 if., 293 if., 365 f., 
390 If., 401 If. 
of a bob on a spring, 416 if. 
Museum of Alexandria, 1 54, 194 
Music, 24, 193, 199,436 if. 
Musical instruments, 445, 447 if. 
Mydorge, Claude, 239 
n-dimensional space, 26, 275 if. 
Nagel, Ernest, 57, 540 
Navigation, 13, 22 f., 1 24, 253, 332, 335, 
416 
Negative numbers, 20, 72 if. 
Neugebauer, Otto, 29, 57 
Newman, James R., 364, 414, 498, 521, 
540, 556 
Newton, Sir Isaac, 2, 22 tr., 205 f., 240, 
242, 251, 284, 289, 308, JJ 5 If., 366, 
368, 375, 406 f., 409 If., 417, 436, 455 
Newtonian mechanics, 334 if. 
Newton's laws of motion, 293 f., 310, 342, 
547 
Nichomachus, 18 
Nicolo of Brescia; see Tartaglia 
Noland, Aaron, 41 5 
Non-Euclidean geometry, 25 f., 452 if. 
Nonnal probability curve, 505 if., 530 if. 
Novum OrgtmUm of Bacon, 283 
Number, concept of, 12 C., 15, 20, 30 if., 
58 If. 
Number mysticism, 59 f. 

Ohm, George S., 447 
Olson, Harry F., 451 
On Burning Glass!. 148 
On the Lever, 1 57 
On the Motiqn of the Plmlet Mars, 328 
On the R('I)()/uzitms of the H((J"I)tniy Spheres, 
327, 332 
Optics; Sft Light 
Ordinate, 257 
Ore, 0., 122, 208, 540 
Origin, 256 
Oscillatory motion, 417 
Pacioli, Luca, 200 f. 
Painting, 21, 204, 209 fr. 
Panofsky, Erwin, 231 
Parabola, 142 If., 222, 241, 253, 264, 3 1  I If., 
334 
equation of, 265 fr. 
Paraboloidal mirror, 14 r., 147 
Paragune of Leonardo. 229 
Parallelism, 126, 236 r., 453 ff. 
Parametric equations, 309 
Parsons, Edward A., 186 
Panhenon, 37 
Pascal, Blaise, I, 27, 206, 239 tr., 242, 
245 f., 284, 410, 522, 554 
Pascal's triangle, 533 f. 
Pearson, Karl, SOl, 517 
Pendulum, 254, 417 
Pmstts of Pascal, 240 
Pentagon, 134 
Pepys, Samuel, 2 
Perimeter, 1 3 1  ff. 
Period of a bob, 432 
Periodic motion, 416 if. 
Periscope. 181 
Perspective, 210 ff., 232 
focused, 215 
optical, 211 
terraced, 210 
vertical, 211 
Petty, Sir William, 500 
Phidias, 37 
Phillips, Melba, 91, 305, 362, 480 
Philosophy, 7, 21, 24, 47 ff., 124, 252 (., 
475, 545; ue olso Truth 
Photograph, 234 
T, 12, 68, 156 
Pierce, John AAo 451 
INDEX 
639 
Piero della F rancesca; see Della F rancesca 
Pitch, 448 ff. 
Plato, 2, 17, 30, 32 ff., 48, 50, 125, 199 r., 
228, 476, 543 
Playfair, John, 453 
Poincare, Henri, 25, 27, 477, 556 
Point curve, 245 
Point at infinity, 236 f. 
Political theory, 7, 24, 26, 33, 476 
Polyclitus, 35 f. 
Polygon, 134; see also Pentagon, Quadri-
lateral, 
Rectangle, 
Square, 
Triangle 
Polyhedron, IlO 
Poncelet, Jean Victor, 243 f. 
Pope Julius II, 227 
Poseidonius, 136, 157 
Positional notation, 20, 61, 85 ff. 
Poundal, 340 
Praxiteles, 37 
Precession of the equinoxes, 358 
Prediction, 548 
Premises, 41 ff. 
Primary and secondary qualities, 285 f. 
Prime numbers, 46 
Principle of least time, 183, 254 
Printing, 22, 201 
Prism, 180 
Probability, 26, 240, 253, 522 if. 
Projectile motion, 22 f., 201, 254 f., 284, 
310 If., JJ8 f., 366, 381 
Projection, 216 if., 232 ff., 419 
Projective geometry, 21, 232 if. 
Proof, 39 ff., 45, 53 f. 
Protestant Revolution, 22, 201 
Provincial uUers, 240 
Psychnlogy, 24, 537 
Ptolemaic theory, 158, 191 if., 326 f. 
Ptolemy, Claudius, 18 if., 21, 155, 1 58, 
161, 165, 170, 190 ff., 200, 228, 282 
Ptolemy, Egyptian dynasty, 154 f. 
Pyramids of Egypt, I l  
Pythagoras, 1 7 ,  59, 65, 68, 228 
Pythagorean theorem, 65 f., 161 
Pythagorean triples, 65 
Pythagoreans, 34, 59 if., 65 ff., 125, 188 tf., 
436 

640 
INDEX 
Quadrangle, 244 
Quadratic fonnula, 1 1 6  f. 
Quadrilateral, 1 34, 244 
Quadrivium, 199 
Qualitative knowledge, 1 56, 282 
Quality of a sound, 448 if. 
Quantitative know ledge, I 56, 288 
Quetelet, L. A. J., SOl, 509 f. 
Radian, 423 
Radio, 25, 147 f. 
Rain, E., 186 
Randall, John H., Jr., 208, 289, 306, 556 
Range, 316, 321 
Raphael, 227 If. 
Rarefaction, 439 
Rate of change, average, 367 if. 
instantaneous, 367 if. 
Reasoning, 3 if., 1 5  if., 39 if., 149 if; Ut 
also Logic 
Rectangle, 1 3 1  if. 
Rectangular Canes ian coordinate system, 
257, 274 
Redfield, John, 451 
Refraction, 1 76 
Regular polyhedra, 129 
Reichmann, W. j., 521, 540 
Relativity, theory of, 90, 470 f. 
Religion, 21, 34, 59, 206, 3 3 1  f.; Stt also 
Catholic Qurch, Christianity 
and painting, 210 if. 
Renaissance, 2, 20, 202 if., 209 if., 248 
Rtpublic of Plato, 32 
Resonator, 448 
Rest position, 418 
Rheticus, George Joachim, 551 
Rhine, j. B., 537, 540 
Riemann, Bernhard, 25, 275, 461 if. 
Ripley, Julian A., Jr., 435 
Robbins, Herbert, 1 52, 498 
Roberval, Gilles P. de, 239 
Roessler, Edward B., 521, 540 
Rolle, Michel, 411 
Roller, Duane H. D., 93, 306, 325, 363 
Romans, 18, 1 57, 194, 197 
Root of an equation, 1 1 2  
Rotation o f  the earth, 352 if. 
Russell, Bertrand, 9, 10, 208, 477, 556 
Saccheri, Girolamo, 454 f., 461 
Sambursky, S., 196 
Sampling, 538 f. 
Sarron, George, 196 
Satellite, 354 f. 
Sawyer, W.W., 122, 1 52, 186, 249, 279, 
306, 414, 498, 556 
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 2, 53 
SchrOdinger, Erwin, 540 
Scientific explanation, 282 f., 288 
Scientific method, 281 if., 337 if., 359 if. 
SCOtt, J. F., 29, 1 52, 186, 279, 415 
Sculpture, 37 if. 
Sears, Francis W., 186, 451 
Section, 216 if., 232 if. 
Similarity, 129 
Sine, 1 59 fr. 
Singer, Charies, 196 
Singh, Jagit, 415 
Sinusoidal functions, 418 fr., 436 fr. 
Slope, 259 If., 379 If. 
Smith, David Eugene, 29, 57, 93, 122, 152, 
186, 208, 4 1 5  
Smith, Preserved, 306, 364 
Snell,Willebrord, 1 76 
Social sciences, 7, 26, 33, 499 ff., Stt also 
Economics, Political theory 
Socrates, 36, 50, 228 
Sommerville, D. M. Y., 477 
Sound, 16, 24, 1 55, 193, 436 fr.; Sf( also 
Music 
complex, 445 if. 
simple, 438 if. 
Sound wave, 440 
Spectacles, 254 
Speed, 287 If. 
instantaneous, 365 fr. 
Spengler, Oswald, 556 
Sphere, 129, 1 56, 222 
equation of, 275 f. 
and Riemannian geometry. 467 ff. 
Spirit of Gtomttry, 240 
Spring. 254 
Spring constant, 429 
Square, 1 32 fr. 
Standard deviation, 504 f. 

Statistics, 26, 499 ff. 
Stevin, Simon, 284 
Strabo, 136, 157 
Strong, E. W., 306 
Struik, Dirk J., 29, 57 
Sullivan, John Wm. N., 364, 556 
Suma of Pacioli, 202 
Sun, density of, 351 
distance from earth, 172 
distance from Venus, 174 f. 
mass of, 351 
radius of, 173 
Surface, equation of, 273 ff. 
Sylvester, James Joseph, 26 
Symbolism, 95 f., 255 
Tacitus, 197 
Tangent, of an angle, 159 ff. 
slope of, 380 
Tartaglia, 8, 22, 1 19 f., 255, 284 
Taylor, Henry 0., 57, 306 
Taylor, Lloyd Wm., 1 52, 
186, 306, 364, 
435, 451 
Telescope, 147, 202, 254, 332 f. 
Television, 25 
Tensors, 26 
Thales, 17, 46, 125 
Tiu Hamumy of llu World, llO 
Theorem, 46 f., 543 f. 
Theory of numbers, 253, 490 
Tides, 358 
Torricelli, Evangelista, 240, 284 
Total reRection of light, 180 
Trajectory; 1(( Projectile motion 
Tr(atise on Painting of Leonardo, 216, 229 
Triangle, 127 ff. 
Trigonometric 
functions; 
1(( 
Sinusoidal 
functions 
Trigonometric tables, 161 f. 
Trigonometry, 18, 1 58 fr., 416 f, 441 ff. 
Trivium, 199 
Truth, 7, 17, 25, 149 If., 206, 252, 281, 
471 If., 479 If., 543 
Tuning fork, 438 fr. 
Turks, 200 
UcceJlo, Paolo, 216, 229 
Union of sets, 49J 
INDEX 
641 
Universe, conceptions of, 
188 f., 
198 f.; 
se( also Heliocentric theory, Ptolemaic 
theory 
Valentin, Antonina, 208 
Validity, 42 
Vanishing line, 222 
Vanishing point, 221 fr. 
diagonal, 222 fr. 
Variable, 287 fr., 291 
Vasari, Giorgio, 231 
Velocity; 1(( Speed 
Venus, 1 74 f. 
Vesalius, Andreas, 204, 283 
Vieta, Francois, 22, 1 1 8, 255 
Voice, 450 
Volume, 366 
Von Bergeijk, Willem A., 451 
Von Guericke, Otto, 284 
Wallis, John, 368 
Water power, 1 55 
Weaver, Warren, 540 
Wedberg, Anders, 57 
Weierstrass, Karl, 27 
Weight, 340, 34 3 n., 353 f. 
Western European civilization, 20 ff., 27 
Whitehead, Alfred North, 10, 18, 122, 1 79, 
306, 435, 546 
Whole number, 58 fT. 
Wiener, Philip, 415 
Wightman, Wm. P. D., 364, 4 1 5  
Wolf, Abraham, 306, 364, 521 
Wolfe, Harold E., 477 
Wood, Alexander, 451 
Work, 397 If. 
Wren, Sir Christopher, 338 
Young, Jacob W. A., 249, 477 
Young, John W., 249 
Zemansky, Mark, 186, 45 1 
Zero, 20, 60 f. 


