This page intentionally left blank

MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE:
A HISTORICAL STUDY

Cover illustration by Erich Lessing

MATHEMATICS AND THE
DIVINE:
A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by
T. KOETSIER
Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
L. BERGMANS
Université de Paris IV – Sorbonne, Paris, France
2005
Amsterdam • Boston • Heidelberg • London • New York • Oxford •
Paris • San Diego • San Francisco • Singapore • Sydney • Tokyo

ELSEVIER B.V.
Sara Burgerhartstraat 25
P.O. Box 211, 1000 AE
Amsterdam The Netherlands
ELSEVIER Inc.
525 B Street, Suite 1900
San Diego, CA 92101-4495
USA
ELSEVIER Ltd
The Boulevard, Langford Lane
Kidlington, Oxford OX5 1GB
UK
ELSEVIER Ltd
84 Theobalds Road
London WC1X 8RR
UK
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
This work is protected under copyright by Elsevier B.V., and the following terms and conditions apply to its use:
Photocopying
Single photocopies of single chapters may be made for personal use as allowed by national copyright laws.
Permission of the Publisher and payment of a fee is required for all other photocopying, including multiple or
systematic copying, copying for advertising or promotional purposes, resale, and all forms of document delivery.
Special rates are available for educational institutions that wish to make photocopies for non-proﬁt educational
classroom use.
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Rights Department in Oxford, UK: phone (+44) 1865 843830,
fax (+44) 1865 853333, e-mail: permissions@elsevier.com. Requests may also be completed on-line via the
Elsevier homepage (http://www.elsevier.com/locate/permissions).
In the USA, users may clear permissions and make payments through the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA; phone: (+1) (978) 7508400, fax: (+1) (978) 7504744, and in the
UK through the Copyright Licensing Agency Rapid Clearance Service (CLARCS), 90 Tottenham Court Road,
London W1P 0LP, UK; phone: (+44) 20 7631 5555; fax: (+44) 20 7631 5500. Other countries may have a local
reprographic rights agency for payments.
Derivative Works
Tables of contents may be reproduced for internal circulation, but permission of the Publisher is required for
external resale or distribution of such material. Permission of the Publisher is required for all other derivative
works, including compilations and translations.
Electronic Storage or Usage
Permission of the Publisher is required to store or use electronically any material contained in this work, including
any chapter or part of a chapter.
Except as outlined above, no part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior written
permission of the Publisher.
Address permissions requests to: Elsevier’s Rights Department, at the fax and e-mail addresses noted above.
Notice
No responsibility is assumed by the Publisher for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter
of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instruc-
tions or ideas contained in the material herein. Because of rapid advances in the medical sciences, in particular,
independent veriﬁcation of diagnoses and drug dosages should be made.
First edition 2005
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record is available from the Library of Congress.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record is available from the British Library.
ISBN: 0-444-50328-5
⃝
∞The paper used in this publication meets the requirements of ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992 (Permanence of Paper).
Printed in The Netherlands.

This book is dedicated to our children
Quod mathematica nos iuvet plurimum
in diversorum divinorum apprehensione
(Mathematics helps us greatly
in understanding various divine truths)
Cusanus, De Docta Ignorantia I, XI

This page intentionally left blank

Preface
The idea that is at the basis of the present book was born several years ago. A compre-
hensive historical study of the relations between mathematics on the one hand, and meta-
physics, religion and mysticism on the other hand, did not exist. Because of the expanse of
the subject we decided to combine the expertise of numerous experts. Although it proved to
be impossible to give attention to everything in the present volume, a wide range of topics
was covered, as is evident from the titles in the list of contents. We believe that at least the
major aspects of the subject are covered. Wherever possible, sources of quotations are ack-
nowledged. Every effort has been made to discover the original source of the illustrations
used and to obtain permission to include them.
We are very grateful to the scholars who contributed the articles. Moreover,we gratefully
acknowledge the following individuals who have assisted us in various ways in making
this book a reality: Marc Bergmans, Henk Bos, Vera Brauns, Sébastien Busson, Georgia
Gauley, Ineke Hilhorst, Jan Hogendijk, Jan Willem van Holten, Bas Jongeling, Jan van
Mill, Mickaël Robert, Karel Schmidt Jr., Arjen Sevenster, Eric-Jan Tuininga.
Luc Bergmans (Paris)
Teun Koetsier (Amsterdam)
October 2004
vii

This page intentionally left blank

List of Contributors
Adamson, D., Goldsmiths’ College, London and Wolfson College, Cambridge, retired
(Ch. 21)
Beeley, P., Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Münster, Germany (Ch. 23)
Bergmans, L., Université de Paris IV – Sorbonne, Paris, France (Ch. 29)
Breger, H., Leibniz Archiv, Hannover, Germany (Ch. 25)
Breidert, W., Universität Karlsruhe (TH), Karlsruhe, Germany (Ch. 26)
Charrak, A., Université de Paris I Pantheon – Sorbonne Paris, France (Ch. 19)
Counet, J.-M., University of Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium (Ch. 14)
De Gandt, F., Université Charles de Gaulle, Lille, France (Ch. 32)
Demidov, S.S., Institute of the History of Science and Technology, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow, Russia (Ch. 31)
de Pater, C., Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam and Universiteit Utrecht, Utrecht, The Nether-
lands (Ch. 24)
Garcia, H., Pfarrhaus, Zillis, Switzerland (Ch. 12)
Hayoun, M.-R., Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France (Ch. 10)
Harmsen, G., Rijksuniversiteit Groningen, The Netherlands, retired (Ch. 22)
Ho Peng-Yoke, Needham Research Institute, Cambridge, UK, director, retired (Ch. 1)
King, D.A., Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany (Ch. 8)
Koetsier, T., Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands (Ch. 15, 30, 34)
Knobloch, E., Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany (Ch. 17)
Lohr, C., Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany (Ch. 11)
Mattéi, J.-F., University of Nice–Antipolis and Institut Universitaire de France, France
(Ch. 5)
Mueller, I., The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA (Ch. 4)
Netz, R., Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA (Ch. 3)
Nicolle, J.-M., Université de Rouen, Mont-Saint-Aignan, France (Ch. 20)
O’Meara, D.J., University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland (Ch. 6)
Pinchard, B., Université Jean Moulin Lyon 3, France (Ch. 33)
Plofker, K., University of Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands (Ch. 2)
Probst, S., Leibniz Archiv, Hannover, Germany (Ch. 23)
Reich, K., Universität Hamburg, Germany (Ch. 15)
Remmert, V.R., Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz, Mainz, Germany (Ch. 18)
Schneider, I., Universität der Bundeswehr München, Neubiberg, Germany (Ch. 16)
Sylla, E.D., North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA (Ch. 13)
Terrien, M.-P., University of Le Mans, France (Ch. 7)
Thiele, R., Universität Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany (Ch. 27, 28)
van der Schoot, A., Universiteit van Amsterdam, The Netherlands (Ch. 35)
Wallis, F., McGill University, Montreal, Canada (Ch. 9)
ix

This page intentionally left blank

Contents
Preface
vii
List of Contributors
ix
Introduction
1
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
1. Chinese number mysticism
45
Ho Peng-Yoke
2. Derivation and revelation: The legitimacy of mathematical models in Indian
cosmology
61
K. Plofker
3. The Pythagoreans
77
R. Netz
4. Mathematics and the Divine in Plato
99
I. Mueller
5. Nicomachus of Gerasa and the arithmetic scale of the Divine
123
J.-F. Mattéi
6. Geometry and the Divine in Proclus
133
D.J. O’Meara
7. Religious architecture and mathematics during the late antiquity
147
M.-P. Terrien
8. The sacred geography of Islam
161
D.A. King
9. “Number Mystique” in early medieval computus texts
179
F. Wallis
10. Is the Universe of the Divine dividable?
201
M.-R. Hayoun
11. Mathematics and the Divine: Ramon Lull
213
C. Lohr
12. Odd numbers and their theological potential. Exploring and redescribing the
arithmetical poetics of the paintings on the ceiling of St. Martin’s Church in
Zillis
229
H. Garcia
13. Swester Katrei and Gregory of Rimini: Angels, God, and Mathematics in the
fourteenth century
249
E.D. Sylla
xi

xii
Contents
14. Mathematics and the Divine in Nicholas of Cusa
273
J.-M. Counet
15. Michael Stifel and his numerology
291
T. Koetsier and K. Reich
16. Between Rosicrucians and Cabbala—Johannes Faulhaber’s mathematics of Bib-
lical numbers
311
I. Schneider
17. Mathematics and the Divine: Athanasius Kircher
331
E. Knobloch
18. Galileo, God and Mathematics
347
V.R. Remmert
19. The mathematical model of Creation according to Kepler
361
A. Charrak
Color ﬁgures
375
20. The mathematical analogy in the proof of God’s Existence by Descartes
385
J.-M. Nicolle
21. Pascal’s views on mathematics and the Divine
405
D. Adamson
22. Spinoza and the geometrical way of proof
423
G. Harmsen
23. John Wallis (1616–1703): Mathematician and Divine
441
P. Beeley and S. Probst
24. An ocean of truth
459
C. de Pater
25. God and Mathematics in Leibniz’s thought
485
H. Breger
26. Berkeley’s defence of the inﬁnite God in contrast to the inﬁnite in mathematics
499
W. Breidert
27. Leonhard Euler (1707–1783)
509
R. Thiele
28. Georg Cantor (1845–1918)
523
R. Thiele
29. Gerrit Mannoury and his fellow signiﬁcians on mathematics and mysticism
549
L. Bergmans
30. Arthur Schopenhauer and L.E.J. Brouwer: A comparison
569
T. Koetsier
31. On the road to a uniﬁed world view: Priest Pavel Florensky—theologian,
philosopher and scientist
595
S.S. Demidov and C.E. Ford
32. Husserl and impossible numbers: A sceptical experience
613
F. De Gandt
33. Symbol and space according to René Guénon
625
B. Pinchard
34. Eddington, science and the unseen world
641
T. Koetsier

Contents
xiii
35. The Divined proportion
655
A. van der Schoot
Author Index
673
Subject Index
683

This page intentionally left blank

Introduction
Teun Koetsier
Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Science, Vrije Universiteit,
De Boelelaan 1081, NL-1081HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
E-mail: t.koetsier@few.vu.nl
Luc Bergmans
Département d’Etudes Néerlandaises, Université de Paris IV—Sorbonne,
108, Boulevard Malesherbes, F-75850 Paris cedex 17, France
E-mail: lbergmans.cesr@wanadoo.fr
Contents
1. The divine and mathematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2. Three periods: The pre-Greek period, the Pythagorean–Platonic period and the period of the Scientiﬁc
Revolution and its aftermath . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3. The pre-Greek period and the ritual origin of mathematics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1. Rock paintings and the Agnicayana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2. Astronomy and the divine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3. Seidenberg’s thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4. The Pythagorean–Platonic period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1. Pythagoras and Plato . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2. Neo-Pythagoreanism and Neo-Platonism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3. The early Middle Ages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.4. The later Middle Ages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.5. The Renaissance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5. The Scientiﬁc Revolution and its aftermath . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.1. The Scientiﬁc Revolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2. Secularization and the divine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3. The 19th century. The freedom of mathematical thought. Neo-Thomism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4. The 20th century. Structuralist mathematics. Gödel. Process theology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.5. Figurative mathematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.6. The turn to the transcendental subject . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.7. A modern creation myth? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
1


Introduction
3
1. The divine and mathematics
The history of mankind is a history of permanent struggle for survival. Human beings sur-
vive by means of cognitive systems. An essential part of a cognitive system is a ‘map’ of
the world that helps us deal with reality. Animals possess cognitive systems as well, but hu-
man cognitive systems differ in that human beings have the capability of symbolic thought
and symbolic language. Symbolic thought makes abstraction possible: with great precision
human beings can describe situations and relations that they haven’t actually observed or
experienced. Even in the Palaeolithic era the complexity of human cognitive systems was
considerable as rock paintings and other archeological evidence show. The Palaeolithic
cognitive systems can be called pre-scientiﬁc, but there is no essential difference between
them and modern scientiﬁc cognitive systems other than that the latter are more systematic.
The modern scientiﬁc cognitive systems developed out of the pre-scientiﬁc ones through a
long process of trial and error.
It seems likely that from the moment human beings became aware of their own exis-
tence they started asking questions like: Who are we? Where are we from? Where are we
heading? In this book religion will be interpreted as the response that people give to such
questions.1 The answers to these questions are part of the cognitive system of the civi-
lization involved. The questions are all related to what the German theologian Paul Tillich
called ultimate concern. Buddhists, Hindus, Sikhs, Taoists, Muslims, Jews, Christians, all
of them display in their thinking this ultimate concern. Characteristics of an ultimate con-
cern are: it has priority over other concerns, it is involved in all human experience and the
emotions it involves are so unique that words like sacred or holy are used for it. Moreover
this ultimate concern has its unique ritual and symbolic expressions.
In the course of history the religious aspect of human cognitive systems has undergone
considerable development. In the 19th century E.B. Tylor proposed that religion began as
animism and developed through polytheism to monotheism. And indeed the development
of our cognitive systems shows a growing sophistication in all areas including religion.
Features of a more sophisticated religious culture would be, for example, pantheism, mys-
ticism and theology. In such a view, pantheism is the result of the development of reﬂective
thought. Mysticism refers to the immediate experience of the divine. Theology is obviously
also a product of higher religious culture; it is the endeavour to state in terms of general
doctrines what is involved in religion. Tylor’s view of the general development of religion
certainly has some value. Yet, because of the great variety of religious expression that has
manifested itself in the course of history, it is too easy to view the development of reli-
gious thought as progressive. An extra complicating factor is that systems of allegiance
like Nazism and Communism have much in common with religion.
In this book we will use the word divine to denote the whole of religious experience and
its expression concerning the numinous or the transcendent. It has many aspects: knowl-
edge, the methods used to acquire and represent this knowledge, the language used to speak
about the divine, the institutions that support man’s relations with the divine, the experience
of the divine of the individual, the applications of knowledge of the divine, etc.
Mathematical knowledge, in the widest sense of the word, has also always been a central
part of human cognitive systems. It concerns structures, in particular the structure of space
1Cf. [21, p. 3].

4
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
and time, and as such, mathematical knowledge already played a role in Palaeolithic and
Neolithic times in the form of counting and, for example, knowledge implicit in geometri-
cal decorations. A great leap forward in mathematics was made when during the third and
second millennia BCE more advanced forms of society evolved along the banks of some
of the great rivers in Africa and Asia: the Nile, the Tigris and Euphrates, the Indus and
Ganges, the Huang Ho and the Yang-tse. This oriental mathematics originated at least to a
large extent as a practical science that facilitated calendar computations, tax collection, the
administration of the harvest, the organization of public works, etc.
A major step forward in the development of mathematics was made in the context
of Greek culture; both arithmetic and geometry developed into deductive theories and a
wealth of new mathematical results was found. After the decline of Greek culture, math-
ematics continued to be practised, both in the Oriental and in the Greek traditions. Me-
dieval mathematics in China and India, mathematics as developed in the world of Islam
and mathematics in Medieval Europe all represent important chapters in the history of
science. During and after the Renaissance the development towards modern mathematics
really got underway. The history of mathematics after the Renaissance is one great success
story. The invention of the calculus by Newton and Leibniz in the second half of the seven-
teenth century was so important that in the eighteenth century mathematical productivity
concentrated almost exclusively on this particular invention and its applications. Until the
nineteenth century mathematics could still be considered as the science of number and
space. Especially the discovery of non-Euclidean geometries in the nineteenth century, but
other developments as well, led to a different view of what mathematics is. For most mathe-
maticians mathematics is now the science of mathematical structures. Euclidean space and
the traditional number structures are very important, but only examples of mathematical
structures amongst many others.
In this book we use the term mathematics in a broad sense. It refers to the objects of
mathematical knowledge, to the knowledge itself, to the methods used to acquire and rep-
resent this knowledge, to the language of mathematics, to the role and nature of logic in
its relation to mathematics, to the institutions that accompany mathematics, to the personal
experience of the individual doing mathematics, to the applications of mathematics, etc.
The chapters of this book all concern the relation between mathematical and religious
aspects of individual or collective cognitive systems. Mathematics in its relation with the
divine has played a special role in the course of history. A particular complex of ideas that
we owe among others to the Pythagoreans and Plato is responsible for this special role.
Mathematics is abstract and it often seems absolute, universal, eternal and pure. More than
other kinds of knowledge it possesses characteristics that we associate with the divine.
2. Three periods: The pre-Greek period, the Pythagorean–Platonic period and the
period of the Scientiﬁc Revolution and its aftermath
We have not attempted to develop a general view of the relations between mathematics and
the divine. The present book is primarily a collection of more or less chronologically or-
dered case studies. Yet it may be helpful to distinguish roughly three periods in the history
of mathematics and its relation to the divine. In the ﬁrst period mathematical knowledge

Introduction
5
Fig. 1. The creation of the world according to the Tchokwe. Source: [47, p. 109].
was usually embedded in other forms of knowledge. This means that mathematical notions
and mathematical truth were to a large extent not explicitly distinguished from other parts
of reality. The Tchokwe people in Angola, for example, use geometrical drawings when
they tell stories (Figure 1). They ﬁrst set out orthogonal lattices of equidistant points with
their ﬁngertips. Then, while they tell the story, they draw a corresponding ﬁgure. The draw-
ings should be made smoothly without lifting one ﬁnger. Figure 1 illustrates the creation
of the world. The corresponding story runs as follows. First the Sun walked and walked
until he found God. God gave him a cock. When the next morning the cock crowed, God
said to the Sun: You may keep the cock, but you must return every morning. Since then the
sun has appeared every morning. The Moon also went to see God. God gave him a cock
as well. The next morning God ordered the Moon to come back every twenty-eight days.
Since then the Moon has done exactly that. Finally man went to see God. God gave man a
cock too. The next morning man had eaten the cock and God said: “The Sun and the Moon
did not kill the cock; that is why they will never die. You ate the cock and that is why you
must die too. But when you die, you will have to return here” [47, pp. 108–109]. The four
characters represent God (top), man (bottom), Sun (left) and Moon (right).
This is an example of implicit mathematics. The feeling for patterns demonstrated by
this drawing and the many other drawings the Tchokwe make when they tell stories, was
not made explicit within their culture. Palaeolithic and Neolithic mathematics is implicit.
The same holds for much of the mathematics in the irrigation societies that evolved on
the banks of the great rivers in the last millennia BCE. Although it is probable that in
the course of time an awareness developed in the irrigation societies with respect to the
peculiar nature of mathematics, the Greeks most clearly discovered the possibility to study
mathematics in abstracto.
With Greek mathematics the second period begins. The awareness of the abstract nature
of mathematics implied the separation of mathematics from non-mathematical elements.
It had an enormous effect on the way mathematics was done: the Greeks developed the
possibility to do mathematics deductively. Until the twentieth century Euclid’s Elements
(ca. 300 BCE) was considered a paradigmatic book. Book 1 (of the thirteen books) starts
with Deﬁnitions, Postulates and Axioms that must be accepted without proof. Then fol-
low Propositions that are all proved rigorously. There are no references in the Elements
to applications, nor to any other non-mathematical aspects of life, such as religion. Yet

6
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
the Pythagoreans and in particular Plato developed a very inﬂuential view of the world
in which mathematics and the divine became closely associated. The divine origin of all
things created the universe on the basis of mathematical principles and the believer wish-
ing to get in touch with the divine had to study mathematics. Such ideas, especially in the
form of Neo-Platonism, have exercised an enormous inﬂuence. During this period, which
we will call the Pythagorean–Platonic period, magic, alchemy, astrology and other now
discredited forms of knowledge were taken seriously by many philosophers and scientists.
The third period that we distinguish begins with the Scientiﬁc Revolution. The Scientiﬁc
Revolution was followed by the Enlightenment. Until the Enlightenment there was a com-
plex of religious values that was shared by everybody in the West. After the Enlightenment
this was no longer the case. Mathematics played a major role in the Scientiﬁc Revolu-
tion. The universe came to be seen as a clockwork mechanism that could be understood
in terms of mathematics. Although the Pythagorean–Platonic view that reality is struc-
tured mathematically was in fact conﬁrmed, the effect was that for many the creator, God,
eventually became a superﬂuous hypothesis. The reactions to the Scientiﬁc Revolution and
its results were quite diverse. Some simply stuck to the idea that God created the world
on a mathematical basis, some refused to accept the new developments in science, some
divorced religion from science and ﬁnally there were those who abandoned religion and
attempted to turn science, including mathematics, into a new faith. Another characteristic
of this period is that it became the received view that positive science should be clearly
distinguished from what came to be seen as pseudo-sciences: alchemy, magic, astrology,
numerology, etc.
Our choice to distinguish three periods in the history of mathematics and its relation to
the divine, the pre-Greek period, the Pythagorean–Platonic period and the period of the
Scientiﬁc Revolution and its aftermath, is based on a Western perspective. Most of the
contributions to this volume do indeed directly concern Western culture. In non-Western
culture this periodisation makes no sense. In Chapter 1 of the present book, Ho Peng-Yoke
discusses Chinese number mysticism. Chinese culture offers a nice example of mathemat-
ics being embedded in a wider context until long after Pythagoras. In fact, until the 19th
century the Chinese equivalent of the word ‘mathematics’ encompassed philosophy, as-
trology, divination and aspects of mysticism. In Chapter 2, devoted to Indian culture, Kim
Plofker, on the one hand, describes the picture of the cosmos presented in sacred texts such
as the Puranas, consisting of divinely revealed truths. On the other hand, she describes the
Siddhantas, astronomical treatises, written under the inﬂuence of Graeco-Babylonian and
Hellenistic sources. Her theme is the delicate balance that existed between these two Indian
cosmological traditions over the centuries and the way in which they have been viewed by
historians.
3. The pre-Greek period and the ritual origin of mathematics
3.1. Rock paintings and the Agnicayana
In the early history of mankind, human cognitive systems were such that mathematical
notions and mathematical truth were not clearly separated from truth concerning the divine.
Let us consider two examples.

Introduction
7
Fig. 2. Rock drawing in Puente Viesgo (Spain).
An aspect of the early cognitive systems was animism. The world was viewed as a
Palaeolithic family, full of forces that were treated as individuals.2 Shamanism was prob-
ably widespread. Characteristic of shamanism is that the shaman enters a trance in which
he communicates with the spirits in order to heal the sick, foretell the future or control the
behaviour of animals. Geometric rock paintings are found in many areas where shamanism
traditionally occurred (Figure 2).
Clottes and Lewis-Williams have put forward an interesting hypothesis that connects
shamanism and pre-historic rock paintings. If Clottes and Lewis-Williams are right, the
geometric paintings correspond to geometrical ﬁgures that the shaman projected with open
eyes on the wall in the ﬁrst stage of his trance. The wall was experienced as a curtain
separating the shaman from the world of the spirits. On the basis of modern studies about
the effects of hallucinants, which describe similar phenomena, it is assumed that in the
course of the trance the geometrical forms turned into animals with which the shaman
could communicate. If this hypothesis is correct the geometrical rock paintings are among
the earliest examples of mathematical patterns in a religious context.
Much more sophisticated is the mathematics in our second example. It concerns the role
of geometry in an old Vedic ritual, called Agnicayana. The ritual is at least 2500 years old.
In Vedic religion, ﬁre, called agni, was worshipped and there was a cult of a plant called
soma, probably a hallucinogen. The major Vedic rituals were dedicated to these two: Agni
and Soma. We have a very good idea of what these rituals were like, because in 1955 Frits
Staal became aware of the fact that this Vedic tradition was still alive in Kerala in southwest
2Cf. [9, p. 156].

8
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
Fig. 3. 17th century Siberian shaman. Source: [45]. Courtesy of the Library of the University of Amsterdam.
India, and in 1975 he documented Agnicayana, the “piling of Agni”, or, simply, Agni.3 The
Agnicayana is a complex ritual, which is the result of a long development. It takes twelve
days of elaborate performances accompanied by recitations. Agni is a god and a divine
messenger, who receives offerings during the ritual. Rituals like the Agnicayana are an
essential element of Vedic culture and they have to be performed painstakingly according
to strict rules.
One of the central elements of the Agnicayana ritual is the building of an altar consisting
of ﬁve layers of bricks. The altar has the shape of a bird (Figures 4 and 5) and it is built
in the course of the ritual in a precisely prescribed way out of bricks that have precisely
prescribed shapes. Staal reports that the 1975 performance of the Agnicayana ritual was
followed by a long series of other rites that were performed only to correct mistakes pos-
sibly committed in the course of the preceding twelve days [36, Vol. I, p. 15]. Figure 4
shows the order in which 57 of the bricks of the second layer are consecrated. These bricks
have names. For example, the bricks 2 through 6 are called Skandhya or “Shoulder” and
the bricks 22 through 26 are called Vrstisani or “Rain bringing”. The remaining bricks of
this layer are called Space Fillers. Each layer consists of 200 bricks and each layer has
an area of 71
2 purusas. The word “purusa” means “man”. It denotes both the height of a
man with his arms stretched upwards (approximately 2.2 m) and an area measure (approx-
imately 2.2 × 2.2 = 4.84 m2). Except for the vertical passage at the centre of the altar the
interstices between bricks of any layer may never be above or under the interstices between
bricks of an adjacent layer. This means that one needs two different patterns of bricks: one
3Cf. [36].

Introduction
9
Fig. 4. Bricks in the second layer of the ﬁre altar. Source: [36].
Fig. 5. A Vedic ﬁre altar. Source: [36].
pattern for the 2nd and 4th layers and one for the 1st, 3rd and 5th layers. Rules like these
concern the geometry of the altar and indeed there exists a class of geometrical sacred
works, the Sulba Sutras (sulba = cord or rope), that have been called “manuals for altar
construction”.

10
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
It is not easy to say what exactly the function of this ritual is, but it is clear that, just as in
the case of the hypothesis of Clottes and Lewis-Williams, geometrical structures embedded
in a context involving other elements are part of an approach to get in touch with the divine.
3.2. Astronomy and the divine
It has been argued that the more advanced forms of society that evolved in Africa and
Asia during the ﬁfth, fourth and third millennium BCE followed similar patterns in their
development.4 The increased productivity of these agricultural societies led to increased
vulnerability. The growth in productivity led to an expansion of the population, which
meant a greater dependence on agriculture, which in its turn led to greater vulnerability.
The traditional dangers that man faced, natural disasters like plagues, droughts, inunda-
tions, locusts, etc., hostile groups of other people and the risk that the crop would fail or be
spoilt by stupidity, negligence or greed, were increased. To cope with these threats a central
role was played by a class of people who can be called priests. They possessed expertise
in many areas and played a crucial role in the organization of society; they guarded and
distributed the crops and by means of a strict system of rites, legitimized by their special
relation with the supernatural, they compelled their people to behave in a disciplined way.5
In such societies the role of the “priests” will have automatically linked mathematics and
religion. Nowadays we clearly distinguish between mathematics, astronomy, astrology and
religion. In the mind of a Babylonian priest this was undoubtedly hardly the case at all.
The Babylonians described the earth as a ﬂat disc ﬂoating on an ocean (Figure 6). On a
Late Babylonian tablet in the British Museum we ﬁnd a picture of the earth as conceived by
the Babylonians. The earth is circular; the water surrounding it is called the ‘Bitter River’.
Beyond this river are several triangular regions for special creatures that are described in the
text written above the drawing on the tablet. Near the upper edge of the disc there is a small
region called ‘mountain’. The two lines running down the map presumably represent the
Tigris and the Euphrates. They run into the marshes near the Persian Gulf, represented by
the two lower parallel lines. The small circles represent cities. The oblong above the centre
seems to represent Babylon. The Babylonians may have thought of the sky as a dome or
vault, although according to Lambert there are no indications of this.6 The gods maintained
the motions of the heavenly bodies. The powers of nature, the sun, the moon, the storm etc.
were associated with gods and for the Babylonians celestial phenomena were astrologically
signiﬁcant. Both the mathematical regularity of the celestial phenomena and the occasional
deviations from their normal regularity were believed to be related to sublunar events.
The earliest known astrological omen texts are in fact Old Babylonian.7 Lunar eclipses
in particular attracted the attention of the Babylonian priests, but they were interested in
other lunar phenomena and the sun and the weather as well. Presumably the ﬁrst versions
4Cf. Johan Goudsblom, Eric Jones, Stephen Mennell, The Course of Human History: Economic Growth, Social
Process, and Civilization, 2001.
5Cf. Op. cit.
6W.G. Lambert, The Cosmology of Sumer and Babylon, in [5, pp. 42–65].
7Although there was undoubtedly astronomical interest, according to [25, p. 33], there is no trace of any real
astrology in the earlier Sumerian sources.

Introduction
11
Fig. 6. The Babylonian Mappa Mundi: British Museum 92687.
of the important Babylonian astrological text Enuma Anu Enlil (EAE) were written during
the Old Babylonian period. The EAE is an omen series consisting of about 70 tablets.
The omens have the form of a description of a celestial phenomenon, followed by the
repercussions it will have. For example: “An eclipse of the evening watch means plague,
an eclipse of the middle watch means diminishing market, an eclipse of the morning watch
means the sick will recover” [25, p. 106]. Babylonian astrology concerned the welfare of
the state and the king. Only in Hellenistic astrology was the horoscope of the individual
introduced.
In order to be able to describe the positions of the sun, the moon and the planets relative
to the stars, a system of reference was needed. Initially the Babylonians used a system
of reference consisting of seventeen stellar constellations. Omens dealt, for example, with
particular planets entering or leaving certain constellations. In the seventh century BCE
Babylonian astronomy and astrology underwent a change; the zodiac was introduced. The
zodiac is the division of the apparent path of the sun in the sky, the ecliptic, in twelve equal
parts, called signs.8
Between 1000 BCE and the 16th century CE a number of complex civilizations compa-
rable to the irrigation cultures in Asia and Africa ﬂourished in South- and Mesoamerica.
We will make a few remarks about the Aztecs.9 The dramatic fall of the Aztec empire is
well known. In 1521 the capital Tenochtitlan, positioned in the middle of Lake Tetzcoco in
the Valley of Mexico, surrendered. The Aztecs viewed the earth as ﬂat. The outer perimeter
8Mathematical techniques have often played a role in divination. Cicero distinguished between natural and
artiﬁcial divination. Natural divination concerns a direct message from the gods: e.g., in a dream or a vision.
Artiﬁcial divination requires observation and calculation. Astrology is an example of artiﬁcial divination in which
astronomical calculations play an important role. From a modern point of view the astronomical part of astrology
should be sharply distinguished from the astrological interpretation.
9Much of what we will say applies to the Maya’s as well.

12
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
was conceived as a circle (or sometimes as a square), where the surrounding ocean met the
dome of the sky. Both the heavens above and the underworld below the earth consisted of
a series of layers. The Aztecs viewed everything in their world that represented a power
as endowed with some sort of personality. They had a complicated calendar: they counted
time in two different ways. The ﬁrst was a 365-day solar year, called xiuhpohualli, the
“counting of the years”. It consisted of 18 months of 20 days plus a period of transition
of 5 days. This is the Aztec ceremonial calendar that regulated the 18 “monthly” and vari-
ous other celebrations directed at the earth, the sun, the maize, the mountains, the rain etc.
The second system was tonalpohualli, the “counting of days”, a 260 days cycle composed
of 20 groups of 13 days, used for divination. The two systems operated together and a
simple calculation shows that it takes 52 solar years for the 365-days calendar and the 260-
days calendar to return to the same relative position.10 In the second calendar, tonalpohalli,
every 13-day period had its own associated deity and every day out of the 13 its Lord of
the Day. In addition, there were 9 Lords of the Night. These Lords of the Night also re-
curred in a cycle in the xiuhpohualli. The 260-days calendar can be described by means
of 3 simultaneously rotating gears and every day corresponded to a 13-day period Deity, a
Lord of the Day and a Lord of the Night. Professional diviners interpreted the signiﬁcance
of the inﬂuence of these deities for newborn children or for the possible courses of action
in a given situation.11
3.3. Seidenberg’s thesis
The arithmetic of the two Aztec calendars is deeply embedded in a religious context. So
is the geometry of the Agnicayana ritual and the astronomy of the Babylonians. Abraham
Seidenberg has argued that mathematics as a whole has a ritual origin. He uses the contents
of the above-mentioned Sulba Sutras as an argument to support his case for the ritual origin
of geometry. For an understanding of the function of the altar Seidenberg refers to Hocart,
who in 1927 in his book Kingship argued that the basic idea of the Indian sacriﬁce was to
make an object equal to an altar and hence, by repetition of the ritual action, two things
(distinct from the altar) equal to each other. By ritual action, we have: Falcon = Altar
and Sacriﬁcer = Altar, and therefore Sacriﬁcer = Falcon, and hence the sacriﬁcer can
ﬂy to heaven [28, p. 492]. The geometry went further than simple rules of thumb. In the
successive augmentations of the falcon-shaped altar, the Theorem of Pythagoras is used,
and according to Seidenberg, we have here the motive that led to its invention.
Seidenberg ﬁnds an analogous link between geometry and religion in the building of
temples. The construction of a temple was a huge cooperative task. The labour of hun-
dreds of participants had to be planned and coordinated in advance. In Sumeria the priests
claimed that the plans were designed by the gods themselves and revealed to them in
10We must solve the equation x · 365 = y · 260. Division by 5 yields x · 73 = y · 52. Because 73 is prime we get:
y = 73 and x = 52. The conclusion of the 52-years cycle was a reason for special celebrations.
11Townsend reported in 1992 that in Guatemala Maya Indian diviners still practice a form of calendrical divina-
tion. Starting from the day corresponding to the client’s problem, they count out the days of the 260-day calendar
by means of seeds and crystals en then they interpret the pattern [40, pp. 126–127].

Introduction
13
dreams, and they may have believed this themselves [28, p. 521]. Temple building and
the stretching of cords that was involved were rituals, according to Seidenberg.
In a second paper Seidenberg argues that counting also has a ritual origin. The argument
runs as follows. What is needed for counting to be invented is “a deﬁnite sequence of words
and a familiar activity in which they are employed” [29, p. 8]. According to Seidenberg the
creation ritual offers exactly such a sequence and such an activity. Counting was a means of
calling the participants in a ritual onto the ritual scene. More precisely, counting was born in
the elaboration of a ritual procession re-enacting the Creation during which the participants
appeared on the scene on being announced. The announcements took the form of numbers.
This innovation took place once in human history and afterwards the invention diffused.
In many different cultures all over the globe we ﬁnd traces and further elaborations of this
ritual counting and its signiﬁcance.
Many of the examples that Seidenberg adduces are equally compatible with a practical
origin of mathematics, and his thesis remains conjectural. Yet it is an interesting thesis,
because it is undeniable that there are many phenomena in the history of human culture in
which numbers have in one way or another a mythical or ritual signiﬁcance. According to
Seidenberg, for example, “in Babylonia, each of the numbers from 60 down to 1 came to be
reserved for a special deity—there was a god Eight, a god Three, etc.” and in the Satapatha
Brahmana the numbers 1 to 101 are deities to whom offerings are made. Also “with the
Maya the numbers 1 to 13 were (and still are) regarded as sacred beings and invoked as
such” [29, p. 7].
4. The Pythagorean–Platonic period
4.1. Pythagoras and Plato
The Greek philosophers in Antiquity were the ﬁrst to express the view that, compared with
other forms of knowledge, mathematical knowledge is special. Pythagoras and his follow-
ers knew that mathematics is different from other kinds of knowledge and so did the Eleatic
philosophers, Parmenides and Zeno of Elea. Although we do not know much with certainty
about the precise doctrines these pre-Socratic philosophers held, it seems clear that for the
Pythagoreans doing mathematics was a way to get in touch with the divine. Dodds has
described Pythagoras as a great Greek shaman [14, p. 143]. It is possible that the open-
ing of the Black Sea to Greek trade introduced the Greeks to shamanism. Tradition credits
Pythagoras with the shamanistic powers of prophecy, bilocation and magical healing. He is
also said to have visited the world of the spirits [14, p. 144]. In Chapter 3 of this book Re-
viel Netz discusses the Pythagorean views of mathematics. In his reconstruction he points
out that in the mystery cult of the Pythagoreans active in the late ﬁfth and early fourth cen-
turies BCE, mathematics was an ideal means for the mortal individual to get in touch with
the transcendent. Mathematics correlates the concrete and the abstract, the temporary and
the eternal; this was most obvious for the Pythagoreans in mathematical musical theory. In
Greek mathematics, proportions, as a means to correlate separate domains, played a major
role. In Netz’s view the Pythagoreans sensed that there is an incorporeal realm, but they
did not fully reach beyond the corporeal. That is why for Plato the Pythagoreans were not

14
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
dualistic enough, while for Aristotle they were too dualistic: the idea that mathematics calls
for the assumption of a reality above the physical one, is simply wrong in Aristotle’s view.
Netz attempts to characterize the Pythagoreans on the basis of how they were perceived by
Plato and Aristotle.
The ideas of the Pythagoreans were a major inﬂuence on Plato (427–347). In about
390 BCE Plato visited the Pythagoreans in Southern Italy. Dodds has described how, in
his view, Plato transposed Pythagorean ideas from the level of revelation to the level of
rational argument:
The crucial step lay in the identiﬁcation of the detachable ‘occult’ self which is [...] potentially
divine with the Socratic psyche whose virtue is a kind of knowledge. That step involved a complete
reinterpretation of the old shamanistic culture-pattern. Nevertheless the pattern kept its vitality, and
its main features are still recognizable in Plato. Reincarnation survives unchanged. The shaman’s
trance, his deliberate detachment of the occult self from the body, has become the practice of
mental withdrawal and concentration which puriﬁes the rational soul [...]. The occult knowledge
which the shaman acquires in trance has become a vision of metaphysical truth [...] [14, p. 210].
Because Plato wrote dialogues the interpretation of his work is not easy. Yet the dialogues
and the passages that his pupil Aristotle12 devoted to the views of his teacher make it
possible to say some things with considerable certainty. First there is the doctrine of the
two worlds: the eternal and intelligible world versus the changing world of the senses.
Mathematical knowledge concerns the intelligible world. Secondly, there is the conception
of a supreme divine intelligence ruling the world in accordance with the eternal ideas.
Finally there is the notion of ‘soul’, both on the human and on the cosmic level; the soul
operates in both worlds.13
For Plato true knowledge is knowledge of the forms. Mathematical knowledge is related
to knowledge of the forms. In the Meno Plato has Socrates demonstrate that mathematical
12Aristotle (384–323 BCE), was very much inﬂuenced by Plato’s ideas. Yet there are some fundamental differ-
ences. According to Plato true knowledge of the visible world is impossible. The reason is that the visible world
is permanently in a ﬂux and change cannot be a subject of rational knowledge. In Plato’s view the mind’s eye
leads the philosopher to the Truth and in philosophy empirical evidence is in fact worthless. According to Plato
a horse is a horse because the animal participates in some way in the idea Horse. However, the idea Horse is a
subject of knowledge independently of all real, material horses. Aristotle rejected this view; for him empirical
evidence was the only source of true knowledge. He believed, moreover, that a theory of change is possible and
started to develop such a theory. He developed the theory of the four different types of interacting causes. The
effective cause is the cause in the modern sense of the word, the material cause is the matter, the stuff a thing
consists of, the formal cause is the form present in the matter, and the ﬁnal cause is the purpose of the thing
or process involved. The notion of ﬁnal cause reﬂects Aristotle’s view that nature has a purpose; everything in
nature develops towards a goal. According to Aristotle Plato was the victim of an illusion: the illusion that next to
the visible material world there is an independent realm of invisible things, the ideas. Aristotle treats the relation
between ideas and visible objects the other way around. According to Aristotle our idea Horse is abstracted from
the real horses that we run into, it is merely the form of the horse that we mentally separate from the matter. This
theory of abstraction we ﬁnd in the Metaphysics. It holds for mathematical notions like straight line, circle, etc. as
well. How much Aristotle’s views differ from Plato’s is particularly clear in Aristotle’s view of the human soul.
For Plato the soul is eternal; for Aristotle the soul is merely the form of the human body and it does not survive
the body.
13In Plato the cosmos is conceived, on the one hand, as a living organism. On the other hand, in the Timaeus,
Plato describes the cosmos as an artifact, created by a superhuman craftsman. Not all Greeks shared this view
of the universe. The ﬁfth century atomists Leucippus and Democritus denied that the universe was created by an
intelligent creator. They believed that the world is merely the result of the mechanical interaction of atoms. See
G.E.R. Lloyd, Greek Cosmologies, in [5, pp. 198–224].

Introduction
15
knowledge is different from other kinds of knowledge in the sense that it is acquired on
the basis of insight and not on the basis of authority. Socrates compares a teacher of math-
ematics with a midwife; if the teacher asks the right questions, the pupil will by himself
give birth to mathematical knowledge. Ian Mueller shows in Chapter 4 that Plato added a
new element in the Timaeus, where he presented a mathematical creation myth. The cre-
ation of the cosmos was the result of the activity of a god, a representative of a higher
level of reality, who imposed limits on unlimited matter, using geometrical forms. Plato’s
universe is geocentric and contained in the sphere of the ﬁxed stars. The earth consists of
four elements: earth, water, air and ﬁre. Yet the universe is a single visible, living entity. In
the Republic we ﬁnd yet another view. Here mathematics is related to the divine because
knowledge of it leads to knowledge of the forms. The future leaders of the Republic had
to study arithmetic, plane and solid geometry, astronomy and harmonics in order to make
their souls aware of a higher level of reality, and, in particular, of the form of the good.
Aristotle used to relate that those who came to hear Plato’s lecture on the good, were
disappointed because he spoke only of arithmetic and astronomy. We do not know what
Plato said in that lecture, but mathematics and the theory of forms were obviously related
in Plato’s mind. According to Aristotle in his Metaphysics (A, 6, 9) Plato declared that
(i) forms are numbers,
(ii) things exist by participation in numbers,
(iii) numbers are composed of the One and the ‘indeterminate duality’.
It is possible that Plato identiﬁed the forms with numbers so that he could ﬁnd a principle
of order in the mysterious world of the forms [10, p. 194]. The natural numbers can be
generated from One and Two, if the Two is used as a principle of doubling the one. The
sequence One, Two, Three, Four, etc., could then represent the ﬁrst part of a logical gen-
eration of the universe. Similar tendencies existed in Pythagoreanism. Sextus Empiricus
refers to the view that everything is derived from the monad or point. The point moves and
generates a line. The line moves and generates a surface and three-dimensional bodies are
generated by surfaces.
4.2. Neo-Pythagoreanism and Neo-Platonism
In Plato’s time the Greeks were aware of the existence of Babylonian astrology, but only in
the second century BCE astrology seems to have become fashionable among the Greeks. In
Plato’s dialogue the Laws, the stars, the sun and the moon are described as gods. In Plato’s
view divine minds were animating these heavenly bodies. Yet Plato did not take astrology
seriously. Babylonian astronomy/astrology is based on the Babylonian cosmology: under-
neath the ﬂat earth is the underworld, above it heaven. The Babylonians did not study the
geometry of the orbits of the heavenly bodies; they studied the regularity of the celestial
phenomena in arithmetical terms. With the Greeks astronomy became a geometrical sci-
ence. The Greeks realized that the shape of the earth was spherical. It is a central element in
the doctrine of the concentric spheres defended by Eudoxus. This doctrine was followed by
the theory of epicycles and eccentrics, proposed by Apollonius in the third century BCE.
Greek astronomy culminated in the work of Ptolomy (100 CE). In Ptolomy’s model the
stars are ﬁxed on the inner side of a constantly rotating sphere with the earth at its centre.

16
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
Fig. 7. Petrus Apianus’ 1553 view of the universe.
The sun, the moon and the ﬁve known planets execute precisely deﬁned motions in the
space between the earth and the sphere of the ﬁxed stars. Ptolomy’s geometrical model of
the universe is highly sophisticated and very much in accordance with the observed celes-
tial phenomena. Although heliocentric theories had been proposed, e.g. by Aristarchus of
Samos (third century BCE), the geocentric model was the generally accepted theory of the
universe until the Scientiﬁc Revolution in the seventeenth century (Figure 7).
When astrology became popular among the Greeks, Greek cosmology understandably
superseded Babylonian cosmology in astrological theory. Present-day astrology is essen-
tially Greek astrology.
In the second century BCE not only astrology became popular among the Greeks but
other ideas that Plato might have considered with great scepsis as well. For example, the
theory of occult forces immanent in certain animals, plants and precious stones gained
popularity among the Greeks. Aristotle held that the properties of the material things in the
world can be reduced to four elemental qualities: hot, cold, dry and wet. The four elements
each have two elemental non-opposite qualities: for example, earth is cold and dry, ﬁre is
hot and dry, etc. There are however, many properties of things that cannot be accounted
for by means of these manifest qualities. That is why non-manifest or occult qualities were
introduced. The theory of occult qualities, or forces or virtues as they would also be called
later, postulates, among other things, the existence of magical links between the celestial
bodies and certain sublunary things. As Dobbs remarked:

Introduction
17
[...] if each planet had its representative in the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms, linked to
it by an occult ‘sympathy’, as was now asserted, one could get at them magically by manipulating
these earthly counterparts [14, pp. 246–247].
In the ﬁrst century BCE there was a revival of Pythagoreanism. In Chapter 5 Jean-
François Mattéi describes the Pythagorean arithmetical-theological speculations of Nico-
machus of Gerasa (ﬂ. 100 CE). Mattei argues that the Greeks did not study man and the
divine in terms of “persons”, but, rather, in terms of “measure”. And the supreme measure
of the divine is Number, in so far as it repeats itself all over the universe with its unchange-
able properties. Nicomachus describes the development, the manifestation of the divine in
terms of ten steps, corresponding to the numbers one through ten, that each characterize
an essential phase. One is the Monad, the supreme god, associated with Zeus, the ruler of
the gods on Mount Olympus, and with Hestia, the goddess of the hearth. Two is the Dyad,
the power of division and multiplication, associated with, among others, Isis, the Egyptian
goddess of nature, Demeter, the giver of grain, and Rhea, that is mother earth, Gaia. Three
is the Triad, representing the opposite of the Dyad, composition, and associated with a long
list of gods. In this way the numbers one through ten, associated with the gods, are used to
describe a ladder connecting heaven and earth, that descends from the Monad, the origin
of all things, to the world we see around us.
The teaching in the Academy was inﬂuenced by Neo-Pythagoreanism. Some Neo-
Platonist philosophers rejected the occult theories, but others were attracted by them.
Plutarch of Chaeronea (born about 45 CE) was an eclectic Platonist who emphasized divine
transcendance and aimed at a purer conception of God, with whom an immediate contact
could be established. He denied that God was the author of evil and strongly opposed
superstition. Yet he took prophecies seriously.
The most important Neo-Platonist philosopher, Plotinus (204–270), rejected astrology,
while his successor Porphyry (234–ca. 305) incorporated it in his philosophy. Unlike Plot-
inus, Porphyry seems to have felt that knowledge of the inﬂuence of the heavenly bodies
on the individual could help him to reach the divine mind.
Plotinus’ views are a remarkable and sophisticated attempt to develop Plato’s philoso-
phy. He held that the source of everything is the One, which is identical with the ‘Good’
in Plato. The One is absolutely transcendent, ineffable, incomprehensible. The only predi-
cates that Plotinus allows to be ascribed to the One are goodness and unity. Yet, even these
can only be used on the basis of analogy. Plotinus must account for the multitude of ﬁ-
nite things and he does this by applying the metaphor of ‘emanation’. Emanation is not
creation, because there is no will involved. It is a manifestation on the basis of the prin-
ciple that every nature expresses itself in what is immediately subordinate to it. Plotinus
also uses the metaphor of reﬂection in a mirror because in a mirror an object is duplicated
without undergoing any change. The ﬁrst emanation from the One is the Intellect or Mind
(Nous): it encompasses the totality of all Platonic ideas, it is the divine mind characterized
by intuition or immediate apprehension. The ideas arise from and are permanently main-
tained in the contemplation of One by itself. Nous is identiﬁed with the demiurg in Plato’s
Timaeus.
From the Intellect emanates the second principle in the hierarchy, the Soul, which cor-
responds to the World Soul of the Timaeus. The Soul arises through the contemplation
of the Intellect by the One. The Soul consists of ‘seminal reasons’. They are reﬂections

18
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
of the ideas in the Nous and they are the productive power in the universe. In this way
the forms have no direct connection with the sensible world. The Soul creates and ani-
mates the material universe. It is immanent in the world of becoming, but its higher part
contemplates the intellect, while its lower part generates the world of the senses. The In-
tellect has an immediate grasp of reality. The Soul proceeds along the lines of discur-
sive reasoning. Time is a product of the soul. The Soul has two aspects: the World Soul
and the individual souls. The Material World is below the sphere of the Soul. Plotinus
compares the emanations from the One to the radiation of light. The observed intensity
of a light source diminishes the further one moves away from it until total darkness is
reached. This darkness is matter in itself. Matter is the antithesis of the One, it is also the
principle of evil. On this point Plotinus agreed with the Orphics and Neo-Pythagorean
philosophers. It is possible for the individual soul to reach a mystical union with the
One after a process of puriﬁcation. Such ecstatic union, however, cannot last long in this
life.
In Chapter 6 Dominic O’Meara discusses the ideas of the Neo-Platonist Proclus, a fol-
lower of Plotinus and one of the last representatives of philosophy in Antiquity. While
Nicomachus used numbers to connect the world and the divine, Proclus used geometry
in order to lead the pupils in his school in Athens to the divine. For the Neo-Platonists
transcendence was characterized by an immediate and total unity of the thinking subject
and its object. In Proclus’ view the soul can attain such a self-discovery in geometry. In its
geometrical projections the soul sees an image of itself and can thus attain a knowledge of
truths concerning transcendent ﬁrst principles, the gods. It is possible to experience some
of the power of geometry as a means to connect man and god in the church of St. Sophia
in Istanbul. If one stands in the centre of the church and looks upward, says O’Meara, one
can see Proclus’ geometry of the divine, translated into architecture. Religious buildings
often symbolize, in various ways religious truths. Chapter 7, by Marie-Pierre Terrien, is
devoted to the problem of religious architecture and mathematical symbolism during late
Antiquity. Another aspect of religious architecture in relation with mathematics is treated
in Chapter 8, in which David King discusses the sacred geography of Islam that developed
out of the necessity to build mosques with the prayer-wall facing away from the direction
of the Kaaba.
4.3. The early Middle Ages
Boethius (executed in 524 CE) and St. Augustine (354–430) transmitted the Neo-Platonic
spirit to the Latin Middle Ages.14 Boethius’ work, for example, contributed to spreading
the idea that music is number made audible. In De Musica he tells the story that Pythago-
ras once passed a forge and heard wonderful harmonies from four hammers beating on
anvils. He weighed the hammers and discovered that the sound of the octave was produced
by the weight ratio 2 to 1; the perfect ﬁfth resulted from the ratio 3 to 2; and the perfect
fourth from the ratio 4 to 3. The harmony corresponded to and was explained by simple nu-
merical relations. Boethius divided music into three kinds, musica instrumentalis, musica
14From the 12th century onward Latin translations of Proclus and the great Arabic philosophers exerted inﬂuence
as well.

Introduction
19
humana, and musica mundana. Musica instrumentalis denotes both vocal and instrumental
music. Musica humana refers to the harmony in the dimensions of the human body and the
harmony between body and soul. Musica mundana is the (inaudible, at least for human
beings) music that is made by the celestial bodies. This music is also called the music of
the spheres or musica caelestis.
In the fourth century Christianity became the ofﬁcial religion of the Roman Empire. In
the debates with opponents Christian theologians felt it was desirable to give profane proofs
of Christian dogmas. Although early medieval theologians had only a limited knowledge
of the original works of Plato and Aristotle, they made use of the Greek heritage. Until
Aristotle’s works became available in Latin translations in the 12th and 13th centuries,
Platonic ideas dominated.15 St. Augustine was the ﬁrst major Christian theologian who
tried to show along Platonic lines that our knowledge of God is as certain as our knowledge
of geometry. In St. Augustine’s view mathematical knowledge is knowledge of an eternal
abstract realm to which we have access by means of an inner light, Divine illumination.
The existence of eternal truth in mathematics implies the existence of the idea of Eternal
Truth, which is an important ingredient of St. Augustine’s proof of the existence of God
and of the immortality of the soul.
The computation of the calendar was part of the task of the Greek astronomers–
astrologers. It is remarkable that in the Latin West the science of time-reckoning and
the construction of the calendar, the computus, was associated in a quite different non-
astronomical way with the destiny of man. The computus was embedded in ideas about the
religious signiﬁcance of numbers. The number metaphysics represented by Nicomachus
of Gerasa reached the Latin West via Boethius (ca. 480–ca. 525 CE). Abbo of Fleury, for
example, wrote an exposition of the metaphysics of number based on Boethius’ writings.
In Chapter 9 Faith Wallis discusses a text by a pupil of Abbo, the English monk Byrht-
ferth of Ramsey, who around 1011 wrote a manual of computus. Wallis shows how in
the early Middle Ages time-reckoning was identiﬁed with numerus. Numerus captures the
core ideas of Christianized Pythagorean–Platonic numerology. Wisdom 11:21 says about
the creation: “Thou hast made all things in measure, and number, and weight”. In numerus
this in fact meant: Thou hast ordered all things in time. In particular, before 1100 CE in the
Latin West the calendar served as a natural vehicle for the survival of a complex of ideas
relating mathematics and the divine.
15In Plato’s hierarchy mathematics is inferior to dialectics, but on the whole mathematical knowledge has a very
central position in Plato’s philosophy as a sine qua non to gain true knowledge and at the same time the ﬁrst and
foremost example of what true knowledge amounts to. In Aristotle’s hierarchy of the sciences mathematics is still
inferior to metaphysics and above physics, but in fact the emphasis on the investigation of the changing visible
world made mathematics lose its central role. This is clear from the work of Thomas Aquinas (1224/25–1274).
Aquinas is the most famous of the scholastics who incorporated Aristotle’s rediscovered ideas in their theology.
Thomas rejected the Augustinian Divine illumination, because in his theory knowledge is separated from belief.
Following Aristotle, Thomas argued that natural knowledge—including mathematical knowledge—only pertains
to what can be abstracted from empirical experience, while belief assumes things that cannot be reached through
natural knowledge. Although the existence and the unity of God can be proved, this only implies that belief in
God is reasonable. Christian dogma, however, cannot be known on the basis of reasoning. The belief in these
dogmas essentially depends upon the acceptance of Christian revelation.

20
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
4.4. The later Middle Ages
In the 12th and 13th centuries Aristotle was rediscovered and scholasticism developed.
Christian theologians have always faced the question: How can reason be reconciled with
revelation, science with faith? One of the core convictions of the Scholastics was that God
is the author of all truths and that His creation cannot possibly show us the opposite of His
revelation. In the thirteenth century Aristotle’s rediscovered works opened new possibil-
ities to deal with these problems. The Scholastics accepted Aristotle’s doctrine of matter
and form and his teleological view of nature. Yet they disagreed on, for example, the uni-
versality of matter. Thomas held that angels are immaterial forms; Franciscan theologians
held that all created beings are material. Another point of dispute was whether there is
only one form or whether there are several forms in each creature. In Chapter 13 Edith
Sylla shows how such problems were in fact closely related to problems in the philosophy
of mathematics.
At the same time other interesting developments occurred. In Babylonian astrology ce-
lestial phenomena were considered to be signs; the future could to a certain extent be read
from the sky. The idea that the heavenly bodies could exert their inﬂuence by means of
rays of light or heat occurs in the work of Robert Grosseteste (ca. 1168–1253), chancellor
of the then newly founded Oxford University, after he had developed his light metaphysics
(second decade of the thirteenth century).16 This metaphysics is linked with his interest in
optics. In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries there was a great interest in optics among
thinkers inﬂuenced by St. Augustine and Neo-Platonist thought. After all, in that tradition
the light metaphor played an important role, for example in the idea of the illumination of
the human intellect by divine truth. Alhazen’s optics and Greek works on optics became
available and exercised a powerful inﬂuence on the development of the theory. Although
these works were probably not yet available to him, Grosseteste was one of the ﬁrst to take
up the study of optics. He argued that light was not only responsible for the dimensions of
an object in space, but also the ﬁrst principle of motion and efﬁcient causation. Light was
the ﬁrst “corporeal form” of all material things. God had created light on the ﬁrst day of
the creation as the essential medium through which to bestow His divine grace. Crombie
summarized Grosseteste’s ideas as follows:
Light emanated from a luminous body as a ‘species’ (the Latin word for ‘likeness’) which mul-
tiplied itself from point to point through the medium in a movement that went in straight lines.
All forms of efﬁcient causality, as for instance, heat, astrological inﬂuence and mechanical action,
Grosseteste held to be due to this propagation of species, though the most convenient form in
which to study it was through visible light [11, Vol. I, p. 112].
Although in retrospect astronomy and astrology can be distinguished clearly—there are the
astronomical facts, observations and the mathematical theory to explain them, versus their
supposed inﬂuence on the sublunar world, and criticism of different sorts of astrologers is
actually at least as old as Antiquity—they were often studied and used concurrently until
the seventeenth century. In the case of Grosseteste his belief in astrology was part of a
serious intellectual enterprise.
16According to Shumaker Renaissance defenders of astrology very much emphasized the power of “rays” to
exert inﬂuence by means of light or heat [33, p. 7].

Introduction
21
Today one will not easily associate astrology, light, the theory of perspective and the
defence of the Christian faith with each other. However, in the view of Samuel Edgerton
Jr., the ideas of the Franciscan Roger Bacon, Grosseteste’s pupil, represent a theoretical
link between Grosseteste’s metaphysics of light and the Renaissance of science and art
after the fourteenth century. In his Opus majus, which Bacon sent to Pope Clement IV in
1267, he argued that in order to convince the Saracens, visual communication should be
used:
Oh, how the ineffable beauty of the divine wisdom would shine and inﬁnite beneﬁt would over-
ﬂow, if these matters relating to geometry, which are contained in Scripture, should be placed
before our eyes in corporeal ﬁgurations! For thus the evil of the world would be destroyed by a
deluge of grace ... And with Ezekiel in the spirit of exultation we should sensibly behold what he
perceived only spiritually, so that at length after the restoration of the New Jerusalem we should
enter a larger house decorated with a fuller glory ... most beautiful since aroused by the visible
instruments we should rejoice in contemplating the spiritual and literal meaning of Scripture be-
cause of our knowledge that all things are now complete in the church of God, which the bodies
themselves sensible to our eyes would exhibit ... because to us nothing is fully intelligible unless it
is presented before our eyes in ﬁgures, and therefore in the Scripture of God the whole knowledge
of things to be made certain by geometric ﬁguring is contained and far better than mere philosophy
could express it [15, p. 45].
In the medieval West geometrical optics was called perspectiva (from the Latin ‘per-
spicere’ = looking through). Edgerton argues that Grosseteste’s view that it is through
perspectiva that God’s grace spreads to the world, inspired Bacon and through Bacon oth-
ers, and led to the idea that a geometrical theory of painting should be developed such that
God’s word could be spread more convincingly.
The Hebrew word ‘kabbalah’ means ‘received tradition’ and until the thirteenth century
it covered the whole Jewish religious tradition. The thirteenth century is also the period
when the mystical current that is now called ‘Kabballah’, gained momentum. One of the
earliest representatives was Nahmanides. Nahmanides objected to Maimonides, who, in his
Commentary on the Scriptures, had explained the biblical prophetic visions as a mere prod-
uct of the prophets’ imagination. Although inﬂuenced by it, the Kabbalists distanced them-
selves from Neo-Platonism and in the thirteenth century developed a seﬁrothic conception
of the divine world. The seﬁroth are the divine attributes or emanations, corresponding to
the numbers one through ten. The seﬁroth are “linked to the Unknowable, the En-Sof (In-
ﬁnite), as the ﬂame is joined to the coal; the En-Sof could exist without the ﬂame, but it is
the ﬂame that manifests the Unknowable” [35, p. 248]. The names of the seﬁroth, given by
God himself, are: 1. Kether Elyon (the ‘supreme crown’ of God), 2. Hokhmah (the ‘wis-
dom’ of God), 3. Binah (the ‘intelligence’ of God), 4. Hesed (the ‘love’ or mercy of God),
5. Gevurah or Din (the ‘power’ of God), 6. Rahamim (the ‘compassion’ of God), 7. Netsah
(the ‘lasting endurance’ of God), 8. Hod (the ‘majesty’ of God), 9. Yesod (the ‘basis’ or
‘foundation’ of all active forces in God), 10. Malkhuth (the ‘kingdom’ of God) [35, p. 248].
The seﬁroth are the expression of God. There are important differences between philoso-
phy and Kabbalah. For the medieval philosopher human actions like prayer only concern
the destiny of the individual, because the individual intellects emanate from God, but are
not part of it. For the Kabbalists the seﬁroth are an expansion of God’s manifestation. The
Kabbalists are often experts in Jewish law as well, because they view human action as
essential in the unfolding of the divine drama. Moreover, for the philosopher evil is the

22
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
Fig. 8. The fourth ﬁgure of the Lullian Ars Brevis. Source: Opera, Strasburg, 1617.
absence of good, while for the Kabbalists evil is a positive force. In the Zohar (Book of
Splendour) from the thirteenth century and the generally accepted central Kabbalistic text,
it is indicated that evil can be associated with the seﬁroth. Evil is said to have developed
out of the separation of seﬁrah 4, Hesed, the love of God, from seﬁrah 5, Din, the power
of God. The study of biblical and traditional texts was at the centre of the Kabbalah. Their
content is seen as a key to the dynamics of the universe and indeed of God himself. In
Chapter 10 Maurice-Ruben Hayoun discusses the seﬁroth as they are treated in the Zohar.
Frances Yates has suggested that the ideas of the Spanish philosopher and mystic Ramon
Lull (1232–ca. 1316) are best understood as a medieval form of Christian Kabbalah [46,
p. 6]. When Lull was thirty years old he repeatedly had one and the same vision of Christ
on the cross. The expression of great agony and sorrow had a tremendous effect upon Lull,
who had until then lived a worldly life. From then on he devoted his life to Christ. Lull
is the author of a vast number of works in Arabic, Latin, Catalan, French, Provençal and
Italian. In everything that he wrote, his goal was to save souls, to convince others of the
truth of the Christian faith. Lull had a system which he believed had been divinely revealed
to him, commonly called the ‘Lullian Art’.
One aspect of the Lullian Art is that letters are used in combination with geometrical ﬁg-
ures. The letter A represents a trinity: Essentia, Unitas and Perfectio. Then there are the at-
tributes of God, the ‘dignities’ of the Art, represented by the letters B through K. In the Ars
Brevis we ﬁnd the following list: B = Bonitas (Goodness), C = Magnitudo (Magnitude),
D = Eternitas (Eternity), E = Potestas (Power), F = Sapientia (Wisdom), G = Voluntas
(Will), H = Virtus (Strength), I = Veritas (Truth), K = Gloria (Glory). Thorndike consid-
ered the Art of Lull as a logical machine [39, p. 865]. And indeed, in the Fourth Figure of
the Art in the Ars Brevis (Figure 8) the two inner circles revolve, which makes possible an
investigation of some sort of combinations of the dignities. Yet, although the combinatorial
character of the Art is clear, the combinatorics are not simple. For example, although in
Lull’s system the four elements, earth, water, air and ﬁre, are a manifestation of the dig-
nities, they are not represented in any simple sense as mathematical combinations of the
dignities.
Another aspect of Lull’s Art is the symbolism of the tree. In Chapter 11 Charles Lohr de-
scribes Lull’s remarkable conception of nature. With the Kabbalists Lull shared a dynamic
understanding of reality. Science was for Lull not the Scholastic ordering of pre-existing

Introduction
23
truths. Instead, in accordance with his view that God’s activity of creation continues in the
sense that everything in reality tends to its own perfection, he viewed science, including
mathematics, as a productive art. Lull was very inﬂuential although his name was misused
as well. Alchemical and kabbalistic works written by others have been associated with his
name. Lullism proper inﬂuenced amongst others Nicholas of Cusa (Chapter 14), Giordano
Bruno, Athanasius Kircher (Chapter 17) and Leibniz (Chapter 25). Although the combi-
natorics in the Lullian Art are not its essence, but merely a means of expression, Lull’s
combinatorial ideas exerted considerable inﬂuence as well. In Gulliver’s Travels Swift de-
scribes a machine for rotating hundreds of cubes with words written on them. The machine
is used by learned men on the island of Laputa to answer questions. Swift ridiculed the
Lullian Art. On the other hand Leibniz’s Lullian ideal of a characteristica universalis—
a universal sign language in which all well deﬁned problems could be solved through
calculation—stimulated him to invent the calculus.
The term ‘gnosticism’ refers to a great diversity of sects that ﬂourished at the beginning
of the Christian era. The different sects have one element in common: they all assume that
the human soul is a divine spark imprisoned inside the body as a result of an error; evil is
due to the severance from the Godhead and the ultimate goal is salvation, i.e. the overcom-
ing of the grossness of matter and the return of the soul to its divine origin. Gnosticism
existed in Christian and non-Christian forms. Plotinus rejected gnosticism, but at the same
time he was inﬂuenced by it. The Hermetic tradition is a non-Christian form of Hellenistic
gnosticism. In Christian gnosticism, Christ is seen as the primary revealer, but the neces-
sity of atonement is denied. Within the Christian tradition a wide range of apocryphal texts
have survived outside of the New Testament canon. Some of them show clear gnostic in-
ﬂuence. In Chapter 12 Hugue Garcia gives a gnostic interpretation of the twelfth century
painting on the ceiling of the church Saint Martin de Zillis, in Zillis, Switzerland.
4.5. The Renaissance
The Renaissance introduced radical changes in all aspects of learning and culture in Europe
in the 15th and 16th centuries, which constituted a break with the Middle Ages. In retro-
spect it is clear that the Renaissance prepared the way for the Scientiﬁc Revolution. In the
later Middle Ages Platonism had lost popularity, but there was a revival of Neo-Platonism
during the Renaissance. Possibly the ﬁrst and no doubt the greatest Neo-Platonic philoso-
pher of the early Renaissance was Nicholas of Cusa (Cusanus) (1401–1464).He developed
a highly original view of how mathematics can deepen man’s insight into his relationship
with the divine. It is in the area of mathematics that man is able to come closest to an
understanding of God’s creative activity. Since the mathematician himself creates the ob-
jects which are considered and manipulated in this particular realm of thought, he becomes
himself like a second creator, capable of reﬂecting on his creations as well as on the act of
creating.
The two key concepts of Cusanus’ philosophy, docta ignorantia (learned ignorance) and
coincidentia oppositorum (coincidence of opposites) also have a strong bearing on math-
ematics. It is often by means of geometrical examples that Cusanus chooses to illustrate
them. Considering a circle which he allows to grow indeﬁnitely against a tangent, Cusanus

24
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
Fig. 9. Cusanus’ coincidentia oppositorum. Drawing from the manuscript of De docta ignorantia in the Cu-
sanus-Library, Kues, Germany.
demonstrates the limitations of rational thought, which fundamentally depends on distinc-
tions, i.e. opposita, such as straight line vs. curved line (the tangent and the growing circle,
respectively), and which, because of this dependence, fails to conceive of their ultimate
fusion.
At the same time, Cusanus stresses the effect of contemplating such ﬁgures in motion,
which is the intimation of something transcending rational understanding, the emergence
of an inkling of what a mind superior to ours might see happening as the movement’s
ultimate stage, viz. the actual merging of the opposites. Signiﬁcantly Cusanus makes his
geometrical ﬁgures vanish. They can therefore be seen as special cases of what in the
Netherlandic and German mystical traditions (Ruysbroeck, Meister Eckhart, Suso) was
termed ontbeelding/Entbildung, i.e. the doing away with images, a necessary prerequisite
to spiritual growth.17
The movement of the mind which allows one to recognize and hence go beyond the limi-
tations of rational thought, thereby transforming relative ignorance into learned ignorance,
is called transsumptio by Cusanus. This capacity, which one has to discover in oneself,
is the same that allows one to see beyond the limitations of the Aristotelian principles
of logic, in particular the principle of contradiction, which so strictly applies in rational
thought and its most cherished domain, mathematics.
In Chapter 14, Jean-Michel Counet discusses the different ways in which Cusanus uses
mathematics to approach the divine. Counet stresses that, according to Cusanus, any ac-
quisition of human knowledge can be described as a form of measuring. The aim of all
this measuring is to become aware of the limits of knowledge and, through this repeated
experience of not-reaching, to attain the wisdom of unknowing.
The most important Neo-Platonist philosopher of the Italian Renaissance was Marcilio
Ficino (1433–1499). Ficino adopted Plotinus’ tripartite scheme of being: the One, the In-
tellect and the Soul. The Intellect contains the Platonic Ideas, the Soul contains the so-
called seminal reasons that constitute the productive power of the soul. Ficino was a Neo-
Platonic philosopher who combined a Platonic view of the universe with astrology and
17Cf. L. Bergmans “Nicholas of Cusa’s vanishing geometrical ﬁgures and the mystical tradition of Entbildung”
in the proceedings of the international conference “Nikolaus von Kues und die Mathematik”, Irsee, 2003 (forth-
coming).

Introduction
25
Fig. 10. The destiny of measuring human knowledge is to become aware of its limitations and to realise that the
inﬁnite remains unknown.

26
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
natural magic. In his explanation of magic, the concept of sympathy or correspondence
played an important role. Not only natural substances like precious stones or herbs have
such occult qualities, but also numbers and ﬁgures.
Ficino’s views exerted considerable inﬂuence on Cornelius Agrippa (1486–1535).
Agrippa was the author of a remarkable book: De occulta philosophia libri tres (ﬁrst
printed edition 1531). It is a complete compendium of the magic that steers clear of bad
demons or evil, so-called white magic. In particular, considerable attention is paid to magic
by means of numbers. Chapter I of the ﬁrst book begins as follows:
Seeing there is a Three-fold World—Elementary, Celestial and Intellectual—and every inferior is
governed by its superior, and receive the inﬂuence of the virtues thereof, so that the very Original
and Chief Worker of All doth by angels, the heavens, stars, elements, animals, plants, metals and
stones convey from Himself the virtues of His Omnipotency upon us, for whose service He made
and created all these things: Wise men conceive it no way irrational that it should be possible for
us to ascend by the same degrees through each world, to the same very original World itself, the
Maker of all things and First Cause, from whence all things are and proceed; and also to enjoy not
only these virtues, which are already in the more excellent kinds of things, but also besides these,
to draw new virtues from above. Hence it is that they seek after the virtues of the elementary World,
through the help of physic, and natural philosophy in the various mixtions of natural things; thence
of the Celestial World in the rays, and inﬂuences thereof, according to the rules of Astrologers, and
the doctrines of mathematicians, joining the Celestial virtues to the former: Moreover, they ratify
and conﬁrm all these with the powers of the divers Intelligences, through the sacred ceremonies of
religions.18
In accordance with this threefold division of the world, Agrippa distinguishes natural, ce-
lestial and ceremonial magic. In natural magic the magician tries to use the occult proper-
ties of things on earth. In celestial magic the goal is to inﬂuence the effects that the heav-
enly bodies have on events on earth. In ceremonial magic, ﬁnally, the magician attempts
to inﬂuence the many spiritual powers that populate the universe. Book I is devoted to nat-
ural magic. Agrippa explains the distinction between the natural and the occult virtues of
things. Natural virtues depend on the four elements: Fire, Water, Earth and Air. The occult
virtues are “a sequel of the species and form of this or that thing”. Their causes are hidden
and not accessible to man’s intellect. Herbs, stones, metals etc. have both elemental and
occult properties. The occult properties do not derive from the nature of the elements, but
are conveyed into them from above by the Spirit of the World. At the end of the ﬁrst book
Agrippa deals with the alphabet. In his view of the world, the order, the number and the
shapes of letters are not accidental. They are not based on a convention that could easily
have been different. Instead, the alphabet is related to the actual structure of the universe.
This is in particular true of the Hebrew letters, which are the most sacred. The Hebrew
alphabet consists of three parts: twelve letters are simple, seven letters are double and three
letters are the ‘mothers’. The simple letters correspond to the zodiacal signs, the double
letters to the seven planets and the mothers to the three elements, earth, ﬁre and water. The
fourth element, the air, has a special position; it is the glue and spirit of the elements. In
this way the Hebrew alphabet covers the entire universe and all kinds of relations between
words and the world can be constructed. Wonderful mysteries concerning the past and the
future can thus be drawn forth from the words that people use. Book II is interesting from
a mathematical point of view. There are chapters on the numbers 1 through 10, a chapter
18Translation by Whitehead [44].

Introduction
27
Fig. 11. The ladder of One in Agrippa’s De occulta philosophia. Courtesy of the Akademische Druck- und
Verlagsanstalt, Graz (cf. [1]).
on the numbers 11 and 12 and a chapter on numbers greater than 12. For Agrippa to each
number there corresponds a ladder consisting of six levels ascending from the underworld,
via the minor world (the human body), the elemental world, the heavenly world and the
spiritual world to the world of ideas (see Figure 11 for the ladder of One). Numbers have
powers and in order to be able to use these powers it is useful to know the ladders of the
numbers. In Chapter 15 of Book II Agrippa explains that the power of large numbers is
determined by the power of their divisors.
Some of the calculations relate individuals via their names to celestial bodies. Agrippa
assigns the values 1 through 9 to the letters A through I of the Roman alphabet, to the
letters K through S the values 10 through 90 and to the letters T, V (for U), X, Y, Z, J, V, HI
(for JE, as in Hieronimus) and HU (for W as in Huilhelmus) the values 100 through 900.
An example of a calculation would be the following. Let us consider someone whose name
is Bogdan and whose parents are called Teunis and Mirjana. When we add the values of the
letters in these names we get, respectively, 104, 444 and 170. We add these three numbers
and get 1309. This total is divided by 9. In this case the remainder is 7. This means that the
heavenly body under whose inﬂuence Bogdan functions is the Moon.19 What implications
does this have? Agrippa is not entirely clear about this. It may be that Bogdan would be
well advised to have a silver amulet made for him with the Moon’s magic square (see
Figure 12) on it in order to apply the occult powers of the Moon to his advantage. It is very
important that the amulet be made when the Moon is in a favorable position. Otherwise
the charm can do harm (Book II, Chapter 23). The positive inﬂuence of the Moon will turn
someone into a pleasant, respected person and it will provide protection during journeys.
19If the remainder is 1 or 4 the sun is involved. If it is 2 or 7 the moon is involved. If it is 3, the star is Jupiter. If
it is 5, the star is Mercurius. If it is 6, Venus is involved. If it is 8, it is Saturnus. If it is 0, it is Mars.

28
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
Fig. 12. Magic square corresponding to the Moon in Agrippa’s De occulta philosophia. Courtesy of the
Akademische Druck- und Verlagsanstalt, Graz (cf. [1]).
If the square is etched on an amulet of lead while the Moon is in an unfavourable position,
it will bring evil to the inhabitants of the area where it is buried.
In Chapter 15 Teun Koetsier and Karin Reich describe the numerology of Michael Stifel
(1487–1567). Although Stifel’s numerology is embedded in his Lutheran faith, and his in-
terests merely concern the interpretation of the Bible and God’s plans with the world, Stifel
and Agrippa are kindred spirits. After Stifel the interest in numerology in Germany did not
disappear. In Chapter 16 Ivo Schneider discusses the numerological theories of Johannes
Faulhaber (1580–1635). Schneider also discusses the ‘brotherhood’ of Rosecrucians.
5. The Scientiﬁc Revolution and its aftermath
5.1. The Scientiﬁc Revolution
The Renaissance culminated in what is commonly called the Scientiﬁc Revolution. The
new science that developed in the seventeenth century differed in several important re-
spects from Greek and medieval science. A novel and very important characteristic is the
great emphasis placed on observation and experiment. A second, no less important char-
acteristic is the conviction that the structure of the material world is mathematical. This
implied that the laws of nature had to be formulated in mathematical terms. The result was

Introduction
29
that mathematics invaded natural philosophy in an unprecedented way. In the Middle Ages
philosophers and theologians had been the specialists on nature. The Scientiﬁc Revolution
led in the course of time to the demise of their authority. In this process Galileo Galilei
(1564–1642) played a pivotal role. In order to be taken seriously Galilei needed a meta-
physical legitimation for his mathematical science. In Chapter 18 Volker Remmert shows
how Galilei constructed this new legitimation. Galilei did not describe nature; he needed
and wanted to read it. He presented mathematics as the only way to decode and under-
stand the book of nature, a book written by God in the language of mathematics. Nature
in this context included both terrestrial and celestial phenomena. The idea that the laws
of nature are universal without a special status for the heavens, is a third characteristic
of the Scientiﬁc Revolution. A fourth characteristic is a novel, very inﬂuential, mecha-
nistic account of the material world. The result of this mechanistic view of nature was
that in the seventeenth century all natural phenomena were explained in terms of moving
particles. This led to mechanistic, non-theological accounts of the world and man. In this
respect the French philosopher and mathematician René Descartes (1596–1650) played a
crucial role. Descartes’ fascination with mathematics is an essential clue to understanding
his philosophical ideas. In the world view of Descartes and his followers, reason is given
an absolute authority. His critics saw this as a threat to theology, and indeed, the Carte-
sians not only revolutionized science but Bible criticism as well. In Chapter 20 Jean-Marie
Nicolle analyses the way in which mathematics functioned for Descartes as a model for his
metaphysics.
Two of the greatest minds that brought about the Scientiﬁc Revolution were Johannes
Kepler (1571–1630) and Isaac Newton (1642–1727). It is remarkable that both were very
religious men for whom their scientiﬁc activities clearly had a religious dimension. Kepler
was very much inﬂuenced by Neo-Platonism. Mysticism, mathematics and astronomy are
all aspects of his work. In Kepler’s view, God created the universe on the basis of mathe-
matical principles. In the end Kepler’s metaphysical speculations led to his three wonder-
fully simple and accurate laws for the motion of the planets around the sun. In Chapter 19
André Charrak discusses Kepler’s views on how God had created the universe on the ba-
sis of mathematical principles. In Chapter 35, in which Albert van der Schoot traces the
history of the divine proportion, he pays considerable attention to Kepler’s views. Kepler’s
laws and the work of others—in particular that of Galileo Galilei (1564–1642),who derived
the parabolic trajectory of a bullet—were the starting-point for Isaac Newton (1642–1727),
who devised the theory that would be the core of mechanics and astronomy until the begin-
ning of the twentieth century. Newton’s work completed the transition from Renaissance
science to modern science.
Until the 1650s the Copernican thesis that the earth moves around the sun had not really
drawn much attention, in spite of Galilei’s defence of it. In the middle of the seventeenth
century it became a central element in the new mechanistic philosophy and after New-
ton’s Principia, the universe was no longer seen as spherical but as an unbounded, inﬁnite
Euclidean space. Moreover, the motions of bodies relative to each other were in principle
completely understood. The theory that Newton developed in his Philosophiae naturalis
principia mathematica (1687) contained a uniﬁed axiomatic mathematical theory that im-
plied both the parabolic trajectories that Galilei had derived and the elliptic planetary orbits
that Kepler had discovered. Like Kepler, Newton was a religious man. His entire life can be

30
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
said to have been devoted to a search for the truth concerning man, God and the universe.
In Chapter 24 Kees de Pater discusses Newton’s scientiﬁc work and the divine. A recent
biography of Newton is entitled Isaac Newton, the last sorcerer [43]. And indeed, he stud-
ied theology, mathematics, alchemy, numerology and other subjects as part of an attempt
to obtain answers to the ultimate questions. Maynard Keynes called him one of the last
great Renaissance magi. As was the case in the pre-Greek period and in the Pythagorean–
Platonic period, during the Scientiﬁc Revolution the human preoccupation with the divine
had a considerable inﬂuence on the development of science and mathematics.20
5.2. Secularization and the divine
During the Renaissance there was still in Western civilization a shared core of faith. The
Scientiﬁc Revolution sowed the seeds of secularization. Conﬂicts between believers were
replaced by debates between believers and non-believers. The different views on mathe-
matics and the divine that were expressed in this period reﬂect this radical development.
In Chapter 21, Donald Adamson discusses the ideas of Blaise Pascal. To many the new
mechanistic philosophy represented a threat to religion. Pascal tried to safeguard religion
by strictly separating the scientiﬁc domain, with its geometric approach from the religious
domain. In Chapter 23 Philip Beeley and Siegmund Probst treat the views of John Wallis
(1616–1703). In the confrontation between theology and science Wallis protected religion
by keeping his work in mathematics apart from his theological work. In this way he could
handle inﬁnity in mathematics in an unconstrained way and at the same time, on a theo-
logical level, attack Hobbes who had claimed that there was no argument to prove that the
world has a beginning.
Descartes had not succeeded in solving the problem of the relation between body and
mind. Baruch Spinoza (1632–1677) put forward a radical solution: mind and body are
two different attributes of one and the same unique substance, God. Moreover, there is
no free will. Spinoza was a determinist; he held that there is a strict parallellism between
body and mind. Extension and thought are just two different ways to experience the same
thing. If the development is completely determined on the level of matter, so it is on the
level of thought. In Chapter 22 Ger Harmsen discusses Spinoza’s views on the relation of
mathematics and the divine and the way they have been interpreted. Spinoza’s main work,
the Ethica, is written ‘more geometrico’, in the manner of geometry. Opinions differ on
whether the geometrical exposition is an essential element of Spinoza’s philosophy. Harm-
sen brieﬂy mentions an idea defended by Von Dunin-Borkowski at the beginning of the
twentieth century.21 Spinoza’s strict parallellism is a solution to the problem of the relation
between body and mind, left unsolved by Descartes. According to Von Dunin-Borkowski,
Spinoza’s solution was inspired by Descartes’ invention of analytic geometry. Analytic
20Of course, Kepler and Newton were no shamans in the strict sense of the word, but, it is tempting to think
that their motives were not unlike the motives of the shamans of the prehistory and the Pythagorean shamans. If
this is the case our account of each of the three periods that we distinguish in the history of the relations between
mathematics and the divine begins with shamans in a star role.
21Stanislaus von Dunin-Borkowski S.J., Der junge De Spinoza, Leben und Werdegang im Lichte der Weltphiloso-
phie, Münster i. W., Aschendorffsche Buchhandlung, 1910.

Introduction
31
geometry is based on the possibility to translate notions from the sphere of extension—
line, point, etc.—into notions from the sphere of algebra, the sphere of manipulating for-
mulae. In analytic geometry there is parallelism between geometry and algebra. Moreover,
in the seventeenth century the manipulation of formulae is not infrequently associated with
thought. It is therefore conceivable that Spinoza was inspired by analytic geometry. Se non
è vero, è molto ben trovato.
Spinoza has been interpreted in different ways. Some have interpreted his pantheism
and his emphasis on the amor dei intellectualis as a form of mysticism. Others view him as
an atheist, because he abolished God as a creator. Jonathan Israel, for example, considers
Spinoza as the crucial representative of what he calls the ‘Radical Enlightenment’. Israel
writes:
Spinoza’s prime contribution to the evolution of early modern Naturalism, fatalism and irreligion,
as Bayle—and many who followed Bayle in this—stressed, was his ability to integrate within a
single coherent or ostensibly coherent system, the chief elements of ancient, modern and oriental
‘atheism’ [22, p. 230].
Yet, if we take Spinoza’s writings literally, pantheist seems a more appropriate term than
atheist. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716) was a philosopher–mathematician who
was a convinced Christian and at the same time had a high esteem for the power of human
reason. In Chapter 25 Herbert Breger develops a coherent view of Leibniz’s philosophical
system, in particular with respect to mathematics and the divine.
Although the view that the world is based upon a divine mathematical concept exerted,
as we have seen, great inﬂuence during the Scientiﬁc Revolution, in the eighteenth cen-
tury a reversal took place. Before and during the Scientiﬁc Revolution nature had to be
rational because God is rational. After the Scientiﬁc Revolution the rationality of nature
became for many authors an observable phenomenon. It is no longer the divine concept
of the world that delights man, but the mathematical laws of nature. In Hume’s Dialogues
Concerning Natural Religion the character Cleanthes compares nature to a machine and
says:
Since therefore the effects resemble each other, we are led to infer [...] that the causes also resem-
ble; and that the Author of Nature is somewhat similar to the mind of man; though possessed of
much larger faculties.22
The reversal is clear: “God must be an engineer, because nature is a machine” [3, p. 56]. If
God is an engineer, He would have been a bad engineer if His involvement were still perma-
nently required. First God became a distant creator, later He became for many superﬂuous
altogether. In Chapter 26 Wolfgang Breidert shows how George Berkeley (1685–1753),
Anglican theologian and Bishop of Clyne, attacked the foundations of the new mathemat-
ical calculus, invented by Newton and Leibniz, in order to defend theology. In Chapter 27,
Rüdiger Thiele describes how the most productive mathematician of the eighteenth cen-
tury, Leonhard Euler (1707–1783) maintained his religious convictions against the trend
towards deism and freethinking.
Although the Scientiﬁc Revolution was in many different ways related to economic and
social developments, it was primarily an affair of people that we would now call philoso-
phers and scientists. Yet, everybody was soon to experience its effects. The Scientiﬁc Rev-
22Quoted in [3, p. 56].

32
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
olution directly led to the Enlightenment and the views of the Enlightenment philosophers
formed the ideology of the French Revolution. The French Revolution took place when
the (First) Industrial Revolution was in full swing. In the course of time, as a result of this
revolution the world changed beyond recognition: steam took over from wind, water and
muscle power. The Industrial Revolution—often taken to have covered the period 1780–
1850—was to be followed by other industrial revolutions and the French Revolution was
followed by other political revolutions. The result of all this was that in many countries
the structure of society changed considerably. In traditional societies family ties and the
church often interfere with economic processes. In modern bourgeois societies, religion
is a private affair and economic activities are almost exclusively led by economic inter-
ests. During the First Industrial Revolution the role of science was still limited, but by the
second half of the 19th century, science had begun to play an important role in industry.
This role has only grown; today science, including mathematics, plays an important role in
many sectors of society.
The problem of evil in the world is a problem no serious Christian philosophy can ignore.
Leibniz had argued that the world as it is, is the best of all possible worlds. In Leibniz’s
view, before He created the world, God had solved a problem of optimization: which of all
logically possible worlds is the best? Leibniz’s view had been ridiculed by Voltaire in his
satirical novel Candide. The deistic Enlightenment philosophers came up with a different
solution. They had a highly optimistic view of the capabilities that man possesses to bring
his own existence and the institutions that he lives by in harmony with the natural order.
Equality, freedom and brotherhood, in combination with the liberating forces of reason
and science, would bring about a better world. Some, Condorcet for example, advocated
the view that the applications of the new differential and integral calculus would not remain
conﬁned to applications in the realm of nature, but would extend to the social sciences and
to politics. Politics would be rationalised by means of the application of mathematics. This
development might be called a secularization of the divine. The religious inclinations of
secular humanism are particularly clear in the case of Auguste Comte (1798–1857), who
dreamt about a positivist religion.
This Enlightenment optimism with its complete rejection of all established religion and
its belief in man’s capabilities to create a better world returned in the nineteenth and twen-
tieth centuries in the workers’ movement. Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels and Vladimir Ilyich
Lenin created Marxism–Leninism, a view of the world that decisively inﬂuenced the course
of history in the twentieth century. In Marxism–Leninism, science and mathematics were
taken very seriously; they were an essential factor in the process that was supposed to bring
about a workers’ paradise on earth (See Figure 13). For most mathematicians and philoso-
phers mathematics lost its connection with the divine. However, in most, the belief in the
certainty of mathematical knowledge remained unshaken.Yet in this respect things were
changing as well. In Chapter 32 François de Gandt discusses the sceptical views of the
young Edmund Husserl (1859–1938) with respect to arithmetic.23
23In the second half of the 20th century Imre Lakatos developed a mitigated sceptical view of mathematics on
the basis of Popper’s philosophy of science. Cf. [24].

Introduction
33
Fig. 13. Stamp of the USSR expressing the importance of mathematics in “living, working, studying in the
communist way”.
5.3. The 19th century. The freedom of mathematical thought. Neo-Thomism
As for mathematics and the divine, the 19th and 20th centuries offer a very complex picture.
The disappearance of a shared core of faith has led to a great plurality of views in Western
culture. The secularisation of the divine represents one line of development. There are,
however, others. In what follows we shall use the development of (pure) mathematics itself
as a guiding principle.
The views of the Enlightenment philosophers remained inﬂuential in the following pe-
riod. Yet, inevitably there had to be a reaction to the Enlightenment philosophers’ overem-
phasis on reason: this was the Romantic movement. The Romantic intellectuals praised
imagination over reason, emotions over logic, and intuition over scientiﬁc rigour. One of
the greatest mathematicians of this period was the French mathematician Augustin-Louis
Cauchy (1789–1857). Cauchy did important work on the application of mathematics in
science, but, in accordance with the Romantic reaction to the ideas of, for example, Con-
dorcet, he totally rejected the idea that mathematics could be applied to matters of the heart.
In the preface of his Cours d’Analyse, published in 1821, he wrote:
Let us cultivate with passion the mathematical sciences, without wanting to extend them beyond
their domain; and let us not imagine that one could attack history with formula’s, or give a foun-
dation to morality by means of theorems from algebra or the integral calculus.24
Cauchy was a passionate royalist, totally opposed to the French Revolution. He was an
orthodox catholic as well.25 Cauchy was a stubborn man and his ultra-conservatism re-
peatedly landed him in difﬁculties. Yet, he is one of the mathematicians who heralded a
new era in mathematics. In the eighteenth century the calculus was vexed by foundational
problems. By a few radical innovations Cauchy put the development of analysis on a new
track and brought about what is sometimes called the ﬁrst revolution of rigour in analysis.
24“Cultivons avec ardeur les sciences mathématiques, sans vouloir les étendre au-delà de leur domaine; et
n’allons pas nous imaginer qu’on puisse attaquer l’histoire avec des formules, ni donner pour sanction à la morale
des theorems de l’algèbre ou de calcul integral”, Cours d’analyse, 1821, Introduction.
25Cf. [4].

34
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
He rejected the ‘generality of algebra’, meaning in particular the, from his point of view,
careless eighteenth-century manipulation of inﬁnite analytical expressions. In this way the
ultra-conservativeCauchy played a crucial and progressive role in the fundamental changes
that mathematics underwent in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Houraya Sinaceur
has attempted to characterize these changes on a fundamental level [34]. One aspect of this
transformation is that mathematicians became aware of their freedom in the creation of
concepts. Great mathematicians like Karl Friedrich Gauss, Richard Dedekind, Georg Can-
tor, David Hilbert, Luitzen Egbertus Johannes Brouwer, and many others have emphasized
the great importance of the freedom of mathematical thought. Galilei, Kepler, Newton, and
others were decoding the book of nature written in the language of mathematics. For them
the object of mathematics was given. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, probably
also under the inﬂuence of Immanuel Kant’s critical philosophy in which mathematics was
described as dealing with the constructive activity of the human mind, mathematics and
science became constructions that are brought about in a process of free creation. There
are different ways in which this freedom can be more precisely deﬁned. A mathematician
who particularly emphasized the freedom of mathematical creation, was Georg Cantor, the
creator of the theory of transﬁnite sets.
Cantor’s discussions with Roman Catholic intellectuals are particularly interesting. On
August 4, 1879 Pope Leo XIII issued the encyclical Aeterni Patris. The result of Aeterni
Patris was that the interest in science among Roman Catholic intellectuals was greatly
stimulated. The goal of the encyclical was a revival and modernization of Christian philos-
ophy along Thomistic lines. According to the neo-Thomists the developments in science
had led to false philosophies: materialism, atheism, liberalism. Leo XIII envisioned a rec-
onciliation of modern science with Christian philosophy. In the encyclical he argued that
modern science could greatly proﬁt from Scholastic philosophy. It was the interest of Ro-
man Catholic intellectuals in Scholastic philosophy and the inﬁnite that brought Cantor
into contact with them. Chapter 28, by Rüdiger Thiele is devoted to Cantor.
Neo-Thomism must have seemed very attractive to thinkers who were searching for the
synthesis and unity offered by an all-encompassing philosophical and theological system.
One of them was Jacques Maritain (1882–1973), who in his Distinguer pour Unir ou Les
Degrés du Savoir (To distinguish in order to unite or the degrees of knowing) of 1946 tried
to give a coherent and balanced survey of the different ways in which knowledge can be
acquired. In doing so, Maritain assigned mathematics and mysticism their due places.
Within his own orthodox Russian tradition, Pavel Florensky related mathematics and the
divine. In Chapter 31, Sergei Demidov and Charles Ford describe his life and views.
5.4. The 20th century. Structuralist mathematics. Gödel. Process theology
The German mathematician David Hilbert (1862–1943) was a key ﬁgure in the develop-
ment towards the ‘structuralist’ view of mathematics that would dominate mathematics
during most of the 20th century. In his Grundlagen der Geometrie (Foundations of Geom-
etry) of 1899 Hilbert applied this approach to geometry. The book contains a rigorous,
strictly axiomatic foundation of Euclidean geometry and the traditional non-Euclidean
geometries. After 1900, when Hilbert gave his famous lecture on important unsolved

Introduction
35
problems in mathematics at the 2nd International Congress of Mathematicians in Paris,
Hilbert’s place of residence in Germany, Göttingen, became the centre of the mathematical
world. Until 1933 Göttingen played a major role in the spread of the structuralist mes-
sage and the application of the axiomatic method in all areas of mathematics and natural
science. The astronomer and theoretical physicist Arthur Eddington, an active Quaker in-
clined to mysticism, was inﬂuenced by this view of mathematics. Physical knowledge is
structural, of the kind investigated in the theory of groups, and the content of this structural
knowledge is mind-stuff, he argued. Chapter 34 is devoted to him.
In structuralist mathematics the choice of a system of axioms is in principle completely
free, the only restriction being that the system must be consistent, that is, it must be impos-
sible to derive a contradiction from the axioms. A totally different philosophy of mathe-
matics was developed by the Dutch mathematician and philosopher L.E.J. Brouwer (1881–
1966). Brouwer completely rejected Hilbert’s formalism and logicism. In Brouwer’s view
of mathematics the role of language and logic is absolutely secondary. Along Kantian lines
Brouwer argued that mathematics consists in mental constructions which are executed on
the basis of a fundamental mathematical intuition and that attempts to ﬁnd a foundation for
mathematics in language or in formal logic are essentially ﬂawed. According to Brouwer
the freedom of the mathematician does not lie in the choice of a system of axioms, but
in the freedom to execute mental constructions. One of the consequences of Brouwer’s
views was a rejection of the principle of excluded third: ‘p or non-p’ is true for all state-
ments p. In intuitionist mathematics a proof is by deﬁnition a mental construction. As a
result a statement of the form ‘p or non-p’ is only considered proven if one can ﬁnd either
a construction corresponding to p, or a construction corresponding to non-p. In the 1920s
Brouwers’ intuitionistic papers began to appear in international journals. As a result the
relationship between Brouwer and Hilbert, which had been cordial, rapidly deteriorated.
Hilbert experienced intuitionism as a serious threat to classical mathematics. Hilbert de-
cided to act and the result was an elaboration of his 1904 ideas on the way in which the
consistency of mathematics could be guaranteed. Frege’s work in logic and Russell and
Whitehead’s Principia Mathematica had suggested that a complete formalisation of math-
ematical theories was possible. The core of Hilbert’s formalist foundational programme
consisted of the following elements: (i) Deﬁne a formal system that captures the theory
of the natural numbers, (ii) Prove that within the formal system no formula that expresses
the inconsistency of the system can be formally derived, (iii) In order to avoid circularity
this meta-mathematical proof of the consistency of Peano arithmetic should, of course, not
implicitly assume this consistency. This is why the proof should only use what Hilbert
called ‘ﬁnitistic’ means. This formalist programme was a brilliant answer to Brouwer’s
intuitionism, because ‘ﬁnitistic means’ essentially meant ‘constructive means’, i.e. means
that should be acceptable to an intuitionist.
It cannot be denied that, compared to Brouwer’s intuitionistic programme, Hilbert’s for-
malist and ﬁnitist foundational programme has been extremely fertile. However, one of the
most spectacular results produced within this programme, viz. Gödel’s incompleteness the-
orem published in 1931, turned out to be a blow to Hilbert’s position. What Gödel showed
is that, if a formal system that contains Peano arithmetic is consistent, a proof of this con-
sistency requires more than the methods of proof that are captured by the system. In a sense
it turned out to be impossible to prove the consistency of Peano arithmetic.

36
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
It is remarkable that both Brouwer and Gödel were inclined towards mysticism.
Brouwer’s mysticism shows the inﬂuence of the Romantic movement (Chapter 30 by Teun
Koetsier) while Gödel’s mysticism is Platonic (Chapter 30, Section 7).
Let us, in this context, brieﬂy turn to process theology. In process theology God has
two natures, He is dipolar. Moreover, He is integrally involved in the cosmic process. God
has a transcendent perfect nature and He has an immanent nature by which He is part of
the process of the world itself. At the origin of this school of thought, which advocates
the view that God himself is in process of development through His intercourse with the
world, lies the work of A.N. Whitehead. Gödel’s incompleteness theorem was as much
a blow to Russell and Whitehead’s Principia Mathematica as it was to Hilbert’s views.
The Principia were based on logicism and Peano arithmetic, and Gödel brought to light
the limitations of both. Process theology as developed by Whitehead and others is there-
fore at least partly to be understood as an attempt at taking into account the new insights
that resulted from Gödel’s 1931 publication. As Granville C. Henry Jr. explains in Logos:
Mathematics and Christian theology, process theology adopted and adopts an Augustinian
point of view. In De libero arbitrio (On free will)26 St. Augustine had established a close
link between mathematics and a type of wisdom that is at the very heart of Christian faith.
According to process theologians, this Augustinian view needed reﬁnement in the light of
the incompleteness theorem, for, as Henry puts it, proving the latter theorem made it clear
that:
There is no set of rules, no matter how large a (ﬁnite) number considered, that are appropriately
formalized and axiomatized, that can give us all of the properties of number. The properties of
arithmetic in their totality somehow transcend any other system. There is an intuitive presentation
of the structures of number that cannot be mechanized by rules [19, p. 101].
In order to overcome the problem of the lack of a single all-encompassing formal system
and to preserve the close relationship of mathematics and Logos (Christ as the Word) as
well as the idea that God establishes and guarantees the unity of Logos, process theologians
look for solutions in terms of plurality and increased potentiality. Radicalizing their views,
Henry concludes
It may be appropriate to understand the realm (however understood) of mathematical relationships,
and hence of potential relationships, as evolving—a rather radical departure from modal Western
philosophy or at least from its Christian adaptation [19, p. 112].
5.5. Figurative mathematics
Cusanus tried to understand the relation of the ﬁniteness of human knowledge with the
inﬁnity of God by means of a sequence of circles converging towards a straight line. René
Guénon’s symbolism of the cross represents a similar form of relating mathematics and the
divine. In Chapter 33 Bruno Pinchard discusses the ideas of this esoteric geometrician, who
26“Though we are unable to see clearly whether number is contained in wisdom, or derived from it or whether
wisdom itself derives from number, and is contained in it, or whether it can be shown that both are names of
the same thing, this much at least is clear, that both are true and are unchangeably true”. De libero arbitrio,
Chapter 11, 32, p. 142 quoted in [19, p. 95].

Introduction
37
Fig. 14. Figurative mathematics (ca. 1916). Acquarel by Karel Schmidt. Courtesy of Karel Schmidt Jr.
did not adhere to his own tradition and displayed a remarkable openness towards other cul-
tures in his Symbolisme de la croix (Symbolism of the cross). In this book Guénon presents
space as the set of all possibilities characteristic of a particular being or of universal being.
As Pinchard remarks, Guénon found the appropriate inspiration in the Eastern traditions
of Taoism, Vedanta and Souﬁsm, which view the centre of the universe as universal Poten-
tiality rather than as the God of monotheism.
Cusanus and Guénon use mathematical examples as symbols to explain or illustrate non-
mathematical divine truths. Another philosopher who used mathematical symbolism in this
way was the Dutchman Mathieu H.J. Schoenmaekers (1875–1944). Schoenmaekers was a
catholic priest, who left the church in 1903 because he had come to experience it as an op-
pressive institution that left no space for an authentic experience of faith. Schoenmaekers
wrote several books in which he attempted to explain the mystery of the relation between
the One and the Many, or between the Absolute and the Relative by means of mathematical
metaphors. He called this use of mathematics positive mysticism or ﬁgurative mathematics
(beeldende wiskunde). He used ellipses, sets of concentric circles and other mathematical
ﬁgures to understand metaphysical truths.27 It is remarkable that Schoenmaekers exerted
considerable inﬂuence on a number of Dutch symbolist painters. One of them was Piet
27There is only one book on Schoenmaekers: [23].

38
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
Mondriaan. In a series of articles in the magazine De Stijl in 1919 Mondriaan used Schoen-
maeker’s terminology to explain that what he aimed at in his paintings was an expression
of the universal harmony of the existing relations in nature. According to Mondriaan this
harmony must be seen, it cannot be understood rationally. Carel Blotkamp and Mieke Ri-
jnders describe Mondriaan as a representative of a romantic, mystical view of nature.28 In
Figure 14 we have reproduced a work by Karel Schmidt (1880–1920), another painter who
was inﬂuenced by Schoenmaekers.
5.6. The turn to the transcendental subject
Gödel’s incompleteness theorem represented another step in the turn to the transcenden-
tal subject characteristic of 19th and 20th century mathematics, represented among other
things by the growing awareness of mathematicians of their freedom in the creation of con-
cepts that we emphasized in Section 5.3 of this introduction. Gödel showed that whenever
the human mind is capable of formulating some of its mathematical intuitions, this imme-
diately yields new intuitive knowledge, for example intuitive knowledge of the consistency
of the developed formalism. The mathematician’s capacity for intuitive comprehension of
truth therefore appears to extend beyond any formalistic reduction [13, p. 61, Footnote 4].
The mathematician seems indeed to have inexhaustible potential for departing from a given
formalism and widening its scope. The technical results of Gödel’s theorem shook the
world of mathematics. The philosophical implications made their impact as well. How-
ever, the idea of a sovereign Subject forever beyond or ahead of formalization, which the
incompleteness theorem naturally brings to the fore, was part of an existing undercurrent of
thought that went back at least to the time of Kant. Kant is sometimes said to have brought
about a Copernican revolution in philosophy. His ideas had far-reaching consequences in
other ﬁelds of learning and scientiﬁc practice. The radical turn toward the knowing subject
that Kant undertook, marked the beginning of a period in which man became the focus of
attention in ﬁelds where his presence had not been felt before. Eddington’s striking im-
age of man studying the tracks of a being unknown to him, and then realizing that he was
actually studying his own, fully applies here (cf. Chapter 34 by Teun Koetsier).
The plan to make this book was born from the editors’ shared interest in aspects of the
history of Dutch culture, particularly the history of the Dutch signiﬁc movement.29 The
term signiﬁcs was coined at the end of the 19th century by Victoria Lady Welby (1837–
1912), lady in waiting to Queen Victoria. She felt that a clariﬁcation of words and concepts
would improve human communication and understanding. She expected that signiﬁc in-
vestigations would contribute to ending the mistrust and misunderstanding between social
groups. Her ideas were taken seriously and she discussed them with Charles S. Peirce,
Bertrand Russell, Bergson, Carnap, Lalande and others. Although the movement has sunk
into oblivion it represented for some time an interesting pendant to the Unity of Science
movement. In The Netherlands Lady Welby had considerable inﬂuence through the psy-
chiatrist, poet and social reformer Frederik van Eeden (1860–1932). Van Eeden founded
28Cf. [7, p. 89].
29For the signiﬁc movement see [18].

Introduction
39
the Signiﬁc Circle (Signiﬁsche Kring) of which the Dutch mathematicians L.E.J. Brouwer
and Gerrit Mannoury were prominent members. In the works of the Dutch signiﬁcians the
turn towards the subject that we mentioned above is clearly present. Van Eeden wrote Het
Lied van Schijn en Wezen (The song of appearance and essence), in which a host of original
metaphors describe the workings of the Self. The turn towards the subject is also apparent
in the search for the volitional element underlying every communicative act (cf. Chapter 29
on Gerrit Mannoury by Luc Bergmans). It was a dominant theme of signiﬁc literature that
the most abstract and formalized expressions of the human mind, when studied properly,
appear to be rooted in the deepest expressions of the will, in other words that no formalism
stands on its own, but that it presupposes a past and continued research. It is by uncovering
the volitional aspects of counting and measuring that Gerrit Mannoury linked mathemat-
ics and what he termed “mysticism”, viz. every striving for the ultimate that manifests
itself in individual and in shared convictions, be they of an explicitly religious nature or
not. L.E.J. Brouwer, who, just like Mannoury, was both a signiﬁcian and a mathematician,
grounded his intuitionism on fundamental reﬂections regarding the will. Brouwer’s preoc-
cupation with the volitional has to be interpreted within its historical context. Above all,
a comparison with the philosophy of Schopenhauer, author of the The world as will and
representation suggests itself (cf. Chapter 30 by Teun Koetsier).30
5.7. A modern creation myth?
Traditional creation myths tell us about the beginning of the world and the origin of man
as they are understood within a particular culture. A group of modern scientists, astro-
physicists, geologists, chemists, biologists, paleontologists, historians, etc., faced with the
question of how we, in our culture, think about the origin of the world and of ourselves,
might give the following answer:
Thirteen billion (13 000 000 000) years ago there was nothing. There wasn’t even emptiness. Time
did not exist. Nor did Space. In this Nothing, there occurred an explosion, and within a split
second, something did exist [...] For a trillionth of a second it expanded faster than the speed of
light, growing from the size of an atom to the size of a galaxy. Then the rate of expansion slowed
[...] After about one billion years, huge clouds of hydrogen and helium began to gather and then
collapse in on themselves under the pressure of gravity. As the centre of these clouds heated up,
atoms fused together violently like vast hydrogen bombs, and the ﬁrst stars lit up. Hundreds of
30It is important to realize that neither signiﬁcs nor intuitionism can be reduced to psychological theory, even if
the formulations used may have been affected by fashionable psychological vocabulary. It would be most inter-
esting to compare Brouwer’s views regarding the transcendental ego with those expressed by the later Husserl,
who rejected psychologism in mathematics. In Chapter 32 a crucial phase in the development of Husserl is de-
scribed by François de Gandt. He explains Husserl’s turning away from a sceptical attitude, and heading towards
the recognition of a transcendental ego, which could account for the objectivity of mathematics as well as for
its being created. In Brouwer’s writings the notion of transcendental ego is endowed with religious overtones
reminiscent of eastern traditions referring to the Self, which is freely acting and beyond representation. The
second-generation signiﬁcian, Johan J. de Iongh, also held the relationship with the Subject to be an essential
feature of mathematical truth. Some of his formulations suggest that for him the (obviously subject-related) pla-
tonic and Augustinian longing for truth was the very foundation of (mathematical) truth. In the paragraph on
intuitionism of Luc Bergmans’ chapter 29 on the signiﬁcians, it is shown how Brouwer’s treatment of inﬁnity can
be related to the notions of longing or searching for truth as opposed to possessing truth.

40
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
billions of stars appeared, gathered in the huge communities we call “galaxies” [...] Our own sun
was formed about four and half billion years ago [...] The planets of our solar system, were formed
at the same time as the Sun, from the debris left over from the Sun’s creation [9, pp. 165–166].
On the early Earth chemical reactions produced simple forms of life. Some of them
developed the capability to extract energy from sunlight and eventually an interconnected
web of Life was formed on Earth. From about 600 million years ago, there began to appear
multicellular organisms. A mere 250 000 years ago, man appeared. The number of humans
grew as they learnt how to live in more and more diverse environments, ﬁrst in Africa, then
in Eurasia, Australia, the Americas and ﬁnally on the islands of the Paciﬁc. Agriculture
was invented.
As populations grew, the number and size of villages grew until there appeared the ﬁrst large cities,
from about 5000 years ago. These large, dense settlements required new and complex forms of reg-
ulation to prevent disputes and coordinate the activities of many people living at close quarters.
In this way there appeared the ﬁrst states, groups of powerful individuals capable of regulating
the activities of the community as a whole [...] About 500 years ago, for the ﬁrst time, these
changes brought human communities in all parts of the world into contact with each other. For
many communities this coming together was disastrous; it brought conquest, disease and exploita-
tion, sometimes of the most brutal kind. But this merging of regional communities also helped
trigger new technological breakthroughs that could now be shared throughout the world. In the
last two centuries, new technologies, beginning with the harnessing of steam power, have given
human societies access to the vast sources of energy locked up in fossil fuels such as coal and oil
[9, pp. 165–166].
This modern creation story contains, with the exception of a few numbers, no mathe-
matics. However, this is because it is a popular version of the full story. The complete story
cannot be told without the formal language of mathematics. This is particularly clear, for
example, in the case of the theory of the ‘Big Bang’, but in the other sciences involved the
role of mathematics and computer simulations is ever growing. The modern creation story
is to a considerable extent a mathematical story.
In modern Western culture science and religion have become separated. Religion has
very much become a private affair. And indeed, one could argue that this modern creation
story has got nothing to do with the divine and that it is essentially different from the
traditional creation myths in the sense that it is merely a description, and not a normative
text that helps us to make sense of our own existence. Such an argument is correct from
a modern scientiﬁc point of view. God is no longer present in modern scientiﬁc theories.
Yet the modern creation story can be interpreted in a religious way and, then, inevitably,
its mathematical elements become related to the divine and there are many examples of
individual scientists putting the story or aspects of the story in a religious perspective. At
the end of this introduction we will brieﬂy mention three examples.
The theory of the Big Bang is based on Einstein’s equation in the theory of general
relativity (See Figure 15). The entire content of general relativity can be summarized as
follows: The curvature gµν of spacetime is related to the matter distribution in spacetime
by Einstein’s equation.31 Given that the universe is expanding, Einstein’s equation im-
plies32 that at a distant time in the past the universe was a singularity, in which the distance
31Cf. [42].
32There are some other reasonable assumptions involved.

Introduction
41
Fig. 15. Einstein’s formula.
between all points of space was zero and the density and curvature of the universe were
inﬁnite. The explosive development of the universe from this singularity is called the “Big
Bang”. Two quotations may sufﬁce to give an indication of Einstein’s religious perspective.
Einstein appreciated Spinoza’s determinism and he recognized the divine in the harmony
and beauty of nature. He said:
I believe in Spinoza’s God who reveals Himself in the orderly harmony of what exists, not in a
God who concerns himself with fates and actions of human beings.33
His well-known remark, “I want to know God’s thoughts [...] the rest are details”, ex-
presses the same idea. Elsewhere Einstein wrote:
Science can only be created by those who are thoroughly imbued with the aspiration toward truth
and understanding. This source of feeling, however, springs from the sphere of religion. To this
there also belongs the faith in the possibility that the regulations valid for the world of existence
are rational, that is, comprehensible to reason. I cannot conceive of a genuine scientist without that
profound faith. Science without religion is lame, religion without science is blind.34
The group of scientists that we introduced at the beginning of this section might continue
as follows:
Human populations have grown faster than ever before [...] Today, human numbers are so great,
and the impact of humans on the biosphere is so signiﬁcant, that there is a real danger that we will
do serious damage to the environment that is our home. And this could lead to a global collapse
of human civilizations and have devastating impacts on other organisms as well. On the other
hand, the ability of humans to share knowledge is now greater than ever before, and it may be that
new technologies and new ways of organizing human societies will allow us to avoid the dangers
created by our ecological virtuosity.35
The role of mathematics is just as important when we try to ﬁnd answers to the ultimate
question of where mankind is heading. Mathematics has become indispensable for the
survival of the biosphere, the reduction of pollution and global warming, the preservation
of biodiversity, etc. In this respect the views of Granville C. Henry Jr. give an interesting
Christian perspective. He wrote in 1976:
An adequate understanding of the relationship of science to the Christian religion depends upon
an analysis of the relationship of mathematics to God. In the near future, decisions of vast political
import will probably have to be made on the basis of mathematical models that relate population,
pollution, industrialization, and other factors. A theology of mathematics concerned with God’s
33Quoted in [31, pp. 659–660].
34Quoted in [27, pp. 121–122].
35[9, pp. 165–166].

42
T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
relationship to the discipline and its content ought to be available, especially to the Christian
community, in order to aid it in such decisions.36
We will conclude with a completely different religious view of the evolution of mankind.
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin (1881–1955), paleontologist and Jesuit priest, interpreted the
evolution of the universe and man as a progression towards a higher state of consciousness.
He claimed that the layer of human consciousness covering the globe would become a
collective brain in the future and that the ﬁnal goal of evolution is a union of humankind
with the universal God-Omega. Teilhard wrote:
The being who is the object of his own reﬂection, in consequence of that very doubling back upon
himself, becomes in a ﬂash able to raise himself into a new sphere. In reality, another world is
born. Abstraction, logic, reasoned choice and inventions, mathematics, art, calculation of space
and time, anxieties and dreams of love—all these activities of inner life are nothing else than the
effervescence of the newly-formed centre as it explodes onto itself [38, p. 165].
The world wide web is connected by some followers of Teilhard with this mystical
view of human evolution. Cyberspace would then be an important element of this collec-
tive brain that Teilhard called the ‘noosphere’. Because computer programmes are abstract
mathematical structures, cyberspace is on a certain level of interpretation a huge mathe-
matical structure as well. We will not discuss the merits of Teilhard’s views, but its recent
transformations contain remarkable links between mathematics and the divine.
References
[1] H.C. Agrippa ab Nettesheim, De Occulta Philosophia (K.A. Nowotny, Herausg.), Akademische Druck- und
Verlagsanstalt, Graz, Austria, 1967.
[2] K. Armstrong, A History of God. From Abraham to the Present: the 4000 Year Quest for God, William
Heinemann, London, 1993.
[3] C.L. Becker, The heavenly city of the eighteenth-century Philosophers, Yale University Press, 1932.
[4] B. Belhoste, Cauchy, 1789–1857 un Mathématicien Légitimiste au XIXe Siècle, Belin, Paris, 1985.
[5] C. Blacker and M. Loewe (Eds.), Ancient Cosmologies, George Allen & Unwin, London, 1975.
[6] C. Blotkamp et al., Kunstenaren der Idee, Symbolistische tendenzen in Nederland, ca. 1880–1930, Haags
Gemeentemuseum, Staatsuitgeverij, Den Haag, 1978.
[7] C. Blotkamp and M. Rijnders, Beeldende kunst en literatuur, in [6, pp. 76–89].
[8] J. Clottes and D. Lewis-Williams, Les Chamanes de la Préhistoire, Transe et Magie Dans les Grottes
Ornées, Editions du Seuil, Paris, 1996.
[9] D. Christian, Science in the Mirror of “Big History”, in [37, pp. 141–169].
[10] F. Coppleston, S.J., A History of Philosophy, Vol. 1: Greece and Rome, From the Pre-Socratics to Plotinus,
Image Books, Doublesay, New York, 1993 (Revised version of the 1962 edition).
[11] A.C. Crombie, Augustine to Galileo, Vol. I: Science in the Middle Ages, 5th to 13th centuries, Heinemann,
London, 1959.
[12] A.C. Crombie, Augustine to Galileo, Vol. II: Science in the Later Middle Ages and Early Modern Times,
13th to 17th centuries, Heinemann, London, 1959.
[13] H.C.M. de Swart, Filosoﬁe van de Wiskunde, Leiden, Nijhoff, 1989.
[14] E.R. Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational, University of California Press, Berkeley & Los Angeles, 1951.
[15] S.Y. Edgerton Jr., The Heritage of Giotto’s Geometry: Art and Science on the Eve of the Scientiﬁc Revolu-
tion, Cornell University Press, 1991.
[16] A. Gasten, Pseudo-mathematica en beeldende kunst, in [6, pp. 59–75].
36[19, p. 21]. When Henry wrote this Forrester’s Neo-Malthusian predictions were very much on his mind.

Introduction
43
[17] P. Gerdes, On possible uses of traditional Angolan sand drawings in the mathematics classroom, Educa-
tional Studies in Mathematics 19 (1988), 3–22.
[18] E. Heijerman and H.W. Schmitz (Eds.), Signiﬁcs, Mathematics and Semiotics, The Signiﬁc Movement in the
Netherlands, Nodus Publikationen, Münster, 1986.
[19] G.C. Henry, Jr., Logos: Mathematics and Christian Theology, Bucknell University Press, Lewisburg, Asso-
ciated University Presses, London, 1976.
[20] R. Hersh, What is Mathematics Really?, Vintage, London, 1998.
[21] J.A. Hutchison, Paths of Faith, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1991.
[22] J.I. Israel, The Radical Enlightenment, Philosophy and the Making of Modernity 1650–1750, Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2001.
[23] H. de Jager and H.G. Matthes, Het beeldende denken. Leven en werk van Mathieu Schoenmaekers (Figura-
tive thought. Life and Work of Mathieu Schoenmaekers) Baarn, 1992 (in Dutch).
[24] T. Koetsier, Imre Lakatos’ Philosophy of Mathematics, An historical approach, Amsterdam, North-Holland,
1991.
[25] U. Koch-Westenholz, Mesopotamian Astrology, an introduction to Babylonian and Assyrian celestial div-
ination, Museum Tusculanum Press, University of Copenhagen, 1995.
[26] J. Maritain, Distinguer pour unir ou Les Degrés du Savoir, 4th edition, Desclée De Brouwer, Paris, 1964.
[27] A. Pais, Einstein Lived Here, Clarendon Press, Oxford, Oxford University Press, New York, 1994.
[28] A. Seidenberg, The ritual origin of geometry, Archive for History of Exact Sciences 1 (1960–1962), 488–
527.
[29] A. Seidenberg, The ritual origin of counting, Archive for History of Exact Sciences 2 (1962–1966), 1–40.
[30] A. Seidenberg, The geometry of the vedic rituals, in [36, Vol. II, pp. 95–126].
[31] P.A. Schilpp (ed.), Albert Einstein: Philosopher–Scientist, 3rd edition, The Open Court Publishing, La Salle,
Illinois, 1970.
[32] R.H. Schlagel, From Myth to Modern Mind, A Study of the Origins and Growth of Scientiﬁc Thought, Vol. 1:
Theogony through Ptolemy, Peter Lanf, New York, 1995.
[33] W. Shumaker, The Occult Sciences in the Renaissance, A Study in Intellectual Patterns, University of Cali-
fornia Press, Berkeley, Los Angeles, London, 1972.
[34] H. Sinaceur, Modernité mathématique: Quelques invariants épistémologiques, Rev. Hist. Sci. 55/1 (2002),
83–100.
[35] C. Sirat, A History of Jewish Philosophy in the Middle Ages, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, and
Editions de la Maison des Sciences de l’Homme, Paris, 1985.
[36] F. Staal (in collaboration with C.V. Somayajipad and M. Ittio Ravi Nambudiri), Agni, The Vedic Ritual of
the Fire Altar, Vols. I an II, Asian Humanities Press, Berkely, 1983 (Reprint: Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi,
2001).
[37] I. Stamhuis, T. Koetsier, C. de Pater and A. van Helden (eds.), The Changing Image of the Sciences, Dor-
drecht, 2002.
[38] P. Teilhard de Chardin, The Phenomenon Man, Harper & Bros, 1955.
[39] L. Thorndike, A History of Magic and Experimental Science, During the First Thirteen Centuries of Our
Era, Vol. II, Columbia University Press, New York, 1923.
[40] R.F. Townsend, The Aztecs, Thames and Hudson, London, 1992.
[41] F. Van Eeden, Het Lied van Schijn en Wezen, Martinus Nijhoff, Gravenhage, 1981.
[42] R.M. Wald, General Relativity, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London, 1984.
[43] M. White, Isaac Newton, the Last Sorcerer, Fourth Estate, London, 1997.
[44] W.F. Whitehead, Three Books of Occult Philosophy or Magic, Book One—Natural Magic, Samuel Weiser,
New York, 1971 (First published in 1897).
[45] N. Witsen, Noord en Oost Tartaryen: behelzende eene beschrijving van verscheidene Tartarsche en Nabu-
urige Gewesten in de Noorder en Oostelijkste deelen van Aziën en Europa, Tweede deel, Tweede Druk,
Schalekamp, Amsterdam, 1785.
[46] F.A. Yates, Lull & Bruno, Collected Essays, Vol. 1, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1982.
[47] C. Zaslavsky, Africa Counts, Number and Pattern in African Culture, Prindle, Weber & Schmidt, Boston,
MA, 1973.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 1
Chinese Number Mysticism
Ho Peng-Yoke
Emeritus Director, Needham Research Institute, Cambridge
Contents
1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
2. The Hetu Diagram and the Luoshu Chart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3. The system of the Yijing (Book of Changes) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4. Daoist liturgy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5. Mysticism in the Chinese magic square . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6. Popular beliefs in number mysticism and conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7. Bibliographical comments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
45


Chinese number mysticism
47
1. Introduction
The modern Chinese equivalent of the term “mathematics” is “shuxue” but before the mid-
dle of the nineteenth century this Chinese term had a much wider meaning, encompass-
ing mathematics, philosophy, astrology and divination. We can ﬁnd parallels in mediaeval
Europe where the great Roman writer Boethius (ca. 480–524/525) divided mathematical
disciplines into arithmetic, music, geometry and astronomy, which were together referred
to as the quadrivium in early European universities. In a similar way traditional Chinese
mathematics not only denoted mathematics in our sense of the word, but philosophy, as-
trology, divination and an element of mysticism as well. Numbers had other signiﬁcance
besides their numerical values.
2. The Hetu Diagram and the Luoshu Chart
In the Mingtang (Bright Hall) Chapter of Dai De’s Da-Dai Liji (Record of Rites by the
Elder Dai), a work dated about the year AD 80, there is an arrangement of the numbers 1
to 9 in sets of three as follows:
2
9
4
7
5
3
6
1
8
The purpose of these numbers is not explained in the book, and we do not clearly under-
stand what their purpose is. We only know that the Bright Hall from the title of the chapter
consisted of nine halls in which the Zhou emperors performed ceremonial rites. These nine
numbers in three sets of three numbers also appeared in a probably earlier mathematical
text, the Shushu jiyi (Memoir on Some Traditions of Mathematical Arts), said to have been
written in the year 190 BC by Xu Yue. Here the set of numbers, which forms a magic
square of the order 3, is referred to as the jiugong (nine-palaces) or the jiugongtu (nine-
palaces diagram). The Shushu jiyi also mentions an arrangement of numbers for calculation
known as jiugongsuan (nine-palaces calculation) but gives no details apart from mention-
ing numbers circulating round (within the nine-palaces). This might have been a system of
divination because we know that this jiugong magic square was already employed for this
purpose in Han China.
There were two important ﬁgures or diagrams that had dominated Chinese thought since
ancient times. They were the Hetu (River Diagram) and the Luoshu (Luo River Chart).
There are different descriptions of their origins, the most popular ones saying that the
legendary emperor Fuxi obtained the Hetu Diagram from a dragon-horse at the Yellow
River and that later during the 11th century BCE, Wenwang, the father of the ﬁrst Zhou
king, received inspiration from this diagram and produced the eight Trigrams used in his
method of divination. As for the Luoshu, Yu, who later became the ﬁrst king of the Xia
dynasty (a dynasty that modern archaeologists in China are still searching for evidence to
conﬁrm), observed at the Luoshui River a tortoise carrying the Luoshu Chart on its back.
Both the Confucian Analects and the Yijing (Book of Changes) mention the names of the

48
Ho Peng-Yoke
Hetu Diagram and the Luoshu Chart. However, we have no evidence in the form of actual
ﬁgures of such Diagrams or Charts to tell us what they looked like at the time of Confucius.
Much discussion on the numbers in the Hetu and the Luoshu about their applications to
astrology and divination took place in the succeeding generations. Then in the tenth cen-
tury a famous Daoist by the name Chen Tuan interpreted the nine-palaces arrangement as
the Hetu Diagram. But during the twelfth century Cai Yuanding (1145–1198), a disciple
of Zhu Xi (1130–1220), identiﬁed the Bright Hall and the nine-palaces arrangement as the
Luoshu Chart. Cai Yuanding himself was the greatest geomancer of his time. His view had
the support of Zhu Xi, whose reputation as a Neo-Confucian scholar raised Cai’s theory
beyond challenge. Henceforth scholars talked about the Luoshu magic square as synony-
mous with the nine-palaces diagram. No matter what name it is known by, modern scholars
regard it as the earliest magic square known to the ancient world.
The Luoshu Chart and the Hetu Diagram, as known since the twelfth century, are shown
in Figures 1 and 2. Figure 1 clearly represents a magic square equivalent to the square of
the nine-palaces diagram. Figure 2 does not qualify as a modern magic square, and has of-
ten been left aside by modern scholars studying Chinese magic squares. This is rightly so
if one looks at magic squares pure and simple. However, to the traditional Chinese math-
ematician the two ﬁgures are of equal importance, both mystically and philosophically. In
both Figure 1 and Figure 2 numbers are represented by little black and white circles, black
circles for the odd or Yang numbers and white for the even or Yin numbers.
Fig. 1. The Luoshu Chart magic square.
Fig. 2. The Hetu Diagram.

Chinese number mysticism
49
Water
Fire
Wood
Metal
Earth
Heaven number
1
2
3
4
5
Earth number
6
7
8
9
10
Fig. 3. Heaven and earth numbers.
Numbers 1 to 5 form the heaven (tian) numbers, while 6 to 10 the earth (di) numbers.
The numbers also represent the wuxing, a term that has been variously rendered as “Five
Elements”, “Five Agents”, “Five Phases”, etc. These are shown in Figure 3.
The so-called heaven numbers are deﬁned in the Book of Changes as the numbers from
1 to 5 and the earth numbers as from 6 to 10. Odd numbers are Yang numbers, while even
numbers are Yin. The Book of Changes also mentions 25, the sum of all odd numbers from
1 to 9, as being signiﬁcant. Other signiﬁcant numbers are the number 30, the sum of all
even numbers from 2 to 10, and the number 55, which is the sum of all heaven and earth
numbers, i.e. from 1 to 10. Neo-Confucian philosophers saw great signiﬁcance in the num-
ber 5 being at the centre of the Luoshu Chart. To them 5 is the most important Yang heaven
number, manifesting itself in the wuxing, in the ﬁve virtues in ethics, in the ﬁve colours,
in the ﬁve tastes in human perceptions, in the ﬁve cereals that sustain human life, in the
ﬁve human relationships that govern human behaviour, and so on. The number 9 is the
highest Yang earth number. The number 9 together with the number 5 resulted in the ofﬁce
of the Chinese emperor often being referred to as having the exaltation of nine-and-ﬁve
(jiu wu zhi zun). Let us take an example from Chinese astrology to illustrate the important
role played by the number 9. Only seven stars were identiﬁed in the Plough by Chinese
astronomers, but according to an old Star Manual, the Xingjing the Plough originally con-
sisted of nine stars, two of which had already gone out of sight. Chinese astrology insists
that there are nine stars, two of which have become invisible. One explanation is that the
two stars concerned had gone beyond the circle of perpetual vision in the north sky, indi-
cating that the antiquity of Chinese astronomy would be much beyond what many modern
historians of astronomy think. Perhaps one may regard it instead as a reminiscence of the
Pythagorean invention of a counter-earth to make up their perfect number 10.
Looking at the Luoshu magic square in Figure 1, let us begin with the two numbers 1
and 6 that represent Yang Water and Yin Water, respectively. Moving in the anticlockwise
direction, we next ﬁnd the two numbers 7 and 2 that represent Yang Fire and Yin Fire,
respectively, which are conquered by the two previous Waters. Moving again in the same
anticlockwise direction, we ﬁnd Yin Metal 4 and Yang Metal 9 conquered by the two pre-
vious Fires. Proceeding likewise, we ﬁnd the Metals 4 and 9 conquering Yang Wood 3 and
Yin Wood 8, which in turn conquers Yang Earth 5 at the centre of the magic square. Finally
Earth 5 conquers the Yang Water 1 and Yin Water 6. The process repeats itself in a cycle.
Here the Chinese found a powerful symbolism that represents and “proves” the Principle
of Mutual Conquest as applied to their wuxing theory.
Next look at the Hetu diagram in Figure 2 and begin again from the numbers Yang Water
1 and Yin Water 6, moving this time in the clockwise direction. We ﬁnd the two Waters
producing Yang Wood 3 and Yin Wood 8, which in turn produce the next Yang Fire 7 and
Yin Fire 2. The two Fire numbers then produce Yang Earth 5 and Yin Earth 10 at the centre
of the diagram. The two Earth numbers then produce Yin Metal 4 and Yang Metal 9, which

50
Ho Peng-Yoke
Fig. 4. The Orders of Mutual Conquest and Production.
produce Yang Water 1 and Yin Water 6. The process goes on and on. Here the Chinese
thought that they had proven the Principle of Mutual Production of the wuxing. Figure 4
illustrates both the Principle of Mutual Conquest and that of Mutual Production.
Thus numbers were intricately linked with the very fundamental early Chinese thinking
that went to explain everything from the natural world to the spiritual as well as human
behaviour. Their connections were not restricted to the Yin and Yang principle and the
wuxing theory. They played a big role in the divination system of the Yijing (Book of
Changes), with which their mystic nature was further enhanced.
3. The system of the Yijing (Book of Changes)
The Book of Changes speaks about the Dao, as does the Daoist canon Daodejing, a text
traditionally attributed to Laozi, an elder contemporary of Confucius in the ﬁfth century
BC. The Daodejing attaches the utmost importance to the number 1. A passage says:
What have attained unity in the past are:
Heaven has become bright and pure after attaining unity;
Earth has become ﬁrm and sure after attaining unity;
The spirits have become luminous on attaining unity;
The valleys have been ﬁlled by their own void on attaining unity; and
The myriad creatures have gained life on attaining unity.
Another passage in the text says:
The Dao produces 1; 1 produces 2; 2 produces 3; and 3 produces the myriad creatures.
It is the latter that has struck a chord of resonance with the Book of Changes.

Chinese number mysticism
51
The great importance of the number unity here needs no further elaboration other than
stating its parallel status in the Islamic world, where unity is regarded as a representation
of Allah. The cell containing the number 1 in an Islamic magic square is often put either
in the middle of the top row or left completely empty as a mark of respect. In the system
of the Book of Changes unity denotes Taiji (Supreme Pole), which gives rise to the two
cosmological forces (liangyi) of Yin and Yang. The two cosmological forces subdivide to
form the four Symbols (sixiang), each of which in turn divides into two to form the eight
Trigrams (bagua). Combinations of two Trigram produce sixty-four Hexagrams. These
sixty-four Hexagrams can be represented by binary numbers from 000000 to 111111, i.e.
from 0 to 63. They have been employed in a sophisticated system of divination in China
for well over two thousand years. The Book of Changes says:
The Dayan (Great Extension) number is 50, (but the system) uses (only up to number) 49. Divide
it into two to symbolise the two cosmological forces of Yin and Yang. Suspend one (between the
ﬁngers) to symbolise the three (powers, sancai—heaven, earth and human beings). Divide into
lots of four to symbolise the four seasons ...
The imprecision of the above passage has given rise to many different interpretations as
to how exactly one should put the system into practice. However, the general method has
been to take 50 pieces of milfoils in one hand, put 1 piece aside to symbolise the Taiji, then
with the other hand take some of the remaining 49 pieces at random to divide the milfoils
into two parts, symbolising the formation of Yin and Yang. The next step is to remove
4 milfoils successively from those held in one of the two hands. The procedure beginning
from this step varies according to different schools. For example, some schools referred to
the bundle of milfoils held in the left hand and others the right. The differences, however,
do not depart from the idea of a liturgy representing the process of the natural world in
Chinese thinking. With the liturgy the diviner hoped to invoke the power of nature to his
aid.
J.G. Frazer, the Cambridge anthropologist of The Golden Bough fame, had two “laws”
on magic. The ﬁrst was the law of similarity, where like produced like. The second was a
law of contiguity or contagion, which said that things which had been in contact but were
no longer so would still continue to act upon one another. The manipulation of milfoils
by the diviner using the system of the Book of Changes is a case in point of the ﬁrst law.
The Book of Changes gives the Chinese another three signiﬁcant numbers. They are 49,
the number of milfoils used in divination; 50, the Dayan (Great Extention) number; and
64, the total number of Hexagrams.
To illustrate the mystical nature of the number 49 let us refer to the last problem in
a sixth century Chinese mathematical text, the Sunzi suanjing (Mathematical Manual of
the Master Sun). It tells how to calculate whether a pregnant mother will give birth to a
male or a female child. The method is to take the number 49, then ﬁrst subtract from it
the month when the child is to be born (one version says the month when the child was
conceived), followed by subtracting the age of the mother and the numbers 1, 2, 3 and 4 in
succession. An odd remainder tells that the child will be male, and an even remainder that it
will be female. Ruan Yuan, a well-known nineteenth century Chinese scholar, regarded this
problem as too bizarre to have actually been written by Master Sun and concluded that it
was a later unworthy addition to the original text. Perhaps the beginning of the acceptance
of the modern meaning of the term mathematics in China had led him to overlook the fact

52
Ho Peng-Yoke
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5.
that the deﬁnition of the term mathematics in traditional China differed from that of his
time. Divination, magic and mathematics were in traditional China covered by the same
word. The numbers 1, 2, 3 and 4 must have referred, respectively, to (1) the Taiji, (2) the
Yin and the Yang, (3) the “three powers” of heaven, earth and human beings, and (4) the
four seasons, similar to the operation of the system of divination according to the Book
of Changes. Hence the Sunzi suanjing provides us another example of Frazer’s ﬁrst law at
play.
The 3 × 3 magic square ﬁnds a place in the traditional Chinese astrological calendar,
where different colours are assigned to each number, and years, months and days are des-
ignated by a number together with its colour. The three numbers 1, 6 and 8 are white and
are regarded as auspicious. The position of the numbers changes in the direction of the
yubu steps, as in Figure 5(a) and (b), forming nine different 3 × 3 squares, of which only
that with the number 5 at the centre is a true magic square. The positions of 1, 6 and 8 on a
square indicate the lucky directions for the year, month and day concerned, subject to the
combinations of the ten stems and twelve branches used to denote the year, the month, the
day and the double-hour of the day.
4. Daoist liturgy
In Daoist ceremonies the priest moves his feet following the pattern of the nine stars of
the Plough. This is called Yubu (Strides made by Yu the Great) or bugang (Stepping on
the Stars of the Plough). By tracing the pattern of the Plough the performer of the rites
tries to invoke the celestial power of the nine stars. This is Frazer’s ﬁrst law in operation.
Now the Spirits of the nine stars of the Plough are also said to reside within the jiugong
nine-palaces. This gave rise to another, and perhaps more powerful Yubu or bugang pattern
by taking the jiugong magic square, taking the ﬁrst step from 1 to 2, then to 3, etc., until
reaching the number 9, or conversely starting from 9, and moving successively to 8, 7, 6, 5,
4, 3, 2 and 1. See Figure 5(a) and (b). By copying the pattern of the position of the Plough
in the jiugong magic square, the performer hoped to invoke not only spiritual power from
the Plough but also the force of nature embodied in the principles of the Yin and Yang and
the wuxing, represented in the Luoshu Chart.
The magical Yubu or gangbu steps used in Daoist liturgy was also applied in the con-
struction of Chinese magic squares. Take for example a 9 × 9 magic square found in the
Dayan suoyin. This is a so-called composite magic square, consisting of nine 3×3 smaller

Chinese number mysticism
53
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 6.
magic squares distributed in accordance with the order of the jiugong diagram. See Fig-
ure 6(a). The numbers 1 to 81 are divided into nine subgroups, namely 1 to 9, 10 to 18, 19
to 27, 28 to 36, 36 to 45, 46 to 54, 55 to 63, 64 to 72, and 73 to 81. Taking each subgroup
in turn and distributing the numbers in the respective cells of the nine 3 × 3 small magic
squares using the bugang steps results in Figure 6(b).
Let us look at the nine 3 × 3 magic squares I to IX in Figure 6(a). The sum of all nine
cells in I to IX are 333, 342, 351, 360, 369, 378, 387, 396, and 405, respectively. These
nine numbers also form another magic square as in Figure 6(c).

54
Ho Peng-Yoke
Fig. 7. Magic circle from the Dayan suoyin.
A number of other 9 × 9 magic squares can also be constructed by taking the Yubu steps
backward or by a combination of forward and backward movement. The Dayan suoyin
also contains some sort of a magic circle constructed using the same principle but in a
more hidden form as shown in Figure 7. The vertical line from top to bottom reads 49, 39,
29, 19, 9, 45, 25, 5, 41, 31, 21, 11, and 1, with 25 at the centre. The horizontal line reads
from left to right, 3, 13, 23, 33, 43, 15, 25, 35, 7, 17, 27, 37, and 47. The diagonal line
in the NW and SE direction, starting from the number at the NW, reads 4, 14, 24, 34, 44,
20, 25, 30, 6, 16, 26, 36, and 46. The other diagonal line, starting from the number in the
NE, reads 2, 12, 22, 32, 42, 10, 25, 40, 8, 18, 28, 38, and 48. Note that 25, the sum of the
heaven and earth numbers, occupies the central position and that 49, the number of milfoils
used in divination according to the system of the Book of Changes, occupies a prominent
position right on top in the ﬁgure.
5. Mysticism in the Chinese magic square
In Figure 7 the numbers in every vertical, horizontal and diagonal line add up to the same
number, 325, but not those in the circles. This is only an imperfect magic circle in the mod-
ern sense. Another example that modern historians of Chinese mathematics come across is
the inclusion of the River Diagram (see Figure 2) among the magic squares given by the
thirteenth century mathematician Yang Hui. As we can see, this diagram does not qualify
as a magic square. It is important to note the difference in meaning and in purpose of a
different culture and time. From the point of view of modern magic squares, some of the
so-called Chinese magic squares and circles are imperfect, but the Chinese referred to them
only as “traverse and transverse diagrams” (zonghengtu), while their main objective was
mysticism, if not recreation, rather than number theory.

Chinese number mysticism
55
Fig. 8.
Fig. 9.
In the realm of mysticism Chinese magic squares were perhaps even more magical than
modern magic squares.
The object of the exercise in Figure 7 was to demonstrate the important relation between
the number 49 and the number 25. The main purpose of many of the earlier Chinese magic
squares was to underline the importance of those numbers which were regarded as signiﬁ-
cant. Figure 8 is a true magic circle given by Yang Hui where all the cells taken in a circle,
vertically, horizontally and diagonally, all add up to 147. Here the cell at the centre is 9,
the highest Yang number.
Yang Hui also gave two 7 × 7 magic squares to show the signiﬁcance of the Yijing
number 49 together with the total number of heaven and earth, 25, as in Figures 9 and 10.
Note that in Figures 9 and 10 the two numbers 1 and 49 are symmetrically opposite,
showing the relation between these two numbers. Furthermore, they add up to 50, the
Great Extension number. In fact, magic squares provided one of the ways to “prove” the
signiﬁcance of the number 49. It is also interesting to note that one of the three juans
(section of a book occupying one complete scroll, roughly equivalent to a chapter) of Ding

56
Ho Peng-Yoke
Fig. 10.
Fig. 11.
Yidong’s Dayan suoyin is devoted entirely to giving other reasons to explain the number 49.
The signiﬁcance of the number 64 is shown in an 8 × 8 magic square in Figure 11 by
Yang Hui. The number 64 here is symmetrically opposite the number 1, indicating its
importance.
The above discussion applies to Zhu Xi’s (1130–1200) Non-Confucian school in gen-
eral and to the xiangshu (Symbolic Numerology) branch in particular. From the ninth cen-
tury some Chinese scholars introduced elements of Buddhist and Daoist philosophy into
Confucian teaching. This was the beginning of Neo-Confucianism. Major development
took place during the eleventh century. Cheng Hao (1031–1085) and his brother Cheng
Yi (1032–1107) incorporated the Book of Changes into their philosophical thought and
devised a metaphysics based on the Supreme Pole, Yin and Yang, and the wuxing princi-
ples to explain Confucian ethics. Zhang Zai (1020–1077) applied a similar metaphysics

Chinese number mysticism
57
to natural science, while Shao Yong (1011–1077) used numerology to illustrate that past
political events were all pre-determined. Some of the Neo-Confucian scholars were them-
selves exponents of the art of divination using the system of the Book of Changes. The ﬁnal
synthesiser of these teachings was Zhu Xi, the twelfth century Chinese thinker to whom
comparison has been made with Thomas Aquinas. Neo-Confucianism dominated Chinese
thinking until the nineteenth century.
One branch of Neo-Confucianism was the Symbolic Numerology (xiangshu) school,
which placed emphasis on the Trigrams and Hexagrams, and on the Hetu Diagram and
Luoshu Chart. Its diverse activities varied from divination, which was not conﬁned exclu-
sively to the system of the Book of Changes, to magic squares. In divination numerolog-
ical calculations were performed not only to foretell future events but also to account for
the past, while in magic squares numbers were used to “verify” or to “justify”, if not to
“explain” the fundamental concept of the school. In this respect number mysticism had
played an important role in Chinese thinking. Zhu Xi’s teaching had a great inﬂuence in
pre-modern Japan and Korea. Hence one may say that this account on Chinese number
mysticism also applies to East Asia in general.
6. Popular beliefs in number mysticism and conclusions
The last statement in the previous paragraph, however, is restricted not only in historical,
but also in geographical, cultural and intellectual context. Neo-Confucian teaching was not
general knowledge among the common people in East Asia, and not even among the Chi-
nese themselves. In spite of the permeation of Neo-Confucian teaching into their societies
over a long period, variation in belief among the people of East Asia is to be expected.
The signiﬁcance of the numbers 1, 6 and 8 in the astrological calendar, for example, is
not general known among the Chinese and Japanese people still using that calendar to-
day.
The number 1 is popular among East Asian societies also because of the hope of winning
in a competition by coming ﬁrst. In Japan Daiichi and Ichiban are familiar names used in
the business world. Hitotsubashi is used as a name by a prestigious university. Denoting
unity, the number 1 also has a political undertone in either national or a commercial sense,
if not in both. In this context the number 2 means division or separation and does not enjoy
the same popularity as the number 1. On the other hand, to the Chinese 2 is an auspicious
number denoting a pair or couple. Here we have a divergence between the Chinese and
Japanese preference for odd and even numbers. Odd numbers are more popular with the
Japanese and even numbers with the Chinese. Japanese cookery sets, for example, are in
ﬁve, while Chinese sets are in six. The number 3 is universally popular in East Asia, es-
pecially in the business world. In Japan we ﬁnd names like Mitsui, Mitsubishi, Mitsukoshi,
Sanai, Sanwa, Sanyo, Mita and Mikasa, in Korea there is Samsung, in Taiwan we come
across San Yang and San Shang, to quote only a few names at random. The same word
for “three” is used by the Chinese and the Japanese, and the Korean word also came from
China. The word rhymes with or sounds like the Chinese word meaning life and growth.
Frazer’s ﬁrst law of like producing like does explain the popularity of the number 3. Num-
ber 13 has no signiﬁcance to the Chinese-educated, and to the Chinese business world in

58
Ho Peng-Yoke
Hong Kong it rhymes with two words, which together mean “certain to live” if not “deﬁnite
to grow”, and is therefore a lucky number.
The Chinese word for the number 4 rhymes with the word meaning “death”. Again
Frazer’s ﬁrst law can explain its unpopularity among people in East Asia. The Japanese
often avoid saying it shi in the Chinese way and read it as yon according to their native
usage. Rhyming is dictated by the dialect of a language. In the middle of the twentieth
century a well-established European car carrying the name “404” was on the market in
Malaysia. It was quite popular with the connoisseur, but a large section of the Chinese
community avoided it, because in their dialect the numbers rhymed with “four people die”,
and if one of them had to take a ride in a 404 he would make certain that there were not
exactly four people in the car.
Rhyming indeed decides the popularity of numbers among the Chinese. The number 8
rhymes with the word for prosperity, 18 with “deﬁnitely prosper”, 28 with “easily prosper”,
38 with “life and prosperity” and 48 with “prosperity to the extreme”. On the other hand,
58 sounds like “do not prosper” and has no appeal to the Chinese. A professor in Hong
Kong once declined an offer to part with his three-year-old car in exchange for a new car
of the same make, not that he remembered Anderson’s tale about the old street lamp that
was going to be replaced by a new one, but because his car number plate read 1668, which
rhymed with “prosperity all the way” in the Hong Kong Cantonese dialect. The number 138
may be read by some as “prosperity throughout one’s life”. The number 9 ﬁnds popularity
among the Chinese because it rhymes with the word that conveys the sense of “long lasting”
and “longevity”.
There is also special signiﬁcance attached to some double-digit or even multi-digit num-
bers, some of which have already been referred to in the above paragraph. The number 10
is favoured by the Chinese because it conveys the sense of wholeness and completeness.
Twenty is sometimes expressed as double-ten, where both the numbers 2 and 10 have an
auspicious meaning. The number 60 is signiﬁcant on account of the 60-year cycle in the
Chinese calendar. The Japanese give a special meaning to the two numbers 77 and 88.
Written in Japanese kanji characters, the former shows some resemblance to the character
for “happiness”, while the latter forms a part of the character for “rice”, the traditional sta-
ple food for the Japanese. Hence the 77th and 88th birthdays of a person are both special
occasions for celebration in Japan.
There is, however, no hard-and-fast rule, as there are always variations. One example is
the number 6, which rhymes with the word meaning emolument, civil appointment or good
job. It is also an auspicious astrological number like 1 and 8. However, some Hong Kong
Cantonese-speaking people ﬁnd it rhyming with the word meaning “falling down”. Room
number 6 in a guest house in Edinburgh has not been popular with candidates from Hong
Kong attempting professional examinations. Even with respect to the number 4 we can ﬁnd
some exceptions, especially in the case of established terms, such as four seasons and four
seas. For example, Shiki is the name of a Japanese restaurant-chain,perhaps advertising that
its food is good for all seasons, and Sihai is a popular Chinese name for the tourist trade,
implying welcome to customers from all the four quarters of the Earth. Yotsuya, a place
name in Tokyo meaning four valleys, is read in Japanese kunyomi and not in Chinese
onyomi. However, the term “Sirenbang” (the Gang of Four) was never meant to be an
exception to the rule. It is a derogatory term that sounds like “the Gang of Dead People”.

Chinese number mysticism
59
Coming back to the topic of motor car number plates, the Malaysian Chinese community
has slightly different ideas from their Hong Kong counterpart. Malaysian Chinese motorists
normally add up the four numbers in their car plates, removing tens from the total until the
remainder is between 1 and 10. The higher the remaining number the better. Numbers 8, 9
and 10 are regarded as winning numbers. This I learned from personal experience. I went
to a second-hand car dealer in Kuala Lumpur to sell my car. The dealer looked down at my
car number plate and immediately offered me a price acceptable to me. Taken by surprise
that the deal had been made within minutes, I asked him why he did not need to examine
the engine and the body work. With a smile he said that he could do something about
the engine and the car body if necessary but what was important was a good number that
would attract a customer. He was proved absolutely right when I saw my old car on the road
again the very next week. My ofﬁcial car in Kuala Lumpur carried the number 9399. I was
approached several times to sell it at a premium, but that was not my own car. Second-hand
cars with popular numbers fetch higher prices and sell better than those with less popular
numbers, while those with unlucky numbers do not enjoy a good market. Commercial and
residential properties are similarly affected by numbers. This provides a practical example
of the application of Chinese number mysticism to modern economics, demonstrating that
number mysticism is not all myth after all. The philosophical study of number mysticism
helps towards the understanding of the construction of Chinese magic squares, while a
knowledge of popular number mysticism would enhance the understanding of the people
of East Asia.
7. Bibliographical comments
The subject on Chinese number mysticism is seldom touched upon speciﬁcally. The Bib-
liography gives general reference concerning Sections 1 to 5. Section 6 is written from the
author’s personal experience and observations and not academic research, which in this
case falls within the province of an anthropologists or sociologist.
References
[1] W.E. Andrews, Magic Squares and Cubes, Chicago, 1908.
[2] S. Cammann, The evolution of the magic square in China, Journal of the American Oriental Society 80
(1960), 116–124.
[3] S. Cammann, Old Chinese magic squares, Sinologica 7 (1963), 14–53.
[4] P.Y. Ho, Magic squares in East and West, Papers in Far Eastern History 8 (1973), 115–141.
[5] P.Y. Ho, Yang Hui, thirteenth-century Chinese mathematician, Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biographies 14
(1976), 538–546.
[6] P.Y. Ho, Chinese science: the traditional Chinese view, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African
Studies 65 (3) (1991), 506–519.
[7] P.Y. Ho, Li, Qi and Shu: An Introduction to Chinese Science and Civilization, Dover Publications, New
York, 1985 (reprinted: Hong Kong, 2000).
[8] P.Y. Ho, Reaching Out to the Stars (in press).
[9] L.Y. Lam, A Critical Study of the Yang Hui Suan Fa, Singapore, 1977.
[10] Y. Li, Zhongsuanshi luncong (Collected Papers on History of Chinese Mathematic), Shanghai, 1935.

60
Ho Peng-Yoke
[11] K.-W. Lih, Lun Bao Qishou de hunyuantu (On Bao Qishou’s Magic Circles), Kejishi tongxin 5 (Supplement)
(2) (1986), 67–79.
[12] J. Needham, Science and Civilisation in China, Vol. 2, Cambridge, 1956.
[13] J. Needham, Science and Civilisation in China, Vol. 3, Cambridge, 1959.
[14] M.-C. Poo, Popular religion in pre-imperial China: Observations on the Almanacs of Shui-hu-ti, T’oung
Pao 79 (1993), 225–248.
[15] M.-C. Poo, In Search of Personal Welfare: A View of Ancient Chinese Religion, New York, 1998.
[16] R.J. Smith, Fortune-Tellers and Philosophers: Divination in Traditional Chinese Society, Boulder, San Fran-
cisco and Oxford, 1991.
[17] R. Wang, Ding Yidong dui zonghengtu de yanjiu (Ding Yidong’s Study on Magic Squares), Shuxueshi
yanjiu wenji 1 (1990), 74–82.

CHAPTER 2
Derivation and Revelation: The Legitimacy
of Mathematical Models in Indian Cosmology
Kim Plofker
Department of Mathematics, University of Utrecht, PO Box 80 010, TA 3508 Utrecht, Netherlands
E-mail: kim_plofker@alumni.brown.edu
Contents
1. Indian science, Indian religion: “Orientalist” and “post-Orientalist” views . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
2. The Pur¯an.as . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
3. The siddh¯antas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
4. Contradiction and concession . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5. The quest for non-contradiction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6. The status of siddh¯antas in the nineteenth century . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
7. Mathematical models in siddh¯antas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
8. Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
9. Bibliographical notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
61


Derivation and revelation: the legitimacy of mathematical models in Indian cosmology
63
1. Indian science, Indian religion: “Orientalist” and “post-Orientalist” views
The importance in classical Indian culture of deities, religious devotion, and the general
spiritual theme of transcending the human and mundane is a very familiar concept to West-
erners. In fact, it has become commonplace to ascribe to India a uniquely pervasive pre-
occupation with the divine, a special status as a land of gods and mystics. Especially to
the modern scientiﬁcally trained imagination, it may seem incongruous to combine such a
preoccupation with a simultaneous interest in understanding the universe mathematically,
that is, via self-consistent quantitative models; certainly, the details of mathematical and
scriptural Weltanschauungen often sharply conﬂict. In the eighteenth and nineteenth cen-
turies, it became a contentious question for many Indians and Anglo-Indians whether and
how mathematics and the divine had coexisted in the “indigenous” Indian (Sanskrit) tradi-
tion. What roles had its science offered to divinely revealed truth (including the picture of
the cosmos presented in sacred texts such as the Pur¯an.as) and mathematically deduced fact
(which involved a very different picture of the physical universe)?
Though some colonial commentators on Sanskrit astronomy were frankly contemptu-
ous of the entire tradition, others—especially Orientalists with some personal experience
of and enthusiasm for Sanskrit literature—inclined to a more nuanced view.1 This asserted
that “Hindu” sciences in earlier times accepted mathematically rigorous models of the cos-
mos similar to those of the classical Greeks, but were subsequently adulterated by various
fanciful superstitions derived from sectarian myths. Several Orientalists, particularly those
with ofﬁcial responsibilities concerning native education, publicly deplored what they de-
scribed as the consequent discrepancies between the classical Sanskrit astronomical tradi-
tion and the sacred cosmology of popular belief. Lancelot Wilkinson, a British Political
Agent and educational reformer in Bhopal in the early nineteenth century, suggested using
the former pedagogically to undermine the latter:
The followers of the Puráns [Pur¯an.as] . . . maintain that the earth is a circular plane, having the
golden mountain Merú in its centre . . . that the moon however is at a distance from the earth
double of that of the sun; that the moon was churned out of the ocean; and is of nectar; that the
sun and moon and constellations revolve horizontally over the plane of the earth, appearing to
set when they go behind Merú, and to rise when they emerge from behind that mountain; that
eclipses are formed by the monsters Ráhú and Ketú laying hold of the sun or moon . . . The jy-
otishís [astronomer/astrologers] or followers of the Siddhántas . . . teach the true shape and size
of the earth . . . The authors of the Siddhántas . . . have spared no pains to ridicule the monstrous
absurdities of . . . the Puráns . . . [W]e have only to revive that knowledge of the system therein
[in the siddh¯antas] taught, which notwithstanding its being by far the most rational, and formerly
the best cultivated branch of science amongst the Hindus . . . has, from the superior address of the
followers of the Puráns . . . been allowed to fall into a state of utter oblivion . . . Indeed, so general
and entire is the ignorance of most of the joshís [or jyotishís] of India, that you will ﬁnd many of
them engaged conjointly with the Puránic bráhmans in expounding the Puráns, and insisting on
the ﬂatness of the earth, and its magnitude . . . as explained in them, with a virulence and boldness
which shew their utter ignorance of their proper profession, which had its existence only on the
refutation and abandonment of the Puránic system [25, pp. 504–509].
1Probably the most famous negative remark on the subject is that of Thomas Macaulay to the effect that Indian
astral science “would move laughter in girls at an English boarding school” [8]. A survey of various other opinions
held by European Indologists of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries is given in [2].

64
K. Plofker
Wilkinson felt that religious and scientiﬁc worldviews in Indian thought were more or
less natural enemies, and that adherents of the former had caused, by their “superior ad-
dress,” the “oblivion” of the latter. Such evaluations have recently begun to receive some
attention from colonial historians interested in the ways in which colonial powers used sci-
ence to further imperial aims. Noting that these uses include not only the obvious roles of
science in technology, education, public health, and so forth, but also colonial reactions to
the indigenous scientiﬁc traditions of the colonized, several scholars have detected more
than a little self-interest in colonial treatments of Indian cosmology. David Arnold, for
example, identiﬁes as “Orientalist” the notion that a Hindu “religious” worldview ousted
in medieval times a more “scientiﬁc” one, and points out the political usefulness of this
assessment to imperialists:
Although the richness and diversity of India’s ancient scientiﬁc traditions has long been recog-
nised, over the past two centuries it has been the convention to see this as a history of preco-
cious early achievement followed by subsequent decline and degeneration. The European Orien-
talist scholarship of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries represented India as having
had an ancient civilisation equalling, in some respects excelling or anticipating, those of classical
Greece and Rome. . . . In astronomy, mathematics and medicine in particular, Hindu science was
considered to have been remarkably advanced well before the dawn of the Christian era and to
have been the source of discoveries and techniques that were only later taken up and incorporated
into Western civilisation, such as “Arabic” numerals and the use of zero. However, according to
this Orientalist interpretation, Indian civilisation was unable to sustain its early achievements and
lapsed into decline. There followed an uncritical reliance upon earlier texts: tradition replaced ob-
servation as surely as religion supplanted science. . . . The history of Indian science thus served
as a mere prologue to the eventual unfolding of Western science in South Asia as science was
rescued from centuries of decline and obscurity by the advent of British rule and the introduction
of the more developed scientiﬁc and technical knowledge of the West. This Orientalist triptych—
contrasting the achievements of ancient Hindu civilisation with the destruction and stagnation of
the Muslim Middle Ages and the enlightened rule and scientiﬁc progress of the colonial modern
age—has had a remarkably tenacious hold over thinking about the science of the subcontinent. It
was a schema deployed not only by British scholars, ofﬁcials and polemicists but also by many
Indians, for whom it formed the basis for their own understanding of the past and the place of
science in Indian tradition and modernity [1, pp. 3–4].
In this analysis and in others like it,2 what the colonial historian chieﬂy seeks to explain
is why such claims about the relationship of science and religion in India were politically
useful to those who made them. The focus is on the rhetorical uses to which these claims
were put in serving or subverting colonial aims—how they were “deployed” in consolidat-
ing or “renegotiating” power. As Richard Young has suggested, however [26, p. 264; 27],
analyses of political motives do not go very far in explaining what is meant by the “sci-
ence” of the siddh¯antic texts or the “religion” of the Pur¯an.as, nor how the one is supposed
to have caused the deterioration of the other, nor how scientiﬁc and mathematical ideas
actually interacted with religious ones in these texts. Labels like “Orientalist”, “colonial”,
“nationalist”, though they may be helpful in understanding historical actors’ beliefs, tell us
nothing about what those actors actually encountered in the traditions they were discussing.
It is this background to such postcolonialist critiques that the present essay attempts to ﬁll
in. That is, was there in fact a shift in Indian cosmological views away from scientiﬁc
2See, for example, [7, pp. 20, 57–64] and [20, pp. 71–72, 83–85].

Derivation and revelation: the legitimacy of mathematical models in Indian cosmology
65
derivation towards religious revelation, and how were these Pur¯an.ic and siddh¯antic texts
involved in it?
2. The Pur¯an.as
The Pur¯an.as form part of the Hindu sacred texts that are categorized as “smr.ti”, literally
“what is remembered” or mediated by human authorship as opposed to “´sruti”, “what is
heard”, e.g., the Vedic hymns themselves and other directly revealed texts; but especially in
the later medieval period, they too were venerated as a source of divine truth. Within their
innumerable legends of the exploits of the gods and other beings is a common picture,
assembled in the ﬁrst few centuries CE from various cosmological concepts up to several
centuries older, of the structure of the universe. In this picture, as Wilkinson mentioned,
the earth is a ﬂat disk ﬁve hundred million yojanas in diameter with the sacred mountain
Meru standing 84 000 yojanas tall in its center. (There is no single standard value for the
length of the yojana, but it is more or less on the order of ten kilometers, which makes the
diameter of the Pur¯an.ic earth about ﬁve billion kilometers, or approximately equal to the
modern value for the size of the orbit of Neptune; Mount Meru reaches more than twice as
far as the distance to the moon by our reckoning.) Its surface is covered by the concentric
rings of seven continents and seven oceans, and above it the sun, moon, constellations, and
planets are carried in circles around the mass of Meru, which makes them appear to rise
and set. The pole-star is above Meru’s summit, upon which is the city of the gods. The
moon is higher above the earth than the sun in this system, so its phases as well as solar
and lunar eclipses are explained by a demon who periodically devours the luminaries, and
the ﬁve visible star-planets are higher than the constellations. These worlds will endure for
one “day of Brahm¯a” or 4 320 000 000 years, called a kalpa, which is one thousand times as
long as a “mah¯ayuga” or “great age”. Each mah¯ayuga in turn is divided into four unequal
yugas of which the last, least, and worst is the Kaliyuga of 432 000 years. (See [16,19].)
This cosmology, unsurprisingly, is not adequate for mathematical prediction of the mo-
tions of the heavenly bodies as seen from the earth, and that was never its intended purpose.
That function was performed in the last few centuries BCE by a collection of simple arith-
metic rules for maintaining a relatively crude luni-solar calendar; it did not set up geometric
models that challenged the Pur¯an.ic cosmology.3
3. The siddh¯antas
Shortly after the beginning of the current era, under the inﬂuence of Graeco-Babylonian
and Hellenistic sources, more comprehensive astronomical treatises usually called siddh¯a-
ntas—which in this context may be rendered by “astronomical systems”—began to appear.
The remnants we still have of the earliest of these texts are devoted mostly to arithmetic
schemes for predicting celestial events, comparable to those in older Babylonian texts.
But as David Pingree has shown [16], by the ﬁfth century at the latest a siddh¯antic model
3Such texts are discussed in [15]. In fact, as noted in [16, p. 275], some details of the Pur¯an.ic model are
apparently adapted from the crude parameters of these schemes.

66
K. Plofker
was established that assumed a spherical earth only about 5000 yojanas in circumference,
suspended in the middle of a sphere of ﬁxed stars, around whose center the planets includ-
ing the sun and moon were considered to move in tilted circular orbits with other circles
included to account for their orbital anomalies. The moon was now established as near-
est to the earth and the constellations most distant from it. Where possible, compromises
were made with the Pur¯an.ic system: for example, Mount Meru was retained as the north
terrestrial pole (though greatly reduced in size), and the unfamiliar southern terrestrial
hemisphere served as a convenient receptacle for exotic geographical features such as the
annular continents and oceans. The Pur¯an.ic divisions of time were respected, and celes-
tial rates of motion and distances were chosen so that all the bodies could complete integer
numbers of revolutions about the earth from the same starting-point in one kalpa or lifetime
of the worlds. But this siddh¯antic model was now committed to certain mathematical con-
straints in return for its increased explanatory and predictive power. For instance, to explain
the varying height of the pole star as seen at different localities, the earth must be more or
less uniformly spherical; to account for the unchanging appearance of the stars’ positions
relative to one another, it must be tiny compared to the sphere of the heavens. Accounting
quantitatively for eclipses and lunar phases by the conﬁgurations of three spherical bodies
rather than by demonic agents requires that the moon’s orbit be smaller than the sun’s;
and all the bodies’ motions must be predictable and geometrically constrained so that their
positions can be computed trigonometrically. These assumptions were retained by most of
the siddh¯antas of the medieval period, of which the last to have great inﬂuence was the
Siddh¯anta´siroman.i composed by Bh¯askara in the middle of the twelfth century.
4. Contradiction and concession
Apparently from their earliest stages, siddh¯antic texts began making explicit their tensions
with the existing Pur¯an.ic model, although at ﬁrst not systematically. For example, the as-
tronomical treatise of ¯Aryabhat.a around 500 CE stressed the earth’s sphericity:
The globe of the earth [made of] earth, water, ﬁre, and air, in the middle of the cage of the constel-
lations [formed of] circles, surrounded by the orbits [of the planets], in the center of the heavens,
is everywhere circular. In the same way that the [spherical] bulb of a kadamba-ﬂower is entirely
covered with blossoms, so is the globe of the earth [covered] by all the beings born of the water
and the land.4
And it ﬂatly contradicted the Pur¯an.ic magnitude of Mt. Meru: “Meru is measured by one
yojana ...”.5 In the same vein, Brahmagupta’s siddh¯anta about 130 years later explicitly
challenged the Pur¯an.ic assumption that the moon is farther away than the sun: “If the moon
[were] above the sun [as the Pur¯an.as indicate], how would [its] power of increase and
decrease in brightness, etc., [be produced] from calculation [of the position of] the moon?
The closer half would always be bright”.6 Brahmagupta’s contemporary Bh¯askara (not to
4vr.ttabhapañjaramadhye kaks.y¯aparives.t.itah. khamadhyagatah. | mr.jjala´sikhiv¯ayumayo bh¯ugolah. sarvato vr.ttah.
∥yadvat kadambapus.pagranthih. pracitah. samantatah. kusumaih. | tadvaddhi sarvasattvair jalajaih. sthalajai´s ca
bh¯ugolah. ∥(Gola, 6–7 [22, pp. 258–259].)
5merur yojanam¯atrah. . . . (Gola, 11 [22, p. 261].)
6sitavr.ddhih¯aniv¯ıry¯adi ´sa´s¯a˙nk¯aj j¯ayate katham. gan.it¯at | upari raver indu´s ced arv¯agardham. sad¯a ´suklam ∥
(Br¯ahmasphut.asiddh¯anta 7, 1 [6, p. 100].)

Derivation and revelation: the legitimacy of mathematical models in Indian cosmology
67
be confused with the twelfth-century author of the same name), commenting on ¯Arya-
bhat.a’s work, opposed his own geographic information to the Pur¯an.ic values of terrestrial
distances; he also (according to the summary of a later commentator) explained that the
Pur¯an.ic size of Meru was impossible because it would block northern stars from sight.7
In the middle of the eighth century, an astronomer named Lalla devoted an entire chapter
(bluntly entitled “Errors”) of his own siddh¯anta to refuting various assumptions such as the
causation of eclipses by a demon and the ﬂatness of the earth:
If your opinion is that a demon invariably devours [the moon or sun] by means of magic, how is
it [that the event can be] found by calculation? And how [is it that there is] no eclipse except [at]
new or full moon?
Eclipses, conjunctions of planets, risings, the appearance of the lunar crescent, the rule for [com-
puting] the shadow at a given [time]—the solution of all ﬁve is accurate [when found] by means
of the [siddh¯antic] size of the earth. So how could it be [as] large [as the Pur¯an.as say]?
Those who know calculation say [that] a hundredth part of the circumference [of the earth] is seen
as ﬂat. So the earth appears ﬂat to this extent; it is just meant in that way.8
Here and in similar remarks by later authors,9 the validity of the siddh¯antic model was
defended essentially on the grounds that it was mathematically effective. The fact that
“calculation” or mathematical prediction agreed with observed result (or could be made to
agree with it, in the case of the apparent ﬂatness of the spherical earth) was an argument in
favor of the predictive model’s reality. So a more or less open breach was made between the
Pur¯an.ic model revealed by sacred texts and the siddh¯antic model derived from calculation
and observation, and remarks like these seem to make it clear which side an astronomer
was supposed to be on.
But if we look at other remarks within the same texts, the picture becomes more com-
plicated. It turns out that instead of simply defying revealed truth for the honor of mathe-
matical consistency, siddh¯anta authors were often trying to have the best of both worlds—
relying on their measurable and calculable universe while still availing themselves at need
of Pur¯an.ic authority. This was already indicated in the early inspiration of using features of
the Pur¯an.ic universe to ﬁll in the gaps (literally and ﬁguratively) in the geography or me-
chanics of the siddh¯antic one. Contradiction continued to be softened by compromise: for
example, ¯Aryabhat.a’s above-mentioned rejection of the traditional height of Mount Meru
did not imply any doubt as to whether the sacred mountain actually existed. In fact, his
assertion that Meru was only one yojana tall was immediately followed by an orthodox
Pur¯an.ic description of its appearance, “shining” and “covered with jewels”. Such minor
concessions to scriptural knowledge are not particularly surprising, as many ancient cos-
mographers similarly incorporated tradition and legend to supply some of the vast lacunae
in the available deﬁnite knowledge about terrestrial or celestial features. In addition, these
concessions made no detectable difference to the siddh¯antic universe: the authority of the
7G¯ıtik¯a 7, Gola 11 [22, pp. 28–29, 261–262].
8asuro yadi m¯ayay¯a yuto niyato ‘tigrasat¯ıti te matam | gan.itena katham. sa labhyate grahakr.tparva vin¯a kathañca
∥grahan. am. grahasa˙ngamodayau ´sa´si´sr.˙ngonnatir is.t.abh¯avidhih. | sy¯at pratyayapañcakam. sphut.am. ks.itim¯anena
bhavet mahat katham ∥pragun. ah. paridheh. ´sat¯am. ´sako gan.itajñ¯ah. kathayanti dr.´syate | pratibh¯ati tad¯a sam¯a mah¯ı
vis.aye yatra tathaiva gamyate ∥(´Sis.yadh¯ıvr. ddhidatantra 20, 22, 31, 35 [3, Vol. I, pp. 235–237]; other assertions
criticized by Lalla in this chapter include non-scriptural speculations such as ¯Aryabhat.a’s hypothesis of the earth’s
rotation.)
9See, for example, Siddh¯anta´siroman. i Gola 17, 11–16 [4, pp. 345–347].

68
K. Plofker
Pur¯an.as might be deferred to in unveriﬁable details, but it was generally not allowed to con-
tradict any point of real signiﬁcance to the astronomers’ model. Thus the Pur¯an.ic oceans of
wine, milk, etc., could be accepted by siddh¯anta authors as existing in the southern hemi-
sphere, beyond the realm of direct knowledge; but the Pur¯an.ic requirement that the earth be
supported from below by an equally unobservable tortoise or serpent or elephants, which
would imply a preferred “down” direction and thus jeopardize the credibility of uniformly
stable positions everywhere on a spherical earth, came in for sharp criticism.10
What is more remarkable is the ﬁrmness with which siddh¯antas often explicitly insisted
on the need to conform to the models of sacred texts—though admittedly, this criterion
was most often invoked by authors criticizing rival authors for having failed to meet it.
For example, the same Brahmagupta who rejected the Pur¯an.ic description of the moon’s
position made the following remark about ¯Aryabhat.a’s views on eclipses:
“How can the sun [illuminate] everything and [the demon] R¯ahu [be] otherwise? Since there is
variation in the [amount of] obscuration in a solar eclipse, an eclipse of the sun or moon is not
caused by R¯ahu”: [what is] thus declared by Var¯ahamihira, ¯Sr¯ıs.en.a, ¯Aryabhat.a, and others is op-
posed to popular [opinion] and is not borne out by the Vedas and smr.ti . . .
“[The demon] Svarbh¯anu or ¯Asuri has afﬂicted the sun with darkness”: this is the statement in the
Veda. So what is said here is in agreement with ´sruti and smr.ti . . . The earth’s shadow does not
obscure the moon, nor the moon the sun, in an eclipse. R¯ahu, standing there equal to them in size,
obscures the moon and the sun.11
A good deal of this sort of disparagement was traded back and forth by siddh¯antic au-
thors, particularly with respect to one another’s choices of values of the basic astronomical
parameters such as the great divisions of time. Objections to the “heterodox” parameter
choices of one paks.a or major astronomical school by the adherents of another were most
common, even though the different siddh¯antic models all resembled one another far more
closely than they did the Pur¯an.ic system.12 We cannot assume with certainty, though, that
critics were always personally convinced of the unimpeachable authority of the Pur¯an.ic
positions that they criticized their rivals for contradicting: authors who indulged in dis-
putes of this sort were generally lavish with their blame, and may have seized with equal
willingness on any debatable point they could ﬁnd. Likewise, their own innovations might
be made for a variety of reasons—e.g., numerical elegance or ease of computation—and
justiﬁed only ex post facto by appeals to smr.ti.
10This generally took the form of pointing out that the idea led to an inﬁnite regress of supporting and supported
bodies (e.g., in ´Sis. yadh¯ıvr. ddhidatantra 20, 41 [3, Vol. I, p. 238], Vat.e´svarasiddh¯anta Gola 5, 5 [23, Vol. I, p. 326],
Siddh¯anta´siroman. i Gola 17, 4 [4, p. 344]). But as [12] remarks, a more conciliatory note was struck by Jñ¯anar¯aja
in the sixteenth century when he suggested that the traditional serpent, etc., might support the earth from within its
spherical shell. The development of such irenic solutions in astronomical works in the second half of the second
millennium is further discussed below.
11kim. prativis.ayam. s¯ury¯a r¯ahu´s c¯anyo yato ravigrahan. e | gr¯as¯anyatvam. na tato r¯ahukr.tam. grahan.am arkendvoh.
∥evam. var¯ahamihira´sr¯ıs.en. ¯aryabhat.avis.n.ucandr¯adyaih. | lokaviruddham abhihitam. vedasmr.tisam. hit¯av¯ahyam ∥. . .
svarbh¯anur¯asurir inam. tamas¯a vivy¯adha vedav¯akyam idam | ´srutisam. hit¯asmr.t¯ın¯am. bhavati yathaikyam. taduktir
itah. ∥. . . bh¯uch¯ayendum ato hi grahan.e ch¯adayati n¯arkam indur v¯a | tatsthas tadvy¯asasamo r¯ahu´s ch¯adayati
´sa´sis¯uryau ∥(Br¯ahmasphut.asiddh¯anta 21, 38–39, 43, 48 [6, pp. 372–374]. Here Brahmagupta has even taken the
unusual step of discarding part of the mathematically predictive model in favor of the scriptural explanation.)
12E.g., Brahmagupta complained (Br¯ahmasphut.asiddh¯anta 1, 9 [6, p. 3]) that ¯Aryabhat.a’s divisions of kalpas
and yugas deviated from the values deﬁned in smr.ti; Vat.e´svara in the tenth century retorted (Vat.e´svarasiddh¯anta
1, 10, 6 [23, Vol. I, p. 72]) that Brahmagupta’s own presentation of these time-units was similarly defective.

Derivation and revelation: the legitimacy of mathematical models in Indian cosmology
69
Some authors went so far as to compose new texts that modiﬁed basic parameters to
bring them more in line with the Pur¯an.ic requirements. For instance, the author of the
early ninth-century S¯uryasiddh¯anta, wishing to conform to the Pur¯an.ic time divisions pre-
served by Brahmagupta while still honoring ¯Aryabhat.a’s requirement for a mean great
conjunction of all planets at the start of the current Kaliyuga, got around the difﬁculty by
hypothesizing a long period of quiescent creation at the beginning of the universe when
the planets are motionless: they begin to revolve only at the right time to bring them to the
desired conjunction (S¯uryasiddh¯anta 1, 10–24 [5, pp. 5–11]). The entire siddh¯antic school
known as the Saurapaks.a was based on this hybridization, whose doctrinal authority was
clinched by ascribing the authorship of the work to the Sun-god, S¯urya. However, not even
inter-paks.a disputes or “schisms” can be taken as evidence of unambiguous commitment
to the reality of any one particular model, as the boundaries between paks.as with different
parameters were in fact highly permeable. Not only did some authors write texts in more
than one paks.a, changing their critical tendencies accordingly, but they also availed them-
selves of another form of compromise that took shape in the medieval period: namely, the
so-called b¯ıjas or corrections for transforming computations starting with one set of para-
meters into their equivalents using the parameters of a different school [17]. Thus neither
the siddh¯antas’ various parameter choices nor their theological ones seem to have been
considered completely mutually unacceptable, in spite of their mutual criticisms.
To complete this kaleidoscope of perspectives on scientiﬁc truth, it should be noted that
innovations contradicting the sacred tradition might even be justiﬁed by questioning the
consistency of the sacred texts themselves. ¯Aryabhat.a’s uncanonical division of the life-
time of the universe into 1008 rather than 1000 mah¯ayugas (which, as we have seen, was
harshly criticized by Brahmagupta on account of its deviation from the Pur¯an.ic value) was
defended by his commentator Bh¯askara as follows: since some religious texts agreed that
the kalpa consisted of a thousand mah¯ayugas, while others maintained it was made up of
fourteen 71-mah¯ayuga periods or 994 mah¯ayugas, then because of “the contradiction in
their own words” implied by the unequal numbers, ¯Aryabhat.a’s value could not be consid-
ered authoritatively contradicted ( ¯Aryabhat.¯ıya K¯alakriy¯a, 8 [22, pp. 197–199]). Note that
here, the charge that a mathematical model had abandoned the tenets of religious revela-
tion was countered by the complaint that the revealed texts had fallen short of mathematical
consistency.
In short, the siddh¯antic model of the cosmos may be said to have substituted math-
ematical and physical truth criteria for the arguments from authority on which Pur¯an.ic
cosmology was based. Except that the authority of the Pur¯an.as was still active at some
level in helping shape and validate the siddh¯antic texts, and siddh¯antic parameters might
be modiﬁed on that account (even, allegedly, by direct divine intervention). Except that
such modiﬁcation of parameters did not necessarily imply the repudiation or obsolescence
of previous, less canonical ones. Except that the validity of the canonical parameters them-
selves might be subject to testing by quantitative truth criteria. And so on, in an apparently
endless cycle of caveats and qualiﬁcations.
The Muslim scholar and scientist al-B¯ır¯un¯ı, who encountered this epistemological
labyrinth in his study of Indian astronomy during his sojourn in India in the eleventh cen-
tury, commented as follows:

70
K. Plofker
The religious books of the Hindus and their codes of tradition, the Pur¯an.as, contain sentences
about the shape of the world which stand in direct opposition to scientiﬁc truth as known to their
astronomers. By these books people are guided in fulﬁlling the rites of their religion, and by means
of them the great mass of the nation have been wheedled into a predilection for astronomical
calculation and astrological predictions and warnings. The consequence is, that they show much
affection to their astronomers . . . For this the astronomers requite them by accepting their popular
notions as truth, by conforming themselves to them, however far from truth most of them may be,
and by presenting them with such spiritual stuff as they stand in need of. This is the reason why
the two theories, the vulgar and the scientiﬁc, have become intermingled in the course of time,
why the doctrines of the astronomers have been disturbed and confused, in particular the doctrines
of those authors—and they are the majority—who simply copy their predecessors, who take the
bases of their science from tradition and do not make them the objects of independent scientiﬁc
research [21, Vol. I, pp. 264–265].
Al-B¯ır¯un¯ı’s interpretation of the “intermingling” of siddh¯antic and Pur¯an.ic models is it-
self somewhat reminiscent of the critiques of Orientalist scholarship mentioned above: it
presents the “corruption” of mathematical astronomy by religious myth as a mere renego-
tiation of power on the part of astronomers seeking to enhance their professional authority.
While his assertions do not do justice to the complexity of the interplay of various kinds of
authority in siddh¯antic texts as sketched above, they do show clearly that the idea that “tra-
dition replaced observation” in Indian astronomy “as surely as religion supplanted science”
is hardly a “European Orientalist” innovation.
5. The quest for non-contradiction
A fascinating new form of this “intermingling” of theories, developed apparently in the
second half of the second millennium, has inspired growing scholarly interest in recent
years;13 it took shape as a separate subgenre of astronomical writings whose explicit
goal was to reconcile the discrepancies between Pur¯an.ic and siddh¯antic truth claims.
Beginning no later than the sixteenth century and extending at least well into the nine-
teenth, several authors composed entire works or sections of works discussing this topic of
“virodhaparih¯ara”, literally “removal of contradiction”, or more simply “avirodha”, “non-
contradiction”. Their basic approach was to defend the divine truth of the Pur¯an.ic texts
while acknowledging the usefulness of the siddh¯antic model for practical computation,
and/or to treat the siddh¯antic universe as a small subset of the Pur¯an.ic one (sometimes
ingeniously reinterpreting siddh¯antic texts for the purpose). As Richard Young has noted
[27], some of the more extensive works of this type were composed in response to attempts
by Westerners or Western-trained Indians to promote the Copernican model. One such text,
the 1837 Avirodhaprak¯a´sa or “Light on Non-contradiction” of Yajñe´svara, was in fact in-
tended as a refutation of a heliocentrist treatise written by an Indian student of Wilkinson’s.
A sampling of its verses gives an idea of some of the arguments typically brought to bear
on this issue:
. . . The siddh¯antas were produced by incarnations [of the gods] S¯urya and so forth. The circle
of the earth, etc., stated there for the purpose of performing computations—which [is] much too
small—having been taken for truth by men such as ¯Arya[bhat.a] and Brahmagupta, controversy
13Cf. [16, p. 280], [9–13,18,26].

Derivation and revelation: the legitimacy of mathematical models in Indian cosmology
71
arose. And by Westerners such as the red-faced ones [i.e., the British], once they had grasped the
meanings set forth in the siddh¯antas and observed some part of the earth by means of an instrument,
a picture [of the cosmos] as it appears to the eye [was] constructed. And after consideration of the
picture [according to] the siddh¯antas [and that] of the Pur¯an.as, this non-contradictory knowledge
is accurately stated by us.
On the great earth as stated by the Pur¯an.as, between the salt sea and the Him¯alaya, the western
portion of the land known as Bh¯arata is called the Bh¯arata region . . . It is raised in the middle like
an overturned dundubhi drum, in the middle of which the pole-star should be seen on the top. . . .
The pole-star, being visible in a place fully ﬁve thousand kro´sas [1250 yojanas] in extent [distant]
from that, is seen [as] depressed [toward] the earth. . . .
It is believed that a sphere of stars is on all sides of the earth [hanging] in space. Similarly, because
of [false] conﬁdence in the change in the height of the pole-star [in different places] on the earth,
the resemblance of the earth to a ball, and by deduction [its] much-too-small dimensions, [are]
assumed.14
Yajñe´svara here is rejecting Lalla’s notion that mathematical predictive power gives a
claim to reality; the siddh¯antic picture, he avers, may be useful for computation but it was
never intended by its divine architects to be mistaken for truth. At the same time, how-
ever, in order to maintain his claims for non-contradiction, Yajñe´svara must make at least
a piece of the Pur¯an.ic cosmos conform, albeit clumsily, to the geometric models set up by
the siddh¯antas. The earth’s sphericity that changes the apparent height of the pole-star at
different latitudes, for example, is more or less approximated by a raised central portion
of the continent and by vertical parallax. These suggestions are geometrically quite feeble
as equivalents for spherical astronomy (and in fact Yajñe´svara had to make some modiﬁ-
cations to them in a later exchange with the same opponent [10]); but they illustrate the
determination of avirodha authors not to relinquish their explicit adherence to the essential
truth of the Pur¯an.ic cosmology.
This brief example barely scratches the surface of its subject: unanswered questions
abound concerning avirodha literature, its relation to the siddh¯antas and to heliocentrism,
its place in Indian epistemology, and its successors in later genres concerning “reconcili-
ation” of scientiﬁc and religious texts. At present, however, this discussion must return to
the siddh¯antas themselves and to the ways in which they were vulnerable to the arguments
of avirodha.
6. The status of siddh¯antas in the nineteenth century
One reason that avirodha texts could consider spherical astronomy as merely a convenient
computational ﬁction was that, paradoxically, it was treated in just this way by many of the
14. . . kr.t¯avat¯araih. s¯ury¯adyaih. siddh¯ant¯ah. parikalpit¯ah. ∥gan.itavyavah¯ar¯aya tatra bh¯uman.d.al¯adikam. | uktam aty
alpam¯anam. yat tadev¯ad¯ayatattvatah. ∥vic¯aro vartitas tv ¯aryabrahmagupt¯adibhir naraih. | yavanais t¯amravaktr¯adyair
api siddh¯antasamsthit¯an ∥arth¯an sam. gr.hya yantrena tath¯a pratyaks.adr.s.t.itah. | kañcid bh¯ubh¯agam¯alaks.ya par-
ilekho vikalpitah. ∥siddh¯ant¯an¯am. pur¯an. ¯an¯am. parilekhasya ceks.an. ¯at | asm¯abhir avirodho ‘yam. vijñ¯atah. sphut.am
ucyate ∥pur¯an. oktamah¯abh¯umau ks.¯ar¯abdhihima´sailayoh. | antargatasya vars.asya bh¯arat¯akhyasya pa´scimah. ∥
bh¯ago bh¯aratakhan. d. ¯akhyah. . . . ks.¯arav¯ardhijalair vy¯apto nyubjadundubhibh¯an. d.avat | madhyonnato ‘sti yan-
madhye dr.´syeta ´sirasi dhruvah. ∥. . . tasm¯at samantatah. pañcasahasrakro´sasam. mite | de´se vilokyam¯anas tu
dhruvo bh¯ulagna ¯ıks.yate ∥. . . bhagola´s c¯abhito bh¯umim ¯ak¯a´se ‘st¯ıti kalpyate | tath¯a bhuvidhruvauccasya
t¯aratamyaprat¯ıtitah. ∥bh¯umeh. kan.d.ukas¯adr.´syam. yukty¯a c¯atyalpam¯anat¯a ∥(Avirodhaprak¯a´sa, 6–12, 13, 15, 18–19
[24, pp. 1–2].)

72
K. Plofker
contemporary astronomers who used it. Lancelot Wilkinson noted that the “city joshí”, an
astronomical professional superior in status and training to the typical village astrologer,
. . . can not only ﬁnd the places of the sun, moon, and planets, but also work out eclipses. But the
operation may be called purely mechanical, or an effort of memory. He can ﬁnd the equatorial
gnomonic shadow, from thence deduce the latitude . . . but is wholly ignorant as to what things
in nature are expressed by these terms. The verses of [the sixteenth-century astronomical texts]
the Graha Lághava and Tithí Chintámaní contain only abbreviated formulae for calculations; their
wording is uncouth, and to the uninitiated, more unintelligible than an enigma. But though the
ingenuity displayed in thus abbreviating calculations is considerable, it has had the effect above
noticed of superinducing an utter neglect of the Siddhántas, in which the principles of the science
are so fully, and in many respects so rationally, explained. I have met and cross-questioned many
hundreds of joshís of late years; but in this large number, have found only two men who had a
rational and full acquaintance with their own system [25, p. 508].
Wilkinson’s knowledge of the contemporary state of Indian astronomy was of course im-
perfect. The copying of manuscripts of siddh¯antas (which, at least in some cases, implied
study and use of the texts) continued up to and through the nineteenth century; inﬂuential
commentaries and even new siddh¯antas continued to appear, although they did not equal in
importance or popularity the major works of the earlier period. Furthermore, there contin-
ued to be at least some pandits who read and understood the texts well enough to discuss
them with the European Sanskritists who translated them. On the other hand, there seems
no reason to doubt Wilkinson’s description of his own experience: it is not implausible that
many professional astronomers were able to manipulate a set of rules whose geometric
implications they did not fully understand (and according to al-B¯ır¯un¯ı, such astronomers
were not rare even back in the eleventh century).
The trend toward mechanical application would have been facilitated by the great inﬂu-
ence of the two works mentioned by Wilkinson. The Tithicint¯aman. i, a set of astronomical
tables, and the Grahal¯aghava, an astronomical handbook, were composed by the same
author in sixteenth-century Gujarat, and were both extremely popular [14, Vol. 2, pp. 94–
103]. Both table texts such as the Tithicint¯aman. i, which developed in imitation of Islamic
models in the second millennium, and handbooks like the Grahal¯aghava, which are as old
as siddh¯antas, focus on the necessities of practical astronomical calculation and ignore un-
derlying cosmological models. Astronomers who could be trained in the practices of their
craft without ever needing to use directly the geometric models from which they were de-
rived would indeed have less motive to maintain the reality of those models in deﬁance
of the venerated Pur¯an.ic cosmology, and might even, as Wilkinson found, remain entirely
oblivious that any such contradiction existed.
7. Mathematical models in siddh¯antas
Finally, there is the question of the integrity of the siddhantas’ own mathematical models.
Although, as previously noted, the basic siddh¯antic cosmos is a quasi-Ptolemaic arrange-
ment of spheres and circles, the computational practices of Indian astronomy usually held a
greater share of the practitioners’ interest than the geometric models underlying them or the
physical consequences they implied. This almost always meant that when computational

Derivation and revelation: the legitimacy of mathematical models in Indian cosmology
73
convenience or creativity came up against physical or geometric consistency, consistency
took second place.
For example, a planet’s mean position in its circular orbit was geometrically corrected by
siddh¯antas to its true position according to the position of its “apex”, a point that could be
considered to correspond to the apogee of an eccentric orbit. However, it was not clearly
speciﬁed in the correction process whether the planet actually moved upon an eccentric
circle or a mathematically equivalent epicycle. Even Ptolemy, of course, did not always
make a conﬁdent physical assumption in favor of either of these mathematically indistin-
guishable structures. But the S¯uryasiddh¯anta, for example, carried conventionalism much
farther than Ptolemy would have dreamed of when it posited another mathematically in-
distinguishable alternative, in which the planet moves on its concentric orbit and the cor-
rection is caused by a demon that stands at the apogee and pulls on the planet with a cord
of wind (S¯uryasiddh¯anta 2, 1–3 [5, p. 31]). Similarly, the physical speciﬁcation of circular
planetary orbits was never explicitly reconciled with position-correcting procedures that
modiﬁed the orbital radius depending on the planet’s position, effectively turning the or-
bit into a quasi-ellipse. Moreover, various coefﬁcients were used that changed the size of
the epicycle radii, causing them to swell or shrink (sometimes discontinuously) depending
on the planet’s orbital anomaly or orientation with respect to the observer, but no phys-
ical reason was suggested for this phenomenon. Even the all-important sphericity of the
earth and the heavens was not handled in an entirely self-consistent manner: a commonly
used approximation for longitudinal difference effectively treated a slice of the earth as a
cylinder, and celestial spherical triangles were routinely solved as if they were plane.15 In
addition, the early siddh¯antic texts also took on, over time, a venerable status of their own,
particularly when attributed to gods or seers. (Note the distinction drawn in Yajñe´svara’s
opening comment above between the original intent of divine siddh¯anta authors and its
subsequent misinterpretations in the texts of merely human astronomers.) This meant that
various approximate or erroneous formulas found in them could, and did, continue to co-
exist with more exact ones in later texts. Given the comparatively low priority allotted to
strict mathematical consistency, and the correspondingly high tolerance for physical and
geometric approximations, it seems less surprising that avirodha authors should venture to
describe the whole siddh¯antic cosmos as based on computational convenience and devoid
of true physical reality.
8. Conclusion
What can we make, then, of the claims of Wilkinson and other British Orientalists that
Indian astronomy had degenerated from an earlier state of comparative scientiﬁc purity
under the inﬂuence of religious superstition? Certainly we can allow them a partial basis in
fact. The sacred cosmology of the Pur¯an.as and the mathematical models of the siddh¯antas
did clash in many important respects, and several siddh¯antic texts of the ﬁrst and early sec-
ond millennium issued open contradictions of Pur¯an.ic assertions. For reasons not yet fully
understood, after the middle of the second millennium it became increasingly necessary
15All these aspects of siddh¯antic astronomy are illustrated in, for example, the editions of [3–6,22,23].

74
K. Plofker
to tone down those contradictions. The arguments of avirodha were marshalled to explain
them away, and the simultaneous growth in the inﬂuence of “cookbook” astronomical man-
uals made them irrelevant to many practicing astronomers. Mathematical arguments with
which earlier authors had conﬁdently countered scriptural ones now stood as examples of
human limitation and error, in opposition to sacred knowledge. The recognition of these
developments cannot be dismissed as merely the operation of imperialist self-interest in
constructing an Orientalist historiography.
But Wilkinson’s assertion that the siddh¯antas “had [their] existence only on the refuta-
tion and abandonment of the Pur¯an.ic system” is also undeniably exaggerated. In fact, the
idea of austere scholarly rigor heroically defending a “scientiﬁc method” of physical ob-
servation and mathematical deduction against superstitious priestcraft, however appealing
it may have seemed to nineteenth-century Protestants thoroughly reconciled to Copernicus
and Newton, does not ﬁt the Indian model very well. Since Sanskrit astronomy was not
delimited by the goal of testing a single self-consistent geometric and kinematic system
against the results of observational experiment, it had greater liberty in its methods than
did the Hellenistic/Islamic astronomy (and its modern European successor) that were so
constrained. The mathematical models that Indian astronomy inherited and reﬁned were
legitimated by a wealth of different criteria that must have seemed startlingly incongruous
to a nineteenth-century Englishman, as indeed they had also done to an eleventh-century
Muslim. The validity of these models was variously claimed by the texts to be conﬁrmed
not only by internal consistency and agreement with observed phenomena, but by numer-
ical elegance and symmetry, agreement with the cosmological premises of sacred texts,
conformity to earlier siddh¯antas which might be considered on a par with sacred texts them-
selves, and—the ultimate argument ex auctoritate—ascription to direct divine authorship.
It is hardly to be wondered at that Wilkinson’s attempts to promote a heliocentric system
(albeit a Sanskritized and siddh¯anticized one) that violated almost all of these criteria met
with strong resistance. Wilkinson (who had himself studied and translated siddh¯antas) and
other Western scholars perhaps simply did not fully realize the complexity and variety of
siddh¯antic claims to truth; or perhaps they ignored or slurred over them in order to make a
better case for modern Western theories, whose eventual dominance ﬁnally displaced San-
skrit astronomy’s delicate balance between the mathematical derivation of facts and the
divine revelation of truth.
9. Bibliographical notes
Unfortunately, there is not a great deal of published research on this aspect of the rela-
tionship of mathematics and the divine in the Indian intellectual tradition. The inﬂuence of
religious scripture does not usually receive close scrutiny from researchers studying San-
skrit astronomical texts. For one thing, it is difﬁcult to draw a clear and consistent picture of
the opinions of authors who reject some assumptions of sacred cosmology while espousing
others; for another, to many scholars eager to validate the scientiﬁc achievements of me-
dieval Indians according to modern criteria, the very notion of their deferring to scriptural
authority at all is something of an embarrassment. Nonetheless, many interesting refer-
ences to ´sruti and smr.ti within important siddh¯antic texts and commentaries are accessible

Derivation and revelation: the legitimacy of mathematical models in Indian cosmology
75
in the published editions by Chatterjee, Chaturvedi, both Dvived¯ıs, and Shukla; for non-
Sanskritists, the English introductions and/or translations and commentaries provided by
Chatterjee and Shukla, though not very detailed on this topic, will have to sufﬁce.
On the subject of avirodha literature and its attempts to reconcile sacred and secular
cosmologies, the cited articles by Pingree, Young, and Minkowski, and the works therein
referenced, contain virtually all the published research now available. The general study of
science, science policy, and science scholarship in British India is a sizable and growing
ﬁeld, well mapped out in the monographs of Arnold, Kumar, and Prakash. The nineteenth-
century writings of Wilkinson, Burgess, and Macaulay, and the many publications surveyed
by Burgess, supply colonial Orientalists’ views of these issues in their own words.
References
[1] D. Arnold, Science, Technology, and Medicine in Colonial India, The New Cambridge History of India III,
vol. 5, Cambridge, 2000.
[2] J. Burgess, Notes on Hindu astronomy and the history of our knowledge of it, Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society (1893), 717–761.
[3] B. Chatterjee (ed.), The ´Sis. yadh¯ıvr. ddhidatantra of Lalla, 2 vols., New Delhi, 1981.
[4] M.D. Chaturvedi (ed.), Siddh¯anta´siroman. i of Bh¯askar¯ac¯arya, Varanasi, 1981.
[5] K.C. Dvived¯ı (ed.), S¯uryasiddh¯anta, Varanasi, 1987.
[6] S. Dvived¯ı (ed.), Br¯ahmasphut.asiddh¯anta, Benares, 1901/1902.
[7] D. Kumar, Science and the Raj, New Delhi, 1995.
[8] T.B. Macaulay, Minute of 2 February 1835 on Indian education, in: Macaulay, Prose and Poetry,
G.M. Young, ed., Cambridge, MA, 1957, pp. 721–724, 729.
[9] C.Z. Minkowski, N¯ılakan. t.ha’s cosmographical comments in the Bh¯ıs.maparvan, Pur¯an.a 42 (1) (2000), 24–
40.
[10] C.Z. Minkowski, The Pan. d. it as public intellectual: the controversy over virodha or inconsistency in the
astronomical sciences, The Pandit: Traditional Sanskrit Scholarship in India, A. Michaels, ed., New Delhi,
2001, pp. 79–96.
[11] C.Z. Minkowski, The Bh¯ugolavic¯ara: A cosmological manuscript from Jaipur, Subh¯as.in¯ı: Dr. Saroja Bhate
Felicitation Volume, G.U. Thite, ed., Pune, 2002, pp. 250–263.
[12] C.Z. Minkowski, Competing cosmologies in early modern Indian astronomy, Studies in the History of the
Exact Sciences in Honour of David Pingree, C. Burnett et al., eds., Leiden, 2004, pp. 349–385.
[13] C.Z. Minkowski, A nineteenth century Sanskrit treatise on the Revolution of the Earth: Govinda Deva’s
Bh¯ubhramana, to appear in SCIAMVS.
[14] D. Pingree, Census of the Exact Sciences in Sanskrit, Series A, Vols. 1–5, Philadelphia, 1970–1994.
[15] D. Pingree, The Mesopotamian origin of Early Indian mathematical astronomy, Journal for the History of
Astronomy 4 (1973), 1–12.
[16] D. Pingree, The Pur¯an. as and Jyotih. ´s¯astra: astronomy, Journal of the American Oriental Society 110 (2)
(1990), 274–280.
[17] D. Pingree, B¯ıja-Corrections in Indian astronomy, Journal for the History of Astronomy 27 (1996), 161–
172.
[18] D. Pingree, Paur¯an. ic versus Siddh¯antic astronomy, English Abstracts, X World Sanskrit Conference, Ban-
galore, 1997, pp. 318–319.
[19] K. Plofker, Astronomy and astrology in India, to appear in the Cambridge Encyclopedia of History of
Science.
[20] G. Prakash, Another Reason: Science and the Imagination of Modern India, Princeton, 1999.
[21] E. Sachau, Alberuni’s India, 2 vols., repr. New Delhi, 1992.
[22] K.S. Shukla (ed.), ¯Aryabhat.¯ıya of ¯Aryabhat.a with the Commentary of Bh¯askara I and Some´svara, New
Delhi, 1976.

76
K. Plofker
[23] K.S. Shukla (ed.), Vat.e´svarasiddh¯anta and Gola of Vat.e´svara, 2 vols., New Delhi, 1986.
[24] B. Subb¯aji, Avirodhaprak¯a´saviveka, Bombay, 1837.
[25] L. Wilkinson, On the use of the Siddhántas in the work of native education, Journal of the Asiatic Society
of Bengal 3 (1834), 504–519.
[26] R.F. Young, Receding from Antiquity: Indian responses to Science and Christianity on the Margins of Em-
pire, 1834–1844, Kokusaigaku-kenky¯u 16 (1997), 241–274.
[27] R.F. Young, ‘Political’ Science: Astronomy in India, 1800–1850, forthcoming.

CHAPTER 3
The Pythagoreans
Reviel Netz
Department of Classic, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
E-mail: netz@leland.stanford.edu
Contents
1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
2. Pythagoreanism in Plato and Aristotle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
3. Pythagoreanism: some evidence from the Pythagoreans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
4. Mathematics and the divine in the Pythagoreans: a suggestion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
Notice for further reading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
77


The Pythagoreans
79
1. Introduction
The place of Pythagoras in the history of mathematics and the divine is, in a sense, well
known. We may, for instance, follow Russell: “Pythagoras... was intellectually one of the
most important man that ever lived... Mathematics... in him, is intimately connected with
a peculiar form of mysticism. The inﬂuence of mathematics on philosophy, partly owing
to him, has, ever since his time, been both profound and unfortunate... What appears as
Platonism is, when analysed, found to be in essence Pythagoreanism. The whole concep-
tion of an eternal world, revealed to the intellect but not to the senses, is derived from him”
[13, pp. 29, 37].
Much is told, in late sources, about a person from the sixth Century, called Pythagoras—
in whom religion, mathematics and proto-Platonism come together. Of most of this, we are
now less conﬁdent than Russell was in 1945. It appears that later antiquity had recreated
the ﬁgure of Pythagoras and that later periods have contributed their own until the famous
character of Russell’s description was ﬁnally formed.1 Little, then, will be said here on
Pythagoras himself.
There are other people, ‘Pythagoreans’, active in the late ﬁfth and early fourth centuries,
whom we need to investigate. The most important of these were, apparently, Philolaus and
Archytas. They did not suffer the fame of Pythagoras and thus the truth concerning them
is somewhat easier to sift from the accretion of later legends. Still, what we know is little,
and is always dependent on later sources. And so we are driven back—as is so often the
case in the study of early Greek philosophy—to Plato and Aristotle.
What I mean is not just that the later tradition concerning Pythagoras and Pythagore-
anism was formed, in antiquity, through the double prismatic effect of Plato and Aristotle
(this is the case for all Pre-Socratic thought). I also mean that the historical signiﬁcance of
Pythagoreans lies precisely in this: that they were important for Plato and for Aristotle. It
is clear that Plato and Aristotle opportunistically changed the meaning of the Pythagorean
sources available to them; in my view, the important thing is that they saw there an op-
portunity. Plato and Aristotle perceived an afﬁnity between a group of thinkers whom they
associated with Pythagoras. They further saw in this group something useful for their own
philosophy. To Plato, the usefulness was in the encouragement of a kindred spirit; to Aris-
totle, the usefulness was in the warning of a philosophical pitfall.
Having said that, let us be clear: Philolaus and Archytas—indeed, even Pythagoras
himself—were real historical ﬁgures. Plato could hardly have invented them. Certainly,
he did not invent Archytas as, in all probability, the two even met in the ﬂesh. Ever since
antiquity, this meeting led to speculation and that is how a certain account of Plato’s growth
is formulated:
Socrates dies when Plato is but twenty-nine. Plato, then, becomes the author of the early
dialogues of Socratic refutation that prove the limits of everyday Athenian knowledge.
Later, in his forties, he sails to the west; he stops at Tarentum and makes the acquaintance
of Archytas—and soon thereafter the Meno is written. Now emerges a new, mathematical
and Pythagorean Plato, with all that follows for western philosophy.2
1On all of this, see [2].
2The best exposition of this account is in [16].

80
R. Netz
This is possible—though I ﬁnd it difﬁcult to believe that Plato, of all people, would
have to be created from the outside, once by Socrates and then by Archytas. (He does
not appear, from his dialogues, to have been easy to inﬂuence.) We just do not know who
invented whom: did Archytas invent Plato—by making him a Pythagorean? Or did Plato
invent Archytas—namely, did Platonist philosophy give, retrospectively, a meaning to the
thought of so-called Pythagoreans?
Be that as it may: the truth is, to repeat, we do not know. From this basic ignorance,
let us begin to look for Pythagoreanism and the divine. First, we look at the use made of
the Pythagoreans by Plato and Aristotle (Section 2). Then we turn to the Pythagoreans
themselves (Section 3). (Both Sections 2 and 3 are, of course, highly selective.) Section 4
offers a tentative explanation of why the Pythagoreans would initiate the history of the
relation between mathematics and the divine.
2. Pythagoreanism in Plato and Aristotle
In a literary context, the mention of personal names would have had a certain jarring effect
to the ears of ancient Greeks. Previous authors are typically merely alluded to, or their
names are periphrastically suggested. Thus the name of Pythagoras is but infrequently
mentioned in the writings of Plato and Aristotle. The most direct reference to Pythagoras
in the writings of Plato is, at ﬁrst sight, rather disappointing. Asking, in the last book
of the Republic, whether Homer was indeed a great educator, Socrates asks if3 “[Homer
was] a private educational guide during his lifetime to individuals who cherished him for
his company and passed on for posterity a Homeric way of life, just as Pythagoras was
himself exceptionally cherished for this reason, and his successors even now call their way
of life ‘Pythagorean’ and are somewhat distinctive among other men?”
No mathematics or religion here; but this in itself is instructive. We see that the essence
of Pythagoreanism for Plato is in some personal quality, a ‘way of life’. The basis of this
in the historical Pythagoras—and in his memory in the 4th century B.C.—is clear: Plato
thinks of the system of rules and taboos that governed the life of Pythagoras’ followers.
But it is not the practice itself that is important (and it would appear that Plato does not
necessarily assume that the ‘Pythagoreans’ of his day live quite the same life of Pythagoras’
immediate followers). What is important is the very distinctiveness of the practice, the
willingness of Pythagoreans to see themselves as belonging to a ‘Pythagorean’ tradition,
standing apart from their fellow-Greeks. The essence of Pythagoreanism, then, is in some
self-imposed difference.
What about the philosophical views of Pythagoreans? Plato hints at them occasionally.
Sometimes, indeed, they gain great signiﬁcance. The ‘Pythagoreans’ are mentioned, ex-
plicitly, towards the end of the curriculum passage in the Republic:4 “It appears... that
these sciences [astronomy and harmony] are sisters, as the Pythagoreans say and we, Glau-
con, agree... [having agreed, we do keep our own principle:] that our students shall not try
to study those things short of perfection... as we have just said for astronomy. For don’t
3Republic X 600a–b, translation from [9, p. 49].
4Republic VII 530d–531c, my abbreviation and translation.

The Pythagoreans
81
you know that with harmony, too, they do this strange thing...—Yes, and absurd, too: they
mention those so-called ‘quarter-tones’, and they stretch their ears [some claiming to hear,
some not]... all of them put the ears before the soul...—You mean those worthy ones who
approach the issue by the chords—torturing them on the rack... They do the same as in
astronomy: They search the numbers in the audible harmonies, without passing onwards to
abstract problems, studying just that—which numbers are harmonious and which are not”.
This follows immediately upon the famous call to let the stars out of astronomy, and leads
immediately to the culmination of Plato’s philosophy of the sciences in his description of
supreme dialectics. Thus the curriculum appears, retrospectively, as a corrected version of
Pythagoreanism. Since Archytas’ fr. 1 refers explicitly to the sciences of the curriculum
as ‘siblings’, it appears that Plato had in mind a speciﬁc Pythagorean source (unless, of
course, fr. 1 itself was written by a later Platonist, to construct the imputed source used by
Plato...).
Another strategic reference to what may be a Pythagorean doctrine comes at the Phaedo,
right before Socrates’ ﬁnal great speech that introduces Platonic metaphysics at its fullness.
Simmias, one of Socrates’ friends, has a worry about immortality:5 “One could surely use
the same argument [as about the soul] as about the attunement of a lyre and its strings, and
say that the attunement is something unseen and incorporeal and very lovely and divine in
the tuned lyre, while the lyre itself and its strings are corporeal bodies and composite and
earthy and akin to the mortal... If then, the soul proves to be some kind of attunement,
it’s clear that when our body is unduly relaxed or tautened by illnesses and other troubles,
then the soul must perish...” While this is often taken to represent Pythagorean doctrine,
there is some debate as to the source of the theory.6 It is possible, indeed, that it was sim-
ply invented by Plato. But this debate may miss the point: there was no ‘doctrine of the
Pythagoreans’ circulating in antiquity, and so, in the general context of what an ancient
reader would expect of Plato and of his interlocutors, the mention of a theory having to
do with music, which is held by friends of Socrates, but not quite by Socrates himself,
would be taken in the same way as the ‘sibling sciences’ mentioned in the Republic. By
the standards of ancient writing, this is a sufﬁciently explicit reference to ‘Pythagoreans’.
So—following what, I admit, is a circular argument—we may put together these two key
references to Pythagorean doctrine, from the Republic and from the Phaedo. The picture
is consistent. The Pythagoreans have nearly reached the truth, and hence they can be men-
tioned at the very gates of Plato’s innermost philosophy. Their views are directly related
to the Platonic interest in duality—the duality of the concrete and the abstract, the duality
of body and soul. They sense somehow that there is an incorporeal realm, and connect it
to the mathematical sciences; but they do not yet reach beyond the corporeal itself. The
basic image is that of music. The Pythagoreans, alone of the Greeks, pursue it as mathe-
matical; Plato goes further, and hears it as purely mathematical and abstract. We begin to
see a connection between mathematics and the divine: a mathematical perception of mu-
sic, serving as a stepping-stone leading from the perception of the world, to the perception
of the otherworldly. The Pythagoreans lead in the right way (even if without reaching the
goal).
5Phaedo 85e–86c, translated from [7, pp. 35–36].
6See, e.g., [8, pp. 306–319; 17, pp. 178–179].

82
R. Netz
Aristotle’s attitude to the Pythagoreans is the mirror image of Plato’s, and thus conﬁrms
it.
Of course, Aristotle was not the opposite of Plato. The distinction between them was
much more ﬁne-grained, and it appears that one of Aristotle’s main questions was pre-
cisely that—“how am I different from Plato?”. This is important to us, since one of Aris-
totle’s strategies for distinguishing himself from Plato, was to distinguish himself from
Pythagoreanism.
Let us consider the Metaphysics. In this work, Aristotle puts forward a world picture
where reality ultimately depends on the perfection of divine stars, which are understood
through an account put in the terms of mathematical astronomy. This is a bad start for any-
one trying to distinguish himself from Plato or from the Pythagoreans. But then, Aristotle
insists, it is a mistake to see reality in mathematical terms abstracted from their physical
basis. This mistake he ascribes, speciﬁcally, to the Pythagoreans:7 “The Pythagoreans, as
they are called, devoted themselves to mathematics; they were the ﬁrst to advance this
study, and having been brought up in it they thought its principles were the principles of
all things. Since in of these principles numbers are by nature the ﬁrst, and in numbers they
seemed to see many resemblances to the things that exist and come into being... since,
again, they saw that the attributes and the ratios of the musical scales were expressible in
numbers... they supposed the elements of numbers to be the elements of all things, and
the whole heaven to be a musical scale and a number... E.g., as the number 10 is thought
to be perfect and comprise the whole nature of numbers, they say that the bodies which
move through the heavens are ten”. Notice that, like Plato, Aristotle associates Pythagore-
anism primarily with a certain way of life. The main characteristic of the Pythagoreans is
their having devoted, or attached themselves (hapsamanoi), to mathematics, or ‘mathemat-
ical learnings’ (mathemata). The context of the description is well known: Aristotle goes
through the philosophies preceding his own, classifying them according to their account of
the ﬁrst principles. These are all material in a sense and, for the philosophers mentioned
prior to the Pythagoreans, we can easily see the origins of the views, as described by Aris-
totle, in the ordinary reality of daily life. (It is here, for instance, that we have the famous
reference to Thales who thought that all was made of water—perhaps, Aristotle suggests,
because of his realization that nourishment is moist!8) In short, while ordinary people live
a life of earth, air, ﬁre and water, the Pythagoreans stand out, once again, in their very life.
Living a strange life, ‘attached to the mathematical learnings’, an immediate consequence
is that of a strange doctrine—‘having been brought up in it they thought its principles were
the principles of all things’.
The place of this comment is signiﬁcant: in Aristotle’s account, the Pythagoreans imme-
diately precede Plato, whose philosophy is explained through a mixture of inﬂuences from
previous thinkers, mainly that of the Pythagoreans.9 Thus we see that the modern tendency
to see Plato as an essentially inﬂuenced thinker begins with Aristotle. In this case, however,
the motivation is clear. Aristotle asserts, effectively: “How do I differ from Plato? By not
being inﬂuenced by the Pythagoreans”.
7Metaphysics A 985b23–986a10, transl. Ross, in [1, p. 1559].
8Metaphysics A 983b22–23.
9Metaphysics A6.

The Pythagoreans
83
Two books of the Metaphysics—M and N—effectively unpack this claim. Aristotle,
once again, offers an account of Plato-under-inﬂuence. Plato (who is unnamed in this ac-
count) starts out from the Socratic search for the deﬁnitions of things; he then posits those
deﬁnitions as possessing separate existence, apart from the things they deﬁne—following
the example of Pythagoreans, who gave arithmetical deﬁnitions to things such as oppor-
tunity, justice, marriage and, apparently, saw those deﬁnitions as existing separately from
any of the things they deﬁned.10 In short, the Pythagoreans provided Plato with a way of
thinking about the otherworldly. Here, for instance, is ‘justice’; and there is the number 4.
The number 4 somehow underlies justice and is prior to it.11 Thus the world is doubled,
consisting of events of justice, on the one hand, and of the number 4, on the other hand.
Aristotle’s main claim in the books MN is that such a doubling is unnecessary, even in the
cases where, for epistemological reasons, it has some prima facie credibility. Thus, even
the study of the mathematical sciences themselves does not call for the assumption of any
reality over and above the ordinary physical one. The Pythagorean extrapolation of their
way of life into an ontology was, therefore, unfounded, even given the way of life itself.
Properly conceived, mathematical learnings do not assume the existence of any separate re-
ality. As mentioned above, Plato uses the Pythagoreans to suggest his dualities—a duality
of the concrete and the abstract, a duality of the body and soul. For Plato, the Pythagoreans
are not dualistic enough; for Aristotle, they are too dualistic.
In arguing against Pythagorean doubling, Aristotle uses two main strategies. One is seri-
ous and impersonal: the opponents are hardly alluded to, and the philosophical problem of
the nature of mathematical abstractions is dealt with in a detailed philosophical analysis.
The other strategy is much more ad hominem and rhetorical: Aristotle alludes to speciﬁc
Pythagorean views, and makes fun of them. This is the climax of Metaphysics N:12
They even say that , and Z are concords, and because there are three concords, the double
consonants are also three. They quite neglect the fact that there might be a thousand such letters;
for one sign might be attached to P. These people are like the old Homeric scholars, who see
small resemblances but neglect great ones. Some say that there are many such cases, e.g., that the
middle strings are represented by nine and eight, and the epic verse has seventeen syllables, which
is equal in number... no one could ﬁnd difﬁculty either in stating such analogies or in ﬁnding
them in eternal things, since they can be found even in perishable things.
Two points are interesting for us. First, Aristotle, in this critique, suggests that
Pythagorean duality is a mere contrived analogy—they do not discover a real duality in the
universe, but simply stitch up together two unrelated things. In other words, they engage
in metaphorical language. Bear this in mind: this will be important for our discussion in
Section 4. Second, notice the Aristotelian reference to the duality of the eternal and the
perishable: this last point reminds us of the serious point of the joke. Aristotle, after all,
subscribes to some dualist vision of the world. The shared assumption for everyone in
the discussion—Pythagoreans, Plato and Aristotle—is that there is an eternal reality, to be
distinguished from the reality of perishable things. Aristotle does not deny the duality: he
merely grounds it in physical stars, and therefore can do away with intangible mathematical
properties.
10Metaphysics M4.
11The identiﬁcation is provided by Alexander’s commentary to the Metaphysics, in Met. 38.10.
12Metaphysics N1093a20–b6, transl. Ross, in [1, pp. 1727–1728].

84
R. Netz
Let us see how Aristotle addresses the Pythagorean account of the stars themselves. Note
the ad hominem—and comical note:13
It is clear that the theory that the movement of the stars produces a harmony, i.e., that the sounds
they make are concordant, in spite of the grace and originality with which it has been stated, is
nevertheless untrue... Melodious and poetical as the theory is, it cannot be a true account of the
facts. ... Indeed, the reason why we do not hear, and show in our bodies none of the effects of
violent force [that follows from large noises] is easily given: it is that there is no noise... [and
ﬁnally the authors of the view are identiﬁed] the very difﬁculty which made the Pythagoreans say
that the motion of the stars produces a concord corroborates our view.
This is the famous harmony of the spheres, which Aristotle criticizes, typically, in a
strictly physical way. Had the spheres produced a noise, Aristotle argues, we would ex-
pect certain physical consequences: the noise would be heard, and there would be other
manifestations of that strong motion. Then what results is a ‘poetical’ theory that Aristotle
would dismiss, once again, as mere metaphor. (Paradoxically, since the theory was taken
literally, it is can now be read metaphorically only!)
Notice that Aristotle simply refuses to treat the theory as a more abstract metaphysical
statement—e.g., that the true account of the motions of the stars is that they manifest the
mathematical structure of musical harmony. According to that more abstract account, both
music itself, as well as the stars, are explained through a more fundamental and abstract
mathematical principle. This, probably, was Plato’s intention when, in both the Timaeus
and in the Republic’s Myth of Er, he connected music and astronomy.14 I make this com-
parison between Aristotle and a possible Platonic view, because we reach here the difﬁculty
of disentangling this complex melee of Pythagoreanism, Platonism and Aristotelianism.
Who was the author of the theory of the harmony of the spheres? Our ﬁrst evidence, in
fact, comes from Plato himself, who has a version of the theory as part of the imaginary
after-world of the Myth of Er. There is nothing to prove that Plato relied on a previous
Pythagorean account. Aristotle’s criticism of the theory as Pythagorean might refer to au-
thors who are contemporary or later than Plato himself; or it might be a characterization
of the nature of the theory, rather than a description of its historical source. Let us as-
sume for the sake of the argument that the theory is ﬁrst put forward in Plato’s Myth of
Er, and is then ﬁrst characterized as ‘Pythagorean’ in Aristotle’s De Caelo. In this case,
we see Pythagoreanism constructed by a tug-of-war between Plato and Aristotle. Plato,
mathematicizing, has an astronomy anchored in the abstract properties of music; Aristotle,
physicialising, gives Pythagoreanism its familiar shape, of the mathematical taken, con-
cretely, to underlie the world. The music of the harmony of the spheres is taken literally,
and so a strange, absurd world comes into being—an ever-present, never-heard soundtrack
to accompany the universe. Aristotle’s Pythagoreans listen to the inaudible.
In this we have come full circle to Plato’s criticism of Archytas’ studies in harmony.
For Plato, the mistake of the Pythagoreans is that, while tuning themselves to the more
abstract study of music, they still pay attention to the audible—the concrete reality of
strings stretched on the rack. For Aristotle, the mistake of the Pythagoreans is that, while
engaged in beautiful and important studies, they go beyond the concrete reality itself, into
a realm of an inaudible, otherworldly layer of existence: a sound that is never heard.
13De Caelo II.9 290b12–291a9, transl. Stocks, in [1, p. 479].
14Timaeus 34b–36d, Republic 616b–617d.

The Pythagoreans
85
For both Plato and Aristotle, then, Pythagoreanism is almost the closest philosophy to
their own, and yet to be distinguished from their own. Pythagoreans look for a reality that
is eternal and superior to the one immediately surrounding us, and they ﬁnd it through the
study of such objects as music and astronomy. So far, Plato and Aristotle follow. There they
diverge from both the Pythagoreans as from each other. In both cases the Pythagoreans are
guilty, as it were, in producing too much music. For Plato, the mistake is in the attention
to concrete, heard sounds; for Aristotle, the mistake is the attention to abstract, unheard
sounds. In both cases, music is suggestive of the more basic principle, of duality—one
thing being simultaneously something else. This is the principle Plato wishes to exploit,
and Aristotle to deny and reduce to mere metaphor.
For both Plato and Aristotle, the Pythagoreans are somewhat admired, they are some-
what sublime—but, even more, made fun of. They display a certain absurdity, paying atten-
tion to the tiny details, whether these are the quarter-tones that Plato’s Pythagoreans stretch
their ears to hear, or the three consonants that Aristotle’s Pythagoreans describe in musical
terms. This special position—sublime, and ridiculous—is perhaps what makes them most
‘Pythagorean’. After all, this duality of the sublime and the ridiculous is central to the tra-
dition of Pythagoras himself, the prophet of metempsychosis—and the hermit of beans.
Once again: it is not so much the contents of the Pythagorean life itself that is important,
as its very otherness. The Pythagoreans insist on living differently, and, in this way, they
reach a different reality. Plato wishes to go beyond them into that reality, Aristotle wishes
to stay nearer to ordinary reality, but both sense that the way to eternal, higher metaphys-
ical realms is through a certain distance from ordinary reality; and that mathematics, in
particular music, may lead the way.
So here is the formula we gain from Plato’s and Aristotle’s reception (or, perhaps, con-
struction) of the Pythagoreans. Otherness (based on a mathematical duality of concrete and
abstract, in particular the duality of mathematical music) leads to the otherworldly. Let us
see if this formula is corroborated by the little we know of the Pythagoreans themselves.
3. Pythagoreanism: some evidence from the Pythagoreans
A number of people are mentioned in our sources as ‘Pythagoreans’, while others are
identiﬁed as such by us, on the basis of what we know of their activity. For most of them,
the little we know makes little sense. (Why, for instance, did Eurytus put pebbles together
in the form of a human being?15) As a group, they belong to the late ﬁfth to the early fourth
century, but this again signiﬁes little. The period begins where it does because only a few
prominent thinkers are at all known from before the late ﬁfth century (perhaps, not much
intellectual activity, before that period, took the form of writing). The period ends where it
does because, from the mid-fourth century onwards, the thinkers we would, coming from
an earlier date, classify as ‘Pythagorean’, would instead be classiﬁed as ‘Platonist’. (It is
possible that Aristotle’s ‘Pythagoreans’ included such later authors.) Thus the chronology
and the very identity of the ‘Pythagoreans’ is a late construct made of the selection of
the sources, and of our own nomenclature. There is a real identity of spirit between several
15[5], Vol. 1, pp. 419–420.

86
R. Netz
ancient authors, but this identity of spirit does not derive from anything like a ‘Pythagorean
school’: the same is largely true for all such groups in early Greek thought. The ancient
authors can be usefully classiﬁed, but they did not come together in clearly deﬁned classes.
Working, then, with our own classiﬁcation of ‘Pythagoreans’, we can see that two ﬁg-
ures stand out. A little more is known about them than about their peers, and some sense of
their intellectual personality can be formed. Philolaus lived in the late ﬁfth century, Archy-
tas in the early fourth century. Philolaus has been somewhat the more studied of the two
(one can mention in particular the magisterial work, Philolaus of Croton, 1993, by Carl
A. Huffman). This is in part because Philolaus’ age makes him technically a ‘Pre-Socratic’
and thus of more interest to modern scholarship. There is another, more important reason
for the relative neglect of Archytas by historians of philosophy. From their remaining frag-
ments, Philolaus appears like a philosopher, while Archytas appears like a scientist. (That
the term ‘Pythagorean’ can accommodate both is in itself signiﬁcant.) To offer a general
formula, Philolaus is the more suggestive and general author, while Archytas had produced
accomplished and more detailed studies. Philolaus’ metaphysics also appears, perhaps, to
have been more speculative, while that of Archytas’ might have been more grounded in
the actual practice of science. To sum up the formula even more brieﬂy, then, I suggest the
following four-term proportion:
Philolaus : Archytas :: Plato : Aristotle
That is, the transition from Philolaus to Archytas may have been rather like the transition,
a generation later, from Plato to Aristotle. It will also appear that Plato, when distancing
himself from Pythagoreans, is thinking in particular of an Archytas-type interest in con-
crete reality; while Aristotle, when distancing himself from Pythagoreans, is thinking in
particular of a Philolaus-type metaphysics.
Having said that, there are important continuities between the intellectual projects of
Philolaus and of Archytas, which are then reﬂected later on in the main tradition of Greek
philosophy preserved by Plato and Aristotle: in this lies their great historical signiﬁcance.
We shall concentrate here on those issues that have some bearing on the question of math-
ematics and the divine.
The best starting-point is Philolaus’ fragments 6 and 6a, from which I quote following
Huffman [11, pp. 123–124, 146–147]:
Concerning nature and harmony the situation is this: the being of things, which is eternal, and
nature in itself admit of divine and not human knowledge, except that it was impossible for any of
the things that are and are known to us to have come to be, if the being of the things from which
the world-order came together, both the limiting things and the unlimited things, did not preexist.
But since these beginnings preexisted and were neither alike nor even related, it would have been
impossible for them to be ordered, if a harmony had not come upon them, in whatever way it
came to be. Like things and related things did not in addition require any harmony, but things that
are unlike and not even related nor of the [the same speed(?)], it is necessary that such things be
bonded together by harmony, if they are going to be held in an order. ...
The magnitude of harmonia (ﬁtting together) is the fourth, and the ﬁfth. The ﬁfth is greater than
the fourth by the ratio 9 : 8. For from [lowest tone] to the middle string is a fourth, and from the
middle string to highest tone is a ﬁfth... [A brief discussion of the elementary structure of the
octave follows.]

The Pythagoreans
87
The system seems to run as follows. The world is made to be known—in a sense, is
made to exist—by having some order imposed upon it. This order is made primarily of two
main components (Philolaus speaks about them elsewhere and they seem to have been the
foundation of his system), limited and unlimited things. These may be, say, some chance
length of string—unlimited—and its being compared in length to some other string, which
comparison then makes it limited.
How can the measure apply to the measured? Philolaus mentions harmony, which we
may consider by discussing further the example of the string. Suppose the lengths of the
two strings have, to each other, the ratio of, say, the side of the square to its diagonal (what
we call the square root of two). This is not a harmony, and no special relationship of sound
would form when the two are plucked in sequence. No knowable, ﬁxed object will come
to be. However, if the two strings are to each other as, say, 3 to 4, the relationship would be
that of the fourth. When plucked in sequence, they would form a musical unit: a precisely
given individual, both knowable and real. By belonging to this real musical structure, the
two lengths of string acquire a meaning—they are no longer mere unlimited lengths. The
harmony—the ﬁtting together of the strings—is thus, in a reasonable sense, ontologically
prior to each of the components of the harmony.
This then is a sober, if bold, theory in epistemology and in metaphysics. Lest the wrong
impression of Philolaus be formed, I hasten to quote testimony 16 [11, pp. 237–238]:
Philolaus [says] that there is ﬁre in the middle around the center which he calls the hearth of
the whole and house of Zeus... And again another ﬁre at the uppermost place, surrounding [the
whole]. [He says] that the middle is ﬁrst by nature, and around this ten divine bodies dance: heaven,
planets, after them the sun, under it the moon, under it the earth, under it the counter-earth, after
all of which the ﬁre which has the position of a hearth about the center.
From such testimonia—and most testimonia are in this spirit—it appears that musical
harmony is not, for Philolaus, a mere example of the more general principle of order.
Rather, he develops a cosmology derived from numerical and harmonic principles: ten
divine objects, moving in dance, surrounding a middle which is prior to them as middle—
presumably, as being the middle term of some cosmic proportion. We can therefore see
how both Plato and Aristotle could have used Pythagoreanism for their own purposes.
We also see that the sobriety of fragment 6 is misleading because—it appears—Philolaus
deliberately aims at being strange. The cosmology is non-geocentric; a counter-earth is
introduced. As usual, then, we see the Pythagorean emphasis on being different for differ-
ence’s sake.
Now the following should be noted. It is likely that, as Philolaus brings forward the
example of musical proportion, he uses a recent mathematical account of the nature of
musical harmony. In other words, for Philolaus’ audience there could have been a shock
of surprise in the suggestion that the lower string to the middle string is as 3 to 4, rather
like the shock of surprise in the suggestion that the heavenly bodies are to each other
are as ten dancing ﬁgures. We, moderns, are now familiar with the mathematical account
of music. We take it to be straightforward science. We have thus lost the shock of the
strangeness of mathematical music and, as we read Philolaus’ fragment 6a, we ﬁnd there
a straightforward scientiﬁc example for a straightforward idea. On the other hand, we do
not think of the heavens as participating in a dance and therefore, as we read testimony
16, we still feel the intended shock, coming across the idea of balletic astronomy. What I

88
R. Netz
suggest is this. To understand Philolaus, we should try not to rationalize balletic astronomy,
so that we make it appear more natural to us; rather, we should somehow come to see the
idea of mathematical music in its full strangeness. Fragment 6a should be as strange as
testimony 16. An equation of strings, on the one hand, and numbers, on the other hand!
The essence of Philolaus’ system is in this, deliberate strangeness.
Note further the following. Philolaus’ account of epistemology and metaphysics may
appear sober but it is still, in itself, counter-intuitive. This is because Philolaus suggests,
in fact, that the intangible precedes, epistemologically and ontologically, the tangible. The
more abstract structure of harmonies is prior to the more concrete matter that it informs.
This fundamental idea will of course ﬂourish, in different ways, in the philosophies of
both Plato and Aristotle, and in fact many parallels to this can be found in many other
Pre-Socratic philosophers. This however does not make Philolaus’ philosophy any more
intuitive: it merely reminds us that the counter-intuitive was valued by people other than
Philolaus himself.
We start, then, with a tangible world, which is meaningless and lacking in value; we
distance ourselves from it and perceive musical harmonies, and through them we come to
see a structured reality, which also gains in value. As we move away from the tangible to
the abstract, we are also led gradually from the mundane to the divine—the world of Zeus
set in the center of a cosmic ballet.
Moving on now to Archytas, it becomes difﬁcult to speak of a philosophical system in
the same sense. The most substantial fragments and testimonies do not provide us with
a philosophy at all, but with four, apparently unrelated pieces of mathematical science.16
I believe, however, that this mathematical science may form together a research program
to complement Philolaus’ metaphysics by offering a systematic, complete account of the
science underlying it.
The ﬁrst piece, which seems to come from a genuine fragment (number 1), is a physical
theory of the origin of sounds.
The second piece, described (in somewhat different forms) in Ptolemy’s Harmony and
in Porphyry’s commentary to the same work (testimonies 16–17, fragment 2), is a classiﬁ-
cation of ratios.
The third piece, reported only in Boethius (testimony 19), is a straightforward argu-
ment in number theory (probably genuine, for who would bother to forge an argument as
straightforward as that?).
The fourth piece, very thoroughly and convincingly documented by the testimonies
14–15, is a brilliant solution to the problem of duplicating the cube.
The pieces ﬁt together harmoniously, so to speak. They all belong to the study of pro-
portions.
To begin with the ﬁrst piece of the puzzle—fragment 1 and its acoustic theory—we
should note that this study of the physical origin of sounds culminates, effectively, in a
proportion. Archytas argues that pitch correlates to the speed of the motion of the air, and
sums up fragment 1 in saying that ‘it has been made clear to us by many [arguments,
examples?] that the higher tones are moved faster, and the lower—slower’. While this
does not yet have the mathematical form of proportion (i.e., Archytas does not offer the
16For the fragments and testimonies concerning Archytas, see [5, Vol. 1, pp. 421–439].

The Pythagoreans
89
mathematical statement that the ratio of the speeds is the same as the ratio of the sounds)
it would have been amazing, in light of his further views on musical ratios (of which see
below) if he did not believe in some such theory. In other words, if the musical theory
available to Philolaus had two separate domains connected by a single proportion—length
of strings, say, and pitch of sounds—the musical theory available to Archytas adds to this
another domain, covered by the same proportion—the speed of motion of air. This is an
important advance since this domain of air motion is universal. This domain is not tied
to any particular musical instrument, but is coextensive with any sound whatsoever. Thus
Archytas had achieved a complete system uniting a mathematical structure with a physical
structure.
This is corroborated by the second piece, where we see Archytas dealing in much greater
detail with this system: this time, not with its physical–mathematical interface, but with the
mathematical structure alone. Once again, Archytas’ aim seems to have been the comple-
tion of the system. Thus he goes on to classify kinds of numerical ratios, corresponding to
different musical relations. The details, especially as reported by Ptolemy, are quite compli-
cated and reveal Archytas’ computational ﬂuency. The principle is simple: from the basic
assumption that the octave is correlated to a 1 : 2 ratio, divided into, e.g., 2 : 3 and 3 : 4
(the ﬁfth and the fourth) one can derive the entire system going as far as the quarter-tones
(the debate as to their existence, we recall, was evoked, to comic effect, by Plato). One
indeed reaches quickly pure numerical constructs whose auditory correlates are probably
impossible to judge (how about the interval of 256 to 243?). A strange, purely numerical
structure takes over the auditory world of music.
Even more abstract—but necessary for the sake of the completion of the system—is
the third piece in the puzzle: the study in number theory reported by Boethius. Archytas
proves that a ratio in integers of the form (n + 1) : (n) cannot serve as the extreme terms
in a continuous proportion in integers (n + 1) : (k) :: (k) : (n). (This is not the trivial re-
sult that between two consecutive integers another integer cannot be found: note that the
ratio (n + 1) : (n), e.g., 9 : 8, is equivalent to many other ratios between non-consecutive
integers, e.g., 18 : 16.) This proposition has immediate consequences on the possibility and
impossibility of musical proportions, and in fact it appears as the third proposition of the
musical treatise ascribed to Euclid, the Sectio Canonis. (Boethius, of course, quotes it in
the course of his own musical treatise.) However, it does not feature any particular musical
ratios. This study—no doubt, a fragment of a larger study in number-theory—moves be-
yond the actual numbers put forward by the facts of music, to a study of the possibility and
impossibility of proportion in integers as such.
The same kind of extension, ﬁnally, may be true for the fourth and ﬁnal piece of the
puzzle—Archytas’ solution of the problem of duplicating the cube. Both the problem, and
Archytas’ approach to its solution, are closely related to issues in proportion theory. We
can see this as follows. How can one ﬁnd, given two lengths, their geometrical mean? E.g.,
given the lengths 18 and 16, how can we ﬁnd the length B that satisﬁes 18 : B :: B : 16?
As we have seen, there is no purely numerical solution to the problem; however, it can be
solved geometrically. In particular, we can ﬁt together right-angled triangles in a circle so
that, by triangle similarity, the triangles will display the geometrical progression A : B ::
B : C (Figure 1). By producing A and C as 18 and 16, we ﬁnd the desired B. Thus, by
considering ratios in a more abstract way—moving beyond the ratios between integers to

90
R. Netz
Fig. 1. A semi-circle with diameter A + C yields B with A : B = B : C.
Fig. 2. Architas’ duplication of the cube. Cf. [10, Vol. 1, p. 247].
the ratios between lengths as such—we have gained a new problem. To further complete
this new abstract system, the following problem suggests itself:
Given two lengths, A and D, to ﬁnd two means B, C that satisfy a geometrical progres-
sion, i.e., A : B :: B : C :: C : D.
This is the problem of ﬁnding two mean proportionals. We may note that it is equivalent
to the problem of ﬁnding a cubic root (B is, effectively, the cubic root of the given D
by the units of A) and therefore we should not be surprised with the name the problem
has had attached to it ‘the problem of duplicating the cube’. But let us remember that the
problem, mathematically speaking, is simply an extension, inside the theory of geometrical
proportions, of the problem of ﬁnding a proportion between two given lengths—as seen in
Figure 1. Archytas’ solution, interestingly, is an extension of Figure 1 in a rather direct
sense. His approach seems to have been to look for ways of ﬁtting right-angled triangles
in space, so that their similarities would provide the proportion required by the terms of
the problem. The reader may now consider Figure 2, of Archytas’ solution, and compare
it to Figure 1. It so happens that the problem of ﬁnding two mean proportionals calls
for considerable spatial gymnastics, hence the charm and brilliance of Archytas’ proof
(probably, Archytas was the ﬁrst to offer such a proof).
Archytas’ research, then, ﬁts together in a system—and, what is more, it ﬁts together
with Philolaus’ metaphysics. The focus of research is proportions. These underly physical
reality, but are also considered from an abstract perspective, as belonging to a purely math-
ematical system. It seems that the model of mathematical music is the key to Archytas’

The Pythagoreans
91
research—just as it was the key to Philolaus’ metaphysics—and that, in both cases, the
interest is not in the fact that mathematics has concrete manifestations but that, on the con-
trary, beneath the world of concrete sounds there is another world, richer and more abstract,
of mathematical relations. Notice that when the theory of proportion reaches its mathemat-
ical culmination—we are likely to have Archytas’ best work in his preserved solution of
the problem of duplicating the cube—it becomes fantastically complicated and abstract,
involving a cosmic dance no less remarkable than that of Philolaus’ stars. The world of
swirling semicircles, studied by Archytas, already belongs to a realm of pure mathematics
that exists apart of any ordinary Greek experience.
Of course, it is impossible for us to tell what were Archytas’ precise metaphysical views.
Clearly, an admirer of Philolaus could have been excited by the science itself; while an ad-
mirer of Archytas could have enjoyed the science while criticizing the metaphysics. I have
suggested above that these two routes were taken by Plato, and Aristotle, respectively. At
any rate, we can now sum up the evidence provided by the four main protagonists—Plato,
Aristotle, Philolaus and Archytas. We may recall the formula gained at the end of the pre-
vious section: Otherness (based on a mathematical duality of concrete and abstract, in
particular the duality of mathematical musical) leads to the otherworldly. This is, indeed,
corroborated by what we know of Philolaus’ metaphysics and Archytas’ science. In this
section, though, we have noticed the predominant role of a special mathematical concept,
that of proportion. Proportion, apparently, served the Pythagoreans to support their duali-
ties of concrete and abstract. So let us reformulate this even more brieﬂy:
Otherness, based on proportion, leads to the otherworldly.
In the next section, we shall try to explain how this formula came to be characterized
as ‘Pythagorean’ and, ﬁnally, how the Greeks ﬁrst formulated the question of mathematics
and the divine.
4. Mathematics and the divine in the Pythagoreans: a suggestion
What made the Pythagoreans Pythagorean? That is, what made the ancients perceive a
link between the thought of, say, Philolaus and Archytas, and the stories attached to person
of Pythagoras? This question involves many unknowns. It does appear that, to have been
called a ‘Pythagorean’, an ancient author had to come from the Greek West (where most of
Pythagoras’ activity took place). But does that mean that there was a historical continuity
between the Pythagoreans of the sixth century, and those of the fourth? We simply do not
know. It is better to concentrate, then, on the pattern of beliefs and practices that the name
‘Pythagoras’ evoked to the Greeks. Somehow, Philolaus and Archytas ﬁtted that pattern.
Why was that so?
On this question, too, one has to be speculative. Speaking somewhat dogmatically, then,
we may offer the following account of ‘Pythagoras’ as present to the Greek imagination.
It appears that Pythagoras was primarily remembered as a charismatic religious leader
of a special kind. He offered a way of life guaranteeing some form of release from pain
and mortality. If this is indeed the case, then Pythagoras had embodied a Greek type—
usually, however, fulﬁlled by mythical ﬁgures. Orpheus was another such savior-ﬁgure and
so, in other ways, were other heroes and gods, such as Dionysius himself. Around such

92
R. Netz
Fig. 3. Pythagoras. Courtesy of the Museo Capitolino, Rome.
savior-ﬁgures, special practices formed, the mystery cults.17 These had a powerful role in
the Greek imagination. It is therefore, probably, in relation to such mystery practices that
we should understand what the term ‘Pythagorean’ evoked.
To follow mystery practices would be to stand out from the public Greek religion of
the body of citizens in a city-state. There is something exclusive about being saved: as
it were, the idea of one’s being saved implies that there are others, who are not. There
is only so much room in the boat. A distinction is thus made between those who belong
to a saved inner circle, and those who do not. The transition into the inner circle—the
initiation—occurs through participation in an activity peculiar to the group, whether in the
ascetic ritual of the Orphics or the Pythagoreans or in some special rite performed in a
ritual center.
Brieﬂy put, the core of such practices is the transition from the mundane to the divine
through a process of becoming-other. This is precisely the formula we have gained for the
Pythagoreans of the ﬁfth and fourth century (minus the role given to mathematics and in
particular music and its proportions as an agent in the initiation.) This then would be a rea-
son for Greeks in the fourth century to conceive of Philolaus, for instance, as a Pythagorean.
Authors such as Philolaus offered a way reaching from the here of the everyday to the there
of the divine, passing through a strange form of life.
17See [3, pp. 296–304] and, in general for Greek mysteries, see [4].

The Pythagoreans
93
How do Greeks bridge the gap between the mundane and the divine? We can follow
a structure, whereby the bridge comes more and more to be, so to speak, under human
occupation.
Religious ritual as such aims at bridging the gap between the mundane and the divine:
but the traditional ritual of the City—by being ordained as ritual—belongs, in a sense, to
the gods. Therefore a further, more personal ritual is called for, the mystery cult. Here, the
individual makes a choice to perform the rite and thus assumes a control over his or her
own destiny, beyond that provided by the ordained ritual of everyday religion. Pythago-
ras, by explicitly instituting a new mystery cult, brought the divine even nearer: the claim
was that a practice, instituted by a mortal, could reach beyond mortality. Even so, the ir-
rationality of the original Pythagorean practice implies that the practice is either worthless
or divinely inspired. To make this claim plausible—of transformation to the transcendent,
through human means—the transformative power should be given some rational basis.
Thus the Pythagoreans of the ﬁfth and fourth centuries went on, to rationalize mystery—
to produce a systematic philosophical counterpart of the experience of mystery. There are
important differences between the four stages—traditional ritual, mystery cult, Pythago-
ras and Pythagorean philosophy—but there is a basic continuity which explains, I suggest,
why the Pythagoreans were called ‘Pythagoreans’. In short, of all the intellectual variety
on offer at the late ﬁfth century, the Pythagoreans offered a life most closely resembling
that of the mystery cult. Hence their special absurdity, as well as their special promise.
Why mathematics? That is, why did the Pythagoreans take mathematics as the agent for
transformation to the transcendent? We can, I suggest, account for that as well. To outline
this suggestion, let us look more closely at the mystery cult practice.
In a mystery cult, say the famous one of Eleusis, the initiate would follow a long and
special rite: sacriﬁces, processions, fasts, all leading to a special ceremony conducted in
an atmosphere of secrecy, terror and ecstasy; secrets lead on to secrets until the highest
secrets are revealed. All of this, ﬁnally, is supposed to endow the initiate with a better
after-life and to revoke the otherwise expected punishments of hell. The secrets, under
close inspection (they were sometimes revealed in antiquity, despite the harsh rules against
their being divulged) appear disappointing. What is the height of the Eleusis mystery?
A priest announces “The mistress has given birth to a sacred boy, Brimo to Brimos”, and
then an ear of corn is displayed and cut in silence.
Any concrete representation of ecstasy is bound to appear disappointing and, with the
appropriate preparation and staging, the rite would no doubt have been effective enough.
But to concentrate on the staging effects is to miss a more important point, namely, that any
rational statement would have been inappropriate at this context. Every text can be staged
but some texts are more appropriate for ecstasy than others. The very irrationality of the
Brimo-to-Brimos text endows it with a transformative power. The text cries out to be inter-
preted (Who is Brimo? Is she perhaps the goddess of Eleusis, namely Demeter? And who
is her boy?). Such irrational texts provide us, then, with a verbal counterpart to the main
theme of the ritual, which is that of becoming-other. The text itself is caught, so to speak, in
the act of becoming-other: it is a metaphorical statement, whose non-metaphorical signiﬁ-
cance is left opaque. Precisely the same holds of the cut ear of corn: we immediately see the
act as rich in metaphorical signiﬁcance, but we are not given the indications which would
specify a unique literal interpretation of the metaphor, so that the cut corn remains, as it

94
R. Netz
were, a metaphor hanging in mid-air. (This, incidentally, is why the secrecy surrounding
the mysteries would have been so important: with the ritual revealed, the assertions and
acts would have acquired standard interpretations and would have thus turned into dead
metaphors.)
The principle, then, is as follows. A certain ‘mystery’ statement—or act—is meaningless
on its own, but it does suggest a meaning which however is different from its surface
meaning. If we call the statement P, then the form of the expression is ‘P is not P’. By
immersing yourself in a system of expressions of this kind, you are made to become non-
yourself, and this is the basis for the transformative power of mystery practice. If identity
is put into question, then so is self-identity.
The transition accomplished in a mystery practice is mediated through strangeness. We
can therefore begin to apply what we have seen from the mystery cults, to the Pythagoreans
themselves. We have noted the aiming at difference for difference’s sake, characteristic
of both the early Pythagoras and the Pythagoreans themselves. We have also noted the
sense of the sublime and the ridiculous, somehow combined, attaching to both. Pythagoras’
abstaining from beans, or the Pythagoreans’ interest in the three characters , and Z, are
both as absurd and as meaningful as the ear of corn: they suggest ways of transformation,
whether of the self into a reformed, ascetic person, or of the world into a musical structure.
We can be even more speciﬁc. Let us consider again the task as it faces the Pythagore-
ans. They are looking for a rational grounding for the mystery experience: that is, they
can no longer rely on the Brimo-to-Brimos type of expression. They need some kind of
literal statement that keeps the sense of the metaphorical, of a thing-being-something-else.
We have offered above a formula to describe Pythagoreanism: Otherness, based on pro-
portion, leads to the otherworldly. I now suggest that this can be derived from the task of
Pythagoreanism: to rationalize mystery.
The best starting point for the rationalization of mystery would be a thing that literally
is something else: an object that is simultaneously two radically separate things, so that for
which, the paradoxical statement ‘X is not X’ could be literally valid.
Music, under its mathematical interpretation, offers just that, and in a peculiarly appro-
priate form: it is a concrete thing, the musical instrument, and it is simultaneously, under its
mathematical interpretation, an abstract thing—a system of proportions. There is a single
formula underlying both so that one can literally say ‘the ratio gave birth to the harmony’—
Brimo gave birth to Brimos—and so the world of strings and instruments (the mortal world
in which we live) is simultaneously something else: another, intangible world. Here then
is one reason why music would be an obvious mode for a systematic Pythagoreanism: it
embodies the continuity of the worldly and the otherworldly.
This can be generalized. For what makes this continuity at all possible? How can it be
possible to say, literally, that ‘X is not X’? This is because we are dealing with proportion
statements, ‘this string is to that string as 3 is to 4’. This is proportion: the most basic way
of saying, in a literal way, that two separate domains are, in some deﬁned way, the same.
They are different; and yet they embody the same relations. Thus proportion-statements
are the most natural route to be taken by the Pythagoreans. Their project was to offer an
intellectually systematic correlate of a mystery practice—as it were, to literalize metaphor
without losing its metaphorical power. This is precisely what proportion statements are.
We recall Aristotle complaining about the Pythagorean tendency to ground everything, in-

The Pythagoreans
95
appropriately, in a numerical and musical realm:18 ‘They even say that , and Z are
concords, and because there are three concords, the double consonants are also three. ...
Some say that there are many such cases, e.g., that the middle strings are represented by
nine and eight, and the epic verse has seventeen syllables, which is equal in number...
no one could ﬁnd difﬁculty either in stating such analogies or in ﬁnding them in eternal
things, since they can be found even in perishable things’. From such criticisms, it is clear
that the Pythagorean speculation was expressed by statements such as ‘as X in domain
A, so Y in domain B’—the general form of proportion or analogy statements or, indeed,
the general form of metaphor. Aristotle criticizes Pythagoreanism for its metaphorical lan-
guage, but metaphors are sometimes valid—when they are true analogy statements, that
is proportions. Thus, for instance, if we take the harmony of the spheres as a proportion
statement (as the motions of the stars to each other, so the motion of the strings on the
octave) we obtain a statement which in principle could be simply true. At the same time,
it is still—as Aristotle would put it—‘poetical’. Indeed, the statement has the appropriate
‘mystery’ effect of alienating us from the mundane world around us and making it appear
rather more ‘divine’, simply by virtue of its possessing a duality or metaphor inherent to
its mechanism. If we are surrounded simultaneously by stars, and by musical harmonies,
then the mundane world is not just mundane.
To sum up, then, there are two properties of Greek mathematics—and, in particular, of
Greek musical theory—that would have made it appropriate for the Pythagorean project.
First, the correlation of the concrete and the abstract. (This is most obvious in mathemati-
cal musical theory, but it is also a wider feature of Greek mathematics with its equation
of a concrete diagram and a general, intangible theorem.) Second, Greek mathematics
essentially relied on the tool of proportion, which is the general tool of correlating sep-
arate domains. Thus these two seemingly irreconcilable domains, too—Mathematics, and
Mystery—could be brought together. Greek mathematics could have functioned as mys-
tery, made literal.
The above account, of course, was merely a dogmatic statement of a speculative sugges-
tion. This is perhaps inappropriate for a historical study and so I shall conclude by restating
the suggestion made here as a philosophical claim concerning mathematics and the divine.
We might perhaps be surprised that there is any relationship between the two. This is
because we often think, today, of mathematics as the domain of the literal par excellence.
We feel that metaphor is more appropriate for discussing the divine—and that mathemat-
ics provides us with no metaphors. In mathematics—we tend to think—everything is just
what it is and the only allowed relation is that of logical entailment, that is, identity. Thus
mathematics is conceived as the domain of the statements of the form ‘X is X’. How can it
guide us, then, into the otherworldly—the domain, so to speak, of the not-X?
But, after all, this is not the only way in which to see mathematics and perhaps not
even the most natural way to see it. After all, why did Russell so dislike Pythagoras? Not
for his absurdity, but for his persuasiveness: Russell, himself, saw his own philosophical
development as leading away from Pythagoreanism.19 Russell, by his own account, had
once been a Pythagorean.
18Metaphysics N1093a20–b6, transl. Ross, in [1, pp. 1727–1728].
19See [14].

96
R. Netz
By describing his philosophical growth in such terms, Russell meant the following. In
his early, Logicist period, Russell believed that mathematics was informative, that is, it
discovered non-obvious truths. Later on, based on what he understood to be the argument
of Wittgenstein’s Tractatus, Russell came to think of mathematics as a mere system of
tautologies. That is, it was no more than a system of useful shorthand expressions of the
form ‘X is X’. Information could be gained through empirical investigation only, and, to
such an investigation, mathematics gave no more than shape.
This later view was one of the standard accounts of the relationship between mathemat-
ics and science in the 20th century, and it may inform our own surprise when encountering
the relationship between mathematics and the divine. It was based on such a view that, in
his History of western Philosophy, Russell said that Pythagoreanism had an inﬂuence on
philosophy ‘both profound and unfortunate’. Pythagoreanism, to Russell, was the origin
of his own youthful mistake—the view of mathematics as going beyond tautology, that is,
asserting that ‘X is not X’.
Now whether mathematics is informative or not is a question I shall not enter here—but
the very fact that the youthful Russell Russell’s believed it was, is of interest. This was
the position held by Russell while still engaged in mathematics (if, that is, this is how we
should call the writing of the Principia Mathematica). To the practitioner of mathematics,
this intuition—that mathematics deals with ‘X is not X’—is overwhelming. Quite simply,
‘X is X’ in never asserted in any mathematical text. That is: there are no statements in
mathematics of the form ‘The squares on the sides of the right-angled triangle are equal to
the squares on the sides of the right-angled triangle’. Mathematical statements are always
of the form ‘The squares on the sides of the right-angled triangle are equal to the square on
the hypotenuse’. Mathematics asserts the identity of the different, not of the same. This is
what it most essentially is: the tool for making valid assertions of the apparent form ‘X is
not X’. Whether the deep form of such assertions may turn out, upon logical analysis, to be
‘X is X’, is a separate question: the fact remains that, at its surface, mathematics asserts the
paradoxical identity of the different. At its surface, then, mathematics is a mystery, that is,
an assertion of the identity of the different—an assertion which, however (unlike standard
mystery assertions) also happens to be true.
This fact about mathematics—that it is, in a real sense, a mystery—is, I suggest, of
historical signiﬁcance. Mathematics deals with metaphor, in a rational way. It follows that
those who care about both rationality and metaphor would, naturally, appeal to it. This,
perhaps, may serve to explain the historical phenomenon of Pythagoreanism.
Notice for further reading
The fundamental study of Greek religion is Burkert [3].
The fundamental study of Pythagoras is Burkert [2]. Its deﬂation of Pythagoras-the-
scientist has been followed here and is challenged in, e.g., Zhmud [18].
There are many accounts of the Pythagorean inﬂuence on Plato, of which I took Vlas-
tos [16] as an example. The Pythagorean inﬂuence on Aristotle is less well known: a bril-
liant introduction is Sorabji [18].

The Pythagoreans
97
As mentioned in the text, Huffman [11] is an essential study of Philolaus. There is noth-
ing as useful on Archytas, whose achievement can be pieced together from such standard
sources as, e.g., Heath [10].
An account of philosophical Pythagoreanism must be based on some picture of the his-
tory of Greek mathematics. In the view of this author, the scholarship on Greek mathe-
matics underwent a sea change in the late twentieth century, rendering much of earlier
scholarship obsolete (perhaps everyone thinks this way about his or her discipline). In par-
ticular, during the twentieth century, much of the literature was inﬂuenced by a belief in
a late ﬁfth century philosophical crisis, caused by the discovery of irrationality, leading to
the formation of historical Pythagoreanism (as distinct from that of Pythagoras). Very few
historians of Greek mathematics still believe in this story: see Knorr [12] for one of the ﬁrst
studies to doubt the traditional story, and Fowler [6] for a recent summary of the problem.
An account of philosophical Pythagoreanism that brings together the lessons of Burk-
ert [2] with those of the recent research into the history of Greek mathematics, remains to
be written.
References
[1] J. Barnes (ed.), The Complete Works of Aristotle, Princeton, 1984.
[2] W. Burkert, Lore and Science in Early Pythagoreanism, Cambridge, MA, 1972.
[3] W. Burkert, Greek Religion, Cambridge, MA, 1985.
[4] W. Burkert, Ancient Mystery Cults, Cambridge, MA, 1987.
[5] H.A. Diels, Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, Griechisch und Deutsch, 9. Auﬂ. Hrsg. Von Kranz W., Berlin,
Weidmann, 1959–1960, 3 vols.
[6] D.H. Fowler, The Mathematics of Plato’s Academy, 2nd edition, 1999.
[7] D. Gallop, Phaedo/Plato, Oxford, 1983.
[8] W.K.C. Guthrie, A History of Greek Philosophy, Vol. I: The Earlier Presocratics and the Pythagoreans,
Cambridge, 1967.
[9] S. Halliwell, Republic 10/Plato, Warminster, 1988.
[10] T.L. Heath, History of Greek Mathematics, 2 vols., Oxford, 1921.
[11] C.A. Huffman, Philolaus of Croton, Cambridge, 1993.
[12] W.R. Knorr, The Evolution of the Euclidean Elements, Dordrecht, 1975.
[13] B. Russell, History of Western Philosophy, New York, 1945.
[14] B. Russell, My Philosophical Development, London, 1959.
[15] R. Sorabji, Aristotle, mathematics and colour, Classical Quarterly 22 (1972), 293–308.
[16] G. Vlastos, Elenchus and mathematics: a turning point in Plato’s philosophical development, American
Journal of Philology 109 (1988), 362–396.
[17] C. Witt, Dialectic, motion and perception: De Anima, Book I, Essays on Aristotle’s De Anima, M.C. Nuss-
baum, A.O. Rorty, eds., Oxford, 1992, pp. 169–183.
[18] L. Zhmud’, Wissenschaft, Philosophie und Religion im fruhen Pythagoreismus, Berlin, 1997.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 4
Mathematics and the Divine in Plato
Ian Mueller
The University of Chicago 1050 E. 59th St., Chicago, IL 60637, USA
E-mail: i-mueller@uchicago.edu
Contents
1. Preliminary remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
2. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
3. The Timaeus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
3.1. Why there are four “elements”, earth, water, air, and ﬁre (Timaeus 31b–32b)
. . . . . . . . . . . . 105
3.2. The construction of the soul of the world (Timaeus 35a–36d) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
3.3. The geometry of the “elements” (Timaeus 48b–57c) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
3.4. Mathematics and human happiness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
3.5. Higher principles (Timaeus 48b–c and 53d) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
4. The Republic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
4.1. The education of the philosopher–ruler
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
4.2. The divided line (Republic VI.509d–511e) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
5. Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
Appendix A. The division of the stuff of the world soul (Timaeus 35b–36b) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
99


Mathematics and the divine in Plato
101
“God is always doing geometry”
1. Preliminary remarks
Plato (ca. 429–347 BCE) of Athens is known primarily as a philosopher.1 It is clear that
he had an intense admiration for mathematics and that his notion of philosophical method
was based on reﬂection on mathematical reasoning.2 His frequent references to and dis-
cussions of mathematics in his dialogues played a major role in establishing the idea that
mathematics is of central human importance, and his making ﬁve branches of study (math-
êmata), arithmetic, plane and solid geometry, astronomy, and harmonics, central to his
notion of higher education in Book VII of the Republic is the source for the quadrivium, a
fundamental component of later Western education. It is also very likely that Plato played a
signiﬁcant role in the rapid development of Greek mathematics in the fourth century BCE.3
On the other hand, it is very unlikely that Plato made substantive contributions to mathe-
matics;4 indeed, many of the more speciﬁcally mathematical passages in his works have no
clear and correct interpretation, and many of them can be read as the half-understandings
of an enthusiastic spectator.
In the twentieth century much work has been done in trying to determine the chronolog-
ical order in which Plato wrote his dialogues.5 In this essay I am going to concentrate on
two dialogues, which are a cornerstone of a traditional interpretation of Plato’s philosophy
and in which he gives his most inﬂuential treatments and uses of mathematics, namely the
Republic, usually classed as a mature dialogue, and the Timaeus, usually classed as a late
one.6 We will see that there are some, at least apparent, tensions in the use of mathematics
in the two dialogues. However, there is a much greater tension between the ways in which
the two dialogues represent the divine,7 even though they agree in their disregard for what
might be called traditional Greek religion.
Explaining this tension requires me to bring in another aspect of Plato’s philosophical
outlook common to the Timaeus and the Republic and thought to be a linchpin of Plato’s
mature philosophy: the so-called theory of forms. The scholarly literature on this topic
is both enormous and contentious, and I have no intention of pursuing interpretive issues
here.8 For purposes of this paper it sufﬁces to think of forms as eternal, intelligible objects
(like real numbers or functions as opposed to perceptible objects like tables or horses) cor-
responding to general terms such as ‘just’, ‘large’, ‘triangle’, ‘ﬁre’, ‘horse’. We might now
refer to these objects as concepts, but it is important to realize that for Plato forms are real
objects, indeed more real than things like tables or horses. For Plato the forms constitute
1On Plato in general I mention two collections of essays, [2] and [16].
2See [18].
3Cp. [17].
4On this topic see [7].
5See, for example, [4].
6There was much discussion of the place of Timaeus after the attempt by Owen [21] to group the Timaeus
with the Republic as a mature work. But it seems that scholarly consensus now backs the response to Owen by
Cherniss [8].
7On the concept of divinity in Plato see [25] and [11].
8Many of the articles in [2] discuss the forms.

102
I. Mueller
Fig. 1. Plato. Marble bust, Roman copy of an original dated 4th BCE. Height 43 cm. Louvre, Paris. Photo: Erich
Lessing.
some kind of system, of which it is the task of the philosopher to gain an understanding.
On the whole the knowledge of forms is conceptual knowledge. Philosophers who know
the form corresponding to the term ‘just’ will have the answer to the question ‘What is
justice’ and will be able to assess the justice of particular actions, programs, etc., things
which are said to be just by participating or sharing in the form of justice.
In the Timaeus Plato describes the creation of our world or cosmos by a benevolent
creator god (standardly referred to as a craftsman (dêmiourgos, frequently rendered as
demiurge) or maker, but also called mind or reason (nous)), who tries to make the world
as good as possible by making it resemble the forms as much as possible. This conception
of a god as an intelligence making the world is found in other dialogues considered to be
late, explicitly in the Philebus and with some complications in the Laws.9 But it is not
found in any explicit way10 in the Republic or in other earlier dialogues. In the Republic
Plato makes the distinction between forms and perceptible things the basis of a distinction
between knowledge and mere belief or opinion. He makes knowledge of the forms the
basis of the philosopher’s superiority to other human beings, and he makes the form of
the good, which he treats as the unhypothetical ﬁrst principle of all things, the pinnacle
of the system of the forms. The forms themselves are treated as objects of rational desire,
understanding of which provides the fullest satisfaction. Plato is willing to speak of people
with knowledge of the forms as divine, and it is quite clear that he thinks of the forms as
divine as well. In this sense the “gods” of the Republic are the forms and the highest “god”
is the form of the good. In the Timaeus mathematics is related to the divine because the
9See [15] or [11, pp. 186–191].
10At Republic 530a there is a reference to the demiurge of heaven, but that it presumably because a point is
being made about heaven by reference to the products of craftsmen.

Mathematics and the divine in Plato
103
demiurge uses mathematics in fashioning the world; in the Republic mathematics is related
to the divine because knowledge of it is an important step on the pathway to knowing
forms.
Many attempts have been made to reconcile these apparently discrepant conceptions of
divinity in the Timaeus and the Republic. The developmentalist alternative of saying that
Plato came to believe in a creating god or mind in his later years is always available. The
other most inﬂuential position, which has an ancient pedigree, involves the claim that the
Timaeus account of creation is a narrative representation of eternal truths about an eter-
nal world which reveals its composition, so that the demiurge can be treated as a ﬁctional
device. I confess that I am unhappy with either interpretation but unable to provide a sat-
isfactory alternative. This unfortunate situation is, I think, ameliorated by the fact that the
representations of the relationship of mathematics to the divine are quite parallel in the
two dialogues. I shall then focus on that relationship and say little more about the intrinsic
character of the divine in the two dialogues.
Before turning to the body of my paper I want to mention one set of texts other than
Plato’s dialogues which are sometimes brought to bear in discussions of the role of math-
ematics in his philosophy. Aristotle has many remarks, almost all critical, of positions
taken by Plato and his associates. In a disconcerting number of cases the positions have
no clear relation to anything we ﬁnd in Plato’s dialogues. Other later writers also mention
these positions and discuss them in more detail than Aristotle does, although we usually
do not know what their sources of information are. Many scholars react to this situation by
referring to Plato’s unwritten doctrines, and many of them think of the doctrines as ideas
developed, probably very schematically, by Plato late in his life. There is, however, a group
of philosophers who think of the unwritten doctrines or, perhaps now better, doctrine as a
relatively worked out theory which in some sense is the core of Platonic philosophy and un-
derlies in one way or another what is said in the dialogues. Since mathematical ideas play
an important role in this interpretation, I shall make occasional references to the notion of
unwritten doctrines, but I shall not go into this topic in any detail.11
2. Introduction
In one of the dialogues included in Plutarch’s “Table-Talk”12 the topic of conversation is
what Plato meant when he made the statement I have used as an epigraph. Plutarch admits
that there is no clear evidence that Plato ever did say this, but says that it is believable
that he made the statement, which is in conformity with Plato’s nature. The speakers offer
four accounts of Plato’s meaning which are more like accounts of the importance Plato
attaches to mathematics. The ﬁrst clearly reﬂects the role assigned to mathematics in the
Republic:
1. Geometry turns us away from perception and towards the intelligible, eternal nature,
contemplation of which is the goal of philosophy.
11On the unwritten doctrines see [12] and [13], and the collection of essays in the Argentinian journal Methexis
6 (1993). Ref. [22] gives a useful presentation of Aristotle’s problematic descriptions of Plato’s views.
12VIII.2 Pôs Platôn elege ton theon aei geômetrein?

104
I. Mueller
The second, which is of less importance, has a relation to the Republic, but it picks up
speciﬁcally on things said by Plato in the Laws and the Gorgias:
2. It is better to distribute goods on the basis of geometric than arithmetic proportion,
since with the latter goods are distributed equally, whereas with the former they are
distributed according to merit;13
The third and fourth relate to Plato’s Timaeus, the dialogue I shall discuss ﬁrst:
3. In creating the world god imposed limit on an unlimited matter, using geometrical
shapes;
4. In the Timaeus Plato distinguished three principles which we call god, matter, and
form; in making and maintaining the cosmos, god imposes form on the entire quantity
of matter, and this is like solving that central geometric problem (Euclid, Elements
VI, 25) of constructing a geometric ﬁgure equal to a given one and similar to an-
other.
3. The Timaeus14
I have already mentioned that the Timaeus, which is named after the character who gives
the discourse constituting most of the dialogue, is a description of the creation of the world
by a benevolent god who strives to make the world as like the forms as possible. The
most important form for god’s creative activity is the form of living thing (zôion), a form
including the forms of all living things and in imitation of which god creates the cosmos,
“a single, visible living thing, containing within itself all living things ...” (30d–31a).
The conception of the cosmos as in some way alive dominates ancient thinking about our
world and separates it from modern physics, which purports to give a universal description
of Plato’s sensible world without making any speciﬁc reference to the fact of life, the
domain of biology, or to intelligence, the domain of psychology. For Plato the cosmos
is alive, and (by deﬁnition) that means it has a soul; for Plato, it also has a mind and
intelligence (nous). It is difﬁcult to spell out with any precision the exact consequences
of this difference between the Platonic conception of the world as alive and the tendency
of modern physics to abstract from the fact of life, but I think the most important related
fact, if not consequence, is that Plato does not use mathematics for the formulation of laws
on the basis of which experiments can be performed, measurements made, and outcomes
predicted. For Plato the mathematical character of the world is most importantly a sign of
its intelligent organization (and perhaps of the intelligence of its organizer) and—more or
less indistinguishably—of its goodness and beauty.
13The conception involved here is difﬁcult to formulate rigorously. But the idea is that in a geometric proportion
v1 is to m1 as v2 is to m2, so that if v1 and v2 represent the values of goods g1 and g2 and m1 and m2 the merits
of two people p1 and p2, then it will be just to assign g1 to p1 and g2 to p2; on the other hand if, g1, g, and g2
are in arithmetic proportion, then g is simply half of g1 and g2, and assigning goods on the basis of arithmetic
proportion to p1 and p2 will allegedly be unjust because the two unequal people are given equal amounts.
14The standard translation and commentary for the Timaeus is [10]. I have used this translation with some
revisions. Another very useful translation and commentary is [5].

Mathematics and the divine in Plato
105
3.1. Why there are four “elements”, earth, water, air, and ﬁre15 (Timaeus 31b–32b)
Timaeus’ ﬁrst speciﬁc invocation of mathematics comes in his ﬁrst description of the gen-
eration of the body of the world. I shall go into some detail on this passage because it
is illustrative of signiﬁcant difﬁculties in interpreting the way Plato uses mathematics. In
outline Timaeus proceeds as follows:
(a) What has a body must be visible and tangible.
(b) Nothing can be visible without ﬁre.
(c) Nothing can be tangible without something solid (stereos).
(d) Nothing is solid without earth.
(e1) “But two things cannot be well united without a third; for there must be some bond
between them drawing them together.
(e2) And of all bonds the best is that which makes itself and the terms it connects one in
the fullest sense; and it is of the nature of a proportion to effect this most perfectly.
(e3) For whenever of three numbers ⟨a,b,c⟩the middle one between any two that are
either bulks (ongkoi) or powers (dunameis)16 is such that “a is to b as b is to c and
c is to b as b is to a, “then, since the middle becomes ﬁrst and last and again the last
and ﬁrst become middle ⟨i.e., b is to a as c is to b⟩, in that way all will necessarily
turn out to be the same thing and therefore they will all be one.”
(f) If the body of the universe were a plane without depth, one mean would be sufﬁ-
cient, but it is a solid and solids are ﬁt together by two, not one, mean;
(g) Therefore god made water and air means between ﬁre and earth, and contrived it
so that ﬁre is to air as air is to water as water is to earth.
It is clear enough that some of the premisses, e.g., (b), (d), (e1), are questionable and appar-
ently ad hoc. But even if we grant all of the premisses which we understand, there remain
premisses and a conclusion the meaning of which is not transparent. In what sense are 4,
6, and 9 one because 4 is to 6 as 6 is to 9? Timaeus’ invocation of the possible positions of
terms in a three-term proportion hardly seems an adequate answer, but the alleged unify-
ing nature of proportion is clearly an important part of Plato’s mathematical vision of the
cosmos. And the way he invokes proportion suggests that he does not understand propor-
tionality as mere proportionality in the way in which we might read an algebraic equation
as merely an equation. Rather he reads a proportionality among entities as a kind of “force”
for bringing things together, not simply as a way of describing relations among things.
A perhaps more important point concerns the whole structure of the reasoning. From our
perspective its subject is physical reality, earth, water, air, and ﬁre, out of which the universe
is made. These are to be blended into a uniﬁed whole, but why should we think the simple
proportionality of (g) will produce that unity? Moreover, what is the proportionality of (g)
a proportionality of? The volumes of the “elements”? Their weights? Again Timaeus does
not say, and it seems unlikely that Plato had speciﬁc quantities in mind. For him the picture
15I retain the standard appellation ‘elements’ for earth, water, air, and ﬁre, but I put ‘elements’ in quotation
marks because, as we shall see at the beginning of Section 3.3, Timaeus speciﬁcally denies that these ‘elements’
really are elements (48b–c).
16These words are not standard arithmetical or, more generally, mathematical terms, and their purpose is not
understood. Dropping them from the assertion would not affect the truth—or falsity—of the claim that propor-
tionality produces unity.

106
I. Mueller
Fig. 2. The ﬁve (regular) Platonic solids as depicted in Johannes Kepler’s Harmonices Mundi, 1619.
of there being something mathematical and relatively simple is an adequate support for the
idea that the god’s cosmos is good.
Finally there is the question of the apparently mathematical assertion (f). It seems un-
likely that Plato was here thinking of some geometric truth.17 He may have had in mind
some version of what we know as propositions 18 to 21 of book VIII of Euclid’s Elements:
• m and n are similar plane numbers if and only if there is one mean proportional
number between m and n;
• m and n are similar solid numbers if and only if there are two mean proportional
numbers between m and n.18
There is obviously a parallelism between these arithmetic truths and Timaeus’ claims about
the four “elements”, but it is difﬁcult to see any more speciﬁc relation between them. Plato
moves from an abstract mathematical proposition about the existence of means to a claim
about the make-up of the physical world without explaining how he passes from one to
the other. He does not purport to look at the physical world and discover a mathematical
17If, for example, (f) presupposes that if there are two solids of volumes v1 and v3 there is no solid of volume v2
where v1 is to v2 as v2 is to v3, then (f) presupposes something which is false from our perspective. We can reﬁne
the issue by introducing some notion of constructing a solid, and we can restrict the possible solids to convex ones
contained by rectilinear planes, but it is not true either that a solid which is a mean between two such solids cannot
sometimes be constructed or that between two such solids two mean solids always can be constructed. Of course,
there are many other ways of trying to extract some geometric truth from (f), but I do not know of any satisfactory
one.
18m and n are similar plane numbers if and only if, for some m1, m2, n1, n2, m = m1 · m2 and n = n1 · n2, and
m1 is to m2 as n1 is to n2 (or equivalently, m1 is to n1 as m2 is to n2). Consequently, if m and n are similar
plane numbers, m1 · m2 is to n1 · m2 as n1 · m2 is to n1 · n2, and n1 · m2 is a mean proportional between m and
n. On the other hand, suppose m is to l as l is to n; let m′ and l′ be the least numbers such that m′ is to l′ as m is
to l. Then, for some j and j′, m = j · m′, l = j · l′ = j′ · m′, and n = j′ · l′, and j is to j′ as j · m′ is to j′ · m′ as
j′ · m′ is to j′ · l′ as m′ is to l′, and m and n are similar plane numbers.
The treatment of similar solid numbers is analogous. However, it should be noted that the same numbers, e.g., 26
and 36, can be similar plane and similar solid numbers.

Mathematics and the divine in Plato
107
relationship among its elements. Rather he takes an alleged truth about proportionality and
the fact that he is dealing with three-dimensional visible entities and infers (or at least
makes a claim about) what the relationship of the “elements” of the cosmos is. Of course,
I am not claiming that Plato actually came to the conclusion that earth, water, air, and ﬁre
are basic components of the world as a result of this kind of thinking. He undoubtedly took
the idea over from other physicists, notably Empedocles. But he chooses to present the
conclusion as a development of a mathematical proposition, and that kind of presentation
proved to be extremely inﬂuential in later philosophy.
3.2. The construction of the soul of the world (Timaeus 35a–36d)
Plato’s presentation of the construction of the soul of the cosmos has the same a priori
character. Timaeus imagines the demiurge producing a blend19 of certain forms and then
a division of this into portions. The ratios of the proportions, in fact, correspond to the
standard diatonic scale of Greek mathematical harmonics, but Timaeus never mentions
this fact; he simply gives an opaque series of arithmetic relations in terms of which the
demiurge makes the division.20 One might think that Plato was playing with mathematics
and with the reader.
Once the division has been made, it drops from sight and the soul stuff is treated as a
uniﬁed whole. This is divided into two equal strips which, in turn, are made into concentric
circles set at an angle to one another and rotating in opposite directions, the “inner” circle
itself being divided into seven unequal circles. Timaeus gives enough of a description of the
motions of these circles to make clear that what underlies his account is a rough, geocentric,
astronomical model in which the “outer” circle represents the sphere of the ﬁxed stars,
the inner circles sun, moon, and the ﬁve planets known at that time. But that this is so
is only made clear some two pages later when Timaeus’ mentions some of the heavenly
bodies explicitly.21 So again mathematics comes into the Timaeus in the service of a kind
of mathematical physics, in this case astronomy. But the mathematics is not presented
as rising out of the physics, but is rather introduced in an apparently abstract way, the
motivation of which is completely obscured.
3.3. The geometry of the “elements” (Timaeus 48b–57c)
Some ten pages after the discussion of the construction of the world soul Timaeus an-
nounces that, whereas he has been mainly discussing the creative activity of mind, he now
has to bring in what he calls necessity and make in effect a new beginning:
19On a literal reading the whole description treats the soul as if it were a compound of extended magnitudes, a
fact which Aristotle criticized as mistaken in the case of soul (On the Soul, I.3.406b26–407b11) because it is not
an extended magnitude. Later Platonists insisted that Aristotle was reading a “mythological” passage too literally.
20For a more detailed discussion of this passage see the appendix.
21When the astronomical signiﬁcance of the ﬁnal arrangement of the soul stuff is put together with the musical
ideas underlying its ﬁrst division into portions, it is difﬁcult to avoid the conclusion that some doctrine of heavenly
music (the “harmony of the spheres”) lies behind what Timaeus is made to say. But it is not to be found explicitly
in what Timaeus does say. (On the harmony of the spheres see [6, pp. 350–357].)

108
I. Mueller
We must, in fact, consider in itself the nature and properties of ﬁre, water, air, and earth before
heaven came to be. For to this day no one has explained their genesis, but we speak as if men
knew what ﬁre and each of the others is, positing them as elements or letters22 of the universe. But
one who has ever so little intelligence should not rank them in this analogy even so low as syllables.
On this occasion, however, our contribution is to be limited as follows. We are not to speak of the
ﬁrst principle or principles—or whatever name men choose to employ—of all things, if only on
account of the difﬁculty of explaining what we think by our present method of exposition. (48b–c)
After a few more words Timaeus launches into his new beginning and brings us into the
third interpretation of the epigraph to this paper.
Timaeus begins by adding to the distinction between the eternal world of forms and its
perceptible copy a third item which he calls (among other things) the receptacle and which
later Platonists usually called matter. He compares the receptacle to a mass of soft gold
which can be molded into a variety of shapes, but in itself has no particular shape; so too the
receptacle receives the likeness of the eternal forms although in itself it has no particular
character. “It is invisible and without form; it receives everything; and it participates in
what is intelligible in a way which is puzzling and difﬁcult to grasp” (51a–b). Timaeus
goes on to describe a pre-cosmic situation in which the receptacle shakes and is shaken by
rudimentary versions of the four “elements” in a wild way.
Fire, water, earth, and air possessed indeed some vestiges of their own nature, but were altogether
in such a condition as we should expect for anything when deity is absent from it. Such being
their nature at the time when the ordering of the universe was taken in hand, the god began by
shaping them by means of ⟨geometric⟩forms23 and numbers. That the god shaped them with the
greatest possible perfection, which they had not before, must be taken, above all, as a principle
we constantly assert; what I must now attempt to explain to you is the arrangement and genesis of
each of them. The account will be unfamiliar, but you are schooled in those branches of learning
⟨i.e., mathematics⟩which my explanations require, and so will follow me. (53b–c)
Timaeus now makes a quick series of mathematical moves when he asserts:
(a) The four “elements” are bodies, and bodies are three-dimensional.
(b) What is three-dimensional is contained by planes.24
(c) Rectilinear plane surfaces are divisible into triangles.
(d) All triangles are divisible into right triangles, whether isosceles or scalene.
Timaeus says he will hypothesize the right-angled triangles as the archê of the simple
bodies, but, as he had done before at 48b–c, he announces that he is not going to talk about
ultimate principles, ones known to god and anyone who might qualify as god’s friend.
Shortly after this Timaeus points out that, whereas all isosceles right triangles have the
same “nature”, presumably because they are all similar, there are inﬁnitely many natures
for the scalene right triangles of which he proposes to choose the most beautiful (kallistos),
the half-equilateral. After saying that it would take too long to explain this choice, he opts
for the triangle with sides in the ratio of 1, 2, and
√
3. I shall call these two kinds of
triangles the rudimentary triangles.
22The Greek word for a letter of the alphabet is stoikheion, a word which came to be applied to elements or
fundamental building blocks of the world.
23Timaeus speaks only of forms (eidê), which could mean Platonic forms, but the likelihood is that here he
means geometric forms or shapes. In any case, so I shall assume. Cp. [5, p. 252, n. 386].
24This is obviously not true of all bodies, but only of those in which Timaeus is interested.

Mathematics and the divine in Plato
109
Just before selecting these two triangles as principles Timaeus says that his task is to
ﬁnd the four most perfect bodies “such that some can come to be from one another by
dissolution” (53e2), a demand whose meaning becomes clear only when the task has been
done, and the four simple bodies have been assigned to four of the ﬁve regular solids which
Euclid constructs in the last book of the Elements:25
• the cube contained by 6 squares, assigned to earth;
• the triangular pyramid contained by 4 equilateral triangles, assigned to ﬁre;
• the octahedron contained by 8 equilateral triangles, assigned to air;
• the icosahedron contained by 20 equilateral triangles, assigned to water;
Timaeus’ job is to somehow reduce these four solids to his principles, the two rudimentary
triangles. He does this by dividing the faces of the regular solids into rudimentary triangles
and then indicating how the faces can be put together to form the solids.26 The construction
of the solids out of their faces is the basis of Timaeus’ account of the way in which “ele-
ments” change into one another, which is a matter of these invisibly small solids breaking
down into their faces and these faces recombining into different solids. This means that
although water, air, and ﬁre can be transformed into one another, earth is never involved
in elemental change. When it is broken into its faces the faces can only reassemble into
another cube (56d).27
There are a number of things to be said about this whole remarkable construction. Let us
begin with an issue which Timaeus does not address: the connection between this treatment
of the “elements” and the one discussed in Section 3.1, in which we were told that we had
to deal with visible, tangible solid bodies and ended up with an unexplained “proportion”:
• Fire is to air as air is to water as water is to earth.
There is no obvious way of correlating this proportion with a true one expressed in terms
of triangular pyramid, octahedron, icosahedron, cube. And, although Timaeus does allude
to the ﬁrst proportionality (53e), his failure to make a connection suggests that Plato does
not think there is one. Presumably, too, the ﬁrst proportionality is not intended to apply to
the pre-cosmic situation in which only traces of the “elements” exist and are shaken about
in the receptacle.
Another issue of connection which is not addressed in detail by Timaeus brings us to a
possible difference between the third and fourth interpretations of the epigraph. The third
interpretation relates clearly and speciﬁcally to the passage I have been discussing. The
fourth seems to be an artiﬁcial reading of the epigraph which draws an analogy between
a particular geometric construction and god’s imposition of form on matter, perhaps in
order to avoid the speciﬁcally geometric interpretation of god’s activity, which is now
seen as the imposition of form on matter, say, in making a portion of that matter come
to have the features of ﬁre, i.e., to resemble the form of ﬁre. It is possible to imagine
25Euclid also proves that these are the only ﬁve regular solids (XIII.17). In this essay I do not discuss Timaeus’
curious remark at 55c about the dodecahedron or the curious discussion of the number of worlds which follows
it.
26The division of the faces is curious because, Timaeus breaks the square into four isosceles right triangles
and the equilateral triangle into six half-equilaterals, although he could have gotten away with two rudimentary
triangles in each case. If there is some signiﬁcance in Timaeus’ choice, Plato has not chosen to tell us what it is.
For discussion of this question see [19].
27Aristotle (On the Heaven III.7.306a1–17) ridicules Plato for adopting this position, which he sees as a case of
promoting theory over what is observed.

110
I. Mueller
Fig. 3. Plato’s cave.28
that god imposes the form of ﬁre on matter without going through any geometrical steps.
But Plato clearly thinks that God imposes such forms by mathematical means and that
these mathematical means “explain” the characteristics of, say, ﬁre. However, Timaeus’
explanations of the correlations between the solids and the characteristics are, for us, mere
analogies. He begins with earth:
Let us next distribute the ﬁgures whose formation we have described among ﬁre, earth, water, and
air. To earth let us assign the cubical ﬁgure; for earth is the most immobile of the four kinds and
the most moldable of bodies. The ﬁgure whose bases are the most stable must best answer that
description; and as a base, if we take the ⟨rudimentary⟩triangles we assumed at the outset, the face
of the triangle with equal sides is by nature more stable than that of the triangle whose sides are
unequal; and further of the two equilateral surfaces respectively composed of the two triangles,
the square is necessarily a more stable base than the triangle, both in its parts and as a whole.
Accordingly we shall preserve the plausibility of our account, if we assign this ﬁgure to earth.
(55d–56a)
The remaining assignments are justiﬁed by assuming a correlation between a lower number
of faces and greater mobility, sharpness, and lightness. It seems clear that Plato is much
28The drawing was made by Dr. B.Th. Koppers. Source: C.J. de Vogel, Greek Philosophy, A Collection of Texts,
Vol. 1, Thales to Plato, 3rd edition, E.J. Brill, Leiden, 1963, p. 204.

Mathematics and the divine in Plato
111
more interested in indicating that there is a mathematical foundation for physics than in
giving an account of physical mechanisms by which the foundation is realized.
The question of the relationship between mathematics and physics is made more difﬁcult
by the seemingly effortless way with which Timaeus moves between the purely mathemat-
ical and the physical. When he begins to describe the order imposed on the disordered
receptacle by the demiurge, the four “elements” already exist, and apparently we know
they are “bodies”. The reduction of bodies to the rudimentary triangles appears to move
us from the domain of physics to the domain of pure geometry, but Plato gives no indi-
cation of where he thinks the transition occurs. Bodies, he says, must have depth. This is,
of course, true of physical bodies, but it is also true of geometrical solids. But as he pro-
ceeds to talk about what has depth being bounded by planes and planes being composed
of triangles, and so on, he appears to be talking at the geometrical level rather than the
physical one. But after he has reverted to the physical level by correlating the solids with
the four “elements” and describing their transformations and non-transformations into one
another, we are left with an apparently bizarre picture of two-dimensional surfaces ﬂoating
in space and, where appropriate, combining to form a new solid. It is difﬁcult to suppose
that Plato wished to assign a physical reality to these triangles and squares, but equally
difﬁcult to see how he could treat them as purely mathematical objects and assign them
physical effects.
The difﬁculties here do not appear to be difﬁculties for Plato. For him the physical world
gains its intelligibility, and therefore, in some sense, its reality, from an ideal world, and,
at least in the Timaeus, that ideal world is importantly mathematical. But, as I mentioned
earlier, the mathematical intelligibility of the physical world is not a matter of what we
would call mathematical laws, but rather of a mathematical structure, a system of ratios, a
system of interacting spheres or circles, the system of regular solids, being present in the
physical world.
3.4. Mathematics and human happiness
In the Timaeus these mathematical structures are said to be present in the world because a
god put them there. And, at least in the case of the heavenly revolutions, our apprehension
of them is a way of perfecting ourselves:
The god invented and gave us vision in order that we might observe the circuits of mind in the
heaven and proﬁt by them for the revolution of our own thought, which are of the same kind as
them, though ours be troubled and they are unperturbed; and that by learning to know them and
acquiring the power to compute them rightly according to nature, we might reproduce the perfectly
unerring revolutions of the god and reduce to settled order the wandering motions in ourselves.
(47b–c)
This, roughly speaking, moral signiﬁcance of mathematics is related to the second in-
terpretation of the epigraph, in which geometric proportion is espoused over arithmetic
proportion as a basis for social justice. The thought underlying the second interpretation
is expressed clearly in Plato’s Laws at VI.756e–758a, although in terms of two kinds
of equality. But the moral signiﬁcance of mathematics comes out much more clearly

112
I. Mueller
in a related passage in the Gorgias, where Socrates is in heated exchange with the op-
portunistic, self-seeking Callicles. Socrates insists that a person should control his ap-
petites:
He should not allow his appetites to be undisciplined or undertake to ﬁll them up. Such a man,
Callicles, could not be loved by another nor by a god, for he cannot participate in a community
and without community there is no love. Wise men say, my friend, that community and love and
order and moderation and justice hold together heaven and earth, gods and men, and that is why
they call this universe a cosmos not a chaos or licentious revel. It seems to me that you do not put
your mind to these things, even though you are versed in them; rather, failing to observe the great
power of geometric equality among gods and among men, you think you should seek for more and
more, because you neglect geometry. (507e–508a)
Putting this passage together with the one just quoted from the Timaeus, one can see that
Plato brings together mathematical knowledge, morality, and a kind of deiﬁcation in a
way which is hard for a person who is accustomed to the modern compartmentalization
of science, ethics, and religiosity to articulate. However we will see the same kind of as-
similation in the Republic, where, as I have indicated, there is no analog of the god of the
Timaeus.
3.5. Higher principles (Timaeus 48b–c and 53d)
Before turning to the Republic I want to signal the two passages in which Timaeus denies
that in the second discussion of the “elements” he will present or has presented what we
might call absolutely ﬁrst principles, since these passages have played a role in the discus-
sion of Plato’s unwritten doctrines. Timaeus has “reduced” the “elements” to geometric
solids and the geometric solids to the rudimentary triangles, but he declines to proceed any
further. For those who believe in the unwritten doctrines such further reductions would
be included in them. Here I wish to mention only that the most obvious further reduction
would be of the triangles to straight lines. Further reductions beyond that, e.g., of straight
lines to points, would seem less straightforward although there are indications that Plato
thought about some such thing. In addition there are indications that Plato thought about a
reduction of geometry to arithmetic and a further reduction of mathematics to something
less mathematical or even non-mathematical, namely the forms. All of these ideas are very
nebulous and controversial, but I shall have a little more to say about them after discussing
the Republic.
4. The Republic29
The central topic of the Republic is dikaiosunê, a term which applies to both social and
political justice and to individual moral rectitude; it is standardly translated ‘justice’. How-
ever, the work is justiﬁably often thought of as the fullest representation we have of a
29For the Republic I have relied on the revised Grube translation [14]. The best annotated edition of the Republic
remains [1]. Good commentaries include [28] and [3]. The classic essay on much of the material I discuss here
is [9].

Mathematics and the divine in Plato
113
Platonic philosophy.30 My concern here is not with Plato’s account of justice, but with his
depiction of (i) the ideally just person in a ideally just society, the philosopher who will be
the ruler of this society, and (ii) his education. For Plato, the distinguishing feature of the
philosopher–ruler is his knowledge of the forms and in particular of the form of the good,
a knowledge which is displayed dialectically, that is, through successful defense of an ac-
count of goodness in the face of sharp and repeated questioning and successful refutation
of alternative accounts through the same kind of questioning. The important passages bear-
ing on mathematics occur in books VI and VII of the Republic in which the central speaker
of the dialogue, Socrates, offers an indirect indication of what the form of the good is and
a description of the special education of the philosopher–ruler.
4.1. The education of the philosopher–ruler
In books II and III of the Republic Socrates describes an elementary education focusing, as
Greek education did, on music and literature and physical training. This education is aimed
at the development of the moral and physical capacities of the students. It appears that these
young people will also be exposed to mathematics by involving them in types of play which
develop mathematical facility (VII.536d–e; the idea is developed more fully at VII.819b–d
of the Laws). At the age of 20 the morally, physically, and intellectually best students will
be separated out and begin a higher education with no precedent in ﬁfth-century Greece.
For ten years these people are to study mathematics in a serious way, bringing its branches
together “into a uniﬁed view of their connection with one another and with the nature of
reality” (VII.537c). After that the best of these students will spend ﬁve years in dialectical
questioning and then a select few of them will spend 15 years in governmental and military
affairs. Finally the best of these will be brought to an apprehension of the form of the good
and spend the remainder of their life alternating between philosophical study and ruling.
Clearly Plato’s educational scheme has a moral, a physical, a mathematical, a dialectical,
and a practical component. Plato has nothing good to say for people who are highly devel-
oped in one of these components at the expense of the others, say, a brilliant mathemati-
cian who can’t ride a horse or a skilled dialectician with no moral scruples. He sees these
components as inextricably blended together in the education of his “divine” (VI.497c)
philosopher–rulers. For this reason it is in an important sense misleading to isolate the
mathematical component, but this must be done here, and doing it has the merit of bring-
ing to the fore one of Plato’s main contributions to western educational theory: the idea
that a fully developed human being must be scientiﬁcally literate.
The mathematical curriculum
I mentioned at the very beginning of this essay that the ﬁve components of mathematical
education for Plato are arithmetic, plane and solid geometry, astronomy, and harmonics. In
his description of these sciences he does not give a further explanation of how one devel-
ops a “uniﬁed view of their connection with one another and with the nature of reality”,
although he does mention the need to do this at 531c–d. His emphasis is almost entirely on
30See, for example, [27, p. 115].

114
I. Mueller
what is emphasized in the ﬁrst interpretation of the epigraph, the way in which mathemat-
ics leads us away from the perceptible world to an intelligible reality. Arithmetic is praised
because it requires us to deal with units or ones which, unlike single cows or horses, are ab-
solutely indivisible.31 Socrates wonders what arithmeticians would say if they were asked
“What kind of numbers are you talking about, in which the one is as you assume it to be,
each equal to every other, without the least difference and without parts”, and imagines
their answer:
I think they would answer that they are talking about those which can only be thought about and
can’t be dealt with in any other way. (VII.526a)
Plane geometry is treated similarly, although Socrates regrets that geometers have to speak
as if they were doing things such as constructing squares or moving a ﬁgure to a certain
position, since the subject matter of geometry is really unchanging reality, not things that
come into existence and go out of existence. Socrates does not say anything speciﬁc about
solid geometry, but only urges that the study of it be promoted.
So, we might say that the ﬁrst three sciences in Socrates’ curriculum are there because
they turn the mind away from human things toward divine ones. One might, of course,
adopt a position of Aristotle and reject the claim that there are separately existing realities
studied by mathematics.32 But even if one adopts the Platonic view, it is difﬁcult to see
how it can be applied to the last two sciences of the curriculum, astronomy and harmonics,
which appear to be about things we see and hear. We have seen in Section 3.4 that in the
Timaeus Plato praises the study of the heavenly motions because by understanding them we
see that they are more regular than they appear, and that understanding somehow affects our
own emotional psychology. But Socrates goes much further in the Republic. The heavens
are indeed beautiful, but their observed motions fall far short of their true ones, which must
be grasped intellectually not by sight. The true ones are permanent, whereas the observed
ones change and do not embody the truth about the “ratio of night to day, of days to a
month, of a month to a year, or of the motions of the stars to these things or to each other”.
Socrates concludes:
Then if, by really taking part in astronomy, we’re to make the naturally intelligent part of the soul
useful instead of useless, let us study astronomy by means of problems, as we do geometry, and
leave the things in heaven alone. (VII.530b–c)
There are many obscurities in Socrates’ discussion of astronomy, but it is clear that Socrates
is envisaging a science which is quite different from anything we think of as astronomy,
even mathematical astronomy, in which the observed heavenly motions are to some ex-
tent idealized to make them more susceptible to geometric representation. I will argue that
the astronomical passages of the Timaeus are an indication of the sort of thing Plato had in
mind for astronomy, but ﬁrst I want to complete my account of Socrates’ mathematical cur-
riculum by mentioning his treatment of harmonics, which is quite parallel to his treatment
of astronomy although formulated only negatively. In it Socrates complains about people
who “look for numbers in heard concords and do not ascend to problems, investigating
31A somewhat different distinction is made at Philebus 56d–e between units of different sizes and units which
do not differ from one another in any way.
32See, for example, Aristotle, Metaphysics M.2.1076b11–1077b14.

Mathematics and the divine in Plato
115
which numbers are concordant and which aren’t and why”. (531c) When his interlocutor
says that such an investigation is superhuman (daimonios), Socrates responds that it is of
use in the search for the good and beautiful.
In my description of Timaeus’ construction of the world soul in Section 3.1 I pointed out
that he partitioned the stuff of the world soul in accordance with the standard diatonic scale
without ever mentioning the musical content of his description. And he arranged the stuff
into moving circles constituting a rough model of the heavenly motions, but only pointed
out that they are a model some two pages after doing the construction. In the Republic Plato
is concerned with the task of getting the soul aware of a higher level of reality to which the
soul is connected. Arithmetic and geometry provide him with examples of sciences which,
he thinks, clearly deal with this level. Two other mathematical sciences, astronomy and
harmonics, do not do so clearly, but Plato imagines that they could. On the other hand, in
the Timaeus Plato is concerned to show how our world is derived from the higher level.
He does this not only in the two cases I have just mentioned, but also in the explanation
of the existence of the four “elements” based on a presumably arithmetic fact about pro-
portion, and of their character on the basis of solid geometry. Timaeus’ derivations are not
anything like formal deductions, but they are based on the idea that mathematical science
is a standard of rationality and that our world, being the best embodiment of a rational
organization, is mathematically organized.
4.2. The divided line (Republic VI.509d–511e)
The sharp contrast between the perceptible and the intelligible world, which is emphasized
in the Republic and many other dialogues, is usually treated as a central point of Platonic
doctrine. Such a position creates difﬁculties for the interpretation of the Timaeus, which
is devoted to an account of the perceptible world. I see this discrepancy between the two
dialogues as a matter of emphasis rather than of doctrine, a position which I would like to
buttress by looking at one further passage, part of Socrates’ attempt to indicate in a rough
way the nature of the form of the good.
The ﬁrst part of that attempt is a comparison of the relationship of the sun to the per-
ceptible world to that of the form of the good to the intelligible world. The second part,
usually referred to as The Divided Line, compares the distinction between the intelligi-
ble and the sensible world to the division of a straight line AB into two unequal sections
at C. However, Socrates then imagines a further division of AC at A1 and CB at B1 so
that:
AC : CB :: AA1 : A1C :: CB1 : B1B.
The difference between CB1 and B1B is explained in terms of the distinction between
perceptible things, animals, plants, artifacts (CB1), and their images, shadows, reﬂections,
etc. (B1B). But the difference between AA1 and A1C is made in terms of a distinction
between two intellectual methods. A1C is explained by reference to geometers, arithmeti-
cians, and the like, who hypothesize various things as known and give no account of them
and then make inferences based on them; these people are also said to make use of visible

116
I. Mueller
Fig. 4.
things in their reasoning even though they are not thinking about these things but about the
things of which they are likenesses. The best model we have for this is probably elementary
geometry done in the style of Euclid, which starts from deﬁnitions, postulates, and axioms,
and reasons in terms of diagrams. AA1 is associated with dialectic, which is said to use
its hypotheses as underpinnings for rising to an “unhypothetical principle of everything”
(certainly the form of the good) and then to move down to a conclusion, not using sensible
things, but only dealing with forms.
In the context of the material we have been discussing it seems natural to think that
A1C is exhausted by mathematics, that is, presumably, the ﬁve subjects Socrates puts into
his mathematical curriculum. At Metaphysics A.5.987b14–18 Aristotle asserts that Plato
believed in mathematical objects which were like the forms and unlike perceptibles in be-
ing eternal and like sensibles and unlike forms in coming in multiple instances. Such a
distinction might make some sense for arithmetic and geometry, but, as Aristotle himself
points out (Metaphysics M.2.1076b39–1077a9 and B.2.997b12–24), it makes little sense
for astronomy and harmonics. However, in the Republic nothing is said about a distinc-
tion between the objects in AC and A1C, and, indeed, later (VII.534a) Socrates explicitly
declines to enter into this issue. A striking feature of the way Socrates divides the line,
but one which is not mentioned in the Republic or elsewhere in antiquity, is that it makes
A1C and CB1 equal. I am not entirely convinced that Plato was aware of this fact, but the
equality and Socrates’ refusal to discuss ontological issues here might well be a way of
expressing the nebulousness of the domain of mathematics, its transitional role between
the sensible and the intelligible, both in the upward direction in the Republic and in the
downward direction in the Timaeus.
5. Conclusion
To many modern readers Socrates’ presentation of the divided line suggests the idea of
a deductive system which in some mysterious way starts from the form of the good as
an unhypothetical ﬁrst principle and deduces an exhaustive description of the forms and
the body of mathematical knowledge. My own sense is that the “downward movement”
referred to in the connection with AA1 and A1C includes the kinds of applications of
mathematics we see in the Timaeus and other kinds of reasoning which we would not class
as deductive. Plato, of course, never provides anything appreciably more detailed than the
kind of schematic presentation I have outlined here. For proponents of the unwritten doc-
trines, the absence of anything more detailed is only to be expected. The dispute over the
unwritten doctrines is importantly a dispute over their signiﬁcance for Plato. For me that
question remains open, although I am inclined to think that some people have exagger-
ated their signiﬁcance by making them the key to understanding all of Plato. Putting that
issue aside, and assuming, what has also been disputed, that Plato did have the idea of

Mathematics and the divine in Plato
117
some broad doctrine of the kind I have tried to sketch, there would still remain the ques-
tion of how detailed and speciﬁc that doctrine was. I think that question is unanswerable,
although it is important to say that we have no information about a detailed and speciﬁc
doctrine.
However, even without that information, it seems clear to me that Plato did have a com-
prehensive picture of the cosmos divided into a higher divine, intelligible world and a lower
human, sensible world, and saw the task of the individual, on which his well-being, his di-
vinization, depends as a matter of somehow attaching himself to that higher world. A, and
I suspect the, crucial link between these worlds is mathematics, in the broad sense deter-
mined by the mathematical curriculum of the Republic. In the Republic Plato emphasizes
the role of mathematics in directing the attention of the potentially divine individual away
from the lower world to the higher world and its apex, the form of the good. But in the
Timaeus he emphasizes the way in which the higher world is expressed in the mathemat-
ical organization of the lower world. In both dialogues and elsewhere Plato insists on the
moral beneﬁt to be gained from the study of mathematics.
These fundamental beliefs of Plato found their expression in what has been called the
world’s ﬁrst institution of higher learning, Plato’s Academy. Having organized this essay
around one, probably apocryphal, statement ascribed to Plato, I want to end with another,
the inscription Plato is said to have put over the entrance to his Academy:
Let no one unversed in geometry enter here!33
Appendix A. The division of the stuff of the world soul (Timaeus 35b–36b)
Here is Timaeus’ description of the way in which the demiurge divided up the stuff of
the world soul before reassembling it and forming it into circles corresponding to major
heavenly motions:
And he began the division in this way.
(a) First, he took one portion from the whole, and next a portion double this; the third half as much
again as the second, and three times the ﬁrst; the fourth double the second; the ﬁfth three times the
third; the sixth eight times the ﬁrst; and the seventh twenty-seven times the ﬁrst.
(b) Next he went on to ﬁll up both the double and triple intervals, cutting off yet more parts from
the original mixture and placing them between the terms, so that within each interval there were
two means, (b1) the one exceeding and being exceeded by the extremes by the same part, (b2) the
other exceeding and being exceeded by an equal number. These links gave rise to intervals of three
to two and four to three and nine to eight within the original intervals.
(c) And he went on to ﬁll up all the intervals of four to three with the interval of nine to eight,
leaving a part over in each of them. This leftover interval of the part had the ratio of the number
two hundred and ﬁfty six to the number two hundred and forty three.
The demiurge’s procedure is the following.
(a) He ﬁrst generates the series of powers of 2 and 3 in the order:
1
2
3
4
9
8
27
33“Ageômetrêtos mêdeis eisetô”. On this inscription see [23].

118
I. Mueller
(b) He then imagines these arranged as intervals (or ratios):
1
2
2
4
4
8
1
3
3
9
9
27
and ﬁlls these intervals m
n with numbers k, l such that (b1) k −m is to m as n −k is to
n and (b2) l = m+n
2 , the so-called harmonic and arithmetic means between m and n. This
yields:
1
4/3
3/2
2
1
3/2
2
3
2
8/3
3
4
3
9/2
6
9
4
16/3
6
8
9
27/2
18
27
Combining these two sequences we have:
1
4/3
4
3
4/3
3/2
9
8
3/2
2
4
3
2
8/3
4
3
8/3
3
4
3
3
4
4
3
4
9/2
9
8
9/2
16/3
32
27
16/3
6
9
8
6
8
4
3
8
9
9
8
9
27/2
3
2
27/2
18
4
3
18
27
3
2
where the right column expresses the ratio of the limiting terms in least numbers. Timaeus
says that this process produces intervals representing the ratios 3/2, 4/3, and 9/8, which is
true except for the case of 9/2
6/3.
(c) Timaeus then says the demiurge ﬁlled up the 4 3 intervals with 9 8 intervals leaving
an interval of 256
243. These values correspond to the fact that 4/3 = 9/8 · 9/8 · 256/243.
Represented in terms of intervals one would have:
1
9/8
81/64
4/3

Mathematics and the divine in Plato
119
and these numbers would correspond to the ﬁrst four notes of the diatonic scale, which I
shall call do, re, mi, fa. Continuing we move up through two octaves as follows:
1
4/3
4
3
do re mi fa
4/3
3/2
9
8
fa
sol
3/2
2
4
3
sol la ti
do′
2
8/3
4
3
do′ re′ mi′ fa′
8/3
3
9
8
fa′
sol′
3
4
4
3
sol′ la′ ti′ do′ ′
The continuation is a little less straightforward, since for the next octave we start from:
4
9/2
9
8
do′ ′
re′ ′
9/2
16/3
32
27
re′ ′
fa′ ′
16/3
6
9
8
fa′ ′
sol′ ′
6
8
4
3
sol′ ′ la′ ′ ti′ ′ do′ ′ ′
Although he does not say so, Timaeus presumably intends us to consider the combined
interval:
4
16/3
4
3
and ﬁll it up as in the case of the preceding two octaves. The remaining octave plus is
represented by:
8
9
9
8
do′ ′ ′
re′ ′ ′
9
27/2
3
2
re′ ′ ′
la′ ′ ′

120
I. Mueller
27/2
18
4
3
la′ ′ ′
re′ ′ ′ ′
18
27
3
2
re′ ′ ′ ′
la′ ′ ′ ′
la′ ′ ′ and re′ ′ ′ ′ ′ give us another 4 3 interval, which we can ﬁll up in accordance with the
diatonic scale if we use the order:
1
9/8
2304/1944
4/3
but there does not seem to be any way that the demiurge can construct quantities for mi′ ′ ′,
fa′ ′ ′, sol′ ′ ′ or mi′ ′ ′ ′, fa′ ′ ′ ′, sol′ ′ ′ ′ following Timaeus’ recipe.
References
[1] J. Adam (ed.), The Republic of Plato, 2 vols., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1902
(second edition with an introduction by D.A. Rees, 1963).
[2] R.E. Allen (ed.), Studies in Plato’s Metaphysics, Humanities Press, New York, 1965.
[3] J. Annas, An Introduction to Plato’s Republic, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1981.
[4] L. Brandwood, The Chronology of Plato’s Dialogues, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England,
and New York, 1990.
[5] L. Brisson (transl.), Platon, Timée, Critias, Flammarion, Paris, 1992.
[6] W. Burkert, Lore and Science in Ancient Pythagoreanism (translated by E.L. Minar Jr.), Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1972.
[7] H. Cherniss, Plato as mathematician, Review of Metaphysics 4 (1951), 395–425. Reprinted in [26], pp.
222–252.
[8] H. Cherniss, The relation of the Timaeus to Plato’s later dialogues, American Journal of Philology 78
(1957), 225–266. Reprinted in [2], pp. 339–378, and in [26], pp. 298–335.
[9] F.M. Cornford, Mathematics and dialectic in Plato’s Republic, Mind 41 (1932), 37–52 and 173–190.
Reprinted in [2], pp. 61–95.
[10] F.M. Cornford, Plato’s Cosmology, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1937.
[11] M. Despland, The Education of Desire, Toronto University Press, Toronto, 1985.
[12] K. Gaiser, Platons Ungeschriebene Lehre, Ernst Klett Verlag, Stuttgart, 1963.
[13] K. Gaiser, Platons Zusammenschau der mathematischen Wissenschaften, Antike und Abendland 32 (1986),
89–124.
[14] G.M.A. Grube (transl.), Plato: Republic, Hackett Publishing Company, Indianapolis, 1992 (translation re-
vised by C.D.C. Reeve).
[15] R.E. Hackforth, Plato’s theism, Classical Quarterly 30 (1936), 4–9. Reprinted in [2], pp. 439–447.
[16] R. Kraut (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Plato, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England,
1992.
[17] F. Lasserre, La Naissance des Mathématiques à l’Époque de Platon, Editions Universitaires, Fribourg,
Switzerland and Editions du Cerf, Paris, 1990.
[18] I. Mueller, Mathematical method and philosophical truth, in [16], pp. 170–199.
[19] I. Mueller, The triangles in Plato’s Timaeus, Mathesis 12 (1996), 286–333 (even pages).
[20] M. Nussbaum (ed.), Logic, Science, and Dialectic: Collected Papers [of G.E.L. Owen] in Greek Philosophy,
Cornell University Press, Ithaca, 1986.
[21] G.E.L. Owen, The place of the ‘Timaeus’ in Plato’s dialogues, Classical Quarterly, n.s. 3 (1953), 79–95.
Reprinted in [2], pp. 313–338, and in [20], pp. 65–84.
[22] L. Robin, La Théorie Platonicienne des Idées et des Nombres d’Aprés Aristote, F. Alcan, Paris, 1908.

Mathematics and the divine in Plato
121
[23] H.D. Saffrey, AGEÔMETRÊTOS MÊDEIS EISITÔ, une inscription légendaire, Revue des études grecques
81 (1968), 67–87.
[24] P. Shorey, What Plato Said, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1933.
[25] F. Solmsen, Plato’s Theology, Cornell Studies in Classical Philology, vol. 27, Cornell University Press,
Ithaca, 1942.
[26] L. Tarán (ed.), Harold Cherniss: Selected Papers, E.J. Brill, Leiden, 1977.
[27] H. Thesleff, Studies in Plato’s Two-Level Model, Commentationes Humanarum Litterarum, vol. 113, Soci-
etas Scientarum Fennica, Helsinki, 1999.
[28] N. White, A Companion to Plato’s Republic, Hackett Publishing Company, Indianapolis, 1979.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 5
Nicomachus of Gerasa and the Arithmetic Scale
of the Divine
Jean-François Mattéi
University of Nice and Institut Universitaire de France,
39 rue Daumier, F-13008 Marseille, France
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
Theologoumena Arithmetica
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
123


Nicomachus of Gerasa
125
Introduction
Nicomachus of Gerasa, who lived in Palestine in the ﬁrst half of the second century, was
a major ﬁgure of the Neopythagorean movement, at the crossroads of mathematical tradi-
tions dating back to the oldest Pythagorism and ontological speculations about Ideas and
Numbers coming from Academic Platonism. According to J.M. Dillon [1], Nicomachus is
supposed to have lived between the era of Tiberius and that of the Antonines. Indeed Nico-
machus mentions Thrasyllus, Tiberius’ astrologer, in his Harmonikon Enchiridion (Jan,
260, 16). Cassiodorus refers to one Latin translation by Apuleius of Arithmetic Introduc-
tion by the same Nicomachus. If we know very little about this mathematician, we at least
know the titles of his lost texts: Ars Arithmetica, mentioned by Jamblichus, Life of Pythago-
ras, quoted by Porphyrus, Harmonic Introduction [2], Geometric Introduction and Platonic
Reading mentioned by Nicomachus himself in the writings which have been preserved. The
three preserved writings are Arithmetic Introduction (Arithmetiké Eisagogé), Manual of
Harmonic (Harmonikon Egkeiridion) and above all, Arithmetic Discourses about the Gods
(Theologoumena Arithmetika). It is possible to reconstruct this latter piece of work through
two late writings: the anonymous text from the Theologoumena Arithmetica, wrongly at-
tributed to Jamblichus (ed. De Falco), and the summary of the Byzantine patriarch Photius
in the 187 Codex of his Library.1 According to Armand Delatte, Theologoumena, by Nico-
machus and the anonymous compiler, might come from Sacred Discourse (Hieros Logos)
or Discourse about the Gods (Logos peri theôn) that Jamblichus mentions in his Life of
Pythagoras (§§146 and 152) [3], a text of the Roman Neopythagorean circles which would
have, allegedly, for the ﬁrst time, linked deities and mythological ﬁgures to numbers. Any-
how, Nicomachus’ work, which has now been forgotten, had a great impact on Boetius,
who was largely inﬂuenced by it in his De institutione arithmetica libri II, as well as on
the Neoplatonists Jamblichus and Proclus.
Theologoumena Arithmetica
If we put aside the mathematical contents of Arithmetic Introduction [4] and the musical
contents of Manual of Harmony, which both integrate Platonic developments into origi-
nal Pythagorean theories, we ﬁnd Nicomachus’ speculations about the divine in Theolo-
goumena. They obviously shocked Saint Photius, the patriarch of Constantinople, who, af-
ter mocking Nicomachus’ “dear divine numbers” (τους ιλους 
αριµους και εο´υς, 142
b 32–33) and rejecting a theology which deserved “neither secret nor respect”, indicated
that the book had become rare and had better disappear in spite of its fame. Nevertheless,
Photius analysed it at length as if he were fascinated by the symbolic power arising from
the mathematical properties attributed to deities.
In his Arithmetic Theology, in fact, Nicomachus no longer considers the natural proper-
ties of whole numbers (even and odd numbers, perfect numbers, linear and ﬂat numbers,
triangle numbers, tetragonal numbers and pentagonal numbers, arithmetic, geometric and
harmonic medians). He reviews the ﬁrst ten numbers, faithfully following the Pythagorean
decade. The question is to relate “the nature of things” (την των οντων υσιν) to “the hy-
postasis of numbers” (την των 
αριµων υποστασιν, 142 b 29–30) while letting us guess
1The original title was Muriobiblion (Thousand Books).

126
J.-F. Mattéi
the sovereign presence of “gods and goddesses” who are likened to them (εους τε και
ε ας, 142 b 35). What is the secret principle of this strange arithmetic theology? Photius
sees it in the projection of the ﬁrst quantity on the deities, who, in return, would deprive
themselves of this same quantity so as to appear in all their splendour. In other words, the
number would be a kind of springboard for reaching God at once without the mathemati-
cian caring to look back. Mathematics would not be worth an hour of effort for the initiate
who is now one with his God.
However, this does not seem to be the initial intuition which allowed the Pythagoreans
to identify Numbers with the various divinities of the Greek Pantheon. In the ninth century,
Photius easily distinguished the ﬁeld of the number from the ﬁeld of the divine because it
had been inscribed in the tradition of the Christian mystery of the Trinity since the bap-
tismal formula of Matthew 28, 19: “Go (and) of all nations make disciples, baptise them
in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit”. The Christian paradox of a God
“one and yet multiple” after Hippolytus’ expression (Contre Noët., 10) and, according to
Tertullian, the very substance of the New Testament, for which “the Father, the Son and
the Holy Spirit are believed to be three to make one God appear”? (Contre Praxeas, 31,
1–2) cannot support the Pythagorean paradox of deities whose sole manifestation is the
Number. Still, in both cases, we are in an analogical perspective. Indeed, St. Augustine
saw in the psychological analysis of the human triad: esse, nosse, velle (Confessions, XIII,
11, 12), mens, notitia, amor (De Trinitate, IX, 2–5) or memoria, intelligentia, voluntas (De
Trinitate, X–XV) the three traces of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit because man
is God’s image in every regard (Genesis 1, 26). Greek thinking does not apprehend man or
divinity in terms of “person”, but, one might say, in terms of “measure”. And the supreme
measure of the divine is the Number inasmuch as it is repeated in all the spheres of the
universe with its immutable properties.
In this sense, it is not certain, as Photius puts it, that Nicomachus made “Gods out of
numbers” (τους 
αριµους εοποιηση, 143 a 9–10) nor that, conversely, he made numbers
out of Gods by subtly introducing numerical principles in the divine. But rather, Nico-
machus considers each god in the radiance of his cosmic measure, which inextricably
combines arithmetic, geometric and astronomical properties. Because the divine is one,
through the inexhaustible variety of its manifestations, the multiplicity of the number has
to acknowledge its original unity, which is found, as we know, in the harmonic interval
of the ﬁrst ten numbers. From the Monad to the Decade, going through the Pythagorean
Tetraktys which links the Whole to the ﬁrst four numbers (1 + 2 + 3 + 4 = 10), Nico-
machus sees the divinity deploying in ten steps, each one being an indispensable stage.
Nicomachus’ scale is not comparable to Jacob’s ladder but it unites heaven and earth, god
to matter, starting with the Monad, which is like the root of all things.
Photius’ account follows the natural scale of the ﬁrst ten numbers, from the Monad to
the Decade, as is found in the text by Pseudo-Jamblichus Theologoumena arithmeticae [5]
as well as in the excerpts from Anatolius, a writer of the third century, partly preserved by
Pseudo-Jamblichus.
(1) The Monad
The principle of all numbers is likened to the supreme God because it “contains all
things” (πανδοχευς, 143 a 26). Nicomachus ﬁrst calls it “chaos” (χ αος) after Hesiod,

Nicomachus of Gerasa
127
then, “abyss” (χ ασµα) in the Platonic tradition (Republic, X, 614 c–d), in order to evoke
the primitive opening of which every being is born. Among the cosmic expressions qual-
ifying it, the Monad is “the Axis of all beings” (αξων τε 
εστιν αυτοις, 143 a 31) and
“Zeus’ Tower” (Ζανος πυργος, 143 a 32), both images probably coming from Philolaos.
The Pythagorean philosopher who, according to Theon of Smyrna, [7] gave the name of
“Monad” to the “One”, indeed identiﬁed the middle of the universe with a “guardroom”
[8] and “the hearth of the universe” [9] which he called “Zeus’ home”. Zeus’ home or
tower is obviously associated with the ﬁgure of the goddess Hestia, in both Pythagorean
and Platonic traditions. This is conﬁrmed in an excerpt from Anatolius preserved by Ps.
Jamblichus, which likens the intelligible unity to Hestia and the Earth. It seems obvious
then, that the oldest Pythagorean teaching regarded the One, as Jamblichus puts it in his
Commentary on Nicomachus’ Arithmetic Introduction, as the “principle of all things”, and
that it located it in the middle of the celestial sphere: “The ﬁrst harmonious compound, the
One, which occupies the centre of the sphere is named Hestia” [11]. The Monad can thus
rightly be called “hermaphrodite” (
αρσενοηλυς, 143 a 25) since it brings together in the
centre of the world, the father of gods, Zeus, and his daughter Hestia who guards the divine
home.
(2) The Dyad
With the Dyad, appears the other element of the number, which, by tearing itself away
from the unity (Nicomachus, in a Plotinian way, deﬁnes the Dyad as “audacity” [τολµα,
143 a 39]), allows the number to form itself and grow to inﬁnity, according to the remark
he makes in his Arithmetic Introduction (II, 1). The Dyad is thus associated with “mat-
ter” ( υλη) since it generates the multiplicity of numbers in an endless process. If Photius
recognises the natural arithmetic properties of the Dyad, he does not see more than a “ter-
atological” development ( !α δε τερατειας; 143 b 5) in the theological considerations that
follow. He never notices the multiplication of feminine terms, which make of the Dyad, as
“source” (πηγη), an endless depth of fecundity. Apart from the expression “equal Zeus”
("ισον ∆ια), that reinforces the monadic image of the just God in the Dyad, the Dyad is “jus-
tice” (διλην), “Isis” (Ισιν, Isin: a play on the words ison: equal or just, and isin: “the god-
dess Isis”), “Nature” (φυσιν), “Rhea” (&Ρεαν), “Zeus’ Mother” (διοµ ατερα), and “Source
of Repartition” (πηγην διανοµης).
All the other divine terms are feminine: Demeter of Eleusis, Dictynna, Aeria, Artemis,
Asteria (Artemis is likened to Hecate, whose mother was called Asteria), Disame, Sub-
stance, Aphrodite, Dione, Mychaia, Cytheraea (143 b 10–16). The names of these god-
desses are associated with abstract terms which underline, in parallel, the dyadic power of
otherness, division and endless multiplication, which is quite logically identiﬁed with the
Lot assigned by Fate (µορος), and therefore, with the tragedy of Death ( ανατος, 143 b
17–18).
(3) The Triad
As the ﬁrst odd number in action—the One being neither even nor odd in the
Pythagorean tradition—and as the ﬁrst perfect number uniting the Monad and the Dyad,

128
J.-F. Mattéi
the Triad is going to be associated with everything that concerns “composition” in the
world (συστασις, 143 b 30) thus with “knowledge” (γν(ωσις, 143 b 29). Photius ﬁnds such
associations “gross” (ορτικ α) in the ﬁeld of science. Yet, they announce Hegel’s idea
of the Triad as the Absolute Spirit and Knowledge of the Whole. As for the myth, Nico-
machus attributes a long series of deities to the Triad: Hecate, the three-headed magician
(trikephalos) who presided at crossroads (triodos) and is often mistaken for Artemis; Leto,
Apollo and Artemis’ mother; Kronia (Kronos’ mountain in Egidia); Amalthaea’s horn (or
Horn of Plenty); Ophion, who reigned over the Titans before Kronos; Thetis the Nereid;
Harmonia; Polymnia, the Muse of geometry and history; Loxia or the Oblique (Apollo in
his oblique solar walk); Arktos (Ursa Major), among various epithets evoking, encounter,
marriage (Γ αµον, 144 a 1), and unity associated with number Three (Triton and Tritoge-
nia, goddesses of the sea). All these observations are proof that for Nicomachus the Triad
is the divine expression of unity, reconciling the contraries and arranging them in unique
harmony.
(4) The Tetrad
For Photius, the Number Four is the greatest wonder in the eyes of the Pythagoreans
(α(υµα µεγιστον, 144 a 4) because it is “the god in all things” (π ανεος, 144 a 5). The
text by this Byzantine author does not emphasise the general quadripartitions of the uni-
verse (four elements, four cardinal points, four seasons, etc.) which Ps. Jamblichus’ Theol-
ogoumena discovered in Peri Dekados by Anatolius. Surprisingly Photius does not mention
the Pythagorean Tetraktys, upon which Theon of Smyrna comments at length, distinguish-
ing eleven tetrads (numerical by addition, numerical by multiplication, geometric, physic,
stereometric, engendered, human, intellectual, parts of the animal, seasons, ages) [12]. But
he underlines that, for Nicomachus, the Tetrad possesses the keys to all Nature. Thus it
is associated with the male element and with power, of which the three gods Hermes,
Hephaistos, and Dyonisus are the highest manifestations, as well as Herakles, the Hermes-
Tetrad being also Maiadeus, Maia’s son, here identiﬁed with the Dyad. It is with these ﬁrst
four founding numbers that the ﬁrst book of Nicomachus’ Theology ended as it should,
thus being faithful to the primacy of the Tetraktys.
(5) The Pentad
At the beginning of the second book came the Pentad (η πεντ ας) which holds the middle
in all things in the same way as it forms the centre of the ﬁrst ten numbers. Photius observes
that it articulates the “natural number” in its ten-step deployment, with its two extremities,
thus linking the unity, or Monad, the beginning of every being, to the totality, or Decade,
which is their ﬁnal term. Photius does not seek any justiﬁcation for the cosmic properties of
the Number Five and does not mention that, under the form of the star-shaped pentagram,
it was the sign of recognition of the ﬁrst Pythagoreans. As a matter of fact, the latter saw in
the Pentad not only the cosmic number par excellence, attributed to the ﬁve regular solids
inscribable in the sphere which Plato mentions at length in Timaeus, but also the nuptial
number of procreation since it joined the ﬁrst even female number or Dyad with the ﬁrst
odd male number, or Triad, hence its given name of Gamelia. Nicomachus, therefore,
rightly insists on the ﬁrst elements of the Whole which go by ﬁve (the four elements and
ether, as quintessence) because the pentad is “division par excellence” (προσεχεστατον,

Nicomachus of Gerasa
129
144 a 27–28). Photius does not seem to notice the particular appropriateness of the number
Five to Justice, even though the divine epithets clearly point in that direction. In fact, the
Pentad is “Justice” (∆ικαισυνη), “Jurisdiction” (∆ικησις), “Nemesis” (Νεµεσις), while it
is at the same time “the one which presides over cosmic regions” (Ζωναια), “the one
which governs the cycles” (Κυκλιο(υχος), or else “The Middle of Middles” (µεσων µεσην,
144 a 36–41), and also, like the Monad, “Zeus’ Tower” (Ζανος πυργος, 144 a 37). The
same divine expressions are to be found in the anonymous Theoulogoumena: the Pentad
is Gamelia, Zonaia, Kukliouchos, “the One which occupies Heaven”, that is Aphrodite
Ourania, the goddess of marriage and nature. Number Five is thus, at the same time, the
number of fertile love (Aphrodite) and the number of Justice (Dike for Jamblichus, Dikesis
and Dikaiosune for Nicomachus, in Photius).
In a famous study on Pythagorean politics, based on Theologoumena arithmeticae
(p. 27 ss) and Jamblichus’ In Nicomachi arithmeticam introductionem (p. 16 ss), Armand
Delatte has clearly established that, for the Pythagoreans, Justice was the power to match
what is equal and is located in the middle of an odd square number [13]. In the series
of numbers from 1 to 9, their addition (45) divided by the number of digits (9) equals
the quotient 5. Therefore, the Ennead balances small and large numbers by taking as set
square in the centre, number 5, which is the arithmetic mean (9−5 = 4, attributed to 1 = 5;
8−5 = 3, attributed to 2 = 5; 7−5 = 2, attributed to 3 = 5; 6−5 = 1, attributed to 4 = 5).
I have myself developed the symbolism of justice linked to number 5 in Pythagorean phi-
losophy as well as in Platonic myths in former writings to which I shall forward the reader
[14].
(6) The Hexad
Photius is less loquacious about the last numbers, apart from the Decade. The Hexad,
once more linked to Aphrodite because it unites the Dyad to the Triad by way of mul-
tiplication and not by addition like the Pentad, is called the “Articulation of the Whole”
(∆ι αρρωσις, 144 b 2) and the creator of “the state of life” (τ(ης ζωτικ(ης !εξεως), from
which it derives its name (&εξ ας). From the testimonies that have been left to us, the
Pythagoreans seem to have hesitated about the symbolism of the numbers 5 and 6, just
like the inhabitants of Atlantis mentioned by Plato in Critias (119 d) who mingled the
product of the numbers 2 and 3 with their sum to establish the cycle of cosmic revolutions.
This is probably the reason why Nicomachus deﬁnes the Hexad as well as the Pentad, as
“the beginning”, and “the middle of the Whole” (
αρχην και "ηµισυ παντος, 144 b 9), a cos-
mic property which, strictly speaking, is only appropriate to number 5. Anyhow, the divine
attributes of the Hexad are more numerous in Nicomachus: Aphrodite, Lachesis, Trioditis
or Trivia honoured at the crossroads, Amphitrite and Thalia. None of these names is truly
revealing and only union, associated with Aphrodite, appears to be related to the Number
Six, which reproduces in minor key what Nichomachus found in the Number Five, i.e., the
articulation of the male and female elements and the ruling of cosmic regions.
(7) The Hebdomad
For Anatolius, quoted by Ps. Jamblichus, the Number Seven, the only number that is not
generated by any of the ﬁrst numbers except the unity, and the only one that does not gen-
erate any other number, is likened to Athena, the virgin motherless goddess. Nicomachus

130
J.-F. Mattéi
also comes to associate Athena with the Number Seven, in 144 b 2, without any comment
from Photius, who lists the divine epithets. Nicomachus seems to identify Heptas with Sep-
tas without taking into account the Greek tradition, which had dropped the sigma. (Theol.
Arithm., 43; Library, 144 b 15). But like Anatolius, he does not insist on the realities which
are seven in number: the ages of life, the openings of the head, the forms of the voice, the
number of stars, etc. He simply identiﬁes with the Number Seven, Kronos, often mistaken
for Chronos and thus, for the favourable moment, Kairos, then Athena, Ares, Clio and
Adrastaea (Nemesis, the “Inevitable” mentioned by Plato in the Republic (451 a 5)).
(8) The Octad
Photius found very little about the Number Eight in Nicomachus and he ironically ob-
serves that the octad does not even account for one eighth of the development of the other
numbers. It is nevertheless associated with Rhea, the wife of Kronos, and the mother of
Hestia, Demeter, Hera, Hades, Poseidon and Zeus. Considering that Rhea and Kronos had
six children, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd the link with the number eight. Then it is also associ-
ated with Cybele, herself later likened to Rhea by the Romans as Mother of the gods, and
ﬁnally with Kadmeia, Neptolemus’ sister. It is hard to understand why Cybele-Rhea’s or-
giastic cult, evoking Nature’s indestructible power, should be represented by the Number
Eight, or else by Themis, goddess of the Law, who is the ultimate attribute of the Octad,
along with Euterpe, the Muse.
(9) The Ennead
The Ennead is given even less importance than the Octad. If Anatolius sees in it the
ﬁrst square of an odd number (3) and the duration of the gestation of a child, Nicomachus,
according to Photius, does not resort to its arithmetic properties and likens it to the Ocean
and the Horizon. Its divine attributes are Halios (= Helios, the Sun, identiﬁed with Apollo),
Prometheus and Hecate (Perseia, Persaeus’ daughter), Hera, Zeus’ wife, and also Core
(Persephone), and Terpsichore, the Muse of dance, but no explanation or analogy is given.
(10) The Decade
The Decade represents the largest development in Photius’ account since it embodies
“the Whole” for the Pythagoreans (το Π(αν, 145 a 5). The Decade is the supreme god who
rules the categories as well as the parts of speech, though Photius’ remarks are here tainted
with Aristotelism. Ps. Jamblichus observes in Theologoumena that Speusippus’ text On
Pythagorean Numbers was half devoted to the Decade, “the number most able to generate
beings and bring them to perfection” (De Falco 82, 10 = Philolaos A XIII).
An even number, Ten completes the series of numbers and contains an equal quantity
of odd and even numbers, an equal quantity of integers (or prime numbers), as well as
the totality of the ratios of equality, superiority, inferiority, superpartiality, linear, ﬂat and
cubic numbers (1 the point, 2 the line, 3 the triangle, 4 the pyramid). Nicomachus thus
concludes that all geometric ﬁgures ﬁnd their completion in Number Ten, which is conse-
quently called “Faith” (Πιστις, 145 a 16; De Falco 81, 15) since it must be unﬂinchingly
trusted. In Photius’ summary the Decade is identiﬁed with all the ﬁgures of the Power
covering the entire universe: Sky, Fate, Time, Force, Faith, Necessity, Atlas the indefatiga-
ble God, Phanes the orphic God, the Sun, Urania, Memory (Μνηµη), and Remembrance

Nicomachus of Gerasa
131
(Μνηµοσυνη) (145 a 15–17). Being “the God par excellence” (&Yπερεος), the Decade
contains “the power of all the divinity which lies in numbers” (το (ακρ ατος τ(ης εν αριµο(ις
εχουσα εοτητος, 145 a 21–22). Therefore, Nicomachus need not repeat all the names of
Gods that have been previously quoted, from the Monad to the Ennead. Inasmuch as the
Decade contains all the numbers, it contains all the Gods, or rather it uniﬁes them in the
ﬁgure of the “Hyper God” who masters all numbers and all the regions of the universe.
Similarly to the Number, which deploys like a ﬂow of discrete unities, the Decade deploys
the genesis of the Gods, which, at any moment, brings about the advent of the world.
How to interpret this long list of divine attributes that shocked the Patriarch of Con-
stantinople as much by its apparent disorder as by the religious impiety which seems to
enumerate the deities along with the numbers? It is not satisfactory to believe, like Photius,
that Nicomachus or his Pythagorean predecessors planted divine ﬁgures, or, more simply,
divine names on arithmetic beings, so as to deify the Number or to number the Deity.
Nichomachus seems to have had the intimate conviction, beyond any surface analogy, not
that the Number was divine and had to be honoured like the ancient Gods, but that ancient
deities, obscured in the myths, were revealed more clearly by the inﬁnite power of the
Number. We may smile with Photius or ignore such wild imaginings. Yet, we cannot help
thinking that these theological speculations were one of the ways that the rising rationalism
opened up before establishing its identity in the neutrality of mathematic demonstration.
Whether it be the trace of ancient mythologies or the sketch of a new rationality, arithmetic
theology remains in man, not like “the dream of a shadow”, to quote Pindarus, but rather,
as Nicomachus wished it, like “the dream of a number”.2
References
[1] J.M. Dillon, A date for the Death of Nicomachus of Gerasa, Classical Review XIX (1969), 274–275.
[2] C. Jan (ed.), Manuale Harmonicum, Musici scriptores Graeci, Leipzig, 1895.
[3] A. Delatte, Sur la littérature pythagoricienne, Bibliothèque de l’École des Hautes Études, 217e fascicle,
Honoré Champion, Paris, 1915, pp. 191–192, 207–208.
[4] Nicomachus of Gerasa, Introduction arithmétique, introduction, translation, notes and index by J. Bertier,
Vrin, Paris, 1978.
[5] Ps. Jamblichus, Theologoumena arithmeticae, De Falco (ed.), Leipzig, 1922.
[6] Anatolius, Sur la Décade et les nombres qu’elle comprend, J.-L. Heiberg (ed.), Annales internationales
d’Histoire, Ve section, Histoire des sciences, Paris, 1901, pp. 27–41; P. Tannery (trans.), pp. 42–57.
[7] Theon of Smyrna, Exposé des connaissances mathématiques utiles pour la lecture de Platon, Hiller, 20,
19 = Philolaos A X; J. Dupuis (trans.), Paris, 1892.
[8] Athenagoras, En faveur du christianisme, 6; Schwartz, 6, 13 = Philolaos B XV.
[9] Aetius, Placita, II, VII, 7 = Philolaos A XVI.
[10] Jamblichus, Commentaire sur l’introduction arithmétique de Nicomaque, Pistelli (ed.), 77, 9 = Philolaos B
VIII.
[11] Stobaeus, Eclogœ, I, XXI, 8 = Philolaos B VII.
[12] Theon of Smyrna, Exposé des connaissances mathématiques utiles pour la lecture de Platon, op. cit.
[13] A. Delatte, Essai sur la politique pythagoricienne, Université de Liège, fascicule XXIX, E. Champion (ed.),
1922, pp. 68–69. Cf. La constitution des États-Unis et les Pythagoriciens, Les Belles Lettres, Paris, 1948,
pp. 15–17.
2A play on words in French: «rêve d’une ombre» and «le rêve d’un nombre».

132
J.-F. Mattéi
[14] J.-F. Mattéi, L’Étranger et le Simulacre. Essai sur la fondation de l’ontologie platonicienne, Presses Uni-
versitaires de France, Paris, 1983; Pythagore et les Pythagoriciens, Presses Universitaires de France, Paris,
1993; 3rd edition updated, 2001; Platon et le miroir du mythe. De l’âge d’or à l’Atlantide, Presses Univer-
sitaires de France, Paris, 1996; re-edition, Presses Universitaires de France, Quadrige, 2002.

CHAPTER 6
Geometry and the Divine in Proclus
Dominic J. O’Meara
Department of Philosophy, University of Fribourg (Switzerland), CH-1700 Fribourg, Switzerland
E-mail: dominic.omeara@unifr.ch
Contents
1. Philosophy as divinisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
2. Mathematics in the divinisation of human nature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
3. The nature of mathematical science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
4. The metaphysics of geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
5. St. Sophia: a geometry of the divine? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
Bibliographical note . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
133


Geometry and the divine in Proclus
135
1. Philosophy as divinisation
Looking back in time, we tend to see Proclus as standing at the end of the history of an-
cient Greco-Roman philosophy and science, one of its last representatives, who did much
to shape its transmission to the Byzantine and Islamic worlds and to the Latin West of the
Middle Ages and the Renaissance. It is true that the resolutely pagan philosophical school
in Athens of which he was head in 437–485 was soon to cease its teaching as a conse-
quence of the anti-pagan measures taken by the most Christian Emperor Justinian in 529,
the last members of the school (including Damascius and Simplicius) leaving for tempo-
rary exile in Persia. The sister school in Alexandria in Egypt, with which the Athenian
philosophers had many close links, was not to survive much beyond the sixth century. And
the works of these philosophical schools of Late Antiquity would only survive in Byzantine
manuscripts, in Arabic and Latin translations, and in the appropriation and adaptation of
their ideas by Christian and Islamic thinkers such as Boethius, Dionysius the Areopagite,
Al-Farabi, Avicenna and Michael Psellos.
Proclus himself would have seen things quite differently. Although conscious of the
danger, he was conﬁdent of his place in a long line of interpreters of a wisdom of whose
eternal value and strength he had no doubt. These interpreters included philosophers iden-
tiﬁed today as ‘Neoplatonists’, in particular Plotinus (205–270), Porphyry (234–ca. 305)
and Iamblichus (ca. 245–325), whose reading of Plato’s dialogues articulated the wisdom
which Proclus wished to represent.1 Plato himself, in Proclus’ view, and to a lesser extent
his somewhat deviant pupil Aristotle, gave this wisdom scientiﬁc form, as compared to the
somewhat enigmatic expressions it had found before in Pythagoras, in the Greek poets (in
particular Homer) and indeed in ancient non-Greek religious revelations such as those of
the Chaldaeans and Egyptians.
Wisdom thus included for Proclus a very wide range of knowledge, expressed in various
ways in the works of Plato and of Aristotle, and in the (Neoplatonic) commentaries on
these works, on earlier Greek philosophers and on ancient Greek and Barbarian religious
traditions. This range of knowledge was uniﬁed and structured in terms of the attempt to
reach a goal, the goal of philosophy as often deﬁned by ancient Platonists, ‘assimilation
to god as far as possible’ (Plato, Theaetetus 176b), what we might call the divinisation of
human life. The training Proclus provided in his school in the various forms of knowledge,
the use made in this connection of the work of Plato, Aristotle, Euclid, Ptolemy, Homer,
Orphic poems, Chaldaean Oracles: all this was thoroughly organized so as to promote a
transformation of the lives of pupils, leading them to higher, more divine levels. Lectures
and texts were occasions, instruments, exercises for gaining access to a higher life. How
this was to be achieved and how, in particular, mathematics had a function in this are
questions which require that we consider ﬁrst what ‘god’ or the ‘divine’ means for Proclus,
what his conception of divinity means for the goal of divinisation, and how different forms
of knowledge were taken by him to represent different degrees of divinisation.
1The link between Plato’s school in Athens (the Academy), which had long since disappeared, and Proclus’
Neoplatonic school is purely intellectual, not institutional or material.

136
D.J. O’Meara
2. Mathematics in the divinisation of human nature
In Plotinus, the realm of the divine extends from the life and order-giving force of the uni-
verse, immaterial soul, to transcendent principles presupposed by soul, Intellect (Nous) and
the One.2 The ‘divine’ thus has to do with what is causally prior and ontologically superior.
The universe as a uniﬁed multiplicity requires a principle of unity other than it, causally
prior to it, independent of it and superior to it. For Plotinus, this principle is soul. Soul, how-
ever, is also a uniﬁed multiplicity, albeit at a higher degree of uniﬁcation. Soul therefore
requires in turn a principle of its unity which is prior, independent and superior, Intellect.
This divine Intellect reminds us of Aristotle’s God (the ‘unmoved mover’ of Metaphysics
XII, 6–10) whose object of thought Plotinus identiﬁes with Plato’s transcendent Forms.
Divine Intellect, as subject and (multiple) object of thought, is itself a uniﬁed multiplicity,
notwithstanding its maximal degree of unity, in which subject and object of thought are
one. Plotinus therefore postulates as its principle of unity, as prior to it, independent and
superior to it, an Ultimate which is absolutely non-multiple, in this sense ‘one’. With the
‘One’ Plotinus identiﬁes the Good ‘beyond being’ of Plato’s Republic (509b). The One,
as the ultimate principle of unity in all multiplicity, constitutes all things in a progressive
order going from Intellect, through soul, to the natural world, each level deriving from
and existing in its relation to the level above it. If then the ‘divine’ ranges from the One,
through Intellect, to soul, the derivative levels of existence represented by Intellect and soul
are ‘divine’ due to the perfection of existence or unity that they derive from the One.
Proclus essentially accepts Plotinus’ metaphysics:3 the ‘divine’, for him also, is found
primarily in a transcendent ultimate principle and derives from it in a range going through
Intellect to soul, a range surveyed in his manual of metaphysics, the Elements of Theology.
However, due in large part to the inﬂuence of Iamblichus, Plotinus’ metaphysical universe
has become considerably more complicated and sophisticated in Proclus: mediating princi-
ples and levels intervene between the One and Intellect (the ‘Henads’), between and within
Intellect and soul. To this highly differentiated and gradated universe of transcendent prin-
ciples Proclus ﬁtted the populous pantheon of traditional Greek and Barbarian religions.
For humans, assimilation to god or divinisation can mean the attempt to live the life of
any of these many degrees of divinity. However, the derivative character of lower degrees
of divinity will imply the desire to reach higher degrees and ultimately that which is above
all else and makes all else divine, the One. The goal of reaching higher degrees of divine
life involves difﬁculties which might be sketched as follows. If human nature is primarily
soul, then living the divine life of soul seems available to the extent that we disengage
ourselves (as soul) from material preoccupations, discovering our true nature as a life and
order-giving immaterial force: to (re)discover one’s self, one’s true nature and value, is
already to live a degree of divine life. However, the transition to a higher mode of life, a
life corresponding to divine Intellect, is made problematic to the extent that the intellec-
tual activity characteristic of soul, discursive thinking, is inferior to the kind of thought
proper to transcendent Intellect. Discursive thinking (dianoia) thinks objects exterior to it,
2Plotinus Ennead V, 1, 7. In Plotinus: an Introduction to the Enneads, Oxford 1993, I provide a sketch of
Plotinus’ metaphysics summarized here.
3A fundamental work on Proclus’ metaphysics is Beierwaltes 1979 (see below Bibliographical note).

Geometry and the divine in Proclus
137
knowledge of which it seeks through the mediation of images (sense-images, for exam-
ple) and through logical procedures whereby propositions are formulated and combined in
arguments so as to yield conclusions. This mediated, indirect grasp of things (which con-
stitutes also the fallibility and weakness of this type of knowledge) contrasts with the kind
of knowledge which Neoplatonists supposed was characteristic of transcendent Intellect,
in which the thinking subject is immediately and totally united with its object such that no
imperfection, no error in this knowledge can occur. How is this higher form of thought, this
higher mode of life lived by divine Intellect, to be attained, if the kind of thinking we live
is of the discursive type? A further problem concerns the highest level of the divine: if the
One transcends all forms of knowledge, if it transcends the highest level of knowledge rep-
resented by divine Intellect, how can it be known and approached? The greater degree of
differentiation and gradation of Proclus’ universe made these problems a good deal more
acute and difﬁcult of resolution than was the case as they posed themselves already for
Plotinus.
Without developing these difﬁculties further, it is possible to give some indications al-
ready as to how the curriculum followed by Proclus in his school was designed so as to
respond to such difﬁculties in the context of the overall aim of divinisation. This curricu-
lum, ﬁrst introduced by Iamblichus, followed a graduated approach in which lower stages
or modes of life prepare for and lead to higher stages. These stages were constituted by a
scale of philosophical instruction going from preliminary moral ediﬁcation and training in
logic, though the ‘practical’ sciences (ethics and politics), to the higher reaches of philoso-
phy, the ‘theoretical’ sciences represented, in ascending order, by physics, mathematics and
‘theology’ (the science of the divine, or metaphysics). Each science in this scale was in-
tended to develop a corresponding kind of moral excellence and life, the practical sciences
promoting a divine life of soul as it orders materiality, the theoretical sciences bringing
soul ever nearer to the life of divine Intellect. For each science corresponding texts were
read, ﬁrst as found in the works of Aristotle, and then in the dialogues of Plato.
In this scheme, mathematics clearly occupies a vital place: it comes very high in the scale
of sciences and immediately precedes the highest science, theology or metaphysics. Plato
had already given mathematics a pivotal role in his programme of an ideal philosopher’s
education in the Republic (510c–511d), where mathematics provides the passage from the
material world to knowledge (called ‘dialectic’) of the transcendent Forms and of the Form
of the Good. However, Proclus gives an interesting interpretation of why and how mathe-
matics can assume this function in the account he supplies of the nature of mathematical
thinking in his commentary on Euclid’s Elements, one of the texts he used4 as providing
mathematical instruction.
3. The nature of mathematical science
What precisely are the objects of mathematical science? What is their status in the struc-
ture of reality? Arguing against Plato, Aristotle saw mathematical objects as conceptual
abstractions which we produce by isolating the quantitative dimension of physical objects.
4With Nicomachus of Gerasa’s arithmetic and Ptolemy’s astronomy.

138
D.J. O’Meara
In contrast, Plato, according to Aristotle (Metaphysics I, 6), saw mathematical objects as
realities existing independently of physical objects, occupying an intermediate realm be-
tween physical objects and the transcendent Forms. In Plato’s dialogues, the position is
less simple. In the Republic, for example, mathematics concerns objects that relate to the
transcendent realm of Forms as images of the Forms. But what is not altogether clear is
whether mathematical objects are images in the sense that they exist as image-like realities,
or merely in the sense that they are the way in which the mathematician thinks immaterial
objects. A further difﬁculty confronting the ancient interpreter of Plato was that concern-
ing the relation between mathematical objects, as intermediates (in some sense) between
Forms and physical objects, and soul, which also mediates in Plato between the Forms and
the material world.
It is in connection with these difﬁculties that ancient Neoplatonists developed the inter-
pretation of mathematical thinking that is presented by Proclus in commenting Euclid’s
geometry. According to this interpretation,5 mathematical objects are concepts derived
through logical procedures by soul from an innate knowledge common to all souls (‘com-
mon notions’, ‘axioms’). This innate knowledge is projected (or constructed) by soul in
quantity (arithmetic) and extension (geometry), with the purpose of developing (in the lit-
eral sense, ‘unrolling’) this innate knowledge so as to articulate and comprehend it more
easily. The space in which geometrical development takes place is provided by imagination
( phantasia): it is an imaginative space in which the contents of innate knowledge emerge
as expressed by point, line, ﬁgure and solid, whereas arithmetic achieves a more uniﬁed,
compact, purely numerical articulation of this knowledge. The innate knowledge in ques-
tion, which mathematics seeks to unroll, might be described as metaphysical: it includes
concepts which concern the transcendent principles of reality and the laws governing the
progression of these principles from the One.
The following aspects of this theory of mathematical objects might be stressed.
(1) Plato’s intermediates, mathematical objects and soul, are related on this interpretation
in the sense that mathematical objects are elaborations of concepts inherent in the nature
of soul. (2) Mathematical objects are images of Forms in the sense that soul projects in a
more accessible dimension its concepts of transcendent principles. (3) The theory involves
both (Platonist) realism and constructivism in the sense that soul projects mathematical
objects, but these objects are concepts expressive of transcendent realities; mathematical
objects are not conceptual abstractions from physical objects. (4) Mathematical thinking is
eminently discursive in its rigorous logical procedures. But this is also its weakness: it is
because the soul has difﬁculty in grasping metaphysical truths that she has recourse to dis-
cursively elaborated expressions of them in mathematics. (5) Mathematics thus promotes
perfection in the life of discursive reasoning, but it also prepares the soul for a higher level
of reasoning, that of theology or metaphysics, the practice of which prepares the soul in
turn for access to yet a higher level of divine life, that of non-discursive, perfect, complete
knowledge, i.e. the life of divine Intellect. (6) There is a gradation within the mathemati-
cal sciences in the sense that arithmetic is a purely numerical articulation of metaphysical
truths, whereas geometry extends these truths further into imaginative space. Among math-
ematical sciences, geometry is mediational and thus eminently suitable as representing the
5Cf. O’Meara 1989: 167–169, where references to further studies are to be found.

Geometry and the divine in Proclus
139
mediational role of mathematics in general: it is more accessible than arithmetic in its use
of imaginative extension and of clearly applied demonstrative procedures. For Proclus,
certainly, geometry is a privileged mediational science in the context of the divinisation of
human life, a science exempliﬁed perfectly for him in Euclid’s Elements.
A passage from Proclus’ commentary on Euclid beautifully summarizes his conception
of the nature and philosophical importance of geometry:
“So the soul, exercising her capacity to know, projects on the imagination, as on a mirror, the
ideas of the ﬁgures; and the imagination, receiving in pictorial form these impressions of the
ideas within the soul, by their means affords the soul an opportunity to turn inward from the
pictures and attend to herself. It is as if a man looking at himself in a mirror and marvelling
at the power of nature and at his own appearance should wish to look upon himself directly and
possess such a power as would enable him to become at the same time the seer and the object seen.
In the same way, when the soul is looking outside herself at the imagination, seeing the ﬁgures
depicted there and being struck by their beauty and orderedness, she is admiring her own ideas
from which they are derived; and though she adores their beauty, she dismisses it as something
reﬂected and seeks her own beauty. She wants to penetrate within herself to see the circle and the
triangle there, all things without parts and all in one another, to become one with what she sees
and enfold their plurality, to behold the secret and ineffable ﬁgures in the inaccessible places and
shrines of the gods, to uncover the unadorned divine beauty and see the circle more partless than
any centre, the triangle without extension, and every other object of knowledge that has regained
unity.” 6
For Proclus, the soul can reach self-discovery in geometry. In her geometrical projec-
tions, she sees an image of herself and, through this self-knowledge, reaches a knowledge
of the presence in her of truths concerning transcendent ﬁrst principles, the gods. In think-
ing these truths, soul already lives a life of knowledge that will bring her higher in the scale
of divinity. This use of mathematics as an anticipatory imaging forth of the knowledge of
the divine Proclus described as characteristic of the Pythagoreans.7
4. The metaphysics of geometry
In the passage quoted above, Proclus refers to the study of circles, triangles and other
geometrical ﬁgures. In the following pages I will describe in a little more detail the use
of geometrical thought in Proclus as expressive of metaphysical principles and laws as
exempliﬁed (i) in geometry in general and in speciﬁc geometrical ﬁgures, (ii) in the circle,
(iii) semi-circle, (iv) triangle and (v) square.
6Proclus Comm. in Eucl. 141,4–142,2. Proclus’ commentary is cited by page and line number in Friedlein’s
edition of the Greek text (the page numbers are given in the margins of Morrow’s translation, which I quote here).
It might seem that Proclus is providing in this passage a surprisingly positive interpretation of the Narcissus myth
(compare Plotinus Ennead I, 6, 8, 8–16 and P. Hadot, ‘Le mythe de Narcisse et son interprétation par Plotin’, in:
P. Hadot, Plotin, Porphyre. Etudes Néoplatoniciennes, Paris 1999, 225–266). However, Proclus speaks of looking
in a mirror: the reference seems to be the mirror of self-knowledge (and knowledge of god) of Plato’s Alcibiades
(132d–133c), a dialogue Neoplatonists read as dealing with self-knowledge as the beginning of philosophy.
7Comm. in Eucl. 22, 9–14; cf. O’Meara 1989 for the revival of Pythagoreanism in the Neoplatonic schools of
Late Antiquity.

140
D.J. O’Meara
(i) Coming back to Proclus’ metaphysical system as traced in its main lines in his Ele-
ments of Theology, we might stress ﬁrst that all reality, for him, relates in a differentiated
range to an ultimate transcendent ﬁrst principle, source of all existence, perfection, divin-
ity, the One. From this Ultimate devolve, in a non-temporal, non-spatial successive order,
levels of uniﬁed multiplicity, tending to ever greater multiplicity and lesser unity. Each
stage in the devolution of reality (which we might summarize as the levels of Intellect,
soul and the natural world) reﬂects a departure from unity, limitation, determination, in
the direction of multiplicity, unlimitedness, indetermination, a departure limited at each
stage, turned back, so as to result in a multiplicity that is uniﬁed, limited, determined. In
this dynamic constitution of things we might note the priority of unity, limit, determinate
identity, equality, perfection, which, combined with the secondary (but necessary) aspects
of multiplicity, unlimitedness, indeﬁniteness, deﬁciency, inequality, generate the whole of
being in ordered succession.
For Proclus, the very structure of the domain of mathematical objects manifests these
metaphysical principles, both the ﬂow of numbers (in arithmetic) from 1 (the monad, limit)
and 2 (the dyad, unlimited) to 3 (the ﬁrst determinate number) and the following members
of the numerical series, and the ﬂow (in geometry) from the point (limit) to line (unlimited
in its tendency), plane ﬁgure (the line as limited) and solid. Euclid’s Elements (Book I) fol-
lows this metaphysical order, in Proclus’ view. Thus Euclid’s ‘Deﬁnitions’ go from point
(Def. 1) to line (Defs. 2–4), surface (Defs. 5–14) and the ﬁgures in correct order, circular
and rectilinear (Defs. 15–34). So also do the ‘Postulates’ go from causes (I), through the
progression of things from causes (II), to their constitution in a reversion to their causes
which bounds them (187, 4–16). As for the Propositions of Book I, they concern the meta-
physical properties of equality (primary) and inequality (greater/lesser) as regards lines and
ﬁgures. The ﬁrst group of Propositions (1–26) deals with triangles, the next with four-sided
ﬁgures (354, 1–7).
There is a difﬁculty here, however, in matching the progression of Euclidean geometry
with the principles of metaphysical progression. In Proclus’ view, as will be seen shortly,
the ordered series of geometrical ﬁgures begins with the circle (a line bounded by turning
back on itself), semi-circle (two lines), triangle and quadrangle. One would therefore have
expected Euclid to deal ﬁrst with circles and semi-circles, and not with triangles, as he
does. However, I think we can infer the solution Proclus would ﬁnd to this difﬁculty. He
notes that the construction of an equilateral triangle, the ﬁrst of triangles, in Proposition 1
requires the use of circles (424, 3–6 with 209, 4–6). Circles are thus presupposed and prior
to triangles in Euclid’s demonstration.
(ii) Geometrical ﬁgures are composed of circular and rectilinear lines and by lines mixed
from these. Circular lines represent limit and determination, as we have seen, whereas recti-
linear lines tend to inﬁnity, indeﬁniteness. Circular lines are therefore metaphysically prior
to all other types of lines (107, 11–16; 164, 8–11). Proclus also claims that circular angles
are prior to rectilinear angles (and prior to angles mixed from both types) as corresponding
to unity, rectilinear angles corresponding to lower levels of being (129,20–130,6). In con-
sequence, the geometrical ﬁgure constituted by circular lines and angles is the ﬁrst of all
such ﬁgures. In the progression point (monad), line (dyad), surface, the circle corresponds
to the triad (centre, diameter, circumference), just as the ﬁrst of the subordinate rectilinear
ﬁgures, the triangle, is also triadic (115, 3–8).

Geometry and the divine in Proclus
141
Proclus often emphasizes the primary metaphysical properties embodied by the circle, its
unity, self-identity, determinateness, equality, perfection.8 It manifests therefore in imag-
inary space the properties of the primary transcendent principles constitutive of reality in
general. In this it compares with secondary, rectilinear ﬁgures which correspond to sec-
ondary aspects of this constitution (146,24–153,9).The circle also manifests, in its internal
structure, the dynamics of reality in general: from the centre, source of geometrical pro-
gression, source of uniﬁcation, determination, stability, radiate lines, inﬁnite in their mul-
tiplicity and tendency, reverting around the centre to constitute the circle (153,12–155,23).
(iii) The semi-circle comes after the circle in the metaphysical order and before the
rectilinear ﬁgures, since it is bounded by two lines, the circle by one (the circumference)
and rectilinear ﬁgures by three or more. In this sense the semi-circle mediates between the
unity of the circle and the multiplicity represented by rectilinear ﬁgures (159, 4–7; 161,
7–12).
(iv) As constituted from straight lines, rectilinear ﬁgures express a tendency to progres-
sion, motion, change, production. This can be seen, according to Proclus (166, 14–18),
in the use made of triangles in Plato’s account of the constitution of the cosmos in the
Timaeus. Coming after circles and semi-circles, which it presupposes (see above (i)), the
triangle is, we have seen, the ﬁrst of rectilinear ﬁgures, having a minimum of three sides.
Of triangles the ﬁrst, for metaphysical reasons, the most perfect, most uniﬁed and closest
to the circle is the equilateral triangle, being composed of equal sides and angles (213,14–
214,15).
(v) Following numerical progression, the ﬁrst of rectilinear ﬁgures, coming after the
triangle, is the quadrilateral. Of quadrilateral ﬁgures, the square is primary for the same
reasons that give primacy in geometrical ﬁgures and in reality: the equality of sides and
angles in the square represents, in quadrilateral ﬁgures, the maximum degree of equality,
stability, limiting power. Hence its fundamental importance, for Proclus, after the triangle,
in the constitutive structure of the world (172,15–174,21).
My brief summary might sufﬁce to give an impression of the way in which Proclus, in
commenting Euclid, ﬁnds in geometry an accessible, scientiﬁc articulation of metaphys-
ical truths, of which the geometer’s demonstrations are discursive ‘images’. This use of
geometry to image forth metaphysics Proclus regards as the main philosophical value of
geometry. He is less interested in the technicalities of Euclidean geometry taken per se
than in the role it can play in preparing the pupil for access to metaphysics or theology.9
He does not fail to remind us that in going through geometrical exercises with Euclid, we
are strengthening our discursive capacities and preparing our transition to a closer knowl-
edge of the divine, a transition which also means sharing more closely in divine life (174,
17–21; 130, 22–23).
5. St. Sophia: a geometry of the divine?
Between 532 and 537 the emperor Justinian replaced an earlier church that had burnt down
in Constantinople with the great church of St. Sophia that still stands in Istanbul. The
8A full discussion of this may be found in Beierwaltes 1979: 166–239.
9Cf. 84, 11–20; 130,23–131,2; 174, 17–21.

142
D.J. O’Meara
Fig. 1. Constantinople, Hagia Sophia interior view in the direction of the apse. Photo: Erich Lessing.
architects of the new church, a unique masterpiece, were Anthemius of Tralles and Isidore
of Miletus. A contemporary, Procopius, describes the church as follows:
“In the middle of the church there rise four man-made eminences which are called piers, two on
the north and two on the south, opposite and equal to one another, each pair having between them
exactly four columns. . . Upon these [piers] are placed four arches so as to form a square, their
ends coming together in pairs and made fast at the summit of those piers, while the rest of them
rises to an immense height. . . Above the arches the construction rises in a circle: it is through this
that the ﬁrst light of day always smiles. . . And since the arches are joined together on a square
plan, the intervening construction assumes the form of four triangles. The bottom end of each
triangle, being pressed together by the conjunction of the arches, causes the lower angle to be
acute, but as it rises it becomes wider by the intervening space and terminates in the arc of a circle,
which it supports, and forms the remaining [two] angles at that level. Rising above this circle is
an enormous spherical dome which makes the building exceptionally beautiful. It seems not to be

Geometry and the divine in Proclus
143
Fig. 2. Constantinople, Hagia Sophia transversal cut. Source: Andre Grabar, L’Age d’Or de Justinien, Gallimard,
Paris, 1966. Courtesy of Gallimard, idem, p. 89.
founded on solid masonry, but to be suspended from heaven by that golden chain and so cover the
space. All of these elements, marvellously ﬁtted together in mid-air, suspended from one another
and reposing only on the parts adjacent to them, produce a uniﬁed and most remarkable harmony
in the work. . . Whenever one goes to this church to pray, one understands immediately that this
work has been fashioned not by human power or skill, but by the inﬂuence of God. And so the
visitor’s mind is lifted up to God and ﬂoats aloft, thinking that He cannot be far away, but must
love to dwell in this place which He himself has chosen.”10
In reading Procopius’ description and in looking at the plan of St. Sophia (see illus-
tration) it is almost as if we see, translated in stereometry, the geometry of the divine as
interpreted by Proclus in his commentary on Euclid.11 From the centre of the church, the
lofty point from which radiates a dome, the church expands to the circular base of the dome,
itself resting on four semi-circular arches. The circular base and semi-circular arches cre-
ate four triangular spaces, the pendentives.12 Arches and triangles lead down in turn to the
10Procopius De aedif. I, 1, 23ff. which I quote in the translation published by C. Mango, The Art of the Byzantine
Empire 312–1453, Englewood Cliffs (1972), pp. 74–76. A description of the construction of St. Sophia can be
read in C. Mango, Byzantine Architecture, Milan (1978), pp. 61–68.
11I limit myself here to the core of the building. A general and philosophically interesting description of the
whole building can be found in R. Krautheimer, Early Christian and Byzantine Architecture, Harmondsworth
(1975), pp. 215–230.
12These triangular spaces, bounded by the curved lines of the arches and dome (we remember that circular
lines are prior to straight lines in Proclus’ geometrical metaphysics), might be described, in geometrical terms, as
‘spherical triangles’, a conception ﬁrst developed by Menelaus of Alexandria, a mathematician whose work was
known to Proclus. In the course of the construction of St. Sophia, the structural deformation became such that

144
D.J. O’Meara
Fig. 3. Plan of the Hagia Sophia. Source: Andre Grabar, L’Age d’Or de Justinien, Gallimard, Paris, 1966. Cour-
tesy of Gallimard, idem.
square composed by four massive piers. Expressed in solids, the sequence centre, circle,
semi-circle, triangle and square manifests a perfectly controlled progression from unity to
developing levels of perfectly uniﬁed multiplicity, ideal limitations of multiplicity which
bring it back in stages to ever greater unity, back to the centre, transcendent source of all.
The church thus corresponds, in visual space, to the metaphysical dynamics of unity and
multiplicity, the progression of reality from, and reversion to, the Ultimate, as formulated
by Proclus. Procopius does not omit to mention also the effect of the interior of the build-
ing on the human beholder, who feels drawn up by the power that radiates down, brought
nearer to a life with God.
There are links between the architects of St. Sophia and Proclus’ school in Athens. One
of Proclus’ pupils, Ammonius, became head of the Neoplatonic school in Alexandria. He
too taught mathematics as part of the philosophical curriculum. In his school Eutocius the
mathematician gave lectures on logic (and may have been Ammonius’ direct successor as
head of the school).13 Eutocius addressed his commentary on Apollonius’ Conics to An-
themius and an edition of Eutocius’ mathematical work was prepared, it seems, by the other
architect of St. Sophia, Isidore of Miletus, himself, like Anthemius, a mathematician in his
own right and a teacher. A link between Proclus’ philosophical teaching and architecture
the arches, leaning outwards, could no longer constitute a circular base for the dome, which became elliptical in
form. The collapse of the dome in 558 led to an extension inwards from the arches which produced a circular
base for the dome, but also a gap between the curves of the dome and of the arches bounding the pendentives.
13On Eutocius, see R. Goulet (ed.), Dictionnaire des philosophes antiques, Vol. III, Paris (2000), pp. 392–395.

Geometry and the divine in Proclus
145
may already be found in Proclus’ works, one of which (the De providentia) is dedicated
to Theodore, mechanikos. Proclus’ authority in the philosophical circles of Athens and
Alexandria, the use of his works in their curriculum and the personal links we have noted
make it plausible that the architects of St. Sophia, themselves primarily mathematicians,
were familiar with the ideas concerning the higher signiﬁcance of geometry that Proclus
conveyed in commenting on Euclid.
Can we go further? We can at least say that in visiting the new church of St. Sophia
in the middle of the sixth century, those with an advanced education in the philosophy
and mathematics of the time would with little difﬁculty have found there, expressed in
three-dimensional space, the geometry of the divine that Proclus had found in Euclid.
Bibliographical note
A recent and interesting introduction to Proclus’ life and scientiﬁc work is provided by
L. Siorvanes, Proclus, Edinburgh 1996. The most important work on Proclus’ metaphysics
is W. Beierwaltes, Proklos. Grundzüge seiner Metaphysik, revised edition, Frankfurt 1979.
E.R. Dodds published the Greek text and a translation of Proclus The Elements of Theol-
ogy, 2nd edition, Oxford (1963). Proclus’ commentary on Euclid is printed by G. Friedlein,
In Primum Euclidis Elementorum librum commentarii, repr. Leipzig (1967) (Greek text),
translated by G. Morrow, Proclus. A Commentary on the First Book of Euclid’s Elements,
revised edition published by I. Mueller, Princeton (1992). On the revival of Pythagore-
anism and the use of mathematics in the Neoplatonist schools of late Antiquity, see
D. O’Meara, Pythagoras Revived, Oxford (1989). Recent publications are, on Proclus’ phi-
losophy of mathematics, G. Bechtle and D. O’Meara (Ed.), La Philosophie des mathéma-
tiques de l’Antiquité tardive, Fribourg (Switzerland) (2000), and, on Proclus’ metaphysics,
A. Segonds and C. Steel (Eds.), Proclus et la théologie platonicienne, Louvain/Paris 2000.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 7
Religious Architecture and
Mathematics During the Late Antiquity
Marie-Pierre Terrien
University of Le Mans, France
E-mail: mpterrien@msn.com
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
1. Religious architecture and heavenly measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
1.1. The Ark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
1.2. The Tabernacle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
1.3. The Temple of Solomon
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
1.4. New Jerusalem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
2. Religious architecture and geometrical measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
3. The building in its Earth–Heaven dialectic, or the circle above the square . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
147


Religious architecture and mathematics during the late antiquity
149
Introduction
At the end of the Classical period and during the Early Middle Ages, the entire abstract,
understandable, world appeared mystically represented in the perceptible world through
symbolical forms. It was for this reason that the Fathers of the Church gave so much
importance to symbols. According to Saint Augustine, the reason for symbols and their
lesson was to light the ﬁre of love and keep it burning, so that man could rise above him-
self, to reach a level he would not be able to reach alone.1 The science of numbers had an
enormous inﬂuence on the writers of this period, for numbers were essential, being signs
corresponding to spiritual truths. We are going to see how numbers and geometrical ﬁgures
played a fundamental role in the symbolism of religious building, a symbolic value which
transcended any physical structure.
1. Religious architecture and heavenly measurements
In the Bible, the Temple was a copy of the heavenly Temple “prepared by Thee from the
beginning”.2 The design of the Temple was not left to the architect’s personal inspiration;
it had been decided by God himself. The earthly Temple was built according to a heav-
enly plan which was communicated to man through a prophet who acted as intermediary:
for the Ark, it was Noah who served as intermediary;3 for the Tabernacle (the Ark of the
Covenant), it was Moses;4 for the Temple of Solomon, the intermediary was David, who
had received the measurements from God.5 This idea was taken up again in the New Tes-
tament: the New Jerusalem would come down from heaven.6
The four models given by Holy Scripture referred to by the founding fathers of the
church were: Noah’s Ark, the Tabernacle, the Temple of Solomon and New Jerusalem.
1.1. The Ark
Saint Irenaeus of Lyon (130–202) wrote about the Ark, which was a copy of the heav-
enly Temple.7 Clement of Alexandria (150–216) states in Stromata8 that the building was
designed following divine intentions, using proportions full of meaning:
The length of the Ark was 300 cubits, its width was 50 and its height 30; the Ark was completed
up to a cubit from the roof, which became narrower from the base, in the shape of a pyramid, the
1Augustine, Epistulae, LV, ed. J.-P. Migne, PL, 33, 1845, col. 214.
2Wisdom 9, 8.
3Genesis 6, 14–16.
4Exodus 25, 8–22.
51 Chron. 28, 11–12; Wisdom 9, 8.
6Acts 7, 44–50; Apoc 21, 2–3. Cf. [39].
7Irenaeus of Lyon, Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching, IV, 10, ed. A. Rousseaux, Sources Chrétiennes
n◦406, Paris, 1995, pp. 121 and 127.
8Clement of Alexandria, Stromata, VI, 11, ed. P. Descourtieux, Sources Chrétiennes n◦446, 1999, p. 235.

150
M.-P. Terrien
ﬁgure of those who have been puriﬁed and tested by ﬁre ... . The proportions are in a ratio of 6 : 1
(300 to 50) or 10 : 1 (300 to 30) ... . Some saw the symbol of the sign of the Lord in the 300 cubits,
that of hope and redemption through Pentecost in the measure of 50; in the measure of 30 cubits,
and according to some manuscripts, that of 12, scholars have tried to show the Gospel, as the Lord
announced it when he was 30 and there were 12 apostles.
Tertullian (155–220) drew a parallel between the Ark and the Church,9 as did Ambrose
(339–397).10 One can ﬁnd this comparison in Jerome’s writings (347–420).11 As for John
Chrysostom (340–407):
The Ark is the Church, Noah is Christ, the dove is the Holy Spirit, the olive tree is the bounty of
God.12
Going even further, for Augustine (354–430), the Ark was a forerunner of the Holy
City.13
1.2. The Tabernacle
The cosmic symbolism of the Tabernacle was set out by Philo of Alexandria (20BC–
50AD): the two-part division of the Tabernacle—the Holy for material things, the
Holy of Holies for spiritual matters—was an image of the world.14 According to
Josephus (37–100), the three parts of the sanctuary corresponded to the three cos-
mic regions: the entrance represented “the sea”, that is to say the lower regions, the
Holy building the Earth, and the Holy of Holies represented Heaven; a three-part di-
vision between sky, earth and water, the natural elements of the universe.15 Then
the symbolism of the Tabernacle was taken up by Christian exegesis. So, for Ori-
gen (182–252), the Tabernacle was a representation of the whole world.16 Theodore
of Mopsuestia used the same symbolism; for him, the Tabernacle was a copy of cre-
ation.17
These comparisons reﬂect the concepts people had of the world at the end of the
Classical period. In the 6th century, the link Cosmas Indicopleustes made between the
Universe and the Tabernacle, one a model, the other a copy of the world with two re-
gions one above the other, emphasises the resemblance between the world and a build-
ing.18
9Tertullian, De Baptismo, VIII, eds. R.F. Refoulé & M. Drouzy, Sources Chrétiennes n◦35, Paris, 1952, p. 78.
10Ambrose, De Noe et Arca, VIII, 25 & XV, 52, ed. J.-P. Migne, PL, XIV, 1845, col. 371 & 386.
11Jerome, Arca Noe ecclesiae typus fuit, Dialogus adversus Luciferianos, 22, ed. J.-P. Migne, PL, 23, 1845, col.
176.
12John Chrysostom, Homilia in terrae motum et in divitem et Lazarum, VII, ed. J.-P. Migne, PG, 48, 1862, col.
1038.
13Augustine, De civitate Dei, XV, XVII, 1, ed. J.-P. Migne, PL 41, 1845, col. 472.
14De Vita Mosis, III, 6, quoted in: [9, p. 61].
15Josephus, The Antiquities of the Jews, III, 6, 4, ed. J. Weill, Paris, 1900, I, pp. 170–171.
16Origen, In Exodum Homilia, IX, 4, ed. M. Borret, Sources Chrétiennes n◦321, Paris, 1981, p. 295.
17Theodore of Mompsuestia, Homilies, XII, 3, eds. R. Tonneau & R. Devresse, Citta del Vaticano, 1949, p. 327.
18[43, p. 12ff].

Religious architecture and mathematics during the late antiquity
151
1.3. The Temple of Solomon
The Temple seemed to be the model for all religious architecture, a model which every
Christian building copied. For Augustine, it was the model of the Church.19 For Theodoret,
it was the model for all churches throughout the world.20
In the same way, the tituli votivi (monumental inscriptions placed in churches which help
one interpret the sacred building, through references to examples found in the Scriptures)
often refer to the Temple of Solomon: they draw a parallel between the building and the
Temple of Solomon.21 In this way, the person who founded the church is identiﬁed with
Solomon, the king who had built the Temple in Jerusalem.22
1.4. New Jerusalem
The building had to be in the image of the eternal home, the New Jerusalem described by
John.23 The comparison with New Jerusalem spread during the 3rd century.24 Eusebius of
Caesarea (265–340)claimed that the Temple was an image of New Jerusalem.25 According
to him, the bishop, Saint Paulinus, built a temple in Tyre following divine inspiration, in
order to make a physical reproduction of the heavenly plan, like a visible emblem of the
invisible Temple.26 The building had been designed “according to descriptions supplied by
the holy oracle”.27 “Above all of these marvels are the meaningful and divine archetypes,
prototypes and models”.28 The Word, who gave order to every thing, had himself made a
copy of the heavenly plan on Earth, the Church of the “ﬁrst-born, written in the heavenly
book”, the Jerusalem from above, Zion, the Mountain of God and the City of the Living
God.29
Many texts compared the church to Heaven: in the 3rd century rite of the dedication of
churches, the hymn Urbs Beata Jerusalem compared the church with New Jerusalem.30
In the East, the 5th century Testamentum Domini Nostri mentioned the existence of
a heavenly prototype for the Christian building—the empire of God, the heavenly king-
dom.31
19Augustine, Enarratio in Psalmum, 126, ed. J.-P. Migne, PL, 37, 1845, col. 1668.
20Theodoret, Libr. 1 Paralipomena q. 1, ed. J.-P. Migne, PG, 80, 1860, col. 236.
21Paulinus of Nola, Carmina 27, 477 & 28, 311; ed. J.-P. Migne PL, 61,1847, col. 659 & 670; Apollinaris
Sidonius, Epistulae VII, 9, 21 & IV, 18, 5, ed. A. Loyen, 1970, pp. 59 & 153; Fortunatus, Carmina II, 10 & III,
6, ed. M. Reydellet, I, Paris, 1998, pp. 66 & 92; Pietri, 1983, n◦16.
22Fortunatus, Carmina III, 20 (for Felix, Bishop of Bourges), Carmina VI, 2 (for King Charibert), ed. M. Rey-
dellet, Paris, I, p. 118 & II, p. 56.
23Apocalypse 21, 2.
24[27, p. 14], [19, pp. 227–229].
25Eusebius of Caesarea, Histoire Ecclésiastique, X, 4, 3, ed. G. Bardy, Sources chrétiennes n◦55, Paris, 1967,
p. 82.
26Ibid, X, 4, 26, p. 89.
27Ibid, X, 4, 43, p. 95.
28Ibid, X, 4, 55, p. 99.
29Ibid, X, 4, 65, 70, p. 103.
30[37, p. 103f].
31Cf. [40, p. 52], [42, p. 45].

152
M.-P. Terrien
One wonders how much inﬂuence these plans had on the architecture of this period.
According to Kitschelt, the Christian basilica represented the heavenly city of Jerusalem
(the door = the gate into the town; the nave = the via sacra; aisles = arcades, the nave
and transept = the cardo and the decumanus, the triumphal arch = the arcus triomphalis,
the presbyterium = the throne room in the royal palace).32 But this interpretation has been
much criticised.33 In fact, the building itself did not respect the archetype, but the idea of
the archetype was transmitted through the building. A shape was imitated uniquely because
of the value it bore. In this way, the building could refer to several archetypes at the same
time.34 Sometimes one even comes across a mixture of competing comparisons (e.g. the
Temple of Solomon, the heavenly city, paradise). Thus, Eusebius35 compared the church
to Jerusalem, but Constantine is compared both to Bezalel and Solomon, builders, respec-
tively, of the Ark of the Covenant and the Temple. It is important to realize that imitation
and illusion were only partial. Many representations were “mixed” in the symbolism of the
building.36
In fact, from the 2nd century, the church was above all a reﬂection of the Christian
community.37
It must be said that the building was not designed according to the heavenly archetype,
as, according to beliefs in the Middle Ages, the only way to pass beyond the perceptible
world was through dissimilar designs. Giving something a shape did not mean that the
object represented had that appearance. On the contrary, it was a question of giving it
another appearance, changing the way one would look at it:
this raw material itself, having received its physical aspect from Absolute Beauty, keeps, through
all its physical alterations, some elements of intellectual beauty. It is possible, through the presence
of this raw material, to raise oneself up to the spiritual archetypes. However, we must always
be sure we understand the metaphors through their very lack of resemblance, that is to say, to
consider them always in an identical way, taking into account the distance which separates the
understandable from the perceptible and deﬁning them in the way which suits each one.38
2. Religious architecture and geometrical measurements
Architecture, with its interplay of numbers and geometrical ﬁgures, was a way of creating
the world.
Already in the Bible, numbers were very important. Everything was a question of mea-
surement and proportion: “Thou hast ordered all things by measure and number and
32[27], [25, p. 20].
33See especially [28,42,4].
34Cf. [4].
35Eusebius of Caesarea, Histoire Ecclésiastique, X, 4, 3, ed. G. Bardy, Sources chrétiennes n◦55, Paris, 1967,
p. 82.
36Cf. [40].
37Cf. [42, p. 36ff]. D. Iogna Prat has shown that this theory persisted until the 11th century: only in the 12th
century did it become possible to represent the Biblical ediﬁce. So, in Gemma Animae, Honorius Augustodunen-
sis pointed out that the Tabernacle of Moses was divided in two—the ﬁrst part corresponded in the Christian
context to the domus anterior where the faithful congregated, while the clergy were in the second part (the sancta
sanctorum). Example taken from [22].
38See Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite’s theory on multiplicity in On the Celestial Hierarchy, XV, 114B–114C.

Religious architecture and mathematics during the late antiquity
153
weight”.39 Earlier we saw that it was God who gave Noah the dimensions of the Ark,
Moses those of the Tabernacle, Solomon those of the Temple. In a dream, Ezekiel received
the dimensions of the new Temple.40 Isidore of Seville (560–636) wrote a treatise on the
“shadows which the Scriptures mention”.41
Numbers were in fact necessary to pass from the terrestrial world to the celestial. To the
Fathers of the Church, they really did have the status of magic keys.42 It was Augustine
who gave his backing to the acceptance of the symbolism of numbers as necessary to cross,
by analogy, from the perceptible to the abstract: “We have praised God for ordering all
things according to number and measure and weight”.43 He saw an image of the absolute
in numbers. It was through visible shapes that divinity, the invisible, showed itself, made
itself known.44 Without perceptible form, man would not be able to reach spiritual realities.
Visible analogies were necessary for men to approach the divine, the invisible, to establish
a link between the outward visible sign and the invisible spiritual mystery. Geometrical
shapes were applied as simulations comparable to divinity. Mathematics, the science of
number, was the best way to gain access to the sphere of the abstract and the divine. So,
numbers were the key which allowed access from the world of the senses to that of the
intellect.
The numbers 4, 7 and 8 were particularly important.45 Four, which evoked the four
points of the compass and the four physical elements—earth, water, air and ﬁre—was
linked with the four evangelists, the four directions of the Cross, the four rivers of Par-
adise. The week had a place of honour for the Fathers of the Church. They all referred to
the hexameron. The creation of the world in six days and God’s rest on the seventh were
seen to be spiritually signiﬁcant: there was a link between the creation of the world and its
development. The addition of 3 and 4, of the spiritual and the temporal, gave 7, which sym-
bolised all numbers. Eight symbolised Eternity, the number of the resurrection of Christ
and man in his perfect state. It was on the day following the Sabbath, and therefore the
eighth day, that Christ came forth from the tomb. He embodied eternal blessedness. Ac-
cording to Augustine, the eighth day represented a return to the life before original sin, a
life which had not disappeared for ever, but which had become eternal. And the eight peo-
ple saved on the Ark from the waters of the ﬂood were an allegory of the Resurrection.46
The circle and the square were the most common geometrical shapes found in Scrip-
ture and amongst the Fathers of the early Church. They were the ﬁrst shapes. “When He
established the heavens, I was there: When He set a circle on the face of the deep”.47 As
for the Temple of Solomon: “This inner shrine was twenty cubits square and twenty cubits
39Wisdom 11, 20.
40Ezekiel 42.
41Isidore of Seville, Liber numerorum qui in sanctis Scripturis occurunt, ed. J.-P. Migne, PL, 83 , 1850, col.
179–200.
42See, for example, Augustine, De ordine, XV, 42–43 (Geometria et Astronomia), ed. J.-P. Migne, PL, 32, 1861,
col. 1014–1015.
43Augustine, De civitate Dei, XI, 30, ed. J.-P. Migne, PL, 41, 1845, col. 343–344.
44For example, Augustine, De Trinitate, II, V, 10, ed. J.-P. Migne, PL, 42, 1841, col. 851.
45[37, pp. 62–65], [31], [13, pp. 60–65].
46Augustine, Epistulae, LV, 8–9 & 17–18, ed. J.-P. Migne, PL, 33, 1845, col. 208–209 & 212–213.
47Proverbs 8, 27.

154
M.-P. Terrien
high”.48 The Temple was often cited as a model;49 in the same way, the Holy of Holies
measured ﬁve cubits by ﬁve.50 The idea of the square and the double square reappeared in
Ezekiel.51 New Jerusalem was also a square city.52 Augustine chose the circle, after elim-
inating the triangle and the square, as the shape which would be most suitable to convey
the unity of the soul, as its surface was limited only by a single, indivisible, line.53
In architecture we come across the Biblical squares and double squares. The plan of
Hagia Sophia in Constantinople is made up of two double squares and a central square:54
the circular central dome is inscribed in a 100 foot square, and the two low semi-domes
which abut it also measure 100 feet in diametre. The secondary columns which surround it
make a double square 100 feet by 200 feet, 15 feet apart. San Vitale in Ravenna is designed
around a 50 foot square which deﬁnes the limits of the octagonal dome; this central square
is ﬂanked by four double squares measuring 25 feet by 50, separated from the central
square by the thickness of the masonry of the arcade which supports the dome.55 In the
Baptistry of Nisibis, the three dimensions are identical, showing that the architect wanted
a perfect cube.56
Ratios and proportions in the basilicas of the 5th and 6th centuries in Ravenna and on
the northern coast of the Adriatic are based on the ﬁgures 4, 7 and 8:57 for example, in the
churches of San Giovanni Evangelista or Sant’Agata Maggiore in Ravenna, started in the
5th century and completed in the 6th, the naos is 4 squares by 7 in dimension and 4 squares
by 8 with the apse. In plans dating from the 5th century, the ratio 4 : 7 always determined
the proportions of the naos, while the apse was the part which gave the overall ratio between
width and length as 4 : 8 (= 1 : 2); this meant that the design of the whole building was
based on 2 squares. At Sant’Apollinare in Classe, the proportions of the whole complex
are 4 : 7 : 11, terms of the mathematical series 1, 3, 4, 7, 11, 18, ..., where the sum of
the last two terms is the next in the series. It was the idea of continuous division which
made it possible to ﬁnd harmony between the parts and the whole in a work of art. The
narthex appeared in the 6th century; it was often added on to the naos and the apse to form
a new ratio. Generally speaking, the centre of the apse was decided upon according to the
line of the seventh square. The ratio between the nave and the aisle was always 1 : 2. The
ratio 1 : 2, one square in width, two lengthways, deﬁned the length and width of the whole
building. These were the rules which had already been laid down in Vitruvius’ books. The
width must be at least a third, at most half, of the length, or there would be no Christian
symbolism .... This ratio was very different from that of the Ark (6 : 10),58 proof that the
theoretical archetype did not bear decisive inﬂuence on the actual architecture.
481 Kings 6, 20. Cf. [23, p. 88f].
49Cf. above.
50Exodus 27, 1.
51Ezekiel Chs 40 ff.
52Apocalypse 21, 16.
53Augustine, De quantitae animae, 10–16, ed. J.-P. Migne, PL, 32, 1861, col. 1042–1045.
54[23, pp. 201–207], [24, pp. 151–156].
55[24, pp. 161–163]. For other examples of square and double-square churches: [23, p. 94], [24].
56[26, pp. 409& 411].
57[34,1].
58Cf. above Section 1.

Religious architecture and mathematics during the late antiquity
155
The cruciform plan was one of the liturgically-based demands, where its importance
was underlined: the cross ﬁgured on the plans Eudoxia, wife of Theodosius II, sent to
Saint Porphyry, bishop of Gaza, in the 4th century; she had asked him to have a church
built on the ruins of a pagan temple: “ecclesia in ﬁguram crucis ... factum ex divina reve-
latione”. The last words show the importance that was given to this symbol.59 According
to Gregory of Tours, Clermont cathedral was built at the end of the 5th century along the
same lines,60 taken from Apostolic Tradition. The Cross had become the Christian symbol
par excellence, the symbol of redemption. Ambrose of Milan considered the Cross as the
emblem of Christ’s victory.61 It was used by architects, who started by incorporating it in
the martyria (cf. the Basilica Apostolorum in Milan). Then the shape was used for churches
dedicated to the Holy Cross. In San Lorenzo Formoso in Ravenne, the building is in the
shape of the Greek cross; a golden cross in the dome, to which Peter and Paul pay homage,
indicates the East, the orientation of the apse of the palace church; on the path which took
Lawrence to where he would be burnt to death, he carries Christ’s cross; above the en-
trance, this same cross is set up by Christus Victor, peace incarnate enthroned in paradise.
In the same way the sign of the cross, represented in the dome entirely dominates Empress
Galla Placidia’s mausoleum.
The octagon evoked the resurrection of Christ. Ambrose of Milan wrote of the Santa
Tecla baptistry in Milan: “it was right that the room of holy baptism be built according to
this number, which is the one by which the people obtained true salvation, in the light of
the risen Christ”.62 This was the reﬂection of a conscious preoccupation with symbolism,
intended from the start, and not a post factum explanation. In this case, it was religious
thought which decided architectural form. But, when there is no written trace, which is the
case most of the time, the question of meaning has to remain open: the choice of plan may
have been dictated quite simply by architectural needs. In that case, Christian ideology was
applied a posteriori to give a meaning to the architecture63 or to tradition (with particular
reference to Vitruvius).
3. The building in its Earth–Heaven dialectic, or the circle above the square
Not only was the design of the building given by God himself, but the whole sacred edi-
ﬁce itself was cosmic, made in imitation of the world. The circle standing above a square
was enough to symbolise the universe in its Earth–Heaven dialectic, for the Temple was a
miniature universe placed within reach of religious man, for use in his praise and worship
of God, a microcosm reﬂecting the macrocosm. It was an image of heavenly, eternal truths.
Many writers established a correspondencebetween the earthly Temple and the heavenly
one. The sanctuaries down here were a reﬂection of the home above, stone buildings were
59Acta Sanctorum, februar, quoted in [2, III, p. 105].
60Gregory of Tours, Historia Francorum, II, 16, ed. R. Latouche, Paris, 1995, pp. 105–106. Cf. the accounts of
Gregory of Nazianzus, Somm. de Anast. eccl. 2, 16. 60; Procopius, De aedif. Iustin., I, 4; & Bede, De locis sacris,
15.
61Inscriptiones latinae christianae veteres, I, ed. E. Diehl, Berolini, 1925, n◦1800.
62Cf. [33].
63Cf. [39, pp. 160–161].

156
M.-P. Terrien
the reﬂection of heavenly truths.64 For Fortunatus, the building ends up by looking like a
reproduction of the heavenly universe; carmen III, 7 underlined the links between Earth
and Heaven. “The roof of the church looks like another Heaven which has its own stars.”
The cover of the ciborium itself was compared to a heaven.65
The building was indestructible. It was eternal, like Christ: “non peritura domus”.66
Going even further, entering the church on Earth meant entering the heavenly sanctuary:
“You start towards the altar; the angels watch you; they have seen you starting; they have
seen your appearance”.67 Once in the sanctuary, they contemplated the hidden mysteries.68
According to the Fathers of the Oriental Church, the church was also a perfect image
of the perceptible world. So, for Maximus the Confessor (580–662), the church “has the
sky for sanctuary and the magniﬁcent Earth for nave”.69 Maximus the Confessor’s myst-
agogy could be adapted very easily to oriental churches, which were cubic structures sur-
mounted by domes. The same idea appeared in the Syrian hymn of Edessa cathedral (6th
century): “It’s a wonderful thing, that in its smallness, this temple should resemble the wide
world”.70 Philogathos, writing about the Cappella Palatino in Palermo, mentioned that its
ceiling “decorated with ﬁne sculptures, which form coffers and its shining gold, represents
Heaven when, in still air, it shines through the choir of its stars”.71
For Cosmas Indicopleustes, the form of the square surmounted by the circle was suf-
ﬁcient to symbolise the universe in its Earth–Heaven dialectic (a double journey—a hor-
izontal one between nave and aisle—and a vertical one between cube and dome). These
two spaces corresponded to the two catastases of man, that is to say, his two transcendental
conditions—the ﬁrst, made of death and change, of tests and conﬂict; the second, unchang-
ing and eternal, where suffering cannot reach him and he is ﬁlled with perfect knowledge.
Through a system of correspondence, God has set up a universe appropriate for these two
states, and divided it into two distinct environments. The world down here, surrounded by
the Earth and the ﬁrmament, and the world above, circumscribed by the ﬁrmament and the
vault of the upper sky, the kingdom of Heaven, incorruptible and eternal. Once He had set
up the universe in this way, God turned to the creation of man, “link of Creation”, a phys-
ical and spiritual being, endowed with intelligence and perception, visible and invisible.
This double nature alone set man apart for two roles. Starting off in this world, the things
he learnt here allowed him to go through to the second space, the kingdom of Heaven. And
it was Christ, man and God at the same time, who was sent to bring mankind from the ﬁrst
64Paulinus of Nola, The Mystery of the Trinity, Epistulae 32, 5; 32, 10; 32, 13, ed. J.-P. Migne, PL, 61, 1847, col.
331, 335, 337; Fortunatus, Carmina, III, 7, ed. M. Reydellet, I, p. 96; The author of the titulus of Sts Peter and
Damian in Rome, Inscriptiones christanae Urbis Romae, II, 71, 41.
65[3, p. 192], [41, p. 52ff].
66Apollinaris Sidonius, Epistula, IV, 18, 5, ed. A. Loyen, Paris, 1970, p. 153; Fortunatus, Carmina, I, 3, ed.
M. Reydellet, I, p. 23; Paulinus of Nola, Epistulae, 32, 18 & 32, 23, ed. J.-P. Migne, PL, 61, 1847, col. 339 &
341–342; cf. [36, pp. 153f].
67Ambrose, De Sacramentis, IV, 5, ed. Dom Barbotte, Sources Chrétiennes n◦25 bis, Paris, 1961, p. 105.
68Ibid, III, 1 5, p. 93.
69Maximus the Confessor, Mystagogy, 3 & 6, PG, 91, ed. J.-P. Migne, 1860, col. 669 & 684.
70See [12] for the translation, [15] and [16] for the commentary. See also [32].
71Quoted in: [17, p. 675].

Religious architecture and mathematics during the late antiquity
157
condition to the second, reestablishing the link of Creation which had been broken through
Adam’s transgression.72
It must be noted that the heavenly ladder as evoked by the Fathers of the Church from
the 3rd century, and in Christian art from the 4th, reﬂected this belief: the ladder linked the
physical world with Heaven and in this way evoked a hierarchical concept of the world, as
is described notably by Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite.73
The building, as has been seen, was the image of the kingdom of God, of the divine order
which encompassed the whole world (Earth and Heaven). Even the liturgy on Earth was
the reﬂection of the heavenly liturgy. Mass was a sacramental representation of the sacri-
ﬁce on the cross and a sacramental participation in the heavenly liturgy: every Christian
initiation was a partaking in Christ’s death and resurrection.74 As all the ritual of the Tem-
ple was accomplished in Christ’s incarnation, death and resurrection, the assembly united
in communion and in the presence of the risen Christ, at the holy altar.75
The liturgy on Earth joined the heavenly liturgy which the angels celebrated; the com-
munity, during the eucharist, was “raised up into heaven”, or rather, was in a risen space
where there was no distinction between Heaven and Earth, between men and angels.
Above, the angelic armies give praise. Down here, in church, men in choirs take up the same
doxology. Up there, the angels of ﬁre beat out the three-times holy hymn; here, man sends back
the echo. The feast of those who live in Heaven joins that of the Earth-dwellers: one thanksgiving,
one burst of happiness, one joy-ﬁlled choir.76
One can make an interesting comparison with the beliefs which were widespread in the
East at the time. According to The Interpretation of the Ofﬁces a Chaldean text of the
7th–8th centuries, taking the cross to the bema symbolised Christ’s going up to Jerusalem.
Taking it away represented His arrest by the Jews who wanted to crucify Him and His
carrying of the cross from Jerusalem to Calvary.77 According to another source, Expla-
nation of the Ofﬁces of the Church (a text which dates from the 9th century, but which
accepted the liturgical prescriptions of the 7th and 8th centuries), the apse, which was the
sanctuary or the Holy of Holies, symbolised Heaven. In front of the sanctuary there was a
raised platform, higher than the level of the nave, the qestroma, and it represented paradise
which rose to Heaven, but which belonged to the Earth. The nave represented the Earth.
The bema in the middle of the nave symbolised Jerusalem, which was the centre of the
world. In the middle of the bema, the altar symbolised Golgotha. Between the bema and
the sanctuary there was a passage which should be relatively clear, symbolising the path of
truth, which one took to reach Heaven. This was the place where any processions would
take place, where the priests would walk two by two. At the end of the service, the veil of
the sanctuary would be drawn shut, to indicate that heaven was closed again.78
This idea came up again in the writings of Narsai [consecrated bishop of Senna by Tim-
othy I (780–823)]: the visible, physical church symbolised the church of Jerusalem, which
72[43, pp. 37–38 & 59].
73[20]. The reference is to Jacob’s ladder, Genesis 28.
74See [8,39].
75[6, p. 25].
76John Chrysostom, Homilia, 4, PG, 56, ed. J.-P. Migne, 1860, col. 120.
77[10].
78Cf. [29], [30] and [40].

158
M.-P. Terrien
was on Earth. The bema represented Zion, the altar which was on the ambon represented
the Ark of the old Covenant, the cross which was placed on it and the Gospel represented
the New Testament and Christ’s Earthly throne, as well as the link which existed between
the Old Testament and the New. The assembly of priests on the bema symbolised the group
of apostles and the passage which led from the ambon to the apse represented the narrow
path to Heaven.79
Because the constantly renewed incarnation of the Logos was accomplished through the
liturgy on the altar, it was necessary to show the Epiphany of the heavenly word on the
triumphal arch. The iconography was linked to the liturgy as it was re-enacted at the altar.
This depiction could be done in one of two ways: through the worship given to the heavenly
master of the world (the Parousia), or through the Logos which came down to this world
(the Incarnation). Both approaches were based on the law which linked Heaven and Earth,
the divine throne and the altar, God and man.80 For example, in the scene of the Parousia
in the San Paolo basilica in Rome, (a Constantinian church added to in the 5th century
by Galla Placidia, in the spirit of Old St Peter’s), the bust of the Pancreator is depicted in
front of an invincible sun which is emitting rays in a circle which ﬂoats above the zenith
of the arch and among the four symbols of the evangelists: the bull, the angel, the lion
and the eagle. The ﬁgures which surround Christ refer to Chapter 4 of the Apocalypse:
on either side of the Saviour two prostrate winged angels represent the heavenly legions.
The 24 elders worship Him also, giving Him their crowns, then in the arch drops one
sees the princes of the apostles, Peter and Paul. On the triumphal arch of Santa Maria
Maggiore in Rome (5th century), where scenes of the life of Christ are depicted, there
are representations of Bethlehem and Jerusalem, the towns where the Logos was born and
died in the Holy Land of this lower world. The circle of the zenith, around which the four
evangelists ﬂoat, with the apostles Peter and Paul on either side, surrounds an empty throne
which is identiﬁed by the cross and the dove as the seat of the Logos.81
In the same way, in the Byzantine churches of the same period, the pictures were de-
signed according to a precise plan: the central dome was decorated with a representation
of Christ dominating all of creation. So, in San Vitale in Ravenna (6th century), the groin
vault which dominates the altar has at its zenith, in the middle of a starry sky, the Lamb of
God exactly over the centre of the altar, on which, at each celebration of the liturgy, His
sacriﬁce is re-enacted (links between Earth and Heaven). A powerful triumphal arch goes
up to the bases of the vault. It presents a frieze (much used after Galla Placidia): this frieze
contains a continuous series of medallions of the apostles and saints and, at the apex, the
bust of the Pancreator in the axis as the Agnus Dei which, through this represents the work
of redemption of this Pantocrator, made ﬂesh in the sacrament on the altar. “We are at the
centre and in the exact spot where Heaven transforms Earth.”82
This iconography was the expression of the union, re-enacted at each celebration of the
Eucharist, between the heavenly church and the victorious and militant church on Earth.
During the Late Antiquity, the symbolism of Christian buildings developed at two levels:
the church was at the same time a reﬂection of the heavenly church and an image of the
79[32, p. 95].
80[27, p. 58], [21], [14, p. 68f].
81[5, p. 55].
82[14, pp. 222 & 230].

Religious architecture and mathematics during the late antiquity
159
universe. The use of numbers and geometrical ﬁgures revealed something deeper, more
fundamental and more mysterious than visible reality, as the early Church fathers’ writings,
archeology, epigrams and pictures show us. It allows a link to be established between the
two levels of cosmic reality, Earth and Heaven, and is a manifestation of God’s presence.
All the same, one cannot ignore the hiatus which, except in a few very special cases (e.g. the
Baptistry of Milan), existed between the architectural plans common to all the architects of
the time (the proportions of the basilicas, the cruciform plan, especially for mausoleums,
wide-spread usage—by pagans as well as Christians—of the dome and the apse) and the
Christian meanings which the Fathers of the Church attributed to them, using an intellectual
approach which they often shared with pagan thinkers.83
References
In the footnotes the following abbreviations are used:
PG: Patrologiae cursus completus, series graeca,
PL: Patrologiae cursus completus, Patres Ecclesiae Latinae.
[1] G. de Angelis d’Ossat, Spazialita e simbolismo delle basiliche Ravennati, Corsi di cultura sull’arte ravennate
e byzantina 17 (1970), 313–333.
[2] C.A. Aubert, Histoire et théorie du symbolisme religieux avant et depuis le christianisme, Paris, 1871–1884
(4 tomes).
[3] G. Bandmann, Mittelalterliche Architektur als Bedeutungsträger, Berlin, 1951.
[4] G. Bandmann, Die vorgotische Kirche als Himmelstadt, Frühmittelalterliche Studien 6 (1972), 67–93.
[5] M. van Berchem, E. Clouzot, Mosaïques chrétiennes du IVème au Xème siècle, Genève, 1934.
[6] A. Biéler, Liturgie et architecture, le temple des chrétiens, Paris, 1961.
[7] L. Bouyer, Architecture et liturgie, Paris, 1967.
[8] J. Daniélou, Bible et liturgie, Paris, 1951.
[9] J. Daniélou, Le symbolisme cosmique du Temple de Jérusalem, Symbolisme cosmique et monuments re-
ligieux, Paris, 1953, pp. 61–64.
[10] J. Dauvillier, L’ambon ou bêma dans les textes de l’Eglise chaldéenne et de l’Eglise syrienne au Moyen-Age,
Cahiers Archéologiques 6 (1952), 11–30.
[11] F.W. Deichmann, Einführung in die christliche Archäologie, Darmstadt, 1983.
[12] A. Dupont-Sommer, Un hymne syriaque sur la cathédrale d’Edesse, Cahiers Archéologiques 2 (1947),
3–39.
[13] V. Foster Hopper, La symbolique médiévale des nombres, origines, signiﬁcation et inﬂuence sur la pensée
et l’expression, Paris, 1995.
[14] F. Gerke, La ﬁn de l’art antique et les débuts de l’art chrétien, Paris, 1967.
[15] A. Grabar, Le témoignage d’un hymne syriaque sur l’architecture de la cathédrale d’Edesse au VIème siècle
et sur la symbolique de l’édiﬁce chrétien, Cahiers Archéologiques 2 (1947), 41–67.
[16] A. Grabar, Byzance, in: Symbolisme cosmique et monuments religieux, Paris, 1953, pp. 65–72.
[17] A. Grabar, L’art de la ﬁn de l’Antiquité et du Moyen Age, I, Paris, 1968.
[18] J. Hani, Le symbolisme du temple chrétien, Paris, 1962.
[19] L. Hautecoeur, Mystique et architecture: symbolisme du cercle et de la coupole, Paris, 1954.
[20] Ch. Heck, L’échelle céleste, une histoire de la quête du ciel, Paris, 1997.
[21] C. Ihm, Die Programme der christlichen Apsismalerei vom vierten Jahrhundert bis zur Mitte des achten
Jahrhunderts, Wiesbaden, 1960.
83E.g. Julian’s speech on The Mother of the Gods, with its Platonic interpretation of the rites and myths which
have a completely different origin (ed. G. Rochefort, Paris, 1963, pp. 94–131).

160
M.-P. Terrien
[22] D. Iogna-Prat, Ordonner et exclure, Cluny et la société chrétienne face à l’hérésie, au judaïsme et à l’islam
(1000-1050), Paris, 1998.
[23] G. Jouven, L’architecture cachée, tracés harmoniques, Paris, 1979.
[24] G. Jouven, La forme initiale, symbolisme de l’architecture traditionnelle, Paris, 1985.
[25] J.A. Jungmann, Symbolik der katholischen Kirche, Stuttgart, 1960.
[26] A. Khatchatrian, Le baptistère de Nisibis, Actes du Vème Congrès International d’Archéologie Chrétienne,
1957, pp. 407–421.
[27] L. Kitschelt, Die frühchristliche Basilika als Darstellung des Himmlischen Jerusalem, Munich, 1938.
[28] R. Krautheimer, Introduction to an “Iconography of medieval architecture”, Journal of the Warburg ans
Courtauld Institutes V (1942), 1–33.
[29] J. Lassus, Sanctuaires chrétiens de Syrie, Paris, 1944.
[30] J. Lassus, G. Tchalenko, Ambons syriens, Cahiers Archéologiques 5 (1951), 74–122.
[31] A. Luneau, L’histoire du salut chez les Pères de l’Eglise, Paris, 1964.
[32] K. Mc Vey, The domed church as microcosm: literary roots of an architectural symbol, Dumbarton Oaks
Papers, 1983, pp. 91–121.
[33] O. Perler, L’inscription du baptistère de Sainte-Thècle à Milan et le De Sacramentis de Saint Ambroise,
Rivista di Archeologia Christiana 27 (1951), 145–166.
[34] N. Petrovi´c, Rapports et proportions dans les plans des basiliques du Vème et VIème siècles de Ravenne et
du littoral septentrional de l’Adriatique, Felix Ravenna 34 (1962), 40–71.
[35] L. Pietri, Sylloge des inscriptions tourangelles, La ville de Tours du IVème au VIème siècle, naissance
d’une cité chrétienne, Rome, 1983, pp. 798–830.
[36] L. Pietri, Epigraphie et architecture religieuse, Coloquio AIEGL Borghesi 1986 Epigraﬁa e Antichita 9
(1988), pp. 137–157.
[37] J. Sauer, Symbolik des Kirchengebäudes und seiner Ausstattung in der Auffassung des Mittelalters, Fribourg
im Breisgau, 1902.
[38] E. Sauer, Symbolik des katholischen Kirchengebäudes, Symbolik der katholischen Kirche, J.A. Jungmann,
ed., Stuttgart, 1960, pp. 55–97.
[39] V. Saxer, Bible et liturgie, Le monde latin antique et la Bible, Fontaine, Pietri, eds., 1985, pp. 157–188.
[40] M. Schneider, Liturgie und Kirchenbau in Syrien, Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Got-
tingen (Philologisch-historische Klasse) I (1949), 45–68.
[41] A. Stange, Das frühchristliche Kirchengebäude als Bild des Himmels, Cologne, 1950.
[42] A. Weckweth, Das altchristliche und das frühmittelalterliche Kirchengebäude—ein Bild des “Gottesere-
iches”, Zeitschrift für Kirchengeschichte 69 (1958), 26–78.
[43] W. Wolska, La Topographie chrétienne de Cosmas Indicopleustes, Paris, 1962.

CHAPTER 8
The Sacred Geography of Islam
David A. King
Institute for History of Science, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University,
D-60054 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
E-mail: king@em.uni-frankfurt.de
Contents
1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
2. The dichotomy of science in Islamic civilisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
3. The sacred geography of the legal scholars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
4. The sacred geography of the scientists
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
4.1. Mathematical solutions to the qibla problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
4.2. Tables displaying the qibla . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
4.3. Instruments for ﬁnding the qibla . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
4.4. Maps for ﬁnding the qibla
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
4.5. Three Safavid world-maps centred on Mecca . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
Added in proof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174
5. The orientation of mosques and Islamic cities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
6. Concluding remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
161


The sacred geography of Islam
163
1. Introduction
In Islam, as in no other religion in human history, the performance of the most important
ritual acts—prayer at speciﬁc times and in a speciﬁc direction, and fasting during a partic-
ular month—has been assisted by procedures involving astronomy and mathematics. This
activity resulted from a distinctive conception of time and space in Islam. The organisa-
tion of the lunar calendar, the regulation of the astronomically-deﬁned times of prayer, and
the determination of the sacred direction towards the sacred Kaaba in Mecca—these are
three topics of traditional Islamic science still of concern to Muslims today, and each has
a history going back close to 1400 years. They form a small but highly signiﬁcant part of
a scientiﬁc tradition which knew no rival for several centuries. This paper deals with the
third of these topics, the sacred direction in Islam and the corresponding conceptions of a
sacred geography.
The Kaaba is a shrine of uncertain historical origin that served as a sanctuary and centre
of pilgrimage for centuries before the advent of Islam in the early 7th century. In Muslim
tradition the Kaaba was built by Abraham and Ishmael; otherwise practically nothing is
known of its early history beyond what can be intimated from the nature and layout of the
ediﬁce. In any case, the Qurân advocates prayer towards the Kaaba, and the ediﬁce was
adopted as the focal point of the new religion, a physical pointer to the presence of God.
Thus, since the early 7th century, Muslims have faced the Kaaba during their prayers. The
sacred direction is called qibla in all languages of the Islamic commonwealth. Mosques
are built with the prayer-wall facing the Kaaba, the direction being indicated by a mihrâb
or prayer-niche. In addition, according to Islamic law, certain ritual acts—such as reciting
the Qurân, announcing the call to prayer, and slaughtering animals for food—are to be
performed facing the qibla. Also Muslim graves and tombs were laid out so that the body
would lie on its side and face the qibla. Thus the qibla is of prime importance in numerous
aspects of the life of every Muslim.
2. The dichotomy of science in Islamic civilisation
Islamic science functioned on two different levels throughout the period 750–1900. First,
there was the folk scientiﬁc tradition, which had the backing of the religious authorities.
Second, there was the mathematical tradition, which was cultivated by a small subset of
society but whose prescriptions were generally too complicated to be put to into practice.
Nowhere is this dichotomy more clear than in the situation regarding the obligation of
Muslims to pray and to perform various other ritual acts facing the qibla.
The Muslims inherited the folk astronomical and folk cosmological notions of pre-
Islamic Arabia, and when they expanded from the Arabian Peninsula they encountered
the folk astronomy of the Hellenistic world. Arabic texts on folk astronomy, of which the
most developed stem from the Yemen, deal with the changing seasons, with the stars and
the lunar mansions, with the phases of the moon, with time-reckoning by shadow-lengths,
as well as with the winds and the effects of the seasons on agriculture. In particular, direc-
tions were deﬁned by astronomical horizon phenomena: the risings and settings either of
the sun at the equinoxes and solstices or of the brightest ﬁxed stars. As we shall see, the

164
D.A. King
techniques of folk astronomy were employed by the legal scholars to determine the qibla,
and a sacred geography deﬁning the positions of various parts of the world in relation to
the central shrine, the Kaaba, was developed (Section 3).
The Muslims were also heirs to the Hellenistic, Iranian and Indian traditions of math-
ematical astronomy and to the Hellenistic tradition of mathematical geography and car-
tography. They assimilated these with remarkable facility, and it was not long before they
were in a position to criticise and improve upon them, and to select what they found most
acceptable. Out of this amalgam of notions there developed a distinctly Islamic astron-
omy, which was without rival from the 9th to the 15th century. (The label “medieval” used
for this period and the scientiﬁc tradition which it produced has no negative connotation
since the tradition was unrivalled at the time; the term is here intended simply to distin-
guish between the scientiﬁc traditions of Antiquity and the modern age.) Muslim scientists
Fig. 1. A diagram of sacred geography with the qiblas of eight different regions of the Islamic commonwealth
displayed around the four walls of the Kaaba. This is found in one of the copies of the cosmography of the
early-15th-century scholar Pseudo-Ibn al-Wardî. [Taken from MS Istanbul Topkap AIII 3025, fol. 30v, courtesy
of the Topkap Library.]

The sacred geography of Islam
165
developed new trigonometric techniques and manifold tables for solving various astro-
nomical problems. As we shall see (Section 4), they applied mathematical techniques to
the available geographical data in order to calculate the qibla in various places. The sci-
entists developed a sacred geography of their own, deﬁning the directions of various cities
to the centre, now Mecca, the city, rather than the Kaaba, the ediﬁce. This distinction is
signiﬁcant and characterises the two different approaches.
3. The sacred geography of the legal scholars
The scholars of the sacred law of Islam created a sacred geography based on the notion that
in order to face the Kaaba in any region of the world one should face the same direction
in which one would be standing if one were directly in front of the appropriate segment
Fig. 2. A diagram of the world divided into sectors about the Kaaba, found in a copy of the navigational atlas of
the 16th-century Tunisian scholar Ahmad al-Sharafî al-Safâqusî. [From MS Paris BNF ar. 2278, fol. 2v, courtesy
of the Bibliothèque nationale de France.]

166
D.A. King
of the perimeter of the Kaaba. Since that sacred ediﬁce is itself aligned in astronomically-
signiﬁcant directions, the directions adopted by the legal scholars for the qibla were to-
wards the risings and settings of the sun at the equinoxes or the solstices or of various
signiﬁcant qibla-stars.
From the 9th to the 16th century Muslim scholars working exclusively in the folk astro-
nomical tradition developed a tradition of sacred geography in which the qiblas of different
regions of the world around the Kaaba were associated with particular astronomical hori-
zon phenomena. Some 20 different schemes of this kind of sacred geography—sometimes
illustrated in manuscripts, sometimes described in word—are known from some 30 differ-
ent medieval sources, and there are surely more yet to be rediscovered. These directions
adopted for the qibla obviously corresponded only roughly to the qiblas that were calcu-
lated by the Muslim astronomers. This tradition was particularly popular in the medieval
Yemen, not least because it was a legal scholar of Yemeni origin named Ibn Surâqa who ca.
1000 ﬁrst proposed various serious schemes with 8, 11 and 12 sectors around the Kaaba.
In various later works, such as the geographical writings of Yâqût (Syria ca. 1200) and al-
Qazwînî (Iraq ca. 1250), the information on the qibla is suppressed, and in yet later works
such as the nautical atlas of Ahmad al-Sharafî al-Safâqusî (Tunis ca. 1575) and various
other Ottoman compilations, the localities are uniformly distributed on a ring around the
Kaaba with no speciﬁc qibla-values. Figures 1 and 2 show two examples of these schemes
of sacred folk geography, involving no calculations whatsoever.
4. The sacred geography of the scientists
4.1. Mathematical solutions to the qibla problem
Muslim astronomers from the 8th century onwards concerned themselves with the determi-
nation of the qibla as a problem of mathematical geography. This activity required knowl-
edge of geographical coordinates and involved the computation of the direction of one
locality from another by procedures of geometry or trigonometry, such as the analemma (a
sophisticated device for reducing problems on a sphere from three dimensions to two) or
spherical trigonometry.
The qibla at any locality was deﬁned as the direction to Mecca along the great-circle
on the terrestrial sphere. The basic problem, illustrated in Figure 3, is to determine the
direction to Mecca M from any locality X, given the latitudes of both localities, measured
by MB (= φM) and XA (= φ), and the longitude difference AB (= L = L −LM). The
qibla is measured by the angle AXM (= q). We shall also have occasion to use the latitude
difference XD (= φ = φ −φM) and the distance to Mecca XM (= d).
Once the geographical data are available, a mathematical procedure is necessary to de-
termine the qibla. The ﬁrst Muslim astronomers who considered this problem developed
a series of approximate solutions, all adequate for most practical purposes. The approxi-
mate solutions were all inspired by cartographic considerations. However, also in the early
9th century, accurate solutions by solid trigonometry and projection methods were formu-
lated, and in the 10th century solutions by spherical trigonometry. Over the centuries one

The sacred geography of Islam
167
Fig. 3. The mathematical problem of determining the qibla.
“standard approximate method” was generally advocated in popular treatises on astron-
omy, and the most widely-known exact procedure amongst the experts was the “method of
the zîjes”. (A zîj is an astronomical handbook with tables, and some 225 works of this kind
were compiled between the 8th and the 19th centuries.)
There is evidence that various scholars over the centuries favoured simple cartographic
solutions to the qibla problem: in an anonymous treatise from 9th-century Baghdad three
essentially cartographic methods are presented, together with an accurate solution by solid
trigonometry and even a table displaying the qibla for a whole range of latitudes and longi-
tudes. The author, as yet unidentiﬁed, was clearly capable of considering the qibla-problem
in both cartographic and mathematical terms. The approximate procedures he presents are
equivalent to:
q = tan−1
L
φ

,
tan−1
LcosφM
φ

,
tan−1
sin LcosφM
sinφ

.
The corresponding basic triangles are shown in Figure 4(a)–(c):
Only the ﬁrst of these had any following in later centuries, namely, on maps with square
grids on which a given locality was simply joined to Mecca by a straight line.
Another approximate method ﬁrst attested in the early 9th century but possibly earlier
lends itself to the simple geometrical construction shown in Figure 4(d), and is equivalent
to the formula:
q = tan−1
sinL
sinφ

.
This, the “standard approximate method”, was widely used until the 19th century but was
generally not approved by the most serious astronomers.
The modern formula for the qibla is:
q = cot−1
cosLsinφ −cosφ tanφM
sin L

,

168
D.A. King
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fig. 4. (a)–(c) The underlying diagrams from which the 9th-century approximations can be derived. (d) The
standard approximate construction for the qibla proposed by al-Battânî ca. 910. (e) The triangle from which the
qibla can be derived from the distance to Mecca, according to the last procedure in the “method of the zîjes”, ﬁrst
derived in the 9th century. This underlies the Mecca-centred maps discussed in 4(e).
and various accurate solutions were devised by Muslim astronomers from the 9th century
onwards which were mathematically equivalent to this although they usually involved var-
ious steps. The distance to Mecca was also of interest. It may be derived using:
d = sin−1
sinLcosφM
sin q

.
As noted above, an anonymous astronomer in 9th-century Baghdad derived an accurate
formula for the qibla by solid trigonometry. From that century onwards, numerous Muslim
scientists discussed the qibla problem, presenting other accurate solutions by spherical
trigonometry, or reducing the three-dimensional problem to two dimensions and solving

The sacred geography of Islam
169
it by geometry or plane trigonometry. The celebrated early-11th-century scholar Ibn al-
Haytham, who was born in Basra but later worked in Cairo, authored two brilliant studies of
the determination of the qibla by means of spherical trigonometry and projection methods,
respectively. The former, written ﬁrst, is remarkable for the fact that all of the possible
cases (0 < L < 360◦and −90◦< φ < +90◦) are considered. The second, which uses an
analemma construction, is spectacular for its conciseness, and from it the modern formula
can be derived immediately. Also Ibn al-Haytham mentions in his autobiography that he
wrote a treatise “on the determination of the azimuth of the qibla in all of the inhabited
world by tables which I compiled ...”; unfortunately, this treatise has not been preserved
for us.
The so-called “method of the zîjes” for the determination of the qibla was developed
in the mid-9th century, probably by Habash al-Hâsib, who is the ﬁrst known author to
have proposed it explicitly. It was also favoured by the major astronomers for centuries
thereafter. The procedure was ﬁrst derived by spherical trigonometry (anonymous 9th-
century author, maybe Habash), then by projection methods (Habash), then by spherical
trigonometry (various 10th-century scholars). It involves ﬁnding three auxiliary quantities
“modiﬁed” from L, φM, and φ and deﬁned using:
sin L′ = sin LcosφM;
sinφ′
M = sin φM
cosL′ ;
φ′ = φ −φ′
M.
With these auxiliary quantities d and q are determined by:
cosd = cosL′ cosφ′,
sinq = sinL′
sind .
What is involved here is essentially a conversion of equatorial/polar coordinates (longitude
and latitude) to coordinates centred on a speciﬁc point on the sphere (qibla and distance).
The most comprehensive medieval discussion of mathematical qibla-procedures is by
the celebrated al-Bîrûnî, who worked in Central Asia ca. 1025. In his treatise Tahdîd ni-
hâyât al-amâkin, “The Determination of the Locations of Cities”, the leading scientist
of medieval Islam set out to establish the geographical coordinates of Ghazna (now in
Afghanistan) in order to compute the qibla there: the result was an involved discussion
of determinations of terrestrial latitude, the length of a degree along the terrestrial merid-
ian, the differences in terrestrial longitudes by eclipse observations, the distances between
cities by measuring caravan routes, and the derivations of the qibla for a given locality by
mathematics, inter alia. Having ﬁrst determined the longitude difference between Mecca
and Ghazna with remarkable accuracy, al-Bîrûnî then applied complicated techniques of
spherical trigonometry and projection methods to derive the qibla. His treatise is the most
valuable work on mathematical geography from the medieval period.
4.2. Tables displaying the qibla
Muslim astronomers compiled a series of tables displaying the qibla q for each degree
(within a certain range) of longitude different from Mecca L and latitude difference φ

170
D.A. King
Fig. 5. An extract from the qibla-table of al-Khalîlî, showing qibla-values for the latitude range 28◦–33◦. The
entries are written in standard Arabic alphanumerical notation. [From MS Paris BNF ar. 2558, fols. 55v–56r,
courtesy of the Bibliothèque nationale de France.]
or latitude φ based on both approximate and exact formulae. The ﬁrst of these was prepared
in Baghdad, probably in the 9th century, and displays values of the qibla in degrees and
minutes were given ostensibly for each 1◦of L and φ from 1◦to 20◦. Several other
qibla-tables are known but the most impressive from the point of view of its scope and its
accuracy is that of the 14th-century Damascus astronomer Shams al-Dîn al-Khalîlî, which
displays q(L,φ) to degrees and minutes for each 1◦of L from 1◦to 60◦and each 1◦of
φ from 10◦to 50◦, with most of the 2 880 entries accurately computed: see Figure 5.
The extensive geographical tables that were a standard feature of Islamic zîjes rarely
included qibla-values. The earliest table of this kind was by Abd al-Rahmân al-Khâzinî,
who worked in Merw in Central Asia ca. 1125. It gives the qibla-values of about 250
localities along with their longitudes and latitudes. These basic coordinates appear to have
been read from a map, for they are mainly those of his predecessor by one century, al-
Bîrûnî, as found in his astronomical handbook, but generally rounded to the nearest 0; 10◦,
and occasionally there is a jump of 1◦or 2◦in one or other of the coordinates. al-Khâzinî’s

The sacred geography of Islam
171
qibla-values are likewise given to the nearest 0; 10◦but invariably they do not correspond
to the longitudes and latitudes as well as one might expect; indeed, the errors can be as
much as several degrees in places. Another table of this kind is found in a work by the
Cairene astronomer Najm al-Dîn al-Misrî ca. 1325. This gives the longitudes, latitudes and
qiblas (measured from the east or west) of some 150 localities, and whilst entries for both
coordinates are given to the nearest degree, the qibla-values are computed to the nearest
minute but do not correspond happily to the coordinates. Several other Egyptian tables
of this kind present similar problems. A more successful table was that associated with
al-Khalîlî (see above), serving 48 localities mostly in Syria and Palestine: here the qibla-
values are remarkably accurate.
An enormous table very different from any of the others in its scope was compiled in
15th-century Timurid Central Asia. The author has not been identiﬁed, but he seems to have
had a connection with the astronomical activity in Samarqand ca. 1425. In the available
version of this table, values of the qibla and the distance to Mecca are given to the nearest
minute, virtually without error, for 274 localities. But the original table had values of q
and d to seconds, and these were accurate to within a few seconds. The information in this
remarkable table, in its simpliﬁed form, was used in the gazetteers which were common on
Iranian astrolabes and compasses from the 17th century onwards (see Section 4.3).
4.3. Instruments for ﬁnding the qibla
Several types of instruments were devised over the centuries for ﬁnding the qibla. One va-
riety serves to actually determine the qibla of any locality: isolated examples of spherical
devices for ﬁnding the qibla graphically are attested from the 12th century to the 14th.
Another variety has markings based on computed qibla-values that provide a convenient
practical means of displaying the qibla. From the 12th century onwards we ﬁnd qibla direc-
tions for a speciﬁc locality marked on the back of an astrolabe or on a horizontal sundial.
Iranian instrument-makers from the 16th century onwards were fond of representing graph-
ically on the backs of astrolabes, for various localities, the solar altitude in the direction of
the local qibla for all solar longitudes (that is, throughout the year).
Qibla-indicators in the form of magnetic compasses with information on the qiblas of
various localities engraved around their rims are described in texts from the Yemen and
from Egypt ca. 1300. A glazed ceramic bowl from Damascus ca. 1520 with qibla-values
painted on it seems to attest to an earlier Iranian tradition. Brass qibla-indicators were
particularly popular in Iran from the 17th century onwards, now using the qibla-values
from the Timurid geographical table (see Section 4.2) in various degrees of corruption.
4.4. Maps for ﬁnding the qibla
Muslim scholars also prepared maps speciﬁcally for ﬁnding the qibla. One from early-
13th-century Egypt is naive: on a standard coordinate grid ﬁtted within a circular frame one
simply joins one’s locality to Mecca and measures the inclination to one’s local meridian—
see Figure 6. In spite of its simplicity, this approximate procedure works reasonably well

172
D.A. King
Fig. 6. A map of the world combining mathematical geography (localities plotted on a grid according to their
coordinates) with folk geography (directions deﬁned in terms of the rising and setting of the sun). The map
occurs in a copy of an Egyptian treatise on folk astronomy compiled ca. 1210. The coordinates of the localities
on the map are in the tradition of al-Bîrûnî (ca. 1025) and al-Khâzinî (ca. 1125), hence the map is of considerable
historical interest. [From MS Princeton Yahuda 4657, fols. 65v–66r, courtesy of Princeton University Library.]
for localities in such regions as Egypt and Iran. Yet the map is not Mecca-centred and di-
rections around the circumference are crudely associated with solar risings and settings.
The map thus constitutes a unique example of the combination of mathematical cartogra-
phy and folk astronomy. Another curious qibla-map with a grid based on an orthogonal
projection is found on an astrolabe from Lahore dated 1666. A ‘qibla-map’ ‘invented’ by
an Armenian for the Ottoman Grand Vizier in the late 1730s, is simply a European map of
the landmass north of the equator between West Africa and Japan ﬁtted with a magnetic
compass and an additional pointer at Mecca, which, unhappily, is not at the centre. A later
Ottoman world-map actually centred on Mecca is also known but has not been studied.
4.5. Three Safavid world-maps centred on Mecca
In 1989, 1995 and 2001, respectively, three remarkable world-maps from Safavid Iran came
to light. Each is engraved on a circular brass plate some 22.5 cm in diameter and each is
ﬁtted with a highly sophisticated longitude and latitude grid centred on Mecca: see Fig-
ure 7. Some 150 localities are carefully marked on each map, the coordinates having being
taken from the Timurid table mentioned above (Section 4.2). A non-uniform linear scale
attached at the centre and a scale around the circumference enables the user to read off at

The sacred geography of Islam
173
a glance the direction of Mecca and the distance to Mecca. A grid achieving this purpose
was previously unknown to the history of cartography, Islamic or European, before the
early 20th century. The ﬁrst map is unsigned and incomplete; its dating to the late 17th
century seems secure on art-historical grounds. The second is signed by a certain Muham-
mad Husayn who appears to be one of the instrument-makers of 17th-century Isfahan, but
who is known only from textual references and not by any other instruments: it looks as
though it was made ca. 1800 but it is as genuine as the ﬁrst and probably contemporaneous
with it. The third is also complete and as elegantly ﬁnished as the ﬁrst, and it is signed
by an otherwise-unknown Hasan Husayn, who is, perhaps, however, to be identiﬁed with
the maker of various unsigned sundials and qibla-indicators bearing a Shiite inscription
mentioning both the imams Hasan and Husayn, which seem to date from the early 18th
century. So even with the instruments themselves there are some unresolved problems.
Was the world-map grid designed by a 17th-century Safavid astronomer? I cannot ac-
cept that it was, since all of the contemporaneous writings from Safavid Iran that I have
examined are devoid of scientiﬁc initiative. Now there were Europeans resident in Isfahan
in the 17th century who were in contact with the Iranian instrument-makers. Also the in-
struments are ﬁtted with a European-type magnetic compass (although the compass was
Fig. 7. The Safavid world-map rediscovered in 1989. [Dar al-Athar al-Islamiyyah, Kuwait, photo courtesy of
Christie’s of London.]

174
D.A. King
known in Islam at least since 1300) and a European-type inclining sundial (although such
sundials were known in 14th-century Syria and 15th-century Egypt). If the grid was pro-
posed to the Safavid instrument-makers by a European then that person would have had
to have been exceptionally gifted. I could ﬁnd no trace of European input on the grids, in
spite of having considered what is known about the Europeans who were in Isfahan in the
17th century.
The problem with the maps is simply that they look very Islamic both from a geographi-
cal point of view and from a mathematical point of view: they feature essentially the world
of medieval Islamic cartography and use somewhat outdated geographical data for regions
of the world other than Greater Iran. Also, the underlying mathematics is in fact very sim-
ple when considered in terms of the well-known Islamic “method of the zîjes” for ﬁnding
the qibla: see Figure 4(e). Furthermore, the latitude curves are approximated with arcs of
circles (the centre of the arc with the smallest radius is still visible, the other centres would
be off the map), and there is a well-attested tradition in Islamic instrument-making of using
arcs of circles to approximate graphic representations of more complex curves (in this case,
ellipses). Nevertheless, the idea of using such a method in this way to produce such a map-
grid smacks of genius; also, even given the basic formula underlying the grid, the way to
construct the grid is not self-evident. I have argued that the maps, all of which are without
any doubt copies of an original, might have been inspired by a prototype developed along-
side the monumental Timurid geographical table mentioned above. Concrete evidence of
this is lacking. But I suspect that the original inspiration for such a grid might have come
much earlier, and I have hypothesised that it was perhaps mentioned in some treatise now
lost by al-Bîrûnî or his predecessor Habash. al-Bîrûnî wrote on mappings which preserve
direction and distance to the centre, and Habash, some of whose works were available to
al-Bîrûnî, devised an astrolabe based on such a projection (which is not the same as the one
underlying the Safavid world-maps). I could show only that both of these early scholars
and the later Timurid calculator had the necessary interest and ability to have devised a
grid such as features on the Safavid world-maps, but not that they ever did.
The Safavid world-maps thus remain something of an enigma. Indeed, they have already
become the object of some controversy, with some colleagues insisting, for example, that
the possibility of European inﬂuence behind the grids should not be ruled out, or that one
should not underestimate the Safavid astronomers. One colleague has proposed that the
grids were added after the localities, which would be a ﬁrst in the history of cartography,
but he overlooked the fact that the deviations in the positions of the localities on the maps
with respect to the longitudes and latitudes in the Timurid table clearly indicate that the
grids were constructed ﬁrst. Hence the inspiration for the Mecca-centred world-maps and
their early development of remain clouded in obscurity.
Added in proof
In 2001, Professor Jan Hogendijk of Utrecht identiﬁed two Arabic treatises, one from 10th-
century Baghdad and the other from 11th-century Isfahan, both dealing with the determi-
nation of the qibla by means of ellipse segments. The latitude curves on the maps are arcs
of circles approximating segments of ellipses. We have thus come considerably closer to

The sacred geography of Islam
175
the origin of the Safavid world-maps, and the publication of Hogendijk’s discoveries is
awaited with anticipation.
5. The orientation of mosques and Islamic cities
The alignment of medieval mosques reﬂects the fact that the astronomers were not always
consulted on their orientation. But since we now know from textual sources which direc-
tions were used as a qibla in each major locality we can better understand not only the
mosque orientations but also can recognise numerous cities in the Islamic world that can
be said to be qibla-oriented. In some, such as Taza in Morocco and Khiva in Central Asia,
the orientation of the main mosque dominates the orientation of the entire city.
In the case of Cairo, various parts of the city and its suburbs are oriented in three different
qibla directions: see Figure 8. The Fatimid city, founded in the 10th century, faces winter
sunrise, which was the qibla of the Companions of the Prophet who erected the ﬁrst mosque
in nearby Fustat some three centuries previously. The Mamluk “City of the Dead” faces
the qibla of the astronomers. The suburb of al-Qarâfa faces south, another popular qibla
direction. The outer south-east walls of the splendid Mamluk mosques and madrasas on
Fig. 8. The main orientations of three parts of medieval Cairo. Each part is qibla-oriented, the old city (A) in
the qibla of the Companions of the Prophet (winter sunrise at ca. 27◦S of E), the ‘City of the Dead’ (B) in the
qibla of the astronomers (at 37◦S of E), and the area around the tomb of al-Shâﬁ’î (C) in the qibla of the Shâﬁite
school, that is, the qibla of the Prophet when he was in Medina (due south).

176
D.A. King
the main thoroughfare of the city are aligned with the street plan, and the insides of the
walls are aligned with the qibla of the astronomers; one can observe the varying thickness
of the walls, which are at a 10◦angle to each other, when standing in front of the windows
inside the mosque overlooking the street outside. Figure 9 shows the qiblas used in Cairo
and also Cordova and Samarqand.
Of all the regions of the Muslim world it is al-Andalus which has been best served by
modern scholarship on orientations. A recent study by Mònica Rius on orientations in al-
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 9. Various qiblas accepted in Cordoba, Cairo-Fustat and Samarqand by different interest groups. (a) Accord-
ing to a 12th(?)-century Andalusi treatise on the astrolabe, mosques in Cordova were oriented in these different
directions: 23◦S of E, the qibla computed by the standard approximate formula (which works well for localities
in the central regions of the Islamic world, but not for al-Andalus, where the error is more than 10◦); 30◦S of
E, winter sunrise; 45◦S of E, a compromise between due east and due south; 30◦E of S, the direction of the
Great Mosque (which is ‘parallel’ to the major axis of the Kaaba); and due south (not speciﬁcally mentioned
in this text). (b) The Egyptian historian al-Maqrîzî (d. 1442) mentioned these qiblas as being used for mosque
orientation in Cairo: due east (not speciﬁcally mentioned in this text); 27◦S of E, winter sunrise, the qibla of the
Companions of the Prophet; 37◦S of E, the qibla of the astronomers, computed according to an exact procedure
and ﬁrst attested in the writings of the 10th-century Fatimid astronomer Ibn Yunus; 39◦E of S, the qibla of the
Mosque of Ibn Tûlûn, variously explained; and any direction between ca. 24◦E of S and ca. 24◦W of S, between
the rising and setting of Canopus. (c) The legal scholar al-Bazdawî (d. 1089) reported these qiblas as being used
for mosque orientation in Samarqand: due west, used by the Hanaﬁte school of law and corresponding to the
direction in which the road to Mecca left the city; 30◦S of W, winter sunset, as used for the Great Mosque; 40◦
S of W, a value underlying a table for the altitude of the sun in the azimuth of the qibla, presented by al-Bazdawî
but lifted from some earlier source; and due south, used by the Shâﬁite legal school, corresponding to the qibla
of the Prophet in Medina.

The sacred geography of Islam
177
Andalus and the Maghrib compares the information in medieval folk astronomical texts
with actual orientations. This is an area of the history of urban development in the Islamic
world which has only recently been understood for the ﬁrst time, not least because, prior
to the discovery of the textual evidence, it was by no means clear which directions were
used as qiblas, and even if a qibla direction at variance from the “true” qibla was clearly
popular, it was not known why.
Only with the systematic scientiﬁc cartographic surveys of the 18th and 19th centuries
did the ﬁrst accurate measurements of geographical longitudes of localities in the Islamic
world become available. Thus most of the accurately-computed qiblas of the Muslim as-
tronomers were off by a few degrees anyway. Nowadays urban Muslims are content to
use the qibla directions found by calculation from modern geographical coordinates. In
rural areas where there is no mosque nearby, astronomical horizon phenomena are still
used for the sacred direction. In recent years, various devices for ﬁnding the qibla have
appeared on the market. The ﬁrst were in the form of a magnetic compass with a list of
directions for the qiblas in the major cities of the world. In some later electronic models
one would feed in one’s latitude and longitude, and the device would beep until it was
turned to the appropriate direction for the qibla, upon which it would purr continuously;
such devices were sometimes ﬁtted to an electronic clock which would indicate the times
of Muslim prayer. Most recently such devices are linked to a satellite which can locate
the user and so does not need to be informed of his/her coordinates. If one were to take
such a device into a mosque built in medieval times just before the call to prayer was to be
announced, it is most unlikely that the device would show the same qibla as the mihrâb of
the mosque, and also highly improbable that the thing would beep at the same time as the
call to prayer.
6. Concluding remarks
The activities of both the legal scholars and the scientists are remarkable for the enthusi-
asm and ingenuity with which they were conducted, the sophistication and complexity they
achieved, and not least for the occasional universality they attained, in both cases provid-
ing solutions to the qibla-problem for all localities. The legal scholars developed a sacred
geography centred on the Kaaba, and the scientists a sacred geography centred on Mecca.
In the long term it was irrelevant whether a particular qibla was “correct”; at the time it
was important only that those who adopted it thought it was correct. Numerous historians
of Islamic architecture have been misled into pronouncing the orientation of this or that
mosque “incorrect”; it is they who stand to beneﬁt most from our new insights about me-
dieval notions of the qibla. Likewise, it is easy for us moderns with a mathematical bent to
pour scorn on the legal scholars for not listening to the scientists and on some of the latter
for not being able to compute the qibla properly. But one should not lose sight of the fact
that the ultimate purpose of the adoption of a sacred direction in Islam was in obediance to
a divine injunction that the devotion of the faithful should be focussed on a sacred shrine
in the most sacred city at the heart of the Islamic world.

178
D.A. King
References
[1] J.L. Berggren, Episodes in the Mathematics of Medieval Islam, Springer, New York, 1986. [A useful intro-
duction to the mathematical methods used by medieval Muslim scientists.]
[2] al-Bîrûnî, Tahdîd: J. Ali, The Determination of the Coordinates of Cities ... by al-Bîrûnî, American Univer-
sity of Beirut Press, Beirut, 1967; and E.S. Kennedy, A Commentary upon Bîrûnî’s Kitâb Tahdîd [Nihâyât]
al-Amâkin, An 11th Century Treatise on Mathematical Geography, American University of Beirut, Beirut,
1973. [Translation of and commentary on the most signiﬁcant surviving medieval treatise on mathematical
geography.]
[3] M. Chebel, Symboles de l’Islam and Symbols of Islam, with photographs by L. Hamani, both Éditions
Assouline, Paris, 1997. [Beautifully illustrated.]
[4] The Encyclopaedia of Islam, new edition, 10 vols. to date, E.J. Brill, Leiden, 1960 to present. [Contains
various survey articles including “Anwâ” [aspects of folk astronomy]; “Ilm al-hay’a” [astronomy]; “Kibla”
[sacred direction]; “Layl and nahâr” [aspects of folk astronomy]; “Makka: As Centre of the World” [sacred
geography]; “Matâli” [ascensions]; “Matla” [horizon directions]; “Mîkât” [astronomical time-keeping];
“Samt” [direction]; “Tâsa” [magnetic compass]; and “Zîdj” [astronomical handbooks with tables].]
[5] D.A. King, Astronomy in the Service of Islam, Variorum, Aldershot, 1993. [Reprints of various articles,
including an analysis of the earliest mathematical methods for ﬁnding the qibla and a study of the orientation
of the Kaaba and its inﬂuence on mosque orientations.]
[6] D.A. King, Islamic astronomy, Astronomy Before the Telescope, Christopher B.F. Walker, ed., British Mu-
seum Press, London, 1996, repr. 1999, pp. 143–174. [An overview.]
[7] D.A. King, The Sacred Geography of Islam, to appear. [An analysis of the numerous medieval schemes of
folk geography in which the world was divided into sectors around the Kaaba; a summary is in the article
“Makka, iv” in the Encyclopaedia of Islam.]
[8] D.A. King, In Synchrony with the Heavens. Studies in Astronomical Timekeeping and Instrumentation in
Medieval Islamic Civilization, 2 vols., 1: The Call of the Muezzin (Studies I–IX), and 2: Instruments of
Mass Calculation (Studies X–XVIII), E.J. Brill, Leiden, 2004. [See especially VIIa: “The Orientation of
Medieval Islamic Religious Architecture and Cities”, ﬁrst published in Journal for the History of Astronomy
26 (1995), 253–274, and VIIb: “Architecture and Astronomy: The Ventilators of Medieval Cairo and Their
Secrets”, ﬁrst published in Journal of the American Oriental Society 104 (1984), 97–133. See also [9].]
[9] D.A. King, World-Maps for Finding the Direction and Distance of Mecca: Innovation and Tradition in Is-
lamic Science, E.J. Brill, Leiden, and Al-Furqan Islamic Heritage Foundation, London, 1999. [An overview
of the treatment of the qibla-problem by Muslim scholars and a detailed study of the two 17th-century
Mecca-centred world-maps with speculations on the source of their inspiration. The third world-map and
the newly-discovered 10th- and 11th-century treatises are introduced in King, In Synchrony with the Heav-
ens, VIIc.]
[10] D.A. King, J. Samsó, Astronomical handbooks and tables from the Islamic world (750–1900): An interim re-
port, Suhayl—Journal for the History of the Exact and Natural Sciences in Islamic Civilisation (Barcelona)
2 (2001), 9–105. [A supplement to E.S. Kennedy’s 1956 survey of Islamic zîjes, with some remarks on
qibla-tables and geographical tables displaying the qibla for numerous localities.]
[11] M. Rius, La Alquibla en al-Andalus y al-Magrib al-Aqsà, Anuari de Filologia (Universitat de Barcelona)
XXI (1998–1999) B-3, Institut “Millás Vallicrosa” de Història de la Ciència Àrab, Barcelona, 2000. [The
ﬁrst investigation of mosque orientations in the light of medieval folk astronomical and legal texts on the
qibla.]

CHAPTER 9
“Number Mystique” in Early Medieval
Computus Texts
Faith Wallis
Department of History, McGill University,
Stephen Leacock Building, 855 Sherbrooke Street West, Montreal, QC H3A 217 Canada
E-mail: faith.wallis@mcgill.ca
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181
1. The shape and scope of computus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183
2. Computus as ratio numerorum: the Irish computus of ca. 658 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 186
3. Computus as ratio temporum: Bede’s revision of computistical “number mystique”
. . . . . . . . . . . 191
4. Byrhtferth’s choices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 195
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
179


“Number mystique” in early medieval computus texts
181
Introduction
Around A.D. 1011, the English monk Byrhtferth of Ramsey composed a manual of com-
putus, the science of time-reckoning and calendar construction.1 The ﬁrst three books of
his Enchiridion explain the basic structure of the Julian solar calendar, the lunar cycle, and
the rules for coordinating the two to determine the date of Easter. The fourth and ﬁnal
book, however, is not about time or calendar problems; rather, it is “a handbook of the
Christian exegesis of numbers”, and is drawn almost entirely from theological sources.2
Byrhtferth’s own computus teacher, Abbo of Fleury, also wrote an exposition of the meta-
physics of number, but based on Boethius’ mathematical and logical writings, and cast
as a commentary on a multiplication table designed by a ﬁfth-century mathematician and
computist, Victorius of Aquitaine.3 Abbo’s numerology stands in the neo-Pythagorean and
neo-Platonic tradition of number metaphysics represented by the manuals of Nicomachus
of Gerasa, and conveyed to the Latin West by Boethius’ De arithmetica. This “philosoph-
ical numerology” derives the meaning of numbers from their mathematical properties: for
example, Abbo characterizes seven as the “virgin number” symbolizing wisdom and the
soul, because it is the only number less than ten which is not a product or a factor of any
other number less than ten.4 Byrhtferth, however, represents the Christian tradition of what
might be called “allegorical numerology”, where numbers derive their meanings from cor-
respondence to Biblical events or theological concepts, alone or in combination (usually
by addition or multiplication).5 Byrthferth makes no mention of the “virginity” of seven,
1Byrhtferth’s Enchiridion, ed. Peter S. Baker and Michael Lapidge, Early English Text Society S.S. 15, Oxford
University Press, Oxford (1995). Hereafter, Byrhtferth’s text will be cited as “Enchiridion”, followed by book
and section number, with the page reference in this edition in parentheses; references to Baker and Lapidge’s
introduction will be cited as “Baker and Lapidge”.
2Baker and Lapidge, p. lxxiii.
3Ed. Alison Peden, Abbo of Fleury and Ramsey: Commentary on the Calculus of Victorius of Aquitaine, Auc-
tores Britannici medii aevi 15, Oxford University Press for the British Academy, Oxford (2003). Portions of
Abbo’s commentary were printed by W. Christ, Über das argumentum calculandi des Victorius und dessen Com-
mentar, Sitzungsberichte der bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, phil.-hist. Kl. (1863), pp. 100–152. Vic-
torius’ Calculus was edited by G. Friedlein, Der Calculus des Victorius, Zeitschrift für Mathematik und Physik
7 (1871), 42–79. For analysis of Abbo’s commentary, see G.R. Evans and A.M. Peden, Natural Science and the
Liberal Arts in Abbo of Fleury’s Commentary on the Calculus of Victorius of Aquitaine, Viator 16 (1985), 109–
127, and A. van de Vyver, Les oeuvres inédits d’Abbon de Fleury, Revue bénédicine 47 (1935), 139–140; on
Abbo’s number metaphysic, see Alison Peden, Unity, Order and Ottonian Kingship in the Thought of Abbo of
Fleury, Belief and Culture in the Middle Ages: Studies Presented to Henry Mayr-Harting, ed. Richard Gameson
and Henrietta Leyser, Oxford University Press, Oxford (2001).
4Abbo, Commentary 3.17 (ed. Peden, 82–83); cf. Evans and Peden, p. 118.
5Classical number metaphysics: Walter Burkert, Lore and Science in Ancient Pythagoreanism, transl. Edwin
J. Minar Jr., Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA (1972); I. Mueller, Mathematical Method and Philo-
sophical Truth, Cambridge Companion to Plato, ed. R. Kraut, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1992),
pp. 170–199; Dominic J. O’Meara, Pythagoras Revived: Mathematics and Philosophy in Late Antiquity, Claren-
don Press, Oxford (1990). Christian number symbolism: Heinrich Meyer, Die Zahlenallegorese im Mittelalter:
Methode und Gebrauch, Münstersche Mittelalter-Schriften 25, Fink, Munich (1975) and Lexikon der mittelal-
terlichen Zahlenbedeutungen, Münstersche Mittelalter-Schriften 56, Fink, Munich (1987). These replace older
syntheses such as V.F. Hopper, Medieval Number Symbolism, Columbia University Studies in English and Com-
parative Literature 131, Columbia University Press, New York (1938). For an accessible overview, see R.A. Peck,
“Number as Cosmic Language”, By Things Seen: Reference and Recognition in Medieval Thought, ed. David L.
Jeffrey, University of Ottawa Press, Ottawa (1975), pp. 47–50.

182
F. Wallis
save perhaps in his elliptical statement that “the number seven commences with unity (that
is, from one) and thus it proceeds reverently, with complete holiness, to the triumph of its
perfection”.6 Rather, seven is meaningful because it is the sum of three, the number of the
Trinity, and four, the number of the Gospels, and because the gifts of the Holy Spirit are
seven.
Christian numerology, as conveyed in handbooks for Bible study like Isidore of Seville’s
Liber de numeris, or in the commentaries of patristic and early medieval exegetes, is the
fusion of this exegetical allegorical tradition with a Christianized version of the cosmolog-
ical and contemplative philosophical tradition. Following the lead of Jewish exegetes like
Philo, the Church Fathers took over the Pythagorean–Platonic concept of number as the
structural principle of the cosmos, and re-framed it in the light of Wisdom 11.20: “But thou
hast arranged all things by measure and number and weight.” This text became the mantra
of Christian philosophical numerology.7 Number was the blue-print of a divinely-designed
creation (not an eternal, divine cosmos), and was therefore the key to understanding the
mind of Creation’s God. In this way, Christian thinkers appropriated not only the cosmo-
logical framework of ancient number-lore, but also its contemplative and ascetic potential.
For the pagan philosopher, meditating on number was a way to train oneself to think about
abstract and immaterial entities, and to purify the soul through harmony and proportion;8
for the Christian theologian, that immateriality and harmony was a revelation of God Him-
self, the source of all beatitude. That it was possible to fuse philosophical and allegorical
numerology is exempliﬁed by Augustine’s assertion that the mathematical “perfection” of
the number 6 (because it is the sum of its factors) explains why God chose to make the
universe in six days as a sign of Creation’s perfection.9 But the fact that Byrhtferth and
Abbo could opt to follow separate strands of the tradition should alert us to the fact that
their fusion was neither total nor automatic, even in Augustine. In De doctrina christiana,
his essay on the erudition appropriate for the Christian intellectual, Augustine discusses
the science of numbers in connection with the role of the Liberal Arts in Christian intel-
lectual life, and also in relation to the knowledge base needed by the exegete and preacher.
First, he observes that though mathematics is classiﬁed with “useful knowledge of human
origin”, it is in fact divinely instituted, since its rules exist independently of human inter-
vention: Virgil could change the pronunciation of “Italia”, but no one can change the fact
the three times three equal nine. The truths of number are not invented, but discovered, and
for this reason the study of the science of number is an ascesis through which one learns
to appreciate the immense difference between immutable divine truth and the mutable hu-
man mind. If one does not learn this, one may still be considered erudite, but one would
6Enchiridion 4.1 (208.174–176).
7Israel Peri, ‘Omnia mensura et numero et pondere disposuisti’: Die Auslegung von Weish. 11,20 in der latein-
ischen Patristik, Mensura: Mass, Zahl, Zahlensymbolik im Mittelalter, ed. Albert Zimmermann, Miscellanea me-
diaevalia 16, De Gruyter, Berlin (1983), 1.1–21.
8This idea would have been familiar to medieval readers through Macrobius, In Somnium Scipionis 1.5.4, ed.
J. Willis, Teubner, Leipzig (1963), 15.9–17.
9Augustine, De civitate Dei 11.30, ed. B. Dombart and A. Kalb, Corpus Christianorum series latina (hereafter
abbreviated CCSL) 48, Brepols, Turnhout (1955), pp. 1–12; De Genesi ad litteram 4.2, ed. I. Zycha, Corpus
scriptorum ecclesiasticorum latinorum 28.1, Temsky, Vienna (1894), 97.19–98.22; cf. Boethius, De institutione
arithmetica 1.19, ed. G. Friedlein, Teubner, Leipzig (1867), 41.6–15.

“Number mystique” in early medieval computus texts
183
not be wise.10 This is a lapidary statement of patristic “philosophical numerology”. But in
the passage which immediately follows, Augustine takes a completely different tack. He
envisions the production of a Christian encyclopaedia geared to the three kinds of signs
found in Scripture: words, things, and numbers. Because ignorance of these matters leads
to misunderstanding of ﬁgural expressions in Scripture, Augustine proposes that someone
compile a reference work containing all the place names, facts of natural history, and num-
bers mentioned in the Bible—but only those numbers mentioned in the Bible—so that the
Christian student would not have to waste time laboriously searching out information on
these topics.11 From being an open-ended process of meditation based on mathematical
procedures, “number” here becomes a mode of explaining a corpus of literary allusions.
It is “allegorical numerology”. Though Augustine included both, and could imagine their
congruence, they were distinct in their scope and their epistemic objects.
Byrhtferth’s treatment of number symbolism is fairly conventional, and as I indicated,
largely “allegorical” in its approach. However, in one critical respect it is rather unusual: it
is found in a manual of computus. His editors have expressed puzzlement that this section
of the Enchiridion seems not to have come to attention of either medieval or modern stu-
dents of Christian number symbolism.12 But why would anyone look for number symbol-
ism in a computus textbook? Number symbolism is about the interpretation of Scripture,
or if one follows the philosophic tradition represented by Abbo, about the disciplina of
arithmetic as a propaedeutic to philosophy or theology. Computus was neither of these.
The aim of this essay is to explain the presence of book 4 in Byrhtferth’s Enchiridion. It
will do this by showing how computus became a major vehicle for ideas about the meta-
physical and religious dimensions of number in the early Middle Ages. It will also discuss
how computus appropriated and shaped those ideas to create what I would term a “num-
ber mystique”—a rhetorical claim to profound signiﬁcance, lofty philosophical pedigree,
and even religious mystery, based on the identiﬁcation of time-reckoning with numerus.
Finally, it will consider the challenge to this mystique set out by Bede, and suggest some
reasons why Byrhtferth might have chosen to ignore that challenge.
1. The shape and scope of computus
Computus—the science and technique of calendar construction—is an application of as-
tronomy and arithmetic to an essentially religious problem.13 Though pre-Christian math-
ematicians and astronomers addressed many issues related to calendar construction, it was
10De doctrina christiana 2.38.56–57, ed. Joseph Martin, CCSL 32 (1961), 71.1–72.24. Cf. Peck, p. 49.
11Ibid., 2.39.59 (72.24–73.47, esp. 36–38).
12Baker and Lapidge, pp. lxxiii–lxxiv, esp. p. lxxiii n. 3.
13For a bibliographical overview of general and technical scholarship on computus, see Bede: The Reckoning of
Time, transl. Faith Wallis, Liverpool University Press, Liverpool (1999), pp. 430–431, and Faith Wallis, Chronol-
ogy and Systems of Dating, in: Medieval Latin Studies: an Introduction and Bibliographic Guide, ed. George
Rigg and Frank A.C. Mantello, Catholic University of America Press, Washington, DC (1996), pp. 383–387.
Brief, reliable, and up-to-date introductions include: Stephen McCluskey, Astronomies and Cultures in Early Me-
dieval Europe, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1998), Chs. 5 and 8; Georges Declercq, Anno Domini:
the Origins of the Christian Era, Brepols, Turnhout (2000); and Baker and Lapidge’s introduction to Byrhtferth’s
Enchiridion, pp. xxxiv–xl.

184
F. Wallis
the speciﬁcally religious context of Christian theology, cultic practice, and ecclesiastical
discipline which created computus as a distinctive domain of learning in Middle Ages.
The medieval computist had to account for the precepts of divine law (the rules governing
Passover in the Old Testament) and the data of sacred history (the account of Christ’s pas-
sion and resurrection in the Gospels), as well as the motions of the heavenly bodies, and
the conventions of the Julian calendar. He had to harmonize all this data and reduce it to
a formula, and ideally, to a cycle, expressed in mathematical terms. Hence computus by
its very nature embodies a profound concern for the relationship of mathematics and the
divine.
However, it is not easy to deﬁne the precise character of that concern. The corpus of
medieval computistica is vast, and largely still unpublished. Much of it is anonymous,
derivative, and “uncanonized”—that is, it is not presented as authoritative texts to be faith-
fully transmitted and reverently expounded, but as an unstructured body of material which
can freely be excerpted, interpolated, re-arranged, or adapted according to particular tastes
and needs.14 Moreover, its principal documents are not texts, or even mathematical formu-
lae, but tables: the Julian solar calendar equipped with formulae (argumenta) or auxiliary
tables with instructions (canones) to customize its information to any given year, and the
Paschal listing the dates of Easter and related information for a sequence of years or a
cycle of years.15 Parallel to this graphic literature of computus is a body of textual litera-
ture which can broadly be divided into two genres: didactic and controversial. The premier
textbook of computus, Bede’s De temporum ratione (725) contains elements of both. Its
didactic style and materials were widely imitated, condensed, glossed and updated in later
centuries.16 But it also aimed to prove the superiority of the Alexandrian computus of
Dionysius Exiguus over its rivals, particularly an older Roman computus which continued
to be used in the British and some Irish churches, and the system of Victorius of Aquitaine.
It can be claimed that Bede’s work settled these controversies forever, but by the 11th
century, new subjects of debate had appeared, notably the problem of reconciling Diony-
sius’ annus domini chronology to the historical and astronomical data of Christ’s Passion.
The new astronomy of the 12th and 13th centuries, based on Greco-Arabic documents and
instrumentation, opened further problems: the progressive advance of the vernal equinox
away from its ofﬁcial calendar date of 21 March, and the widening gap between the calcu-
lated and observed ages of the Moon. As equinox and lunar phase were the astronomical
markers for Easter, this discrepancy between nature and convention was troubling. Various
14Canonized and uncanonized texts: Faith Wallis, The Experience of the Book: Manuscripts, Texts, and the
Role of Epistemology in Early Medieval Medicine, in: Knowledge and the Scholarly Medical Traditions, ed. Don
G. Bates, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1995), pp. 101–126. Computus as “uncanonized” knowledge:
Faith Wallis, The Church, the World and the Time, in: Normes et pouvoirs à la ﬁn du moyen âge, ed. Marie-Claude
Desprez-Masson. Inedita et rara 7, Ceres, Montreal (1990), pp. 15–29; Baker and Lapidge, pp. xl–lx.
15There are variations on this formula: in the early medieval period, a computus MS might be structured around
more or less stable dossiers of controversial and didactic material; the Carolingian period sees the emergence of
the “classbook” or encyclopaedic anthology of quadrivial sciences, with computus at the core; in the Scholastic
period, computus texts were often part of the corpus astronomicum. These will be discussed in my forthcoming
volume for the series Typologie des sources du moyen âge occidental, entitled Computus: Manuscripts, Texts and
Tables.
16See The Reckoning of Time, pp. lxxxv–xcvii.

“Number mystique” in early medieval computus texts
185
solutions to these problems were debated from the 13th to the 16th centuries, culminating
in the Gregorian reform of the calendar in 1582.
Computus therefore covers a broad spectrum of graphic and literary production on calen-
dar construction spanning more than twelve centuries of Christian history. It was regarded
throughout this period as a branch of clerical vocational learning, though after the 12th
century a parallel secularized form of calendar science, allied to Scholastic astronomy and
astrology, emerged. Nonetheless, most computus literature, including the most inﬂuential
works such as De temporum ratione, takes a matter-of-fact approach to the mathemati-
cal dimensions of calendar reckoning. Computus demands some skill in calculation, but
no mathematical theory. Moreover, it does not self-evidently lend itself to numerological
treatment, because most of its data is furnished by astronomical fact, not Scripture or meta-
physics. There is no inherent mystique to the 19 years of the Metonic lunar cycle, or the
29 1
2 days of the lunation, or the 365 1
4 days of the solar year, and for the most part, com-
putists did not attempt to furnish any. In the case of Bede, the exception which proves the
rule is 7, the number of the Christian week. The requirement to celebrate Easter only on
Sunday introduced the week into the design of a formula for determining the date of Easter.
However, the week is a time-unit like no other. Though the periods and cycles of the Sun
and Moon served as “signs ... for seasons and for days and years” (Genesis 1.14, cf. De
temporum ratione, Ch. 6), the observance of the week was mandated by God directly, and
is not governed by the heavens. In Ch. 2 of De temporum ratione, Bede gives the week as
the classical example of “authoritative”, as distinct from “natural” time-reckoning.17 The
week is the only division of time which inspires Bede to reﬂect on the symbolism of num-
ber, for it typiﬁes the seven-fold structure of all sacred time. There are not only weeks of
weeks—the seven-times-seven days between Easter and Pentecost—but weeks of years,
both solar and lunar (Ch. 8). All of history is scanned into seven ages, which correspond
to the seven ages of human life and the seven days of the historic weeks of Creation and
Our Lord’s Passion (Ch. 10, 66). Bede took this latter concept from his reading of the
Fathers, especially Augustine, from whom he borrowed as well his understanding of the
eschatological dimensions of the cosmic week—the sabbath rest of the Church Expectant
in heaven, and the everlasting Lord’s Day which will follow the end of time (Ch. 71).18
What is exceptional about the week and the symbolism of 7 is that it is all but unique in
De temporum ratione. For example, the 12 months and the 12 zodiac signs are discussed
without the slightest mention of the rich Christian symbolism of this number, the number
of the patriarchs and apostles, of the gems on the High Priest’s breast-plate and the gates of
the apocalyptic New Jerusalem. This is particularly surprising in that Bede revels in such
contrapuntal allegorical numerology in his exegetical and hagiographical works.19
17C.W. Jones (ed.), Bedae opera didascalica 2, CCSL 123B (1977), 274.14–18; transl. F. Wallis, p. 13. Cf. Ch. 8,
where Bede rejects as “the foolishness of the Gentiles” the idea that the seven-day week was derived from the
seven planets (302.58; transl. F. Wallis, p. 34).
18The Reckoning of Time, pp. 353–375.
19Examples are cited by Claude Jenkins, Bede as Exegete and Theologian, in: Bede, his Life, Times and Writings,
ed. A.H. Thompson, Clarendon Press, Oxford (1935), pp. 173–180; and Walter Berschin, ‘Opus deliberatum ac
perfectum’: Why did the Venerable Bede Write a Second Prose Life of St. Cuthbert? in: St. Cuthbert, His Cult and
Community to AD 1200, ed. Gerald Bonner, David Rollason and Clare Stancliffe, Boydell, Woodbridge (1989),
pp. 95–102. On the relationship of the 12 stones of the High Priest’s rationale to the 12 patriarchs, apostles, months

186
F. Wallis
That being said, Byrhtferth’s inclusion of a major exposition on number symbolism in
his computus manual is far from eccentric or accidental. In fact, Byrhtferth is tapping into a
tradition about computus which Bede actively rejected, a distinctively computistical “num-
ber mystique”. This number mystique is the consequence of the cultural role of computus in
the Middle Ages, and particularly in the period before 1100, when words like “philosophy”
and “mathematics” were little more than labels on ancient boxes whose contents could no
longer be located. For many computists, the calendar actually ﬁlled those boxes, and in
doing so served as a vehicle for equally venerable notions of the metaphysical properties
of number, and of the value of mathematics as spiritual ascesis.
2. Computus as ratio numerorum: the Irish computus of ca. 658
One of our oldest witnesses to this number mystique is a tract on computus in dialogue
form, composed in Ireland about A.D. 658.20 It opens with an exordium not ascribed to
either participant in the dialogue (magister or discipulus), but which presumably represents
the doctrina of the magister:
Concerning the four divisions of Scripture, Augustine says: “Four things are necessary in the
Church of God: the divine law (canon) in which the future life is described and foretold/preached
( praedicatur); history, in which deeds are recounted; number, in which future events and divine
celebrations are reckoned up ( facta futurorum et solemnitates diuinae dinumerantur); grammar,
in which the science of words is understood. Therefore there are four parts of Scripture: divine
law, history, number, and grammar.21
The source of this statement of “Augustine” has not been traced, but the closest cognate
appears to be De Genesi ad litteram: In libris autem omnibus sanctis intueri oportet, quae
ibi aeterna intimentur, quae facta narrentur, quae futura praenuntientur, quae agenda prae-
cipiantur uel admoneantur (“In every book of Scripture, it behooves one to take cognizance
of what matters pertaining to eternity are intimated therein, what deeds are recounted, what
future events are foretold, and what it commands or admonishes us to do.”).22 If this is what
the author of the Irish computus thought he was quoting, then the changes introduced to the
original are very signiﬁcant indeed. Augustine is outlining four modes of Biblical exegesis:
the literal (quae facta narrentur), the allegorical (quae ibi aeterna intimentur), the anagogi-
cal (quae futura praenuntientur) and the moral or tropological (quae agenda praecipiantur
uel admoneantur). The Irish author has transformed these into topics or disciplines: sacred
law replaces tropology; history corresponds to the literal meaning; grammar to allegory;
and “number” to the anagogical mode. It is noteworthy that in common with most early
and zodiac signs, see, for example, De tabernaculo 3, ed. D. Hurst, CCSL 119B (1969), 111.737–113.787; transl.
Arthur G. Holder, Translated Texts for Historians 18, Liverpool University Press, Liverpool (1994), pp. 129–130.
20This tract is composed of the text entitled De computo dialogus in PL 90.647–652, and the piece which follows,
De divisionibus temporum (653–664). The prologue and capitula were edited by C.W. Jones, Bedae opera de
temporibus, Mediaeval Academy of America. Publications, 41, Mediaeval Academy of America, Cambridge, MA
(1943), pp. 393–395, and by Alfred Cordoliani, Une encyclopédie carolingienne [sic] de comput: les Sententiae
in laude computi, Bibliothèque de l’École des Chartes 104 (1943), 237–242. Dr Dáibhi Ó Cróinín of University
College, Galway, is preparing a critical edition.
21PL 90. 647D. My translation.
22De Genesi ad litteram 1.1 (3.7–10).

“Number mystique” in early medieval computus texts
187
medieval writers, on computus or other topics, the Irish teacher avoids the ambiguous term
“mathematics”, which could connote either mathematics in our modern sense, or astrol-
ogy.23 The preferred terms are numerus or ratio numerorum. The latter term incorporated
its own ambiguity: “reckoning numbers” or “explaining the meaning of numbers”. The
ﬁrst opened up the possibility of philosophical numerology; the second invited allegorical
numerology. However, the Irish writer’s equation of number speciﬁcally with the power to
“reckon up future events and divine celebrations” indicates that “number” here is a syn-
onym for computus. This identiﬁcation is elaborated as the prologue continues:
In praise of computus, Isidore says: “The ratio of numbers is not to be scorned, for it reveals the
mystery contained in many passages of Holy Scripture. Not in vain is it said of God [in Wisdom
11.21]: ‘Thou hast made all things in measure, number and weight’. The number six, perfect in
its factors, proclaims the perfection of the cosmos by a certain numerical signiﬁcance. Likewise
the forty days wherein Moses, Elijah and our Lord himself fasted cannot be understood without
a knowledge of number. There are other numbers in Holy Scripture whose symbolism ( ﬁguras)
can only be unravelled by those knowledgeable in this science. Using the science of numbers, we
have an ability to stand fast (consistere) to some degree, when through this science we discuss
the course of the months or learn the span of the revolving year. Indeed through number we are
taught so that we do not fall into confusion. Take number away, and everything lapses into ruin.
Remove computus from the world, and blind ignorance will envelop everything, nor can men who
are ignorant of how to calculate be distinguished from other animals”.24
This passage comes from Etymologiae 3.4, where Isidore introduces arithmetic as one
of the four branches of mathematics, and as the citation of Wisdom 11.21 would sug-
gest, it leads into a discussion of the properties of different kinds of numbers based on
philosophical numerology—though the allusion to Scriptural exegesis indicates Isidore’s
awareness of the parallel allegorical tradition. But Isidore’s discussion of mathematics is
not related directly to time-reckoning or the calendar, which he reserves for other sections
of his encyclopaedia (the motions of the Sun and Moon in book 3, the units of time in book
5, and the Paschal reckoning in book 6, under the rubric of “ecclesiastical disciplines”).
Moreover, Isidore’s praise of computus—by which, it will be noted, he means simply
“computation”—is a tissue of quotations from sources which have nothing to do with the
calendar. The Augustinian borrowings are from exegetical and theological works,25 and
concern Biblical number symbolism. Cassiodorus’ Institutiones 2.4.7 inspired the ﬁnal sec-
tion of this passage, beginning at “Using the science of numbers ...”. Here Cassiodorus is
also discussing the mathematical properties of number in the “philosophical numerology”
mode. His words echo those of Augustine in De libero arbitrio,26 but he has altered Au-
gustine’s perspective in a signiﬁcant way. For Augustine, “number” is the vehicle by which
eternal Form is embodied in particular, material things. We can only know things insofar
as they have “number”, that is, insofar as they possess form. “Take away these forms”,
23Contrast Isidore, Etymologiae 3, praef. (mathematica as science of abstract quantity) and 8.9.24–26 (mathe-
matici as astrologers).
24PL 90. 647D–648D.
25“The ratio of numbers ... measure, number and weight”: cf. Augustine, De civitate Dei 11.30 (350.31–35).
“The number six ... a certain numerical signiﬁcance”: ibid. (350.1–9). “Likewise the forty days ... without a
knowledge of number”: cf. Augustine, De doctrina christiana 2.16.25 (50.53–57).
26“Using the science of numbers ... distinguished from other animals”: cf. Cassiodorus, Institutiones 2.4.7, ed.
R.A.B. Mynors, Clarendon Press, Oxford (1937), pp. 141.1–7; Augustine, De libero arbitrio 2.16.24, ed. W.M.
Green, CCSL 29 (1970), 265.25–26.

188
F. Wallis
he says, “and there will be nothing”. Cassiodorus, however, is writing in praise of arith-
metic and its manifold usefulness. For Cassiodorus, the comprehension of number is not
the contemplation of forms, but the ability to calculate: “Take it away from the generation
of those who now possess it, and blind ignorance will encompass all things; he who does
not understand reckoning cannot be distinguished from the other animals”. Calculation is
useful for many things—ﬁnancial accounting, for example, and also the reckoning of time,
and it contributes to both intellectual and ethical discipline. The Irish author, however, sin-
gles out time-reckoning as the unique application of “the science of numbers”, and ignores
the others mentioned by Cassiodorus. “Computus” has acquired an exclusively calendrical
connotation here,27 without losing entirely its connection to the wider ﬁeld encompassed
by the Christian revision of classical philosophical numerology.
That connection is, in fact, celebrated by the Irish writer:
DISCIPULUS: We would like to know where this calculation of numbers ﬁrst came from.
MAGISTER: From God, of course, because all wisdom and knowledge comes from the Lord God,
by whom all things were made.
DISCIPULUS: So tell me when this calculating was ﬁrst discovered.
MAGISTER: At the time when the creatures were made, that is, at the beginning of the universe.
That is when number ﬁrst began; as we read in Genesis, “And the evening and the morning were
the ﬁrst day” [Genesis 1.5]. He spoke of night and day when he said “evening” (that is, night)
and “morning” (that is, day). But he spoke of number when he said “the ﬁrst day”, the second,
third, fourth, ﬁfth, sixth and seventh. God spoke of number again when he said about the sun
and moon, “And they shall be signs for seasons and days and years” [Genesis 1.14]. For who
can understand days and seasons and years except by number. Boethius says: Everything which
is fashioned from the ﬁrst nature of things (a prima rerum natura), is perceived to be given form
by the ratio of numbers. For this was the principal exemplar in the Creator’s mind. From it is
derived the multiplicity of the four elements, and from it the changes of the seasons, and from it
we understand the cycle (conversio) of the motion of the stars and of the heavens. Boethius also
says: Properly speaking, every course of the stars and every astronomical ratio is constituted by
the nature of numbers itself (ipsa natura numerorum). For thus we compute (colligimus) risings
and settings, thus we track the slowing down and acceleration of the planets, thus we come to
know the eclipses and manifold variations of the Moon.28
The Irish computist argues that time-reckoning is the primary manifestation of the role
of number in generating and structuring God’s creation. It is particularly signiﬁcant that
“number” is seen as prior to astronomy, a point which, as we shall see below, Bede chal-
lenged. But number is also a human science, and the foundation of “philosophy”. Indeed,
number is synonymous with philosophy.
DISCIPULUS: This art—that is, number: what it is general name?
MAGISTER: Philosophy, to be sure, because all wisdom is called philosophy.29
Not only are number and philosophy all but identical, but philosophy itself is deﬁned in
the most sweeping of terms:
DISCIPULUS: How is philosophy deﬁned?
MAGISTER: Isidore deﬁnes it like this, saying: “Philosophy is the knowledge of things human
and divine”. This example shows that all wisdom, whether divine or human, is called philosophy.
27Changing meanings of computus: The Reckoning of Time, Appendix 4.
28PL 90.649A–B. The author is quoting from Boethius, De institutione arithmetica 1.2 (12.14–19), and 1.1
(12.6–10).
29PL 90.649B.

“Number mystique” in early medieval computus texts
189
Again, here is another deﬁnition of philosophy. “Philosophy is probable knowledge, insofar as this
is possible, of divine and human things. And here is another deﬁnition of philosophy. “Philosophy
is the art of arts and the discipline of disciplines”.30
Then in a surprising turnabout, but one prepared by Isidore of Seville himself, our author
proceeds to merge philosophy into Scripture, while retaining its secular origins:
DISCIPULUS: How many divisions of philosophy are there?
MAGISTER: Three: namely, physical, ethical, and logical—that is, natural, moral and rational.
Hence Isidore says: “The form of philosophy is in three parts. One is natural, which in Greek is
called φυσικη that is, physics, in which the investigation of nature is discussed. The second is
moral, which amongst the Greeks is called ηθικη, that is, ethics, and which deals with conduct.
The third is rational, designated by the Greek word λογικη, that is, logic, in which, by disputa-
tion, truth itself is sought out, for instance, with respect to the causes of things or the conduct
of life. Therefore the cause of inquiry is in physics, the order of discovery in ethics, and the law
of understanding in logic [Etym. 2.24.3–4].” Hence, once again, there are three divisions of wis-
dom: physics, ethics and logic. The divine utterances consist of these three types of philosophy,
for either they are wont to speak of nature, as in Genesis, Ecclesiastes, Proverbs, the Epistles of
the Apostle Paul, or in the Song of Songs, and in the Gospels, and many other books, or else of
conduct, or else of the higher celestial mysteries, that is, of logic [Cf. Etym. 2.24.8].
DISCIPULUS: Who discovered these three parts of philosophy?
MAGISTER: Thales of Miletus, one of the seven sages of Greece, discovered physics; Socrates
discovered ethics; the philosopher Plato discovered logic.31
This delicate tight-rope walk between philosophy and the Bible has a very precise goal:
to establish computus as the key to the relationship between number and the Divine, in
line with the patristic revision of philosophical numerology. Computus, the Magister goes
on to explain, is part of physica, but though physica is glossed “natural science”, it is in
fact the mathematical quadrivium. Of the four mathematical arts, arithmetic is the ﬁrst in
importance, for it is the exemplar of God’s creative work.
DISCIPULUS: Of these four divisions of physica, that is, of natural science, which should be
learned ﬁrst?
MAGISTER: Arithmetic, without doubt. It is the beginning, and takes the role of mother to the
others, so to speak. For arithmetic is prior to all, because God, the creator of all this mass of the
cosmos, had [arithmetic] as the ﬁrst model of his reasoning [ primum suae habuit ratiocinationis
exemplar]. From her he constituted everything, that is, by numbers he constituted and arranged all
the elements.32
Arithmetic, synonymous with “number”, which was earlier equated with computus, is
both the foundation of philosophy and the governing principle of a creation ordered by
“measure, number and weight”. The climax of this intertwining of classical and Chris-
tian approaches to number is the endowing of number/arithmetic/computus with a double
pedigree, divine (Abraham and Moses) and human (Pythagoras, Apuleius and Boethius).
DISCIPULUS: Who ﬁrst discovered number amongst the Hebrews and the Egyptians?
MAGISTER: Amongst the Hebrews, Abraham ﬁrst discovered number, and then Moses; and Abra-
ham transmitted this science of number to the Egyptians, and taught it to them. So says Josephus.
DISCIPULUS: Who ﬁrst possessed this science of number amongst the Greeks and Latins?
30PL 90. 649B–C, quoting Etymologiae 2.24.1, 9, 3–4, and 8.
31PL 90. 649C–D.
32PL 90. 650A.

190
F. Wallis
MAGISTER: Pythagoras amongst the Greeks; Apuleius and Boethius amongst the Latins. Hence
Isidore says: They say that Pythagoras as the ﬁrst amongst the Greeks to write about the disci-
pline of number, and that Nicomachus thereafter described it in a more extended manner, and that
Apuleius and then Boethius translated this into Latin.33
The Irish computus of ca. 658 endows calendar science with “number mystique”—an
essentially rhetorical claim to a distinguished pedigree, a close afﬁliation with philosophy,
and a profound religious power, all based on the identiﬁcation of time-reckoning with nu-
merus. Numerus both captures and re-writes the core ideas of Christianized Pythagorean–
Platonic numerology:the creation ordered by measure, number and weight becomes specif-
ically the order of time, and the hierarchy of its divisions, which together form the theme
of the second half of the Irish treatise. Though rhetorical in character, this mystique is not
purely literary decoration, but appears to have inspired some distinctive practices in Irish
computistical works. A notable feature of these texts is the interest in mathematical calcu-
lations which go well beyond what is necessary for calendrical purposes. For example, the
author of the anonymous 7th century De ratione conputandi sets his students problems in-
volving the calculation of extremely minute divisions of time which have no computistical
application.34 In Irish circles, the dry computistical formula or argumentum (“If you wish
to know X, take Y, multiply by Z...”) stimulated the production of numerous imitations
and variations, many of which have little or no relevance for the calendar. It was arithmetic
for its own sake.35
Computus’ number mystique arises from a complex cultural process, in which the an-
cient concept of the arts as a preparation for philosophy mutates into the notion that the
arts are a repository of erudition for the Christian intellectual. The handbook for Bible
studies proposed by Augustine in De doctrina christiana never materialized; moreover, he
appears to assume that someone in search of the ﬁrst, or philosophical kind of number-lore
would know where to turn. In practice, then, “number” as a branch of doctrina christiana
had no canon of literature. Cassiodorus, acting on Augustine’s assumption, collected and
described the appropriate ancient mathematical treatises for his monks. But most of the
works listed in the Institutiones were not readily available to western Europeans in ensuing
centuries: even Boethius’ De arithmetica was little known, outside some Irish circles, until
the Carolingian period.36 What was generally available, for example in Isidore’s Etymolo-
gies, was relatively diluted. In consequence, much mathematics and physica was cut adrift
without a secure “address” in the new Christian scheme of learning. Computus came, willy
nilly, to offer a legitimate Christian shelter to these refugees from the ancient scientiﬁc
encyclopaedia, and inherited its mystique. It was not the only applied science to do this:
the technical literature of the agrimensores or surveyors sometimes offers reﬂections on
33PL 90. 650A–B. The quotation from Isidore is from Etymologiae 3.2.
34De ratione conputandi 108–109, ed. Dáibhí Ó Cróinín, in: Maura Walsh and Dáibhí Ó Cróinín (eds.), Cum-
mian’s Letter ‘De controversia paschali’ and the ‘De ratione conputandi’. Studies and Texts 86, Pontiﬁcal Insti-
tute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto (1988), pp. 209–210.
35Jones, Bedae Opera de temporibus, p. 71; Baker and Lapidge, p. xli.
36Gillian R. Evans, Introductions to Boethius’ Arithmetica of the Tenth to the Fourteenth Century, History of
Science 16 (1978), 22–41. Irish use of De arithmetica: Walsh and Ó Cróinín, Cummian’s Letter, p. 122, and Ó
Cróinín, The Irish as Mediators of Antique Culture on the Continent, Science in Western and Eastern Civilization
in Carolingian Times, ed. P.L. Butzer and D. Lohrmann, Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel (1993), p. 44.

“Number mystique” in early medieval computus texts
191
the spiritual and intellectual ascesis of studying geometry quite analogous to the “num-
ber mystique” of the Irish computus.37 Computus, however, was distinctive in that it had
an explicitly Christian religious mission, which allowed it to absorb allegorical numerol-
ogy into its mystique. The potential scope of computus was also broader than that of the
agrimensores texts: “time” was an elastic container which would accommodate, besides
arithmetic and astronomy, materials on geography (the latitudes or climates deﬁned by
the varying lengths of the days), meteorology (the weather patterns of the seasons), mu-
sic and prosody (acoustic phenomena in time), and even physiology and medicine (season
regimina). One can see this in the shape of early computus manuscript anthologies, which
incorporate an ever-expanding halo of extra-computistical scientiﬁc material.38 The core
of this material is arithmetic and astronomy, so when the Carolingian intellectuals sought
to recover the ancient philosophical curriculum, they found the materials for two of the
seven arts—arithmetic and astronomy—on the pages of computi.39
It would seem, then, Byrhtferth’s justiﬁcation for including a whole book dedicated to
number symbolism in his Enchiridion was the tradition of computistical number mystique
represented by the Irish computus text discussed above. That tradition was, as we shall
see, taken up by the Carolingian computists who most inﬂuenced Byrhtferth, particularly
Hrabanus Maurus. The story could end here, but it does not, for Byrhtferth, like Hrabanus
before him, drew heavily on Bede’s De temporum ratione for his treatise. And De tempo-
rum ratione promotes a different view of the relationship of computus to mathematics, one
which is actually hostile to “number mystique”.
3. Computus as ratio temporum: Bede’s revision of computistical “number
mystique”
It would be difﬁcult to exaggerate the importance of Bede’s De temporum ratione in the
evolution of computus in the Middle Ages. Besides being a superbly lucid and well-
organized text-book, and a persuasive argument in favour of the Alexandrian computus,
this book is also a response to Augustine’s proposal for a Christian encyclopaedia, in that
it fuses computus with chronology (cf. De doctrina christiana 2.28.42–43) on the one
hand, and natural history, especially cosmology, geography and physiology on the other.40
37Kurt Reindel, Vom Beginn des Quadriviums, Deutsches Archiv zur Erforschung des Mittelalters 16 (1959),
519–520.
38Probably the oldest extant computus MS, Vatican City BAV Reg. lat. 2077 (s. VII in., from Vivarium or
a monastery in its orbit) contains, apart from Paschal tables, a treatise on the seven prophetic weeks, and a
wind-rose: in short, a representation of allegorical numerology, and a token of the scientiﬁc “halo”: F. Troncar-
elli, Il consolato dell’Anticristo, Studi medievali 3. ser. 30 (1989), 567–592, esp. p. 573, and ibid., Una pietà
più profonda. Scienze et medicina nella cultura monastica medievale italiana, Dall’eremo al cenobio. La civiltà
monastica italiana dalle origini all’età di Dante, Scheiwiller, Milan (1987), Fig. 536 (see also pp. 706–708).
39Dispersal of mathematics in the early Middle Ages into “functional” settings such as computus: Michael
S. Mahoney, Mathematics, Science in the Middle Ages, ed. David Lindberg, University of Chicago Press, Chicago
(1978), pp. 145–150; and Stephen McCluskey, Astronomies and Cultures, passim. Computus as vehicle for
quadrivium in early Middle Ages: Brigitte Englisch, Die Artes liberales im frühen Mittelalter (5.–9. Jh.): Das
Quadrivium und der Komputus als Indikatoren für Kontinuität und Erneuerung der exacten Wissenschaften zwi-
schen Antike und Mittelalter. Sudhoffs Archiv, Beiheft 33, Franz Steiner, Stuttgart (1994).
40The Reckoning of Time, pp. lxiii–lxxi.

192
F. Wallis
However, the “science of number” in either its philosophical or its allegorical mode, plays
a surprisingly subdued role. This is all the more surprising in that Bede deﬁnitely knew
the Irish computus of ca. 658.41 But unlike the Irish computus, De temporum ratione con-
tains no general disquisition on “number”, no encomium from Isidore or quotations from
Boethius.42 Bede never considers computus as a domain of knowledge that can be deﬁned
in its own right; indeed, he uses the term computus only twice, and without comment (once
in the title of Ch. 1, and once in the chronicle in Ch. 66 to record Theophilus of Alexan-
dria’s composition of a work on Paschal reckoning). He never alludes to computus as a
branch of philosophy or an “art”. Furthermore, he neglects to praise number as the prin-
ciple of cosmic created order, and does not quote Wisdom 11.20 on “measure, number
and weight”—though he did not hesitate to do so in his own commentary on Genesis.43
Finally, he never equates computus with numerus in De temporum ratione, even though
when working in exegetical mode, he could regard “number” and “time” as interchange-
able terms.44
For “computus”, Bede substitutes the phrase ratio temporum, a term which appears in
the opening sentence of his textbook, and which gave it its conventional title.45 His notion
of ratio temporum, moreover, is grounded not in ratio numerorum but in cosmology. In
fact, he goes out of his way to deﬁne time as a dimension of the created universe, and not
as a numerical abstraction. Moreover, he reverses the hierarchy of the Irish computus by
making arithmetic subordinate to astronomy. For example, he mentions the etymology of
“month” from “measure”, only as a foil for his “more correct” explanation that “month”
comes from the word for “Moon”.46 Moreover, Bede’s case on behalf of the Alexandrian
reckoning rests on the argument that the Alexandrian computus is based on the astronomi-
cal data which obtained at Creation. God must have created the Sun at the spring equinox
(21 March) and the Moon must have been full. These phenomena are not recorded in Scrip-
ture, but they are justiﬁed by cosmological symbolism: ﬁrst, God would not have created
anything other than in a perfect state, and secondly, the positions of the planets at Cre-
ation are ﬁgurae of the relationship between Christ and the Church, whose redemption he
achieved at Easter. Hence all the cycles of time which the computist measures must start
from this point, and must end when the planets in question resume their status at the time
of Creation.47 This is what Bede calls natura, and the naturalis ratio of computus is cal-
endar calculation based on this premise.48 The broad array of extra-computistical material
41The Reckoning of Time, p. lxv.
42Bede’s use of Irish computistica: Daíbhí Ó Cróinín, The Irish Provenance of Bede’s Computus, Peritia 2
(1983), 238–242. Bede’s apparent ignorance of Boethius’ De arithmetica: C.W. Jones, Bedae pseudepigrapha:
Scientiﬁc Works Falsely Attributed to Bede, Cornell University Press, Ithaca and London (1939), p. 49.
43Libri quatuor in principium Genesis usque ad nativitatem Isaac et eiectionem Ismahelis adnotationum, 1.1.31,
ed. C.W. Jones. CCSL 118A (1967), 32.966–974.
44See praefatio to his Expositio Apocalypsis, where Bede, transcribing Augustine’s summary of Tyconius’ rules
for exegesis, inserts his own gloss on rule 5 “Of Times”: “It seems to me that it can also be called ‘of numbers’ ”:
ed. Roger Gryson, CCSL 121A, Brepols, Turnhout (2001), pp. 277.75–76.
45See De temporum ratione preface (263.2; transl. F. Wallis, p. 3).
46De temporum ratione 11 (312.2–313.9; transl. F. Wallis, pp. 41–42).
47De temporum ratione 6 (291–295; transl. F. Wallis, pp. 26–28) and 64 (456–459; transl. F. Wallis, pp. 151–
155).
48This point is discussed in detail in my essay “A New Approach to Bede’s Science”, in: Bede: New Approaches,
ed. Scott De Gregorio (forthcoming).

“Number mystique” in early medieval computus texts
193
which Bede folded into his treatise reﬂects this orientation to cosmology and astronomy:
climates, tides, planetary phenomena like eclipses, the effects of seasonal changes on ter-
restrial life. There is, to be sure, a considerable amount of mathematics in De temporum
ratione, some of it quite demanding, and Bede is relentless in his insistence that students
learn to compute.49 But mathematics per se is never mentioned. For Bede it is a technique,
a means to the end of establishing a correct calendar. Unlike the Irish, he is not interested
in making students perform complex calculations which serve no computistical purpose;
indeed, he seems to ﬁnd this activity suspicious. In Ch. 3, Bede discusses the divisions
of time smaller than a day, but qualiﬁes them as “not natural, but apparently agreed upon
by [human] convention”. By the time one reaches the smallest units of reckoning, like the
atomus, one has left entirely the realm of practical calculation. Such minute division of
time reminds Bede of astrologers (mathematici), who divide the zodiac into inﬁnitesimal
segments, and who base their claims to predict the future with precision on such feats.
Bede rejects this claim with scorn: indeed, his reticence in using the term “computus” may
be due to its implicit association with astrology.50
In Ch. 38, writing about the determination of the leap-year day, Bede waxes sarcastic
about virtuoso calculators who lack substantial knowledge of the astronomical phenom-
enon they are measuring, or its computistical consequences:
Some people are so clever at computation that they understand without difﬁculty how many frac-
tions of the growing leap-year day are relentlessly added on each year, or month, or even week or
day. Nonetheless, they would not be able to say how this same fraction increases, or what is its
cause, or how the increase is calculated, or what troublesome error is engendered if the leap-year
day is not intercalated in its sequence in the necessary way.51
Bede is certainly not averse to confronting the more extreme mathematical challenges
of computus—in Ch. 41, for example, he thinks it worthwhile to examine “by what and
how many particles of time” the Moon’s leap-year day accrues, and in Ch. 46, he makes
his students add up the total number of lunar and solar days in the 19-year cycle—but
such feats are strictly subordinated to elucidating the problems of the calendar, and have
no value beyond this.
Bede’s reasons for steering away from “number mystique” are complex, and largely
elusive, but one issue in particular seems to have made him especially sensitive to the
dangers of over-enthusiastic computation: chiliasm. From the time he published his revised
chronology of world-history in his early essay on computus, De temporibus, Bede had to
contend with the objections of the literal-minded that the six ages of the world (a schema
that Bede himself adopted52) had to unfold over 6000 years. The logic was that world-
history replicated the week of creation (an analogy which Bede also accepted), and since
Scripture states that a thousand years for God are as a day, the world was therefore destined
49E.g., De temporum ratione, Ch. 17–19, 21–23: see The Reckoning of Time, pp. 290–293, 296–299, re: Bede’s
preference for calculation over tables.
50De temporum ratione 3 (277.34–278.40; transl. F. Wallis, pp. 15–16); cf. The Reckoning of Time, Appendix 4:
A Note on the Term Computus.
51Ch. 38 (399.8–14; transl. F. Wallis, pp. 106–107). The target seems to be the Irish: cf. the Irish-inspired Bobbio
computus, Ch. 87 (PL 129.1315) which works out how much of the leap-year increment accrues in a single day.
52De temporibus, Bedae opera didascalica 16 (600–602); De temporum ratione, Chs. 10, 66. On Bede’s treat-
ment of the world ages, see The Reckoning of Time, pp. 353–366, and literature cited therein.

194
F. Wallis
to end in annus mundi 6000. De temporibus, by adopting the chronology of the ﬁrst two
ages recorded in Jerome’s Vulgate, deﬁed this equation of an age with 1000 years much
more radically than did the more conventional chronology of Eusebius, and brought the
charge of heresy down on Bede. Bede’s response in the Epistula ad Plegwinum, and in
the preface and closing chapters of De temporum ratione itself, was to ﬁrmly deny that
an “age” had any ﬁxed measurement that could be calculated. Indeed, to do so would be
heretical, for it would mean that we could know when the end would come by simply
adding up the years since Creation, and Christ himself warned that no one, not even the
Son, knew when this would be.
In the letter to Plegwin, Bede records his irritation not only at the “rustics” who pester
him to tell them “how many years are left in the ﬁnal millennium of the world”, but at the
“brothers” who dispute whether the end will come in annus mundi 6000 or annus mundi
7000.53 Yet he himself was deeply committed both to the notion of the six world ages, and
to a eschatological orientation. Indeed, contemplation of the elision of time and eternity
replaces numerus as the focus of contemplation in Bede’s computus. Rather than seek to
identify computus with the mystique of mathematics as a way of understanding the divine
mind, Bede chooses to imagine computus as a temporal crescendo, rising from the small-
est unit of time to the world-ages, and from the world-ages to the world-to-come. Bede’s
closing chapters of De temporum ratione are a symphonic tour de force of overlapping tem-
poral symbols, where the week of Creation, the Paschal week, and the cycles of calendrical
time converge in a new “ﬁrst day”, an eternal Sunday and an everlasting Easter. In the light
of his views on chiliasm, Bede was certainly running a risk in associating the reckoning
of time with speculation on the future. But this association could hardly be avoided by the
computist, whose mandate was to predict the future, if only the future date of Easter. In
a sense, Bede’s emphasis on the cyclical structure of computed time took the apocalyptic
sting out of such reﬂections, for every Easter, every Sunday is a ﬁgura of eternity. But his
awareness of latent danger may have made him especially cautious about computation and
the “science of numbers”, even though he was capable of exquisite subtleties of calculation
himself, and by no means averse to applying numerology to time. We have already noted
his interest in the symbolism of the seven-day week; to this we may add some more casual
observations he draws from Augustine about the meaning of the 24 hours in the day, or
of the quarter-day of the leap-year.54 But this allegorical numerology is here used as dis-
crete decoration. Bede sees no inherent religious meaning in number or in mathematical
operations, no “number mystique”.
Perhaps the most striking illustration of Bede’s intention to de-mystify number is the
opening chapter of De temporum ratione, whose title contains one of the rare appearances
of the word computus in Bede’s work: De computo uel loquela digitorum. Here Bede de-
scribes the Roman technique of ﬁnger-computation, justifying its study as “a very useful
and easy skill” for students of the calendar. The exegete might also ﬁnd that it is worth
knowing something about ﬁnger-reckoning, because the positions of the hands which cor-
respond to the numbers 30, 60 and 100 furnish a beautiful interpretation of the parable of
53Ep. ad Plegwinum 15, Bedae opera didascalica, pp. 624–625; transl. F. Wallis, The Reckoning of Time,
pp. 413–414.
5424-hour day: De temporum ratione 5 (quoting De Genesi ad litteram) (284.19–29; transl. F. Wallis, p. 19).
Quarter-day: ibid., Ch. 39 (quoting De Trinitate) (402.26–404.59).

“Number mystique” in early medieval computus texts
195
the Sower (Matthew 13.1–23). But curiously, after describing the manual positions repre-
senting the various numbers, Bede does not actually explain how the computist might per-
form calculations with the hands. Instead, he teaches his students how to use the manual
numerals to convey secret messages, by representing each letter by a number corresponding
to the numerical position of the letter within the alphabet. These secret messages could be
deadly serious—outwitting enemies, for example—but Bede also describes the technique
as a sort of party-trick. This is, of course, also the basis of gamatria, the computation of
the numerical value of names. Bede was aware of gamatria as a technique of exegesis—his
own commentary on the Apocalypse, for example, reproduced various solutions to the rid-
dle of the name of the Beast coded into the number 66655—but in De temporum ratione, it
is just a game.
4. Byrhtferth’s choices
Carolingian educators and thinkers therefore inherited two distinctive traditions of calen-
dar science. One tradition, represented by the Irish texts, called this science computus—
“calculation”—and closely identiﬁed it with arithmetic, ratio numerorum. The tradition
articulated by Bede, on the other hand, preferred to call calendar science ratio tempo-
rum—“the reckoning of time”—and stressed the roots of that reckoning in astronomy, the
movements of the Sun and Moon. Arithmetic played a signiﬁcant, but distinctly instru-
mental role. Byrthferth deﬁnitely espoused the “Irish” rather than the “Bedan” approach,
preferring to imagine the world as number rather than as “natural history”.56 But he had
the option of choosing the Bedan route, or even, like Hrabanus Maurus, of fusing the two.
Hrabanus Maurus’ De computo is essentially an adaptation of De temporum ratione, but
prefaced with the encomium of ratio numerorum found in the Irish computus.57 Moreover,
he responded in a typically Carolingian way to one particular theme of “number mystique”,
namely, the alleged relationship of computus to the Liberal Arts, and to philosophy.
Nourished by the re-discovery of Martianus Capella’s De nuptiis and other didactic texts
from late Antiquity, Carolingian schoolmasters and intellectuals like Remigius of Aux-
erre meditated on the classiﬁcation of the arts and their role as a preparation for philoso-
phy. Philosophy itself recovered some of its ancient content through the diffusion of texts
like Boethius’ De consolatione, Calcidius’ partial translation of and commentary on the
Timaeus of Plato, and Macrobius’ commentary on Cicero’s Dream of Scipio. These works
furnished at once a classiﬁcatory framework for the mathematical sciences, and a powerful
raison d’être to study them: the quadrivium. What was missing, however, was a content for
the category labelled “quadrivium”. Apart from what was included in the texts of Calcid-
ius, Macrobius or Martianus themselves, westerners had few resources for reconstituting
55Expositio Apocalypsis, c. 22 (415.79–417.94).
56Jennifer Neville, Representations of the Natural World in Old English Poetry, Cambridge Studies in Anglo-
Saxon England 27, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1999), p. 155.
57De computo 1, ed. Wesley Stevens, Corpus christianorum continuatio mediaevalis 44, Brepols, Turnhout
(1979), pp. 205–206. Hrabanus and number symbolism: B. Taeger, Zahlensymbolik bei Hraban, bei Hincmar—
und im ‘Heliand’? Studien zur Zahlensymbolik im Frühmittelalter. Münchner Texte und Untersuchungen zur
deutschen Literatur des Mittelalters 30, Fink, Munich (1975).

196
F. Wallis
the mathematical curriculum. An excellent illustration of how they improved this content
through creative bricolage is the Geometria Boethii I, a composite work assembled prob-
ably at Corbie in the 7th century from parts of Boethius’ translation of Euclid, sections of
his De arithmetica, excerpts from Isidore and Cassiodorus, and some materials from the
agrimensores.58 By the mid-9th century, to be sure, there is evidence for the slowly ex-
panding circulation of Boethius’ De arithmetica and De musica, but their readership was,
until the end of the 10th century, relatively small and specialized.59 What ﬁlled the gap,
was computus.
Computus already carried much of the quadrivium in its baggage, so to speak, and it had
an additional advantage: an established position in the Carolingian program of doctrina
christiana. This curriculum was designed in the ﬁrst place to produce a literate clerical
elite, and its contents were entirely vocational. As Charlemagne put it in his Admonitio
generalis, students were to learn psalmos (i.e. how to read—the Psalter being the elemen-
tary textbook of clerical literacy), notas (writing), cantus (chant), compotum, grammati-
cam, and libros catholicos (the literature of the Christian tradition).60 The Liberal Arts
are not mentioned, with the exception of grammatica, which probably meant composition.
Compotus meant calendar science.
That being said, Carolingian intellectuals persisted in developing the connection be-
tween computus and the quadrivium in a variety of ways. There seems to have been lit-
tle question that computus belonged with astronomy, not arithmetic—in other words, that
Bede’s and not the Irish perspective on computus and number had prevailed. When Hra-
banus Maurus re-cast Cassiodorus’ Institutiones for his own day, and sought a place for
computus (a branch of learning not mentioned by Cassiodorus), he chose to ﬁle it under
astronomy.61 Even more telling are the Carolingian computus manuscripts, some of de luxe
quality, which set computus in the midst of an extensive penumbra of astronomical and cos-
mological materials,62 or the Carolingian taste for dismembering the text of De temporum
ratione in order to ﬁt computus under astronomia in new compilations and anthologies.63
Computus was on the way to being absorbed by the quadrivium.
This trend of separating mathematics from computus intensiﬁed in the 11th century, es-
pecially in the career of Gerbert of Aurillac (d. 1003), scholasticus of Reims and later Pope
Sylvester II. Gerbert represents a signiﬁcant turning point in the history of western math-
ematics, and his innovations are difﬁcult to summarize.64 We must content ourselves with
58Paul L. Butzer, Mathematics in West and East from the Fifth to Tenth Centuries: an Overview, Science in
Western and Eastern Civilization in Carolingian Times, 451.
59Alison White, Boethius in the Medieval Quadrivium, in: Boethius: His Life, Thought and Inﬂuence, ed. Mar-
garet Gibson, Basil Blackwell, Oxford (1981), pp. 164–169.
60Ed. A. Boretius, Capitularia regum francorum, Monumenta Germaniae Historica Leges (Quarto), 2, Berlin
(1883), pp. 1.59–60.
61Hrabanus Maurus, De clericorum institutione, PL 108.403C–D; on astrologia naturalis, see Isidore, Etymolo-
giae 3.27.1–2.
62Arno Borst, Alkuin und die Enzyklopädie von 809, Science in Western and Eastern Civilization in Carolingian
Times, pp. 53–78; Bruce Eastwood, The Astronomies of Pliny, Martianus Capella and Isidore of Seville in the
Carolingian World, ibid., pp. 161–180; Anton von Euw, Die künstlerische Gestaltung der astronomischen und
komputistischen Handschriften des Westens, ibid., pp. 251–269.
63The Reckoning of Time, pp. xci–xcii.
64Essential literature on this topic: Uta Lindgren, Gerbert von Aurillac und das Quadrivium: Untersuchungen zur
Bildung im Zeitalter der Ottonen, Sudhoffs Archiv Beiheft 18, Franz Steiner, Wiesbaden (1976); Joseph Navari,

“Number mystique” in early medieval computus texts
197
three here. First, Gerbert raised the study of mathematical theory to a new level through his
creative reading of Boethius’ De arithmetica. Mathematics was for him a special form of
logic, and he drew the attention of his students to the presence of challenging logical prob-
lems in the Boethian text. At the same time, he recovered something of Boethius’ classical
understanding of philosophical numerology, and the intellectual ascesis attendant on the
study of mathematics. Responding to his patron Otto III’s request for an explanation of De
arithmetica, Gerbert wrote:
If you were not ﬁrmly and immovably convinced that the power of numbers both contained the
origins of all things in itself and brought forth all things from itself, you would not be hastening to
a full and perfect knowledge of these numbers with such zeal.65
Secondly, Gerbert was the ﬁrst teacher who is recorded as having specialized in the
quadrivium as a “subject”; in other words, he was re-shaping the curriculum in a non-
vocational direction. Gerbert’s students were enthralled by his schemata showing the divi-
sions of philosophy and the relationship of the artes to philosophy. One such taxonomy,
circulating through the cathedral and monastic schools of the day, occasioned a famous
public debate before Otto III himself between Gerbert and the scholasticus of Magdeburg,
Otric—a debate which hinged on the relationship of physica and mathematics.66
Finally, Gerbert was responsible for introducing new content into the quadrivium which
deﬁnitively pushed it beyond the boundaries deﬁned by computus. In particular, his intro-
duction of the classical abacus inspired a proliﬁc output of treatises on calculation over the
following century, and his promotion of the astrolabe from was the initial step in a process
which would eventually result in the recovery of Ptolemy’s Almagest.67 In all these ac-
tivities, he promoted the study of the mathematical sciences at a level well beyond what
computus required, and without reference to its problems. Indeed, Gerbert seems never to
have taught or written on computus.68
This is not to claim that a Gerbertian revolution replaced computus with the quadrivium
overnight. To the contrary, the vocational style of education continued to be the norm for
many decades after Gerbert. Indeed, those who followed in Gerbert’s footsteps by compos-
ing treatises on the abacus or astrolabe, like Abbo of Fleury, Hermannus Contractus and
The Leitmotif in the Mathematical Thought of Gerbert of Aurillac, Journal of Medieval History 1 (1975), 139–
150; Carla Frova, Le opere matematiche di Gerberto d’Aurillac, Studi sul medioevo cristiano offerti a Raffaelo
Morghen, Istituto Storico Italiano, Rome (1974), pp. 323–353; Guy Beaujouan, Les apocryphes mathématiques
de Gerbert, in Gerberto: scienza, storia e mito. Atti del Gerberti Symposiums (25–27 luglio 1983), Archivi Storici
Bobiensi, Bobbio (1985), pp. 645–658.
65Ep. 187, ed. F. Weigle, Die Briefsammlung Gerberts von Reims, Monumenta Germaniae Historica, Briefe der
deutschen Kaiserzeit, Berlin (1966), p. 224; transl. Harriet P. Lattin, The Letters of Gerbert, Columbia University
Press, New York (1961).
66Richer, Histoire de France (888–995), 3.56–65, ed. Robert Latouche, Classiques d’histoire de France au
Moyen Age, 12, Les Belles Lettres, Paris (1967), pp. 66–80.
67W. Bergmann, Innovationen im Quadrivium des 10. und 11. Jh.: Studien zur Einführung von Astrolab und
Abakus im lateinischen Mittelalter, Sudhoffs Archiv, Beiheft 26, Franz Steiner, Wiesbaden (1985); Guy Beau-
jouan, L’Enseignement du ‘quadrivium’, La scuola nell’ occidente latino dell’ alto medioevo, Settimane di studio
del Centro italiano di studi sull’ alto medioevo 19, Centro italiano di studi sull’alto medioevo, Spoleto (1972),
pp. 639–667, 719–723; Arno Borst, Astrolab und Klosterreform an der Jahrtausendwende, Sitzungsberichte der
Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschaften, phil.-hist. Kl., Carl Winter, Heidelberg (1989).
68Lindgren, Gerbert von Aurillac, 44; Lindgren sees this as a point which distinguishes Gerbert from contem-
porary scholastici like Abbo of Fleury or Heriger of Lobbes: see pp. 52, 55, 57.

198
F. Wallis
Gerlandus Compotista, also wrote on computus, and their works on the “new mathematics”
are found side by side with computus materials in the manuscripts. Nonetheless, these new
domains of mathematical activity appropriated the “number mystique” hitherto associated
with computus by laying claim to a high philosophical vocation,69 to profunditas,70 and to
number symbolism.71
Byrhtferth’s teacher Abbo of Fleury was in the thick of this trend. His commentary on
the Calculus of Victorius takes mathematics beyond computus, while capturing the mys-
tique of number traditionally conveyed by the computus. Abbo’s commentary is imbued
with a Platonic philosophical numerology, yet he also stresses the role of number as the
constituent principle of creation, and in so doing adopts a more conservative and Chris-
tian tone. Abbo titled his commentary Tractatus de numero, mensura et pondere super
calculum victorii,72 and he intended that all the theological resonance of that ubiquitous
tag from the Book of Wisdom should be present in his work. Indeed, measure, number
and weight held the key to understanding the meaning of the Trinity.73 To be sure, the
Calculus is defended as an indispensible adjunct to “all the arts which deal with the reck-
oning of numbers, that is arithmetic, geometry, music and astronomy”—the quadrivium, in
other words—but what this essentially amounts to is its utility for those who must tackle
problems of ratio temporum.74 But in fact, computus is never explicitly discussed in the
commentary. “Number mystique” has left its temporary shelter in calendar science, and
resumed its ancient residence in the quadrivium.
Faced with an array of models—the Irish computus, still in circulation in the 11th
century, De temporum ratione and Hrabanus’ De computo, and the works of his master
Abbo—Byrhtferth opted for a conservative, even archaic style of “number mystique” em-
bedded in computus, and we can only conclude that he did so deliberately. This choice not
only explains his inclusion of a tract on number-symbolism, but sheds light on his many
poetic and strangely affecting invocations of the “mystery” of computus.
69Gillian R. Evans, The Inﬂuence of Quadrivium Studies in the Eleventh and Twelfth Century Schools, Journal
of Medieval History 1 (1975), 151–154; Difﬁcillima et ardua: Theory and Practice in Treatises on the Abacus,
950–1150, Journal of Medieval History 3 (1977), 21–38.
70Gillian R. Evans, Schools and Scholars: the Study of the Abacus in English Schools ca. 980–ca. 1150, English
Historical Review 94 (1979), 79–80.
71Gillian R. Evans, The Development of some Textbooks on the Useful Arts, History of Education 7 (1978),
90–91.
72Commentary II.1, ed. Peden, 65; see also Abbo of Fleury, Quaestiones grammaticales 50, ed. Anita Guerreau-
Jalabert, Les Belles Lettres, Paris (1982), p. 275.
73Evans and Peden, pp. 112–114.
74In presentiarum tamen intentio Victorii haec fuit, ut inerrato lector numerorum summas multiplicaret,
diuideret; seu proponeretur aliquid de artibus, quae numerorum ratione constant, ut arithmetica, geometrica,
musica, et astronomia, seu quaestio inesset de mensura et pondere, quae omnia calculatori sunt curae. Denique,
et huius calculi quanta sit utilitas agnoscere potuit ut praecedentibus dictis, etiamsi ad quamlibet rationem tempo-
rum ob difﬁcultatem multiplicandi nullomodo desudavit, qui talium rerum saltem parvam intelligentiam accepit.
Verum, quoniam omnia creata sunt in numero mensura et pondere, in his singulis speculationem placet con-
stituere, ut perspecta eorum natura, facilius pervideri possit singula quibus insunt in causa: Commentary I.3, ed.
Peden, 65.

“Number mystique” in early medieval computus texts
199
Yesterday, when the serene light of the golden sun had expelled the shadows from the innermost
recesses of the mind, theology (that is, language concerning God) spoke concerning the enterprise
of computus, and thereafter concerning the days of the solar year.75
We have touched with our oars the waves of the deep water; we have seen as well the mountains
by the shore of the salty sea, and with billowing sails and prosperous winds we have harboured
on the coast of the fairest nation. The waves stand for this profound science [deoper craeft] and
the mountains stand for the magnitude of this science. Therefore it says, ‘Where we saw the lily
blossom’ (the beauty of the computus), ‘there we sensed the roses’ fragrance’ (we perceived the
profundity of the computus).76
Bede had rejected computistical number mystique; Hrabanus paid it lip-service only; Abbo
and his generation unyoked number mystique from computus. But for Byrhtferth, compu-
tus’ number mystique was still vital and valid. The secret of its persistent attraction may
lie in the breadth of its appeal. Computus was a subject that all educated people, especially
clergy, but laymen as well, were expected to know at least something about. The abacus, by
contrast, was accessible only to a scholarly elite. In the broader stream of early medieval
culture, numbering and calculating were overwhelmingly, almost automatically associated
with the reckoning of time. Hrotswith of Gandersheim reveals how widely accepted this
equation was. Her heroine Sapientia tells the emperor Hadrian how old her children are
by means of a complex mathematical riddle. When the emperor dismisses the riddle as an
“unproﬁtable dissertation”, she replies:
It would be unproﬁtable if it did not lead us to appreciate the wisdom of our Creator, Who in the
beginning created the world out of nothing, and set everything in number, measure and weight,
and then, in time and the age of man, formulated fresh wonders the more we study it.77
The number mystique of computus was Pythagoreanism for Everyman. It had spoken on
behalf of the nexus of mathematics and the divine for many centuries, and that voice still
resonated at the turn of the millennium.
75Enchiridion 1.1 (16.164–166), and transl. p. 17.
76Enchiridion 1.1 (16.145–158), and transl. p. 17.
77Sapientia 3, transl. Christopher St. John, The Plays of Roswitha, Cooper Square, New York (1966), p. 140.
My emphasis.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 10
Is the Universe of the Divine Dividable?
Maurice-Ruben Hayoun
Centre de recherches et d’études hébraïques, Université de Strasbourg,
22 rue René Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg, France
E-mail: mha8439783@aol.com
1. The seﬁrotic concept of Divinity developed in response to philosophy and rational theology . . . . . . . 203
2. Eyn-sof, the perfectly unknowable origin of the seﬁrot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 204
3. The struggle between Plotinus’ God and the God of the Bible
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 205
4. Thought and Will in zoharic and pre-zoharic literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 205
5. The relations between Eyn-sof and the seﬁrot; the One and the multiple; otherness and immanence . . . 206
6. The origin of the term seﬁrot. A presentation of the nomenclature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 208
7. Lights and colours
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209
8. The unbreakable dynamic unity governing the seﬁrot and respected in prayer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
201


Is the Universe of the Divine dividable?
203
“When the lights of the seﬁrot start to glow, to spread and to unite, the face of the community of
Israel is radiant.” (Zohar II, 232b)
1. The seﬁrotic concept of Divinity developed in response to philosophy and rational
theology
As Tishby pointed out following Gershom Scholem, the great writings of the Spanish Kab-
balah, one of them being the Zohar, developed ideas regarding God which were radically
new and which were created in response to the philosophical conceptions of the times.
However, this converting of philosophical concepts into mysticism-based theological ones
brought about immeasurable separation between kabbalist representations on the one hand
and concepts of rational theology on the other. Among the themes that were so dear to me-
dieval philosophers, whether they were Jewish (Maïmonides), Christian (Thomas Aquinas)
or Muslim (Ibn Badja, Ibn Tufayl and Averroes), the theme of divine immobility and unaf-
fectedness was one of the more prominent ones. The Jews, who were very much attached
to a non-conceptualised representation of God, and who identiﬁed with the naïve faith of
their ancestors, as it was described in the Bible and greatly ampliﬁed by rabbinical litera-
ture, could not accept that a philosophical idea might take the place of the Divinity, who
revealed himself to the Hebrews on Mount Sinai, who delivered them from Egyptian slav-
ery, who satisﬁed their needs during the journey through the desert and who established
them in the Holy Land. This is what Gershom Scholem wrote about the biblical God:
“Before entering the melting pot of speculative theology which came about as the result of a long
and difﬁcult development, the biblical God was not an abstract construction, nor was he the end
product of continued intellectual efforts. The biblical God must be seen as a historical experience
of a community, an experience which the devout of the biblical times lived through individually at
all levels of their existence. This God communicates with man, expresses himself and intervenes
without mediation into the created world. His manifestations are too tangible to require proof.
Whenever he exerts his power, this is felt in nature and especially in History. When he hides,
then this is not due to his nature, but to the fact that we are not worthy of his revelation, because
we ourselves have enveloped him in a veil, for which we are responsible. This God, whose ways
and thoughts are incomparably superior to ours, is to a large and even very large extent assigned
positive attributes by the biblical books. He is the creator, the king, the judge, the dispenser of
blessings, the master of History, who leaves the mysteries which surround him in order to reveal
himself.” 1
Finally the daily invocation of God during prayer would loose all its meaning if one were
to follow the philosophers into their domain. If God is immobile and unaffected as well as
gifted with eternal will, why should one direct one’s prayers to him? In this context it is
worth mentioning the importance which even pre-zoharic authors such as Azriel attached
to the mysticism of prayer—an obvious reaction to the only marginal role which orison
could play in the eyes of the medieval philosophers.
The seﬁrotic concept of Divinity, i.e. the concept which involves the ten primordial
or ideal numbers (seﬁrah, plural: seﬁrot) was clearly meant as a response to a situation
which the kabbalists felt had become most serious. The seﬁrot, they said, incarnated the
dynamic unity of Divinity. Certainly, God transcends the categories of time and space and
1[5, p. 18]. All translations into English are the editors’.

204
M.-R. Hayoun
his essence is not affected by passions as man’s is, but all this does not detract from the
fact that God is in some way present in the world.
This opposition between the dogma of the transcendence of God and the determination
of the kabbalists to afﬁrm his immanence reveals something of their philosophical culture.
Even the most determined mystics could not leave the question of the immanence of divine
essence to be a matter of naïve faith only. They decided to adopt the nomenclature of the
seﬁrot in order to show that their God was a God of providence, that he cared for his
creatures, that he could be implored, even if his name could not be pronounced.
2. Eyn-sof, the perfectly unknowable origin of the seﬁrot
The kabbalists insisted on attributing an occult origin to the world of the seﬁrot, an origin
which was absolutely unknowable and the name of which rightfully called up the idea of
the inﬁnite, i.e. Eyn-sof. It is this polar tension between the eminent essences (the seﬁrot),
which are barely accessible, and their absolutely occult source, which makes itself felt in
zoharic literature, and even long before, i.e. in early mystical circles, such as those around
Isaac the Blind. During revelation the seﬁrot serve somehow as a mirror to the hidden God.
It would indeed be a contradictio in adjecto to expect of Eyn-sof to reveal itself. It is the
seﬁrot which take care of this.
This occultation of Eyn-sof is very much present in the comments on the seﬁrot by Azriel
of Gerona. Eyn-sof, so this author writes, escapes the grip of thought; no language can
comprehend it and yet it is present everywhere. No letter, no speech, no name can contain
it. Hence, even the biblical divine names do not apply to Eyn-sof. Jean Reuchlin, who had
access to the works of Azriel, deﬁned as follows the divine concepts of the kabbalists.
“He is called Eyn-sof, i.e. inﬁnity, which is the highest of things and which is itself incompre-
hensible and inexpressible; in a movement of retreat, which happens in the most secret part of his
Divinity, he withdraws and hides into the inaccessible abyss of his light, which is the source. One
has to understand that nothing proceeds from this. It is like the most absolute Divinity, immanent
in its non-action, in its own retreat, naked without clothing, and without the surrounding things
enveloping it. This Divinity does not diffuse itself. It has not extended itself by the generosity of
its splendour. It is being and non-being without distinction, which, like a free and totally sepa-
rated unity, envelops in a perfectly simple way all things which, to our intelligence, are contrary
or contradictory.” 2
The Zohar literature, which no doubt seeks to respect scrupulously the absolutely occult
nature of Eyn-sof, always insists on its inscrutable and inconceivable character. More than
most other passages of the zoharic literature (e.g. I, 16b and I, 65a, where Rabbi Simeon
reaches his arms to the sky) it is Zohar I, 21a, which deﬁnes the best that which is undeﬁn-
able. The context of this last passage is indeed quite appropriate. It deals with the creation
of lights. This allows the author to quote a passage from the vision of Ezekiel, and to stress
its perfectly occult nature (1; 22: “Above the heads of the beings there was a kind of plat-
form. It was like the impressive splendour of crystal. It spread itself over the upper part of
their heads.”).
2J. Reuchlin, De arte cabbalistica, quoted in [5, p. 30, note 10].

Is the Universe of the Divine dividable?
205
Beyond this limit, there is no intellectual comprehension any more (le-istakela u-le-
minda’), because this level is buried in divine Thought, which lies in the ultimate depths of
superior mystery. It is not even possible to ask questions, let alone to draw any knowledge
from them. Eyn-sof, so the Zohar continues, does not show any trace of something that
human thought could have a grip on. Starting from occultation, the most occult Eyn-sof
begins to descend, so to speak, to the realm of revelation. Eyn-sof then gives birth to an
extremely thin light, which is unknowable and as difﬁcult to see as the eye of a needle.
This is, the Zohar concludes, the occult mystery of Thought.
3. The struggle between Plotinus’ God and the God of the Bible
How did one ever arrive at this concept of a hidden God, which makes one think, whether
one wants it or not, of a gnostic type of dualism? An opposition of this kind between a
revealed God and a hidden God does not seem to have been known by rabbinical Judaism.
It rather seems to have come from the just mentioned gnosticism and from Neoplaton-
ism, which penetrated the whole of medieval philosophy. One should add in particular the
inﬂuence of Plotinus.
Gershom Scholem devoted some shrewd reﬂections to this problem, which he presented
as the struggle between Plotinus’ God and the God of the Bible in the ancient Kabbalah.3
Against the idea of a perfectly personal being, Plotinus sets, so Scholem says, the concept
of the One, which is situated at the extreme opposite of the biblical God. Plotinus only
very rarely gives this One (a neuter or masculine “the One”, or “the thing which is one”)
the name “God”. As a matter of fact, he writes whole chapters of the Enneads without ever
using the word God. Just like Eyn-sof, this One is above and beyond everything: beyond
life, pure being, the Good, thought, etc. No act of creation or revelation is attributed to
this One. One easily measures the distance which separates this “occult Divinity” from the
biblical God. By producing their theory of Eyn-sof, the kabbalists indeed touched upon
regions which were completely foreign to their own. The terms which the Zohar applied to
this “nameless entity”, at least as to their spirit, resembled the ones which Plotinus used.
Eyn-sof is the hidden thing, the light which occults itself, the mystery of occultation, the
undivided unity, the absolute being, the root of all roots, etc.
Explaining the terminological origin of the expression Eyn-sof, Scholem quotes a brief
but signiﬁcant passage from a small work called Book of the real Unity, which was known
by the circles of Isaac the Blind:
“All spiritual forces, which reveal themselves, which shine and echo from the primordial wisdom
come to unite themselves in Eyn-sof, and this is the place of unity of which they [the Neoplatonists]
said: everything proceeds from the One and everything returns to the One.”4
4. Thought and Will in zoharic and pre-zoharic literature
Some ﬁfty years before the spreading of the Zohar, Azriel had, through certain of his
commentaries on the Aggadot and through his deﬁnition of real faith, tried to bring together
3[5, pp. 18–53].
4[5, pp. 28–29, note 7].

206
M.-R. Hayoun
the impersonal aspect of the Divinity and the creative will of the biblical God. The biblical
God indeed wants creation, but one cannot say as much of Eyn-sof. Since it is thought or
the act of thinking which is present at the beginning of God’s manifestation, Azriel as well
as later generations of kabbalists asked themselves questions regarding the links between
divine thought and will.
In Azriel’s commentary on the Aggadot we ﬁnd a strange expression involving an
antinomy. All by retaining a clear distinction of priorities regarding God’s thinking and
God’s will, Azriel there speaks of the “will of thought” (retson ha-mahashava), as if disso-
ciating thinking and willing in God were a problem to him. Thinking no doubt corresponds
to the Plotinian, impersonal character of Eyn-sof, whereas the will better manages to do
justice to the God of Bible. Bringing together the two in one and the same expression,
could give the impression of a solution, but is it will which posits thinking and keeps it
under its authority or is it actually the other way around?
Whatever may be the case here, the main characteristic of this will is inﬁnity. Scholem
remarks quite correctly that it is not inﬁnite will which is referred to, but will in inﬁnity
or reaching right up to inﬁnity (ha-rom ad eyn-sof). This aspect is very subtly brought to
the fore by a kabbalist from Gerona, Jacob ben Shéshét, the author of the Sefer ha-Emuna
wé-ha-bittahon (Book of belief and conviction). The latter takes literally a verse from the
Psalms (19; 15), which was included in the liturgy and which contains the term will, but in
an expression that actually signiﬁes “to agree” or “to suit”: yhyu le-ratson imré ﬁ[may the
words from my mouth be accepted]. In the spirit of ben Shéshét, who wrote around 1250,
the verse of the Psalm becomes: “may the words from my mouth go to the Will! ”, i.e. to
that part of Eyn-sof which is hidden in the depths of the occult. In chapter V of the Book
of belief and conviction, the author even writes that by wishing that the prayers reach the
very Will, the one who prays “seeks to unite everything in the inﬁnite”.5
Does this mean that Eyn-sof and the Will are rigorously the same? By no means, but very
tight ties unite them. The pre-zoharic kabbalists did not hesitate to speak of the “ravaging
of plantations” in case one decided to dissociate the Will from Eyn-sof.
The writings of Moses of Leon, the author of the principal part of the Zohar, reﬂect
the same difﬁculties, especially if one compares certain Aramaic versions to the parallel
Hebrew texts published under his real name, in particular the Sickle of sainthood:
“Before the Blessed-may-he-be created the world [the universe of the seﬁrot] he himself and his
name—which was hidden in him—were one and the same and no thing could exist before he
ascended into Thought’s will to press the seal of existence onto Everything and to create the world.
He traced the signs and constructed, but the things did not subsist until he enveloped himself in
the cover of the supreme luminous splendour of thought; nothing subsisted before he created the
world and produced the high mystical cedars from this supreme luminous splendour” (Zohar I,
29a).
5. The relations between Eyn-sof and the seﬁrot; the One and the multiple;
otherness and immanence
Which relationship does there exist between Eyn-sof and the crown, Kéter, the ﬁrst se-
ﬁrah? Eyn-sof is the primordial point which gives birth to the ten lights or luminaries,
5See [2, p. 85].

Is the Universe of the Divine dividable?
207
but is Kéter really a seﬁrah just like the others? Zohar III, 269a, responds positively. Cer-
tainly Kéter is a seﬁrah situated at the very top of the seﬁrotic process, but it is a seﬁrah
nonetheless! It is no doubt the master of the process of emanation, but at the same time, it
is nothing more than an emanation. Some zoharic texts want to go further than this. They
identify the Holy old man (attiqa qadisha) or Arikh anpin (the longanimous) with Kéter
and have Zé’ir anpin correspond to the seﬁrot going from Hokhma (wisdom) to Malkhut
(kingdom).
The Ra’ya méhémna (the True shepherd) and the Tekkuné Zohar tend to make use of a
type of terminology which has a philosophical appearance and is adapted to mystical needs:
the expression sibbat ha-sibbot or illat ha-illot occur very frequently. It seems that this
impersonal designation covers at the same time Eyn-sof and Kéter, and that the ontological
opposition between the Deus absconditus on the one hand and the seﬁrotic universe on the
other is thus somewhat blurred. One might almost say that we are faced with one and the
same Divinity with two aspects, an occult one and a revealed one.
It would be difﬁcult to quote the quasi-totality of texts which support the preceding, but
it does remain possible to pick out some of the most signiﬁcant passages of the zoharic
corpus. One passage from the Zohar Hadash (pericope Jethro, fol 55b–55d) speaks of
the activity of Eyn-sof and, from the very beginning, insists on the paradox of the One
and the multiple: Eyn-sof is the absolute unity which transcends the very idea of unity;
nevertheless its actions reﬂect diversity: the seﬁrot which Eyn-sof installs are big, small or
intermediary, and their acts reﬂect their own nature. Eyn-sof on the other hand, although
being at the origin of everything, does not change. The text of the Zohar Hadash stipulates:
he has created everything through Bina, but nobody created him. He is the one who shaped
everything with the aid of Malkhut, but nothing shaped him. One is not allowed to separate
him from the seﬁrot, which form an undividable whole, and which are called Yod, Hé,
Waw and Hé (YHWH). It is Eyn-sof which constitutes a kind of architectural principle of
the world by tying up and uniting the chariots of the angels and by linking up the inferior
and superior universes.
Eyn-sof lets its existence be guessed thanks to the seﬁrot, which only subsist through
him: his withdrawal would deprive them of science, existence and even life. This life-giving
principle spreads itself all over the world. The Zohar quotes a verse from Isaï (40; 25):
“Who would you assimilate me with so that I would become his equal?” says the saint in
order to stress the absolute otherness and solitude of Eyn-sof. Only the Torah could offer a
valid term of comparison. To that effect the text in question quotes a passage from Proverbs
(3; 15): “She is more precious than pearls and nothing which is precious to you can match
her”.
In the same passage of the Zohar one further reads developments of ideas which strongly
resemble philosophical considerations, such as: Eyn-sof is not knowledgeable through sci-
ence nor omnipotent through power. What seems important to be stressed here is that in
spite of otherness, so this text of the Zohar Hadash tells us, Eyn-sof is exterior to nothing.
Nobody can escape his inﬂuence, although he himself is radically cut from it.
Another passage situated at the beginning of the Zohar (I, 22a), but which is actually part
of the Tikkunim, develops interesting speculations regarding Eyn-sof, all by commenting
on Deuteronomy (32; 39): “See now that it is me who is me, and that there is no God
besides me; I am the one who puts to death and brings to life, who wounds and heals; no

208
M.-R. Hayoun
one can deliver out of my hand.” In English the expression “it is me who is me” is already
most intriguing, but it does not bring about the strange feeling that the Hebrew text leaves
us with, which uses two different terms: ani ani hu! The Zohar says that what is referred to
here is not the cause of causes but the Cause of all superior essences, i.e. Eyn-sof, which
calls to being the seﬁrot.
In a study regarding the symbolism of colours, Gershom Scholem gives an excellent
presentation of the relations which exist between Eyn-sof and the seﬁrot:
“Considered in his pure transcendence and in the occultation of his being, which does not manifest
itself, and which cannot be described by means of symbols and images, God is called Eyn-sof by
the kabbalists, i.e. the inﬁnite thing or being. This term was introduced by the kabbalists in order to
refer to the nameless absolute as it is present in God. From him emanate the ten seﬁrot, which are
not fundamental qualities of God in his relationship with creation, but active forces, or even rays of
divine light. Through the seﬁrot the creative forces in God are represented, i.e. that which proceeds
from him and which acts upon creation, or more precisely, provokes and determines creation; in
other words, they represent the living God, who leaves his occultation and who manifests himself.
The seﬁrot are no creations of God: they are the diversity which is contained in the dynamic unity
of his life.” 6
Although we are mainly interested here in the Zohar and its conception of the seﬁrot,
it may still be useful to take into account the later speciﬁcations suggested by a Jew of
the beginning of the seventeenth century, Abraham Herrera, who around 1620 wrote in his
Sha’ar ha-Shamayim (VII, 4 (Porta Coelorum)):
“The seﬁrot are the mirrors of his truth and the analogies of his most sublime being, the ideas
of his wisdom and the conceptions of his will, the reservoirs of his power and the instruments of
his activity, the treasure chests of his felicity and the distributors of his grace, the judges of his
empire, who reveal his verdict. They are also the designations, the attributes and the names of the
one who is the highest and the cause of everything. The ten [seﬁrot] are inextinguishable; they
are the ten attributes of his exalted majesty, the ten ﬁngers of the hands, ten lights by which he
reﬂects himself and ten clothes with which he covers himself. They are ten visions through which
he appears, ten forms through which he shaped everything, ten sanctuaries where he is magniﬁed,
ten degrees of the prophecy through which he reveals himself, ten chains from the higher parts of
which he dispenses his teaching, ten thrones from which he judges the peoples of the world, ten
compartments in paradise destined to those who are worthy of them. They are ten steps which he
goes down, and which one can go up toward him, ten zones producing all the inﬂux and all the
blessings, ten aims desired by all, but reached only by the Just, ten lights which illuminate every
intelligence, ten types of ﬁre which appease all desires, ten categories of glory which animate all
reasonable souls, ten words through which the world was created, ten spirits which animate the
world and keep it alive, ten numbers, weights and measures, which count, weigh and measure
everything, ten touchstones, which watch over the accomplishment of everything.” 7
6. The origin of the term seﬁrot. A presentation of the nomenclature
Let us go back for a moment to trace the origin of the term seﬁrot. It is the Book of Creation,
the Sefer Yetsira, which talks about esser seﬁrot belima. However, this book by the hand of
a Pythagorean Jew (of the ﬁfth century?) designates by this expression the ten primordial
6[5, p. 167].
7Knorr von Rosenroth, Kabbala denudata, Apparatus in librum Zohar III & IV, Sulzbach, 1678, quoted in [4,
p. 60].

Is the Universe of the Divine dividable?
209
numbers which constitute the foundations of created order. It was only in the interpretation
of the medieval kabbalists, that the seﬁrot became the acting forces of Divinity, or, using
mystical terminology, that through which Divinity receives an appearance, a face. It is
those seﬁrot, which in a sense, scan the rhythm of the intimate life of the Divinity, but also
the rhythm of the pulsations of natural order into which they project themselves.
As the Divinity displays different aspects of itself according to the levels at which it
manifests itself, the seﬁrot carry different names and correspond to a variety of symbols.
It is important to see this dynamic unity of the Divinity. It is totally present at every stage
of its manifestation, but it preserves its absolute unity by a mystery (raza de yhuda).
We shall now present the nomenclature of the seﬁrot which is composed of three triads to
which a ﬁnal seﬁrah is added, which directly feeds our lower world, the so-called sublunary
world.
The ﬁrst triad consists of Kéter elyon (supreme crown), Bina (the discernment) and
Hokhma (intelligence). Through this ﬁrst group, Eyn-sof, the occult and perfectly imper-
sonal, takes, in a manner of speaking, its ﬁrst steps in the direction of the created. This
ﬁrst triad is rather neutral because it just emerges from the occult depth of Eyn-sof. One
also tends to say, as is done in certain passages of the Zohar, that the very idea of creation
becomes concrete (i.e. to the extent that one can speak of anything concrete at this level of
the seﬁrot ) in this passage from ﬁrst seﬁrah to Hokhma.
The second triad contains the implacable rigour of judgment, called Din, then grace or
Hésed, which dispenses its blessings, and ﬁnally the result of those two opposing forces,
the sixth seﬁrah, Tif’érét or splendour, also called Rahamin, mercy. Tif’érét / Rahamin,
which symbolises the community of Israël, is also called the superior Shekina as opposed
to Malkhut, the inferior Shekina (which is the tenth and last seﬁrah). Situated in the very
center of the seﬁrotic tree, Tif’érét exerts an appeasing inﬂuence in the seﬁrotic world by
tempering rigour with mercy.
The third triad encompasses Hod, majesty, Nétsah, eternity and ﬁnally Yesod, i.e. foun-
dation. This last seﬁrah, the second-last of the whole series, symbolises the Just, for a
passage from the Proverbs (10; 25) speaks of the Just as of the foundation of the universe.
In the conﬁguration of primordial man, which constitutes an alternative to the seﬁrotic
tree, the seﬁrah Yesod corresponds to a sign of alliance, i.e. the phallus. On the other
hand, the very last seﬁrah, Malkhut (kingdom), is gifted with an intrinsically feminine
symbol: This seﬁrah is indeed a real receptacle in which all the inﬂux of higher entities
is deposed. Malkhut revives the worlds by transmitting to them the Shéfa’, or directed
ﬂux.
7. Lights and colours
We saw how the theory of the ten primordial numbers of the Book of Creation gave rise
to the nomenclature of the seﬁrot, which ended up imposing itself on all kabbalists start-
ing with the authors of the zoharic literature. Let us now have a closer look at the theory
of intellectual lights, which we know through the writings of the pre-zoharic Iyyun-circle
(thirteenth century). In the Sefer ha-‘Iyyun (book of theosophical speculation), God is de-
scribed as “the One which is united in all its powers, just like the ﬂame of ﬁre, which unites

210
M.-R. Hayoun
Fig. 1. The Sephirot. Frontispiece of Paulus Ricius, Portae Lucis (Gates of Light), Augsburg, 1516.
itself in all its colours, whereas its powers emanate from this unity like the light of the eyes
comes from the black of the eye”.8 We may identify the ten seﬁrot with ten lights, because
the mystical speculations of the beginning of the Zohar regarding Beréshit, the ﬁrst term
of the Torah, seem to come from the writings of the Iyyun-circle:
“In the beginning, when the will of the king started to act, he engraved signs into the celestial
aura. A dark ﬂame emerged from the most intimate domain of the mystery of Eyn-sof, like a mist,
which takes shape in something that does not have any, a dark ﬂame enclosed in the ring of this
aura, a ﬂame which was neither white, nor black, nor red, nor green, and which was without any
colour. It was only when this ﬂame started to rise and to expand that it produced radiant colours.
In the most intimate centre of this ﬂame indeed a spring gushed forth, from which colours poured
themselves onto everything that was beneath, a spring hidden in the mysterious secrets of Eyn-
sof. The spring passed through the ﬁrst ether without really travelling through it, and became
completely unrecognisable until by the very power of this break through, a supreme and occult
point started to glow. Beyond this point nothing can be known, and that is the reason why it is
called Réshit, i.e. the beginning, i.e. the ﬁrst word of creation.” (Zohar I, 15a)
The author thus turns to the symbolism of light in order to explain how the emergence of
the ﬁrst superior entity from the occult depths of Eyn-sof takes place. This light sometimes
carries the name of light that conceals itself and hides from sight (or mit’ allem). It is the
8Quoted in [3, p. 330].

Is the Universe of the Divine dividable?
211
ﬁrst seﬁrah, completely bereft of shape and identiﬁed with a mirror which does not have
any colour, and hence renders them all.
The world of colours makes it possible for the kabbalists to show how the different
powers of the Divinity, which are the seﬁrot, project themselves. The symbolism of colours
plays a fundamental role in determining each of those superior entities.
“As all the religions seem to agree on applying the concept of light to divine essence, colour, which
is considered originally as the manifestation of light, cannot therefore have any other function than
to refer to the Divinity as it manifests itself or as it appears. The different colours hence necessarily
symbolise the different modes or ways in which the divine being manifests itself. They represent
the divine being under different aspects, as well as in its relations with whatever is exterior to it.
The symbolism of light therefore varies depending on the concept of divine essence and of its
relationship with the world.” 9
8. The unbreakable dynamic unity governing the seﬁrot and respected in prayer
One may refer to the beautiful remark made by Tishby “the seﬁrot are the divine archetype
of a universe which is not divine”.10 Fundamentally, the Zohar does not recognize the
existence of barriers separating the world above from the world beneath, the world of the
dead from the world of the living. The universe of the seﬁrot is precisely the obligatory
passage between those different levels of being. Even the inferior seﬁrot are animated by
the desire to come closer to their original source. They do not, however, turn away from
our lower world, which they nourish with their blessings and which they, by doing so, keep
alive. Different channels unite all the levels of the seﬁrot to one another. It is along those
channels that people who pray in Israel orient their prayers, if they want the latter to be
answered.
The Zohar (I, 12b) sometimes conceives of the last seﬁrah as being interwoven with “the
other side”, i.e. as being in close proximity with the forces of evil. The worst thing to do
would be to give autonomous status to this last seﬁrah, Malkhut, and to cut if off from the
others with which it forms an indivisible whole. Malkhut has to remain united to Tif’érét,
because the harmony of the worlds depends on it.
If someone who is praying, isolates in his mind Shekina from the other seﬁrot, and
addresses his prayers to Shekina only, he will be committing an act of idolatry and is bound
to reinforce the grip of “the other side”. The Zohar hadash (Béréshit, 18c) explicitly warns
against this and quotes Exodus 22; 19: “Whoever sacriﬁces to the gods, and not to God
only, exposes himself to anathema”.
References
[1] K.C. Bähr, Symbolik des mosaischen Kultus, I, Heidelberg, 1837.
[2] J. Maier, Die Kabbalah. Einführung, klassische Texte, Erläuterungen, C.H. Beck, München, 1995.
[3] G. Scholem, Les origines de la kabbale, traduction par Jean Loewenson, Aubier, Paris, 1966.
9[1, p. 317].
10[6, Vol. I, p. 273].

212
M.-R. Hayoun
[4] G. Scholem, La mystique juive: les thèmes fondamentaux, traduction de l’allemand avec une introduction par
Maurice-Ruben Hayoun, Le Cerf, Paris, 1985.
[5] G. Scholem, Le nom et les symboles de Dieu dans la mystique juive, traduit de l’allemand avec une introduc-
tion et des notes par Maurice-Ruben Hayoun, Le Cerf, Paris, 1989.
[6] I. Tishby, The Wisdom of the Zohar. Arranged by F. Lachower and I. Tishby. Introductions and explanations
by I. Tishby, translated by D. Goldstein, Oxford University Press for the Littman Library, Oxford, 1989.

CHAPTER 11
Mathematics and the Divine: Ramon Lull
Charles Lohr
Institut für Systematische Theologie, Arbeitsbereich Dogmatik Theologische Fakultät,
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, D-79085 Freiburg, Germany
E-mail: Charles.Lohr@theol.uni-freiburg.de
Contents
1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 215
2. The arbor elementalis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 215
3. Lull’s dynamic understanding of reality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 216
4. The disciplines as productive arts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 220
5. Geometry as an “art” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 224
6. Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 227
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 228
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
213


Mathematics and the Divine: Ramon Lull
215
1. Introduction
Medieval Scholasticism sought, in accordance with its apologetic purpose, to present the
various disciplines as Aristotelian “sciences”, theology taking its principles from the ar-
ticles of the Christian faith and philosophy from the axioms which Aristotle was thought
to have found, to argue to “scientiﬁc” conclusions which would agree with one another.
Our histories of human thought have consequently neglected the medieval development of
another Aristotelian project, the description of methods or “arts” of production—medicine
for example—so that many signiﬁcant thinkers have been treated inadequately. The Cata-
lan, Ramon Lull (1232–1316), belongs to this latter group.
Lull, who enjoyed a position in the court of the later king of Majorca (a realm which
at that time extended as far as Montpellier), resolved at the age of about 30 years to dedi-
cate his life to winning Muslims and Jews for the truth of Christianity. After studying both
Latin and Arabic as well as Christian and Muslim theology, he composed a great num-
ber of works in the most diverse literary forms and travelled to the leading cities of the
Mediterranean basin (including north Africa and Cyprus) in accord with this missionary
purpose. During the period between 1270 and 1307, he drew up various forms of a produc-
tive “art” in the utopian conviction that through his “art” man would produce a world in
which concord among the different religions of the world should reign.
2. The arbor elementalis
We all remember the dream of Nebuchadnezzar, recorded in the book of Daniel:
I looked, and lo! there was a tree in the midst of the earth, and its height was great. The tree had
grown great and strong, so that its height reached to the heavens, and its bound of vision to the
end of the earth. Its leaves were fair, and its fruit was abundant, providing food for all (Daniel
4.10–12).
The symbolism of the tree played an important role in the Mediterranean context of Muslim
Suﬁsm and Jewish Kabbalism in which Lull’s ideas developed. In all its forms the tree
appears as a symbol of growth, of dynamic action, of striving for the inﬁnite. It is “great”,
it “has grown great and strong”, its “height reaches to the heavens”.
The structure of the book on the Arbor elementalis (Elemental Tree, ROL XXIV 11–
116) in Ramon Lull’s Arbor scientiae (Tree of Science, Rome 1296) also resembles the
description of the tree in Nebuchadnezzars’s dream. Like the branches, leaves, and fruit
of the tree described in the book of Daniel, Lull’s Arbor elementalis grows great in its
(Table 1).
Table 1
roots
principles of the art (dignitates)
trunk
chaos
branches
simple elements
boughs
composite elements
leaves
accidents
ﬂowers
instruments
fruit
elementated things (elementata)

216
C. Lohr
Fig. 1. Lull’s Arbor Elementalis. Source: Arbor Scientiae, Lyon, 1515.
The Arbor elementalis grows from the Lullian principles, through substances and acci-
dents, to the ﬁnal elementata. This structure is basic, not only for all the sections of the
Arbor scientiae, but also for all of Lull’s works. I would like here to present Lull’s idea of
the emergence of all things from the vast realm of possibility which he called chaos, on
which his mathematics is based.
The roots of the Arbor elementalis are the attributes of God, the “dignities” of the Lul-
lian Art: bonitas, magnitudo, duratio; potentia, sapientia, voluntas; virtus, veritas, gloria
(goodness, greatness, duration; power, wisdom, will; virtue, truth, glory). The inclusion of
greatness among the principles shows that Lull was thinking of a tree which is “great and
strong”, the height of which “reaches to the heavens”. In the dynamic spirit of Anselm of
Canterbury’s id quo maius cogitari nequit (that than which nothing greater can be thought),
Lull maintained that all the dignities of the Art must be taken to stand for active powers
striving for the inﬁnite.
3. Lull’s dynamic understanding of reality
Lull’s analysis of what it means when we say that the powers of the principles are active is
revolutionary. Lull spoke not only of principles of being, but also of principles of action.
He proposed the thesis that God is not only productive contingently (contingenter) and
outwardly (ad extra) in creation, but also necessarily (necessarie) and inwardly (ad intra)
in the divine persons of the Christian Trinity. He maintained that all the principles of his

Mathematics and the Divine: Ramon Lull
217
Art must be active necessarily and inwardly. True goodness must produce something good;
true greatness must produce something great. We cannot truly call something good which
does not produce a good.
In this way Lull introduced a completely new category in the history of thought. Because
action presupposes a source, that which is produced, and a bond between them, he spoke
not only of the “dignities”, but also of their activity and the “correlatives” (correlativa) of
their action. To designate these correlatives, he developed a new terminology:
I call the acts of goodness boniﬁcative, boniﬁcable, to bonify; also the acts of greatness are mag-
niﬁcative, magniﬁcable, to magnify; and so for the other divine dignities.
Actus ... bonitatis dico boniﬁcativum, boniﬁcabile, boniﬁcare; actus etiam magnitudinis sunt
magniﬁcativum, magniﬁcabile, magniﬁcare; et sic de aliis divinis dignitatibus (Vita coaetanea
26; ROL VIII 290).
Lull generalised this idea to the extent that he could speak even of the abstract moments
of activity as -tivum, -bile, and -are (-tive, -ble, to -fy). The correlatives are the intrinsic
and substantial moments of all agency (agentia). They are ontological principles, implicit
in the striving of all things for inﬁnity.
Applying his ideas to creation, Lull strongly emphasized not only the dynamic character
of God’s causal action, but also the dynamic activity of its effect which is the created
world itself. For Lull creation is a likeness of God because of its dynamic character. Not
only does God’s activity of creation not cease with the bestowal of being on the world, the
world which God has created is itself also active, tending to its own perfection. The divine
activity is continued in the striving of all things for their own unlimited perfection.
Lull applied therefore the distinction between necessary inward (ad intra) activity and
contingent outward (ad extra) activity to the activity of creatures. To explain how the dis-
tinction applies to creaturely activity, he employed the example of a property in a subject.
Finite things like ﬁre and whiteness have their own necessary, inward (necessaria, intensa)
correlatives of action, but the outward things which they need to realize the perfection of
their activity (earth or water, this or that body) are contingent and extended (contingentia,
extensa). The forms of ﬁre (igneitas) or of whiteness (albedo) are necessarily active within
themselves, but when the form say of whiteness contingently whitens (albiﬁcat) this or that
body, this form is present in the body as a perfection in a “contracted” (contracte) way.
Through this analysis Lull was able to apply a distinction which he had learned from
Arabic authors to explain the origin of the predicamental accidents. This distinction he
referred to as a distinction between “two intentions”—not in the Scholastic sense of ﬁrst
and second intentions in logic, but rather in the sense of a “ﬁrst intention”, which is the
ultimate end of an action, and a “second intention” which includes the instruments and the
operations necessary to attain the end.
Lull explains that the knowledge of the ﬁrst and second intention and their correct order
(recta ordinatio) are most necessary to men. He clariﬁes this distinction in one of his
earliest works with the following example:
Furthermore, we shall see that the apple tree or any other fruit-bearing tree brings forth leaves, so
that it can better bear fruit. But it does not bear fruit for the sake of the leaves. Therefore, it bears
fruit by a ﬁrst intention, but it brings forth leaves by a second intention.
Praeterea, iam videmus nos, quod pomerium vel quaelibet alia arbor fructifera, ut melius possit
facere fructum, facit folia. Non facit autem fructum ad foliorum utilitatem. Facit ergo fructum

218
C. Lohr
intentione prima; folia vero intentione secunda producit (Compendium logicae Algazelis, Mont-
pellier 1271/72; ed. C. Lohr, §8.13).
Lull’s use of the distinction reﬂects the much broader meaning employed by Arabic writers.
The terms can be found in the philosophical encyclopaedia of the so-called “Brotherhood
of Purity”. This school explained that the ﬁrst intention of the creator in the production
of the world is the permanence and welfare of creatures, whereas corruption and pain are
accidental and due to the imperfection of the matter which is necessary for creation. It
was possibly through the tenth-century encyclopaedia that the distinction of two inten-
tions came to Lull, either directly or perhaps through cultivated Majorcan Jews, of whose
intellectual baggage the encyclopaedia formed an essential part.
Lull’s emphasis on God’s productive action in creating the world and on the consequent
dynamic aspect of all reality led him to distinguish clearly between the end of an action
and the means to the end. The ﬁrst intention of an action is its proper end, the second in-
tention is not the proper end, but that of the instrument which is for the sake of the proper
end. In his earliest works Lull used this distinction primarily in the sphere of ethics: God
should be loved for himself, while all other things are only a means to this end; sin reverses
this order—it is contrary to the correct order (recta intentio/recta ordinatio). But he soon
applied it in other areas as well: in the Liber demonstrationum (Book of Demonstrations,
1274–78) to the problem of the relationship between faith and reason, in the Ars demon-
strativa (Demonstrative Art, ca. 1283) to the theory of knowledge. The Liber de intentione
(Book concerning Intention, 1283) offers a generalized theory of the two intentions.
Lull applied this distinction to the action of the elements in his epoch-making Liber
chaos (Book of Chaos), a work appended to the Ars demonstrativa. As indicated above, ﬁre
must by nature—in the ﬁrst intention of its action—necessarily (necessarie) and actively
burn inwardly (ad intra). But as ﬁnite, it requires a foreign matter—in second intention—
to realize its activity. Whether ﬁre warms air, water, or earth outwardly (ad extra) is not
necessary, but contingent. In itself ﬁre is active “substantially” (substantialiter); in water
or in earth it is active “accidentally” (accidentaliter). Thus each created thing strives nec-
essarily and “in ﬁrst intention” toward its own inward perfection. But as ﬁnite, a created
thing can not attain its goal—its perfection—without an outward activity. In order to real-
ize its true self, a ﬁnite -tivum must go out of itself to an outward -bile. Extrinsic objects
become thus the means or instruments which serve intrinsic perfection “in second inten-
tion”. In this understanding of the properties of things action and passion are not, as in
Aristotle, simply accidental. Because being and activity both belong to the substance of
things, inward action and passion are necessary and substantial, whereas only outward
action and passion are contingent and predicamental accidents.
Taken also as a whole, the world created by God is active and strives for its own perfec-
tion. Lull understood the individuals, the species and the genera, which we encounter in
the world, as parts of a whole, as components of a unity reﬂecting the dynamic greatness
of the creator. He presented his understanding of this whole—this universe—most clearly
in the Liber chaos, making use of many ideas taken from the great Suﬁmaster, Ibn al-
’Arabî (d. 1240). For Lull, chaos is the complex of the intentional limits of the activity of
all the things which were created by God in a unique act. Chaos embraces all the poten-
tialities of created things. From chaos proceed the actualizations of all their potentialities.

Mathematics and the Divine: Ramon Lull
219
Lull divided chaos into three degrees. In the ﬁrst degree we ﬁnd the causal seeds (sem-
ina causalia)—the universal form and the universal matter, the genera and species, the
substances and accidents—which ground all things, as in the Arbor elementalis outlined
above. In the second degree we ﬁnd the ﬁrst individuals of the particular species—Adam
as the perfect, primordial man. In the third all the individuals deriving from these ﬁrst ones.
But Lull’s idea of the correlatives of all activity completely transformed the meaning of
these ideas. Chaos is made up of the four abstract essences of the four elements: igneity,
aereity, aqueity, terreity (igneitas, aereitas, aqueitas, terreitas). Each essence is active in its
proper form (igniﬁcativum), its proper matter (igniﬁcabile) and its proper act (igniﬁcare).
The matter and the form of the various intentional realities in chaos should not be thought
of as limited to the concrete individuals beneath them. Though abstract, they are real things,
existing intentionally as real potentialities, as real goals for the striving of creation for its
own perfection.
All the proper forms are joined together in a unique universal form—an soul of the world
(anima mundi)—which is the sum of all the possible -tiva—and all the proper matters are
joined together in a unique universal matter—a body of the world (corpus mundi)—which
is the sum of all the possible -bilia. From the universal form and universal matter emerge
the predicables and the predicaments—genera and species, substances and accidents—
and from them in turn the individual things composed of particular forms and matters. Each
particular form and each particular matter is grounded in the universal form and matter. Out
of the unity of the universal form and the universal matter arises the one supposite (unum
suppositum), which is the contract inﬁnite Lull calls chaos. The creator has so created
things that they tend to approach this contract inﬁnite not only by numerical multiplication.
The concrete individual things which emerge from the causal seeds (semina causalia) tend
each of them also to their intrinsic, proper perfection. By nature all concrete things strive
to fulﬁll the abstract essences from which they have emerged.
Lull’s conception of nature as the source of the limitless striving in things sets his
dynamic understanding of reality off from the ideas of his Scholastic contemporaries.
Whereas the Latin Scholastics thought of the nature of a thing simply as its essence under-
stood as a principle of activity, Lull distinguished between essence and nature, taking the
latter to be that which is the source of its appetite for its proper act—its proper -are. The
nature of man, for example, is that which gives him his appetite for the humanization of his
animality (appetitus homiﬁcandi animal). By nature man seeks to transform his animality
completely into that of a human being. That is, I think, the sense of the enigmatic deﬁni-
tion of the Logica nova (New Logic, Genoa 1383) Man is a humanizing animal (Homo est
animal homiﬁcans: I cap. 5, ROL XXIII 31).
In his Liber novus de astronomia (New Book of Astronomy, Paris 1297; ROL XVII
93–218) Lull explains the difference between nature and essence:
There is a difference between essence and nature, because essence is related to constituting being
(as humanity which constitutes human being, and lionness the being of a lion, and igneity which
constitutes the being of ﬁre). And nature is related to becoming a nature (as the nature of a man
which gives the appetite of becoming a man, and as the nature of a lion which gives the appetite
of becoming a lion, and as the nature of ﬁre which has the appetite of becoming ﬁre).
Inter essentiam et naturam est differentia, quoniam essentia respectum habet ad constituendum
esse, sicut humanitas, quae constituit esse humanum; et leonitas esse leonis; et igneitas, quae
constituit esse ignis. Et natura respectum habet ad naturandum, sicut natura hominis, quae dat

220
C. Lohr
appetitum homiﬁcandi; et sicut natura leonis, quae dat appetitum leoniﬁcandi; et sicut natura ignis,
quae habet appetitum calefaciendi (I 2 5 [1]; ROL XVII 163).
This chapter of the Liber de astronomia returns us to the tree of the Arbor elementalis.
Lull’s tree is made up of its matter and form as a material thing and the vegetative power
which transforms the material thing into a living tree. Without the vegetative power, Lull
tells us, the tree would dry up; the whole appetite of the tree would be inclosed within
its own being and, in its essence, to being simply that which it is. The vegetative power
completes the tree; it is its end and purpose. Through the vegetative power all the parts
of the tree have the appetite to vegetate (ad vegetandum)—of going beyond themselves in
branches, leaves and ﬂowers. Through the vegetative power Lull’s tree has the appetite to
attain the end for which it exists and to multiply its nature and its similitude. In Lull’s own
words:
The tree has an appetite through the vegetative power for the end for which it exists and for
multiplying its nature and likeness.
Arbor appetitum habet per vegetativam ad ﬁnem, propter quem est, et ad multiplicandum suam
naturam et similitudinem (loc. cit.; ROL XVII 163).
This striving, this appetite is true both of the species and of the individuals which make
them up. For Lull, all concrete things strive by nature to return to the species and gen-
era from which they have emerged. In his Liber de natura (Book of Nature), Lull deﬁned
nature as the principle through which a concrete being—the individual man (homo), for
example—approach ever more closely its abstract being—the essence of man (humani-
tas)—as to their perfection (Cyprus 1301; ed. Palma 1744, Int. IV p. 4).
Although the particular, individual things of which the world is made up are in con-
stant process, tending toward their proper perfection, no individual thing can attain the full
perfection of its species. The species is the limit to which the perfection of the individual
approaches, the genus that of the species, the universe that of the genera. The abstract is
already really present in the concrete, individual things as the limit of their striving toward
inﬁnity.
Chaos taken as a whole is understood as the created reﬂection of the divine inﬁnity
whose dynamism unfolds in a nature which is three-fold. At each degree of the return
of created things to the original unity the respective -tiva form the natura naturans, the
respective -bilia the natura naturata, and the respective -are the union of both—the natura
naturare. Chaos is the trunk of the elemental tree because it is the limit of the striving of
ﬁnite things for inﬁnity—the limit of the striving of all created things for that than which
nothing greater can be thought (id quo maius cogitari nequit).
4. The disciplines as productive arts
Lull’s Art represents the attempt to understand and make use of this dynamic conception
of reality. It is precisely because this conception was meant to include the striving of ﬁ-
nite things for the inﬁnite that Lull’s thought is so foreign to one accustomed to Scholastic
terminology. The Scholasticism of his contemporaries was built on the idea of science as
ordering a truth which is already possessed, but hidden. Science was thought of as the or-
dered knowledge of the immutable and eternal essences of things. It was in accordance

Mathematics and the Divine: Ramon Lull
221
with this idea that Thomas Aquinas sought to arrange revealed Catholic truth in a “scien-
tiﬁc” way on the model found in Aristotle and Euclid. But in Lull’s works there appears
the notion of truth not as something possessed, but as something to be gained. In Lull’s
work truth is not a beginning; it is rather an end to be sought.
Lull seems clearly to have known Aristotle’s distinction of the disciplines concerned
with knowing, doing, and making, particularly as it was developed in the Arabic tradition.
Aristotle developed his conception of these disciplines in his treatment of the intellectual
virtues in Nicomachean Ethics VI 3–5. Whereas for Aristotle—as for the Scholastics who
took the idea from him—“science” is concerned with the knowledge of the immutable
and universal essences of things, the practical disciplines he described as concerned with
doing and making deal with the possible, with things capable of being other than they are.
Practical reason has to do with things belonging to the vast realm Lull described as “chaos”.
Both doing and making seek something which does not exist, but is none the less real,
because it can be. “Art” has to do with making; “prudence” is the virtue of correct conduct.
The different ends of acting and making led Aristotle to make this further distinction. In
making, something is produced—a house or a chair, for example. In acting, there is no
product other than the prudent action itself.
“Art”—the technical knowledge which has to do with making—is deﬁned as a virtue
with respect to production alone. Although it aims at perfection, the level of technical skill
is always limited; for instance, by the material being worked on. But here we must take
account of an important distinction, which arises because of the difference between art and
nature, as Aristotle observed in Metaphysics VII 9 (1034a8–30). Whereas the source of
change in artistic production lies in the producer and his knowledge, nature brings forth
change of itself.
Aristotle distinguished accordingly between two forms of art, according as the change
involves natural change or not. The material which forms the basis of technical production
is such that it either can or can not move itself. If the material (say, wood or stone in
building a house) can not move itself, an extrinsic principle (an architect) is necessary
for the production of the form (of a house). The house can not produce itself without an
“artist”. But if the material is capable of producing the change of itself, the active principle
of the change is already present in the subject as its nature. The nature is an intrinsic
principle which can develop and change of itself. The former type of change is that included
in what was later called “ﬁne art”; the latter is that with which the disciplines like medicine
and rhetoric and the Ars lulliana are concerned. Health, for example, is a product of nature;
the medicines which the art of the physician uses to heal simply help to restore the natural
balance of the bodily humors.
In the medical tradition this latter type of art came to be known as a “conjectural art”
(ars coniecturalis, Celsus, 1 praef.; 2, 6 ﬁn.). The nature of those things having a principle
of change in themselves lies in the form by which they are constituted. The term “nature”
should be understood here in the sense of a dynamic process—a natura naturans. It does
not mean simply the principle, but rather also the end, of the activity—an end which it seeks
ever more closely to approach (Physics II 2 [193b12–18]). The nature which is the origin
of the change is itself the goal of the change—the fullness and perfection of the essence of
the thing. Rather than speaking of nature as a static principle of activity, one should speak
of it as a “bridge”—a bridge rendering an estimate, a “conjecture”, necessary, because the

222
C. Lohr
Table 2
temperament
hot
cold
wet
dry
quality
quality
quality
quality
absolutely tempered
all primary qualities are in balance
hot
hot dominates over cold
in balance
cold
cold dominates over hot
in balance
wet
in balance
wet dominates over dry
dry
in balance
dry dominates over wet
hot & wet
hot dominates over cold
wet dominates over dry
hot & dry
hot dominates over cold
dry dominates over wet
cold & wet
cold dominates over hot
wet dominates over dry
cold & dry
cold dominates over hot
dry dominates over wet
end of the activity is an ideal maximum, approached ever more closely, but never attained
(Table 2).
Not only the individual elements seek a maximum; the activity of all the elements, taken
together as a unit, also tends toward a highest value. Galen, the greatest physician of an-
tiquity, used the “canon” (rule) of Polycleitos as an example of nature’s way of working
in healing (Ars medica cap. 14 [Kühn 341–343]). He compared the balance and symme-
try produced by nature with the artist seeking the best possible organization of its subject
through its victory over matter. He saw nature as a workman, a maker in a creative process.
Nature is the immanent agent, bringing the form of health, which is adumbrated in man’s
abstract essence, to concrete realization. The ideal end of nature is the realization of the
canon, the best possible organization of parts in balance, symmetry and proportion. In its
course it follows a complex of rules, but because of the torpidity of matter, its end is a limit
to which it can ever more closely approach, but never attain.
Galen stressed the due proportions which must be maintained among the primary qual-
ities for the attainment of health. He presented the best possible temperament as the con-
dition in which all primary qualities are in balance. But this temperament was an ideal,
rarely if ever attained in the real world. Galen’s doctrine is found in his Medical Art and a
schematic presentation (see Joutsivuo 122) makes clear the balance which the action of the
qualities of the elements seeks is an ideal value, sought, but rarely attained (see Table 2).
The balanced complexion (aequa complexio), the ideal value to which all qualitative do-
minion was to be referred in a system based upon the primary qualities, was the temperate
or qualitatively balanced complexion. Galen’s De complexionibus (On Complexions) de-
scribes the complexion as temperate when it is balanced between its possible extremes (I
cap. 6 [Kühn I 547f.]; see McVaugh, “Introduction” 10). But the medical tradition, while
accepting the possibility of an ideal mathematical equality, emphasized the relativity and
variability of complexions in the real world in which the physician lives. For Avicenna, the
human complexion “is something with a considerable range (latitudo) and cannot be pre-
cisely deﬁned; it exists, not ﬁxed, but between two extremities, which it may not surpass
and still remain the human complexion” (Canon I fen 1 doct. 3 cap. 1 [Venice 1507, f. 2r];
see McVaugh 21).

Mathematics and the Divine: Ramon Lull
223
These ideas—in both the Arabic and the Latin traditions—were also used to clarify
the status of the discipline as an art. At the beginning of his famous Colliget, Averroes,
the great Muslim Peripatetic of the twelfth century in Spain, deﬁnes the art of medicine
as “an operative art, taking its departure from true principles, in which the preservation
of the health of the human body is sought ... to the extent possible for each body” (I
cap. 1 [Venice 1562, f. 3r–4r]). He states that in all the practical arts three things must be
considered: the subject, the end sought, and the instruments necessary to attain the end in
the subject in question (that is, ﬁrst and second intention).
Averroes distinguished two types of knowledge in medicine. One type is theoretical and
deals—in a “scientiﬁc” way—with the causes of health and sickness. The second type of
knowledge is experiential and deals with the various types of medicine and the hidden
powers of the medicinal compounds necessary to attain their ends. Averroes regarded the
theoretical part of medicine as an Aristotelian “science” belonging to natural philosophy,
because it deals with ultimate causes of sickness and health. The practical part of medicine
takes only the “principles” of its art from the theoretical physician; for the “rules” of the
art, it is limited to experience—to trial and error.
Averroes structured his Colliget in accordance with this distinction, as he stated at the
beginning of the work. He explained that he would begin with the universal and then pro-
ceed to the particulars, employing rules formulated for the purpose. By means of his art, the
practical physician tries to predict the working of nature, but can only have probable knowl-
edge. He approaches the truth by way of estimate and approximation—coniecturae—and
needs long experience. Averroes cited the aphorism of Hippocrates: Vita brevis, ars longa
(Life is brief, art long).
In the medieval medical tradition a methodology was developed for these two processes,
using the terminology of “precepts” and “rules”. The universal principles applying to all
cases were designated as “precepts” (praecepta) or “principles” (principia) and the means
of arriving at the desired end in particular cases “rules” (regulae), as Arnau of Vilanova
explained in his Aphorismi de gradibus (Aphorisms concerning Degrees), a treatise on the
degrees of intensity in the operation of compound medicines. Rules in medicine, through
which the intellect may attain truth to the extent possible, have, he tells us, to do with
particular applications, but are based on theorems, that is, the conclusions deduced from
the certain principles of medicine (ed. McVaugh, Arnaldi Opera, II prologus). The rules are
meant to aid the intellect in its approach from merely probable, experiential knowledge on
its way to production of some work. A “rule” in an art—understood in the medieval sense
of “art”—is a statement which regulates the approximations and conjectures necessary for
the artist as he approaches balance and symmetry in the end sought. The arts consist of a
system of “precepts” and “rules” according to which a given end may be attained.
The idea of the disciplines as productive arts led to a radical revision of the theory of the
traditional liberal arts. As early as the tenth century, Alfarabi, in his Catalogue of the Sci-
ences, presented each of the liberal arts under two headings, ﬁrst as “sciences”, and then
as “arts”—geometry, for example, not only as a “science” in the traditional Aristotelian
sense, but also as an “art” concerned with production. The medieval Arabic tradition made
great advances employing this conception of the arts. In Spain, under the inﬂuence of Al-
farabi, a great effort was made clarify the notions of “scientiﬁc” and “artistic” practice,
in a way which was somewhat similar to our distinction of theoretical and applied sci-

224
C. Lohr
ence. Theoretical geometry—the geometry of Euclid’s Elements—was regarded as “scien-
tiﬁc”, considering by way of propositions, theorems and examples the universal essences
of lines, surfaces and volumes and formulating demonstrations in a teaching context. But
Aristotelian demonstrative “science” deals only with universal statements which are im-
mutable because based on the immutable essences of things. In the Aristotelian theory
there is no “scientiﬁc” knowledge of individuals or things subject to change. The art of
geometry measures real dimensions toward making things, with the aid of instruments and
ﬁxed procedures. As an art, geometry must go beyond the universals—genus, species,
difference, property, and accident—to the individual things which are to be produced.
Lull understood his Art in this way, but also as general, applying not only to geometry
and medicine, but to theology as well, and to all the other disciplines, taken not as sciences,
but rather as productive arts. The Art presupposes the reality of the vast realm of possible
things described in the Liber chaos. Taking as his point of departure the existence of this
realm called “chaos”, Lull developed a new methodology to guide the “artist” in his pro-
duction of the possible reality conjured up by man’s imaginative faculty and his realization
of its truth in its production.
It is as a part of this conception that the terms, “precepts” and “rules”, used by Lull,
must be understood. His Art is concerned with doing and making. To attain the end sought,
his Art begins with principles or precepts and goes on to rules, as he found them especially
in the medical tradition. In his Ars inventiva veritatis (Art of Discovering the Truth, about
1290) he attempted to formulate the rules by which the end sought—the work, its truth—
could be achieved. The Ars inventiva seeks to incorporate his conception of the search for
truth in the Art which he had ﬁrst developed in his Ars compendiosa inveniendi veritatem
(Compendious Art of Discovering the Truth, 1274) and his Ars demonstrativa (Demonstra-
tive Art, 1283). From the time of the Ars inventiva the opening distinctions of Lull’s Arts
enumerate the principles and rules for this purpose.
Lull had begun to develop methods applicable not only to demonstrative science, but
also to “artistic” production. He substituted in the Tabula generalis (General Table, Tunis
1293–Naples 1294) for the rules of the Ars inventiva nine new rules, meant to categorize
the particular things which will be discovered in the phenomenal world. The Tabula begins
with possibility and continues with rules based on the Aristotelian table of categories,
as he had found them in the Arabic tradition, explicitly in the work of the Andalusian
Suﬁ, Ibn Sab`în of Murcia (1217/18–1269/71 Mecca). The combinatoric which the Tabula
introduces was meant to help in making the rules applicable to the phenomenal world. The
Ars generalis ultima (The General Art in Its Final Form, Lyon 1305–Pisa 1308) represents
the ﬁnal stage of this development.
5. Geometry as an “art”
The idea of geometry as an “art”, which followed from the vision of the creator as a maker,
revolutionized mathematics. Lull related this vision to the medical theory of the intensity
of qualities. The idea of a range—a “latitude”—in the intensity of qualities which had
appeared in the medical tradition brought the discussion into the area of mathematics con-
cerned with limits and continuous variability. These notions mark a break with the static,

Mathematics and the Divine: Ramon Lull
225
“scientiﬁc” geometry which the West had inherited from antiquity in favor of a geometry
which takes account of change. In this new geometry, ﬁgures are generated by the move-
ments of points and lines. The difference of approach may be illustrated by two possible
ways of formulating deﬁnitions in geometry. The circumference of a circle can be deﬁned
statically as the locus of all points in a plane at a given distance from a center or dynam-
ically as the curve generated by a point moving in a plane at a constant distance from a
center.
Here Lull made some important distinctions. For Aristotle, qualities like heat were ac-
cidental forms. But whereas he had maintained that such qualities were capable of differ-
ences in degree only in the subjects in which they are found, not in themselves, Lull—in
order to deal with such problems as the way in which a body grows hotter—suggested a
quantitative treatment of increases or decreases in a quality (heat) by way of the addition
or subtraction of degrees of intensity (temperature). Lull distinguished between an intense
quantity (quantitas intensa), referring to the intensity of a perfection, and an extended
quantity (quantitas extensa), characterized by three dimensions as it heats a foreign mat-
ter, and admitting only a potential inﬁnity. In accordance with this distinction, the measure
of the intensity of a quality was understood not as the extension of a quality in a subject
(quantitas extensa, extended quantity, the quantity of heat), but rather in the sense of the
inward quantity (quantitas intensa, temperature, for example).
Whereas Aristotle simply stated that, of the two qualities belonging to each of the
four elements, one belongs to one element “more than” the other, Lull distinguished
these two qualities, maintaining that heat is a quality “proper” to ﬁre, while dryness is
“appropriated” by it from another element, earth. With this distinction, Lull went beyond
Aristotle’s analysis of the activity of the elements. The distinction of proper and appropri-
ated is based on Lull’s conception of the two intentions—intense and extense—of ﬁnite
activity. Lull understood the qualities of the elements as intimations of their dynamic ac-
tivity, expressed in terms of his theory of the correlatives of action.
Heat (caliditas) is the quality, through which ﬁre as a calefactivum is active (calefacit).
In an intensive sense, the caliditas of ﬁre has its object within itself, it is its own cale-
factibile. Lull called this species of caliditas a “proper” quality and an inseparable accident
of ﬁre; its action is a proper action and necessary. In an “extensive” sense, however, the
calefactibile of ﬁre is contingent, it is possible that it be an element like air or water (as
when air or water is heated by ﬁre) or a medicinal herb like pepper. In this case, the action
of heat is an appropriated action and contingent. Because of the instruments necessary to
gain its end, ﬁre admits “appropriatedly” only a potential inﬁnity. An appropriated qual-
ity can only approach the maximum; it is for this reason subordinate to its proper quality,
according to the speciﬁc subject in which it is found.
These two types of quality—“proper” and “appropriated—are found in each of the ele-
ments, understood as dynamic natures. Lull maintained that because of the activity of the
qualities of the elements one of the two assigned to each of the elements should be regarded
as a “proper quality”—in the way the quality of heat is related to ﬁre—while the other qual-
ity is merely “appropriated”—as is the dryness which is related to ﬁre through earth. The
distinction of ﬁrst and second intention was important in this connection. The proper qual-
ity of each element is due in “ﬁrst intention” to the necessary action of the element within
itself, whereas the appropriated quality is due in “second intention” to its contingent action

226
C. Lohr
in another element. Lull distinguished therefore the qualities of heat and dryness, main-
taining that heat is a quality “proper” to ﬁre, while dryness is an “appropriated” quality,
coming to ﬁre from earth.
We may present Lull’s conclusions as he himself did—as answers to the questions of the
Ars lulliana which are meant to relate his abstract ﬁrst principles to particularized phenom-
enal reality (Logica nova III 3 D–F; ROL XXIII 64). Since actions are—in accordance with
the Aristotelian axiom—known through their objects, a distinction in respect of the two
types of action discussed above is necessary. The distinction regards the question Quando?
(When?) of the Ars lulliana. The proper action of things is—in time—instantaneous and
continuous, because it is the ideal maximum which is the end of the action performed.
But the phenomenal “diffusion” of the appropriated action of concrete things is in time
successive and discrete, according to the concrete subject in which it is diffused.
A further question concerns the Quantum? (How much?) of quality. Lull distinguished
two types of quantity according to the type of potency (calefactibile) which is reduced to
act (calefactum). When the object is within the same genus (ad intra) as the quality which
reduces it to act, ideal quantity is continuous. But when the object is of a different genus
(ad extra), the phenomenal quality emerges as various discrete quantities.
A proper quality is continuous in quantity. The quantity of an appropriated quality is
discrete, according to the speciﬁc subject in which it is found. Taking a standard exam-
ple, Lull presents the quantity of the appropriated heat (caliditas) of ﬁre—the quantitas
extensa—as it is found in various herbs (Table 3).
Lull’s theory of the continuous and discrete powers of things is a consequence of his
vision of creaturely activity as striving for the inﬁnite—for the Anselmian “that than which
nothing greater can be thought” (id quo maius cogitari nequit). But because created things
must turn to other created things to realize their own perfection, their “proper” action—
which can be thought of as instantaneous and continuous—must remain an ideal to be
reached only by “appropriated” effort which is successive and discrete. Continuous and
instantaneous values are ideal maxima, quantities and times greater than which nothing
can be thought (quae maius cogitari nequeunt), the limits to which created activity can
only approach. Discrete and successive values are phenomenal, real-world values, values
which increase and decrease in indivisible steps, in instants of time and atoms of matter,
whose action can approach maximum values only as limits.
Lull did not make clear the manner in which transition from the continuous to the dis-
crete is made. He asserted that although in thought the division of continuous magnitudes,
such as space and time, may be continued indeﬁnitely, nevertheless in actuality this process
of subdivision is limited by the smallness of the parts obtained—that is, of atoms and in-
stants.
Table 3
Heat
dryness
humidity
coldness
pepper
4
3
2
1
cinnamon
3
fennel
2
anise
1

Mathematics and the Divine: Ramon Lull
227
With Lull’s Geometria nova (New Geometry, Paris, 1299), constructed on these presup-
positions, a radically new conception of geometry made its appearance. For Lull, natures
are not static, immutable essences, but include an ontological intensity which can be mea-
sured as a distance between the relative nothingness of ﬁnite reality and a supreme terminus
to which it tends as to its own unattainable perfection. The notion of continuous variability
marks a break with the static geometry of pure form which the West had inherited from an-
tiquity, in favor of a geometry of motion in which ﬁgures are generated by the movements
of points and lines. The new geometry’s concern with the problem of continuous variation
led to the conclusion that knowledge consists in the determination of proportions or ratios
and that perfect exactitude in measurement is unattainable.
To illustrate his idea that for the understanding of dynamic reality a “transcensus” from
rational to “mathematical” knowledge is necessary, Lull took—in his De quadratura et
triangulatura circuli (On the Quadrature and Triangulature of the Circle, Paris, 1299)—
the example of a polygon as a variable magnitude inscribed in a circle. In his explanation
of the measurement of the circle he used inscribed polygons. For rational knowledge the
polygon and the circle are ﬁxed essences which exclude one another, because according to
the principle of contradiction an attribute cannot at the same time belong and not belong
to a subject. But if we, by “conjecture”, imagine a polygon the number of sides of which
increases to inﬁnity, we can see, by the vision of the intellect, that the polygon with a
maximum number of sides will coincide with the circle. The triangle and the circle are the
polygons with the smallest and the greatest number of sides. On this view, Lull proposed a
characteristic quadrature of the circle. If the circle belongs among the polygons as the one
with an inﬁnite number of sides, its area may be found by the same means as that employed
for any other polygon, by dividing it up into a number (in this case an inﬁnite number) of
triangles.
Lull regarded the validity of the propositions of mathematics as established by the in-
tellect, the subject not being bound by the results of empirical investigation. Continuous
motion belongs to the ideal world, not to the phenomenal world where real motion is com-
posed of discrete, serially ordered states of rest. This view of mathematics as independent
of the evidence of the senses encouraged speculation and allowed the indivisible and the
inﬁnite to enter, so long as no inconsistency in thought resulted. Such an attitude enriched
the subject and eventuated in the methods of the calculus.
In a ﬁnal step the mind extends these conclusions to the absolutely inﬁnite God. Because
he understood his “new geometry” as an application of his Art as productive, Lull saw it
as a step beyond the ﬁnite mathematical ﬁgures of Euclid’s Elements on the mind’s ascent
to the absolutely inﬁnite. The mind ascends by transferring its considerations to inﬁnite
ﬁgures—the inﬁnite which was the source and means, and at the same time the unattainable
goal, of all knowledge.
6. Conclusion
Lull’s Art was meant to bridge the gap between the necessary, universal conclusions of
Aristotelian science and the contingent, particular facts which are produced by God. Lull
saw God not as knower—not as “scientist”, but as maker—he would have said, as “artist”.

228
C. Lohr
The absolutely inﬁnite God is the architect who produces the things He wants to make
manifest. Possible things are entities as the objects of His knowledge. Chaos, the trunk
of the Arbor elementalis, is the reality which bridges the chasm separating Him and the
cosmos.
These steps imply a different idea of truth than that of Aristotelian science. In his en-
counter with the divine exemplar—a real, transcendent exemplar which is his truth—man
arrives at the end of his striving. The measure of his truth is the degree of intensity with
which he reﬂects the divine exemplar. Man is a living image of God because the measure
of the intensity of his perfection is the perfection of the exemplar. It was in this way that
Lull learned the correct method of dealing with the inﬁnite, not merely as a potentiality,
but rather as an actuality, the upper limit of the activity of ﬁnite reality.
Lull’s view of cosmic phenomena made him a peculiar player in the history of thought.
Although he was certainly acquainted with Euclid’s Elements, he was not a trained mathe-
matician. Much that he wrote seems clumsy and bafﬂing. But the things he wanted to
address stemmed from the attempt to promote eternal truths in a shifting world.
The looseness of expression found in his works regarding the nature of the inﬁnite was
paralleled in Islamic Suﬁsm and Jewish Cabala, which spoke above all in images. Man
can know nothing of God’s hidden, inner nature. Only through the divine attributes can
man know something of the absolutely inﬁnite. The attributes describe God’s inner life
and are not—like the Neoplatonic emanations—outside of him. They name the moments
in which the divine life pulsates. Arabic and Hebrew writers as well as the Ars lulliana
used especially the image of the living, growing tree to describe the way in which creation
reﬂects this divine life. God’s inner nature is the hidden root of the tree, beyond the limitless
possibilities where the cosmos takes shape.
References
[1] ROL = Raimundi Lulli Opera latina, 28 vols., Palma de Mallorca–Turnhout (1957–2003).
[2] J.M. Millás Vallicrosa (ed.), El libro de la Nova geometria de Ramon Lull, Barcelona (1953).
[3] A.A. Davenport, Measure of a Different Greatness: The Intensive Inﬁnite, 1250–1650, Leiden (1999).
[4] A. González Palencia (ed. and tr.), Al-Fârâbî: Catálogo de las ciencias, 2a ed., Madrid (1953).
[5] G. Harig, Bestimmung der Intensität im medizinischen System Galens, Berlin (1974).
[6] J.E. Hofmann (ed.), Die Quellen der Cusanischen Mathematik I: Ramon Lulls Kreisquadratur, Cusanus-
Studien VII, Heidelberg (1942).
[7] T. Joutsivuo, Scholastic Tradition and Humanist Innovation: The Concept of Neutrum in Renaissance Medi-
cine, Helsinki (1999).
[8] F. Kovacic, Der Begriff der Physis bei Galen vor dem Hintergrund seiner Vorgänger, Dissertation, Univ.
Freiburg (1998); Leiden (2000).
[9] M. McVaugh, Introduction: Medieval pharmaceutical theory, in: Arnaldi de Villanova II, Granada (1975),
pp. 3–24.

CHAPTER 12
Odd Numbers and their Theological Potential.
Exploring and Redescribing the Arithmetical Poetics
of the Paintings on the Ceiling of St. Martin’s
Church in Zillis
Hugue Garcia
Pfarrhaus, CH-7432 Zillis, Switzerland
E-mail: marianne.iberg@gr-ref.ch
Contents
1. Introduction: displaying the method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 231
2. An anatomical description of the ceiling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 234
3. A theological imagination of odd numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 236
4. A zoomorphic and soteriological arithmetic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 241
5. The cross as cosmic sign and structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 245
6. The celestial cross and its function as odd-number Eon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 247
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
229


Odd numbers and their theological potential
231
As the great increase of learning has made it necessary for most historians to limit their studies to
one country, and one period of that one country, the importance of tradition as a factor in history
has been somewhat obscured. Students of a particular area and age too often fail to realize that
many of the actions they have to study were determined by patterns established far away and long
ago.1
By some strange illusion, it is often believed that history does not repeat itself; under the pretext
that an historical event is isolated, it is imagined to be particular. Yet, numerous historical events
are practically twins: they resemble each other like drops of water, and indeed, one can hardly
make distinctions between the two. Only from a sociological viewpoint are they put into one
single category. It is not that history consists in appreciating that which one will never see twice,
it consists in appreciating twice as much what one sees occasionally.2
Heavy eyelids that weigh on a ﬁxed eye authenticate the seriousness of the national historian...
The ﬁrst shortcoming of the comparative historian is that he looks and critiques what ﬁrst jumps
out at him. No matter: his look must be alert and above all amused.3
It is only the desire for a masterful author that makes one into a slavish reader.4
1. Introduction: displaying the method
This article will try to explain a certain mathematical logic found in the 153 paintings
of the famous mediaeval ceiling in St. Martin’s Church in Zillis.5 In order maximise its
intelligibility, this paper will attempt to redescribe such a remarkable (but mute about its
origin6) work of art by piecing together multiple sources and references through analogical
and not genealogical speculation and method.
This “excessive presumption” is an excellent heuristic tool, but let us deﬁne it right away:
it is less the analysis of an object’s intrinsic quality than the disposition of an on-looker or
1M. Smith, “On the Wine God in Palestine (Gn 18, Jn 2, and Achilles Tatius)”, in J.W. Baron Jubilee, II, 1975,
p. 815.
2“Par une étrange illusion, on croit que l’histoire ne se répète pas ; sous prétexte qu’un fait historique est indi-
viduel, on s’imagine qu’il est singulier. Pourtant, de nombreux faits historiques sont presque de vrais jumeaux ;
ils se ressemblent comme deux gouttes d’eau ; ils n’en sont pas moins deux individus distincts et quand l’historien
fait le recensement, ils comptent pour deux. Ce n’est qu’aux yeux d’un sociologue qu’ils tomberaient dans une
seule et même catégorie. Il ne faut pas dire que l’histoire consiste à aimer ce que jamais on ne verra deux fois, elle
consiste à aimer deux fois ce qu’on revoit à l’occasion”, P. Veyne, L’inventaire des différences. Leçon inaugurale
au Collège de France, Seuil, Paris, 1976, p. 38.
3“Les paupières lourdes sur oeil ﬁxe authentiﬁent le sérieux de l’historien national... L’oeil du comparatiste
est primesautier, qualité dont on fera son premier défaut. Peu importe : son regard doit être vif et surtout amusé”,
Marcel Détienne, Comparer l’incomparable, Seuil, Paris, 2000, p. 17.
4Dennis A. Foster, Confession and Complicity in Narrative, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987,
p. 19.
5For useful introductions, historical considerations and tentative interpretations, see E. Poeschel, Kunst-
denkmäler Graubündens IV, Basel, 1943, pp. 223–246; R. Meier, Suisse Romane, Zodiaque, 1996, p. 85s.;
E. Murbach and P. Heman, Zillis. Images de l’univers roman, Editions de Fontainemore/Bibliothèque des Arts,
Paris (Atlantis, Zürich), 1967, p. 11ss.; D. Rudloff, Zillis. Images de l’univers roman, Zodiaque, 1989, p. 14ss.;
H. Blanke, Zillis. Evangelium in Bildern, Theologischer Verlag, Zürich, 1994. Note also the more recent book of
Ursi Tanner-Herter, Zillis-Biblische Bilder, Theologischer Verlag, Zürich, 2003.
6Very little is known about the Zillisian artist. One might imagine that he was surrounded by a team of students
and apprentices, but died before the ceiling was ﬁnished, and that perhaps one of his students completed the
project after his death (the last rows on the west side of the piece were apparently done by another’s hand.

232
H. Garcia
researcher, especially that of a comparatist researcher (here between text and painting7)
who must choose, select and build his or her object in terms of “useful ends”. The great
historian of religions Jonathan Z. Smith recently deﬁned this process as both scientiﬁc and
humanist in a tellingly “discourse on method”:
Comparison does not necessarily tell us how things “are” (the far from latent presupposition that
lies behind the notion of “genealogical” with its quest for real historical connections); like mod-
els and metaphors, comparison tells us how things might be conceived, how they might be “re-
described”, in Max Black’s useful term.8 A comparison is a disciplined exaggeration in the ser-
vice of knowledge. It lifts out and strongly marks certain features within difference as being of
possible intellectual signiﬁcance, expressed in the rhetoric of their being “like” in some stipulated
fashion. Comparison provides the means by which we “re-vision” phenomena as our data in order
to solve our theoretical problems [...] The statement of comparison is never dyadic, but always
triadic; there is always an implicit “more than”, and there is always a “with respect to”. In the case
of the academic comparison, the “with respect to” is most frequently the scholar’s interest, be this
expressed in a question, a theory, or a model—recalling, in the case of the latter, that a model is
useful precisely when it is different from that to which it is being applied.9
In light of such a resolutely heuristic perspective, ancient Gnosticism (which seems to
have become my disciplinary expertise) can be (and will be) invoked as a legitimate and
(for me) sufﬁciently intelligible resource for translating these images and bringing them
forth from the unknown to the conceivable. To quote once again Jonathan Z. Smith:10
The process [of comparison] by which this is accomplished... is translation, that is to say, a
proposal that the language that is appropriate to one domain (the known/the familiar) may translate
the language characteristic of another domain (the unknown/the unfamiliar). The only effective
grounds for rejecting such a proposal, is to attack the possibility of translation itself, most often
expressed through arguments of incommensurability. Such arguments, if sustained, would render
the human sciences sheerly impossible and are, therefore, always to be rejected... I raise this issue
in order to focus on one of its implications. Translation is never fully adequate: there is always
discrepancy. To repeat the old tag: to translate is to traduce. This holds for natural language as well
as for models. Central to any proposal of translation is the double requirement of comparison and
criticism [...]
To repeat: The implication of this is that comparison, the negotiation of difference to some intellec-
tual end, is not an enterprise conﬁned to odd surviving adherents of some religionsgeschichtliche
Schule... The interesting arguments are over modes of comparison, their procedures and entail-
7Indeed, this is a relation not exempt from conﬂict and debate! See especially Léo Steinberg, The Sexuality of
Christ in Renaissance Art and in Modern Oblivion, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1996, p. 330ss.; see
too the propositions of D.R. Cartlidge, “Which Path at the Crossroads? Early Christian Art as a Hermeneutical and
Theological Challenge”, in: Julian V. Hills (ed.), Common Life in the Early Church. Essays Honoring Graydon F.
Snyder, Trinity Press International, Harrisburg, PA, 1998, pp. 357–372; and of R.M. Jensen, “Giving Texts Vision
and Images Voice”, ibid., pp. 344–356.
8Cp. this proposition to that, suggestively very Aristotelian, of Paul Veyne, op. cit., p. 62:
It is more important to have ideas than to know truths ... this results in one ceasing to be naive
and perceiving that which is could not have been. Reality is surrounded by an indeﬁnite zone of
non-realized potentialities. Truth is not the highest level in the values of knowledge.
9J.Z. Smith, Drudgery Divine. On the Comparison of Early Christianities and the Religions of Late Antiquity,
Chicago University Press, Chicago, 1990, pp. 51–53.
10Cf. J.Z. Smith, “Social Formations of Early Christianities: A response to Ron Cameron and Burton Mack”,
Method and Theory in the Study of Religion 8, 1996, pp. 271–278; cf. p. 273s.

Odd numbers and their theological potential
233
Fig. 1. The ceiling in St. Martin’s Church in Zillis, the Johannine Gospel and the imaginary arithmetic of
salvation.
ments, as well as questions as to the appropriate intellectual goals, and not over the question of
whether or not to compare.
The ceiling’s scene seems rich with literary references that apparently go beyond the
framework of the New Testament.11 The pictorial Zillisian imagery combines, in the style
of a diatessaron,12 multiple traditional scenes and constructs them in a particular “narra-
11On the importance of the apocryphal literature in Zillis, see H. Garcia, “Les diverses dimensions d’apocryphité
dans le plafond de l’église Saint Martin de Zillis. Le cas du cycle zilliséen de la nativité de Jésus” (forthcoming
in Apocrypha. International Journal of Apocryphal Literatures).
12This term refers to the major work of Tatian (second century) Diatessaron (dia tessarôn, “through four”) that
reunites, selects and recomposes in one coherent story the four (or more) “pre-canonical” gospels. See: W.L. Pe-
tersen, Tatian’s Diatessaron. Its Creation, Dissemination, Signiﬁcance, and History in Scholarship, Brill, Leiden,
1994); a substantial overview (less history of research) of this monumental study has already been rendered by the

234
H. Garcia
tive” composition. This is like a silent cartoon in which the story and the commentary are
in the hands of the on-lookers!
2. An anatomical description of the ceiling
The painting on the ceiling is rectangular and consists of 153 individual panels (17 rows
with 9 panels and images each) that depict different scenes. In addition, there are 6 por-
traits that have been placed on the wall in the middle of a large, painted frieze that out-
lines the nave. The internal structure of the ceiling is easily discernible. Two areas can be
clearly distinguished, through which a third area become visible after a relatively lengthy
scrutiny. These areas are the following: 1 – the ceiling’s evocatively colourful border that
displays a water world ﬁlled with phantasmagorical and polymorphous or hybrid inhabi-
tants and sea monsters (48 panels); 2 – an interior scene—by far the largest, consuming
a total of 105 panels, only 7 of which depict the life of St. Martin—describing the life
of Jesus and St. Martin, beginning with Jesus’ childhood, at the east of the church, to his
passion, and ending with a small row on St. Martin’s life, at the west of the church; 3 –
a prominent display of the glorious cross whose majesty dominates the ceiling and whose
extremities include even the sea monsters at the painting’s far borders; the cross is made
visible or emphasised by an ornamental, double-friezed border of waves that consumes 25
panels.
Indeed, the entire painting is made up of a spectacular cosmography, an organised rep-
resentation of the world that is both ordered and decorated in its entirety (a kosmos!) even
to its maritime and monstrous extremities. Such a representation is as impressive as the
environment in which it is framed; the church of Zillis and the valley of Schams (or the Val
Schons in the local “réto-romanche” language) is a place that is geographically protected
and enclosed by the Via Mala Schlucht in the north, Ferrera and Roﬂa Schluchten in the
south.13 Such a maritime scene, pregnant and luxurious in this alpine milieu14 adds much
to the artist’s remarkable use of perspective, which creates a maximal widening effect and a
veritable cosmological panoramic that zooms in on singular objects and situations. Indeed,
with exquisite largesse, the created universe (and even the Almighty Christ) makes itself
known in this tiny church in this hidden part of the world. As for Abraham15 and other
biblical or apocryphal personages16 it is an artistic “heavenly tour” that is proposed to the
visitor.
This scene, as a window into the “space of the inﬁnite where I am not”17 is consequently
placed, put or even resting, and become like the natural centre of the painting: the ﬁxed
same scholar Petersen in: H. Koester, Ancient Christian Gospels. Their History and Development, SCM, London,
1990, pp. 403–430.
13The presence of such a rich work in a church as small as this one seems to be another paradox (Cf. H.R. Meier,
op. cit., p. 86).
14The mountainous environment abounds in traces of prehistoric times, when the marine universe dominated
this region of Schams (see the fossiliferous site of Piz Mellen).
15See, for example, the Testament of Abraham, IX, 6ss.
16Cf. M. Himmelfarb, Ascent to Heaven in Jewish and Christian Apocalypses, Oxford University Press, New
York/Oxford, 1993.
17Cp. the spatial–temporal anguish described by the French philosopher Blaise Pascal (Les Pensées, editées par
F. Kaplan, Cerf, Paris, 1982; cf. §52, p. 114), whose style suggestively evokes that of the great horror and fantastic

Odd numbers and their theological potential
235
space where one can come to contemplate the (imaginary) world. Such a dynamic seems
to highlight the actual purpose of the Zillisian artist: to represent, from a determined point,
a place that embraces all immensity; this privileged place is the valley of Schams, the
village of Zillis and ultimately a church whose purpose is to elevate the faithful to the
highest heights of God, as the Psalmist says (cf. Ps 113, 4–6; Jb 22, 12), and show the
faithful how God sees all things.
The artist, however, is not content with only spiritual and mystic elevation since he is
about to enshrine concretely his “point of view” in the very centre of this painted, symbolic
geography of the world. At the very heart of this representation of the cosmos (panel J-V;
n◦101),18 the Schams “physique”, seen from below (from the church’s main door, which
faces west), is metonymically represented as the hillside facing the Piz Vizan and as the
Piz Vizan itself, both situated in the southwest of the valley, the ﬁrst on the right and the
other on the left of the panel (as they are in physical reality). Suggestively, in the panel, the
dark left wing of the devil completely takes the form of the Piz Vizan: This corresponds,
perhaps, to the experienced fact that, in winter, around three o’clock in the afternoon (and
later and later as winter gets underway), the sun always disappears precisely on the left
side of the Piz Vizan. The symbolic correspondence is clear and evident: the devil is on
the dark side of the mountain because he is the dark side par excellence! Through this
detail, the only countryside that is geographically and physically accurate in the middle
of an imaginary, mythic, symbolic, literary and undetermined painted universe,19 that is,
through this illusion that ingeniously manages and orders place and space,20 the (local?)
artist makes Val Schons (and the church of Zillis!) the centre of the world, even the centre
of the gloriously displayed cross that covers and “crosses” the entire ceiling. But beware!
Because, at the centre of the world, is the polymorphous ﬁgure of the devil who is shown
struggling with the Savior himself!21
writer Howard Phillips Lovecraft: “Je vois ces effroyables espaces de l’univers qui m’enferment, et je me trouve
attaché à un coin de cette vaste étendue, sans que je sache pourquoi je suis plutôt placé en ce lieu qu’en un autre, ni
pourquoi ce peu de temps qui m’est donné à vivre m’est assigné à ce point plutôt qu’en un autre de toute l’éternité
qui m’a précédé et de toute celle qui me suit. Je ne vois que des inﬁnités de toutes parts, qui m’enferment comme
un atome et comme une ombre qui ne dure qu’un instant sans retour”; §§129, 130, p. 151s.: “Quand je considère
la petite durée de ma vie, absorbée dans l’éternité précédant et suivant... le petit espace que je remplis et même
que je vois, abîmé dans l’inﬁnie immensité des espaces que j’ignore et qui m’ignorent, je m’effraie et m’étonne
de me voir ici plutôt que là, car il n’y a point de raison pourquoi ici plutôt que là, pourquoi à présent plutôt que
lors. Qui m’y a mis? Par l’ordre et la conduite de qui ce lieu et ce temps a-t-il été destiné à moi? Le silence éternel
de ces espaces inﬁnis m’effraie”. In the Zillisian context, the fact of quietly contemplating and mastering de visu
all the created universe in its tiny spaces, corners, even those tremendous and far-out realities, constitutes a clever
pedagogical aid.
18The ceiling is usually mapped out in two different ways: either as a naval battle (on one side, from the letters
A to R, and on the other, from the numbers I to IX); or as a spiral, from 1 to 153. Here I am giving both these
standard indications.
19The mountain represented in the panel O-VII (n◦138), the prayer of Jesus at Gethsemane, is less a situated
object from a speciﬁc point of view or a panorama than a “theatrical” support, a symbolic, decorative element
signifying the “Mount of Olives”.
20On these concepts, see especially: J.Z. Smith, To take Place. Toward Theory in Ritual, University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, 1987, p. 27ss.
21The very centre of the ceiling, panel J-V (n◦101), represents the third temptation of Jesus, according to
Matthew 4, 8–10.

236
H. Garcia
When we take separately the ceiling’s central and principal area, what initially seems
striking are sensations of profusion, asymmetry and yet something lacking: profusion be-
cause we recognise a wide array of gospel and apocryphal scenes; asymmetry because
certain scenes (or sets of scenes) are much more developed than others, probably because
of the underlying stories that are more or less narrated in their original textual context;
something lacking in that certain traditional stories are not at all mentioned (including the
cruciﬁxion and the resurrection of Jesus). Amazingly, as we have noticed, the entire pic-
torial story is organised on a rectangle consisting of 153 panels. The central space unfolds
into four narrated parts: the infancy of Jesus, which occupies a very large third of the ceil-
ing;22 the public ministry of Jesus, which takes up another third;23 Jesus’ passion (perhaps
somewhat shortened); and, to conclude, a depiction of the short but meaningful life of St.
Martin. In fact, perhaps it is possible to reduce the ensemble to three parts: the passion
being a part of Jesus’ ministry; or even to two rather spatially asymmetrical parts narrating
the lives of Jesus and St. Martin. Yet, in this reductio ad unum, the ensemble could be even
more drastically reduced to one part: the narration of Jesus and Martin being co-ordinated
in term of a Christological (and traditional) trajectory; as Burton L. Mack suggests: “It is
as important for the disciples to be apostles as it is for Jesus to be the Christ”.24
3. A theological imagination of odd numbers
Is it reckoning, chance or spatial constraint? There has been much speculation on the size
of the ceiling’s 153 panels, notably regarding issues of the corruption and disappearance
of certain initial scenes or other problems relating to the ceiling’s abrupt end. Several ex-
egetical interpretations, suggestively with allegorical mathematical perspectives, have been
proposed to explain this speciﬁcally Johannine number 153 (cf. Joh 21, 11).25 Possibly, the
accent of this Johannine passage is less on the precise number of the ﬁshes than on the ma-
terially sufﬁcient measure (1 cm →× = big!) of the ﬁshes and their total quantity in only
one net. Moreover, not only does the net remain untorn, but Peter pulled it to shore in one
fell swoop, according to the literary phenomenon of “miracles in the miracle”. One can
compare, in this context, Joh 11, 44, where the “resurrected” Lazarus walks all by himself
with hands and feet tied without at all feeling disturbed or disconcerted!
Mathematical symbolism has possessed a long and rich religious and philosophical tra-
dition since the mythical (and rather shamanistic) Pythagoras26 and even Homer.27 Its
frequent and “natural” utilisation by Philo of Alexandria28 and in Jewish and Christian
22Until panel H-IV (n◦93).
23Until panel O-III (n◦134).
24B.L. Mack, Who Wrote the New Testament. The Making of Christian Myth, HarperCollins, New York/San
Francisco, 1995, p. 225.
25See, for instance, E.C. Hoskyns and F.N. Davey, The Fourth Gospel, Faber & Faber, London, 1947, p. 553ss.
26On the “philosophical” Pythagoras, see: J.P. Dumont et al. (eds.), Les Présocratiques, Gallimard, Paris, 1988,
p. 53ss.; on philosophical posterity in late antiquity, cf. D.J. O’Meara, Pythagoras Revived: Mathematics and
Philosophy in Late Antiquity, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1989.
27See especially: F. Bufﬁère, Les Mythes d’Homère et la pensée grecque, Les Belles Lettres, Paris, 1973 (1956),
p. 559ss.
28See, for instance, De Opiﬁcio Mundi, 47ss.

Odd numbers and their theological potential
237
apocalyptic literature29 attest to its importance in the remarkable “bouillon de culture” of
the ﬁrst Christian century, from which the Johannine Gospel emerged, in all its arithmetic
particularity. From then on, one cannot imagine that the mention of 153 ﬁshes is meaning-
less or merely ornamental.
In fact, after scrutinising Johannine references, one ﬁnds an underscoring of certain num-
bers and, more precisely, a certain logic in the distribution of odd and even numbers. One
can collect, for instance, the following data: Joh 1, 39 (the tenth hour); 2, 1 (the third day);
2, 6 (the six jars); 4, 16–18 (the ﬁve husbands); 4, 52–53 (the seventh hour); 5, 5 (the par-
alytic of 38 years); 6, 7 (200 denari); 6, 9 (ﬁve loaves and two ﬁshes); 6, 10 (ﬁve thousand
men); 6, 13 (12 baskets from ﬁve loaves left over); 6, 15 (Jesus alone); 6, 67.70–71 (the
Twelve); 8, 57 (Jesus not yet 50 years old); 11, 1.3 (the two sisters—with one brother); 11,
39 (Lazarus having already been in the tomb for four days); 12, 1 (six days before Easter);
19, 4 (the sixth hour); 19, 23 (the clothes of Jesus separated in four parts plus one tunic);
19, 39 (100 pounds of myrrh and aloe brought by Nicodemus; 20, 4 (two disciples); 20, 12
(two angels); 21, 2 (two others disciples); 21, 11 (153 ﬁshes!); 21, 14 (third appearance of
the resurrected Christ); 21, 15–17 (Jesus’ three questions to Peter); 21, 25 (the hyperbolic
and inﬁnite number of books about Jesus).
According to Pythagorean traditions,30 widely popular (and modiﬁed) throughout the
centuries, numbers have profound signiﬁcance and reveal many things: they constitute ul-
timate reality and, accordingly, have become a privileged and ultimate explanation of the
world. As such, they possess a divine character—indeed each Homeric god has his or her
own essential or corresponding number31—and by extension, any person who could deci-
pher the arcana of arithmetics was promised divine happiness.
For those living in ancient times, numbers are like points which order themselves in
forms and ﬁgures; for example, numbers like four or nine form a square, whereas other
numbers like ten or twenty-four make triangles.32 Each number as such become a series of
points or units (monads) that form ﬁgures and are fundamental elements of the number.33
Such a description of numbers is suggestively analogical to military manœuvres in which
a hoplite is the principle and basic unity of the Phalanx, the army host’s multiple forms or
shapes. If numbers are transcribed into two columns, the signiﬁcant difference between odd
and even numbers becomes easily discernible: the even numbers make two equal columns
and the odd numbers always create unevenness. In this ancient speciﬁc logic, even numbers
are “hollow” (kenos) because one can cut them into two equal parts whereas odd numbers
29See especially: A. Yarbro Collins, “Numerical Symbolism in Jewish and Early Christian Apocalyptic Litera-
ture”, Aufstieg und Niedergang der römishen Welt, II, 21.2, 1984, pp. 1221–1287.
30I am referring directly to the elements of F. Bufﬁère’s excellent explanation in op. cit., p. 560s. A good
overview of mathematical traditions, notably from the ancient Near East (Mesopotamia, Egypt, etc.) is given
by Jens Hoyrup, “Mathematics, Algebra and Geometry”, Anchor Bible Dictionary 4, Doubleday, New York,
1992, pp. 602–612.
31Cf. F. Bufﬁère, op. cit., p. 561ss. (Apollo, Proteus = 1; Eole = 4; Athena = 7; Hephaistos =, Hera = 9; Atlas =
10, etc.).
32Numerous examples are provided by Philo: Quaestiones in Genesim, II, 4–5; De Opiﬁcio Mundi, 47; De Vita
Mosis, I, 96; De Decalogo, 26ss., etc.
33Cf. J. Hoyrup, op. cit., p. 610.

238
H. Garcia
Fig. 2. Hybrid monster. Detail of the ceiling of St. Martin’s Church in Zillis.
are “full” (perissos).34 Odd numbers oppose this unity in surplus, like an irreductible bas-
tion that resists every attempt to cut them. This surplus unity distinguishes the odd number
from the even number and gives the odd its exceptional force and value.
In addition, this unity that stands out, “beyond the shape”, is analogous to the male
notion of fecundity or reproduction from which comes the principle that odd numbers are
male and even numbers are female. Actually, combinations of numbers are considered to
be genuine marriages: two numbers that come together beget a third number; yet in these
unions, the odd number clearly plays the dominant role.
This is ﬁrst evident in the ability of the odd number to make any sum with an even
number, an odd number: odd + even = odd, always. The “stronger” number imposes itself,
overtakes the weaker and stays on, alone. Moreover, the even number, added to itself, can
never make anything but an even number (it can never get out of its “even sex”): even +
even = even, always. On the contrary, the odd number is not so limited because an odd
added to itself becomes an even, the “opposite sex”: 5 + 5 = 10. Indeed, an odd number is
like a god capable of creating the companion with whom he can unite.
34The word perissos means “what goes beyond the limits or what goes past the limits”; it is composed from the
preverb/preposition peri; that expresses the idea of completely encircling or surrounding, even from above—from
which the uses of the term expressing the idea of superiority (cf., suggestively, Joh 10, 10).

Odd numbers and their theological potential
239
Fig. 3. Fishermen. Detail of the ceiling of St. Martin’s Church in Zillis.
The joining of Adam and Eve (1 + 1) appears evident (cf. Gn 1, 26; 2, 18–24). In this
“Genesiac” context, we can also pick out several logia of the Gospel of Thomas (11; 16;
23; 49; 75; 106) and its soteriological and ascetic “return to the odd”: from two towards
one or 1 + 1 = 1!35
All the power of the odd number, therefore, resides in its ability as unity that goes be-
yond; it is therefore the monad—the one, what is adding itself to the even—which con-
stitutes the great principle of fecundity, union and order. Again, referring to the military
metaphor, the monad is like the commander or general who leads his soldiers; without him
walking ahead, outside, the military shape marching on would not be this beautiful organic
group. It is the monad, the unity that distinguishes the odd number from the preceding even
number, that seals a number and determines its role. The even number has no precise lim-
its; its components can move about in any way. The monad, however, imposes a limit and
enchains the even number. From the dynamic comes the notion that the monad is precision
and determination and the dyad (the number 2, the pair or the double row of points ﬁguring
even numbers) is indetermination and imperfection. The monad is divine; the dyad, matter.
A moral interpretation naturally follows such a paradigm. With tautological obvious-
ness, a monad signiﬁes unity and a dyad, duality. Consequently, the monad is a source of
35See especially: M. Meyer, The Gospel of Thomas. The Hidden Sayings of Jesus, HarperCollins, New York/San
Francisco, 1992, in loco.

240
H. Garcia
Fig. 4. Jesus and the devil. Detail of the ceiling of St. Martin’s Church in Zillis.
all good, the dyad is the root of all evil; unity is a symbol of peace and harmony, duality
begets conﬂict and war; health is unity in the human body, illness duality. In the soul, odd
and even numbers are, respectively, virtue and vice. In homes and cities, odd and even are
translated into concord and discord. The number one is equated with coherence of species,
whereas the number two connotes confusion and disorder. In the Zillisian context with its
horde of polymorphousor hybrid monsters, it is possible to continue further in this vein and
to record certain (fragmentary) developments concerning limitlessness and the undifferen-
tiated from the pre-Socratic philosopher Anaximander.36 Indeed, odd numbers are equal
to peras, “limit, limitation, order, principle of organisation”; even numbers correspond to
apeiron ou aoriston, “the limitless, the indiscernible, the disorganised”.
What is the usefulness in exploring these allegorical and metaphysical dynamics to en-
lighten the Zillisian artwork? A few general descriptive remarks and suggestions can be
made: 1 – As we have seen, the ceiling’s entirety is composed of 17 rows of 9 panels,
suggestively two odd numbers used by the artist to create (the dimensions of ) his space;
2 – The maritime fresco of the sea monsters consumes 44 panels (with the exception of
36Cf. Dumont, op. cit., p. 24ss.

Odd numbers and their theological potential
241
the four “cardinal” angels in each corner of the monsters’ border). These four and “even”
angels reveal the fundamental imperfection of even numbers: the perfectibility of creation
itself manifested through the subaltern status of God’s messengers who yet limit and con-
trol it! 3 – The glorious cross traverses all of the ceiling’s regions and occupies 25 panels
(25 = 2 + 5 = 7!). Given these conﬁgurations, what do the 153 Zillisian panels mean in
light of the 153 Johannine ﬁshes? Several possible combinations have been proposed by
the Church Fathers, notably Origen, Cyril of Alexandria and Augustine.37
The sum of all the numbers from 1 to 17 equals 153 (1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + ··· + 17 = 153),
which together form a perfect equilateral triangle.38 Moreover, 17 is the result of the “mar-
riage” between 10 + 7 (even + odd = odd),39 two pregnant numbers in the Johannine
narrative and symbolism. The ten refers to the “tenth hour” (Joh 1, 39), that marks the
accomplishment—in fact, narratively, the beginning of the accomplishment of the revela-
tion of the two disciples: 3 × 3 = 9 + 1 = 10 or 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 = 10. The seven of the
“seventh hour” (Joh 4, 52–53) likewise marks an analogous symbolic phenomenon (in the
Johannine narration, the hour of effective realisation of the healing). On the other hand, the
six (7 −1) seems to mark the lack and the waiting (cf. Joh 2, 6; 12, 1; 19, 14).40
Other arithmetic combinations have been proposed with varied corresponding allegori-
cal meanings such as: 153 = 3 × 50 + 3 (50 = 7 × 7 = 49 + 1; 7 = 4 + 3). All of these
combinations always suggest the superiority and the domination of the odd number and
the monad.
4. A zoomorphic and soteriological arithmetic
Other interpretations have been offered concerning these 153 Johannine ﬁshes.41 One sug-
gests that this number reveals a zoological allusion to the supposed 153 species of ﬁshes,
each ﬁsh representing one species and symbolising one nation or human category. Jerome
thus comments:
Aiunt autem qui de animantium scripsere naturis et proprietate, qui halieutica tam latino, quam
graeco didicere sermone, de quibus Oppianus Cilix est, poeta doctissimus, centum quinquaginta
tria esse genera piscium.42
37See Hoskyns/Davey (eds.), op. cit., p. 556.
38Ibid., p. 553.
39Note again 17 = 5 + 12 (cf. Joh 6, 9.13: ﬁve loaves and twelve baskets!).
40Cp. Philon, De Opiﬁcio Mundi, 89ss., on the sacred characteristic of the number seven. In Philo, the number
six marks the completion, the end and the limit (cf. De Opiﬁcio Mundi, 13; Legum Allegoriae, I, 3-4; Quaestiones
in Genesim, III, 38).
41Notably through the gematria, or the calculation according to the numerical value of the letters of the alphabet.
On the notion of the gematria in relation to the 153 Johannine ﬁshes, see J.A. Emerton, “The Hundred and
Fifty-three Fishes in John XXI”, 11”, Journal of Theological Studies (JTS) 9, 1958, pp. 86–89; id., “Some New
Testament Notes. IV. Gematria in John 21, 11”, JTS 11, 1960, pp. 335–336, which highlights the link between
the number 153 and Hebrew words of place En Guedi and En Eglaïm in Ez 47, 10: “Guedi” signifying 17,
“Eglaïm” signifying 153 by gematria , “En” being the word for “source”; note likewise the note by P.R. Ackroyd,
“The 153 Fishes in John XXI, 11—a Further Note”, JTS 10, 1959, p. 94, using the gematria on certain Greek
transliterations of the words “En Guedi” et “En Eglaïm” (èggadi = 33; agalleim = 120); note to which the second
article of Emerton responds.
42Jérôme, Commentaria in Ezichielem, Lib. XIV, Cap. 47 (PL 26. 474C).

242
H. Garcia
This passing citation of Oppian’s Halieutica is signiﬁcant. In fact, Oppian does not pro-
pose a precise number;43 he only says that he does not believe that the species of ﬁshes
in the sea are less numerous than the animals of the land; moreover, this important and
undeﬁned number measures up to the unexplored depths of this other world, the Ocean; to
quote Oppian (I, 80–89):44
Innumerable are the people and numberless are those who swim in the depths of the sea, and no
one can name them with certitude. For no one has penetrated until the sea’s limits; but at most men
have been able to discover only three hundred fathoms of the sea’s undulating depths. Yet much
more—for indeed the sea’s depths are measureless—remains hidden and such invisible things no
mortal can ever make known, for the force and reason of mortal is small. Remarkably, the salty
ﬂood, I believe, does not nourish any less the human ﬂock or tribes than does the fertile Mother
Earth.45
The purpose of Jerome in thus linking these two heterogeneous but thematically analo-
gous references (Oppian and the Johannine Gospel) is to subordinate the negative notions
of the beyond and inﬁnite (used by Oppian) to those of totality and universality (used by
the Johannine Gospel): the catch of ﬁshes, in the Johannine story, is miraculous in that it
has effectively explored and controlled the depths of the sea and its innumerable creatures
which symbolise the entirety of the human race until the boundaries of both land and sea.
Presumably, Jerome seeks to comment on Ez 47, 10:
People will stand ﬁshing besides the sea from En-gedi to En-eglaim; it will be a place for the
spreading of nets; its ﬁsh will be of great many kinds, like the ﬁsh of the Great Sea.46
This Messianic perspective seems to provide the scriptural backdrop for the Johannine
story of the miraculous catch via the Lukan text (LK 5, 1–11) as a direct text source which
highlights Peter’s missionary role. Indeed, in the Johannine story, it is Peter alone who
goes back into the water and alone pulls the net47 from the sea (Joh 21, 11; cp. 21, 6; Lk
5, 6–7). Moreover, the Lukan passage implies a comparison and a movement of activity in
which the expected end result is reversed:
Do not be afraid; from now on you will be for their life catching people (esè/zôgrôn).48
43In this regard, one can suspect that here the idea depends less on the citation of Oppian than on the reﬂexive
imagination of Jerome interpreting Oppian (see R.M. Grant, “One Hundred Fifty-Three Large Fish (John 21,
11)”, Harvard Theological Review XLII, 1949, p. 273).
44I refer to the recent edition of F. Fajen (Teubner, Stuttgart/Leipzig, 1999).
45Cp. Apuleius, Apologia, 39, about the “Gastronomy (Hedyphagetica) of Quintius Ennius: “innumerabilia gen-
era piscium enumerat... alios etiam multis uorsibus decoravit”.
46Translation of the New Oxford Annotated Bible (New Revised Standard Version), Oxford University Press,
New York, 1991. Again, the text from the Septuagint stresses less the number of diverse species of ﬁshes and
more their inﬁnite number: plèthos polu sphodra. Moreover, one can imagine that the Johannine author made a
sort of syntactical adjustment of the ﬁshes from the “great” sea (hoi ichthues tès thalassès tès megalès) to the
“great” ﬁshes of the sea (tès thalassès tès Tiberiados ... ichthuôn megalôn); this gentle manipulation logically
places less emphasis on the (rather ridiculous) immensity of the sea of Tiberiades and more on the numerous
“big” ﬁshes one can occasionally catch!
47As we have seen, the net remains untorn (cp. inversely Lk 5, 6: dierrèsseto de ta diktua autôn; but it is perhaps
a conative imperfect: the Lukan nets resisted and remained untorn!; see B.M. Fanning, Verbal Aspect in New
Testament Greek, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1990, p. 249ss.).
48Lc 5, 10.

Odd numbers and their theological potential
243
Here the verb zôgreô,49 being in the future periphrastic tense, has strong connotations
and is rich with meaning; it signiﬁes “to make alive, to make a prisoner alive, to spare
the life of a prisoner of war”. Homer already uses it to refer to a captive whose life has
been saved.50 A ﬁsherman takes the life of the ﬁshes he catches; the “apostles” as Christ’s
ministers capture people to give them life,51 to revitalise, revive or reanimate them.
This missionary vocation is also found in these same terms of ﬁshing technique and
imagery in the parable of Matthew 13: 47–49:
The Kingdom of heaven is like a net that was thrown into the sea and caught ﬁsh of every kind;
when it was full, they dragged it ashore, sat down, and put the good into baskets but threw out the
bad. So it will be at the end of the age. The angels will come out and separate the evil from the
righteous.52
World is thus compared to sea and human beings to diverse species of ﬁshes to be
caught. By analogy with the archaic Greek image of the land as an island surrounded by
the ocean53 where people can easily throw their nets “from the centre”, the Zillisian ceil-
ing, formed by several distinct panels interlocked in an organised and ornamental pattern,
convincingly creates the image of a net!54
D. Rudloff55 considers the ﬁshing scene in panel B-IX (n◦10) to be representative of
the miraculous catch described in Joh 21, 1–14 and of the speciﬁc role of the apostle Pe-
ter. In so doing, the “ﬁsh story” thematically contrasts with the neighbouring scene (C-IX;
n◦11): Jonah ﬂeeing from God and thus embarking “on the sea”56. These scenes illustrate
two different responses to receiving a vocation from God.57 This interesting interpretation,
however, seems for me unlikely for several reasons: ﬁrstly, the traditional, stereotypical
character of Simon Peter58 is not represented on this ﬁshing boat; secondly, from an ex-
egetical point of view, Joh 21, 1–14, as all the Johannine story,59 does not offer a positive
image of the apostle Peter, and portrays him rather as resembling more a recalcitrant and
49Cf. 2 Tm 2, 26.
50Cf. Iliad, VI, 46; X, 378; V, 697. Note the expression ta zôagria, “the prize of salvation” that is given as
recompense to the victor by the one whose life he spared (cf. Iliade, XVIII, 407; Odyssée, VIII, 462).
51Cf. E. Delebecque, Evangile de Luc. Texte traduit et annoté, Klincksieck, Paris, 1992 (1976), p. 28.
52Cf. Es 24, 17; Lc 21, 35 (the coming of the Kingdom of God as a net). The devil as monkey of God also
beneﬁts from this ﬁshing technique: he too throws his nets and possesses his “miraculous catches” (cf. 2 Tm, 2,
26; 1 Tm 6, 9).
53See especially: J.M. Romm, The Edges of the Earth in Ancient Thought, Princeton University Press, Princeton,
1992.
54Cf. Murbach, op. cit., p. 18.
55Cf. Rudloff, op. cit., p. 53.
56Indeed, in the panel, Jonah embarking seems nearly to fall into the sea!
57Cp., in this regard, the proposal of R. Eisler (cf. Emerton, op. cit., 1958, p. 88): the number 153 is the sum
of the numerical values of the word Simôn (= 76) and Ichthus (= 77); by gematria, many Johannine themes are
thus joined together: Simon Peter, the ﬁsh and, indirectly, the testimony of Christ as saviour.
58See C.R. Matthews, “Nicephorus Callistus’ Physical Description of Peter: An Original Component of the
Acts of Peter?”, Apocrypha 7, 1996, pp. 135–145. For the stereotypical description of the Zillisian Peter with
white hair, see the following panels: J-VII/n◦103; L-III/n◦113; M-V/n◦122; M-VI/n◦123 or M-VIII/n◦125; O-
IV/n◦135; O-VI/n◦137 (perhaps); O-VIII/n◦139; P-III/n◦141.
59See P. Perkins, Peter. Apostle for the Whole Church, University of South Carolina Press, Columbia, 1994,
p. 95ss.

244
H. Garcia
ﬂeeing Jonah than the obedient follower of Christ!60 If there is a reference to the miracu-
lous catch, it would probably refer to the one found in Luke, which is more favourable to
Peter.
The eschatological Matthean parable that refers directly to the following passage in
Habakkuk (1, 14–17), however, seems to be much more satisfying:
You have made men like ﬁshes of the sea, like crawling things that have no ruler. This one brings
all of them up with the hook; he drags them out with his net, he gathers them in his seine; so he
rejoices and exults. Therefore he sacriﬁces to his net and makes offerings to his seine; for by them
his portion is lavish and his food is rich. Is he then to keep on emptying his net and destroying
nations without mercy?
This Zillisian overall scene, redescribed and structured by these references and their
common or “isotopic” theme, tends to give its “net trick” of 153 ﬁshes an allegorical
arithmetic meaning that connotes both the solidity and proliﬁc effectiveness of Christian
apostolic mission61 which, guided by the Lord,62 captures every person or nation with-
out distinction.63 It also connotes the Christian church that must remain one, despite the
numerous apostles sent into action and the numerous faithful that are captured by these
diverse ﬁshers of men64 (cf. again the image of the untorn net).65
In this large and coherent context of remarkable, though strange, mythological herme-
neutics, the 153 Zillisian panels imply an enumerated or calculated expression of the entire
world attained by Jesus’ apostles and called to conversion, and the universal pertinence
of Christ’s message that must occupy all dimensions of human space and kosmos, as the
Pauline letter to Ephesians records (3, 18s.):
I pray that you may have the power to comprehend, with all the saints, what is the breadth and
length and height and depth, and to know the love of Christ that surpasses knowledge, so that you
may be ﬁlled with all the fullness of God.66
60See especially D. Gee, “Why did Peter spring into the Sea”, JTS 40, 1989, pp. 481–490.
61That is, the work of the apostles of which the narratively immediate numbers make the sum of 17 (7 in
Joh 21, 2 and 10 in Joh 20, 24) and, as we have already seen, 153 when multiplied to become a triangle. As
Grant concludes (op. cit., p. 274), it seems probable that the importance of 17 comes directly from the fact that
its components are ten and seven: two traditionally sacred numbers, as remarked with Philo; the value of 153
participates, therefore, in the same sort of background and thus symbolises the demultiplication of the works of
Jesus’ disciples effectively turned into plenitude.
62Cp. Mc 16, 20.
63One can note here that in Acts 2, 7ss., 17 geographic and political situations seem to be mentioned in a sort
of “list of nations” probably borrowed from ancient geographers or even astrologers (see H. Conzelmann, Acts of
the Apostles, Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1987, p. 14s.).
64Hence the importance, in this context, of the ﬁnal reconciliation between the character of Peter and the enig-
matic “Johannine disciple/author”, of the relative rehabilitation of the ﬁrst and the non-competitive repartitioning
of mission ﬁelds and functions between these two disciples (cf. Joh 21, 15ss.); cp. the polemical missionary con-
text in 1 Co 1, 12–13; 3, 4–23; cp. likewise the apocryphal pacifying theme of this apostolic repartitioning of
mission ﬁelds; see, for instance, Acts of Andrew and Matthias, 1 (cp. Acts 2, 1.47; Ph 2, 2); Acts of Philip, III,
1–2; VIII, 1–2 (cf. J.D. Kaestli, “Les scènes d’attribution des champs de mission et de départ de l’apôtre dans les
Actes apocryphes”, in: F. Bovon et al. (eds.), Les Actes apocryphes des apôtres. Christianisme et monde païen,
Labor et Fides, Genève, pp. 249–264).
65Cf. M.J. Lagrange, Evangile selon Saint Jean, Gabalda, Paris, 1936, p. 527.
66In this passage, see the recent erudite commentary of E. Best, Ephesians, Clark, Edinburgh, 1998, p. 344s.

Odd numbers and their theological potential
245
5. The cross as cosmic sign and structure
In the preceding descriptions, one saw how the ceiling in the Zillis church is constituted
of a third space—in the shape of a cross—that traverses the other two spaces, penetrating
both as if from the interior and the exterior and building a sort of celestial framework
which keeps the sea monsters away from the centre. This cosmic and glorious cross67 is
all the more important, in the Zillisian context, because the pictorial narration of Jesus’ life
contains no cruciﬁxion scene, a fortiori no resurrection scene. The illustrations of Jesus’
life cease with the representation of his being crowned with thorns (panel P-VIII; n◦146),
which constitutes a remarkable irony of situation by its clearly designated aspect of royal
crowning and enthronement.68
A passage from Andrew’s Passion (54; Armenian version, 16–19) offers some very in-
teresting insights for entering into the logic of this celestial, though a little hidden, Zillisian
cross and consequently for perceiving it with accurate intelligence, notably its autonomous
or self- sufﬁcient status as cross sans Christ:
I study your image for which you stood. I saw mine in you as I etched yours upon me. If what
I perceive is you existing, I like what I see, what I perceive, what I understand from you. What
is your shape, O cross? What is your crossbeam? Where is the center? What is invisible in you?
What is apparent? To what extent are you hidden? To what extent are you revealed through the
cry of your companion (the gallows)? To what extent do you travail to ﬁnd those who hear you?
O name of the cross, entirely ﬁlled with deeds! Well done, O cross, who restrained the error of the
world! Well done, vision of violence, that continually and violently treats violence with violence!
Well done, shape of understanding, who shapes the shapeless! ... But until when shall I say this
and not that which you showed, O cross? Standing before you I commend to you those who are
listening, for there is not for us any other time to approach this vision, O cross.69
Clearly the Zillisian cross contains many “things to see”, many actions, many painted
panels that represent multiple scenes, especially the tempting devil facing Christ which is at
the centre, at the intersection of the cross’s “rays”: the Zillisian cross, like the polyonymous
cross in the Acts of Andrew, is swarming with many things!
In this regard, the Zillisian cross is not unlike certain Byzantine crosses decorated with
medallion-shaped, in-laid portraits like the one situated in the “heaven” of the apse in the
church of St. Apollinarus-in-Classe in Ravenna.70 There is also the miniature of the Byzan-
tine Bible entitled the “Bible of Leon” (tenth century)71 which can be called a library-cross
because it contains multiple circular-shaped pieces that together constitute the canonical
list of the biblical books of the Septuagint: each circular piece carries the name of a book;
the four evangelists, standing, surround the cross thus constructed; a medallion of Mary is
67On this important theme in ancient Christianity, see, for instance, Mt 24, 26s.30; Didachè, 16, 6, Acts de John,
97ss.; Gospel of Peter, 39–42; Epistle of the Apostles, 16; Apocalypse of Elijah, III, 3; Sibylline Oracles, VI,
26–28; Acts de Philip, III, 14.
68This irony is probably present in the Johannine text and intention (see Joh 19, 13–16).
69Translation from R.D. MacDonald, The Acts of Andrew and the Acts of Andrew and Matthias in the City of the
Cannibals, Scholars Press, Atlanta, GA, 1990.
70Cf. A. Kartsonis, “The Emancipation of the Cruciﬁxion”, in: A. Guillou, J. Durand (eds.), Byzance et les
images, La Documentation Française, Paris, 1994, pp. 151–187; cf. pp. 158–160.
71See the beautiful photography in W. Ziehr, Das Kreuz. Symbol und Wirklichkeit, Silva Verlag, Zürich, 1997,
p. 77.

246
H. Garcia
just above the cross; a medallion of Jesus with its own caption or title, as have all the circu-
lar biblical pieces, is at the centre of the cross signifying not only that Jesus is/has a book,
but that all the biblical holy books, announcing this Jesus at the centre, take artistically
the prophetic form of the cross! This resemblance and analogy suggest a Byzantine inﬂu-
ence in Zillis, notably with regard to how Jesus’ life can be organised through and around
the shape of a cross structuring inside and outside of itself multiple biblical or evangelical
scenes.72
The lengthy speech on the cross in the Acts of John certainly constitutes another the-
matic and intertextual insight important for redescribing and understanding the structure
of the Zillisian ceiling and the cross as the soteriological and cosmic ordering principle and
ecclesiological symbol for the arithmetic game of the one and the many. This discourse is
the very commentary of the Revealer, addressing his disciple John, about the Cross of light
and what it signiﬁes:
This Cross of light is called by me now Word because of you, now Intellect, Jesus, Christ, Door,
Way, Bread, Seed, resurrection, Son, Father, Spirit, Life, Truth, Faith, and Grace. The Cross is so
called these names according to humanity. Yet what it is in reality, as conceived in itself and said in
relation to us is the separation from all things, and the strong raising of that which is composed of
unstable elements and in harmony with a wisdom that is harmoniously consistent. There are places
right and left, Powers, Authorities, Principles and Demons, Energies, Threats, Furies, Devils, Satan
and the roots of below, from which issues the nature of things that come to be.
Such is the cross, that from a word ﬁxed the All and separated that which is from the generation
and the lower things and then combined everything into one unity. This cross is not the cross of
wood that you must see, descending from here; and I am no longer the one who is on the cross that
at this hour you do not see but only hear the voice. I have been taken for that which I am not, not
being what is to the eyes of many, but something completely different. They called me something
vile and unworthy of me. Just as the resting place is not seen or spoken of, indeed even more so
the Lord this place will not be seen and no one will speak of him. As for the crowd of people who
have different aspects and who surround around my cross, they are from the lower nature. And
those who you see on the cross, they do not possess one form because each member of this one
who is come down has not yet been understood. When human nature is assumed, together with the
race that approaches me and obeys my voice, he who hears me will be united to him and will no
longer be what he is now, but will be above others as I am now. For so long as you do not say that
you belong to me, I am not what I am. But if you listen to me, in listening me you will become
as I am and I shall be what I was, when you are like me beside me. For it is by me that you are
what I am. Therefore, do not worry about the great crowd and despise those who are outside of the
mystery.73
The cross of light is thus presented as the centre of the world, of which it is the pivotal
structure, both on the inside and the outside and right and left, separating and limiting
spaces and qualities of beings that spiritually (ontologically) differ.74 Its polyonymous
designation, through multiple evangelical names referring to many traditional stories,75
72See the reliquary Sancta Sanctorum, Vatican Museum (cf. W. Ziehr, op. cit., p. 157s.).
73Cf. Acts of John, 98–100; see the commentary of E. Junod and J.D. Kaestli, Acta Johannis. Textus alii–
commentarius–indices, Brepols, Turnhout (CCSA 2), 1983, p. 617ss.
74This idea makes intelligible the function of the Zillisian cross in relation to the multiplicity of the many-
aspected monsters that surround from right and the left.
75For example: the word “bread” refers to the stories of the multiplication of loaves and to its commentary by
Christ in Joh 6; the word “door” alludes to the allegory of the shepherd (Joh 10), etc.; The designation of the cross
as “Jesus” or “Christ” implies that the Logos that reveals himself is not limited to a form or a determined name.
The Logos’ apparition and determination as Jesus is just one manifestation out of many possibilities.

Odd numbers and their theological potential
247
makes itself a reality where, effectively, many things are to be seen and named and told,
whereas the cross itself remains unique. To quote again the Acts of John (98) as a summing
up:
He showed me a cross, dense with light, around which a large crowd had gathered, but not a single
face could be discerned. But in the cross, there was only one face and one resemblance.
This dynamic of multiple names, forms and images reveals a metaphysical and epis-
temological insufﬁciency of human hearers (and seers!) and leads to a speciﬁc, notably
liturgical, pedagogy.76 In this human Unterwelt, nothing is totum simul; the Zillisean tech-
nique of multiplying images expresses at best this insufﬁciency and the necessity of this
symbolic arithmetic game of the one (the structure, notably the “designed” cross) and the
many (the painted panels). Such pedagogy is clearly exposed in the Valentinian collection
called the Gospel of Philip:
Names given to worldly things are very deceptive, since they turn the heart aside from the real to
the unreal. And whoever hears the word “god” thinks not of the reality, but has been thinking of
what is not real; so also, with the words “father”, “son”, “holy spirit”, “life”, “light”, “resurrec-
tion”, “church” [...] Only one name is not uttered in the world, the name that the father bestowed
on the son; it is above every other—that is, the name of the father. For son would not become
father had he not put on the name of the father. Those who possess this name think it but do not
speak it. Those who do not possess it do not think it. Yet for our sakes truth engendered names in
the world—truth, to which one cannot refer without names. Truth is unitary, ⟨...⟩is multiple and
it is for our sakes that ⟨it⟩lovingly refers to this one thing by means of multiplicity. [...]
Truth did not come to the world nakedly; rather, it came in prototypes and images.77
6. The celestial cross and its function as odd-number Eon
The description of the motifs and qualities of (or on) the cross in the Acts of John probably
reﬂects the debates and mythological (theogonic and cosmogonic) speculations that occu-
pied the thoughts of many second century theologians, especially in the so-called Gnostic78
76See the liturgical dance and litany in the Acts of John, 94-96!
77Nag Hammadi Codices, II, 3, p. 53, 23–54, 17; 67, 9–19 (translation from B. Layton, The Gnostic Scriptures,
London: SCM, 1987, pp. 330 and 341). On the different forms of the Saviour that adapts himself to the various
spiritual levels of his disciples, cf. ibid., pp. 57, 28–58, 9. On the Gospel of Philip, see especially M.L. Turner,
The Gospel according to Philip. The Source and Coherence of an Early Christian Collection, Brill, Leiden, 1996.
78On this term and its particular endemic problems of deﬁnition, see the following studies: U. Bianchi (ed.), The
Origins of Gnosticism (Colloquium of Messina, 13–18 April 1966), Studies in the History of Religion 12, Brill,
Leiden, 1967; M. Smith, “The History of the Term Gnostikos”, in B. Layton (ed.), The Rediscovery of Gnosticism.
Proceedings of the International Conference on Gnosticism at Yale New Haven, Connecticut, March 28–31, 1978.
Volume Two: Sethian Gnosticism, Brill, Leiden, 1981, pp. 796–807; Kurt Rudolph, Gnosis: The Nature and His-
tory of Gnosticism, T&T Clark, Edinburgh, 1986; M. Tardieu, “Histoire du mot “gnostique” ”, in: M. Tardieu and
J.D. Dubois, Introduction à la littérature gnostique I, Cerf/CNRS, Paris, 1986, pp. 21–37; M.J. Edwards, “Ne-
glected Texts in the Study of Gnosticism”, Journal of Theological Studies 41/1 (1990), pp. 26–50; C. Markschies,
Valentinus gnosticus?, Untersuchungen zur valentinianischen Gnosis mit einem Kommentar zu der Fragmenten
Valentins, Tübingen: Mohr (WUNT I.65), 1992; id., “Valentinian Gnosticism: Toward the Anatomy of a School”,
in: J.D. Turner, A. McGuire (eds.), The Nag Hammadi Library after Fifty Years. Proceedings of the 1995 Soci-
ety of Biblical Literature Commemoration, Brill, Leiden, 1997, pp. 401–438.; A.H.B. Logan, Gnostic Truth and
Christian Heresy. A Study in the History of Gnosticism, T&T Clark, Edinburgh, 1996; M.A. Williams, Rethink-

248
H. Garcia
schools of thought. Indeed, in the ﬁrst volume of his ambitious Against Heresies, Ireneus
of Lyon dedicates a lengthy critique of Ptolemy’s Gnostic speculations.
According to Ptolemy,79 the double-named power called “Cross” and “Limit”80 is a
unique power, independent and separate from the thirty “Eons” of Plerome (the Valen-
tinian divine world). Whereas the Eons all appeared as “zyzygies” or twin-numbered even
numbers, the “Cross” is a sort of thirty-ﬁrst Eon, a surplus Eon without peer (asuzugon)
and is thus the very image (en eikoni idi¯a) of the First Principle or “Proto-Father” from
which come all other Eons.
The Cross’ double function determining its double name81 is indicative of two things:
ﬁrstly, its structural function, its internal consolidation of the unity of the Plerome (as
Cross) as celestial framework; secondly, (as Limit) that of delimitation and of separation
of Pleromatic realities from the reality that has become heterogeneous to the Plerome as
a consequence of the “passion” of the thirtieth Eon called Sophia (Wisdom)82 who has
committed a sort of celestial original sin that resulted in the creation of the world below
and the redemptive economy of Christ.83
This Plerome’s heterogeneous reality issued from Sophia84 as an Ersatz, rejected by the
Cross/Limit and called Enthumesis or Achamoth (“weak and feminine fruit”), is declared
to be “without form or ﬁgure” or an “abortion” (amorphos kai aneidos; ektrôma).85 This
heterogeneous entity is totally outside of the game, outside of the numbers game, outside
of the structure; it does not have a number since it belongs, like the demiurge that comes
from it,86 to the world outside of Plerome, a world that has been created by its liquid
humours (from its laughter, tears, sweat... and urine!);87 it belongs to the undetermined
multiplicity ...
ing “Gnosticism”. An Argument for Dismantling a Dubious Category, Princeton University Press, Princeton,
1996; R. van den Brœk, “Gnosticism and Hermetism in Antiquity: Two Roads to Salvation”, in: id., Studies in
Gnosticism & Alexandrian Christianity, Brill, Leiden, 1996, pp. 3–21; R. Roukema, Gnosis and Faith in Early
Christianity. An Introduction to Gnosticism, London: SCM, 1999 (Dutch original title: Gnosis en geloof in het
vroege christendom. Een inleiding tot de gnostiek, Uitgeverij Meinema, Zoetermeer, 1998); M.G. Lancelloti,
The Naassenes. A Gnostic Identity among Judaism, Christianity, Classical and Ancient Near Eastern Traditions,
Ugarit Verlag, Münster (FARG—Forschungen zur Anthropologie und Religionsgeschichte 35), 2000. Finally, see
especially K.L. King, What is Gnosticism, The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 2003,
which presents a remarkable, critical, update of the gnostic research and, historiographically more interesting, of
the researchers and scholars treating these gnostic traditions!
79Cf. Adversus Haereses, I, 2, 2; I, 2, 4; I, 3, 5; I, 4, 1.
80This is a pun playing on the words stauros and horos.
81Adversus Haereses, I, 2, 4; I, 3, 5; as all of Plerome Eons (I, 2, 6), the Cross/Limit Eon is polyonymous and
polymorphous as it measures and contains in itself all Eons.
82Cf. Adversus Haereses, I, 2, 2; this heterogeneous reality (indeed these heterogeneous realities) is called En-
thymesis and, later, “Achamoth”.
83This Christological economy happens ﬁrst in the interior of the Plerome (Adversus Haereses, I, 2, 5).
84Sophia itself is ﬁnally reintegrated to the Plerome.
85Cf. Adversus Haereses, I, 2, 4; I, 4, 1.
86Cf. Irénée, Adversus Haereses, I, 5, 1ss.
87Cf. Irénée, Adversus Haereses, I, 4, 4.

CHAPTER 13
Swester Katrei and Gregory of Rimini:
Angels, God, and Mathematics
in the Fourteenth Century
Edith Dudley Sylla
Department of History, North Carolina State University,
Box 8108, Raleigh, NC 27695-8108, USA
E-mail: edsssl@unity.ncsu.edu
Contents
1. How many angels can dance on the point of a needle? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 251
2. The place of angels: Gregory of Rimini . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 256
3. God and the continuum: Gregory of Rimini . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 260
4. Bibliography Swester Katrei and Gregory of Rimini . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 269
4.1. Primary sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 269
4.2. Secondary sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 270
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
249


Swester Katrei and Gregory of Rimini
251
“Tell me, daughter”, he said, “doctors declare that in heaven a thousand angels can stand on the
point of a needle (tusent selen siczen jn dem himelrich uff einer nadel spicz). Now rede me the
meaning of this”.
She answered, “The doctors are right. You can see it in this way. The soul that enters into God
owns neither time nor space nor anything nameable to be expressed in words. But it stands to
reason, if you consider it, that the space occupied by any soul is vastly greater than heaven and
earth and God’s entire creation. I say more: God might make heavens and earths galore yet these,
together with the multiplicity of creatures he has already made, would be of less extent than a
single needle-tip compared with the standpoint of a soul atoned in God”.
So spoke “Swester Katrei, Meister Eckhart’s Strasburg Daughter” in a fourteenth-
century German mystical work belonging to the tradition of the Brothers and Sisters of
the Free Spirit.1
1. How many angels can dance on the point of a needle?
Nearly everyone has heard it said that scholastic theologians disputed how many angels
can dance on the point of a needle (or, more frequently, on the head of a pin). In his
1791 Curiosities of Literature, under the heading “Quodlibets, or Scholastic Disquisitions”,
Isaac D’Israeli wrote:
The reader desirous of being merry with Aquinas’s angels may ﬁnd them in Martinus Scriblerus,
in Ch. VII who inquires if angels pass from one extreme to another without going through the
middle? And if angels know things more clearly in a morning? How many angels can dance on the
point of a very ﬁne needle, without jostling one another?2
In their pseudonymous Memoirs of the Extraordinary Life, Works, and Discoveries of
Martinus Scriblerus, written sometime before 1714, Pope, Arbuthnot, and Swift say noth-
ing about angels dancing on the point of a needle, although they do include the ﬁrst two
questions D’Israeli lists, which are, in fact, very similar to questions found in Thomas
Aquinas’s Summa Theologiae, Part I, Questions 53 and 56.3
Moreover, despite extensive searches, no scholars up to the present have found any me-
dieval quodlibet or other scholastic theological work containing a disputation asking how
many angels can dance on the point of a needle. “Swester Katrei” is the only currently
known medieval work in which even angels standing, or perhaps “perching” like birds
(siczen), on points of needles is so much as mentioned. How did Swester Katrei’s thousand
angels standing on the point of a needle begin to dance and when did their numbers become
uncertain?
1Swester Katrei, as in Franz Pfeiffer (ed.), Deutsche Mystiker, vol. 2, Leipzig, 1857, reprinted: Scientia, Aalen,
1962, p. 474; translated in Franz Pfeiffer, Meister Eckhart, trans. C. de B. Evans, John Watkins, London, 1924,
Sister Katrei. Meister Eckhart’s Strasburg Daughter, p. 333. George MacDonald Ross, Angels, Philosophy 60
(1985), 495, found a reference to this text in a letter to the editor of The Times, 26 November 1975. For the
provenance of this text, which has sometimes been attributed to Meister Eckhart, see Franz-Josef Schweitzer,
Die Freiheitsbegriff der deutschen Mystik. Seine Beziehung zur Ketzerei der “Brüder und Schwestern vom Freien
Geist”, mit besonderer Rücksicht auf den pseudoeckartischen Traktat “Schwester Katrei”, Peter D. Lang, Frank-
furt am Main–Bern (1981), and, for an alternative perspective, Raoul Vaneigem, The Movement of the Free Spirit,
trans. Randall Cherry and Ian Patterson, Zone Books, New York, 1994, pp. 149–152.
2Ross, Angels, p. 495.
3Ross, Angels, p. 496.

252
E.D. Sylla
Fig. 1. White Angel at Christ’s sepulchre. 13th century. Mileševa monastery, Serbia.
Fig. 2. Archangel Gabriel (marble relief), School of Benedetto Antelami, late twelfth–early thirteenth century,
Princeton University Art Museum (Photo: Princeton University Art Museum).

Swester Katrei and Gregory of Rimini
253
In his 1678 True Intellectual System of the Universe, Ralph Cudworth wrote:
And to conclude, though some who are far from Atheists, may make themselves merry, with that
Conceit, of Thousands of Spirits, dancing at once upon a Needles Point, and though the Atheists,
may endeavour, to Rogue and Ridicule, all Incorporeal Substance in that manner; yet does this
run upon a clear Mistake of the Hypothesis, and make nothing at all against it; for as much as an
Unextended Substance is neither any Parvitude, as is here supposed (because it hath no Magnitude
at all) nor hath it any Place, or Site, or Local Motion, properly belonging to it; and therefore can
neither Dance upon a Needles Point, nor any where else.4
Forty years before Cudworth, William Chillingworth, in his Religion of the Protestants
of 1638, had defended Anglican clergy against a Jesuit critic, saying that they might be
learned even though they “dispute not eternally, Utrum chimera bombinans in vacuo possit
comedere secundas intentiones? ‘Whether a million of angels may not sit upon a needle’s
point?’”5 Chillingworth’s sitting angels might have derived ultimately from a source like
Swester Katrei.
4R. Cudworth, The True Intellectual System of the Universe: The First Part: Wherein, All the Reason and
Philosophy of Atheism is Confuted; and Its Impossibility Demonstrated, Richard Royston, London, 1678, Book
I, Ch. 5, pp. 776–777. Reprinted Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt: Friedrich Frommann Verlag/Gunther Holzboog, 1964.
See also: Meyer, Jena, 1733, pp. 1018–1019. In saying that incorporeal substances such as angels do not fall
into the category of things in place, Cudworth drew upon Plotinus and other ancient authors ( just before the
text already quoted): “By this time we have made it unquestionably Evident, that this Opinion of Incorporeal
Substance being Unextended, Indistant, and Devoid of Magnitude, is no Novel or Recent thing, nor ﬁrst started in
the Scholastik Age, but that it was the general Perswasion, of the most ancient and learned Asserters of Incorporeal
Substance; especially, that the Deity was not Part of it Here, and Part of it There, nor the Substance thereof
Mensurable by Yards and Poles, as if there were so much of it contained in one Room, and so much and not
more in another, according to their several Dimensions; but that the whole Undivided Deity, was at once in Every
Part of the world, and consequently No where Locally after the manner of Bodies. But because this opinion,
seems so Strange and Paradoxical, and lies under so great Prejudices, we shall in the next place show, how these
ancient Incorporealists, endeavoured to acquit themselves in repelling the several Efforts and Plausibilities made
against it. The First whereof is this, That to suppose Incorporeal Substances, Unextended and Indivisible, is to
make them Absolute Parvitudes, and by means of that, to render them all (even the Deity itself!) contemptible;
since they must of necessity, be either Physical Minimums, that cannot Actually be Divided further by reason of
their Littleness (if there be any such thing) or else meer Mathematical Points, which are not so much as Mentally
Divisible: so that Thousands of these Incorporeal Substances, or Spirits, might Dance together at once upon a
Needles Point. To which it was long since thus Replied by Plotinus ... God and all other Incorporeal Substances,
are not so Indivisible, as if they were Parvitudes, or Little things, as Physical points; for so would they still be
Mathematically Divisible; nor yet, as if they were Mathematical Points neither, which indeed are no Bodies nor
Substances, but only the Termini of a Line. And neither of these ways, could the Deity Congruere with the world;
nor Souls with their respective Bodies, so as to be all present with the whole of them”.
5William Chillingworth, The Works of W. Chillingworth, M.S., containing his book, intituled The Religion of
the Protestants a Safe Way to Salvation; together with his Sermons, Letters, Discourses, Controversies, &c. &c.,
12th ed., London, 1940, p. 12. I owe this reference to Marty Helgesen at a web newsgroup found at http://geneva.
rutgers.edu/src/faq/angels-dancing.txt, who quotes Arnold Lunn, The Revolt Against Reason, London: Eyre and
Spottiswoode, 1950, p. 231, who quotes James Brodrick, in The Tablet, October 10, 1942, who was the person
who noticed the passage in Chillingworth. The pseudo-scholastic question “Utrum chimera bombinans in vacuo
possit comedere secundas intentiones?” comes from Rabelais’ life of Gargantua, and is later repeated in Voltaire’s
Philosophical Dictionary, under “authority” and “atheist” (with reference to Vanini “a poor Neapolitan priest ... a
merciless arguﬁer about quidities and universals, et utrum chimera bombinans in vacuo possit comedere secundas
intentiones. But for the rest, there was not a drop of atheism in him”). According to Brodrick, Ebenezer Brewer,
in Dictionary of Phrase and Fable, had said that Thomas Aquinas had “discussed the knotty point of how many
angels can dance on the point of a needle”, adding that what St. Thomas discussed in fact was “more strictly
speaking, Utrum angelus possit moveri de extremo ad extremum non transeundo per medium,” [i.e. can an angel

254
E.D. Sylla
Cudworth’s atheists, wanting to “rogue and ridicule all incorporeal substance” could
have been someone like Thomas Hobbes. In his Leviathan (1651) Hobbes called the Pa-
pacy the “Kingdom of the Fairies”.6 The Catholic Church erred, Hobbes said, “by mixing
with the Scripture divers reliques of the Religion, and much of the vain and erroneous
Philosophy of the Greeks, especially of Aristotle”.7 Having decided that there can be “sep-
arated essences” or substances without matter, the scholastics were faced, he said, with the
problem of the place of such entities:
seeing that they will have these Forms to be reall, they are obliged to assign them some place. But
because they hold them Incorporeall, without all dimension of Quantity, and all men know that
Place is Dimension, and not to be ﬁlled, but by that which is Corporeall; they are driven to uphold
their credit with a distinction, that they are not indeed any where Circumscriptive, but Deﬁnitive:
Which Terms being meer Words, and in this occasion insigniﬁcant, passe only in Latine, that the
vanity of them may bee concealed.
Again, whereas Motion is change of Place, and Incorporeall Substances are not capable of Place,
they are troubled to make it seem possible, how a Soule can goe hence, without the Body to
Heaven, Hell, or Purgatory; and how the Ghosts of men (and I may adde of their clothes which they
appear in) can walk by night in Churches, Churchyards, and other places of Sepulture. To which I
know not what they can answer, unlesse they will say, they walke deﬁnitive, not circumscriptive, or
spiritually, not temporally: for such egregious distinctions are equally applicable to any difﬁculty
whatsoever.8
In so arguing, Hobbes may have spoken for intelligent lay people against the technical
terminology of theologians, but in scholastic theology, the distinction between “circum-
scriptive” and “deﬁnitive” ways of being in place was well-established and not “insigniﬁ-
cant” as Hobbes charged. In scholastic terms, corporeal substances or material bodies are
in place “circumscriptively”, in the sense that one part of them is in one part of the place
and another part of them in another place. But the soul is in the body “deﬁnitively”, i.e.
wholly in every part: if a leg is amputated, one does not lose part of one’s soul. Similarly,
God is not in place circumscriptively, but omnipresent, wholly in every part of the uni-
verse.9 Angels, which have no matter, are, like the soul, in place deﬁnitively: when they
act on earth, they can be present to a larger or smaller, but always ﬁnite, volume, in such
move from one extreme to the other without passing through the middle] on which Brodrick remarked “now the
‘more strictly speaking’ of this emendation is a joyful thing, for it is as though one were to say: ‘The man had red
hair, or, more strictly speaking, his wife was wearing a new hat’ ” (Lunn, p. 231).
6Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, ed. C.B. MacPherson, Penguin Books, London, 1968, reprinted 1985, p. 712.
7Cf. Hobbes, pp. 628–629.
8Cf. Hobbes, Leviathan, pp. 691–693.
9God is in space neither circumscriptively nor deﬁnitively, because God is not in any deﬁned space, but every-
where. In the fourteenth century, theologian natural philosophers like Thomas Bradwardine and Nicole Oresme
emphasized God’s ubiquity outside the cosmos as well as inside, but said that, being wholly everywhere, God is
present only in a non-extended sense. Isaac Newton would later come up with the parallel analogy that time is
wholly the same in every part of space. See Edith Sylla, Imaginary Space: John Dumbleton and Isaac Newton, in:
Jan Aertsen and Andreas Speer (eds.), Raum und Raumvorstellungen im Mittelalter, Miscellanea Mediaevalia 25,
Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, 1998, p. 222. In Nicole Oresme’s terms, the space outside the cosmos “is inﬁnite and
indivisible, and is the immensity of God and God Himself”. Cf. E. Sylla, Imaginary Space: John Dumbleton and
Isaac Newton, pp. 214–215. Just as God is eternal without temporal extension before the creation of the world
and time, so God is ubiquitous without spatial extension outside the cosmos. If God were to annihilate everything
inside the sphere of the moon, so John Buridan argued, what would be left inside would have no dimension,
so that God could put huge new bodies into places that previously contained much less. See Edith Sylla, ‘Ideo
quasi mendicare oportet intellectum humanum’: The Role of Theology in John Buridan’s Natural Philosophy,

Swester Katrei and Gregory of Rimini
255
a way that, like the rational soul in the body, they are wholly everywhere within the given
volume.10
When Swester Katrei said that the soul that enters God occupies a space vastly greater
than God’s entire creation, this was the sort of extravagant claim about the soul that might
cause the Catholic Church to declare the Brothers and Sisters of the Free Spirit heretics, but
it was a claim not unrelated to orthodox scholastic conceptions. Thus the Jesuit Franciscus
Suarez, in a treatise on angels based on Thomas Aquinas’s Summa Theologiae extending
to more than 700 folios, discussed whether an angel may occupy a mathematical point or
whether angels always occupy some volume which may be vanishingly small, but never
zero.11 In his discussion, Suarez used an additional concept of being in place, namely the
concept of “ubi” or “where” derived from Aristotle’s categories, which might be compared
to location in a scheme of Cartesian coordinates, with the added connotation that the sub-
stance in question has a sort of intrinsic quality expressing its ubi.12 If Thomas Hobbes
in: J.M.M.H. Thijssen and J. Zupko (eds.), The Metaphysics and Natural Philosophy of John Buridan, E.J. Brill,
Leiden–Boston–Köln, 2001, pp. 241–242. When Isaac Newton built upon such theological speculations to use
God to “constitute” absolute space, he drew upon Platonic solids and something like Neoplatonic emanation from
the One to convince his readers that empty space might have intrinsic dimension or extension without matter.
E. Sylla, Imaginary Space, pp. 218–225.
10Perhaps the passion with which Hobbes and others attacked the idea of deﬁnitive place is to be explained by the
fact that deﬁnitive place was sometimes used to explain the mode of being of Christ’s body in the transubstantiated
Eucharist. Christ’s body is totally in every part of the Eucharist, so that when the bread is broken, Christ’s body is
not broken. One way of attacking the doctrine of transubstantiation was to attack the ways in which theologians
had elaborated the doctrine.
11Franciscus Suarez, De Angelis in Opera Omnia, 20 vols., pp. 1613–1625. Pars Secunda Summae Theologiae
de Deo rerum omnium creatore. In tres praecipuos tractatus distributa, quorum primus De angelis, Sumptibus
Iacobi Cardan et Petri Cavellat, Lyon, 1620. Folio volume of 746 pages plus index. Later edition Vives, 1956.
Suarez divides his work on angels, which follows the pattern established by Aquinas, into parts, the ﬁrst half
concerning what can be said about angels from a natural philosophical or metaphysical point of view (from which
point of view the beings are usually called intelligences rather than angels), and the second half concerning what
can be said about angels from the standpoint of grace. From the natural standpoint, Suarez’s work is divided
into four books considering in turn: Book 1, On the nature of angels, their production and attributes; Book 2,
On the intellective potency of angels and their natural cognition; Book 3, On the will of angels with regard to
their pure state of nature; Book 4, On the power of angels to effect transient actions. In Book 4, Chapters 9–11,
Suarez concludes that the place of angels is not “omnino punctualis”, but later he seems to say that an angel can
be at a point and cites many authors including Thomas Aquinas in agreement. Suarez reports that the Thomists
say there cannot be many angels in the same place (angels are in place by activity; there can only be one cause
of one effect), while the Scotists say there can be many angels in one place. The maximum place of an angel is
spherical. An angel cannot extend itself inﬁnitely far by constricting its width—i.e. there is a maximum dimension
in any direction as well as maximum volume it can have. Question 11 is Utrum angelus necessario sit in loco
adequato, vel possit esse in quocunque minori, aut etiam in nullo. Suarez says angels are “extra genus quantitatis”.
God is indivisible, yet everywhere. Whether the minimum angelic size is intrinsic or extrinsic is, Suarez says, a
philosophical (not a theological) question. The mode of presence of an angel is absolute. It depends on the will
of the angel. An angel could be present in an imaginary space—it doesn’t require a body. The many demons in
a single man may interpenetrate—it would be absurd to suppose that they have to stay in separate places. The
host of angels in the Christmas story need not be crowded because they can interpenetrate. No particular shape is
necessary for angels “nihilominus satis probabiliter credo locum eius adequatum secundum circularem ﬁguram
designari, et limitari”.
12Joseph Glanvill in talking about angels dancing on points of needles complains particularly about the concept
of “ubi”: “That the Soul and Angels are devoid of quantitative dimensions, hath the suffrage of the most; and that
they have nothing to do with grosser locality, is as generally opinion’d: But who is it, that retains not a great part

256
E.D. Sylla
had used the phrase “dispute how many angels can dance on the point of a needle”, he
might well have had his contemporary Suarez in mind: if any scholastic ever came close to
disputing how many angels can dance on the point of a needle, it was Suarez, and Hobbes
had many political as well as intellectual reasons for opposing Suarez.
Additional circumstantial evidence that Hobbes could have originated the satire derives
from the fact that, after Chillingworth, the earliest mention of disputations about angels
dancing on needles currently identiﬁed is in Henry More’s 1659 The Immortality of the
Soul, where he argues that the soul is extended and says that he thinks this is:
worth taking notice of, that it may stop the mouths of them that, not without reason, laugh at those
unconceivable and ridiculous fancies of the Schools: that ﬁrst rashly take away all Extension from
Spirits, whether Souls or Angels, and then dispute how many of them booted and spurr’d may
dance on a needles point at once.13
Here More is writing about those who ridicule the Schools and it is only in the words of
these satirists that the scholastics dispute how many angels “booted and spurr’d” (compare
Hobbes’ “their clothes in which they appear”) may dance on a needle’s point. In his defense
of the reality of spirit, More argued against materialists like Hobbes. Thus I am persuaded
that, if not Hobbes, it was some mid-seventeenth-century author very like him who ﬁrst
conﬂated for the sake of ridicule a mystical tradition which said that a thousand angels
can stand or sit on the point of a needle and scholastic disputations involving the deﬁnitive
place or ubi of angels. In sum, the most famous (supposedly) medieval connection between
mathematics and the divine—the dispute how many angels can dance on the point of a
needle—was almost certainly a seventeenth-century invention.
2. The place of angels: Gregory of Rimini
This said, it must be conceded that the scholastics did engage in disputations concerning
the relation of angels to points, but I would like to argue here that what they had to say did
not deserve the dismissal to which later satirists consigned it, not the least because, within
their disputations, they had novel and progressive things to say about the mathematics
of continuity and inﬁnity. In the rest of this paper, I focus on the mid-fourteenth-century
Lectura of Gregory of Rimini on Peter Lombard’s Book of Sentences to show what the
relation of mathematics and the divine in scholastic theology was really like.14 I will begin
with Gregory’s questions concerning the place of angels and then show how Gregory’s
of the imposture, by allowing them a deﬁnitive Ubi, which is still but Imagination? He that said, a thousand might
dance on the point of a Needle, spake but grossly; and we may as well suppose them to have wings, as a proper
Ubi”. Joseph Glanvill, The Vanity of Dogmatizing (1661), p. 100. A revised version of this work was published
in 1665 under the title Scepsis Scientiﬁca, and with a dedication to the Royal Society. It was published again in
1676 under the title Essays Against Conﬁdence in Philosophy. Reprint of all three works together with a critical
introduction by Stephen Medcalf, The Harvester Press, Hove, Sussex, 1970. Note that, like Cudworth, Glanvill
does not imply that there were scholastic disputations about angels dancing on the point of a needle.
13Henry More, The Immortality of the Soul, ed. Alexander Jacob, Archives Internationales D’Histoire des Idées,
vol. 122, Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, Dordrecht/Boston/Lancaster, 1987, Book III, Chapter II, pp. 198–199.
14Gregory of Rimini, Lectura super Primum et Secundum Sententiarum, vol. 3, Super Primum (Dist 19–48),
ed. A. Damasus Trapp and Venicio Marcolino, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin and New York, 1984; vol. 4, Super
Secundum (Dist 1–5), ed. A. Damasus Trapp, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin and New York, 1979.

Swester Katrei and Gregory of Rimini
257
conception of God’s knowledge of the world impacted what he had to say about inﬁnity
and continuity in progressive ways.
In Book II, distinction 2 of his Lectura on the Sentences, Gregory of Rimini had three
questions on angels. First he asked whether the angels were created together with time,
before time, or after time; second whether an angel may be in an indivisible or a divis-
ible place; and third whether an angel can be in several places at the same time.15 The
second and third questions exemplify what the scholastics really did dispute concerning
the place of angels. On the second question, having given a very brief principal argument,
Gregory then devoted Article 1 to an extensive treatment of the continuum as a necessary
background to the main question, considering whether a magnitude may be composed of
indivisibles and whether there may be something indivisible within a continuum.16 He con-
cluded that no magnitude is composed of indivisibles; rather any magnitude is composed of
magnitudes. Second any magnitude is composed of inﬁnitely many magnitudes and, third,
in no magnitude is there something indivisible intrinsic to it.17 Gregory’s arguments for
these conclusions are a tour de force: he clears up several confusions about continuity in
earlier authors, and he argues for the possibility of an actual inﬁnity.18 I will come back to
Article 1 and its treatment of inﬁnity and continuity below. Here I want simply to note that
in the recent edition of Gregory’s Lectura, Article 1 with its discussion of continuity and
inﬁnity takes up 53 pages (pp. 278–331), and only then does Gregory come to the question
at issue concerning the place of angels:
The second article, which, as is clear, concerns the main question, supposes that an angel is in
a place. On this there is a common agreement among theologians, doctors, and saints. They all
say in common that an angel is in place, not dimensively or circumscriptively, to use the modern
terminology, but only deﬁnitively.19
There is, however, a difference of opinion about how an angel comes to be in place.
Thomas Aquinas and Aegidius Romanus say that an angel is only in place by its operation.
15Gregory of Rimini, Lectura II, dist. 2, vol. 4, pp. 277–343, “Quaestio 1 additionalis: Utrum angeli fuerint creati
simul cum tempore, an ante tempus, vel post”. “Quaestio 2. Utrum angelus sit in loco indivisibili aut indivisibili”.
“Quaestio 3: Utrum angelus possit simul esse in pluribus locis”.
16Lectura II, dist. 2, q. 2, art. 1, p. 278, “an magnitudo componatur ex indivisibilibus ... et utrum in magnitudine
sit aliquid indivisibile”.
17Ibid., “nulla magnitudo componitur ex indivisibilibus ... quaelibet magnitudo componitur ex magnitudinibus.
Secunda quod quaelibet magnitudo componitur ex inﬁnitis magnitudinibus. Tertia, quod in nulla magnitudine est
aliquid indivisibile”.
18See Anneliese Maier, Die Vorläufer Galileis im 14. Jahrhundert: Studien zur Naturphilosophie der Spät-
scholastik, 2nd ed., Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, Rome, 1966, pp. 172–177; Eadem, Diskussionen über das
aktuell Unendliche in der ersten Hälfte des 14. Jahrhunderts, in: Eadem, Ausgehendes Mittelalter, vol. 1, Edizioni
di Storia e Letteratura, Rome, 1964, pp. 82–84; John Murdoch, “Inﬁnity and Continuity”, in: Norman Kretzmann,
Anthony Kenny, and Jan Pinborg (eds.), The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, 1982, pp. 572–573; Richard Cross, Inﬁnity, Continuity, and Composition: The Contri-
bution of Gregory of Rimini, Medieval Philosophy and Theology 7 (1998), 89–110. It should be noted that Maier
was mistaken in thinking that Gregory believed in inﬁnitesimals. Cf. Cross, Inﬁnity, Continuity, and Composition,
p. 103, n. 58.
19Lectura II, dist. 2, q. 2, art. 2, p. 331, “Secundus articulus, qui est de principali quaesito, ut patet, supponit
angelum esse in loco. De quo communis concordia est apud theologos, doctores et sanctos. Dicunt enim omnes
communiter quod angelus est in loco, non quidem dimensive, seu circumscriptive iuxta moderniorem usum vo-
cabuli, sed tantummodo deﬁnitive”.

258
E.D. Sylla
Article 203 of the Condemnations of 1277 opposes this view, however. Gregory concludes
that angels are in place not only by operation, but through their substance.20 Angels are
not, he says, properly speaking in an indivisible place, but rather in a divisible place. This
is so because there are no indivisibles in nature, as he had proved previously.21
Only after replying to the main question does Gregory of Rimini raise a doubt that might
seem to be scholastic quibbling about angels and pins or needles. He asks whether an angel
ﬁlls a determinate volume or whether angels may vary in size down to some minimum or
up to some maximum.22 There was general agreement among the scholastics that angels
have a maximum possible size, because they are of a ﬁnite power.23 Gregory agreed with
this and added that an angel has a maximum extension in any dimension: it would not
be possible for the given volume ﬁlled by an angel to become so extremely narrow that
it could stretch, say, from heaven through the spheres of ﬁre and air to earth. Richard
Fitzralph (called Hibernicus) had argued that angels ﬁll spheres of a certain size, so that
if an angel were united to a very small body, the angel might extend into the air beyond
the body. Gregory thought that this might be the case, but that it was more probable that
an angel’s volume could be constricted or shaped so that it did not overﬂow the body to
which it was united; he thought it unreasonable to think that if an angel were united to a
human form, that it would overﬂow into the surrounding air.24 Moreover, in the case of
humans we see that the volume occupied by the soul changes as the person changes size,
even sometimes when a limb is amputated.25
Since angels are in place deﬁnitively, they are for Gregory in every part of any place
they occupy, however small and of whatever shape. An angel could be in a whole house
and, as such, in the stones, wood, iron, etc., that make it up.26 The real question is whether
the whole place of a given angel has a minimum or whether an angel could even be at a
point. Some people, for instance John Duns Scotus, to avoid the possibility of the very long
and very thin place previously mentioned, proposed that there was a minimum dimension
20Ibid., p. 335, “Dico igitur quod non solum per operationem angelus est in loco, sed etiam per substantiam
suam, sic intelligendo quod eius etiam substantia praesens est loco et eo deﬁnitur et concluditur; quod etiam
contingit, etiamsi non ibi operetur”.
21Ibid., p. 335, “Quantum ad illud quod principaliter quaeritur, dico quod angelus non est in loco indivisibili
proprie loquendo de loco scilicet corporali, sed est in loco divisibili. Ratio est, quia nullum tale indivisibile est in
rerum natura, ut probatum est in primo articulo”.
22Ibid., p. 335, “Sed tunc remanet dubium, an angelus in quantocumque loco possit naturaliter esse, vel sibi
determinet magnitudinem loci, cui coexistere possit. Et si sic, est dubium, an sic determinet sibi magnitudinem
aliquantam loci, quod nec in maiore possit esse naturaliter nec in minore, quamvis nullum determinatum locum
secundum numerum sibi determinet ...”.
23Ibid., p. 336.
24Ibid., p. 337, “Et determinat etiam sibi sphaericam ﬁguram ita quod, si corpus aliquod sit minus illa quantitate,
angelus non solum erit in eo, sed etiam erit in alio extra ipsum propinquo, cuius tantae parti coexistet, ut habeat
integre sui loci quantitatem ... Quamvis autem istud dictum sit satis pulchrum et probabile, communius tamen
tenetur oppositum, quod et mihi videtur etiam probabilius ... Conﬁrmatur quia, cum angelus assumit sibi aliquod
corpus in forma verbi gratia humana, non videtur rationabile quod tunc non solum sit in corpore illo, sed etiam in
aere circumstante...”.
25Ibid., p. 337, “Ad hoc etiam aliqualiter persuadet quod videmus in anima humana, cuius unio et conformitas
ad corpus est multo maior quam angeli ad locum, et tamen nunc minus nunc maius corpus informat secundum
quod illud augetur vel minuitur naturaliter, et aliquando etiam per truncationem membri aut partis”.
26Ibid., p. 337.

Swester Katrei and Gregory of Rimini
259
that an angel could occupy. Gregory, however, did not ﬁnd Scotus’ arguments for this
position convincing. Moreover, Scotus also conceded that an angel could be at a point,
which, Gregory suggested, was inconsistent with arguing for a minimum size in any given
dimension.27 Gregory himself concluded that neither position about minimum sizes of
angels was impossible and neither was necessary. Each person might chose the position
they preferred to defend, he said, so long as they were not too dogmatic, since this was a
matter hidden from human comprehension, and the scriptures say nothing clear about it.28
In Question 3, Gregory then asked whether an angel could be in several places and,
within this discussion, whether several angels can be in the same place. Thomas Aquinas
had argued that two angels cannot be in the same place because an angel only comes to be
in place by its operation. The net effect produced by such an operation must have a single
cause, so that there cannot be two angels with different operations producing the same
net effect. Since Gregory had argued that angels are in place by their substance and not
only by their operation, this argument did not hold for him. Moreover, even if angels were
in place by operation, he said, since they act freely, they could cooperate, each providing
part of the cause of the net effect.29 By God’s power, even two bodies can be in the same
place, so certainly two angels can be in the same place. Even if the question is whether
two angels could be in the same place naturally, without a miracle, Gregory (agreeing with
Duns Scotus) concluded that they probably can be. After all, matter and form are in the
same place, so why not two angels, which are only in place deﬁnitively? Moreover, we see
in obsessed people that they are simultaneously informed by their own souls and by the
demon or spirit that possesses them.30
It is worth noting that the whole of Gregory’s Question 3 takes up less than four pages
in the recent edition, while the conclusions about angels at the end of Question 2 ﬁll only
a little more than three pages. This is not the sort of discussion that cries out for satire,
but might be compared to modern discussions of the position of photons.31 Gregory as-
sumes the truths of natural philosophy and mathematics and has evidence about angels
from scripture. Putting his information together, he gives reasonable answers to the ques-
27Ibid., p. 339, “Et mirum est de isto doctore, qui non reputat inconveniens, quod angelus possit esse in puncto,
et videtur reputare inconveniens, quod in quantumcumque parvo possit esse...”.
28Ibid., p. 339, “Dico igitur quod non video impossibilitatem alterius partis; nec tamen necessitatem. Eligat
ergo quis quod velit, dummodo nihil temere afﬁrmet. Nam haec materia abscondita est nobis, dum hic sumus. Et
scriptura divina nihil tale nobis manifestat”.
29Ibid., p. 342, “Ad primum ... nego consequentiam. Cuius inﬁrmitas patet: Tum quia supponit angelum non
posse esse in loco nisi operetur circa illud, cuius oppositum in praecedenti quaestione probatum est; tum quia,
dato quod operaretur, adhuc non sequitur quod essent duae causae totales, seu duo motores perfecti. Quoniam,
cum ipsi libere moveant, posset quilibet movere citra ultimum suae potentiae, et citra illud quod requireretur ad
movendum corpus illud, ita quod uterque esset partialis motor et ambo simul aequivalerent uni perfecto motori”.
30Ibid., p. 342.
31See Matthew Fox and Rupert Sheldrake, The Physics of Angels. Exploring the Realm Where Science and
Spirit Meet, Harper Collins, San Francisco, 1996, p. 21, “When Aquinas discusses how angels move from place
to place, his reasoning has extraordinary parallels to both quantum and relativity theories. Angels are quantized;
you get a whole angel or none at all ... from the point of view of the angel this movement is instantaneous; no
time elapses. This is just like Einstein’s description of the movement of a photon of light... So in modern physics
there are remarkable parallels to the traditional doctrines about angels, and I think the parallels arise because the
same problems are being considered. How does something without mass, without body, but capable of action,
move?”

260
E.D. Sylla
tions about angels traditionally found in commentaries on the Sentences, in the course of
which he cites previous authorities such as St. Augustine, Thomas Aquinas, Aegidius Ro-
manus, John Duns Scotus, and others and agrees with or argues against them. Believing as
other scholastics that angels really exist, Gregory tries to be as scientiﬁc as possible about
them, admitting unavoidable uncertainty about some ﬁner details.
3. God and the continuum: Gregory of Rimini
Now, however, I would like to discuss in more detail the 53 pages of mathematics and math-
ematical physics that formed Article 1 of Question 2. In this section, Gregory assumes an
Aristotelian conception of the status of mathematics. For Aristotelians, quantities, or math-
ematical entities in general, have no existence separate from things or substances. They are
features of things which mathematicians consider in abstraction from other attributes of
things although they do not in reality exist separate from these other attributes.32 If, in a
Platonic conception, mathematics concerns mathematical forms that really exist in a realm
separate from the physical world, in the Aristotelian conception of mathematics this is not
the case. And not only do the objects of mathematics not exist separately, they do not in a
strict sense even exist in objects.33 Instead, they exist in the minds of mathematicians who
talk about them using concepts or reasoning (ex parte rationum sive conceptuum apud an-
imam existentium). Mathematics differs from metaphysics and physics not because it con-
siders different entities, but because it considers the same entities under the aspect of quan-
tity, whereas metaphysics considers them insofar as they are things, and physics considers
32Cf. Aristotle, Metaphysics, Book M (XIII), Ch. 1, 1076a33–37, “If the objects of mathematics exist, they
must exist either in sensible objects, as some say, or separate from sensible objects (and this also is said by
some); or if they exist in neither of these ways, either they do not exist, or they exist only in some special sense.
So that the subject of our discussion will be not whether they exist but how they exist”. Aristotle’s conclusion
(Ch. 3, 1077b11–17) is that the objects of mathematics exist neither in sensible objects, nor separately from
sensible objects, but only in some special sense. Ch. 3, 1077b31–1078a30: “Thus since it is true to say without
qualiﬁcation that not only things which are separable but also things which are inseparable exist... It is true
also to say without qualiﬁcation that the objects of mathematics exist, and with the character ascribed to them by
mathematicians. And as it is true to say of the other sciences too, without qualiﬁcation, that they deal with such
and such a subject ... so too is it with geometry; if its subjects happen to be sensible, though it does not treat them
qua sensible, the mathematical sciences will not for that reason be sciences of sensibles—nor, on the other hand,
of other things separate from sensibles. Many properties attach to things in virtue of their own nature as possessed
of each such character ... so that there are also attributes which belong to things merely as lengths or as planes ...
Therefore, if we suppose attributes separated from their fellow-attributes and make any inquiry concerning them
as such, we shall not for this reason be in error ... Each question will be best investigated in this way—by setting
up by an act of separation what is not separate, as the arithmetician and the geometer do. For a man qua man
is one indivisible thing; and the arithmetician supposed one indivisible thing, and then considered whether any
attribute belongs to a man qua indivisible. But the geometer treats him neither qua man nor qua indivisible, but
as a solid. For evidently the properties which would have belonged to him even if perchance he had not been
indivisible, can belong to him even apart from these attributes. Thus, then, geometers speak correctly; they talk
about existing things, and their subjects do exist...”.
33Gregory of Rimini, Lectura, vol. 3, In I Sent. dist. 24 q. 1, ad rationes principales, p. 33, “Ad secundam
auctoritatem eiusdem dico quod opinio Commentatoris, ut videtur in verbis allegatis, et clarius adhuc in 10 Meta-
physicae commento 8 fuit quod unum numerale signiﬁcaret aliquod accidens inhaerens rei, quae dicitur una, sicut
albus signiﬁcat albedinem inhaerentem subiecto. Et in hoc ipse non fuit minus deceptus quam Avicenna, nec eius
auctoritas in hac parte recipienda”.

Swester Katrei and Gregory of Rimini
261
them insofar as they are mobile.34 To fourteenth-century Aristotelians of a nominalistic
bent, many of whom including Gregory of Rimini denied that mathematical indivisibles
such as points, lines, planes, or instants really exist, mathematics might be considered a
conditional science, saying that if such and such were the case, then this and that would
follow.35 When a theologian who denied the real existence of points or other indivisibles (a
“non-entitist” in Rega Wood’s terms36) engaged in debate with a theologian who thought
34John Buridan, Perutiles questiones in ultima eius lectura edite super duodecim libros Metaphysice, Paris,
1518, ff. 33va–34ra, “Quaeritur secundo utrum philosophia speculativa bene dividatur in physicam, mathemati-
cam, et metaphysicam ... Notandum est quod ista questio est satis difﬁcilis, quia non est facile assignare unde
proveniat sufﬁcientia talis divisionis ... Et primo pono istam conclusionem: et ista divisio non sumitur ex distinc-
tione rerum extra animam existentium, scilicet consideratorum in istis tribus scientiis, quoniam eedem res in istis
tribus scientiis considerantur. De omnibus enim considerat metaphysicus. Et similiter etiam de omnibus consid-
erat physicus, quia considerat terminos supponentes pro omnibus rebus ... Sed tunc sequitur alia conclusio: quod
hec divisio provenit ex parte rationum sive conceptuum apud animam existentium, quia oportet eam provenire
vel ex parte rerum extra vel ex parte rationum sive conceptuum. Tertia conclusio potest poni quod illa divisio
non est sumenda ex dispositione conclusionum ... Alia conclusio ponitur quod etiam illa divisio non provenit
ex distinctione principiorum complexorum ... Ideo ﬁnaliter concludo quod illa distinctio originaliter sumitur ex
distinctione aliquorum principiorum incomplexorum. Cum enim debeat sumi hec distinctio ex parte rationum
sive conceptuum, et tamen non ex parte complexorum, quia nec conclusionum nec principiorum, sequitur quod
ex parte incomplexorum. Sed tunc est difﬁcile assignare qui sunt illi termini et quare non ita bene sunt alii. Ad
quod ego dico quod illi termini sunt ‘ens’, ‘mobile’ et ‘quantum’. Omnia enim considerata in metaphysica consid-
erantur secundum attributionem vel retributionem ad illum terminum ‘ens’... Deinde venio ad illum terminum
‘quantum’, et dico quod mathematicus non considerat que res est ipsum quantum nec que res est ipsa magnitudo
vel numerus, scilicet utrum magnitudo sit substantia an non vel utrum numerus sit distinctus a rebus numeratis
an non. De istis enim non curat mathematicus. Immo hec pertinent ad metaphysicum. Sed mathematicus consid-
erat de rebus quante sunt, mensurando quantitates ignotas per quantitates notas, et sic habet considerare omnes
proportiones quantorum adinvicem ... Unde mathematicus [correxi ex: metaphysicus] considerat de quanto ab-
strahendo secundum rationem non solum a motu, immo et ab ente, quia non curat de illis quid sunt nisi quantum
ad quid nominis nec etiam a quibus causis sunt, de quo physica. Deinde consimiliter venio ad illum terminus
‘mobile’...”.
35William of Ockham, Expositio in Libros Physicorum Aristotelis Bk. VI, Ch. I, ed. R. Wood, R. Green, G. Gál,
J. Giermek, F. Kelley, G. Leibold, and G. Etzkorn, St. Bonaventure University, St. Bonaventure, NY, 1985, Opera
Philosophica, vol. V, pp. 461–462, “Et si dicas quod linea est longitudo sine latitudine, cuius extremitates sunt
duo puncta, dicendum est quod mathematici imaginantur talia puncta... Et iuxta illam imaginationem mathemati-
corum datur praedicta descriptio... Sic ista deﬁnitio ‘linea est longitudo’ [etc.] debet sic intelligi: si esset aliqua
longitudo et non latitudo et haberet puncta talia indivisibilia, tunc quaelibet linea haberet duas extremitates quae
essent duo puncta... Sic ergo dico quod ex principiis Aristotelis sequitur quod non sunt talia puncta indivisibilia
copulantia et terminantia lineas, quamvis mathematici imaginentur talia... ”. Cf. John Murdoch, William of Ock-
ham and the Logic of Inﬁnity and Continuity, in: Normann Kretzmann (ed.), Inﬁnity and Continuity in Ancient
and Medieval Thought, Cornell University Press, Ithaca and London, 1982, p. 178. Gregory of Rimini, Lectura,
vol. 3, p. 33, “Et, si esset aliquod omnino indivisibile habens situm, illud esset punctus. Utrum autem aliquod
huiusmodi sit, alias videbitur. Sermo tamen Commentatoris in proposito condicionaliter debet intelligi. Secundo
potest dici et forte melius quod Commentator in verbis illis et Philosophus etiam, qui ibidem dicit similia, non
loquuntur secundum opinionem propriam, sed secundum opinionem tunc famosam ponentium mathematica sep-
arata et puncta et alia indivisibilia, quae, si esset vera, esset aliquid praecise de genere quantitatis carentis situ
et indivisibile, et illud esset unitas principium numeri mathematici separati, esset etiam tale aliquid indivisibile
habens situm, quod punctus ab illis vocabatur”.
36See Rega Wood, Adam Woodham, “Tractatus de Indivisibilibus”: A Critical Edition with Introduction, Trans-
lation, and Textual Notes, Kluwer, Dordrecht, Boston, and London, 1988, p. 11.

262
E.D. Sylla
they did exist, the non-entitist might accept for the sake of argument that points exist.37
Some “non-entitists” also argued that Aristotle did not believe in the real existence of indi-
visibles but only wrote of them following common or famous opinion. Gregory of Rimini
took both of these positions in Article 1.38 Thus Gregory argued about the points in a line
while he denied that such points actually exist in the outside world.
To this Aristotelian conception of mathematics and physics, fourteenth-century theolo-
gians like Gregory of Rimini added ideas about God’s sight or knowledge. Aristotle himself
was of the opinion that a continuum is potentially inﬁnitely divisible. No matter how many
times a continuum has been cut into parts, the remaining pieces are still extended and may
be cut further. At the same time, Aristotle thought that it was impossible to ﬁnish cutting
a continuum into all the parts into which it could possibly be cut. One can cut as much as
one likes and then more, but the result will always be a ﬁnite number of extended parts that
could be cut further. One never has an actually inﬁnite number of parts and, in fact, the
concept of an inﬁnite number is something of an oxymoron, since a number is supposed to
have a certain quantity, while an inﬁnite is immeasurable.
This conception worked for Aristotle, but it could not work in the same way for a
scholastic Aristotelian like Gregory who asserted that God timelessly knows everything
that has happened, is happening, or will happen.39 If God timelessly knows all the places
in which a continuum might be cut, does it not follow that God must know an actually
inﬁnite number of such places? If the places at which a continuum might be cut are points,
does it not follow that God sees an actually inﬁnite number of points in any line?
This introduction into discussions of continuity and inﬁnity of God’s knowledge or sight
of inﬁnitely many things had received a stimulus through notes that Robert Grosseteste
wrote in the margins of his copy of Aristotle’s Physics. Grosseteste wanted to explain how
measurement would be possible if it were posited that only one line existed and nothing
else by which it could be measured.40 His suggested solution was to say that humans might
not be able to make a measurement in such cases, but God would know. God might see, for
37Gregory of Rimini, Lectura II, dist. 2, q. 2, art. 1, vol. 4, p. 291, “Ad secundum, tertium et quartum possem
simul respondere, negando id quod communiter supponunt, scilicet aliquod punctum esse in magnitudine. Hoc
enim falsum est, sicut patebit in tertia conclusione. Quia tamen praeter hoc quodlibet etiam aliter deﬁcit, respon-
deo ad secundum, supponendo pro nunc puncta esse in magnitudine secundum quod multi imaginantur, et false
iudicio meo. Hoc tamen supposito dico...”.
38Gregory of Rimini, Lectura II, dist. 2, q. 2, art. 1, vol. 4, p. 325, “Et pro duobus primis, sciendum quod, si-
cut patet ex diversis partibus philosophiae Aristotelis, quaedam opinio famosa fuit temporibus Aristotelis, quae
huiusmodi indivisibilia posuit, non solum in anima, verum etiam extra animam. Et ex eis dicebant componi
magnitudinem ... Huius opinionis non fuerunt Augustinus, ut ex dictis patet, neque Philosophus; quinimmo se-
cundum in pluribus locis impugnavit. Primum autem, videlicet puncta esse extra animam, aliquando sub dubio
posuit... Aliquando vero expresse negavit... Nullibi tamen in propria forma exquisite discussit. Et ideo sicut
moris sui fuit, antequam a proposito materiam tractasset et ubi etiam non principaliter de illa agebatur, loqui iuxta
famosiorem opinionem, frequenter de punctis et lineis et superﬁciebus et contiguis et continuis locutus est iuxta
opinionem illam famosam, et non secundum propriam”.
39For a clear statement concerning various aspects of God’s knowledge, cf. John Buridan, In Metaphysicen
Aristotelis, ff. 75rb–76rb.
40Richard Dales (ed.), Roberti Grosseteste Episcopi Lincolniensis Commentarius in VIII Libros Physicorum
Aristotelis, University of Colorado Press, Boulder, Colorado, 1963, pp. 90–91, “Sed cum linea numeretur, mirum
est quo numeretur. Ponamus enim solam unicam lineam esse, et intelligamus eam abstractam ab omni materia.
Hec iam metiri potest non per aliam lineam nec aliud longum, quia non sit alia dimensio longitudinis ab ipsa, nec
per seipsam metiri potest...”.

Swester Katrei and Gregory of Rimini
263
instance, all the inﬁnitely many points in a one-foot magnitude and all the inﬁnitely many
points in a two-foot magnitude and, by a comparison of these two inﬁnite multitudes, could
know that one was twice as great as the other. The same might hold for periods of time be-
fore the creation of the cosmos.41 To God, but not to humans, inﬁnites are comprehensible,
Grosseteste said.42
In the early fourteenth century, Henry of Harclay, drew non-Euclidean conclusions from
this theological–mathematical–physical mix, concluding, for instance, that points are im-
mediate to each other within lines or, in general, that indivisibles are immediate within
continua. According to Harclay, if God sees all the inﬁnitely many points of a line, then
God must see the point immediate to the end point.43 Imagine a line and that God removes
the end point of the line. Then touch the end of the line. If you touch the line, you must
touch something. What else could it be but the new end point of the line? Then before the
original last point was removed, this new end point must have been immediate to it.
In the many fourteenth-centurydiscussions of such cases, what we would consider math-
ematics and what we would consider physics are very frequently mixed: authors begin by
discussing points and lines, but very frequently turn, for instance, to bodies of water being
uniﬁed or separated. This happens naturally, because the authors assume that the math-
ematical entities such as lines really exist only as characterizations of bodies. In his De
continuo, in which he tried to refute the views of Harclay and Grosseteste among others,
Thomas Bradwardine explicitly stated that the properties of all continua, whether mathe-
matical or physical, are isomorphic.44
In this mathematical–physical mix, many authors used God and angels to make possible
such hypotheses as that a single point be removed from the end of a line, something that
would be physically impossible. Or one assumed that a continuum had been divided into
proportional parts and that an (indivisible) angel is located at the edge of each part.45 To
resolve such conundrums, the tools most frequently called upon were those of logic and,
in particular, supposition theory.46 The authors consider the truth or falsity of a proposi-
tion where this truth or falsity is assumed to depend upon the ways that the terms of the
41Cf. Edith Sylla, Thomas Bradwardine’s De Continuo and the Structure of Fourteenth-Century Learning, in
Edith Sylla and Michael McVaugh (eds.), Texts and Contexts in Ancient and Medieval Science. Studies on the
Occasion of John E. Murdoch’s Seventieth Birthday, E.J. Brill, Leiden, 1997, pp. 164–166.
42Augustine, The City of God, Book XII, Ch. 18 (cf. E. Sylla, Thomas Bradwardine’s De Continuo, pp. 165–
166 n. 36), had said the same thing, “Far be it, then, from us to doubt that all number is known to Him ‘whose
understanding’, according to the Psalmist, ‘is inﬁnite’. The inﬁnity of number, though of inﬁnite numbers there
is no number, is yet not incomprehensible to Him of whose understanding there is no number. And thus, if
everything which is comprehended is deﬁned or made ﬁnite by the comprehension of him who knows it, then all
inﬁnity is in some ineffable way made ﬁnite to God, for it is comprehensible by his knowledge”.
43Cf. E. Sylla, Thomas Bradwardine’s De continuo, pp. 171–177, and John Murdoch, Henry of Harclay and
the Inﬁnite, in A. Maieru and A. Paravicini-Bagliani (eds.), Studi sul XIV secolo in memoria di Anneliese Maier,
Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, Rome, 1982, pp. 228–229 n. 24.
44See E. Sylla, Thomas Bradwardine’s De continuo, p. 157. It is worth noting that Bradwardine silently excludes
the arguments of Grosseteste, Harclay, and Chatton that mention God. Cf. E. Sylla, ibid., pp. 162, 180.
45Cf. Gregory of Rimini’s use of arguments from Richard Fitzralph in Lectura, II, dist. 2, q. 2, art. 1, vol. 4, p.
301, “Sexto, sit ita quod super huiusmodi inﬁnitis partibus proportionalibus sint inﬁniti homines habentes corpora
gloriﬁcata, ‘ita quod corpus unum terminetur in puncto medio ipsius B, et corpus secundum terminetur in ﬁne
secundae partis, et sic de inﬁnitis super partes inﬁnitas procedendo versus A, ita quod non sint simul plures’ ”.
46Supposition theory is a theory of how terms in a proposition stand for things in the world. Cf. L.M. De Rijk,
The origins of the theory of the properties of terms, in: Norman Kretzmann, Anthony Kenny, and Jan Pinborg

264
E.D. Sylla
proposition supposit or stand for things in the world, now, in the past, or in the future.47 It
was in this context that nominalists frequently said that phrases such as “all the points of a
line” are illegitimate, so that a proposition like “All the points of a line are inﬁnite” cannot
be true, because there are no things in the past, present, or future world for which “all the
points of a line” can stand. But if many of the things that mathematicians talk about, such
as points, lines, planes or even numbers, are not real, but imaginary or ﬁctions, how do
these words stand for things in the world? A tack that was used to solve such problems was
to talk about possibilities. Thus Adam Wodeham replaced talk about points in a line with
talk about possible cuts (incisiones possibiles) of the line and about the distinct parts that
might result.48 Aristotle had argued that it is impossible to divide a continuous magnitude
into all the parts into which it could possibly be divided because those ﬁnal parts could
neither be divisible nor indivisible. Wodeham argued that when a line has been divided
into parts then it no longer exists. Then one can ask concerning any collection of distinct
parts, such as two halves or four fourths, whether they can be separated from each other,
but it does not make sense to ask whether the original line can be divided into all its in-
ﬁnitely many potential parts.49 Following this line of reasoning, Gregory of Rimini could
conclude that it is impossible, even by God’s power, that a line be actually divided into
inﬁnitely many distinct parts, such that the parts are actually separated from each other,
but it is not impossible for God to distinguish conceptually inﬁnitely many parts within a
continuum, understanding that God sees at one time the two halves, the four fourths, the
one thousand one-thousandths, ad inﬁnitum, where all the parts he sees are themselves si-
multaneously divided in God’s sight into inﬁnitely many smaller parts, so that God knows
the same magnitude as one, and as two, and as one thousand magnitudes, etc. In a pile
of rocks, one may consider two rocks or three rocks or a hundred, and there need be no
intrinsic quality in any given rock that makes it part of a pair or a triplet, etc. All the more
is this the case if, instead of talking about a pile of rocks, we talk about a continuum that
might possibly be divided in inﬁnitely many different ways.50
(eds.), The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1982,
pp. 166–167. Cf. Edith Sylla, God and the Continuum in the Later Middle Ages: The Relations of Philosophy to
Theology, Logic, and Mathematics, in: Was ist Philosophie im Mittelalter?, Miscellanea Mediaevalia 26, Walter
de Gruyter, Berlin and New York, 1998, pp. 791–797. Eadem, God, Indivisibles, and Logic in the Later Middle
Ages: Adam Wodeham’s Response to Henry of Harclay, Medieval Philosophy and Theology 7 (1998), 69–87.
47For some authors ‘supposition’ concerns the way in which terms stand for things in the present, but ‘amplia-
tion’ resulting, for instance, from the tense of the verb, may cause a word to stand for things in the past or future.
Cf. De Rijk, The origins of the theory of the properties of terms, p. 172.
48Cf. E. Sylla, God, Indivisibles, and Logic in the Later Middle Ages, pp. 81–86.
49Cf. E. Sylla, God, Indivisibles, and Logic, p. 84.
50For a discussion of related issues, cf. Buridan, In Metaphysicen, f. 60va–61rb, Queritur circa decimum Meta-
physice primo utrum omne mensurabile mensuretur uno... Postea dico quod quidam binarius est ternarius, quia
hec festuca est sue due medietates et sic est binarius et etiam est sue tres tertie, et sic est ternarius, et tunc per
syllogismum expositorium sequitur hec festuca est ternarius et ipsa etiam est binarius, vel una si volueris, ergo
binarius est ternarius. Et ille binarius que est ternarius vocetur B. Tunc ex dictis ego concludam quod omnis
binarius est eidem, scilicet B, secundum multitudinem equalis et etiam inequalis, quia est omni binario equalis
et omni ternario inequalis secundum prius dicta. Et causa huius est quia idem secundum aliam et aliam discre-
tionem suarum partium est maior et minor multitudo... Et tunc ultra concludo quod non sequitur: hec sunt illis
equalia secundum multitudinem, ergo hec sunt equalia, quia duo dolia vini sunt equalia secundum multitudinem
duabus quartis, et tamen simpliciter falsum est dicere quod duo dolia sunt equalia duabus quartis ... Et notan-

Swester Katrei and Gregory of Rimini
265
From this point of view, God knows not only all past, present, or future things and their
parts and properties for which terms in a proposition could supposit, but God also knows
all logically possible things or properties, whether or not they ever exist physically.51 Then
in cases in which, in the past, theorists had said that there was a potential, but not an actual
inﬁnite involved, William Heytesbury, Gregory of Rimini, and others concluded that there
must be actually inﬁnitely many possibilities in the pool from which any actual selection
of a ﬁnite sub-set of supposita might be made with regard to a given proposition.52 In this
context it mattered whether one assumed that God knows in the same way that philoso-
phers know, that is through knowing the truth of propositions about the world, or whether
God knows individuals directly and not so-to-speak through the ﬁlter of propositions. In
his Metaphysics, Buridan, for instance, argued that God knows individuals and not propo-
sitions, but he believed that God also knows relations between things.53 Gregory of Rimini,
on the other hand, thought that God knows propositions (complexe signiﬁcabile) as well
as individuals.54 Whether God knows individuals outside himself and whether God knows
propositions, most agreed that, as eternal and unchanging, God does not think discursively
or in time. Whatever he understands, he must understand all at once. On the other hand,
to be true a mathematical proposition needs to be formed, so there is a problem if the
formation of a mathematical proposition is contingent, since it is not usually said that a
mathematical proposition becomes true, just because it is ﬁrst formed.55 Perhaps it should
dum est quod forte non sequitur: hec sunt illis secundum multitudinem inequalia, ergo hec sunt illis inequalia
secundum multitudinem. Nam dicetur quod negatio implicita in iso termino ‘inqualia’ confundit distributive il-
lum terminum ‘multitudinem’ quando ille terminus sequitur, sed non confundit si precedat. Et ideo si dico: hec
sunt illis inequalia secundum multitudinem, sequitur quod secundum omnem discretionem sunt inequalia. Sed si
dico: hec sunt illis secundum multitudinem inequalia, non est sensus nisi quod secundum aliquam multitudinem
vel discretionem sunt inequalia, licet forte secundum aliam discretionem sint equalia”.
51Cf. Buridan, In Metaphysicen Aristotelis, f. 76rb, “Ad aliam dico quod Deus similiter intelligit Sortem quando
est et quando non est, et quando bene agit et quando male agit. Dico similiter quantum est ex identitate intel-
lectionis, et tamen ab eterno per illam unicam et simplicissimam intellectionem ipse scit quandocumque Sortes
est, erit, vel fuit, et quandocumque peccat, peccavit, vel peccabit, quia illa intellectio continet (ut dictum fuit)
omnes partiales intellectiones quibus sic distincte intelligeremus Sortem ... Ad aliam dicendum est quod Deus
omnia intelligit intuitive: presentia, preterita, et futura, et possibilia, quia intuetur suam simplicem essentiam que
est omnium sufﬁcientissimum representativum, ita quod non intelligit ea per aliquam discursum nec per aliquem
modum abstrahendi, et omnia satis sunt ipsi presentia, cum omnia sint in eius potestate”. Such conclusions made
use of new interpretations of logical possibility introduced in the early fourteenth century. See Simo Knuuttila,
Medieval Theories of Modality, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy [http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/modality-
medieval/].
52Cf. Edith Sylla, William Heytesbury on the Sophism ‘Inﬁnita sunt ﬁnita’, in: Miscellanea Mediaevalia, Band
13/2, edited by Albert Zimmermann, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin and New York, 1981, pp. 632–636.
53Buridan, In Metaphysicen, f. 75vb, “Ultima conclusio quantum ad presens est quod Deus nichil intelligit com-
plexe, ita quod ibi sit complexio conceptuum simplicium sicut quando formamus propositionem, quia statim
sequeretur in Deo multiplicitas et compositio. Et omnes istas conclusiones concesserunt tam ﬁdeles quam omnes
philosophi. Positis conclusionibus in quibus ﬁdes et opinio omnium philosophorum concordant, ponenda conclu-
sio in qua aliqui philosophi discordaverunt a ﬁde quamvis etiam multi concordaverint. Dicimus ergo quod Deus
omnia alia a se intelligit clarissime et sic distincte quod omne ens intelligit et omnem modum se habendi ipsum
ad seipsum et ad quelibet alia et scit quod Sortes differt a Platone et scit quomodo differunt ab eo, et quando et
quomodo unusquisque agit vel non agit”.
54Gregory of Rimini, Lectura, vol. 3, 1984, pp. 276–277.
55Ibid., p. 257, “Et adverte quod proprie non dicitur propositio incipere esse vera ex hoc praecise, quod ipsa
est vera et non fuit prius vera, quia, si numquam ipsa fuit prius et modo sit et sit vera, verum est quod ipsa est

266
E.D. Sylla
be said that God knows all mathematical propositions that may possibly be formed. If
mathematical propositions are conditionals, as Ockham and others argued, this introduces
an additional layer of complexity.
In Article 1, then, Gregory decisively rejects Henry of Harclay’s argument that, if God
sees all the points of a line, God must see points immediate to each other.56 He did this, in
effect, by treating God’s knowledge of the world as multilayered or involving many possi-
bilities that are not compossible: God simultaneously sees the two halves of a continuum
and the three thirds, and the thousand one-thousandths, and so forth.57 These are all pos-
sible, and God sees them as such, but they are not all distinct from each other, since the
quarters are parts of the halves, and so forth.
From this point of view it was possible to see why, even though God sees all the propor-
tional parts of a continuum, there is no last or smallest part. Take the two halves of a line
and divide one of those halves into proportional parts with the smaller parts on the side
connected to the other half of the line. There will be no last proportional part touching the
second half of a line, but inﬁnitely many such parts. In God’s eyes these are not potential,
but actual parts. God sees them all and God sees that between any given part and the other
half of the line there are other parts. God does not see a last proportional part, because there
is no last proportional part—within every part that God sees there are smaller parts.58 If
one talked in terms of points rather than proportional parts, then one should say that God
does not see any point next to the last point of a line because what is the case for points
should be taken as analogous to what happens with proportional parts.
To the fourth [objection] I would say that no point is between the ﬁrst point and all the other
points of the same line. And when it is inferred ‘therefore the ﬁrst point and all the other points
are immediate and consequently some one of the other points is immediate to the ﬁrst point’, if
in the conclusion the word ‘all’ is taken collectively, I concede the conclusion, whatever might be
said about the inference. But I deny the further consequence by which it is said ‘therefore some
one of the other points is immediate to the ﬁrst point’. A most certain counter example for me is
because if there are two immediate bodies A and B dividing B in proportional parts such that the
ﬁrst proportional part is more distant from A and the second proportional part is half of the other
half immediate to the ﬁrst half of the whole, and the third is half of the rest, and so forth continuing
toward A, then this is true: ‘A and all the proportional parts of B are immediate’, but this is false:
vera et numquam prius fuit vera. Nec tamen quaelibet talis proprie dicitur incipere esse vera, sed illa tantum quae
fuit prius non vera, aut, si fuisset, fuisset non vera; alioquin quaelibet propositio vera noviter formata diceretur
incipere esse vera, et sic una conclusio geometrica inciperet esse vera, quod tamen in communi usu loquendi
absurdum diceretur”. Of course, the real concern in most discussions of God’s unchanging knowledge involved
problems of predestination and free will, not mathematics. If human choices are contingent, how could God have
determined timelessly who will or will not be saved?
56Gregory of Rimini, Lectura, vol. 4, p. 290, “Tertio ... suppono unum verum et a quolibet ﬁdeli concedendum,
scilicet quod deus videt quodlibet punctum quod est in linea. Tunc quaero, an deus videat quod inter primum
punctum lineae huius vel illius demonstratae et quodlibet aliud punctum ab eo visum in eadem linea intercipitur
linea media, aut non. Si non, igitur videt punctum immediatum puncto. Si sic, igitur contra suppositum non
videt quodlibet punctum illius lineae, quoniam in linea illa media sunt plurima puncta et nullum secundum hoc
est visum a deo”, p. 292, “Ad tertium dico, stante praedicta suppositione, quod deus videt quod inter primum
punctum et quodlibet aliud eiusdem lineae intercipitur linea, et inﬁnita etiam puncta, non tamen linea non visa,
nec puncta non visa ab eo. Nullam tamen lineam deus videt intercipi inter primum punctum et quodlibet aliud
punctum ab eo visum”.
57Cf. Richard Cross, Inﬁnity, Continuity, and Composition: The Contribution of Gregory of Rimini, p. 224.
58Cross, Inﬁnity, Continuity, and Composition, p. 101. Gregory of Rimini, Lectura, vol. 4, pp. 304–305.

Swester Katrei and Gregory of Rimini
267
‘some proportional part of B is immediate to A’, since of the proportional parts none is the last
towards A. Therefore, this [further consequence] does not follow from the ﬁrst.59
In Book I, distinctions 35 and 36, Question 1 of his Lectura, Gregory had raised the issue
of the composition of a continuum precisely in the context of God’s knowledge of things
other than himself. Peter Aurioli had argued that God does not know individual things
outside of himself on the grounds that God cannot know all the parts of a continuum.60
Gregory replied that God can know all of the inﬁnitely many parts of a continuum every
one of which contains within itself inﬁnitely many parts and such that there is no last and
ﬁnal division.
To the seventh, when it is said ‘It is impossible for the division of a continuum to be totally com-
pleted’, speaking of division not as a real separation and breaking up into parts but of division
as made by the understanding of the intellect distinguishing parts, which is compatible with the
real continuity of the continuum so divided, in which sense the argument is made, I deny this
assumption... To the proof, when it is asked whether this division stops at divisibles or indivis-
ibles, I say that something may be called indivisible in two ways. In one way indivisible means
lacking any sort of parts actually divided or possibly divided or distinguished in any way. In the
59Gregory of Rimini, Lectura II, dist. 2, q. 2, art. 1, vol. 4, p. 290 (against his ﬁrst conclusion), “Quarto, et for-
tius. Aut aliquod punctum est medium inter primum punctum huius lineae verbi gratia A et omnia alia eiusdem,
aut nullum punctum est medium inter punctum primum lineae A et omnia alia puncta eiusdem. Hoc patet, quia
partes huius disiunctivae contradicunt mutuo. Si aliquod est medium, igitur illud est immediatum primo puncto;
si nullum est medium, igitur primum punctum et omnia alia sunt immediata, et per consequens aliquod aliorum
punctorum est primo immediatum”, p. 292, “Ad quartum dicerem quod nullum punctum est medium inter primum
et omnia alia eiusdem lineae. Et cum infertur ‘igitur primum et omnia alia sunt immediata’, si in consequente ly
‘omnia’ teneatur collective, concedo consequens, quidquid sit de consequentia. Et nego ulteriorem consequen-
tiam qua dicitur ‘igitur aliquod aliorum punctorum est primo immediatum’. Instantia certissima apud me est,
quoniam si sint duo corpora immediata A et B, dividendo B in partes proportionales sic quod prima pars sit eius
medietas remotior ab A, et secunda sit medietas alterius medietatis, immediata priori medietati totius, et tertia
sit medietas residui, et sic semper procedendo versus A, tunc haec est vera ‘A et omnes partes proportionales B
sunt immediata’, et tamen haec est falsa ‘aliqua pars proportionalis B est immediata ipsi A’, cum talium nulla sit
ultima versus A. Igitur haec non sequitur ad primam”.
60Gregory of Rimini, Lectura, Book I, dist. 35 et 36, q. 1, vol. 3, pp. 211–214: “Utrum sequens praecise ra-
tionem naturalem habeat ponere quod deus intelligat alia a se vel non”. Seventh proof of Aristotle’s third con-
clusion: “Opinio Aristotelis et Commentatoris sui Averrois fuit quod deus nihil aliud a se intelligit. Unde 12
Metaphysicae ponit Philosophus circa intellectionem dei tres conclusiones: Quarum prima est quod deus est sub-
stantia intellectualis et semper actu intelligens. Secunda, quod sua substantia est sua intellectio. Tertio, quod deus
nihil aliud intelligit praeter se ipsum”. “Septimo, ad eandem conclusionem arguitur sic per alios: ‘Impossibile
est divisionem continui totaliter evacuari. Aut enim staret divisio in aliqua indivisibili’, et hoc non, quia tunc
sequitur quod continuum componitur ex indivisibilibus, ‘aut staret divisio in aliqua divisibilia’, et hoc etiam dici
non potest, quia sic non esset evacuata, sed possibilis esset ulterior divisio. Ex quibus patet quod impossibile est
divisionem continui totaliter evacuari. Sed hoc sequeretur, si deus intelligeret alia a se, nam intelligeret continuum
et eius divisio evacuata esset in conceptu eius. Quod probatur, quia aut in eius intuitu essent omnes partes con-
tinui divisae et distinctae, ita ut non relinquatur ulterior divisio, et per consequens ‘divisio continui erit evacuata’,
aut aliquae partes tantum in certo numero, ‘quarum quaelibet esset divisibilis’, et hoc non potest esse, quoniam
‘tunc divinus intuitus esset in potentia et sibi aliquid posset accrescere, scilicet dividendo unamquamque illarum
partium, quinimmo posset sic dividendo procedere in inﬁnitum sicut et noster intellectus’; quod est penitus im-
possibile. Ex quo ultimate sequitur quod impossibile est deum intelligere alia a se”. Cf. a principal argument
repeated in Buridan, In Metaphysicen Aristotelis, f. 75va, “Item vel Deus intelligit alia a se universaliter solum
et hoc est intelligere confuse et imperfecte, quod non est dicendum, vel intelligit omnia singulariter, et hoc est
impossibile, quia inﬁnita sunt singularia, et inﬁnitum secundum quod inﬁnitum est ignotum, ut habetur primo
Physicorum”.

268
E.D. Sylla
other way, something may be said to be indivisible because, even though it has parts, nevertheless
each of them is divided in act from any other, such that it is not divisible in any way or in any
part of itself unless it is actually divided in that way... I do not understand by ‘stops’ that there
is some last division or any things which are ﬁnally divided that do not include within themselves
parts divided in act, but I understand that the division ‘stops’ at the indivisible in the sense that
it is totally divided in indivisibles in this second way, but that these parts are divisible in the ﬁrst
way. Thus I say that any part you take however small includes in itself parts actually divided in
the divine mind (conceptu), indeed it includes inﬁnitely many, nor can any be taken without taking
inﬁnitely many. And thus as it is a fact that any continuum has inﬁnite parts potentially and any
one of them no matter how small contains inﬁnitely many, nor can any indivisible part be taken
unless one takes inﬁnitely many potential parts, so I say that in the mind of God a continuum is
totally divided in act into parts of which any one is also totally divided in act and includes inﬁnitely
many actually divided parts.61
With this conclusion in place, in Book II, concerning the place of angels, Gregory could
then make use of this earlier reply. God sees inﬁnitely many parts of any continuum, but
all of those parts also contain inﬁnitely many parts.62
Thus adding God and angels into the picture of Aristotelian mathematics at ﬁrst led
fourteenth-century theologians into mathematical difﬁculties, but in the work of Gregory
of Rimini it led to what we might consider progress in learning to deal with the mathemat-
ics of continuity and of actual inﬁnites. The sort of intellectual labor that went into such
mathematical progress does not deserve to be satirized by characterizing it as disputing
how many angels can dance on the point of a needle.
61Ibid., pp. 223–224, “Ad septimam, cum dicitur ‘Impossibile est divisionem continui totaliter evacuari’, lo-
quendo de divisione non realis separationis vel discretionis, sed de divisione quae ﬁt per signiﬁcationem intel-
lectus distinguentis, quae secum compatitur realem continuitatem continui sic divisi, in quo etiam sensu procedit
ratio, nego istud assumptum, quamvis etiam loquendo de divisione actualis discretionis in effectu, si hoc intel-
ligatur esse simpliciter impossibile etiam per divinam potentiam, aestimem ipsum esse falsum, sicut in quadam
Responsione publica dixi, alias et forte alibi a proposito in speciali discutiam. Sed hoc non est necessarium ad
propositum. Ad probationem, cum quaeritur, utrum ista divisio stet ad divisibilia vel indivisibilia, dico quod
potest dupliciter dici aliquid indivisibile: Uno modo indivisibile, id est carens partibus quibuscumque actu divisis
vel possibilibus quoquo modo dividi vel distingui, sicut multi imaginantur esse punctum et sicut in rei veritate
quodlibet simplex est indivisibile. Alio modo potest dici aliquid indivisibile, quia, etsi habeat in se partes, quaeli-
bet tamen est actu divisa a qualibet alia, ita quod ipsum non est aliquo modo vel secundum aliquid sui divisibile,
quin sit illo modo actu divisum ... Non intelligo autem per ‘stare’ quod sit aliqua ultima divisio vel aliqua ultimo
divisa, quae in se non includat partes actu divisas, sed intelligo quod ‘stat’ ad indivisibilia, id est illud est totaliter
divisum in indivisibilia isto secundo modo, quae tamen sunt divisibilia primo modo sumendo ‘divisibile’. Unde
dico quod, quamcumque partem quantumcumque parvam sumpseris, illa includit partes actu divisas in conceptu
divino, immo inﬁnitas includit, nec aliquam potest sumere quin sumas inﬁnitas. Et, sicut de facto quodlibet con-
tinuum habet inﬁnitas partes potentiales et quaelibet quantumlibet parva includit inﬁnitas nec aliqua sumi potest
indivisibilis et quin sumantur tales partes potentiales inﬁnitae, sic dico quod in conceptu dei continuum est total-
iter actu divisum in partes, quarum quaelibet etiam est totaliter actu divisa et includit inﬁnitas actu divisas”. Cf.
Cross, Inﬁnity, Continuity, and Composition, p. 103.
62Gregory of Rimini, Lectura, vol. 4, p. 293, “Dico quod nec in aliqua divisibilia nec in aliqua indivisibilia
nec in aliqua omnino ultimate facta esset, quoniam nulla essent, quae non essent in alia resoluta. Unde sicut
ante huiusmodi resolutionem nulla pars erat irresolubilis in alias, sic, posita totali resolutione, nulla esset non
resoluta in alias, sicut satis propinque huic dictum est in primo libro distinctione 35 quaestione unica articulo 1
in responsione ad 7 argumentum opinionis ibi reprobatae de totali divisione continui in conceptu divino”.

Swester Katrei and Gregory of Rimini
269
4. Bibliography Swester Katrei and Gregory of Rimini
There are innumerable scholastic discussions of the place of angels in connection with
commentaries on Peter Lombard, Liber Sententiarum, Book II, Distinction 2. Below I list
only those of Aquinas, Duns Scotus, and Suarez, in addition to that of Gregory of Rimini.
Through the recent edition of Gregory of Rimini, one can ﬁnd references to Peter Aurioli,
Richard Fitzralph, Adam Woodham, and many others. For God’s knowledge of individ-
uals, see the Liber Sententiarum, Book I, Dist. 35–38. For God’s knowledge of the parts
of a continuum, the question of God’s knowledge of future contingents is important, as
well as fourteenth-century developments in theories of modality, contingency, necessity,
and logical possibility. Although the theory of God’s “scientia media” would not be fully
developed until Luis de Molina, Thomas Bradwardine argues that God’s knowledge of the
past is like his knowledge of the future, both being contingent, while Gregory of Rimini
and William of Ockham argue that God knows the future intuitively. As in the doctrine of
scientia media (cf. Normore, p. 379) God knows “all true subjunctive conditionals regard-
ing contingent matters”, so in Gregory of Rimini’s theory of God’s knowledge of inﬁnity
and continuity, God knows or sees the relations between all possible things even if they
are not compossible. So when body A touches body B in which God sees all the inﬁnitely
many possible proportional parts with the smaller parts towards A, God sees no single part
of B that touches A, but sees inﬁnitely many parts, all of which have inﬁnitely many parts.
4.1. Primary sources
Aquinas, Thomas, Summa Theologiae. Blackfrairs in conjunction with McGraw–Hill and
Eyre and Spottiswoode, London, 1963, vol. 9. Part I, Questions 50–64, Angels. Ques-
tion 52. Angels and Position in Space (Does an angel exist in place? Can an angel be in
several places at once? Can several angels be in the same place at once?). Question 53.
The Movement of Angels in Space (Can an angel move from place to place? Does an
angel, moving locally, pass through an intermediate place? Is an angel’s movement instan-
taneous?).
Aristotle, Metaphysics, Book M (XIII), Ch. 1, for the relations between mathematics,
metaphysics, and physics.
Augustine, The City of God, Book XII, Ch. 18.
Buridan, John, Perutiles questiones in ultima eius lectura edite super duodecim libros
Metaphysice, Paris, 1518 (In Metaphysicen Aristotelis).
Duns Scotus, John, Ordinatio, in Opera Omnia, vol. VII, ed. Carolo Balic, Typis Poly-
glottis, Vatican, 1973. Book II, Distinction II, Part II. Question 1. Whether an angel is in
place. Question 2. Whether an angel requires a determinate place. Question 3. Whether
an angel could simultaneously be in two places. Question 4. Whether two angels could be
together in the same place. Question 5. Whether an angel could be moved from place to
place by a continuous motion. Question 6. Whether an angel could move itself. Question 7.
Whether an angel could be moved in an instant. Question 8. Whether an angel could be
moved from one extreme to the other without traversing what is in between.

270
E.D. Sylla
Gregory of Rimini, Lectura super Primum et Secundum Sententiarum, vol. 3, Super
Primum (Dist 19–48), ed. A. Damasus Trapp and Venicio Marcolino, Walter de Gruyter,
Berlin and New York, 1984; vol. 4, Super Secundum (Dist 1–5), ed. A. Damasus Trapp,
Walter de Gruyter, Berlin and New York, 1979.
Grosseteste, Robert, Commentarius in VIII Libros Physicorum Aristotelis, Richard Dales
(ed.), University of Colorado Press, Boulder, CO, 1963.
Suarez, Franciscus, De Angelis in Opera Omnia, 20 vols., pp. 1613–1625. Pars Secunda
Summae Theologiae de Deo rerum omnium creatore. In tres praecipuos tractatus distrib-
uta, quorum primus De angelis, Sumptibus Iacobi Cardan et Petri Cavellat, Lyon, 1620.
Folio volume of 746 pages plus index. Later edition: Vives, 1956.
Swester Katrei (Ps. — Meister Eckhardt), in: Franz Pfeiffer, Meister Eckhart, trans.
C. de B. Evans, John Watkins, London, 1924, “Sister Katrei. Meister Eckhart’s Strasburg
Daughter”.
Woodham, Adam, in: Rega Wood (ed.), Tractatus de Indivisibilibus: A Critical Edition
with Introduction,Translation, and Textual Notes, Kluwer, Dordrecht, Boston, and London,
1988.
4.2. Secondary sources
Cross, Richard, Inﬁnity, Continuity, and Composition: The Contribution of Gregory of
Rimini, Medieval Philosophy and Theology 7 (1998), 89–110.
Fox, Matthew, and Rupert Sheldrake, The Physics of Angels. Exploring the Realm Where
Science and Spirit Meet, Harper Collins, San Francisco, 1996.
Knuuttila, Simo, Medieval Theories of Modality, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
[http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/modality-medieval/].
Knuuttila, Simo, Modal Logic, in: Norman Kretzmann, Anthony Kenny, and Jan Pinborg
(eds.), The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1982, pp. 342–357.
Maier, Anneliese, Die Vorläufer Galileis im 14. Jahrhundert: Studien zur Naturphiloso-
phie der Spätscholastik, 2nd ed., Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, Rome, 1966, Ch. 7, Kon-
tinuum, Minima und Aktuell Unendliches, pp. 155–215.
Maier, Anneliese, Diskussionen über das aktuell Unendliche in der ersten Hälfte des 14.
Jahrhunderts, in: Eadem, Ausgehendes Mittelalter, vol. 1, Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura,
Rome, 1964, pp. 41–85.
Murdoch, John, Inﬁnity and Continuity, in: Norman Kretzmann, Anthony Kenny, and
Jan Pinborg (eds.), The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, 1982, pp. 564–591.
Murdoch, John, Henry of Harclay and the Inﬁnite, in: A. Maieru and A. Paravicini-
Bagliani (eds.), Studi sul XIV secolo in memoria di Anneliese Maier. Edizioni di Storia e
Letteratura, Rome, 1982, pp. 219–261.
Murdoch, John, William of Ockham and the Logic of Inﬁnity and Continuity, in: Nor-
mann Kretzmann (ed.), Inﬁnity and Continuity in Ancient and Medieval Thought. Cornell
University Press, Ithaca and London, 1982, pp. 165–206.

Swester Katrei and Gregory of Rimini
271
Murdoch, John, and Johannes M.M.H. Thijssen, John Buridan on Inﬁnity, in: J.M.M.H.
Thijssen and J. Zupko (eds.), The Metaphysics and Natural Philosophy of John Buridan,
E.J. Brill, Leiden–Boston–Köln, 2001, pp.127–149.
Normore, Calvin, Future Contingents, in: Norman Kretzmann, Anthony Kenny, and Jan
Pinborg (eds.), The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy, Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, 1982, pp. 358–381.
Ross, George MacDonald, Angels, Philosophy 60 (1985), 495–511.
Stump, Eleonore, Theology and Physics in De sacramento altaris: Ockham’s Theory of
Indivisibles, in: Normann Kretzmann (ed.), Inﬁnity and Continuity in Ancient and Medieval
Thought. Cornell University Press, Ithaca and London, 1982, pp. 207–230.
Sylla, Edith, God and the Continuum in the Later Middle Ages: The Relations of Phi-
losophy to Theology, Logic, and Mathematics, in: Was ist Philosophie im Mittelalter?,
Miscellanea Mediaevalia 26, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin and New York, 1998, pp. 791–797.
Sylla, Edith, God, Indivisibles, and Logic in the Later Middle Ages: Adam Wodeham’s
Response to Henry of Harclay, Medieval Philosophy and Theology 7 (1998), 69–87.
Sylla, Edith, ‘Ideo quasi mendicare oportet intellectum humanum’: The Role of Theol-
ogy in John Buridan’s Natural Philosophy, in: J.M.M.H. Thijssen and J. Zupko (eds.), The
Metaphysics and Natural Philosophy of John Buridan, E.J. Brill, Leiden–Boston–Köln,
2001, pp. 221–245.
Sylla, Edith, Imaginary Space: John Dumbleton and Isaac Newton, in: Jan Aertsen and
Andreas Speer (eds.), Raum und Raumvorstellungen im Mittelalter, Miscellanea Mediae-
valia 25. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, 1998, pp. 206–225.
Sylla, Edith, Thomas Bradwardine’s De continuo and the Structure of Fourteenth-
Century Learning, in: Edith Sylla and Michael McVaugh (eds.), Texts and Contexts in
Ancient and Medieval Science. Studies on the Occasion of John E. Murdoch’s Seventieth
Birthday. E.J. Brill, Leiden, 1997, pp. 148–186.
Sylla, Edith, William Heytesbury on the Sophism ‘Inﬁnita sunt ﬁnita’, in: Albert Zim-
mermann (ed.), Miscellanea Mediaevalia, Band 13/2, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin and New
York, 1981, pp. 628–636.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 14
Mathematics and the Divine in Nicholas of Cusa
J.-M. Counet
University of Louvain, Collège Mercier, 14 pl. Cardinal Mercier,
B-1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
E-mail: counet@risp.ucl.ac.be
Contents
1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 275
2. The place of mathematics in human knowledge and its symbolic value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 275
2.1. The symbolic bearing of mathematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 276
2.2. The theological ﬁgures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 277
2.3. The great conjecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 278
2.4. Dianoetics and dialectics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 282
2.5. Matter–form dialectic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 283
2.6. The whole–parts dialectic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 284
2.7. The third dialectic: the two natures of Christ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 286
3. The problem of squaring the circle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 286
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 289
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
273


Mathematics and the divine in Nicholas of Cusa
275
1. Introduction
Nicholas of Cusa (1401–1464) is known above all as a philosopher and theologian. He was
the author of numerous works on metaphysical and mystical topics, in most of which he
tirelessly studied the various facets of the coincidence of opposites. The most famous of his
books is Learned Ignorance (De Docta Ignorantia), published in 1440. Therein Nicholas
tried for the ﬁrst time to breathe life into his great intellectual discovery, the coincidentia
oppositorum, which he had experienced while sailing home from Greece in 1438 with the
emperor, the Patriarch of Constantinople and his entourage, whom Nicholas accompanied
to Italy, where a Uniﬁcation Council, gathering Latins and Greeks, was to take place.
Learned Ignorance and other subsequent works developing and prolonging his insights
devote much attention to mathematics. The most important part of this study will concern
the usefulness of mathematics in this search for truth. But it is also incumbent on us to
look at Nicholas of Cusa’s strictly mathematical works, where he tried to solve the cele-
brated problem of squaring the circle. Many books are devoted to this topic, among which
we should mention the Geometrical Transformations (De Geometricis Transmutationibus)
and Arithmetical Complements (De Arithmeticis Complementis) of 1445, On Circle Squar-
ing (De circula quadratura) and Squaring of the Circle (De Quadratura circuli) of 1450,
the Mathematical Complements (De Mathematicis Complementis) of 1454, etc. These are
the more technical books, where the relation to the Divine is not particularly underlined, but
which are nevertheless indispensable for a full idea of Nicholas’s conception of mathemat-
ics. We shall see that some difﬁculties remain as to the exact bearing these mathematical
treatises had in relation to the whole of his thought.
2. The place of mathematics in human knowledge and its symbolic value
Mathematics played a fundamental role in Nicholas’s thought: it was the example par ex-
cellence, the model of all veritable human knowledge, to the point that Nicholas did not
hesitate in extending to all human knowledge the gaps and the bounds he observed in
mathematical approach of reality.
At the beginning of Learned Ignorance, we ﬁnd very interesting developments as to the
inherent limitations of human knowledge.
1. Human knowledge is compared to measuring size.
2. Measuring implies having a standard, something well known and in comparison with
which the unknown becomes known.
3. Acquiring new knowledge is easy when few intermediary steps are needed to reduce
the unknown to the already known; hard, should the contrary be the case.
4. It is impossible to make knowable that which has no proportion to it.
5. The inﬁnite has no proportion with the ﬁnite. The inﬁnite will never be known from
the ﬁnite and will therefore always remain unknown.
Hence human knowledge cannot have total, exhaustive knowledge of reality as its objective
goal because it is impossible. But its destiny is accomplished in becoming aware of its own
limits and boundaries. This is the theme of Nicholas of Cusa’s Learned Ignorance: this
human knowledge conscious of its basic insufﬁciency in relation not only to God but also

276
J.-M. Counet
to other realities. The fact that there are limits by right to human knowledge of God, and
not only limits of fact, has immediate repercussions on all other realities. In fact, to know
the essence of a thing exactly would be to realise an inﬁnite equality between the object
and the knowledge man has of it. But only God is inﬁnite in the strong sense of the term
and hence only he can grasp the ultimate truth of anything. It is therefore impossible for
man to know the essence of any reality whatever.
Given these circumstances, human knowledge is always conjectural, limited and sym-
bolic: it strives to represent external realities within the mind but the precision is always a
relative one and can always be improved.
Nicholas has recourse to two particularly striking images to help us understand the con-
jectural dimension of human knowledge:
1. The image of a series of polygons inscribed in a circle;1 no more than the growing
number of polygon sides can ever be identical with the circle in which they are in-
scribed, even if they get closer and closer, can human knowledge ever reach its object
with absolute precision.
2. The image of a geographer2 who seeks to map an unknown country; on the basis of
observations and other information collected by his messengers, he traces the map
which is only a likeness of the described reality, whose precision can always be im-
proved by further attempts.
Both of these images, of a geometrical type, readily show the conjectural and symbolic
dimension of any human knowledge and, particularly, knowledge of God.
2.1. The symbolic bearing of mathematics
In Learned Ignorance,3 Nicholas strives to justify the great attention he has paid to math-
ematics, in the order of human knowledge, particularly in knowing invisible realities, for
which we have no direct experience. It should be pointed out that, according to Nicholas,
each part of reality has relations, proportions, to all others. It is therefore possible to rep-
resent and symbolise these invisible realities which escape direct knowledge by using oth-
ers realities better known to us. In this respect, mathematical objects are quite interesting
given their stability, the fact that they are exempt from any direct relation to change. This
is what makes the reliability and strength of the disciplines dealing with them. Hence the
Pythagoreans’ and the Platonists’ predilection for mathematics as a means of access to
reality as a whole. Representatives of other philosophical trends were also involved: in a
famous passage of his treatise On the Soul Aristotle compared forms to numbers.4 This
predilection, recognised and proclaimed by Greek philosophers, has been conﬁrmed by
numerous Christian thinkers, among whom Nicholas mentions St. Augustine and Boethius
speciﬁcally.
The reliability and value of these mathematical objects justiﬁes the fact of using them in
aiming at the absolute maximum. This cannot be known in itself but has to be approached
1Learned Ignorance, I, 3, 10.
2Compendium, VIII.
3Learned Ignorance, I, 11–12.
4Aristotle, On the Soul, B 3 414b.

Mathematics and the divine in Nicholas of Cusa
277
Fig. 1.
symbolically by other objects of knowledge which, as well as designating themselves,
also refer to something other than themselves, that is, to God himself or to the absolute.
The gap between the symbol and what is symbolised is already an (unavoidable) source
of imperfection in human knowledge of God. One more reason to avoid a second shift
factor as much as possible: which would come from variations and changes in the symbols
themselves.
The merit of mathematical objects is precisely to hinder this second shift factor danger,
due to their immutability.
Here Nicholas clearly takes up the classical tripartition of theoretical science, going back
to the Platonic Academy: physics, mathematics and theology.
Given their characteristics as objects free of any movement while maintaining a link
to matter, mathematical objects are intermediate between physical, material and changing
realities and the reality theology treats, separated from all materiality and all change.
Nicholas’s originality in this ﬁeld consists in justifying the symbolic bearing of math-
ematical realities for the absolute maximum as he in fact conceives of it, i.e., as a coin-
cidence of opposites. Geometrical ﬁgures can symbolise this absolute maximum because
they are able to represent this coincidence in their own way. Nicholas shows this by means
of what he calls theological ﬁgures.5
2.2. The theological ﬁgures
Different geometrical ﬁgures (circles, spheres, lines and triangles) can be identiﬁed with
one another when they are increased to the inﬁnite. Hence the inﬁnite circle and the inﬁnite
line may be identiﬁed with one another, as present-day geometry readily admits.
In the same order of ideas, both equal sides of an isosceles triangle, of ever increasing
altitude, become two parallel lines. Inversely, the same triangle reduces itself to a single
line if its altitude is decreased until it vanishes.
Adding metaphysical considerations to this commonplace geometrical observation,
Nicholas says that everything that is possible or potential in the domain of ﬁnite ﬁgures
becomes actual in the case of corresponding inﬁnite ﬁgures. For instance, it is possible to
trace a circle from a single segment of a line by making this segment turn round its centre.
This circle will itself generate a sphere by turning round any one of its diameters.
Therefore, the ﬁnite line contains the sphere potentially and what is potentially true for
a ﬁnite segment becomes actual reality for an inﬁnite line; so the inﬁnite line is triangle,
5Learned Ignorance, I, 13–17.

278
J.-M. Counet
Fig. 2.
circle and sphere and is also identiﬁable with all other geometrical ﬁgures. In a general
way, an inﬁnite geometrical ﬁgure is identical with all of space because the inﬁnite can
lack nothing and hence all inﬁnite ﬁgures coincide with one another. By going to the limit
of theological ﬁgures, the human mind can get a feeling of the genuine coincidence of
opposites as it exists in God. But it can only feel this because geometrical ﬁgures all lose
their shape when they are increased to the inﬁnite, and so disappear, as ﬁgures.
Yet what is only ﬁction on the level of geometrical ﬁgures and quantity is for Nicholas
of Cusa an incontestable reality on the level of being: there is indeed an inﬁnite form in
which all differences and all opposites are identical.
2.3. The great conjecture
In his book On Conjectures (De Coniecturis), Nicholas sums up some themes he had
treated in Learned Ignorance. He widens their development and lends them some new
accents in the direction of the new metaphysics of the One and the new philosophy of
mind he is working out here.
The main points of this new contribution to mathematics can be summarised as follows:
1. Every human cognition is conjectural and, on the grounds of sensible experience,
tries to ﬁnd its way back to ideas that, in the divine mind, are at the origin of that
experience. So sensible reality is not, properly speaking, the object of human knowl-
edge but simply its factual occasion. Human knowledge is therefore a sign or symbol
of divine ideas and nothing more.
2. The human mind can claim to ﬁnd in itself likenesses of the divine ideas because it
is created in God’s own image. This well-known biblical theme plays an important
role in Nicholas of Cusa’s view of man. Just as God is the creator of a real world
through which he manifests his virtues and perfections, so the human mind creates
an intentional world of concepts and conjectures in which it too reveals its internal
aptitudes. Given this link of image to model between the mind and God, the concepts
forged by the human mind by virtue of its internal dynamism naturally square with
and are relevant to the real world created by God, who permits knowledge of it,
properly speaking.

Mathematics and the divine in Nicholas of Cusa
279
3. This process of knowledge is dynamic: the more the mind increases its knowledge,
the more it exteriorises itself in a web of conjectures and concepts and knows itself,
the more like God it becomes. The status of the image of God belongs to the intrinsic
nature of the mind and can no more be lost than it can be increased, but the mind’s
likeness to God can be unceasingly increased. The level of similarity to God results
from man’s noetic activity.
4. These human conjectures in step with things are of a mathematical kind. Mathemat-
ical objects are therefore good symbols of the essences of things. In this context, on
the grounds of a theory tracing back to the school of Chartres, Nicholas works out
what he calls the Great Conjecture.
According to this theory, the different kinds of reality have to be symbolised by different
kinds of numbers and unities. The divine unity, which transcends all created things while
present to every ﬁnite reality it produces, should be symbolised by the ﬁrst arithmetical
unit (the one) which is the principle of all numbers. The unit of ten and its ﬁrst multiples
(20, 30, 40, 50, etc.) represent the order of pure intellects or intelligences, the unit of one
hundred and its multiples (200, 300, 400, 500, etc.), the order of souls, and lastly the unit
of one thousand should be linked to the world of bodies and materials.
God
1
Pure Spirits
10
Souls
100
Bodies
1000
The advantage of such conjecture is to give more precise content to the alleged corre-
spondence between numbers and things. Nicholas also relies on the intrinsic symbolism
of Arabic digits to make his conjecture plausible. Obviously God can be represented by
pure unity, while creatures participate in this divine unity, all the while containing a certain
measure of non-being, increasing with their distance from God; this is well symbolised by
the series of units: 10, 100, 1000.
Moreover, the unit of ten, associated with the world of intelligences, is indeed the root
of the two following worlds: the world of souls, symbolised by 102 and the world of matter
or bodies, by 103. We ﬁnd here the trace of a hierarchy of degrees of being in reality;
according to the hierarchical scheme as it is worked out, for instance, by Dionysius; a
lower degree of being receives its ontological consistency and perfection from the higher
degrees it participates in.
It is also clear that 10 = 1 + 2 + 3 + 4, as the Pythagoreans underlined long ago, in
speaking of the Tetraktys. Thus intelligence appears to be precontained in the unity of
God. In fact, 1 + 2 + 3 represents the concrete divine nature in the coincidence of the
opposites it incarnates (1 being oneness, 2 equality and 3 the union of oneness and equal-
ity). Subsequently, 4 is the number of the world, which the divine unity includes in itself
as a possibility. What is most interesting is Nicholas of Cusa’s statement that we actually
have no knowledge of the different levels of reality in question other than that drawn from
the analogy of the arithmetical units and their links with each other. Therefore, divine at-
tributes like omnipotence, inﬁnite fecundity, immanence and transcendence in relation to
the world can be obtained by considering the links pure unity has with the numbers emanat-

280
J.-M. Counet
Fig. 3.
ing from it. For Nicholas, rational theology has no other positive content than that provided
by the systematic use of this analogy of arithmetical unity in its relation to numbers.
We have here a particularly strong statement but which is merely the logical conse-
quence of the identiﬁcation of human knowledge and mathematics, already proclaimed in
Learned Ignorance. When, at the end of the book, Nicholas describes his discovery during
the return from Greece as consisting in “incomprehensibly grasping the incomprehensi-
ble in a learned ignorance transcending humanly knowable, incorruptible truths”, incor-
ruptible truths designate the level of mathematical knowledge. Becoming one with God
in ignorance, transcending the order of immutable truths, means concretely transcending
mathematical statements as well as those of Aristotelian metaphysics, which have the same
epistemological status as mathematics, according to Nicholas.
Nicholas further develops this conjecture and strives to symbolise the various levels of
reality through what he calls the paradigmatic ﬁgure (Figure 3).
It consists of two perfectly overlapping pyramids: the pyramid of unity or light and the
pyramid of otherness or darkness. Together the pyramids delimit different levels deter-
mined by the more or less high degree of unity.
a. The base of the light pyramid coincides with the vertex of the other one. There oth-
erness vanishes and unity is pure. It is the symbolic place of divine unity and the
plenitude of being.
b. A second country is characterised by the prevailing of unity which includes otherness.
It is the country of pure spirits or intelligences. This is the third heaven or supreme
world.
c. A median zone where unity and otherness are externally opposed to each other and
both have the same strength or approximately so, symbolises the domain of the souls.
d. A fourth country is marked by the victory of darkness and otherness over light and
unity. It the matter domain of sensible bodies, corresponding to the ﬁrst heaven and
to the lowest world.
e. Finally we ﬁnd a place where the vertex of light vanishes and is completely dominated
by darkness. There is the not-being and nothingness.
As like numbers are looked upon as compounds of the One and the Other in the
Pythagorean perspective, or of the One and the indeﬁnite Dyad in the Platonic Academy,
all things proceed from combinations of two ontological principles: Unity and Otherness.

Mathematics and the divine in Nicholas of Cusa
281
It is important to point out that Aristotelian logic, with its principles of non-contradiction
and of the excluded middle, is only valid in a limited part of reality. The two regions sur-
rounding the middle one are governed by dialectical logics where one opposite is internal
to the other. The role of unity in the intellectual heaven and of otherness in the corporal
one is quite the same. Both regions are in fact the inverted reﬂection of each other, with
the soul or rational level as a mirror. So many truths over the intellectual world could be
extracted from a careful study of the corporal world.
But Nicholas goes still further and claims that each of the three worlds of creatures is
actually a whole universe in which three sub-levels could be made out. And each of these
sub-levels is also to be divided into three parts. He gives the example of angelic hierarchies
and angelic choirs as the pseudo-Dionysius works it out in his Celestial Hierarchy.
Every reality can therefore be considered an image reﬂecting the whole universe and its
ternary structure. He expresses this doctrine of everything is in everything through another
typical ﬁgure that he call the ﬁgure U (U for universes). It develops the analogy with the
number serial we have already seen in the Great Conjecture. Each world is a universe
and so contains three heavens and therefore the three derived units: 10, 100, 1000, as the
Figure 4 clearly shows.
Fig. 4.

282
J.-M. Counet
2.4. Dianoetics and dialectics
Although unfamiliar with Plato’s famous allegory of the Line6 and not using Plato’s ter-
minology, Nicholas of Cusa seems to sum up the core of Plato’s distinction between two
kinds of rationality:
1. Dianoetical (or mathematical) rationality, characterised by discursiveness, grounded
in hypotheses accepted as self-evident, as well as in the sensible similarities upon
which reasoning is based to facilitate demonstrations.
2. Dialectical rationality which starts with hypotheses to reach what is self-sufﬁcient on
the level of being and knowledge.
Dianoetical sciences, of which geometry is the clearest example, attain a certain grasp
of their objects but the intelligibility obtained is not total because of the unjustiﬁed char-
acter of the starting hypotheses which condition the whole mental process. Dialectics, on
the other hand, is not conditioned by the value of its starting point because that consists
precisely in freeing itself from anything that starting point might have that is partial and
limited to rise to the hypothetical. The mind’s journey here is justiﬁed not by its start-
ing hypothesis but by its term, beyond essence and determination, unconditioned, needing
nothing else to prove its worth but attesting to itself and thereby attesting to the relative
value of things other than itself.
The rationality suiting true theology is the type other than that which is useful for math-
ematics. That is the signiﬁcance of the expression “learned ignorance” used by Nicholas.
Theology is ignorance because it does not consist in a dianoetical knowledge of a math-
ematical type, identiﬁed here with human knowledge, as a whole. (“Learned ignorance”
should not be confused with that trivial ignorance which knows nothing at all and, in par-
ticular, is not aware of its own ignorance.) Theology deals with an inﬁnite reality which
does not obey the same laws as mathematical realities: the coincidence of opposites es-
capes mathematical categories. It clearly belongs to what Plato called dialectical rational-
ity, which Nicholas calls, for his part, ignorance conscious of itself. But the rapprochement
with Plato shows that mathematics, even though destined to be transcended by dialecti-
cal procedure is, nonetheless, an indispensable preliminary support to dialectics. In this
way, mathematics will continue to play a key role, even in theology, as proof that theology
constantly needs to transcend itself in order to conquer its own epistemological identity.
The “ignorant” approach to the absolute maximum is actually going to take the form of a
negation of the indicating characteristic of the ﬁnite. Now indicating the ﬁnite implies using
numbers, as we have seen. Two different realities will be represented by distinct numbers,
unequal to one another and distant from one another in the number series. These three as-
pects mutually imply one another but are not strictly identical to one another; for instance,
unequal numbers may be more or less distant from one another. In this respect, proper to
the ﬁnite, every creature that exceeds another is in turn transcended by another real or pos-
sible creature. Thus what exceeds is at the same time what is by that very fact exceeded.
That is something fundamental for Nicholas of Cusa. We never ﬁnd an absolute maximum
or minimum among ﬁnite things but only factual relations of excedent and exceeded which
can always be widened to other possibilities. The anterior–posterior is therefore a category
6Republic VI 509d–511e.

Mathematics and the divine in Nicholas of Cusa
283
typical of the ﬁnite. That is a very important point in Learned Ignorance. For that matter,
it is because the real is intrinsically characterised by relations of more or less (be that in
perfection, origin or distance) that they can be so easily described in mathematical fashion.
On the contrary, God, as a coincidence of opposites, will be characterised by non-
difference, that is to say by oneness (unitas), by non-inequality, meaning equality (ae-
qualitas) and by that non-distance, meaning by union (connexio).
These three moments or aspects of divine unity, oneness, equality and union, are three
ways of expressing the fact that God radically escapes the anteriority–posteriority typifying
the ﬁnite.
The ternary structure of the absolute maximum also very clearly corresponds to the three
persons of the Trinity: the Father corresponds to oneness, the Son to equality, and the Holy
Spirit to union.
Here Nicholas reworks an approach to the Trinity already known to Thierry of Chartres7
and his school, and whose roots go back to Saint Augustine, even if the concepts had no
particular mathematical meaning for the great bishop of Hippo.
If Nicholas takes up the conceptual framework of the Line tentatively, he develops it by
distinguishing three distinct dialectics more clearly than had been done before him:8
• the dialectics of matter and form;
• the dialectics of wholes and parts;
• the dialectics of the two natures in Christ.
2.5. Matter–form dialectic
The ﬁrst dialectic aims at grasping the essences of things considered in and of themselves,
independently of links they might have with their surroundings. The only relationship taken
into account is that of creation which connects things to their creator and ontological prin-
ciple, the absolute maximum. God himself is included within this dialectic inasmuch as he
is the unique form free of every link with matter or movement, who gives existence to all
particular forms embedded in matter–form compounds as actualising principles.
According to Nicholas of Cusa, God is, therefore, the form of being ( forma essendi to
follow Boethius’s terminology) and the form of forms (the forma formarum, as Aristotelian
and Plotinian traditions call him).
The mathematics that serve as the foundation for this ﬁrst dialectic are mainly arithmetic
and geometry. We have seen how a concept of absolute maximum can arise in terms of
unity, equality and connection, from symbolically indicating creatures through numbers.
In the same way, geometrical ﬁgures, by means of passage to the limit towards theological
ﬁgures, turn out to be a good starting point in seeking the absolute maximum.
Nevertheless, we have here a transcending of ordinary mathematics, which symbolise
things seemingly “existing on their own”, that is to say, substances in the traditional sense
of the term, but which are actually conditioned by and constitutionally dependent upon the
7Häring, Nicholas (1971), Commentaries on Boethius by Thierry of Chartres and his school, Pontiﬁcal Institute
of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto; [12].
8Cf. Counet, [6, pp. 40–49].

284
J.-M. Counet
absolute maximum and which are transcended to grasp the absolute maximum, the sole
veritable substance that is reality on its own.
2.6. The whole–parts dialectic
The second is the whole–parts dialectic. It is the object of the second book of Learned Igno-
rance dedicated to the universe and plays a central role in other works like On Conjectures
(De Coniecturis) and On the Mind (De Mente).
It actually splits into two branches:
a. A dialectic of the universe where Nicholas breaks with the ancient vision of the cos-
mos,9 with the earth immobile at the centre of the world, the heavens composed of an
essentially different matter than that of the sublunary world and a set of qualitatively
differentiated places corresponding to the natural inclinations of the elements. This
cosmos of the ancients, conceived as an aggregate of accidentally interconnected sub-
stances, is replaced by a boundless universe—not really inﬁnite because God alone
is, strictly speaking, inﬁnite—a kind of sphere whose centre is everywhere and bor-
ders nowhere. This universe is a structure in the modern sense of the term, that is to
say the elements composing it have essential links with one another, deﬁning them
and interconnecting them ontologically. One might even say that in every part of the
universe the reality found there may be considered the result of all the interactions,
of all the relations of the elements of the universe with one another, gathered in this
place as in a focus. In other words, the universe may be considered to be a function,
each particular thing being able to be seen as the value of the universe-function at
the point in question. E. Cassirer10 and H. Rombach11 have insisted on the fact that
by developing this vision of the material world, Nicholas of Cusa inaugurated the
ontology and conceptuality which are the philosophical grounds of modern science.
The mathematics involved here as the foundation of this second dialectic are prin-
cipally astronomy and music. Traditional astronomy tries to describe the cosmos of
the Ancients the help of some hypotheses admitted as obvious: there is an immobile
centre of the universe, the paths of the planets can be reduced to circles, etc. With
regards to this astronomy, which is clearly dianoetical learning in Plato’s sense of
the term, Nicholas of Cusa’s cosmological vision must be seen as dialectical. By a
transcending process, the mind comes to the sight of a reality that is not hypothetical,
totally material reality, which is itself its own physical justiﬁcation: the universe. Any
explanation of a particular physical event will consist in reintegrating this event into
the whole of the universe, where it has meaning.
Nicholas’s universe, which is actually neither inﬁnite nor ﬁnite, whose centre is
at once everywhere and nowhere, which is not exactly describable through mathe-
matical notions, although mathematics can give an ever more precise account of it,
corresponds to the so-called “astronomy-without-hypotheses” natural philosophers
9[13].
10[2–4].
11Rombach, Heinrich (1966). Substanz, System, Struktur. Die Ontologie des Funktionalismus und der Philo-
sophische Hintergrund der modernen Wissenschaften, 2 vols., Alber Verlag, Freiburg–München.

Mathematics and the divine in Nicholas of Cusa
285
had sought since the 14th century. In that respect, the revolution initiated by Nicholas
of Cusa is far more radical than that of Copernicus, although Copernicus came after
Cusa in time. No matter what is said, the Copernican system remains in the theo-
retical framework of traditional astronomy; it has simply changed the centre of the
cosmos and assigned another role to the epicycles than had the Ptolemaic system.12
For his part, Nicholas introduced the modern view of the universe, accentuating
the essential links between material realities within one and the same whole. In this
respect, his conception is essentially musical. Proportions existing among all the parts
of the world reﬂect the constitutive links among components of one and the same
structure.
b. A dialectic of spirit. The universe is composed not only of material parts but also of
spirits: the pure intelligence (the angels) and also embodied spirits like men and other
intelligent animals that might exist on others planets. The fact of being the dwelling of
numerous spirits and the fact of being a structure of interconnected material elements
are correlative for Nicholas of Cusa. Indeed, minds can only exit in a multi-centred
totality such as the “inﬁnite” universe thought by Nicholas. In fact, perceiving and
knowing reality in its totality, what every mind or spirit does in its rational activity,
requires being at the centre of the world. Thus a manifold of ﬁnite minds necessitates
as many centres as there are possible positions to be occupied.
An important work of Nicholas of Cusa, the Vision of God (De Visione Dei), illustrates
this point very clearly. In order to introduce the monks of Tegernsee Abbey to mystical
theology, Nicholas asked them to hang a picture he had sent to them on their dining hall
wall. The picture represents a face with the peculiarity of always ﬁxing its eyes on the
person looking at it, from any position. Observers on the left get the impression the face is
looking at their side, while people on the right believe it is staring at them. People moving
around the room see the gaze following them and stopping if they stop. Thus everyone has
the experience of being looked at and has the impression of being the only one looked at
that way. In others words, everyone thinks he is the centre of the world and he really is,
although he has to accept the fact that others are centres too. By sharing their experiences
through language, everyone realises that others are living through exactly the same things.
Finite minds can, therefore, only live in a many-centred reality. Inversely, minds allow
the unfolding of the universe as such and the unfurling of the manifold elements it contains.
Further developing this view would take us beyond our goal; we shall content ourselves
with simply remarking that, for Nicholas, the mind plays an active role in the manifestation
of the world as such and of the mathematical proportions connecting the elements to one
another. Brieﬂy, number plays a role practically equivalent to that of an a priori category
in Kant. Everything the mind grasps is seen as governed by number and proportion, even
if this proportion eludes every attempt at exactly determining it.
This dialectic of mind is considered most intensely by Nicholas of Cusa in the mathemat-
ical context of the problem of squaring the circle. We have already seen that mathematics
is a privileged means of studying the human mind because mathematics is its highest pro-
duction. Ordinary mathematics illustrate reason’s capacities but Nicholas wonders whether
it might not be possible to forge new mathematics which, for its part, would express the
12[15].

286
J.-M. Counet
virtues of human intellect, which, unlike reason, is able to rise to the grasp of a conjunction
of opposites. In these works, he talks about a new mathematics, also about what he calls an
intellectual mathematics, in which such squaring would be possible. But this question will
be considered in the last part of this paper.
2.7. The third dialectic: the two natures of Christ
The third part of Learned Ignorance relates to Christ and faith. It is not a simple appendix
but the crowning achievement of the ﬁrst two dialectics. One might speak here of a dialec-
tic of man which would complete the matter–form and the whole–parts sections. Man is
destined to partake in Christ’s life and hence to undergo a metamorphosis and divinisation
of his nature. For Nicholas, this accomplishment promised to the human mind was already
perceptible in man’s transcending capacities, capable of transcending ﬁnite geometrical
ﬁgures towards theological ﬁgures and the divine inﬁnite of which the latter are signs.
Christ, both man and God, whose two natures subsist in the divine person of the Word,
who possesses in himself all the properties of human nature and hence identiﬁes himself
with every particular human nature, should be considered the equivalent in human reality
of what the theological ﬁgures are with respect to ordinary geometrical ﬁgures.
Christ
Particular human nature = Theological ﬁgures
Geometrical ﬁgures.
This analogy alone strikingly summarises all the importance of mathematics in Nicholas of
Cusa’s thought and their propaedeutical role in acquiring true understanding of what man
is capable of knowing and believing about the divine.
3. The problem of squaring the circle
This problem is one of the most famous in the whole history of mathematical science. It
is above all renowned for having retained the attention of generations of mathematicians
who tried to construct a square with a surface equal to that of a circle given at the outset,
with the help of only a ruler and compass.
Archimedes13 managed to demonstrate that the surface of a circle of radius R and of
perimeter P was no greater or smaller than RP/2. Hence many concluded that the sur-
face of the circle was therefore equal to that of a rectangle whose width is equal to the
radius of the circle and the length of the half-diameter. The rectangle must then simply be
transformed into a square, which is quite elementary, from a technical point of view.
This extrapolation of Archimedes’ correct result is based on a postulate:14 if there exists
a square inferior in surface to a given circle, and if there exists a square superior to the
same circle, there exists a square equal to it. Not everybody admitted that postulate and
13[5].
14[7, p. 37].

Mathematics and the divine in Nicholas of Cusa
287
Fig. 5.
many maintained the incommensurability of rectilinear surfaces (generated by squares or,
more generally, by polygons) and curvilinear surfaces (based on curves).
In a certain sense, this debate brought two views on equality to grips: either equal-
ity represents an actual quantitative identity, or one admits that a difference between two
quantities is admitted as long as that difference is smaller than any rational fraction of the
quantities concerned.
In squaring the circle, Nicholas saw a mathematical analogy to the coincidence of op-
posites as it exists in God or to the conjunction of opposites as the human intellect grasps
it. He hoped to move the question along using principles from Learned Ignorance. In fact,
his mathematical writings are those of a good amateur but do not really attain top level in
rigour. Their interest is more philosophical than strictly mathematical.
Nicholas thinks the squaring is impossible on the level of ordinary mathematics.15 His
refusal of squaring plays an essential role here, comparable to his forbidding contradiction
in formal logic. In others words, the older equality concept is the right one and there is no
need to change it.
We nevertheless see Nicholas multiplying his attempts at practical approximations.
There is a major paradox here: why spend so much time and energy on these many squar-
ing attempts if the aim cannot theoretically be achieved? I suggest two paths for answering.
Their value is quite conjectural:
1. According to the principles of learned ignorance, just because a truth may be inac-
cessible as such is not a reason not to try to approach it as closely as possible. That
the essences of things, for instance, are unattainable does not stop human conjectures
from being more and more exact, as we saw with the series of inscribed polygons
or the geographer’s map drawing analogy. The problem with that explanation is that
Nicholas’s practical approximations got worse and worse—rather than better—over
time.
2. Practical approximations of squaring are valid only on the level of physical mathe-
matics and not on the level of rational mathematics. But physical mathematics is the
inverted reﬂection of intellectual mathematics, which is the principle, the ground of
rational mathematics.
Many times in his works Nicholas mentioned the idea of intellectual mathematics, which
is an extension of rational mathematics. The theological ﬁgures, dealing with the inﬁnite
15[7, p. 40].

288
J.-M. Counet
Fig. 6.
Fig. 7. Nikolaus von Kues (1401–1464) detail of the altarpiece in the chapel of the St.-Nikolaus-Hospital (Kues,
Germany) founded by the philosopher.
ﬁgures we spoke of, belong to this intellectual mathematics, like the vanishing quantities
obtained by going to the limit. For example, there is a difference between the length of an
arc and the length of the corresponding chord. But as the height of the chord decreases, the
difference between arc and chord decreases too. Finally both quantities vanish according to
rational mathematics, but intellectual intuition grasps something that is not zero (we would
speak today of the rapport, which is not equal to zero even if the terms are).

Mathematics and the divine in Nicholas of Cusa
289
Clearly, intellectual mathematics deals with the inﬁnitely great and the inﬁnitely small.
A coincidence or a conjunction of opposites exists there.
Where does this intellectual mathematics come from? It is distinct from ordinary math-
ematics in the sense that it is the light of the mind, thanks to which one can do ordinary
mathematics. In Kantian terms, we might say that intellectual mathematics is the condition
that makes possible ordinary mathematics.
Just as in the philosophy of nature, light is the source, the condition that makes possible
different colours and, for that matter, contains all of them in itself in a state of unity, so
intellectual light contains in its concrete unity all the ﬁgures and forms that are distinct
for reason. Intellectual mathematics might be said to be nothing but new mathematics
expressing the rules of these conditions of possibility of ordinary mathematics and allowing
us to judge the truth or falsity of their propositions.
Nicholas insisted in saying that if squaring is impossible on the level of ordinary math-
ematics, it exists on the level of the light of the intellect and of the superior mathematics
which is its expression. But it seems that this mathematics can only be studied indirectly,
on the basis of physical mathematics.
As we saw in Figure 3, the intellectual world and the world of bodies are the inverse
reﬂection of one another: unity includes in itself otherness within the intellect and oth-
erness includes in itself unity in material bodies. Physical approximations may thus be
signs pointing towards the true squaring, which is not to be found on the level of ordinary,
rational mathematics but on that of the spiritual light making them possible.
References
[1] W. Breidert, Mathematik und symbolische Erkenntnis bei Nikolaus von Kues, Mitteilungen und Forschungen
der Cusanus-Gesselschaft 12 (1977), 116–126.
[2] E. Cassirer, Das Erkenntnisproblem in der Philosophie und Wissenschaft der neueren Zeit, vols. 1, 2, 3,
B. Cassirer, Berlin (1906–1907–1920).
[3] E. Cassirer, Substanzbegriff und Funktionbegriff, B. Cassirer, Berlin (1910).
[4] E. Cassirer, Individuum und Kosmos in der Philosophie der Renaissance, Teubner, Leipzig–Berlin (1923).
[5] M. Clagett, Archimedes in the Middle Ages, Maddison, New York (1964).
[6] J.-M. Counet, Mathématiques et dialectique chez Nicolas de Cuse, Vrin, Paris (2000).
[7] J.H. Hofmann (transl.), Nikolaus von Kues. Die Mathematischen Schriften, Felix Meiner, Hamburg (1952).
[8] J. Hopkins (transl.), Nicholas of Cusa On Learned Ignorance. A translation and an Appraisal of De Docta
Ignorantia, Arthur Banning, Minneapolis (1981).
[9] J. Hopkins (transl.), Nicholas of Cusa’s dialectical mysticism. Text, translation and interpretative study of
De Visione Dei, Arthur Banning, Minneapolis (1985).
[10] J. Hopkins, A concise interpretation to the philosophy of Nicholas of Cusa, Arthur Banning, Minneapolis
(1986).
[11] J. Hopkins, Nicholas of Cusa’s Metaphysics of Contraction, Arthur Banning, Minneapolis (1983).
[12] E. Jeauneau, Mathématiques et Trinité chez Thierry de Chartres, Miscellanea Medievalia 2, de Gruyter,
Berlin (1963), pp. 289–295.
[13] A. Koyre, From the closed world to the inﬁnite universe, John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore (1957).
[14] F. Nagel, Nicolaus von Kues und die Entstehung der exakten Wissenschaften, Aschendorff, Münster (1984).
[15] F. Nagel, Nicolaus von Kues zwischen Ptolemaüs und Kepler, Mitteilungen und Forschungen der Cusanus-
Gesellschaft 17 (1986), 235–250.
[16] J.-M. Nicolle, Mathématiques et métaphysique dans l’oeuvre de Nicolas de Cues, Presses du Septentrion,
Villeneuve d’Ascq (2001).

290
J.-M. Counet
[17] H. Rombach, Substanz, System, Struktur. Die Ontologie des Fubktionalismus und der Philosophische Hin-
tergrund der modernen Wissenschaften, 2 vols., Alber Verlag, Freiburg–München (1966).
[18] N. Stuloff, Mathematischen Tradition in Byzanz und ihre Fortleben bei Nikolaus von Kues, Mitteilungen
und Forschungen der Cusanus-Gesellschaft 4 (1964), 420–436.
[19] N. Stuloff, Die Herkunft der Elemente der Mathematik bei Nikolaus von Kues im Lichte der neuzeitlichen
Wissenschaft, Mitteilungen und Forschungen der Cusanus-Gesellschaft 6 (1967), 55–62.

CHAPTER 15
Michael Stifel and his Numerology
Teun Koetsier
Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Science, Vrije Universiteit, De Boelelaan 1081,
NL-1081HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
E-mail: t.koetsier@few.vu.nl
Karin Reich
Institut für Geschichte der Naturwissenschaften, Mathematik und Technik, Bundesstraße 55,
D-20146 Hamburg, Germany
E-mail: reich@math.uni-hamburg.de
Contents
1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 293
2. The end of the world and the Antichrist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 293
3. The autumn of the Middle Ages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 296
4. Stifel’s numerology in 1532 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 297
5. Stifel’s mathematics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303
6. Concluding remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 309
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
291


Michael Stifel and his numerology
293
1. Introduction
Michael Stifel (1486/87–1567) was born in Esslingen, Germany. As a young man he be-
came a monk in the Augustine Order and in 1511 he became a priest. In the conﬂict be-
tween Luther and the Church he chose the side of the Reformation, left the monastery and
became a minister. He spent two years in Tyrol but the persecution of the Lutheran move-
ment forced him to move to Lochau (today called Annaberg), Germany not far from Wit-
tenberg, Luther’s residence. In 1532 Stifel anonymously published a booklet in Wittenberg
under the title Ein Rechenbüchlein vom Endchrist. Apocalypsis in Apocalypsim (A Book
of Arithmetic about the Antichrist. A Revelation in the Revelation). In the booklet Stifel
used numerological arguments to show that the end of the world was very near and that
the popes and the Catholic Church had to be identiﬁed with the Antichrist. After the pub-
lication Stifel continued his calculations and showed that the end of the world would take
place on October 19, 1533, at 8 o’clock in the morning. Stifel gathered his faithful in the
church and discovered that the world did not stop existing on this particular day. He was
arrested by the authorities and spent several weeks in jail in Wittenberg. Luther, however,
did not let down the man who had chosen his side at the very beginning of the Reformation
and, although it took some time, in 1535 Stifel was again allowed to practise as a minister
in Holzdorf, not far from Lochau. He never completely quit numerology but he clearly
became more careful with respect to the interpretation of his calculations. Moreover, his
interest in numbers led him to several original contributions to mathematics. In 1544 he
published his main book, the Arithmetica Integra, printed by the man who had printed
Copernicus’s Revolutiones one year earlier. After the battle of Mühlberg in 1547, where
the noblemen who had taken the side of the Reformation were defeated by Charles V,
Stifel had to leave Holzberg. In 1559 he was teaching mathematics at the university in
Jena.
In the history of sixteenth century German mathematics Stifel is a remarkable ﬁgure.
His interest in numerology is sometimes depicted as a strange and irrational element in
his work. We will show that this is a one-sided and superﬁcial view. At the time, Stifel’s
numerological considerations were less strange than they appear to us now. In the sixteenth
century there were many other men of learning engaged in similar calculations and it seems
quite reasonable to view this work as a form of applied arithmetic that turned out to be
sterile in the end.
2. The end of the world and the Antichrist
In the Bible the end of the world and the period preceding it are described on several
occasions. At the very end Jesus Christ will return. Yet, preceding Christ’s return, there
will be signs announcing his coming. According to St. Luke, Jesus said:
Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom:
And great earthquakes shall be in divers places, and famines, and pestilences; and fearful sights
and great signs shall there be from heaven. (Luke 21:10–11)

294
T. Koetsier and K. Reich
A remarkable ﬁgure associated with the nearing of the end of the world is the so-called
Antichrist. The word “Antichrist” occurs only in Christian literature. The ﬁrst mention is
found in the Epistles of John. In 1 John 2 it says in verse 18:
Little children, it is the last time: and as ye have heard that antichrist shall come, even now are
there many antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last time.1
Understandably this text was associated with the following words that Paul the apostle
wrote to the Thessalonians:
Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering
together unto him.
That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as
from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand.
Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, except there come a falling
away ﬁrst, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition.
Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he
as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God. (2 Thessalonians 1–4)
The text is clear. Before the coming of Christ, a man of sin will be revealed, who will
present himself as God. This “son of perdition” is often identiﬁed with the Antichrist an-
nounced by John.
In particular, the book Revelation contains many details about the events that will pre-
cede the end of the world. In Chapter 11 it says:
And I will give power unto my two witnesses and they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and
threescore days, clothed in sack-cloth.
These are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks standing before the God of the earth.
And if any man will hurt them, ﬁre proceedeth out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies:
and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed.
These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy: and have power
over waters to turn them to blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will.
And when they shall have ﬁnished their testimony, the beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless
pit shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them. (Revelation 11:3–7)
After three and a half days “the spirit of life from God” enters the two witnesses and they
ascend to heaven. The witnesses represent the forces of good. The beast that kills them has
often been interpreted as the Antichrist. Chapter 13 contains a similar prophecy:
And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up out of the sea, having seven heads
and ten horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemy. [. . . ]
And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies; and power was
given unto him to continue forty and two months.
And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle,
and them that dwell in heaven.
And it was given unto him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them: and power was
given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations. (Revelation 13:1–7)
One notices in these texts the period of 1260 days equal to 42 months of 30 days. At the
end of chapter 13 the number 666 occurs; the beast and its number are usually identiﬁed
with the Antichrist:
1The Antichrist is also mentioned in 1 John 2, 22 and in 2 John 7.

Michael Stifel and his numerology
295
Fig. 1. Dürer’s depiction of St. Michael’s battle with the dragon from Revelation 12:7–9.
Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast: for it is the number
of a man; and his number is Six hundred threescore and six. (Revelation 13:18)
Although in the third century the Antichrist had already turned into the “one and only
ultimate eschatological opponent of Jesus Christ” (Cf. [7, p. 1]), the medieval Antichrist
tradition is very complex. It was developed from many sources and it varied from author to
author. Nevertheless, according to Richard Kenneth Emmerson, it is possible to describe
a widely accepted understanding of the Antichrist, which was from the tenth century on
developed, modiﬁed and repeated throughout the later Middle Ages:
Antichrist will be a single human, a man with devilish connections who will come near the end
of the world to persecute Christians and to mislead them by claiming that he is Christ, he will be
opposed by Enoch and Elias, whom he will kill, and will ﬁnally be destroyed by Christ or his agent
[3, p. 7].

296
T. Koetsier and K. Reich
3. The autumn of the Middle Ages
In the The Autumn of the Middle Ages the Dutch historian Huizinga wrote about the ﬁf-
teenth century:
A human being who seriously contemplated the daily course of things and judged subsequently
on life, only spoke of suffering and despair. This man saw how the time inclined towards the end
[5, p. 35].
Such a sad opinion was strongly expressed not only by the religious, but by the chroni-
clers and the poets as well. In this context Huizinga quoted Deschamps:
Times of sorrow and temptation,
Ages of weeping, of desire and torment,
Times of longing and damnation,
Ages leading towards the end,
Times full of horror that do everything wrongly
I only see fools and folly,
Times without honour and true judgement
Age in sadness, that shortens life.2
The last centuries of the Middle Ages represented a fearful period, characterised by
failing crops, epidemics and chronic misery caused by warfare. Wandering monks of the
mendicant orders propagating the “memento mori” only reinforced the resulting feeling of
despair. Moreover, at the end of the Middle Ages a new type of illustration entered the lives
of many people: the woodcut, which spread the same message. Dürer’s woodcuts no longer
depict the serene dignity of the ﬁgures of the Middle Ages. On the contrary, the fragility of
human existence is omnipresent.
In Central Europe this state of mind reached a climax at the end of the ﬁfteenth and
at the beginning of the sixteenth century. It was a confusing period not understood by
anyone: economic changes, usury, peasants revolting against the feudal order and citizens
opposing the oligarchy in their cities. Moreover, the existing tradition of criticism of the
Church and the clergy as for their attitude with respect to worldly goods and enjoyments
reached an unknown level and intensity. In particular, the selling of indulgences by the
Church represented to the critics a clear sign of degeneration. Last but not least there were
the rumours about the Turks advancing in the southeast. What did it all mean? To many a
mediaeval mind it seemed clear: at last the end of the world was really approaching.
The spirit of the times at the end of the ﬁfteenth century is visible in the themes of many
woodcuts. The Bible of Strasbourg of 1485 contains 17 illustrations, 8 of which concern
the Apocalypse and in 1498 Dürer devoted a whole series of engravings to the Apocalypse.
Dürer’s depiction of St. Michael’s battle with the dragon (Figure 1) still impresses the
modern viewer. The dramatic impact on the mediaeval mind, not used to the multitude of
images that we grow up with, must have been immense.
In the history of the Antichrist legend, images have always played an important role (Cf.
[13]). This was not different at the end of the ﬁfteenth century. The woodcut entitled The
Preaching and Fall of the Antichrist from Schedel’s chronique of 1493 (Figure 2) gives us
2“Temps de doleur et de temptacion, Aages de plour, d’envie et de tourment, Temps de langour et de damp-
nacion, Aages meneur près du deﬁnement, Temps plains d’orreur qui tout fait faussement, Aages menteur, plein
d’orgueil et d’envie, Temps sanz honeur et sans vray jugement, Aage en tristour qui abrege la vie” [5, p. 36].

Michael Stifel and his numerology
297
Fig. 2. The preaching and the fall of the Antichrist (from Schedel’s Buch der Cronicken, 1493).
in fact two scenes in one: a scene on earth and a scene in the sky. On earth, on the left,
the Antichrist in the form of a man of learning is preaching to a crowd with a devil behind
him whispering things into his ear; on the right the two witnesses (Revelation 11) are
preaching to another crowd. In the sky the fall of the Antichrist is depicted. The Antichrist
is depicted in a different way in the woodcut entitled The Antichrist from Brant’s The Boat
of Fools (Stultifera Navis) of 1498 (Figure 3). The woodcut was probably done by Dürer.
The Antichrist is sitting on top of a capsized boot; following him leads to catastrophe. In
the front St. Peter is pulling a boat full of the faithful to the safe shore with his key.
4. Stifel’s numerology in 1532
Richard K. Emmerson wrote:
“Early Protestants felt that they were living on the verge of Doomsday, for the millennium was in
the past, the two witnesses—oppressed for 1260 years—had been resurrected, the beast had been
wounded, and only the return of Christ remained in the future. This expectation of the imminent

298
T. Koetsier and K. Reich
Fig. 3. The Antichrist as master of the fools (From Brant’s Stultifera navis, 1489).
Second Advent led particularly to an increasing desire to determine the time of the end [. . . ]”
[3, p. 209].
Clearly, in his conviction that the end of the world was approaching Stifel was not alone.
Moreover, before Luther the position of the papacy had never been called into question.
Of course, late mediaeval opponents of the papacy had argued that its worldliness and
degeneracy were proof of the last days and the work of the Antichrist. Yet, this criticism
did not concern the church as an institution. However, when Luther broke with the church
the identiﬁcation of the institution of the papacy with the Antichrist seemed very natural,
from the point of view of the Reformation.
In his booklet (Figure 4) Stifel constructed a correspondence between words on the one
hand, and numbers on the other hand, by means of three methods. Stifel used Hindu-Arabic
digits to denote numbers but he still calculated on the board (Figure 5).
Method I
One restricts oneself in a word or a phrase to all characters that have a numerical value
in the Roman system. For example, consider the text
Iesvs Nazarenvs Rex Ivdeorvm

Michael Stifel and his numerology
299
Fig. 4. Frontispiece of Stifel’s Endchrist.
In the Roman system we have I = 1, V = 5, X = 10, L = 50, C = 100, D = 500 and M =
1000. If we put these values on the board we get 1532. According to the preface of his book-
let Stifel at ﬁrst did not consider relations such as the one constructed here between Jesus
and the year 1532 too seriously. However, he changed his mind. The number of interesting
discoveries must have made him change his mind. Another example: Take the name Leo
Decimvs, pope from 1513 until 1522. The Roman characters corresponding with numbers
are L, D, C, I, M, V. Adding them we get 1656, which in itself looks rather meaningless. On
the board, however, 1656 is not much different from 666; all that is required is that we move
one coin—the one that is on the thousands line—to the tens line. The fact that there are ten
letters in Leo Decimvs and the fact that the M is the ﬁrst letter of “mysterium” gave Stifel
an argument to assume that in order to get the true number corresponding to Leo Decimvs
the M had to be interpreted as 10. Obviously then, Leo Decimvs is the beast announced
in the book of Revelation. It is interesting to read Stifel’s account of this last discovery,
written many years later. He describes how worried he was that the text in Revelation 21:8:
“But the fearful, and unbelieving [...] shall have their part in the lake which burneth with
ﬁre and brimstone: which is the second death” would apply to him, fearful as he felt. Then,
one day in the library he attempted to calculate the number of the beast in the described
way. As for the “trick” with the M, he wrote: “I ﬁgured that M might mean “mysterium”,
went onto my cell, kneeled down and prayed to God about this matter. However, I did not
pray for long; or I received such a consolation, that it consoles me even today, whenever I
think about it. And after that I was no longer so fearful and despondent as I was before and
from that time on I have always loved the Revelation of John” ([6, pp. 531–532]).

300
T. Koetsier and K. Reich
Fig. 5. Frontispiece of Jakob Köbel’s textbook on calculating on the board, Augsburg, 1514.
Method II
The second numerological method that Stifel used is based on the order of the letters in
the alphabet.
a →1,
b →2,
c →3,
d →4,
e →5,
f →6,
g →7,
h →8,
i →9,
k →10,
l →11,
m →12,
n →13,
o →14,
p →15,
q →16,
r →17,
s →18,
t →19,
v →20,
x →21,
y →22,
z →23.
Stifel illustrated the method using the name of the reformer Husz. He wrote
“Nim nv zvm Exempel dieses Wort Hvsz/leg fvr das h 8, fvr das v 20,
fvr das s 18 vnd fvr das z 23. So machet dir das gantz wort 69”.
In English: “Take for example this word Husz/lay for the h 8, for the v 20, for the s
18, and for the z 23. So make yourself the whole word 69.” It is clear from the language
that Stifel was doing the addition on a calculating board. Stifel wrote that he entertained
himself for some time with these calculations and had sometimes found things that amazed
him. However, he did not succeed in calculating the number of the beast in this way and
that is why he invented a third numerological method.

Michael Stifel and his numerology
301
Method III
The ﬁrst two methods were already very old in Stifel’s time. The third numerological
method could very well be an original contribution to numerology by Stifel. It is based
on the sequence of so-called triangular numbers 1, 3, 6, 10, etc. This sequence is closely
related to the sequence of the natural numbers and can be calculated from it as follows:
the nth triangular number = the sum of the ﬁrst n natural numbers. We get the following
correspondence.
a →1,
b →3,
c →6,
d →10,
e →15,
f →21,
g →28,
h →36,
i →45,
k →55,
l →66,
m →78,
n →91,
o →105,
p →120,
q →136,
r →153,
s →171,
t →190,
v →210,
x →231,
y →253,
z →276.
Most of the calculations in Stifel’s booklet are based on the triangular numbers. Stifel ap-
plies his third method to calculate the numerical value of words and phrases. Subsequently
he shows that the resulting numbers, combined with the numbers denoting special years
in the history of Christianity, and special numbers from biblical texts, like 1260, 666 and
others, are related arithmetically in rather simple ways. The relations all take the form of an
equality which, if the original words are again substituted, express, at least from Lutheran
point of view, important truths. Before we will consider some examples it is necessary to
know that in the history of the Church Stifel distinguished three periods.
(i) The period of the spiritual popes from Petrvs to Leo IV (847–855).
(ii) The period of the secular popes from Johannes VIII (856–???) to Leo X (1513–
1522).
(iii) The period of the “furious” popes from Adrianvs VI (1522–1523) to Clemens VII
(1523–1534).
N.B.: Clemens VII was still alive when Stifel published his booklet.
From the Lutheran point of view things went terribly wrong with Johannes VIII. Ac-
cording to Stifel he was a woman dressed like a man. Feminists might enjoy this pos-
sibility but Stifel did not. Moreover, one of the primary blasphemies of the secular and
furious popes concerns the free will, the libervm arbitrivm. For both the reformers and
the Catholic Church man is a sinner who cannot be saved without Divine Grace. How-
ever, while, according to Catholicism man can choose between accepting Divine Grace
and refusing it, according to the reformers salvation depends exclusively on God. From the
point of view of the Lutherans this Catholic belief in the role of the free will was a major
blasphemy.
Stifel used neither characters for arithmetical operation nor the equality sign. We will
sometimes use the equality sign. By means of the third numerological method we can now
show that
Johannes Octavvs equals Libervm arbitrivm,

302
T. Koetsier and K. Reich
because the numerical value on both sides of the equality sign is 1448. Because Petrvs =
859 and Leo Qvartvs = 1257, we have
Petrvs minus 856 plus Leo Qvartvs equals 1260.
Here 856 is the year in which Johannes VIII became pope. At the same time we have
1260 = Ira revelabitvr (the rage revealed) and Cessatio Papatvs = 1517.
The year 1517 is the year of the beginning of the Reformation.
In the Old Testament in the book of Daniel the numbers 1290 and 1335 occur.3 Using
Martinvs Lavter = 1574 and Romanvs Papa = 1051, Stifel deduced:
1290 plus 1335 equals Martinvs Lavter plus Romanvs Papa.
The result suggests a special relation among Luther, the pope and two special biblical
numbers.
Stifel enlarged the scope of his investigation by allowing other arithmetical operations
than addition and subtraction. He allowed the repetition of words as a sign of emphasis.
Moreover, he uses an operation that he calls “duplatio”. The duplatio of a number requires
adding 3 to the number and subsequently doubling the result. So, because Leo Decimvs =
721 and Johannes Octavvs = 1448 and 2 times (721 + 3) yields 1448, Stifel gets
The duplatio of Leo Decimvs equals Johannes Octavvs.
Next to the duplatio Stifel uses the “mediatio”: subtract 3 from a number and divide by 2.
Stifel ﬁnds
The mediatio of 1335 equals 666.
At least once Stifel applies what we will call a “shift” on the calculating board. Such a
shift is in fact a multiplication by 10. On page F6 he says: “Lay down Ira Dei and move
all the coins one line forward and you will ﬁnd Adrianvs Sextvs et Visio Danielis” And
indeed, because Ira Dei = 269, Adrianvs = 1670, Danielis = 1020, and 10 times 269
equals 1670 + 1020, we have
Shift of Ira Dei equals Adrianvs plus Danielis.
Luther is reported to have told the story that Johannvs Husz, the Czech precursor of the
Reformation, when they were about to burn him, said: “You can roast the goose, but in
a hundred years the swan will sing”. The name of Husz (Czech for goose) and the word
Cygnus (Latin for swan) occur frequently in Stifel’s calculations. For example, he derived
3“And from the time that the daily sacriﬁce shall be taken away, and the abomination that maketh desolate set
up, there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days” (Daniel 12:11).
“Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hundred and ﬁve and thirty days” (Daniel 12:12).

Michael Stifel and his numerology
303
among others the following numerological results (N.B. 1518 was the year in which Luther
refused to withdraw his theses).
1518 plus Visio Danielis minus Johannes Husz equals 1290,
Johannes Hvsz minus Visio Danielis + Johannes equals Cygnvs plus 1,
Johannes Hvsz plus Cygnvs equals Leo Decimvs plus Antichristvs.
The reader who tries to check these calculations will ﬁnd that Stifel made a mistake in
the calculation of the value of Cygnvs (= 759). Stifel must have calculated by mistake
the value of Czgnvs (= 782). Because he used this value repeatedly all results concerning
Cygnvs are wrong.
At the end of the booklet there is a list of important words and combinations of words
in alphabetical order with their numerical values on the basis of the third method. Stifel
probably obtained many of his results on the basis of this list, simply trying combinations
of numbers and operations.
After the publication of his book, Stifel continued his calculations and at a certain mo-
ment convinced himself of the fact that the end of the world would take place on October
19, 1533, at 8 o’clock in the morning. Unfortunately we do not know how he did this. It
has been suggested that Stifel calculated the year 1533 using a phrase from John 19:37:
“VIDebVnt In qVeM transfIXerVnt” (“They shall look on him whom they pierced”).4 The
fact that Sunday, October 19, 1533 is the ﬁrst day immediately after the 42nd week of the
year 1533 may have played a role in Stifel’s arguments as well.
5. Stifel’s mathematics
Stifel was clearly a man who loved to calculate; he was also good at it. We do not know
anything about Stifel’s early mathematical development. There are indications that already
in 1532 when he wrote his booklet his interest went beyond mere calculation. This is
suggested by the application of triangular numbers but also by the occurrence of a magic
square in the book. At the end of chapter XVI we ﬁnd an example of a square consisting
of the ﬁrst 36 natural numbers arranged in such a way that the square is magic: the sum
of the number in a row, in a column and on a diagonal equals 111 (Figure 6). Why is the
square there? Probably only because the sum of all the numbers in the square is 666. It is,
however, mathematically interesting as well.
Let us compare the square with the magic square on the well known etching of Dürer,
Melencolia, done in 1514, the year in which Dürer’s mother died (Figure 7).
If we take the four-by-four square in the centre of Stifel’s square and substract 10 we get
a slight variation on Dürer’s square.5 Stifel must have obtained his square the other way
4This calculation is given by Marcus Friedrich Wendelin in his Cosmologia (1648), Section 2, p. 349.
5The four by four square in the centre of Stifel’s square is identical with Dürer’s square if the second and third
(horizontal) row are interchanged.

304
T. Koetsier and K. Reich
Fig. 6. The magic square in Dürer’s Melancholia and the magic square from Stifel’s Enchrist.
Fig. 7. Dürer’s Melancholia.

Michael Stifel and his numerology
305
around. He must have wondered whether the four-by-four square cannot be turned into a
six-by six-square by adding a border. For the resulting square we then need the numbers
1,2,3,4,...,10 [11,12,13,...,25,26] 27,...,34,35,36.
The numbers 11 through 26 are the numbers 1 through 16 all raised by 10. With them
we can make a magic square. Let us put them in the four-by-four centre square of an
empty six-by-six square. Moreover, we have 1 + 36 = 37, 2 + 35 = 37, 3 + 34 = 37, etc.
This means that we can ﬁll up the border by completing the rows columns and diagonals
with the pairs 1,36 and 2,35 etc. in such a way that the sum of the numbers in the rows,
columns and diagonals becomes 111. It turns out that this can be done in such a way that
the resulting square is magic.
Stifel’s major mathematical work is the Arithmetica Integra of 1544. It consists of three
books. In the ﬁrst book we ﬁnd Pythagorean number theory like the theory of triangular
numbers, etc. However, there is also a beautiful and original theory of certain magical
squares, based on a generalisation of the idea that had led him from Dürer’s magic square
to the one in the Endchrist. The result is, for example, the 16-by-16 square of Figure 8. It
is constructed from Stifel’s six-by-six square by adding ﬁve more borders. For the details I
refer to Joseph Hofmann [4].
Fig. 8.

306
T. Koetsier and K. Reich
The second book of the Arithmetica Integra is devoted to Euclid’s theory of irrational-
ities. The third book of the Arithmetica Integra deals with the “Coss”, i.e. algebra. At the
time it was common practice among “cossists”—as algebrists were often called, because
of the Italian word cosa (thing) denoting the unknown—to distinguish three different types
of quadratic equations that were then solved by means of three analogous but different
algorithms. According to Hofmann Stifel was (one of) the ﬁrst mathematicians to realise
that if the right rules for the addition, multiplication and division of negative numbers are
used, the three different types turn out to be special cases of one general quadratic equa-
tion that can be solved by means of one algorithm [4, p. 31]. Because this is an important
point we will illustrate it. Figure 9 shows part of a page from Stifel’s last book, a re-
vised and extended edition of an earlier book on algebra, Die Coss by Christoff Rudolff,
1525 [12].
Fig. 9.

Michael Stifel and his numerology
307
The text says:
About the extraction of square roots from such Cossic numbers as
240 −8x,
240 + 8x,
20x −96.
First, multiply half of the number that has the character x by itself/and watch the sign −or +.
Then you should know that −and −multiplied yield + (just as + and +). In the ﬁrst example
I take −4 times −4. Facit +16. Just as I get in the other example +4 times +4. Facit +16 and
the sign + points in both examples at an addition. That is why I add in both examples the 16 to
the isolated number of the example, namely 240. Facit 256. From this number I extract the square
root/facit 16. From this number I substract in the ﬁrst example 4 and in the other example I add
the 4 to 16. That is why in the ﬁrst example the wanted number is 12, but in the other example 20.
Stifel did not yet admit negative roots and this means that his treatment of quadratic equa-
tions is not yet completely uniform. His treatment of the ﬁrst two cases boils in modern
notation down to the following rule: if x2 = p + qx and p and q have opposite signs, then
x = q/2 +

(q/2)2 + p.
6. Concluding remarks
The application of calculations to the prophetic interpretation continued to fascinate Stifel
until his death. Some of his results are indeed remarkable. Stifel’s 1532 booklet was not an
isolated incident in his life. Twenty years later he came up with the following diagram in
which the six numbers from the Book of Daniel and the Book of Revelations are related
to the sentence “Christ, by faith alone, is for the elect the God of salvation eternal”. It was
found by Stifel [1, p. 191]. The calculations are based on the triangular numbers:
Christvs sola ﬁde (= 1416),
2300 (= 1416 + 884),
Est Electis (= 884),
1290 (= 884 + 406),
Devs (= 406),
1260 (= 406 + 854),
Salvtis (= 854),
1335 (= 854 + 481),
Aeternae (= 481),
666 (= 481 + 185),
Amen (= 185).

308
T. Koetsier and K. Reich
Neither was Stifel isolated in his interest in numerology.By the middle of the century it was
common for Lutherans to offer “cabbalistic” support for the belief that with the Reforma-
tion had begun the Last Times. Barnes gives several examples of continental authors ([1],
Ch. 5). Brady [2] is a good source for British authors. Some like Johannes Faulhaber of
Ulm combined real mathematical talent with eschatological fervour. Faulhaber wrote many
mathematical texts dealing to some extent with eschatological mysteries (see Chapter 16
of the present volume).
Another example of a mathematician involved in eschatological calculations was John
Napier, Laird of Merchiston and inventor of logarithms. He published his Plain Discovery
of the Whole Revelation of Saint John in 1593. Napier’s book became quite popular. It was
reprinted often and translated into Dutch, French and German.
It is interesting to compare brieﬂy Stifel’s 1532 booklet with Napier’s book. Napier’s
book is more a theological treatise in which the Book of Revelations is interpreted. The
numbers occurring in the book are interpreted as well but calculations play a much more
limited role than in Stifel’s work. Napier’s book consists of two treatises; the ﬁrst contains
a “searching of the true meaning of the Revelation [...] after the manner of propositions”.
A few examples of propositions give a good idea of Napier’s style.
1. Proposition. “In the propheticall dates of daies, weeks, moneths and years, euery com-
mon propheticall day is taken for a yeare”.
3. Proposition. “The starre and locusts of the ﬁft trumpet, are not the great Antichrist and
his Cleargie, but the Dominator of the Turkes and his armie, who began their dominion,
in anno Christi 1051”.
4. Proposition. The Kings of the East, or foure Angels, speciﬁed in the sixt trumpet or
sixt vial. cap. 9 &16 are the foure nations, Mohametanes beyond and about Euphrates,
who began their empire by Ottoman, in the year of Christ, 1296 or there about”.
The identiﬁcation of the years 1051 and 1296 is based on a comparison of the events
described in the Revelation with actual historical happenings. Because 1296−1051 = 245,
we have:
5. Proposition. “The space of the ﬁft trumpet or vial, containeth 245 years, and so much
also, euery one of the rest of the trumpets or vials doe containe.”
12. Proposition. “The ﬁrst of the seuen thunders, and the seuenth and last Trumpet or vial,
begin both at once in Anno 1541.”
The year 1541 is based on propositions 3 and 5. It is 1051 plus the spaces of the ﬁfth and
sixth trumpet, i.e. 1051 plus twice 245.
14. Proposition. “The day of Gods Iudgement appears to fall betuixt the yeares of Christ,
1688 and 1700.”
The year 1700 is based on a simple addition. The “time that the daily sacriﬁce shall be
taken away” (Daniel 12:11) is identiﬁed with the year 365. The 1335 days in Daniel 12:12
are taken as 1335 years and 365 + 1335 yields 1700. According to Napier days should
always be taken as years (see Proposition 1). The year 1688 is obtained by taking the year
1541 (see Proposition 12) and adding 3 times a period of thundering angels of 49 years [8,
pp. 26–27].

Michael Stifel and his numerology
309
23. Proposition. “The whore who in the Reuelation is stiled spiritual Babylon, is not re-
allie Babylon, but the very present citie of Rome.”
24. Proposition. “The great ten-horned beast, is the whole bodie of the Latine Empire,
whereof the Antichrist is a part.”
26. Proposition. “The Pope is that only antichrist, prophecied of, in particular.”
29. Proposition. “The name of the beast expressed by the number of 666 is the name
λατεινοσ.”
32. Proposition. “Gog is the Pope, and Magog is the Turks and Mahometans.”
As for the interpretation of words as numbers Napier does not go beyond the possibilities
offered by the Greek Ionic numeral system: the 24 letters of the alphabet extended with
three obsolete symbols all had a numerical value and were used to denote numbers. For
example, the 29th Proposition contains the following argument: 666 stands for Latinus or
λατεινοσ, “for λ is 30. α is 1. τ is 300. ε is 5. ι is 10. ν is 50. ο is 70. And σ is 200 which
altogether make sixe hundreth three score and sixe” [8, p. 69]. Moreover, in the Greek
New Testament the number 666 is written in this way χξζ, for χ + ξ + ζ = 600 + 60 + 6 =
666 stood for the German Empire of his time. χ is the Greek cross, ξ is the same as the
Latin X, again a cross, and the obsolete symbol stigma ζ or στ is also the beginning of
the Greek word σταυροζ (cross). So 666 denoted the institution that was in every way
abusing the cross in their “rings”, the Catholic Church. Napier also declared that χξζ are
not accidentally precisely the major initial letters in the phrase χαραµα του ξυλου ζαυρου
(“character ligni crucis: the marke of the tree of the cross” [8, p. 69].
This brief comparison of Stifel’s booklet with Napier’s treatise shows that it was not at
all uncommon for religious men with a talent for arithmetic to relate the Biblical numbers
to the historical events of their time by means of calculations.
References
[1] R.B. Barnes, Prophecy and Gnosis, Apocalypticism in the Wake of the Lutheran Reformation, Stanford
University Press, Stanford, California, 1988.
[2] D. Brady, The Contribution of British Writers between 1560 and 1830 to the Interpretation of Revelation
13.16–18, J.C.B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), Tübingen, 1983.
[3] R.K. Emmerson, Antichrist in the Middle Ages, A Study of Medieval Apocalypticism, Art, and Literature,
Manchester University Press, Manchester, 1981.
[4] J.E. Hofmann, Michael Stifel 1487–1567, Leben, Wirken und Bedeutung für die Mathematik seiner Zeit,
Franz Steiner Verlag, Wiesbaden, 1968.
[5] J. Huizinga, Herfsttij der Middeleeuwen, Uitgeverij Contact, 1999.
[6] H.-U. Hofmann, Luther und die Johannes-Apokalypse, J.C.B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), Tübingen, 1982.
[7] L.J. Lietaert Peerbolte, The Antecedents of Antichrist, A Traditio-Historical Study of the Earliest Christian
Views on Eschatological Opponents, Brill, Leiden–New York–Köln, 1996.
[8] I. Napier, A Plaine Discovery, of the Whole Revelation of S. Iohn. Edinbvrgh, Printed by Andrew Hart,
1611.
[9] K. Reich, Die Beziehung Martin Luthers zu Michael Stifel, Esslinger Studien Zeitschrift 29 (1990), 17–
36.
[10] K. Reich, Zwischen Theologie und Mathematik: Michael Stifels Endchrist (1532), Rechenmeister und
Cossisten der frühen Neuzeit, R. Gebhardt & H. Albrecht (Herausg.), Adam-Ries-Bund e. V., 1996,
pp. 159–172.

310
T. Koetsier and K. Reich
[11] M. Stifel, Ein Rechenbüchlein vom EndChrist. Apocalyps in Apocalypsim, Wittemberg, Georgen Rhaw,
1532 (Published anonymously).
[12] M. Stifel, Die Coss Christoffs Rudolffs, mit schönem Exempeln der Coss, Durch Michael Stifel gebessert
und sehr gemehrt, Amsterdam, 1613. Was ﬁrst printed in 1554.
[13] R.M. Wright, Art and Antichrist in Medieval Europe, Manchester University Press, Manchester and New
York, 1995.

CHAPTER 16
Between Rosicrucians and Cabbala—Johannes
Faulhaber’s Mathematics of Biblical Numbers
Ivo Schneider
Fakultät für Sozialwissenschaften, Universität der Bundeswehr München, Werner-Heisenberg-Weg 39,
D-85579 Neubiberg, Germany
E-mail: ivo.schneider@unibw-muenchen.de
Contents
1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 313
2. Pyramidal numbers and the Bible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 313
3. Gog and Magog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 317
4. Word calculus and signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 319
5. The Rosicrucian movement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 321
6. The comet of 1618 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 323
7. Pyrgoidal numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 328
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
311


Between Rosicrucians and Cabbala—Johannes Faulhaber’s mathematics
313
1. Introduction
Johannes Faulhaber was born the son of a weaver in Ulm in 1580. After an apprenticeship
in Ulm with David Selzlin, a teacher of reading, writing and arithmetic, Faulhaber mar-
ried and opened his own school as a Rechenmeister (teacher of arithmetic). In 1604 his
ﬁrst book appeared, a collection of cubic (third degree) problems entitled Arithmetischer
Cubicossischer Lustgarten (Arithmetic Cubicossic Pleasure Garden), through which Faul-
haber wanted to distinguish himself as a provider of methods to solve cubic equations, a
hot topic after the appearance of Cardano’s Ars Magna in 1545. So far nothing suggested
the religious raptures and the heterodox views of the apparently very ambitious Faulhaber
that would later involve him in numerous conﬂicts with the municipality and the represen-
tatives of the Protestant church in Ulm. Such a change became visible only in 1606 when
he began to associate himself with the landlord of his court, the sanctimonious baker Noah
Kolb. Kolb suggested to Faulhaber that he (Faulhaber) possessed an enlightenment deriv-
ing directly from God and he was strengthened in this conviction by his confessor, Johann
Bartholome, a preacher at the minster, who, according to a contemporary report, “ordained
and initiated [Faulhaber] by means of numerous ceremonies, prayers, incantations and the
like, kneeling to one of the Latter-day prophets”.1 After this Faulhaber announced in Ulm,
Memmingen, Augsburg and Hamburg the imminent (according to him) Day of Judgment.
As a result of this he was imprisoned in the tower at the end of 1606 because of his fan-
tastic ideas, together with Kolb. Because Faulhaber’s wife was pregnant he was released
quickly but for some time seriously limited in his freedom of movement and his contacts
with others.2 Ofﬁcially no one was allowed to visit Faulhaber. In 1611 the new preacher at
the minster, Peter Hueber, denied Faulhaber Holy Communion, because of, among other
things, a suspicion of sorcery.3 Because of his continuing contacts with Kolb, whom he
also supported ﬁnancially, Faulhaber was publicly reprimanded in 1613 and all contacts
with Kolb were forever forbidden. Kolb was executed in 1615, in particular because of his
confession—repeated in several interrogations, some under torture—of having committed
fornication with several women and children; Faulhaber was one of the people interrogated
in connection with Kolb’s trial.
2. Pyramidal numbers and the Bible
The fantastic ideas (Fantastereyen) that Faulhaber was accused of were essentially con-
nected with his mystic-cabbalistic number speculations about biblical numbers, which
were in their turn based on the formulae that he had adopted and developed for the de-
termination of polygonal and pyramidal numbers. Several of the 160 cubic problems in his
Arithmetischer Cubicossischer Lustgarten concerned polygonal and pyramidal numbers,
though no connection with biblical numbers was established. In this book Faulhaber had
without further explanation introduced polygonal numbers—well known from the Greek
1Hermann Keefer, Johannes Faulhaber, der bedeutendste Ulmer Mathematiker und Festungsbaumeister des 17.
Jahrhunderts, in: Württembergische Schulwarte 4, 1928, pp. 129–141, in particular p. 134.
2Report of the city council of Ulm for December 24, 1606.
3Report of the Kirchenbaupﬂegamt for July 4, 1611.

314
I. Schneider
Fig. 1. Johannes Faulhaber in an engraving from 1630 (Courtesy of Birkhäuser Verlag).
tradition—and the pyramidal numbers based on them, in the manner of the German coss-
tradition,4 in order to get to the cubic problems via pyramidal numbers.5
Polygonal numbers are the sums of the ﬁrst n terms of ﬁrst order arithmetic sequences
with ﬁrst term 1 and difference d. The names of polygonal numbers depend on d. The
Greek numeral that is used to denote the numbers corresponds exactly to d + 2. When
d = 1 we get triangular (or triagonal) numbers; when d = 2 we get quadrilateral (or tetrag-
onal) numbers, etc. When d = 1 the successive triagonal numbers, 1, 3, 6, 10, etc., can
be read off the base of the sequence of nested isosceles triangles depicted on the left side
in Figure 2, starting from the left vertex. If the sequence of nested isosceles triangles is
extended with a similar sequence like that on the right side of Figure 2, again starting from
the left vertex, we can now read off the quadrilateral numbers from the base: 1, 4, 9, 16,
etc. In the terminology of the German Rechenmeister according to Faulhaber n had to be
called the square root of the polygonal number and the nth term of the arithmetic progres-
sion, 1 + (n −1)d, was called the polygonal root.6 The polygonal root equals the number
of points on the nth gnomon in the sequence of polygons counted from the initial point.
4See Ivo Schneider, Textbooks of German Reckoningmasters in the Early 17th Century. In: Journal of the Cul-
tural History of Mathematics 2, 1992, pp. 47–52, and Der Einﬂuß der griechischen Mathematik auf Inhalt und
Entwicklung der mathematischen Produktion deutscher Rechenmeister im 16. und 17. Jahrhundert. In: Berichte
zur Wissenschaftsgeschichte 23, Heft 2, 2000, pp. 203–217 (= Nach oben und nach innen—Perspektiven der Wis-
senschaftsgeschichte, Festschrift für Fritz Krafft zum 65. Geburtstag (ed. by Ulrich Stoll and Christoph J. Scriba).
5See Ivo Schneider, Johannes Faulhaber (1580–1635)—Rechenmeister in einer Welt des Umbruchs, Birk-
häuser, Basel, 1993, Section 2.2.3.
6Faulhaber does not write n but uses the cossic character for the unknown, which is used here as a symbol for
an arbitrary natural number.

Between Rosicrucians and Cabbala—Johannes Faulhaber’s mathematics
315
Fig. 2. Triangular and quadrilateral numbers.
The polygonal number itself is the totality of points in a polygon with a total length of the
edges n and it equals
n

i=1

1 + (i −1)d

= n +

n
2

d =

n
1

+

n
2

d.
When for a given d the polygonal numbers corresponding to all square roots from 1 to n are
added, one gets the total number of points in the pyramid made by putting the associated
polygons of points on top of each other in such a way that the result resembles a pyramid
of cannon balls. That is why these numbers are called pyramidal numbers. Their value is
n

j=1
	
j
1

+

j
2

d

=

n + 1
2

+

n + 1
3

d = dn3 + 3n2 + (3 −d)n
6
.
In later works, in particular in his Miracula Arithmetica of 16227 and in his Academia Alge-
brae of 1631,8 starting from ﬁgurate numbers like polygonal numbers and pyramidal num-
bers, Faulhaber introduced other solid numbers, like prismatic or dodecahedronalnumbers.
This led to arithmetic progressions of higher order and their sums, in particular sums of
powers of natural numbers up to the exponent 17, for which he gave general formulae.
He applied various methods, among others a calculus of differences to get his formulae.9
7Johannes Faulhaber, Miracula Arithmetica. Zu der Continuation seines Arithmetischen Wegweisers gehörig.
Augsburg 1622 at David Franck.
8Johannes Faulhaber, Academia Algebrae. Darinnen die miraculossiche Inventiones/ zu den höchsten Cossen
weiters continuiert vnd proﬁtiert werden. Dergleichen zwar vor 15. Jahren den Gelehrten auff allen Vniver-
siteten in gantzem Europa proponiert, darauff continuiert, auch allen Mathematicis inn der gantzen weiten Welt
dediciert, aber bißhero/ noch nie so hoch/ biß auff die regulierte/ Zensicubiccubic Coß/ durch offnen Truck pub-
liciert worden. Welcher vorgesetzet ein kurtz Bedencken/ Was einer für Authores nach ordnung gebrauchen solle/
welcher die Coß fruchtbarlich/ bald/ auch fundamentaliter lehrnen vnd ergreiffen will. Augsburg 1631 at Johann
Ulrich Schönigk.
9See Ivo Schneider, Johannes Faulhaber (1580–1635)—Rechenmeister in einer Welt des Umbruchs, Birkhäuser
Basel 1993, chapters 5 and 7.

316
I. Schneider
Invariably the seven biblical numbers 2300, 1290, 1335, 666, 1260, 1600 and 1000, repeat-
edly interpreted ﬁguratively, played a special role. The fact that the great mathematicians
and philosophers of antiquity did not know anything about the biblical numbers, or at least
did not express themselves on the interpretation of them, was understood by Faulhaber as
an indication of God’s intention to hide such information until his time.10
His claims to be able to reveal the intentions of God by means of the interpretation of
the biblical numbers became explicit, at the latest, with his Newer Mathematischer Kun-
stspiegel (The New Artistic Mirror of Mathematics). In addition to the description of an
instrument for surveying and a special pair of compasses, this book contains speculation
about the biblical numbers. A Latin translation by Johannes Remmelin, a physician and
pupil of Faulhaber’s, appeared in the same year.11 Both publications prompted the repre-
sentatives of the Church authorities to object to the number speculations contained in them,
as had happened on earlier occasions. The printer of both treatises in Ulm was subsequently
urged to print no more work by Faulhaber or Remmelin in the future without permission
of the council.12 Apparently Faulhaber was only moderately impressed by the admonitions
of the clerical and secular authorities in Ulm and in 1613 he published Andeutung Einer
vnerhörten newen Wunderkunst (Indication of an Unheard New Miraculous Art), which
was printed in Nuremberg and contained an interpretation of the biblical numbers as pyra-
midal numbers. In this book Faulhaber gave the most concise explanation of the sense of
such number speculations. According to him, the biblical numbers are divine secrets and
divine testimonies that occur continuously. Moreover, God Almighty has used them to ﬁx
all relationships and measures in nature.13
Speciﬁcally, Faulhaber wanted to represent the biblical numbers as pyramidal numbers,
that is in the form

n + 1
3

d +

n + 1
2

,
where n and d are natural numbers n > 1. According to Faulhaber the biblical numbers
are very special; they are speciﬁcally indicated by God. Excluding the trivial possibility
n = 2 and d = c −3 by means of which every natural number c ⩾4 can be represented
as a pyramidal number, for a given biblical number b one should try stepwise whether
for the numbers n = 3,4,5,... there is a corresponding natural number d by means of
10Miracula Arithmetica, p. 30.
11Johannes Faulhaber, Speculum Polytechnum Mathematicum nouum (translated by Johannes Remmelin), Ulm
1612.
12Report of the Kirchenbaupﬂegamt for 11.02.1612.
13Johannes Faulhaber, Andeutung/ Einer vnerhörten newen Wunderkunst, Welche der Geist Gottes/ in etlichen
Prophetischen/ vnd Biblischen Geheimnuß Zahlen/ biß auff die letzte Zeit hat wöllen versigelt und verborgen hal-
ten. Darauß dann abzunehmen/ das Gott zu allen zeiten die Ordnung gehalten/ Daß er in den fürnembsten General
Propheceyungen/ über die Hauptverenderungen/ sich der Piramidal Zahlen gebraucht/ wann er eine gewisse Zeit
bestimmet., Augsburg 1632 at Johann Schultes, f. A IV r., in which Faulhaber gives Johannes Dobricius Sittanus,
Zeiterinnerer, 1612, f. 49 as source.

Between Rosicrucians and Cabbala—Johannes Faulhaber’s mathematics
317
Fig. 3. Triangular, quadrilateral and pyramidal numbers as depicted in Johannes Remmelin’s Mysterium Arith-
meticum (Courtesy of Birkhäuser Verlag).
which b can be represented as a pyramidal number. Most of the biblical numbers treated
by Faulhaber are divisible by 10. It is obvious that the choice of n = 4 yields the equation
10d + 10 = b
or
d = b −10
10
which gives for each b > 10 divisible by 10 a natural number d. This representation does
not hold for 666, which possesses (like all natural numbers ⩾10 that are not divisible by 4)
for n = 3 a non-trivial representation as a pyramidal number, in this case with d = 165.
Because there is for 666 only one non-trivial representation with n = 3 and d = 165, this
representation of 666 as a pyramidal number is unique. A similar result holds for the other
biblical numbers divisible by 10; they all permit a pyramidal representation of four levels
with a unique d.
3. Gog and Magog
In the same year 1613 another book written by Faulhaber appeared, Himlische gehaime
Magia Oder Newe Cabalistische Kunst/ vnd Wunderrechnung/ Vom Gog vnd Magog
(Heavenly Secret Magic or New Cabbalistic Art and Miraculous Calculus about Gog and

318
I. Schneider
Magog). It was published by Remmelin in Ulm and printed in Nuremberg. Faulhaber dedi-
cated the book to the Emperor Matthias and sent him a copy as a well-timed present, before
the beginning of the Reichstag. It is apparent from the dedication that Faulhaber expected
protection from the Emperor against his opponents, in particular in his hometown. Three
testimonies about technical inventions precede and hide the actual text. They were sup-
posed to point out to the Emperor and other “potentates” that Faulhaber was an inventor
and at the same time to identify Faulhaber as someone capable of interpreting the biblical
numbers. They show that Faulhaber wanted to place his cabbalistic interpretations on the
same level of usefulness and applicability as his technical inventions.
Faulhaber could have used the Emperor’s protection that he expected for his book be-
cause the representatives of the clerical authorities in Ulm appeared rather angry about
Faulhaber’s new thrust into the realm of adventurous number speculations. They accused
him of leaving the area of his actual competence as a mathematician and composing in an
inadmissible way a prophecy “from letters, numbers and sealed words”.14 He was ordered
to appear at the Dombauhütte in Ulm to be questioned and heard by the clergymen about
the sense of his statements and the authorisation to use notions like “magic”.15
In the preface and in the conclusion of his Himlische gehaime Magia (Heavenly Secret
Magic) Faulhaber claims that, unlike those who believe they can decipher such divine se-
crets with their common sense, he himself had learned something about the secrets hidden
in the “heavenly numbers” from God in person.
Here is a key to understanding the conﬂict between Faulhaber and his many critics.
Until the end Faulhaber emphasised the intentionally esoteric character of the “biblical
numbers”. If God had wanted man to be able to discover the secrets by means of common
sense, it would have been possible to decipher the numbers in the Book of Revelations
much earlier. This however, at least in Faulhaber’s view, was not the intention of God, who
used particular chosen individuals to decipher the secret meaning of the biblical numbers.
Such individuals had to be enlightened by God and, obviously, the result of the enlight-
enment lies outside the realm of human faculties. Faulhaber maintained that he belonged
to those enlightened by God, and this raised him—in his own estimation—above all ne-
cessity to supply explanations for the knowledge to which he had gained access. To most
of his contemporaries such a claim seemed unacceptable because they could not discover
in Faulhaber much or indeed anything at all which would have justiﬁed the claim. They
were moreover quite capable of giving everybody insightful explanations of the origin of
Faulhaber’s very vague utterances about the meaning of the biblical numbers. Faulhaber
was thus depicted as a charlatan or a misguided religious fanatic.
In the text of Himlische gehaime Magia (Heavenly Secret Magic), a booklet of 10 pages,
Faulhaber referred to the unsubstantiated necessity to assign by means of a “general key”
to every “heavenly miraculous number its philosophical algebraic weight” and by doing so
ﬁx certain measures of time, from which predictions of the occurrence of important events
can be deduced. He gave, moreover, a word calculus (Wortrechnung) relating not only to
one but to four alphabets, which he used to decipher a biblical saying that he “observed
through God’s grace” in different texts of the Old and New Testaments.16
14Report of the Kirchenbaupﬂegamt for 2.09.1613.
15Report of city council for 10.09.1613.
16“durch Göttliche Gnad observieret.”

Between Rosicrucians and Cabbala—Johannes Faulhaber’s mathematics
319
Only in 1619, the year in which the Emperor Matthias died, did Remmelin publish this
saying together with the required word calculus in an apology for Faulhaber, Sphyngis
Victor. The saying is: Gog and Magog, a high regent comes from the offspring of Japhet.17
In the biblical book Ezekiel Gog from the land of Magog leads at the end of time an army
of nations against the nation of Israel. After initial successes Gog is destroyed together
with his followers by God himself. In many of his Cabbalistic works Faulhaber refers to
Gog who, in the context of a very old Christian tradition, had assumed the traits of the
Antichrist.
4. Word calculus and signs
Faulhaber and his contemporaries often used a word calculus in which the letters of an al-
phabet are given numerical values and vice versa; it was part of a long tradition going back
at least to the secret Jewish teachings of the Cabbala. The goal of this word calculus, which
had been revived in the 16th and 17th centuries, was, among other things, the interpretation
of certain sayings by means of the assignment of numbers to the letters in them and, the
other way around, the hiding of names and sayings by means of numbers. A prominent
precursor of Faulhaber in Germany was Michael Stifel who, in 1532, in his anonymously
published Rechen Büchlein Vom End Christ, by means of his form of word calculus iden-
tiﬁed the Beast of the Apocalypse18 with Leo X, who was pope at the time that Luther
nailed his 95 theses to the door of the Castle Church in Wittenberg. Stifel, moreover, used
a suitable biblical text to predict the end of the world on October 18, 1533.
Stifel used the successive triangular numbers n+1
2
 for n = 1,2,3,...,23 for the 23
letters of the alphabet in order to interpret the Latin sentence id bestia leo (this animal is
[the pope] Leo), calculating the sum of the values of its letters, as the number 666, which
in its turn stands for the Beast of the Apocalypse. Stifel’s ideas were spread in Ulm by his
pupil Conrad Marchtaler who founded, in 1545, a successful school for arithmetic in this
town.19
The extent to which Faulhaber, who certainly knew very little, if anything at all, about the
tradition of the Jewish Cabbala, was inﬂuenced in his interpretations by Stifel, Marchtaler
and others, can no longer be established.
In the interplay of the very different mentalities that existed in the social microcosm of
the city of Ulm in the year before the outbreak of the Thirty Years’ War, Faulhaber was
undoubtedly dependent on a group of supporters composed of representatives of all social
ranks. This group was willing to interpret many observed events that were considered as
particularly striking as tokens sent by God and to exempt them from all attempts to explain
them rationally. Reports of such signs followed events that were experienced as particu-
larly dramatic, like the death of a beloved sovereign or the outbreak of a war. This holds
for the beginning of the Thirty Years’ War in 1618. The beginning of the year 1618 was
unpromising. The Emperor Matthias was very ill and hardly capable of taking care of gov-
ernment affairs. His death was expected soon. His cousin Ferdinand, who would succeed
17“Gog vnd Magog ein hoher Regent in Europa kompt auß Japheths Geschlecht.”
18Apocalypse 13, 18.
19Keefer (Footnote 1), p. 129.

320
I. Schneider
him and who had already been elected King of Bohemia in May 1617, was considered
to be a stirrer in the battle between the religious denominations. When in the summer of
1618 lightning set ﬁre to the tower of the castle of Preßburg, many contemporaries con-
sidered this to be a bad omen because the regalia of the Hungarian crown were kept in
the tower. Although the regalia could be saved and on July 1, 1618, as planned, Ferdinand
was crowned King of Hungary; on that same day the cardinal responsible for the imperial
politics, Cardinal Klesl, was almost killed. A bullet from a gun salute just missed him. In
spite of their lucky outcome, the events were interpreted as an unhappy omen, the more so
because less than three weeks later Ferdinand deprived Klesl of his power forever. Klesl
represented an obstacle to Ferdinand’s plans and he was put in prison.
Such tokens, in combination with many other signs—for example, the ﬁnding of strange
animals and human beings, rivers allegedly ensanguined, and the like—were ascribed by
many to the immediate intervention of God. God wanted, through these signs, to deliver
a message, the content of which, however, could only be understood by a chosen few.
Three years before his death, Faulhaber, who claimed for himself immediate access to the
interpretation of the signs sent by God, published the following text: Vernünfftiger Crea-
turen Weissagungen/ Das ist: Beschreibung eines Wunder Hirschs/ auch etlicher Heringen
vnd Fisch/ vngewohnlicher Signaturen vnd Characteren, so vnderschidlicher Orten gefan-
gen/ worden. Auß den gehaimen Zahlen deß Propheten Danielis/ vnd der Offenbarung S.
Johannis erklärt/ vnd was sie bedeuten möchten/ vermuthlich angezaigt. (Prophecies of
Reasonable Creatures That is: A Description of a Miraculous Deer and quite a few Her-
rings and Fish of unusual Signature and Character, caught on different Spots Explained
from the secret Numbers of the Prophet Daniel and the Revelation of Saint John and what
they may mean, presumably shown.)
Apparently he had published this treatise in connection with an expected meeting with
the Swedish king Gustav Adolf. Such a meeting took place when Faulhaber, together
with the burgomaster and some companions, visited Lauingen and was ordered to come
to Donauwörth in order, as an engineer, to talk to the king about fortiﬁcations. Faulhaber
used the opportunity to brief the king not only in this area but also to draw the king’s at-
tention to his interpretations of numbers, miracles and tokens. In this context he clearly
pointed out God’s intentions with respect to the decisive role of Gustav Adolf in the pre-
determined history of mankind. The treatise dedicated to Gustav Adolf was motivated by
a miraculous deer that was shot in June 1630, the year in which the “Midnight Lion”,20 as
Gustav Adolf was called, entered the war. The dimensions of this deer, for example, the
length of the antler, the size of the head and the lengths of the legs, measured by means
of a unit chosen by Faulhaber, yielded the biblical numbers, including 666. Faulhaber’s
interpretation of the miraculous deer implied that “a high regent” from the country of the
reindeer, with an army, would “as fast as a deer” penetrate the area where the deer was
shot. Faulhaber alluded to the extraordinary manoeuvrability and the impressive marching
time of the Swedish army, which left at the time a lasting impression.
Among the signs that were given most attention by the followers of Faulhaber were the
celestial phenomena because they belong to God’s immediate sphere of inﬂuence. To a
20Carlos Gilly, The ‘Midnight Lion’, the ‘Eagle’ and the ‘Antichrist’: Political, religious and chiliastic propa-
ganda in the pamphlets, illustrated broadsheets and ballads of the Thirty Years War in: Nederlands Archief voor
Kerkgeschiedenis 80, 2000, pp. 46–77.

Between Rosicrucians and Cabbala—Johannes Faulhaber’s mathematics
321
certain extent the events seen in the sky were viewed in direct relation with the events on
earth in the sense of the macrocosm–microcosm relationship as it was defended by the
followers of Paracelsus. Not only did many ordinary people see themselves as more or
less helplessly dependent on the events in the sky, but quite a few of the political actors,
like the imperial military commander Wallenstein, also made their decisions in accordance
with the celestial phenomena.
5. The Rosicrucian movement
The opposition between the followers of such interpreters of tokens as Faulhaber and their
opponents were intensiﬁed by the so-called Rosicrucian movement, triggered by the circu-
lation of the two ﬁrst Rosicrucian manifests, Fama Fraternitatis and Confessio Fraterni-
tatis, ﬁrst in the form of handwritten versions and, after 1614, in printed form.21 It is to this
day not known who wrote the Fama and the Confessio, although it is generally assumed
that the protestant theologian Johann Valentin Andreae, who worked in Württenberg at the
time, was party to it.
In both texts a brotherhood of the Rosicrucian cross is mentioned. In the Fama the his-
tory of the brotherhood is accompanied by references to the teachings of the brotherhood.
The basic tenor is a criticism of the established authorities like Aristotle in philosophy
and Galen in medicine. In order to read the only book that possessed authority, the book
of nature written by God, the Rosicrucians instead based themselves on neo-Pythagorean,
neo-Platonic and hermetic ideas, the microcosm–macrocosm correspondence in the har-
mony between man and nature, Paracelsus and the Cabbala. Numbers and their properties
are in this view attributed with extraordinary explanatory power. With the aid of God’s
grace the members of the original brotherhood had acquired knowledge about the book of
nature. The new generation of the brothers, who had rediscovered the grave of the founder
of the order, foresaw a new reformation of mankind on the basis of the knowledge found
in the book of nature and called upon the readers of the Fama, that they had written, to
express themselves with respect to this ﬁrst communication of the brotherhood.
The conglomerate of expectations expressed in the Fama was so extended that it led in
the period 1614–1620 to more than 200 known Rosicrucian publications. The impact of the
Fama and the next two Rosicrucian manifestos was not caused by the novelty of the ideas
contained in them. Many of the ideas, like the Cabbalistic or neo-Platonic body of thought,
the expectation of a more comprehensive reformation on the basis of a balance between
theology and science, the critical discussion of the rigid forms of scholastic science and
the idea of the creation of new forms of science that would lead to the actual solution
of real practical problems, can all be found in texts that had been published before and
independently of the Rosicrucian manifestos.
21Fama Fraternitatis, Oder Brüderschafft/ des Hochlöblichen Ordens des R. C. An die Häupter/ Stände und
Gelehrten Europae. In: Allgemeine vnd General Reformation der gantzen weiten Welt. Beneben der Fama Frater-
nitatis, Deß Löblichen Ordens des Rosenkreutzes/ an alle Gelehrte und Häupter Europae geschrieben: Auch einer
kurtzen Responsion, von dem Herrn Haselmeyer gestellet/ welcher deßwegen von den Jesuitern ist gefänglich
eingezogen/ und auff eine Galleren geschmiedet: Itzo öffentlich in Druck verfertiget/ und allen trewen Hertzen
communiciret worden. Kassel 1614, pp. 91–128 and Confessio Fraternitatis, Oder Bekanntnuß der löblichen
Bruderschafft deß hochgeehrten Rosen-Creutzes/ an die Gelehrten Europae geschrieben. In: ibidem, pp. 54–82.

322
I. Schneider
The success of the Fama was caused by the clever grouping of the expectations that
were fostered by completely different circles. These were only united in their dissatisfac-
tion with the after-effects of all forms of dogmatism. Also correspondingly multifaceted
were the reactions to the Rosicrucian manifestos; not surprisingly the group of opponents
consisted to a large extent of representatives of orthodox Protestantism. Some more or less
sensational legal proceedings initiated by representatives of the Protestant church in Würt-
temberg show that about 1620 the Protestant orthodoxy had succeeded in marginalising the
Rosicrucian movement as heterodox and at the same time assessing the presuppositions for
the use of the Cabbalistic, number-mystical and alchemistic elements in their construction
as irrational.
Such appraisal hardly inﬂuenced the self-conception of those attacked by the orthodoxy,
as two examples will show. The quite large number of mystics among the adherents of the
Rosicrucian movement who followed a Cabbalistic tradition were in general mathemati-
cally trained and, as far as their mathematics went, beyond the accusation of irrationality.
A statement about the goals of the Rosicrucians by the at times fervent follower of the
Rosicrucian movement, Daniel Mögling, in his Rosa Florescens,22 published in 1617 un-
der the pseudonym Florentinus de Valentia, makes clear what the starting points were for
the conﬂict with the orthodoxy. According to Daniel Mögling, the Rosicrucians abandon
a literal understanding of the Holy Scripture in order to read the “true book of life” with
the “eyes of the mind” and interpret it in harmony with the Bible. The realm of everything
that is accessible to human reason can only be transcended with God’s help. However, the
means needed in order to assure oneself of God’s help are no longer rational; moreover,
in order to be able to effect God’s help the special grace of God is required, which is not
bestowed on everybody but only on a few.
Exactly on the question of the means to acquire human knowledge and the scope of such
knowledge, the roads of the protestant orthodoxy and the Rosicrucian heterodoxy sepa-
rated. While for the orthodoxy human knowledge was limited to the literal understanding
of the Bible and a rational explanation of nature compatible with such understanding, the
followers of the Rosicrucian movement were convinced of the fact that the revelations in
the Bible are at least partially written in a symbolic language and that the rather limited
sphere of rational knowledge of nature can only be transcended with God’s help. If the
symbolic language of the Holy Scripture is interpreted in the right way, it will not contra-
dict what the eyes of reason see in the book of nature and what is on the pages that can
only be interpreted by means of God’s grace.
The followers of the Rosicrucian movement and their opponents can be viewed as rep-
resentatives of two mentalities typical of this time. The orthodox Protestants on the side of
the opponents represent the mentality of independence that is reached socially by means of
personal responsibility and is reached in the area of knowledge by restricting the means of
acquiring knowledge to the activity of the human mind. From their point of view God had
created the world in accordance with a plan accessible to human understanding. It seemed
agreeable to God that man should study the plan of the creation and explain as natural phe-
nomena in the sense of the plan of the creation the many events seen by others as miracles
brought about by God. This mentality corresponded to a high preparedness for competi-
22Florentinus de Valentia (Pseudonym for Daniel Mögling), Rosa Florescens, no place, 1617, f. 10 v.

Between Rosicrucians and Cabbala—Johannes Faulhaber’s mathematics
323
tion and conﬂict. The mentality of the followers of the Rosicrucian movement was char-
acterised by a longing for harmony in a world without conﬂicts, that would be guaranteed
by unselﬁsh labour for God and mankind in combination with access to new transcendent
knowledge in possession of a group of chosen ones; these exceptionally gifted individu-
als would take over the responsibility that according to the orthodoxy everyone must bear
individually.
From the beginning the texts of the Rosicrucians appealed to Faulhaber and they con-
ﬁrmed his ideas in many regards; like many other followers of the Rosicrucian movement
he tried for years in vain to get in touch with the legendary brotherhood of Rosicrucians.23
An anonymous Latin text published in 1615, of which Johannes Remmelin, Faulhaber’s
pupil and friend, later claimed to be the author, was one of such futile attempts.24 This
text was like a birdcall directed explicitly to the “above all enlightened and highly laudable
men of the Fama of the Rosicrucian brotherhood”. This did not protect Faulhaber, during
the most intense disputes about the meaning of the comet of 1618, against being seen by
the authorities as himself a member of the brotherhood. His booklet on the interpretation
of the comet, Fama siderea nova, in which he again manipulated the number 666, and of
which the title began with the word “Fama”, like the ﬁrst of the Rosicrucian texts, was
connected in Ulm with the suspiciously watched meetings of the Rosicrucian movement in
which Faulhaber, at least from the point of view of the church authorities in Ulm, played
a signiﬁcant part.25 They had, for example, discovered that Faulhaber had secretly met up
to 70 people, called in town Rosenkreutz Brueder (Rosicrucian brothers), that apart from
such Conventicula communicated with each other in writing.
6. The comet of 1618
The special attention that was given to Faulhaber by the clerical and municipal authorities
was sparked off by his interpretation of the comet of 1618, which had made big waves.
In 1618 Johannes Kepler had observed three comets that were predominantly identiﬁed
as one and the same heavenly body.26 The ﬁrst was from the end of August to the end
of September only faintly visible and was apparently ignored by most people, as was the
second, albeit not by Faulhaber. A third comet, easily visible to everybody, was only seen
in November of 1618. From both the Catholic and Protestant pulpits sermons about its
signiﬁcance were delivered and in a ﬂood of leaﬂets and treatises the astronomers and self-
proclaimed experts on comets attempted to satisfy the curiosity of an intensely interested
public.
The authors of the many texts on comets can be classiﬁed into two groups on the basis
of their views. The ﬁrst group, to which Faulhaber and most followers of the Rosicrucian
movement belonged, viewed the comet as a “preacher of penance” (Bußprediger) put by
23Letter by Rudolf von Bunau for 21./31. January 1618 (Stadtarchiv Ulm).
24[Johannes Remmelin], Mysterium Arithmeticum, without place, 1615.
25Report of the Kirchenbaupﬂegamt in Ulm for 27. July, 1619, f. 647.
26Johannes Kepler, De Cometis Libelli Tres, Augsburg 1619; see Johannes Kepler, Gesammelte Werke, Bd. VIII,
München 1963, pp. 129–262, in particular p. 177; cf. Werner Landgraf, Über die Bahn des zweiten Kometen von
1618, Sterne 61, 1985, pp. 351–353.

324
I. Schneider
God on the “heavenly pulpit” (Kanzel des Himmels) in order to announce God’s wrath
and punishment if men did not abandon their sinful ways. The other group saw its task in
particular as appeasing the population that was already afﬂicted with many problems, need
and fears. Its representatives were concerned to explain the comet as a natural, for example
atmospheric, phenomenon without further signiﬁcance. The critics of Faulhaber from the
second group ﬁrst of all accused him of claiming without any justiﬁcation the arrival of
the comet, two months late, as a conﬁrmation of his prediction. One of Faulhaber’s friends
objected to this, on the ground that in addition to Faulhaber other “credible learned folks”
(glaubwürdige gelehrte Leute) had already seen a comet in September 1618, although it
was not very visible, and because of that an irresistible “power was assigned” (Kraft erteilt
wurde) by God to Faulhaber’s prediction, made much in advance in a calendar for the year
1618, that a comet would appear on September 1.
The Protestant Free Imperial Town of Ulm (Freie Reichsstadt Ulm) had ordered this
one-page calendar for the year 1618 with the intention of giving it to the civil servants
of the town. Among the special references and predictions in this calendar was the entry
“comet” on September 1. The small size of the entry on a page that had to refer to all the
days of the year and the very much restricted distribution of the calendar were not suitable
for making the public at large aware of Faulhaber’s prediction. Faulhaber had informed
his friend in Reutlingen, Matthäus Beger, of his observations of the comet he had seen in
August, in a letter dated August 26, 1618, with the intention that these observations be sent
to Professor Michael Maestlin in Tübingen. Beger had only learned from Tübingen27 that
in Tübingen and its environment such a comet could not be seen before November; this
meant that Faulhaber had been the ﬁrst to discover the comet in the sky.
Faulhaber saw no restriction on the validity of his prediction in the fact that the comet
was observed later in Tübingen. In his Fama Siderea Nova, published in 1619, under the
pseudonym Julius Gerhardinus Goldtbeeg from Jena, by Daniel Mögling, Faulhaber inter-
preted the observation without any restrictions as a conﬁrmation of his special God-given
faculties to interpret the comet as a token sent by God. The main opponents of Faulhaber
in the discussions following the appearance of the Fama were the principal of the grammar
school in Ulm, Johann Baptist Hebenstreit, and one of his teachers, the Praeceptor Zim-
bertus Wehe, who tried to hide behind a pseudonym in his two pamphlets written against
Faulhaber. Hebenstreit and Wehe were acquaintances of Faulhaber, who had visited him at
home up to the time of their criticism of the Fama. In particular the about-face of Heben-
streit came rather as a surprise. Faulhaber had given Hebenstreit lessons with respect to the
observation of the comet(s) of 1618 and Hebenstreit had corrected the text of the Fama as
well. With his treatise Cometen Fragstuck (The Question of the Comet) Hebenstreit wished
to exploit the general interest in the appearances of the comet(s) as quickly as possible. A
mistake he made in the booklet, confusing Mars and Arcturus, was apparently quickly dis-
covered by one of his competitors in the market of texts on comets and used as a basis
for a destructive criticism of Hebenstreit’s text. Hebenstreit’s view of the essence and the
location of the comet provoked fairly lively disagreement.
Already in his Cometen Fragstuck Hebenstreit had asserted, without mentioning Faul-
haber, that his eyes were “too foolish” (zu blöd) to see on September 1, 1618 a comet
27Matthäus Beger, Problema Astronomicum: Die Situs Der Sternen Planetarum oder Cometarum zu observirn,
without place, 1619, f. D I v.

Between Rosicrucians and Cabbala—Johannes Faulhaber’s mathematics
325
Fig. 4. Faulhaber’s prediction of the 1618 comet depicted in his Fama Siderea Nova of 1619 (Courtesy of
Birkhäuser Verlag).
that would only be visible much later.28 In his second Latin booklet of 161929 Hebenstreit
extensively attacked the possibility of predicting the appearance of comets on the basis
of Cabbalistic number speculations. At the same time he criticised the contents of Fama
siderea nova, again without mentioning Faulhaber. Hebenstreit and Wehe pointed out that
Faulhaber had taken the prediction of the comet from a publication of the imperial math-
ematician and astronomer Johannes Kepler. Kepler had in his Prognosticon for the year
1618, in a section about diseases, granted the possibility of the appearance of a comet, be-
28Johann Baptist Hebenstreit, Cometen Fragstuck/ auß der reinen Philosophia, Bey Anschawung, deß in diesem
1618. Jahr/ in dem Obern Lufft schwebenden Cometen, erläutert/ vnd auff etlicher Gelehrten vnd Vngelehrten
Gegehren/ an Tag gegeben. Ulm 1618.
29Johann Baptist Hebenstreit, De Cabala Log-Arithmo-Geometro-Mantica, Ulm 1619.

326
I. Schneider
cause since 1607 no comet had been observed.30 Although at the time it was not yet known
that comets return after a period characteristic for their orbit, Kepler obviously assumed,
on the basis of the astronomical observations he was familiar with, that comets would ap-
pear with more or less regularity. Kepler’s argument was based on experience and was
suitable, although he could not explain the observed regularity, and was written so as to
make comets appear as something natural and not as something wonderfully supernatural.
Faulhaber was, moreover, familiar with Kepler’s Ephemeris for 1618, in which for Sep-
tember 1618 (Julian calendar) the ecliptical longitude of Mars—calculated with reference
to the meridian through Uraniborg, Tycho Brahe’s observatory on the island of Hiven—and
the ecliptical latitude of the moon as well, were ﬁxed at 3◦33′.31 Wehe followed Heben-
streit32 and connected in his reconstruction of the background for Faulhaber’s prediction
of a comet in 1618 the possibility of the appearance of a comet that Kepler had mentioned
without a more precise indication of the time, with the fact that the longitude of Mars and
the latitude of the moon had the same value in the Ephemeris for 1618 on September 1 (old
style).33 Subsequently, said Wehe, Faulhaber had against all reason and every scientiﬁc
rule interpreted the double occurrence of this value 3◦33′ as the double occurrence of the
number 333, that is as the holy number 666 and construed this as a divine indication of the
occurrence of a special event.
The testimonies of Hebenstreit and Wehe about the way in which Faulhaber proceeded
to predict the comet are completely in accordance with the style of the Cabbalistic specu-
lations Faulhaber engaged in elsewhere; neither Faulhaber, nor any of his defenders have
contradicted this point of the two critics. This holds for both Vorläufer einer Rechtfer-
tigung Faulhabers (Forerunners of a Justiﬁcation of Faulhaber), a text written under the
pseudonym of Justus Cornelius in defence of Faulhaber,34 and Fortsetzung der Rechtferti-
gung Faulhabers (Continuation of the Justiﬁcation of Faulhaber), which appeared subse-
quently, written by an author who used the pseudonym C. Euthymius de Brusca.35 Any-
way, both texts refer explicitly to the speciﬁcations of the positions of Mars and Kepler’s
Ephemeris for the year 1618.36
C. Euthymius de Brusca ﬁrst asserted that Faulhaber saw Kepler’s calendar for 1618,
shown to him by Hebenstreit, in which a comet was mentioned, only in December 1618,
long after the appearance of the comet.37 A few pages later, after admitting the correctness
30Quoted from Justus Cornelius, Vindiciarvm Favlhaberianarvm Prodromus, Ulm 1619, p. 17, from Johannes
Kepler, New vnnd Alter Schreib Calender sambt dem Lauff vnd Aspecten der Planeten auff das Jahr Christi M.
DC. XVIII. Prognosticum Astrologicum auff das Jahr MDCXVIII. Von natürlicher Inﬂuentz der Sternen in diese
Nidere Welt. Linz 1618.
31Johannes Kepler, Ephemeris nova Motuum Coelestium ad annum vulgaris aerae M D C XVIII. Ex obserua-
tionibus potissimum Tychonis Brahei, Hypothesibus Physicis, & Tabulis Rvdolphinis; Nova etiam formâ disposita,
ut Calendarii Scriptorii usum praebere possit. Ad Meridianum Vranopyrgicum in freto Cimbrico, quem proximè
circumstant Pragensis, Lincensis, Venetus, Romanus. Linz (no year), in: Johannes Kepler, Gesammelte Werke,
Bd. XI, 1, München 1983, pp. 75–94, in particular p. 91.
32Johann Baptist Hebenstreit, De Cabala, Ulm 1619, p. 26.
33[Zimbertus Wehe] alias Hisaias sub cruce, Expolitio famae sidereae novae Faulhaberianae. Ulm 1619, p. 23.
34Justus Cornelius, Vindiciarvm Favlhaberianarvm Prodromus, Ulm 1619.
35C. Euthymius de Brusca, Vindiciarvm Favlhaberianarvm. Continuatio. Moltzheim 1620.
36Justus Cornelius, Vindiciarvm Favlhaberianarvm Prodromus, p. 13 and C. Euthymius de Brusca, Vindiciarvm
Favlhaberianarvm. Continuatio. p. 24.
37C. Euthymius de Brusca, Vindiciarvm Favlhaberianarvm. Continuatio. p. 18.

Between Rosicrucians and Cabbala—Johannes Faulhaber’s mathematics
327
of Wehe’s description, C. Euthymius de Brusca attempts to paper over the cracks with the
statement that Faulhaber owed the discovery, that 666 is a “tessaracondexagonal number”
with the square root 6 and at the same time a prismatic number on the basis of a nonagon
(polygon with 9 sides) with the same square root, to the “speculation and consideration”
(Speculation vnd Betrachtung) of the longitude and latitude of, respectively, Mars and the
Moon for September 1, 1618.38 As a matter of fact, 666 can be represented as a polygonal
number of square root 6 corresponding to a 46-gon, that is as sixth term of an arithmetic
sequence of the second order with ﬁrst term 1 and difference 44, and also as a prismatic
number of square root 6 corresponding to a nonagon, that is as six times the sixth term of
an arithmetic sequence of the second order with ﬁrst term 1 and difference 7.
However, the two representations offer no connection with Kepler’s value of 3◦33′ both
the longitude of Mars and the latitude of the Moon on September 1, 1618. After all, it
is very probable that Hebenstreit and Wehe were right with their account of the way in
which Faulhaber found his prediction of a comet; it even looks as if Hebenstreit and Wehe,
who both, before the conﬂict about the comet of 1618, had a friendly relationship with
Faulhaber, did not even have to speculate about Faulhaber’s method, but had learned about
it directly or via intermediaries.
When the clerical establishment felt that its authority could be eroded by “prophets”
like Faulhaber, Hebenstreit, using his two texts on comets to attack Faulhaber, induced
the Church to start an investigation of Faulhaber’s theses. Thus in a colloquium in the
autumn of 1619, not open to the public, an attempt was made to answer the main question:
whether Faulhaber’s prediction of a comet was the result of divine inspiration or of his own
speculations. Faulhaber’s testimony that he owed his knowledge about biblical numbers
only to his zeal, in particular when studying arithmetic, and prayer, saved him from further
sanctions.
When it became known that, despite his promise of the beginning of 1621, Faulhaber
had talked again about Gog and Magog, absolution after confession was denied to him.
He then obtained absolution from another confessor by misleading him. Moreover, he took
Holy Communion in spite of repeated admonitions by Dr. Dieterich not to participate; the
result was that he was excluded from the Holy Communion by the clerical authorities in
Ulm.39 Things escalated until the end of the year 1621; at this time the accusation of a
conscious disesteem for and deception of the authorities played a decisive role. Moreover,
in the same year, a text appeared40 anonymously, in which the disciplinary actions against
Faulhaber by the administration were vehemently attacked.41 The authorities saw them-
selves prompted to proceed more strongly against Faulhaber, who denied all knowledge
about the text and its author. Two intercepted letters from Faulhaber to his friend the physi-
cian Dr. Verbezius and the testimonies of the nobleman Hans Ludwig Schad, who had
associated with Faulhaber and Verbezius,42 fuelled the distrust and the suspicion against
38Ibidem, p. 24.
39Reports of the Kirchenbaupﬂegamt for 20. and 23.03.1621.
40Gründliche Warhaffte Erzehlung Was in den Etlich Jahr wehrenden aber noch nit zu End gebrachten Stritten
zwischen Johann Faulhaber und Gegentheil sich verloffen, von einer eifrigen Christlichen Persohn getreulich an
Tag geben, o. O. 1621; one suspects that David Verbez was the author of this text.
41Jakob Neubronner, manuscript of a biography of Faulhaber preserved in Stadtarchiv Ulm, p. 22 f.
42Report of the city council for 21.11.1621.

328
I. Schneider
Faulhaber so strongly that it was considered justiﬁed to put Faulhaber in prison.43 The in-
tention was to question Faulhaber about the divine enlightenments that he had repeatedly
claimed to have had and his participation in the brotherhood of the Rosicrucians.44 How-
ever, Faulhaber absconded from imprisonment before Christmas Eve of the same year by
ﬂeeing to Augsburg,45 where he was also excluded from Holy Communion by the authori-
ties. After Johann Fugger the Elder and others from Augsburg had pleaded for him in Ulm,
the authorities in Ulm promised not to imprison Faulhaber again.46 Faulhaber returned to
Ulm in March 1622, only in order to escape again to Tübingen for three months, having
disobeyed another invitation by the authorities to exculpate himself at the Dombauhütte.47
Theologians of the University of Tübingen told Faulhaber that the Greek text of the
New Testament, there where the biblical number 666 occurs, was corrupt.48 This may
have turned the balance, so that Faulhaber after long hesitations could return to Ulm at the
beginning of 1624. After a discussion and reconciliation with representatives of the church
he signed a profession of faith that was acceptable for the clerical authorities in Ulm.49
7. Pyrgoidal numbers
Although in Faulhaber’s later texts the biblical numbers in general are taken as a starting
point for mathematical developments and discoveries, they show that he never gave up
his conviction that he possessed special abilities for the interpretation of the “heavenly”
numbers in the Book of Revelation, though he had admitted he had erred. In the Miracula
Arithmetica Faulhaber ﬁrst deﬁned so-called tower or pyrgoidal numbers,50 that represent
the number of lattice points of a tower built from a prism and a pyramid with the same base,
by adding pyramidal and prismatic numbers or “columns” of which the bases are in each
case equal but arbitrary polygonal numbers. This enabled him to form biblical numbers
like 666, 1600 or 1000 as sums of pyrgoidal numbers by appropriately choosing d, that is,
the number of sides of the fundamental polygon minus 2.
As soon as one knows that there exists for a biblical number a representation as a polyg-
onal, pyramidal or pyrgoidal number, or as a sum of such numbers, corresponding to a
certain d, one can determine the second variable n, the number of terms or, in Faulhaber’s
terminology, the square root of the polygonal number. This determination requires, for ex-
ample, in the case of a polygonal number the solution of a quadratic equation and, in the
case of a pyramidal or pyrgoidal number, the solution of a cubic equation.
In his next step Faulhaber attempts to represent the “holy” numbers as pyramidal num-
bers on the basis of generalised polygonal numbers. By the additional condition that the
individual terms of the sequence that ends with the given “holy” number must correspond
43Reports of the city council for 17., 19. and 20.12.1621.
44Report of the city council for 6.04.1621.
45Report of the city council for 24.12.1621.
46Report of the city council for 20.03.1622.
47Report of the Kirchenbaupﬂegamt for 15.05.1622.
48Letter from Faulhaber to Sebastian Kurz of 20.02.1623 (BN Paris).
49Report of the Kirchenbaupﬂegamt for 9.02.1624.
50Miracula Arithmetica, pp. 41–43, Chapter 35.

Between Rosicrucians and Cabbala—Johannes Faulhaber’s mathematics
329
with all the letters of a given alphabet, Faulhaber can assume n as given and d as to be
determined. On the basis of, for example, the German alphabet, the ﬁrst pyramidal number
corresponds to the letter a, and the given “holy” number corresponds to the last letter. With
the Latin, Hebrew and Arabic alphabets Faulhaber proceeds analogously.
Since a pyramidal number belonging to a polygonal number with the basis n can be
expressed as follows:

n + 1
3

d +

n + 1
2

,
and n is given for a given alphabet, this yields
d =
	
b −

n + 1
2

:

n + 1
3

,
where b is a biblical or “holy” number. In contrast to the case of the proper polygonal
numbers, where d is always necessarily a natural number, d can now be a positive rational
number. Faulhaber gives four examples that are based on the German, Latin and Arabic
alphabets, that is with n = 24, 23 and 29, and concern four different biblical numbers.
In a last generalisation Faulhaber also admits irrational differences d, by requiring that
the nth term in the sequence of sums of correspondingly generalised pyrgoidal numbers
equals a given biblical number. With it Faulhaber released himself by means of a formal
arithmetic–algebraic generalisation from the concrete geometric notions that are the basis
of the formation of the polygonal, pyramidal and pyrgoidal numbers. In particular, in his
Miracula Arithmetica Faulhaber demonstrated his ability to formulate amazing generali-
sations. These generalisations not only concerned the application of the cossic notation to
statements about binomial coefﬁcients or power series for arbitrary natural numbers, but
affected his entire mathematical work, as the 3-dimensional theorem of Pythagoras illus-
trates.
If one cuts off a corner from a cube and puts it down, the result is a triangular pyramid of
which the three faces that meet at the top are mutually perpendicular. In this situation the
theorem that was phrased by Faulhaber in his Ingenieurs-Schul (Engineering School) of
163051 holds: in all such pyramids the square of the base equals the sum of the squares of
the three other faces. Faulhaber had already given the 3-dimensional theorem of Pythago-
ras in the Miracula Arithmetica of 1622. There,52 restricting himself to pyramids with
an equilateral base, Faulhaber had taken the number 666 as the length of the legs of the
three mutually perpendicular isosceles triangular faces and shown that the square of the
base equals the sum of the squares of the three other faces. Not satisﬁed with amazing his
readers with the equality of the two calculated numbers, Faulhaber subsequently, without
explanation or proof,53 asserted that the same is true for all pyramids with three mutually
perpendicular faces. Faulhaber pays no attention to the fact that the statement of the general
validity of the relation that he had demonstrated, in the special case of isosceles triangular
51p. 153.
52pp. 73–76.
53p. 75.

330
I. Schneider
faces with legs of length 666, annuls the allegedly exceptional position of this number,
because he could have demonstrated the theorem in any particular case. This argument,
however, would not have disturbed his followers. They interpreted the use of the very spe-
cial biblical number 666 as an indication that the secret of the 3-dimensional theorem of
Pythagoras, that, after antiquity, in principle could have been found by any mathematician,
was intentionally revealed by God to Faulhaber, who found the theorem with 666 as test
case.
A section in the second part of the Ingenieurs-Schul, which appeared together with the
third and fourth part in Ulm in 1633 and in which problems of fortiﬁcation are treated,
shows that Faulhaber on various occasions extended his manipulations with the biblical
numbers, so central to his self-imposed status as a prophet, into the area of technology.
In chapter 13 of the second part under the title “About a wonderful fortress” (Von einer
wunderbahrlichen Fortressen) Faulhaber deals with the construction of a non-regular for-
tiﬁcation that results in the construction of a non-regular hexagon inscribed in a circle of
which the edges sequentially are proportional to the following biblical numbers54
2300,
1600,
1290,
1000,
666,
1260,
and 1335.
Until the plague of the year 1635 ended his life Faulhaber remained faithful to his con-
victions as an exponent of a mentality of which the representatives had already been pro-
nounced outsiders by the Protestant church in the 1620s. Even more effective was the
exclusion of Faulhaber and his Cabbalistic speculations on the profane level by the father
of early rationalism, Réné Descartes, who, according to uncorroborated reports, stayed in
Ulm in the winter of 1619–1620, at the climax of the quarrel about the prediction of the
comet. With Descartes the representatives of a mentality that suited the protestant ortho-
doxy, could ﬁnally establish themselves as part of a development that led to the Enlighten-
ment.
54Several authors treated the calculation of the radius of the circumference: Johann Melder in a letter to Faul-
haber of 16.08.1629 (Stadtarchiv Ulm) and in the 19th century August Ferdinand Möbius (Ueber die Gleichun-
gen, mittelst welcher aus den Seiten eines in einen Kreis zu beschreibenden Vielecks der Halbmesser des Kreises
und die Fläche des Vielecks gefunden werden, in: Crelle’s Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik
3, 1828, pp. 5–34) and Siegmund Günther (Über das irreguläre Siebeneck Faulhabers, in: Sitzungs-Berichte der
physikalisch-medizinischen Societät in Erlangen, 1874, Heft 6). Faulhaber only gave the result of his calculation,
which did not differ much from MELDER’s, but not his method.

CHAPTER 17
Mathematics and the Divine: Athanasius Kircher
Eberhard Knobloch
Institut für Philosophie, Wissenschaftstheorie, Wissenschafts- und Technikgeschichte,
Technische Universität Berlin, Ernst Reuterplatz 7, D-10587 Berlin, Germany
E-mail: eberhard.knobloch@tu-berlin.de
Contents
1. Biographical introduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 333
2. God and the rational foundation of music . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 333
3. The rules of the divine, combinatorial art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 335
4. The world as God’s organ
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 338
5. Universal science as an imitation of God’s art
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 339
6. Mystical arithmetic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 341
7. Mathematical theology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 343
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 346
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
331


Mathematics and the divine: Athanasius Kircher
333
1. Biographical introduction
Athanasius Kircher (1602–1680) was one of the most famous polyhistors of the Baroque
period, one of the most important Lullists of his time, that is an adherent of Ramón Lull’s
(about 1235–1315) ideas. In 1618, Kircher was admitted as a novice to the German Jesuit
College at Paderborn. After many travels and various appointments he became professor
of mathematics at the College of Rome in 1638. After some eight years he resigned from
this post and devoted himself to independent studies until his death.
Thirty-three monographs appeared during his lifetime dealing with nearly everything,
including humanities, natural sciences and religion. Scientiﬁc research was no end in itself
for him or for many of his contemporaries, but was the understanding of God’s perfection.
Kircher never envisioned any separation of science from religion.
2. God and the rational foundation of music
Using a quantitative-mathematical approach to being, the Baroque period saw a numerical
foundation to all existence. This included music, whose own foundation was mathematical
in those days. Solomon’s apocryphal saying that God ordered all according to measure,
number and weight (Wisdom 11: 20), is paraphrased again and again in musical text books
of the Baroque period.
Order is the fundamental law of music, too. This applies especially to Kircher’s tenth
work which appeared in 1650, one of the most voluminous works he ever published:
Musurgia universalis, Universal musical art, or great art of consonance and dissonance,
subdivided into ten books, by which the whole doctrine and philosophy of notes and the
science of theoretical and practical music are treated with the greatest versatility. The
wonderful forces and effects of the consonance and dissonance in the world and even in
the whole of nature are revealed and proven by an equally new and unknown exhibition
of the various examples. This is done with regard to the individual practical applications
as well in almost every faculty, especially in philology, mathematics, physics, mechanics,
medicine, politics, metaphysics, theology.1
Already the Baroque title makes clear that consonance and dissonance were not only
musical but also universal categories of philosophy. All natural or mental processes are
dominated by agreement or disagreement (“consensus” or “dissensus”), by concord or dis-
cord (“concordia” or “discordia”). The musical equivalent of these pairs of notions were
consonance and dissonance. In his Magnet or on the magnetical art (Rome 1641), Kircher
had elaborated his understanding of a universal science for the ﬁrst time, his magnetic phi-
losophy. The force of magnetism became the key for his understanding of all processes in
the world.
His Universal musical art shows how a rational conception of music, which makes num-
ber the determining principle of music and of its effects, could occur together with a re-
1Musurgia universalis sive ars magna consoni et dissoni in X libros digesta. Qua Universa Sonorum doctrina, et
Philosophia, Musicaeque tam Theoricae, quam practicae scientia, summa varietate traditur; admirandae Consoni,
et Dissoni, in mundo, adeoque Universa Natura vires effectusque, uti nova, ita peregrina variorum speciminum
exhibitione ad singulares usus, tum in omni poene facultate, tum potissimum in Philologia, Mathematica, Physica,
Mechanica, Medicina, Politica, Metaphysica, Theologia, aperiuntur et demonstrantur.

334
E. Knobloch
Fig. 1. Athanasius Kircher (1602–1680).
ligious conception of harmony. Though it taught the universal harmony of the world, it
explicitly rejected Kepler’s mathematics based harmony of the world.
In the frontispiece, the symbol of the holy Trinity is surrounded by the nine choirs of
angels who sing a 36-part canon and are enlightened by the Trinity’s rays. Musica is sitting
on the world sphere holding Apollo’s lyre and the panpipes of Marsyas. Pythagoras points
with his right hand to his famous theorem, and with his left to the blacksmiths whose
hammers, ringing on the anvil, allegedly led him to discover the relation of tone to weight.
The muse is surrounded by musical instruments.
The outstanding importance of music for the Baroque period consisted in the possibility
of transferring its laws to the harmonical structure of the world construction. God’s creation
became recognisable by analogical thinking where the fundamental notion was number.
The world was a universal realisation of God’s music. Or the other way around: number
was God’s instrument in order to create the world. Tones were—by Kircher’s deﬁnition—
sounding, harmonical numbers. The beauty of divine and human music consisted in the
order, that is in the composition, combination, and arrangement of tones or sounding num-
bers (“numeri sonori”): to compose was identical with to combine. God was the ﬁrst to
practice this combinatorial art when he created the world. God was not only the ﬁrst com-
binatorialist; his combinatorial activity is unlimited.

Mathematics and the divine: Athanasius Kircher
335
Fig. 2. Frontispiece of Kircher’s Musurgia Universalis, Book I.
3. The rules of the divine, combinatorial art
Analogies and combinatorial art thus characterised Kircher’s universal science. For that
reason, he was deeply interested in the rules of that divine art and studied them in the
eighth book of his Universal musical art in great detail.
The book is entitled The eighth book of the great art of consonance and dissonance, that
is the wonderful musical art, a new, recently invented musical–arithmetical skill, by which
everyone is able to acquire in a short time a profound knowledge of composing, even if he
knows nothing about music.2 It is divided into four parts:
(1) the combinatorial musical art,
(2) the rhythmic or poetical musical art,
(3) the practice of “song-building musical numbers” (musarithmi melothetici),
(4) the mechanical musical art or the various transpositions of certain “musical-
arithmetical columns”.
2Artis magnae consoni, et dissoni liber octavus de musurgia miriﬁca hoc est ars nova musarithmica recen-
ter inventa, qua quivis etiam quamtumvis Musicae imperitus, ad perfectam componendi notitiam brevi tempore
pertingere potest.

336
E. Knobloch
In detail greater than anywhere else Kircher explained some fundamental combinatorial
rules and operations in the ﬁrst part. The second part applies these rules to rhythms, that is
notes and metrical sequences of syllables or metrical feet. The third part explains Kircher’s
new musical art, which consisted in an artistic composition of song-ordering columns.
However this composition is done, it will result in a new harmony. The fourth part explains
the use of a musical–arithmetical box. Kircher’s message is clear: to compose means to
combine, it is a mathematical activity. Not the idea matters but the disposition, elaboration
of notes, which are based on rules.
As usual Kircher did not reveal his sources, though he completely depended on Marin
Mersenne’s two great monographs on music theory, the French Universal Harmony and
the Latin Books on Harmony. Both works had appeared in 1636. He even used Mersenne’s
number-examples 9 and 22.
Thus he explained permutations, combinations or unordered selections, and arrange-
ments or ordered selections. Though he did not discuss all of Mersenne’s combinatorial
problems, he still presented remarkable knowledge of combinatorics. It is worthwhile con-
sidering in more detail. Kircher wanted to demonstrate “the force of numbers” (vis nu-
merorum), the huge variety of possible permutations and selections of relatively few, say n
elements which constitutes the universal harmony of God’s creation.
The number P(n,n) of permutations without repetitions of n pairwise distinct elements
is calculated by means of
Rule 1:
P(n,n) = 1 ···n = n!
(“n factorial”)
and illustrated among others by the word-examples “ora” and “amen”, which admit 3! = 6
and 4! = 24 permutations, respectively. Kircher presented the factorials from 1! to 24! (the
latter is a number of 24 digits).
The number of permutations becomes smaller if one element of the n elements can be
repeated k times, because it is
Rule 2:
n!
k!
(division rule).
Kircher’s word-examples were “Maria”, “ala”, and “Amara”, which admit 5!
2! = 120
2 = 60,
6
2 = 3, and 120
6 = 20 permutations, respectively.
Mersenne had explained that there is one permutation of say nine equal notes. Kircher
understood the notion of “mutatio”, permutation, in the strict sense of the word, and as-
serted that there is no permutation at all of n equal elements. He did not notice that this
assertion contradicted the division rule taken over from Mersenne.
Hence, he elaborated the following table:
1
2
3
4
Sequence of
Combinations of things
Combinations of things
Combinations of things
different things
which are all different
where 2 are equal
where 3 are equal
I
0
II
2
0
III
6
3
0
etc.

Mathematics and the divine: Athanasius Kircher
337
It corresponds to the topic of his book that most of the following examples are taken
from musical theory. Kircher discussed the more general problem that several of n notes are
repeated. Mersenne had systematically studied all different types of repetitions regarding
a certain number n like 9. This procedure recalls Lull who had selected nine fundamental
notions for his language theory. In modern terms, he looked for the multinomial numbers
Rule 3:

n
n1n2 ···np

=
n!
n1!n2!···np!,
where n1 + n2 + ··· + np = n, ni ⩾1, i = 1,...,p.
The equation represents a partition of n. It means with regard to permutations with rep-
etition that there are p different elements. The ith element is repeated ni times. For ex-
ample, there are thirty different partitions of 9; hence there are thirty different types of
repetitions on the understanding that nine elements are combined. While Mersenne had
actually considered all these types, Kircher enumerated only nineteen without referring to
the number-theoretical context or the total number of different types. Here are three of his
examples:
n = 9,
type 2 2 2 3, number of permutations = 7560,
type 3 3 2 1, number of permutations = 5040,
type 5 2 2, number of permutations = 756.
His “universal problem” deals with the number P(n,k) of arrangements without repetitions
or ordered selections of k elements out of n elements:
Rule 4:
P(n,k) = n(n −1)···(n −k + 1).
If k = n, we get P(n,n) = n! as before, that is arrangements can be dealt with as gener-
alizations of permutations. Kircher spoke of the “wonderful force of combination” (‘mira
combinationis vis’) to describe the incredibly huge combinatorial numbers resulting from
relatively small initial numbers.
The transition from arrangements without repetitions to arrangements with repetitions is
especially simple if only two notes are arranged:
P(n,2) + n
are all possible arrangements with or without repetitions. It is a special case of the “most
universal problem” (see below) because
P(n,2) + n = n(n −1) + n = n2.
If the order of the elements or notes does not play any role, then the arrangements are
replaced by combinations. Their number is calculated by means of
Rule 5:
C(n,k) = P(n,p)
P(p,p) =

n
k

.

338
E. Knobloch
Kircher’s “most universal problem” dealt with arrangements with repetitions. The required
number is
Rule 6:
np
if we select p elements out of n. np −P(n,p) is the number of those arrangements where
at least one element is repeated.
Hitherto Kircher exclusively explained some of Mersenne’s results, normally without
giving a demonstration like his predecessor. Yet, he added an interesting detail. Let us sup-
pose we permute n elements. The type of repetitions n −k, k leads to P(n,n) =
n!
(n−k)!k!.
This expression can be reduced to n(n−1)···(n−k+1
k!
= C(n,k).
In other words, Kircher calculated C(n,k) by means of the formula for permutations
with repetitions. He knew, too, the principle of multiplication of choices:
If there are k successive choices to be made, and if the ith choice can be made in ni ways,
for 1 ⩽i ⩽k, the total number of ways of making these choices is the product n1n2 ···nk.
Kircher applied the principle to four bars consisting of four, three, four, and ﬁve notes,
respectively, and admitting certain numbers ni of permutations in order to calculate the
total number of possible permutations.
4. The world as God’s organ
Not by chance the Universal art of music comprises ten books. Kircher entitled his tenth
book Decachord of Nature or organ with ten ﬂutes where it is shown that the nature of
things looked in all at musical and harmonic proportions and that the nature of the uni-
verse is consequently nothing else but the most perfect music. God’s all-penetrating force is
nothing but a force, which joins together and unites all, he said, to a harmonic proportion.
If one should separate harmonic ratios and nature, all will necessarily perish in a complete
chaos and disaster, in nothing. The diligent reader will ﬁnd, he said, the detected causes for
the forces of stones, plants, animals, and their effects. This door is open to a certain new
workshop of natural magic.
Kircher equated nature, which is ordered according to measure, number, and weight,
with music. This identiﬁcation led him to the theory that music or harmony itself is noth-
ing else but measure, number, and weight. His illustration entitled Harmony of the world
coming into being using a world organ relates the six organ stops to the six days of creation,
which God needed to ﬁnish His work step by step.
After pulling the pertinent organ stops, the harmonics of the corresponding days of cre-
ation sound: The coming into being of light, the separation of water from land, the occur-
rence of plants, the creation of the stars, the occurrence of animals by water, land, and air,
ﬁnally, the creation of man as God’s image. All stops are pulled; the creation is ﬁnished.
Beneath the keyboard we read: “In such a way God’s eternal wisdom plays on the whole
world”. Kircher proves entirely to be a child of his time in this respect, because the ideal
sound with Baroque period was produced by a richly coloured combinations of organ stops.
In the following explanations Kircher used the metaphorical expression of stop for the
ten domains of being. Hence he dealt with the “symphonism” of the four elements of

Mathematics and the divine: Athanasius Kircher
339
Fig. 3. Harmony of the world coming into being, Musurgia Universalis, Book II.
heavens, stones, plants, and animals; the microcosm and the megacosm; the harmony of
the pulses and rhythms in the human body; the ‘pathetic’ symphonism or the music of the
different affects of the spirit; the symphonism of the political world or the political music;
metaphysical harmonics or music; the music of the angels; and ﬁnally the divine music or
with the choir of the choirs’, that is, with God’s symphonism with the whole of nature.
His central statement was that neither intellect nor senses is able to detect the harmonic
construction plan of the divine “Architect”, as God was now called. Hence he rejected
Kepler’s world harmony, which was mathematically founded and based on scientiﬁc ob-
servations. He required the renunciation of the concept of harmony of the celestial spheres
being quantiﬁable in the strict sense of the word. Instead, harmony consists in God’s glori-
ﬁcation when considering the perfection of the world. The harmony of the spheres consists
in their admirable disposition and in a certain ineffable proportion working together in a
unity. By this unity these world bodies correspond mutually to each other in such a way
that after taking away just one world body the harmony of the whole world collapses.
5. Universal science as an imitation of God’s art
Nineteen years later, Kircher took up again such mathematical studies related to combi-
natorics, in his Great art of knowledge or combinatorial art, through which the broadest

340
E. Knobloch
Fig. 4. Wisdom sitting on a throne. Frontispiece of Kircher’s Ars Magna Sciendi sive Combinatoria.
door is opened for quickly acquiring knowledge in all arts and sciences. This invention is
new, just as everybody will be able to speak about any proposed theme in an almost inﬁnite
amount of ways, if he is instructed with its help, and everybody will be able to obtain a
certain summary knowledge of any doctrine.3
Wisdom sitting on a throne reveals the book of nature which has not seven but ﬁf-
teen seals. They represent the disciplines theology, metaphysics, physics, logic, medicine,
mathematics, moral ethics, ascetics, jurisprudence, politics, scriptural interpretation, con-
troversy, moral theology, rhetoric, combinatorial art. The table shows twenty-seven (which
is the number of books in the New Testament) fundamental notions of Kircher’s alphabet
of the art, that is nine notions forming the alphabet of absolute, of respective, and of uni-
versal principles, respectively, like goodness, difference, God, etc. Kircher promised that
these notions contain the core of human knowledge, which comprehends the word sciences
and the natural sciences as well. Hence he wrote on the base of the throne in Greek: “Noth-
3Ars magna sciendi sive combinatoria qua ad omnium artium scientiarumque cognitionem brevi adquirendam
amplissima porta recluditur, quod uti inventum novum est, ita quoque eius subsidio usuque instructus, quilibet
de quavis re proposita inﬁnitis pene rationibus disputare, omniumque summariam quandam cuiuslibet doctrinae
notitiam obtinere poterit.

Mathematics and the divine: Athanasius Kircher
341
ing is more beautiful than to know everything”.4 In his dedication to the emperor Leopold
I he began by saying “Nothing is more divine than to know everything”, attributing it to
Plato. The human “great art” and “universal science” is an imitation of the divine art. Its
signiﬁcant structure is combinatorics for Kircher. Combinatorics as a specialty of the Lull
school of the 16th and 17th centuries cannot be separated from the idea of a universal
mathematization or quantiﬁcation of being. Nature is the art of God.
The similarities are obvious between the declarations made in the title of the eighth
book of the Great art of consonance and dissonance and in the title of the Great art of
knowledge. Thanks to the Combinatorial art the special case of the musical art can be
and is replaced by “all arts and sciences”. This universal claim was the core and credo of
Lullism. The fourth book is called the “own place of the combinatorial art” where its nature
and method are explained. Before he discussed the various species of combination Kircher
spoke about the marvelous and incomprehensible force of numbers, about the nature and
variety of the combinatorial art. Number is, he said, a certain natural, exuberantly growing
principle of rational construction (‘rationalis fabrica’). Number is the principle of all that is
attainable by reason. Unity is the principle of all numbers. This eternal unity is the essence
of God, the beginning and end of all. All beings of created things are nothing else but signs
of that supreme unity. Kircher explicitly referred to Augustin, Plato, Pythagoras, and the
mythical author Hermes Trismegistus.
The combinatorial art consists mainly, he continued, in demonstrating how often and in
how many ways arbitrarily given things might be combined with one another or permuted
among one another. God’s eternal wisdom practised this art for the ﬁrst time when he
created the world, when he formed by means of the confused bulk of chaotic mass such a
great variety of things that it cannot be grasped by mind or sufﬁciently admired by men.
Hence the combinatorial art is an “arithmological faculty” ( facultas arithmologica). Its
variety stems from the different things which are to be compared—for example letters,
numbers, elements, or principles, terms, propositions, syllogisms of arts and sciences.
Regarding mathematical combinatorics, there is nothing new relative to the Universal
musical art. On the contrary, Kircher repeated only some of his earlier rules, tables, results,
namely the ﬁrst two rules for permutations and the corresponding table for permutations
with one repeated element. He extended the table for n! up to 50! which has 67 digits. It is,
however, by far still smaller than 64! which he found in Mersenne’s two great monographs
on musical theory mentioned earlier. Yet, perhaps he took it from Mersenne’s book La
vérité des sciences, which had appeared in 1625. There Mersenne not only calculated 1!
up to 50! but also the number 2n −1 −n of possibilities altogether for selecting two or
more (up to n) elements out of a set of n elements (combinations without repetitions in a
body). This is exactly the result Kircher repeated in his Great art of knowledge.
6. Mystical arithmetic
Kircher had said in the Universal art of music that whoever knows mystical arithmetic,
is able to penetrate into all secrets. No wonder that in 1665 he published a whole book
4Mηδεν 0 αλλιον 1η π αντα ε
ιδεναι.

342
E. Knobloch
Fig. 5. The Divine Eye. Frontispiece of Kircher’s Arithmologia.
on this subject, his Arithmologia (Science of numbers) or on the hidden mysteries of
numbers. Therein he combined his theoretical interest in the mystical mathematics of the
Pythagorean and Cabbalistic traditions with a more practical approach to the quantitative
and computational matters of arithmetic [1, p. 15].
On the frontispiece the divine eye is surrounded by the nine orders of angels who occur
again in his combined version of Cusanus’s ﬁgures P and U (see below). The scrolls of
the two cherubs allude to the biblical saying that God disposed all according to measure,
weight, and number. The cherub on the right holds a so-called magical square consisting
of the ﬁrst nine natural numbers. Such squares are called “magical” if and only if the
sum of the numbers of every row and column and of both main diagonals is always the
same, in this case twelve. The winged sphere between the two angels is contained within
the sphere of the forty ﬁxed stars of the primum mobile and comprehends the Ptolemaic,
geocentric world system consisting of the earth and the centre and the seven homocentric
spheres of the “planets” Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn. This is worth
mentioning because even Kircher no longer adhered to this out of date world system but
to the Tychonian system. The Hebrew scholar on the left, whose book shows the stars of
Solomon and David, symbolises the Cabbala. The ﬁgure on the right can be identiﬁed as
Pythagoras, thanks to his theorem.

Mathematics and the divine: Athanasius Kircher
343
7. Mathematical theology
All important Lullists and adherents of a universal science of the 16th and 17th centuries
were inﬂuenced by Nicolaus Cusanus (1401–1464). Kircher was no exception. The in-
ﬂuence of the “mathematical theologian” Cusanus especially concerned two aspects of
Kircher’s thinking:
(1) The use of mathematical symbols to describe the structure of the universe conceived
of as God’s creation;
(2) the conception of the inﬁnite.
(1) The use of mathematical symbols
In his treatise On conjectures, Cusanus introduced two ﬁgures, namely the paradigmatic
ﬁgure P (chapter I, 9) and the circle of the universes U (chapter I, 13). Figure P consisted of
two intersecting dark and light pyramids, ﬁgure U of forty circles of four different sciences
vertically ordered in such a way that the greatest comprehended the remaining thirty-nine.
Kircher enlarged their uniﬁcation into one ﬁgure by two further closed curved lines.
It illustrates the overwhelming cosmological importance of the number three, four and
ten for Cusanus as well as for Kircher, thus admittedly bearing witness to Pythagorean and
Platonic tradition.
Kircher inserted it into the tenth book of his Universal musical art which itself was
divided into ten registers. Its ninth register dealt with the music of the angels. Correspond-
ingly, Kircher called the ﬁgure the “harmonical scheme” (schema harmonicum), the num-
ber forty the “most mystical number”: Forty is the sum of 1, 3, 9, 27 that is of the unity
one and of the ﬁrst three powers of three. It is a product of ten multiplied by four. Ten itself
is the sum of the ﬁrst four numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, which is the Pythagorean “tetraktys”. The
simple unit one denotes God, the higher units ten, hundred, thousand denote intelligence,
soul and body. Hence it is worthwhile considering the ﬁgure in more detail.
The two intersecting, horizontally arranged pyramids comprehend three worlds (the
same applies to Cusanus’s ﬁgure P): the supreme or angelic world, the middle or side-
real world, and the lowest or elemental world, each divided into nine. God as unity is the
basis of the light; similarly, the basis of darkness is nothingness. Every creature is situated
between God and nothingness. The nine levels of the angelic world are the choirs of the
Seraphim, Cherubim, Throni, dominations, virtues, powers, principals, archangels, angels;
that is the nine orders of angels. The nine levels of the sidereal world are the immobile
sphere, the ﬁrmament of the ﬁxed stars, the seven planets Saturn, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mer-
cury, Moon. The nine levels of the elemental world are stones or metals (mixta), zoophytes,
plants, animals, man and the four elements ﬁre, air, water, soil.
The forty vertically arranged circles forming Cusanus’s ﬁgure U represent the same
world structure. Kircher’s description almost literally repeats Cusanus’s text but without
mentioning his source. On conjectures, §67 corresponds to page 451 of Kircher’s Universal
mathematical art, volume II. This proves that Kircher completely depended on Cusanus,
not on Robert Fludd who also used Cusanus’s ﬁgures.
The simple unity of God touches four circles, Kircher explained: the greatest circle or
that of the universe, the circles of the supreme world, of the supreme order, and of the
supreme choir. Throughout, there is an analogical structure to the universe and the worlds

344
E. Knobloch
Fig. 6. The Harmonical Scheme. Musurgia Universalis, Book X.
contained therein: everything is to be found in everything (omnia in omnibus). Triads char-
acterise the universe, the single worlds, the single choirs.
A related scheme was at least motivated by Cusanus. It occurs even twice; at the very
beginning of the second volume of his Great musical art, and again in his tenth book.
Kircher’s basic idea was that the world is God’s organ. This idea is explained by three
distichs saying that God’s love is harmony by which the world is held together, that God is a
“harmostes”, “somebody who puts together”. Already in the preface to the reader, Kircher
had referred to Plato by deﬁning music as being nothing else than τ αξιν than “to know the
order of all things”. Now he cited the mythical author Hermes Trismegistus from the third
Christian century, who had said accordingly in his writing to the physician Asclepius: “η
µουσι0η µηδεν 
εστιν !ετερον, 1η π αντων τ αξιν ε
ιδεναι” (music is nothing other than to
know the order of all things).
The circle represents God who binds all together (Kircher adopted this conception from
Cusanus); the sevenfold divided scale representing an octave explains the different levels of

Mathematics and the divine: Athanasius Kircher
345
Fig. 7. The world as God’s organ represented differently. Musurgia Universalis, Books II and X.
creation. The ﬁrst chord refers to the angel, the last chord to human intellect, the interme-
diate chords to the perceivable levels of the world: element, heaven, life, sense, reason. The
intellect, is so to speak, an eye, memory a mirror in which all pictures of the world reﬂect.
Or the intellect might be an ear, and memory the reﬂexive mirror-like object. Kircher liked
this metaphor. On the frontispiece of his Great art of knowledge the eye of reason (ratio)
and the ear of use and experience (usus et experientia) occur again (see above Figure 3).
(2) The conception of the inﬁnite
In 1656 Kircher published his only cosmological work, the Ecstatic Journey, in which the
construction of the world, that is the nature, forces, proprieties of the celestial expansion
and of the planets and of the ﬁxed stars as well, the composition and structure of the single
stars from the lowest sphere of the earth up to the ultimate limits of the world explored
under cover of ﬁctive abduction, is truly explained by a new hypothesis in the form of a
dialogue between Cosmiel and Theodidactus.5
Its second dialogue especially deals with the magnitude of the world. Just as little as
in the Universal art of music did Kircher reveal his source, that is Cusanus, though he
repeated Cusanus’s theory of the inﬁnite. God is the absolute maximum, the only actual
5Itinerarium exstaticum quo mundi opiﬁcium id est Coelestis expansi, siderumque tam erantium, quam ﬁxo-
rum natura, vires, proprietates, singulorumque compositio et structura, ab inﬁmo Telluris globo, usque ad ultima
Mundi conﬁnia, per ﬁcti raptus integumentum explorata, nova hypothesi exponitur ad veritatem interlocutoribus
Cosmiele et Theodidacto.

346
E. Knobloch
inﬁnite. Hence, the world itself and all things in it cannot be inﬁnite. They all are contracted
to ﬁnite quantities. Yet, the world is the “contracted maximum”.
This conception of the inﬁnite, which is incomprehensible for the ﬁnite mind of men,
implies a crucial consequence: the difference between God and the ﬁnite world remains
inﬁnite. Kircher called this difference the imaginary space, which had no equivalent in
Cusanus. But its characterisation as being nothing and inﬁnite at the same time was a
reminiscence of Cusanus’s famous coincidence of the opposites. Such a coincidence could
not take place in mathematics, but only mathematical theology, in God who is the absolute
coincidence.
References
[1] M. Baldwin, Athanasius Kircher and the Magnetic Philosophy, PhD Dissertation, Chicago, 1987. Explains
Kircher’s conception of the magnet as a symbol for a universal natural force.
[2] R. Dammann, Der Musikbegriff im deutschen Barock, Köln, 1967. Authoritative inquiry into the Baroque
music.
[3] J. Goldwin, Athanasius Kircher, A Renaissance Man and the Quest for Lost Knowledge, London, 1979.
Bio-bibliography with many illustrations taken from Kircher’s publications.
[4] W. Goldhan, Epilogue, in: Athanasius Kircher, Musurgia universalis, Deutsche Teilübersetzung von An-
dreas Hirsch. Schwäbisch-Hall, 1988 (Reprint Kassel–Basel–London–New York). Explains Kircher’s the-
ory of music.
[5] O. Kaul, Athanasius Kircher als Musikgelehrter, Aus der Vergangenheit der Universität Würzburg,
Festschrift zum 350jährigen Bestehen der Universität Würzburg. Berlin, 1932, pp. 363–370. Evaluates
Kircher’s theory of music.
[6] S. Klotz, Ars combinatoria oder “Musik ohne Kopfzerbrechen”, Kalküle des Musikalischen von Kircher bis
Kirnberger, Musiktheorie 14 (1999), 231–245.
[7] T. Leinkauf, Mundus combinatus, Studien zur Struktur der barocken Universalwissenschaft am Beispiel
Athanasius Kirchers SJ (1602–1680), Berlin, 1993. Authoritative philosophical study of Kircher’s universal
science.
[8] C. Reilly, Athanasius Kircher S.J., Master of a Hundred Arts 1602–1680, Wiesbaden–Rom, 1974. The best
available biography containing a selected bibliography and a complete list of Kircher’s publications.
[9] U. Scharlau, Athanasius Kircher (1601(sic!)–1680) als Musikschriftsteller, Ein Beitrag zur Musikanschau-
ung des Barock, Marburg, 1969. Most comprehensive explanation of Kircher’s theory of music.
[10] W. Schmidt-Biggemann, Topica universalis, Eine Modellgeschichte humanistischer und barocker Wis-
senschaft, Hamburg, 1983. Deals among others with Kircher’s Lullism and his trial to establish the model
of a universal science.

CHAPTER 18
Galileo, God and Mathematics
Volker R. Remmert
AG Geschichte der Naturwissenschaften, FB17 Mathematik, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz,
D-55099 Mainz, Germany
E-mail: remmert@mathematik.uni-mainz.de
Contents
1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 349
2. The mathematical sciences in early modern Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 349
3. Galileo, God and mathematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 350
4. God and mathematics around Galileo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 356
5. Concluding remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 357
6. Selected bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 359
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
347


Galileo, God and mathematics
349
1. Introduction
It is not a particularly new insight that the mathematical sciences of the seventeenth century
stood at the very core of what is commonly called the Scientiﬁc Revolution. True as this
may be, it has to be realised that the actual message of this statement is twofold. It has long
been seen that mathematical techniques and methods played a mayor role in fashioning
the new sciences in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. As a rule a central place in
this process is assigned to Galileo Galilei (1564–1642) who undertook the study of motion
(free fall) in terms of mathematics and certainly gave a stimulus—the extent to which is
highly debated—to the research on inﬁnitesimal techniques by his disciples Buonaventura
Cavalieri (ca. 1598–1647) and Evangelista Torricelli (1608–1647). On the other hand, the
rapidly changing social and epistemological status of the mathematical sciences as a whole
from the mid-sixteenth through to the seventeenth century is an important precondition of
the Scientiﬁc Revolution.
In the early seventeenth century there was a growing consensus that the mathematical
sciences should take up natural philosophy as an object, and the desire grew to legitimise
this transgression of the existing boundaries. Therefore, one of the main aims of Galileo
and of many of his contemporaries was to enhance the epistemological status of the mathe-
matical sciences and to abolish the authority and monopoly of philosophers and theologians
as keepers of the book of nature. This process not only required a legitimising strategy for
the mathematical sciences, but also implied the disintegration and the restructuring of the
ensemble of the mathematical sciences. This naturally led to the transformation of the
whole hierarchy of scientiﬁc disciplines and, in the long run, to the formation of various
speciﬁc scientiﬁc disciplines out of the whole of the mathematical sciences. In this process
Galileo held a prominent position. The metaphysical legitimation he constructed for the
mathematical sciences by eventually taking recourse to God and the divine is the topic of
this paper.
2. The mathematical sciences in early modern Europe
For his contemporaries Galileo was a mathematician (matematico/mathematicus). I stress
this as people today tend to consider him a natural philosopher. In early modern Europe
the term “mathematical sciences” was used to describe those ﬁelds of knowledge that de-
pended on measure, number and weight—reﬂecting the much quoted passage from the
Wisdom of Solomon 11:20, “but thou hast ordered all things in measure and number and
weight” (sed omnia in mensura, et numero, et pondere disposuisti). This included astrol-
ogy and architecture as well as arithmetic and astronomy. The scientiae mathematicae were
subdivided into mathematicae purae, dealing with quantity, continuous and discrete as in
geometry and arithmetic, and mathematicae mixtae or mediae, which dealt not only with
quantity but also with quality—for example, astronomy, geography, optics, music, cos-
mography and architecture. The frequent analogy between mixed mathematics and mod-
ern applied mathematics rather compares apples and pears, or, to be more precise, is quite
anachronistic as pure and applied mathematics are subdivisions of a modern scientiﬁc dis-
cipline, mathematics, which did not even exist as a discipline in its own right around 1600.

350
V.R. Remmert
The mathematical sciences, then, consisted of various ﬁelds of knowledge, often with a
strong bent toward practical applications, which only became independent from each other
and became scientiﬁc disciplines in the process of the formation of scientiﬁc disciplines
from the late seventeenth to the nineteenth century.
Considering this context it is important to keep in mind the conceptual inaccuracy im-
plied in the use of the terms (1) mathematicus, signifying either a (pure) mathematician or
a practitioner of the mathematical sciences doing (mixed) mathematics, (2) mathematica,
normally used as an adjective and only rarely but confusingly employed as a noun meaning
pure mathematics and (3) mathematicae instead of scientiae or disciplinae mathematicae,
denoting the whole ensemble of the mathematical sciences. This inaccuracy often renders
it difﬁcult to distinguish between the two branches of the mathematical sciences under
discussion (mathematicae purae or mixtae).
Practitioners of the mathematical sciences were not expected to tackle physical problems
like motion or to apply mathematical methods to such problems, since these belonged to the
realm of natural philosophy. In the hierarchy of scientiﬁc disciplines of the Middle Ages
and up to the sixteenth century, the mathematical sciences were subordinate to theology
and philosophy, and to natural philosophy in particular. In the seventeenth century the
picture began to change: Cinderella developed into mathesis Regia1 and scientiﬁc modes
of explanation increasingly dominated many branches of the sciences and segments of
society. The mathematical sciences began to play a leading role in the hierarchy of scientiﬁc
disciplines.
In the early modern era the mathematical sciences began to produce potential instru-
ments of power and to supply technically and socially valuable knowledge—for use in
engineering, administration, social control, etc. This ability to produce useful knowledge
and potential instruments of power became the critical basis for the existence of the math-
ematical sciences; the publication and propagation of this capital was among the essential
means through which their social and epistemological status was established.
3. Galileo, God and mathematics
Galileo boldly formulated the attempt to transgress the boundaries of the traditional hier-
archy and the aspiration to participate in, if not to monopolise, the reading of the book of
nature in his courtly pamphlet of 1623, The Assayer. Here his famous words on mathemat-
ics and the book of nature are to be found:
Philosophy is written in this grand book, the universe, which stands continually open to our gaze.
But the book cannot be understood unless one ﬁrst learns to comprehend the language and read the
letters in which it is composed. It is written in the language of mathematics, and its characters are
triangles, circles, and other geometric ﬁgures without which it is humanly impossible to understand
a single word of it; without these, one wanders about in a dark labyrinth.2
1As Claude François Milliet Dechales wrote in the letter of dedication of his Cursus seu Mundus Mathematicus
(Lyon, 1676): “Plebeiae sunt ceterae disciplinae, mathesis Regia”.
2The translation is Stillman Drake’s (Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo, New York etc., 1957, p. 237f); cf. EN
VI, p. 232: “La ﬁlosoﬁa è scritta in questo grandissimo libro, che continuamente ci sta aperto innanzi a gli occhi
(io dico l’universo), ma non si può intendere se prima non s’impara a intender la lingua, e conoscer i caratteri,

Galileo, God and mathematics
351
Fig. 1. Portret of Galilei by Giusto Sustermans, Ufﬁzi, Florence.
The essence of these words seems at ﬁrst sight to be clear: of all possible mathematical
methods, the exploration of nature’s secrets has to depend on geometry and the geometer
alone is capable of reading the book of nature. But history is not as simple as rhetoric:
Galileo, the working scientist, did not rely exclusively on classical Euclidean geometry,
but rather on a mixture of a theory of proportions and early inﬁnitesimal methods. On the
other hand, Galileo as an “imperialistic” scientist sought to extend the bounds of his own
competence and scenes of inquiry. Consequently, he could in his rhetoric not be content
with a conception of geometry as being only one out of several possible languages for
understanding and reading natural phenomena. He needed a cognitive tool guaranteeing
exclusive and legitimate access to secure knowledge about the book of nature. He con-
structed (pure) mathematics as such a tool, thereby locking natural philosophers out of
their own traditional domain.
This has to be explained. In discussing Galileo’s thoughts about mathematics and the
mathematical sciences, it is necessary to keep in mind what is frequently ignored: that he
did not codify them and that he worked—as did many early modern scholars—with con-
ﬂicting epistemologies. Furthermore, there is naturally a wide gap between his theoretical
reﬂections on the nature of his scientiﬁc work and his actual procedures. In what follows I
ne’quali è scritto. Egli è scritto in lingua matematica, e i caratteri son triangoli, cerchi, ed altre ﬁgure geometriche,
senza i quali mezi è impossibile a intendere umanamente parola; senza questi è un aggirarsi vanamente per un
oscuro laberinto”.

352
V.R. Remmert
Fig. 2. Frontispiece of the original edition of The Assayer, Rome, 1623.
will concentrate on his theoretical reﬂections, as they are fundamental to the legitimation
of his scientiﬁc claims.
Standard historiography—following modern scientiﬁc conceptions—would have Gali-
leo using mathematics to describe nature. This cherished view is none the less mistaken.
Galileo did not seek to describe nature. He wanted and needed to read it. The description
of nature allows for a variety of possible languages whereas the reading of nature has to be
done in the given and unequivocal language. It is not our conception of a (possibly) variable
description that is the basis of Galileo’s expressed world view, but rather the conviction
that nature is to be understood and explained in the one and only God-given language of
mathematics. And even the language of mathematics left room for interpretation as Galileo,
the working scientist, knew quite well.
However, for the sake of his argument Galileo considered mathematics in a rather mono-
lithic way and did not distinguish among its diverse branches like geometry, arithmetic,
theory of proportions, theory of indivisibles, etc. To have an unequivocal conception of
mathematics, he deliberately presented geometry alone as a model of mathematical rigor
and exactness. This was, at the same time, to the convenience of the contemporary reader
who might not have been at all familiar with more abstract mathematical concepts or with
any kind of mathematics other than plane geometry. To confront, say a courtier, with such

Galileo, God and mathematics
353
concepts would have been a fatal mistake because it is quite unlikely that he could have un-
derstood their meaning. But a minimum of knowledge or the illusion of such knowledge of
plane geometry could be expected. Why was it so important for Galileo’s scientiﬁc claims
to legitimise mathematics as the deﬁnite language of the book of nature?
Galileo wanted his claims to be necessary. In particular, he wanted to escape the mere
probability of his arguments for Copernicanism—for that was their status in the dominant
scientiﬁc hierarchy—and give them the compelling character of mathematical proofs. He
tried to achieve this by means of a double strategy. On the one hand, he sought to break
the spell of theology by reducing the power of theological reasoning and formulas to an
adequate domain, that is by excluding the explanation of natural phenomena from its com-
petence. The book of revelations—the Bible—and the book of nature had both been written
by God, but in different languages and for different purposes. Even though the languages of
these books are not the same there can be no contradiction between their respective claims
and truths. Galileo put this principle centre stage in his famous letter to the Grand Duchess
Christina in 1615:
Because of this, and because (as we said above), two truths cannot contradict one another, the task
of a wise interpreter is to strive to fathom the true meaning of the sacred texts; this will undoubtedly
agree with those physical conclusions of which we are already certain and sure enough through
clear observations or necessary demonstrations.3
As a consequence, each of these books required its own exegetes. On the other hand—
and this string of arguments is largely independent of the ﬁrst one—Galileo tried to elevate
the epistemological status of mathematics. Mathematics allowed the utmost epistemolog-
ical certainty that could possibly be attained. This conviction was at the core of his math-
ematical cosmos. It was rooted in the sixteenth century debate quaestio de certitudine
mathematicarum on the epistemological status of mathematical proofs. I do not want to
give an account of this rather extensive debate, but just to state the main result accepted
by most mathematical practitioners by the beginning of the seventeenth century: if math-
ematical proofs were not the most powerful within the ideal scientiﬁc hierarchy of early
modern Aristotelians (demonstrationes potissimae) they still guaranteed the highest degree
of certainty humanly attainable (demonstrationes certissimae). This perception was central
to the revaluation of epistemological categories and deliberately ignored and undermined
the Aristotelian hierarchy of the scientiﬁc disciplines.
Now Galileo not only considered mathematics absolutely certain, but he followed the
sixteenth century quaestio de certitudine mathematicarum in attributing to pure mathemat-
ics (as exempliﬁed by geometry and arithmetic) a logical structure superior to the logical
systems of the early modern Aristotelians. Therefore, it was not only admissible to em-
ploy mathematical reasoning in the study of nature, it was compulsory to do so in order to
guarantee creativity and epistemological certainty. In addition to the epistemological su-
periority of mathematical reasoning, Galileo declared in his Dialogue Concerning the Two
3The translation is Maurice A. Finocchiaro’s (The Galileo Affair: A Documentary History, Berkeley/Los Ange-
les/London, 1989, p. 96); cf. EN V, p. 320: “Stante questo, ed essendo, come si è detto, che due verità non possono
contrariarsi, è ofﬁcio de’saggi espositori affaticarsi per penetrare i veri sensi de’luoghi sacri, che indubitabilmente
saranno concordanti con quelle conclusioni naturali, delle quali il senso manifesto o le dimostrazioni necessarie
ci avessero prima resi certi e sicuri”.

354
V.R. Remmert
Chief World Systems of 1632 that mathematical reasoning could produce knowledge that
was equivalent in quality to divine knowledge. Galileo’s spokesman Salviati explains:
Salviati: ... But taking man’s understanding intensively, in so far as this term denotes under-
standing some proposition perfectly, I say that the human intellect does understand some of them
perfectly, and thus in these it has as much absolute certainty as nature itself has. Of such are pure
mathematics; that is geometry and arithmetic, in which Divine intellect indeed knows inﬁnitely
more propositions, since it knows all. But with regard to those few which the human intellect
does understand, I believe that its knowledge equals the Divine in objective certainty, for here it
succeeds in understanding necessity, beyond which there can be no greater sureness.4
Galileo even insinuated that pure mathematics was the only way open to the human intel-
lect to gain knowledge equivalent in quality to divine knowledge. In the Dialogue he spoke
of “pure mathematics” (le scienze matematiche pure), namely geometry and arithmetic,
as a way to certain knowledge. Although capturing Galileo’s conception of mathematics
as the exclusive way to knowledge equivalent in quality to divine knowledge, Stillman
Drake’s translation of le scienze matematiche pure as “the mathematical sciences alone” is
still misleading, as this refers to the whole of the mathematical sciences—pure and mixed.5
This interpretation neglects the direct connection of Galileo’s statement to the quaestio de
certitudine mathematicarum. It was not the possibly refutable mathematical knowledge
of an individual that Galileo referred to in order to demolish the priority of theological
knowledge but the whole branch of pure mathematics (le scienze matematiche pure) whose
methods, merits and absolute certainty were accepted everywhere among mathematicians
and were not open to debate.6
For Galileo the certainty of mathematics was not derived from God, but, on the con-
trary, it was a way to God. The certainty of mathematics was not only independent of God
and consequently of theology, but was even the only way to epistemological perfection.
Galileo’s claims about the relation of pure mathematics and theology, though not ofﬁcially
mentioned in the trial of 1633, were among the points the inquisition held against him
4The translation is based on Stillman Drake’s (Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems. Translated
with Revised Notes by Stillman Drake. Foreword by Albert Einstein, Berkeley/Los Angeles, 1962, p. 103); cf. EN
VII, p. 128f: “Salviati: ... ma pigliando l’intendere intensive, in quanto cotal termine importa intensivamente,
cioè perfettamente, alcuna proposizione, dico che l’intelletto umano ne intende alcune così perfettamente, e ne
ha così assoluta certezza, quanto se n’abbia l’istessa natura; e tali sono le scienze matematiche pure, cioè la
geometria e l’aritmetica, delle quali l’intelletto divino ne sa bene inﬁnite proposizioni di più, perchè le sa tutte,
ma di quelle poche intese dall’intelletto umano credo che la cognizione agguali la divina nella certezza obiettiva,
poichè arriva a comprenderne la necessità, sopra la quale non par che esser sicurezza maggiore”.
5Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems. Translated with Revised Notes by Stillman Drake. Fore-
word by Albert Einstein, Berkeley/Los Angeles, 1962, p. 103. Emil Strauss’ German translation as “purely mathe-
matical knowledge” (“rein mathematische Erkenntnisse”) is incorrect (Dialog über die beiden hauptsächlichsten
Weltsysteme, das ptolemäische und das kopernikanische. Aus dem Italienischen übersetzt und erläutert von Emil
Strauss, Leipzig, 1891, p. 108). Maurice A. Finocchiaro translates “the pure mathematical sciences” (Galileo on
the World Systems: A New Abridged Translation and Guide, Berkeley/Los Angeles/London, 1997, p. 113).
6Galileo was well aware of the quaestio de certitudine mathematicarum. Not only did he own a copy of
Francesco Barozzi’s Opusculum, in quo una Oratio, & duae Quaestiones: altera de certitudine, & altera de
medietate Mathematicarum continentur (Padua, 1560), but he also knew Giuseppe Biancani’s Aristotelis Loca
Mathematica Ex universiis ipsius Operibus collecta, & explicata ... Accessere de Natura Mathematicarum Trac-
tatio; atque Clarorum Mathematicorum Chronologia (Bologna, 1615) as a note in his Discorsi proves (EN VIII,
p. 165).

Galileo, God and mathematics
355
in 1632. After the complaints against Galileo’s Dialogue Pope Urban VIII suspended fur-
ther distribution of the book and appointed a special commission to investigate the affair.
In the commission’s report of September 1632, apart from Galileo’s undisguised Coperni-
can propaganda, mostly formal aspects of how he had dealt with Church censorship in the
process of getting the imprimatur for the Dialogue were mentioned. However, the commis-
sion explicitly pointed to the passage under discussion:
Moreover, there are in the book the following things to consider, as speciﬁc items of indictment:
[...]
vi. That he wrongly asserts and declares a certain equality between the human and the divine
intellect in the understanding of geometrical matters.7
At the same time Galileo held mathematics to be the prescribed language of the book of
nature and consequently mathematical reasoning was the exclusive way for the human in-
tellect to decode the laws of divine creation. By this twofold construction Galileo wanted to
secure an epistemological monopoly for mathematics in the explanation of natural things,
rivalling that of theology and philosophy.
It does not come as a surprise that on this basis Galileo considered it legitimate to employ
mathematics as the ideal tool in natural philosophy. Galileo combined ﬁve properties of
mathematics in his argument: (1) God has written the book of nature—which is the object
of natural philosophy—in the language of mathematics. (2) Man can learn this language
and (3) apply it to the study of nature as it has a logical structure superior to that of early
modern Aristotelians. (4) Handled with care this language cannot err or go astray because it
is not only the most certain epistemological tool, but (5) even the most perfect one capable
of elevating the human mind to divine knowledge. Actually Galileo did not just think it
legitimate to use mathematics in natural philosophy but made it quite clear that it was the
only legitimate way to proceed. Nature had to be read mathematically and was not to be
described philosophically or theologically if any ambiguity was to be excluded and the
(real) laws of nature were to be discovered.
Galileo automatically transferred the certainty of pure mathematics (mathematicae pu-
rae) to the mixed mathematical sciences (mathematicae mixtae) and particularly to the
mathematical study of nature, the subject of the emerging new science. In this way the
epistemological status of not only mathematics but of the mathematical sciences in their
entirety and the applications of mathematics were enhanced and the hierarchy of scientiﬁc
disciplines transformed. Of course, what one has to keep in mind is Galileo’s desire to
prove the Copernican system against scripture.
What Galileo needed and meticulously constructed was mathematics as a tool to refute
counter-arguments from biblical exegesis and to fulﬁll the well-known demand of Car-
dinal Bellarmine and the Jesuit mathematicians that if the Copernican system was to be
accepted and the Earth did in reality circle the sun, a necessary demonstration should be
given instead of just probable arguments. The Jesuits’ leading mathematician, Christopher
Clavius (1538–1612), had left no doubt about this in one of his ﬁnal statements in print,
the preface to the fourth volume of his Opera mathematica published in 1612 and dealing
7The translation is Maurice A. Finocchiaro’s (The Galileo Affair: A Documentary History, Berkeley/Los Ange-
les/London, 1989, p. 221f); cf. EN XIX, p. 326f: ‘Nel libro poi ci sono da considerare, come per corpo di diletto,
le cose seguenti: [...] 6. Asserirsi e dichiararsi male qualche ugualianza, nel comprendere le cose geometriche,
tra l’intelletto umano e divino’.

356
V.R. Remmert
with the theory of sun-dials.8 And Cardinal Bellarmine put it bluntly in his 1615 letter to
the Copernican Carmelite Antonio Foscarini: “But I will not believe that there is such a
demonstration, until it is shown to me”.9 Regardless of the structure and truth of the proof
Galileo eventually presented it had to be a mathematical proof or, to be more precise, a
proof that deﬁnitely belonged in the sphere of the mathematical sciences. Only mathemat-
ical arguments, opening a highway to divine knowledge, could lead out of the impasse into
which the Copernican debate had run. Mathematical arguments alone carried the power
to counter biblical arguments as mathematics, too, was the language of God, the divine
geometer.
4. God and mathematics around Galileo
An attempt to review thoroughly the divine element in seventeenth century mathematical
sciences is beyond my scope but without doubt the divine quite naturally entered many
a mathematician’s theoretical reﬂections on the foundations of his discipline. Two of the
standard arguments for a certain afﬁnity between mathematics and divine creation have
already been quoted, namely the saying attributed to Plato that in essence God himself
was a geometer (Deum semper Geometriam exercere) and the famous passage from the
Wisdom of Solomon that God had organised the world according to measure, number, and
weight.
Nearness to God was explicitly drawn upon to legitimise the mathematical sciences
by many of Galileo’s contemporaries: by Johannes Kepler (1571–1630), who even con-
sidered the mathematical way as a kind of divine service; by Galileo’s disciple Niccolò
Aggiunti (1600–1635), who also served God mathematically; more cautiously by Evan-
gelista Torricelli, who after the trial of 1633 knew about the pitfalls into which discourse
about the divine and mathematics could lead; by Galileo’s Dutch sympathiser Martin van
den Hove (Martinus Hortensius, 1605–1639), who could freely confess to the close neigh-
bourhood between mathematics and the divine; by the Jesuit mathematicians Giuseppe
Biancani (1566–1624) and Charles Malapert (1580–1630), both of whom clearly saw that
nearness to God and their epistemological perfection guaranteed the progress of the math-
ematical sciences; and many more.10 It has to be taken into account that after the trial of
1633 the profession to close links between the mathematical and the divine may have been
prevented by fear of ecclesiastical intervention, at least on the Italian scene.
A denunciation of October 1641 bears witness to this. The Piarist Mario Sozzi (1608–
1643) had indicted some of his Florentine brothers before the Roman Inquisition. The
8Clavius, Christoph: Operum mathematicorum tomus quartus complectens gnominices libros octo. fabricam et
vsvm instrvmenti ad horologiorum descriptionem peropportuni. Horologiorum novam descriptionem. Compen-
divm brevissimvm describendorvm horologiorum horizontalium ac declinantium. Notas in novam Horologiorum
descriptionem, Mainz, 1612: “... vt nihil probabile admittant, sed illustribus omnia argumentis necessarijsque
demonstrent...”.
9The translation is Maurice A. Finocchiaro’s (The Galileo Affair: A Documentary History, Berkeley/Los An-
geles/London, 1989, p. 68); cf. EN XII, p. 172: “Ma io non crederò che ci sia tel dimostratione, ﬁn che non mi
sia mostrata”.
10For a detailed discussion of these topics cf. Volker R. Remmert, Ariadnefäden im Wissenschaftslabyrinth.
Studien zu Galilei: Historiographie–Mathematik–Wirkung, Berne, 1998, Chapter 5.

Galileo, God and mathematics
357
Piarists (Scolopi) were an order devoted to teaching. In contrast to the Jesuits they did not
teach advanced and elitist courses but founded elementary schools (Scuole Pie) to teach
the children of the poor. The Florentine Piarists had been well known for their Galilean
sympathies, which Sozzi deplored, but his main complaint about the Florentine brothers
Clemente Settimi, Famiano Michelini and Ambrogio Ambrosi was another:
All of them believe that there is no science truer and more certain than the one Galileo teaches
following the mathematical way, calling it the new philosophy and the real way to do natural
philosophy. The above mentioned, and Fathers Francesco Clemente and Ambrogio in particular,
have often said that this was the true way to know God. And time and again Father Clemente tried
to convince me to take up the study of their theories.
... they said that this philosophy had been proved and that it was the true way to convert the
heretics and to know God ...11
This was sufﬁcient for the Roman Inquisition to order Settimi to come all the way from
Florence to Rome to justify himself. Even though the historical context and consequences
of Sozzi’s denunciation still lie in the dark, the affair nevertheless illustrates that to speak
boldly about God and mathematics or the mathematical way as Galileo had done in his
Dialogue, bore a certain risk of running into trouble with ecclesiastical authorities.
5. Concluding remarks
Obviously, there is a contradiction between Galileo’s theory that mathematics is the only
and unequivocal means to explain nature and his practice when he applied mathematical
methods which called for the idealisation of nature and mathematical techniques adapted
to the actual problems. But this contradiction breaks up into two fundamentally different
concepts of mathematics. Galileo the working scientist employed mathematics as a re-
search instrument, whereas Galileo the propagandist fashioned mathematics as a model of
epistemological perfection.
Galileo followed two interwoven strategies to legitimise his position. He persisted with
amazing success in advancing his own social status as a practitioner of the mathematical
sciences. Mario Biagioli has shown how ingenious Galileo was in advancing his own ca-
reer in the system of court patronage and how this contributed to the social legitimation
of his scientiﬁc practice. On the other hand, Galileo outlined a complete legitimising strat-
egy for the epistemological status of pure mathematics, its employment in other branches
of knowledge and its emancipation from theology. Furthermore, on the foundation of his
unshakeable belief in the epistemological excellence of the mathematical sciences in the hi-
erarchy of scientiﬁc disciplines, Galileo devised and used many methods and mechanisms
to enhance their status. By so doing, he could build on common procedures and patterns of
argumentation.
11The translation is mine; cf. Picanyol, Leodegario: Le Scuole Pie e Galileo Galilei, Rome, 1942, pp. 141–143:
“Tutti li sopradetti tengono che non ci sia né più vera, né più certa scienza di questa del Galileo che insegna per
via di mattematica, chiamandola nova ﬁlosoﬁa, e vero modo di ﬁlosofare; e più volte hanno detto i sopradetti
e particolarmente il Padre Francesco Clemente et Ambrogio che questo è il vero modo di conoscere Dio, e più
volte mi ha essortato il Padre Clemente a darmi a questo studio ... hanno detto che questa ﬁlosoﬁa è provata, che
questo è il vero modo di convertire gli heretici e conoscere Dio; ...”.

358
V.R. Remmert
Galileo’s double strategy was extraordinary only insofar as it was exceptionally suc-
cessful. To elevate the social status of the mathematical sciences and the epistemological
status of pure mathematics by different means and mutually to transfer the epistemological
status of pure mathematics to all the mathematical sciences and the social status of mixed
mathematics to the realm of pure mathematics was totally conventional and accorded with
the practice of many contemporary mathematicians. As did his contemporaries, Galileo re-
ferred to existing patterns of argumentation, employed the same sources and used the same
structures and mechanisms to advance the common cause. His exceptional success rested
on his high visibility as a client of the Medici, his outstanding scientiﬁc achievements and
his rhetorical and intellectual brilliance.
But there is more to the story than a divine touch to Galileo’s mathematical universe.
Such developments around the mathematical sciences were closely related to the transfor-
mation of the hierarchy of scientiﬁc disciplines beginning in the early seventeenth century.
Disciplinary boundaries were extended and blurred by the expansion of the mathematical
sciences into hitherto forbidden scenes of inquiry. This expansion was particularly indebted
to the construction of pure mathematics as a divine science and a model of perfection that
had necessarily to be applied to the study of nature. The rising epistemological status of
mathematics and the mathematical sciences automatically brought along epistemological
weight for the originating new sciences depending on mathematical methods. This points
directly, for instance, to the later role of physics as a leader in the hierarchy of scientiﬁc
disciplines in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries (a Leitwissenschaft in the sense of
Norbert Elias).
Without a doubt, the position of the new sciences originating in the changing hierarchy
of scientiﬁc disciplines greatly proﬁted from the changing position and imperialism of the
mathematical sciences. The emancipation of the mathematical sciences, the elevation of
their epistemological and social status, was a necessary precondition for the astonishing
transformation of the hierarchy of scientiﬁc disciplines. And this transformation prepared
the ground for the implementation of the modern organisation and structure of scientiﬁc
disciplines. It was not merely the noble minds or backgrounds of its practitioners that gave
the new ﬁelds of scientiﬁc inquiry credibility; it was, at the same time, the applicability
of pure and mixed mathematics to these ﬁelds. This is not to say that the mathematical
sciences were actually and efﬁciently applied to these ﬁelds but only that they could proﬁt
from their status—just think of the new branch of physico-mathesis or ﬁsicomatematica,
which not only incorporated mathematics into its name to prove that the mathematical sci-
ences were to be used in physical inquiries but also to transfer the epistemological certainty
of pure mathematics to the results of theses inquiries.
The importance the divine aspect had originally had in this process and in the thinking
of Galileo and many of his contemporaries increasingly sank into oblivion as a more pol-
ished and rationalistic picture of the Scientiﬁc Revolution was painted in historiography.
Indeed, taken at face value, Galileo’s ideas on God and mathematics hardly seemed com-
patible with his position as a martyr of science (and not only science) or with the image
of the founding father of modern physics. But seen in the context of Galileo’s legitimis-
ing efforts and propaganda for the Copernican system, the divine ﬁts perfectly into the
picture.

Galileo, God and mathematics
359
6. Selected bibliography
On the mathematical sciences in the seventeenth century see:
J.-M. Mandosio, Entre mathématiques et physique: note sur les “sciences intermédi-
aires” à la Renaissance, in: Comprendre et maîtriser la nature au Moyen Age: Mélanges
d’histoire des sciences offerts à Guy Beaujouan, Geneva, 1994, pp. 115–138.
P. Dear, Discipline & Experience: The Mathematical Way in the Scientiﬁc Revolution,
Chicago/London, 1995.
V.R. Remmert, Ariadnefäden im Wissenschaftslabyrinth. Studien zu Galilei: Histori-
ographie–Mathematik–Wirkung, Berne 1998.
Special attention is paid to the quaestio de certitudine mathematicarum in:
N. Jardine, Epistemology of the Sciences, in: C.B. Schmitt (ed.), The Cambridge History
of Renaissance Philosophy, Cambridge etc., 1988, pp. 685–711.
P. Mancosu, Philosophy of Mathematics and Mathematical Practice in the Seventeenth
Century, New York/Oxford, 1996.
On Galileo’s biography and career see:
M. Biagioli, Galileo, Courtier: The Practice of Science in the Culture of Absolutism,
Chicago/London, 1993.
S. Drake, Galileo: Pioneer Scientist, Toronto/Buffalo/London, 1990.
R. Feldhay, Galileo and the Church: Political Inquisition or Critical Dialogue?, Cam-
bridge/New York/Melbourne, 1995.
P. Machamer (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Galileo, Cambridge/New York/
Melbourne, 1998.
On the divine in seventeenth century science see:
A. Funkenstein, Theology and the Scientiﬁc Imagination from the Middle Ages to the
Seventeenth Century, Princeton, 1986.
D.C. Lindberg, and Ronald L. Numbers (eds.), God and Nature: Historical Essays on
the Encounter between Christianity and Science, Berkeley/Los Angeles/London, 1987.
M.J. Osler, Divine Will and the Mechanical Philosophy. Gassendi and Descartes on
Contingency and Necessity in the Created World, Cambridge, 1994.
Sources:
A. Favaro (ed.), Le opere di Galileo Galilei. Edizione Nazionale diretta da Antonio
Favaro, 20 vols., Florence 1890–1909 [referred to as EN].
O. Besomi, and M. Helbing (eds.), Dialogo sopra i due massimi sistemi del mondo
tolemaico e copernicano. Edizione critica e commento a cura di Ottavio Besomi e Mario
Helbing, 2 vols., Padua, 1998.
Sources in English translation:
S. Drake (ed. and transl.), Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo. Including ‘The Starry
Messenger’ (1610), ‘Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina’ (1615) and Excerpts from
‘Letters on Sunspots’ (1613), ‘The Assayer’ (1623), New York, 1957.

360
V.R. Remmert
S. Drake (ed.), Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems. Translated with
Revised Notes by Stillman Drake. Foreword by Albert Einstein, Berkeley/Los Angeles,
1962.
M.A. Finocchiaro (ed. and transl.), Galileo on the World Systems: A New Abridged
Translation and Guide, Berkeley/Los Angeles/London, 1997.
M.A. Finocchiaro (ed. and transl.), The Galileo Affair: A Documentary History, Berke-
ley/Los Angeles/London, 1989.

CHAPTER 19
The Mathematical Model of Creation
According to Kepler
André Charrak
Universite de Paris I Panthéon-Sorbonne, France
E-mail: charrak@univ-paris1.fr
Contents
1. Harmony and mathesis: the originality of Kepler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 364
2. Mathematical ideas in God and creation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 367
3. The limits of univocity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 370
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
361


The mathematical model of Creation according to Kepler
363
Kepler not only embodies the birth of classical science with his model of the elliptical
orbits of the planets and the formulation of the law of gases, but he is also often considered
as one of the last representatives of a Renaissance scientiﬁc style, a style weighed down
with questionable analogies and which is commonly presented, erroneously, as opposed to
the modern project of a methodical mathematical expression of nature. Thus, the author of
Harmonices mundi may have supposed that the movements which he observed in the sky
were characterised by the same harmony as musical scales, and it is very tempting to think
that Spinoza, when he criticised the cosmological application of traditional ﬁnalism, was
talking about these attempts by Kepler: “[...] and ﬁnally, those [objects] which move the
ears are said to produce noise, sound or harmony. Men have been so mad as to believe that
God is pleased by harmony. Indeed there are Philosophers who have persuaded themselves
that the motions of the heavens produce harmony”.1 This opposition between the rational
core of his contributions to astronomy and the accompanying symbolism, explained away
as a kind of intellectual “extravagance”, is hardly satisfying. In fact it should be recognised
that through the redevelopments that Kepler claims to have made in the interpretation of
analogical correspondences, there exists an ambitious philosophical project to found the
geometricisation of natural phenomena. To be more precise, on the one hand, it is clear
that the mathematical research concerning the harmony of the world (that is to say, the
orbits of the planets) has an apologetic purpose, “[...] seeing that we astronomers are,
with the book of nature as our starting point, the priests of God the Almighty, we should
seek above all not the praise of our own minds but the glory of the Creator”.2 Kepler
interprets the Creation according to a mathematical model that allows him to maintain a
similarity between the regions of which Boethius afﬁrmed the correspondence, the music
of the world (which governs natural phenomena), human music (which characterises the
order of the parts of the soul and the purest pleasure) and instrumental music (which we can
observe in music between different voices3). But, on the other hand, this similarity ﬁnds
itself reinterpreted according to precise epistemological constraints: confronted with the
ﬁrst developments in algebra, the author of the Harmonices Mundi afﬁrms the ontological
primacy of geometrical objects which, alone, are truly real and constitute the archetypes
of Creation. In so doing, Kepler abandons the Pythagorean tradition, which he explicitly
challenges, even if this break is not sufﬁciently underlined by commentators. The critique
of analogy, of which recent commentators have deﬁned the metaphysical foundation,4 is
constructed with great attention to rigorous methodology, which will lead Kepler himself
to reject a general appeal to ﬁnalist speculations. In short, Kepler’s theory of harmony,
1Ethics, Ist Part, Appendix, The Collected Works of Spinoza, Edited and translated by Edwin Curley, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1985, volume I, p. 445.
2Letter to H. von Hohenburg, 26 October 1598, Gesammelte Werke [GW], Band VI, Beck, München, 1937–
1959: GW XIII, p. 193. All quotes from Harmonices mundi are taken from E.J. Aiton, A.M. Duncan, J.V. Fields,
The Harmony of the World [HW], Translated into English with an Introduction and Notes, Memoirs of The
American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, vol. 209, 1997.
3See, for example, this precise version of the correspondence between instrumental music and music of the
world which allows the order of Creation to be represented: “[...] for our polyphonists as they call them, no
limit is set when they multiply the number of lines of melody to be sung together, as God the Creator also, in
his tempering of the heavenly motions, preceded them, making a system of seven diapasons, and more” (HW,
Book III, Chapter XI, p. 212).
4For example, J.-L. Marion, Sur la théologie blanche de Descartes, PUF, Paris, 1991, pp. 178–203.

364
A. Charrak
Fig. 1. Johannes Kepler (etching by Jacob von Heyden).
which was to make explicit the true criteria of divine creation, will also have to set forth
the conditions of a rigorous scientiﬁc explanation. In this respect, the problem is no longer
that of the domination of Kepler’s conception of science by theological preoccupations,
but, on the contrary, of whether (and how) it is possible to avoid reducing his theological
discourse to a discussion of the foundations of the mathematical sciences.5
1. Harmony and mathesis: the originality of Kepler
To illustrate his critique of ﬁnalism, Spinoza takes the example of the generalisation of the
harmony of sounds to all the other parts of the natural order, and in particular to the order
of the world or of nature; and we may, with certain reservations that we will examine later,
consider that it is really according to this argument (from musical harmony to the harmony
of the world, conceived and desired by God) that Kepler develops his conceptions. For it is
ﬁrstly in music that man experiences the reality of harmony, and we should go back from
this musical system (i.e., from the division of the octave and the classiﬁcation of conso-
5In the present essay the relations between God and mathematics are examined and not Kepler’s theological
texts. The theological aspects of Kepler’s work are presented in the studies (which are discussed by Marion in
Théologie blanche) of E.W. Gerdes, “Keplers theologisches Selbstverständnis und dessen Herkunft”, in: Interna-
tionale Kepler Symposium, Weil-der-Stadt, eds. F. Krafft, K. Meyer, B. Stricken, Hildesheim, 1973; “Johannes
Kepler as Theologian”, in: Kepler. Four hundred years, eds. A. Beer and P. Beer, Oxford-New York, 1975. The
biographical chapters of Max Caspar, Kepler, translated and edited by C. Doris Hellman, Dover Publications,
New York, 1993, deal with the religious context of Kepler’s time.

The mathematical model of Creation according to Kepler
365
nances) to the true foundation of relationships that it incarnates. This system which gives
pleasure to the soul does not follow the whims of the musician, but ﬁnds its rational foun-
dation in the same formal cause that God exploited in order to construct harmony in every
region of creation: “Its construction is not arbitrary, as some may suppose, nor a human
invention which may be modiﬁed, but entirely rational, and entirely natural, so much so
that God Himself the Creator has given expression to it in adjusting the heavenly motions
to each other”.6 This declaration gives us an essential indication: the intelligibility of the
(rational) foundation guarantees that it is the (natural) cause of the diverse incarnations
of harmony; and at the same time, Kepler must produce precise methodological criteria
to deﬁne the domain of what is knowable. From this perspective, he takes great care to
distinguish his research from traditional speculations, initiated by the Pythagoreans, about
the correspondence between cosmological music and instrumental music (that which men
sing or play) which gives us the idea of harmony.
The author of Harmonices mundi criticises the more or less suggestive comparisons
between the different levels of Creation accepted before him, and he is motivated in this
criticism by a truly demonstrative research based on the clear idea of the status of different
mathematical objects which could (or could not) be called true causes. Thus, for example,
he explicitly insists on “the difference [...] between the symbolism of Ptolemy and [his]
own legitimate demonstrations ⟨inter Ptolemaei symbolismos et meas demonstrationes le-
gitimas⟩”.7 Kepler’s opposition to purely symbolic similarities is echoed in the criticisms
he directed at certain of his contemporaries such as Robert Fludd. In the case of Fludd, as
in that of Ptolemy or the Pythagoreans, the fundamental error consisted in ﬁrst taking the
numbers or, more generally, the discrete quantities (the relationships and proportions of
which they are composed) for the causes of harmony which they try to explain: for exam-
ple, Fludd “trusts the Ancients, who believed that the force of the harmonies comes from
abstract numbers”.8 Thus the criticism of Renaissance symbolism is in reality connected to
a strong conception of the relationships between discrete and continuous quantities, which
leads Kepler to reject the (Pythagorean) notion that harmony comes from the beauty of
numbers. The new doctrine of Harmony will therefore be based on a reformed mathesis
that should be understood in a more precise context.
To begin with, this criticism of numerical causality seems to be aimed at prestigious
but distant adversaries, above all the Ancients and Ptolemy in particular. For example,
when, in 1621, he went back to the text of Mysterium cosmographicum, which, since 1597,
had marked his adhesion to Copernicanism, Kepler argues, on the grounds of certain re-
sults established in Harmonices mundi in 1619, that Ptolemy is guilty of having looked
for the causes of phenomena (in the same way as musical chords) in the properties of
numbers: “Ptolemy does not look beyond the numbers as causes without considering the
ﬁgures as counted numbers and so he, with the ancient writers, unjustly proscribes cer-
tain chords and accepts among the melodic intervals some which do not deserve that sta-
tus”.9 Kepler knows, however, that the great astronomer endeavoured to avoid the errors
of the Pythagoreans, but the criticism given here is situated at a much more general level.
6HW, Book III, Chapter II, p. 158.
7Ibid., Appendix to Book V, pp. 499–500; GW VI, pp. 369, 30–31.
8Ibid., p. 506.
9Mysterium cosmographicum, in caput duodecimum notae auctoris, n◦38, GW VIII, p. 77.

366
A. Charrak
Fig. 2. The universe as depicted in Kepler’s Mysterium Cosmographicum (1596).
Ptolemy’s error stems from the fact that he does not see that numbers are nothing but the re-
sult of a measurement, and that only the objects counted possess true being: “[...] whereas
Ptolemy looks for the basic principles of harmonies in abstract numbers, along with the
Ancients, I, on the other hand, say that there is no force in the numbers as counting num-
bers ⟨numeris ut numerantibus⟩, and in their place establish as the basic principles of the
harmonies the counted numbers ⟨numeros numeratos⟩, that is, the things themselves which
are subject to the numbers, in other words the plane regular ﬁgures and the divisions of the
circle which are to be controlled by them”.10 In itself, such a use of the distinction between
counting numbers and counted numbers11 has no originality. But in this criticism of ap-
parently distant concerns, Kepler is actually arguing against the evolution of mathematical
sciences of his time.
The refutation of all forms of numerical causality is allied to the criticism of other con-
temporary opponents that Kepler was engaged in from the ﬁrst book of his Harmonices
mundi. These opponents developed cossic methods and thus anticipated developments in
algebra. Kepler targeted in particular Justus Burgius (Jost Bürgi), who wanted to provide
an algebraic expression of the relation of a heptagon (which up to the 19th century was
not a constructible polygon) to the radius of the circumscribed circle. We should note, in
passing, that this object plays an important role in the theory of harmonics, because its ex-
amination engages the traditional exclusion of the number seven in deﬁning the consonant
intervals in music. Kepler maintains this exclusion with arguments taken from geometry.
In general, the defect of algebra (or of its pre-ﬁgurations in cossics) lies in the fact that it
has a tendency to create a belief in the existence of what is, in reality, a non-entity, because
10HW, Appendix to Book V, p. 500.
11Established, for example, by Aristotle, Physics IV, 11, 219b 6.

The mathematical model of Creation according to Kepler
367
it allows the apparently rigorous deﬁnition of an object, such as the heptagon, which is not
constructible: “[...] it is appropriate to add a word here addressed to Metaphysicians in
connection with this algebraic treatment: let them consider if they can adapt this treatment
to algebraic Axioms, since they say that which does not exist (a non-entity) has no char-
acteristics and no properties. For here, indeed, we are concerning ourselves with entities
which can be known; and we correctly maintain the side of the Heptagon to be among
non-entities that cannot be known”.12 In conclusion, cossics, for Kepler, demonstrate that
numbers lose their basis in being when their use is not strictly subordinate to the condition
of measurement. We thus understand that the author of Harmonices Mundi is very care-
ful concerning the redistribution of the relations between the two types of quantity, which
modern developments in algebra deﬁne precisely as the problem of the objective corre-
late in mathematical writing. In this context, Kepler judged that it was becoming urgent
to denounce explanations based on simple calculation (especially concerning proportions),
in which the geometrical correlate in a constructible ﬁgure is not certain, in order to sub-
ordinate research into harmony to the preliminary elucidation of the status of objects of
mathesis, of which the reality must be proven.
The remarkable point is that Kepler, starting with this discussion, reinterprets the whole
of his etiology: the causes of the harmonies must be found in the mathemata which really
possess being—that is to say, not in the geometrical ﬁgures whose numbers are subordi-
nate, but in those that can be inscribed within a circle, to which Kepler attributes a special
ontological status: it constitutes, for example, the nature of the soul. It is therefore the ques-
tion of constructability that divides geometrical ﬁgures into knowable ﬁgures, which can
be raised to the level of true causes, and their unknowable counterparts. In the framework
of this article, the question is not really to know how the author of the Harmonices mundi
can thus give a special primacy to the circle (which will be taken up by Descartes and
Galileo) that means essentially that he maintains the schema of formal causality for certain
mathematical objects; the real problem concerns the exclusive restriction of all causes in
Creation to mathematical archetypes.
2. Mathematical ideas in God and creation
It can be considered, in a very general way, that Kepler conserves a model according to
which certain mathematical objects are the formal causes of harmony, but we must be
particularly attentive to the restrictions that he progressively assigns to this cosmological
model and which lead him to produce an original interpretation of the passage of the book
of Genesis in which God creates the world according to weight, measure and number.
Firstly, we have seen how Kepler rejected the Pythagorean model of numerical causal-
ity: it was excluded after the ﬁrst version of Mysterium cosmographicum and made way
for a more technical interpretation in the criticism of Cossics given in 1619. However,
with Harmonices mundi, Kepler also rejects the model of Platonic inspiration according
to which the causes of phenomena must be looked for in the properties of regular solids.
This second restriction turns out to be all the more serious in that it also targets Kepler’s
12HW, Book I, Prop. XLV, p. 74.

368
A. Charrak
own initial attempts, revealed in 1597, and of which he demonstrated the shortcomings ﬁrst
in the Harmonices mundi and then in the notes to the second edition of Mysterium. And
it is this second question that gives him the space to discuss the passage in the book of
Genesis, which interested all the founders of classical science. If it is acceptable to relate
the harmony which reigns in phenomena to the properties of polyhedrons (as Kepler does
again in Harmonices mundi), it is because such an analogy “is acceptable to me and to
all Christians, since our Faith holds that the World, which had no previous existence, was
created by God in weight, measure and number, that is, in accordance with ideas coeternal
with Him”.13 In other words, the quote from Scripture legitimates the use of analogy; but
analogies which focus on solid bodies are not sufﬁciently justiﬁed before recognition of the
geometrical causes of such correspondences, and these are to be found only in the ﬁgures
(it is this point that had not been understood in the Mysterium cosmographicum): “For their
origin is not really in the properties of their solid angles but, rather, the properties of the
solid angles are a consequence of the origin of the ﬁgures, being by their very nature some-
thing that comes later”.14 It is, therefore, obvious that the strict geometrical interpretation
of formal causality serves to analyse philosophical discourse concerning the Creation of
the World. The broader analogies that are suggested, for example, in Genesis, do not mean
anything until they have been cross-referenced with the constructible ﬁgures which are the
basis of the correspondence between different domains. The status of such comparisons
was to be clariﬁed in the second edition of the Mysterium cosmographicum. Kepler here
distinguished two categories; an authentic relationship (cognatio), which truly associates
the objects of the same mathematical type, and a simple afﬁnity (afﬁnitas), which may be
revealed in objects of different species but which is also subordinate to the principles of
all created things, the regular ﬁgures inscribed within a circle—the ancient comparisons
between musical chords and regular solids will have only this status: “therefore, this per-
fection (or its opposite, mediocrity) belongs to the chords because of the plane ﬁgures
themselves, and, furthermore, to the solid ﬁgures: consequently, and again, it is not a rela-
tionship (cognatio) but a simple afﬁnity (afﬁnitas sola) that exists between the double and
imperfect harmonic sections and the Dodecahedron (primary ﬁgure) and the Icosahedron
(secondary ﬁgure)”.15 This rarely quoted text seems to us to be absolutely necessary to an
understanding of the profound change which marks the structure of comparisons proposed
by Kepler between the diverse harmonies. It is no longer a question of envisaging the anal-
ogy between different levels which are more or less close to the formal archetype, but of
recognising the existence of a unique formal causality in different sectors, which resemble
(or not) each other only in this way.
Thus, only comparisons subservient to geometry are fully intelligible (and not simply
pedagogic); but in return, geometrical knowledge guarantees us a full and complete intel-
ligence of the formal criteria of Creation. If we can assimilate with complete certainty the
unknowable (that is to say that which is not constructible) to non-being, it is because we
share with God the principles of the mathematical sciences. Once again, Kepler’s remarks
concerning the heptagon prove particularly enlightening. On the one hand, the (non-) con-
structability establishes the limits of what is intelligible to the human mind, which does
13HW, Book II, Prop. XXV, p. 115.
14Ibid., p. 116.
15Mysterium cosmographicum, in caput duodecimum notae auctoris, n◦16, GW VIII, p. 74.

The mathematical model of Creation according to Kepler
369
not know a ﬁgure until it can produce its formal description.—The heptagon must be con-
sidered as unknowable, in the strong sense of the word: “For a formal description of it
is impossible; nor therefore can it be known to the human mind, since the possibility of
being constructed is prior to the possibility of being known [...]”. On the other hand, this
restriction is not relative only to the capacity of our understanding: it concerns the Creator
himself, whose science cannot reduce unrealised ﬁgures to the criteria of mathematical
truth. God, who ﬁnds in himself the mathemata, does not know the heptagon any more
than man: “[...] nor can it be known by the Omniscient Mind by a simple eternal act:
because of its nature it is among unknowable things”.16 The impossibility of ﬁnding the
geometrical procedure that would allow the inscription of a heptagon within a circle is not
(and which, for example, would give the calculations of Burgius their objective correlate)
is not due to an incapacity of the human mind, but, as G. Simon has written, “it is linked
to the very nature of the mathematical object, and consequently, is just as valid for divine
intelligence”.17 Above all, these declarations found in Harmonices mundi clearly indicate
that the author supports the integral univocity between the mathematical knowledge of God
and that of created intelligences.
Kepler afﬁrms at the same time that the mathematical essences founded within being
(that’s to say the constructible ﬁgures) constitute all the formal material of Creation and
that they are not known by God in a different way than by Man. In other words, geometry
expresses God himself as the Creator and as intelligence. It is in the light of this double
characterisation of the problem of the mathematical essence of things that the famous thesis
“Geometry is coeternal with God” should be envisaged. In this afﬁrmation, Kepler states
more than just the eternity of Mathematical truths—as J.-L. Marion indicates, he says that
these objects are “comparable (to God) on the basis of their relationship to eternity, and
that (they) beneﬁt from his eternity itself, as if one of the divine attributes spread out to that
which does not come from God”18). Marion also observes that, at the same time, geomet-
rical objects are placed on the same plan as idea exemplares which, according to Thomas,
presided over the creation of the world—strongly attested to in the following text: “[...]
geometry [...], is coeternal with God, and by shining forth in the divine mind supplied
patterns to God [...], for the furnishing of the world, so that it could become best and
most beautiful and above all most like to the Creator. Indeed all spirits, souls and minds
are images of God the Creator if they have been put in command each of their own bodies,
to govern, move, increase, preserve, and also particularly to propagate them. Then since
they have embraced a certain pattern of the creation in their functions, they also observe
the same laws along with the Creator in their operations, having derived them from geom-
etry. Also they rejoice in the same proportions which God used, wherever they have found
them”.19 In the light of such declarations we can follow Marion in concluding that, in Ke-
pler, we witness a “a transcription of exemplarism in mathematical terms”,20 since it is
obvious that in as much as they structure divine understanding, and thus the ﬁelds of possi-
16HW, Book I, Prop. XLV, p. 74.
17See concerning this point the fundamental work of G. Simon, Kepler, astronome astrologue, Gallimard, Paris,
1979, p. 156.
18Op. cit., p. 179.
19HW, Book III, Axiom VII, p. 146.
20Op. cit., p. 180.

370
A. Charrak
bility, geometrical forms organise all forms of intelligibility (that is to say, also, that which
created intelligence can attain) and function as the formal causes of all natural phenomena.
It is within this remarkable perspective that we can add that the characteristics of knowable
mathematics deﬁne a certain type of perfection of ideas that Kepler explicitly assimilates
to their tendency to be present in nature. God ﬁnds in constructability a motive for realis-
ing the movement of the idea of constructible ﬁgures towards creation itself: “Since this
property of Congruence, which shows itself in structure and bodily form, is such that it,
as it were, of itself encourages the speculative mind to make something external to itself,
to create, to fashion a solid body. Thus it has from eternity lain hidden in the supremely
blessed divine mind, as one of the Ideas, and so far partook of the highest goodness that
it might not be contained within its own abstraction but must break forth into the work
of Creation, causing God the Creator to enclose bodies within particular ﬁgures”.21 The
criteria of divine action and, ﬁnally, God himself seem thus to manifest themselves to the
human mind which can attain, via mathematics, an apparently complete intelligence of the
act of creation. The whole question is therefore to know if, as it seems to recent commenta-
tors, Kepler conﬁnes himself to this characterisation, which is at the same time exorbitant
(from an epistemological perspective) and simplistic (from a theological perspective), of
our relationship with God.
3. The limits of univocity
Here, it would be convenient to start with a precise question: is mathematical intelligence
really sufﬁcient to establish complete univocity between divine science and the typically
human modalities of knowledge of harmonies? That is what the passages we have quoted
lead us to understand, at least isolated from their systematic context. We must now re-
construct this context which shows that all human science is not established—at least not
immediately—in the conditions of such certainty. The arguments that can be produced in
this sense concern Kepler’s remarks on the order of exposition of the works, his awareness
of the novelty of his project and the limits that its radical position imposed on the writer to
explain in truly remarkable terms. To catch the general feeling of research concerning the
harmonies, we must pay attention to the explicit terms that Kepler himself uses to comment
on his own work and also to the precautions that he often discusses in order to prevent a
“naïve” interpretation of the mathematical model which, he argues, guarantees maximum
intelligibility.
It is true that the human mind, when it has attained a clear consciousness of the mathe-
matical causes of things, applies itself with the same certainty to the geometrical archetypes
which deﬁne their nature as to God himself, with whom these objects are said to be
coeternal—we have seen that this thesis implies, in particular, that the impossibilities en-
countered by Geometry with regard to certain objects apply equally to God, who, for ex-
ample, cannot imagine, any more than we can, the constructability of a heptagon. But this
strict identiﬁcation de jure between human science and that of the creator is not, in fact,
so easy to apply. And once it has been understood in principle, it does not lead, however,
21HW, Book II [Introduction], pp. 97–98.

The mathematical model of Creation according to Kepler
371
to an effective explanation of the system of harmonies. This is the meaning of Keplers’
remarks concerning the order of exposition that he follows in his works. In principle (de
jure), the elucidation of the metaphysical status of harmony and its foundation in geometry
should allow us to deduce its various aspects in God himself as creator, then in the world
and ﬁnally in human music. However, if the inscribable polygons, as archetypes, constitute
that which is most real, it remains that man encounters them only in abstraction based on
sensory experience, which comes ﬁrst in a chronological perspective. In other words, in
the effective presentation of science, it is convenient to start with what is most derived,
i.e. melody, and then progress up to the purest forms of harmony. Thus the beginning of
the third book of Harmonices mundi makes it clear that once the mathematical premises
of the research have been presented (especially the status of counted numbers which cos-
sic methods tend to conceal), exposition of the harmonies must start by the examination
of instrumental music, whose vocabulary is more familiar to us, and not the examination
of the metaphysical theory of harmony, which is nevertheless the basis of the application
of this concept to other areas of knowledge: “[...] it is indeed difﬁcult to abstract men-
tally the distinctions, types and modes of the harmonic proportions from musical notes
and sounds, since the only vocabulary which comes to our aid, as is necessary to expound
matters, is the musical one”.22 In fact the situation is even more complicated than this. It
does not consist only in tracing the order of exposition onto the order of invention, avoid-
ing following the order of real generation of harmonies, which is “[...] what the nature
of the subject requires”.23 A less quoted passage of the following book makes it clearer
that in reality we must realise a double inversion, which consists in starting with the study
of musical harmony and, furthermore, in including, the most abstract metaphysical con-
siderations: “[...] the requirements of stating the arguments have persuaded us not only
to reverse the order, starting from human song, passing from that to the works of Nature,
and thus ﬁnally to the Work of Creation, which was the ﬁrst and most perfect of all, but
also to combine the end of abstract speculation with the beginning of actual harmonies
in melody”.24 Such considerations are necessary in order to avoid reducing harmony to a
simple relationship between sounds, which constitute the sensory starting-point of the in-
vestigation. We should note that Spinoza was to criticise such metaphysical extrapolation
entrenched in the methodological composition of the work. Whichever direction we take,
if the identiﬁcation of human and divine logic leads Kepler, as Marion establishes, to push
aside the inequality that is characteristic of relations of imitation and, in doing so, to reject
analogia entis,25 it is obvious that from the strict point of view of the order of exposition
of harmonies, a difference remains, linked to the conditions of experience, which deﬁnes
the conditions of its interpretation and affects the direction of our research.
But it is on the level of the very structure of science, and no longer on the conditions of
its acquisition and exposition that the inordinate demands of complete univocity must be
confronted. Therefore it is essential to turn careful attention to the passages of Harmonices
mundi in which Kepler goes over his own reasoning in order to underline a novelty of which
he is perfectly aware, even in its theological implications. The author does not hide the fact
22Ibid., Book III [Introduction], p. 129.
23Ibid.
24Ibid., Book IV, Preamble. Explanation of the Order, p. 283.
25See J.-L. Marion, op. cit., pp. 187–188.

372
A. Charrak
that the reduction of archetypes to the ideas of geometry, accentuated in the mathematical
transcription of the logic of the creator, may give rise to certain difﬁculties for theologians,
even if he thinks that such difﬁculties do not of course undermine his ideas. To put it in
another way, Kepler means to avoid (mistakenly, no doubt) the “theological loss” which
sanctions the rewriting of exemplarism in a mathesis of continuous quantity. This attitude
is illustrated once again in the very strong conclusions taken from the non-constructible
nature of the heptagon: “[...] it is on account of this result that the Heptagon and other
ﬁgures were not employed by God in ordering the structure of the World, as He did em-
ploy the knowable ﬁgures”.26 As we have seen concerning this ﬁgure, the central thesis of
the univocity of mathematical reasoning in God and Man implies that the impossibilities
encountered by the human mind in the order of mathematical knowledge constitute logical
impossibilities for divine intelligence itself and, therefore, ontological impossibilities in
the process of Creation. But it is obvious that the text of 1619 creates a remarkable shift
(where a “theological loss” can be identiﬁed), following which the identical structuring of
the mathesis for God and the human mind, illustrated in the fact that God used only the
constructible ﬁgures in Creation, is generalised in the sense of complete univocity. The
essential point is that, as Kepler himself recognises, such a project is scandalous and he
tries to justify it by an identiﬁcation between the deﬁnitions of mathematical knowledge
and the formal rules of logic, which, for all writers (before Descartes), are common to all
forms of intelligence. He argues that it is acceptable to say that we share the same logic
with God and then afﬁrm that this logic is fulﬁlled in mathematics. The coeternity which
the geometrical objects contain means that they deﬁne the very principles of the work-
ing of intelligence, to which the creator must conform in order to remain consistent with
his essence: “In case it should be supposed that these comments are blasphemous. One of
my friends, a very practiced mathematician, thought they could be left out. But nothing is
more habitual among Theologians than to claim that things are impossible if they involve
a contradiction: and that God’s knowledge does not extend to such impossible things, par-
ticularly since these formal ratios of Geometrical entities are nothing else but the Essence
of God; because whatever in God is eternal, that thing is one inseparable divine essence:
so it would be to know Himself as in some way other than He is if He knew things that
are incommunicable as being communicable. And what kind of subservient respect would
it be, on account of the inexpert who will not read the book, to defraud the rest”.27 From
this point of view, knowing more geometrico boils down, not only to knowing like God,
but to knowing God himself. But what does that mean exactly? It means that geometry,
which gives us the material of divine understanding, reveals equally, concentrated in its
corpus, the elementary logical criteria of its organisation, such that respect of the principle
of contradiction is included as an internal demand of the mathesis. Such a reinterpretation
allows Kepler to state, against the theologians, that he has not belittled divine science by
discovering its true objects. Such a declaration should be judged in the light of the work
accomplished in the ﬁrst books of Harmonices mundi in order to realise that, far from being
indifferent to the developments made in the domain of mathematical science, this radical
conception of univocity assumes the novel conversion of a certain area of mathesis pura to
architectonic science.
26HW, Book I, XLV Prop., p. 60.
27Ibid.

The mathematical model of Creation according to Kepler
373
Kepler is sharply conscious of the radical break that he brings to the thesis of univoc-
ity between divine and human logic. This agreement not only concerns an indeterminate
concept of ens,28 but also the readable and perfectly attributable principles and also the
detail of the classiﬁcation of mathematical objects which, as far as they are constructible,
constitute the archetypes of Creation. However, because of the problem of determining the
complete univocity of the geometrical model which God himself has allowed us to know,
Kepler increases the number of precautions to avoid ﬁctional analogies that other authors,
less aware of the criteria put into action within the mathesis, may have imagined between
mathematics and God. This is the deeper meaning of numerous passages in which analog-
ical arguments justifying the special dignity of certain numbers with more or less direct
scriptural or theological references are refuted. Kepler takes care to denounce (in texts
which commentators rarely take into account) what must be called a ﬁnalist prejudice, ac-
cording to which man postulates a purely imaginary numerical causality which transforms
the simple measurement of harmonies into their formal cause—thus he discusses the har-
monic triad: “[...] this threefold number is not the efﬁcient cause of the harmonies, but an
effect of the cause, or a concomitant of the harmony which is realised. It does not give form
to harmonies, but is a splendour of their form. It is not the matter of the harmonic notes,
but is an offspring begotten by material necessity. It is not the end ‘for the sake of which’,
but it is an eventual product of the work”.29 It is very remarkable, moreover, that the con-
fusions that Kepler denounces here are put down to the ignorance of man who forges an
imaginary relationship between the phenomena whose veritable causes he does not know:
“[...] as this six fold does not come from the six days of Creation, so neither does that
threefold depend on the Trinity of persons in the Deity. But since the threefold is common
to divine and worldly things, whenever it occurs the human mind intervenes and knowing
nothing of the causes marvels at this coincidence”.30 It goes without saying that such com-
ments are aimed at marking out the domain pertinent to the methodical research of formal
archetypes, whose perfection directed God in ﬁnalised Creation; but it remains that, here,
Kepler’s text describes the structure of a prejudice which associates an ignorance of the
true causes and the presumption of a ﬁnal causality which, taken from the simple consider-
ation of numbers, is deﬁnitively invalidated by the effective mathematical presentation of
phenomena. Thus, in the effort to distinguish his own attempt from the symbolism of the
Pythagoreans and from Ptolemy, Kepler ﬁnally formulated the argument that Spinoza was
to turn against him.
The analysis proposed here allows us to characterise the historical situation of the Kep-
lerian doctrine of harmony by a double tension, which engages its metaphysical (its relation
with the theological doctrines of analogy) and scientiﬁc (its place in the reﬂection on the
principles of classical science) aspects. (1) As J.-L. Marion has established, Kepler’s crit-
icism of analogy sanctions a new conception of univocity, which, exclusively interpreted
according to a mathematical model, leads Kepler to adopt complete univocity. And what-
ever the limits within which the author of Harmonices mundi afﬁrms the pertinence of
this project, it is impossible to contest the argument that the thesis of complete univocity
between the logic of the Creator and the conditions of rigorous rational (mathematical)
28As Marion underlines, op. cit., p. 184.
29HW, Book III, Chapter III, pp. 169–170.
30Ibid., p. 170.

374
A. Charrak
knowledge leads Kepler to neglect the transcendence of God, who ﬁnds himself measured
“in function of our comprehension”.31 But this theological regression expresses at its foun-
dation, in a tone which Kepler hopes to be apologetic, the demand for a methodical ordering
of knowledge. One must, at the same time, be attentive to the fact that, in the striking pas-
sages that we have quoted, the explicit criticism of analogy entails a rejection of the ﬁnalist
prejudice which weighed heavily on Renaissance theories of similarity. We are thus able
to read God’s designs in the world—a point that is essential to the doctrine of harmony
in the world, up to Leibniz and even up to the 18th century. But this decoding can only
be carried out on the basis of a rigorous mathematical epistemology which replaces the
traditional power of numerical causality by a reformed mathesis. (2) In one sense, the crit-
icisms of analogy developed later will apply to Kepler himself a line of argument which he
directed against the Pythagorean tradition—without going as far as Spinoza, we can quote
Mersenne: “[...] I’m surprised how Kepler dared to compare the ﬁgures with the conso-
nances, in order to extract the reason for their number and their goodness”. Such procedures
lose all their scientiﬁc value, and can scarcely serve any pedagogical purpose in the work:
Kepler’s attitude “would be tolerable only if he contented himself with comparing the said
ﬁgures with the consonances and dissonances by analogy, and for recreation”.32 But by the
same movement, and if we admit the possibility of a natural theology, a whole ﬁeld is freed
for comparisons which will no longer be simply explanatory but essentially apologetic—
which is why Mersenne will allow himself several purely symbolic comparisons, against
which Kepler had warned his reader. The ideas of Mersenne concerning Harmony are char-
acterised in this way by a sort of chiasmus in which harmony loses its status of scientiﬁc
explanation but is reinstated as a general principle of order. And this situation is brought
about by the (provisional) abandoning of the maximal demand, accepted by Kepler, for a
conciliation between the geometrical science of phenomena and a metaphysic in which the
formal causes are determining and harmonic.33
31Marion, op. cit., p. 186.
32Harmonie Universelle, Traité des consonances, des dissonances, des genres, des modes et de la composition,
livre I, proposition XXXIII, Paris, Editions du CNRS, vol. II, p. 86.
33Qu’il nous soit permis de remercier ici Antony McKenna, directeur de l’UMR 5037, pour son aide précieuse
dans l’établissement de ce texte.

Colour Figures
375

376
Colour ﬁgures
Fig. 1. Constantinople, Hagia Sophia interior view. Photo: Erich Lessing.

Colour ﬁgures
377
Fig. 2. Nikolaus von Kues (1401–1464) (left) and his brother; detail of the alterpiece in the chapel of the
St.-Nikolaus-Hospital (Kues, Germany) founded by the philosopher. Courtesy of Helmut Gestrich and the Lan-
desbildstelle Rheinland-Pfalz.

378
Colour ﬁgures
Fig. 3. Titlepage of De docta ignorantia, codex 218 of the Cusanus-Library (Kues, Germany). Courtesy of the
Bibliothek des St.-Nikolaus-Hospitals, Helmut Gestrich and the Landesbildstelle Rheinland-Pfalz.

Colour ﬁgures
379
Fig. 4. Page from De docta ignorantia with geometrical ﬁgures (First book, end of chapter 13, Folio 6v), codex
218 of the Cusanus-Library (Kues, Germany). Courtesy of the Bibliothek des St.-Nikolaus-Hospitals, Helmut
Gestrich and the Landesbildstelle Rheinland-Pfalz.

380
Colour ﬁgures
Fig. 5. Scene of the tapestry known as “la tenture de l’Apocalypse d’Angers” (14th century) based on drawings
by John of Bruges. Illustrating Apocalypse (XI, 1): “And there was given me a reed like unto a rod: and the angel
stood, saying, Rise, and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and them that worship therein.” Courtesy of
the Château d’Angers, France.
Fig. 6. Trinity. Icon by Andrej Rublev (ﬁrst quarter of the 15th century).

Colour ﬁgures
381
Fig. 7. Mathematical realization (ca. 1919). Acquarel by Karel Schmidt. Courtesy of Karel Schmidt Jr.

382
Colour ﬁgures
Fig. 8. Reason against Religion by E. Šˇceglova. Anti Religious poster, USSR, 1970s.

Colour ﬁgures
383
Fig. 9. The Ancient of Days (1827?) by William Blake (1757–1827), relief etching ﬁnished in gold, body colour
and watercolour; frontispiece (Plate I) from “Europe”. Courtesy of the Whitworth Art Gallery, The University of
Manchester.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 20
The Mathematical Analogy in the Proof of God’s
Existence by Descartes
Jean-Marie Nicolle
Université de Rouen, Faculte des Lettres et Sciences Humaines, Département de Philosophie,
rue Lavoisier, 76821 Mont-Saint-Aignan Cedex, France
E-mail: jm.nicolle@wanadoo.fr
Contents
1. Introduction: Descartes’ plan
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 387
1.1. The reconstruction of our knowledge on the basis of reason alone
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 387
1.2. Mathematics as a model for metaphysics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 387
2. Mathematical truth as an example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 388
2.1. Descartes’ involvement with geometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 389
2.2. Towards a general method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 389
2.3. Certainty and simplicity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 391
3. The ontological proof of God’s existence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 392
3.1. The ontological proof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 392
3.2. The position of the ontological proof in the wider context of Descartes’ meditations
. . . . . . . . 395
3.3. The particular character of the ontological proof with respect to the proofs based on God’s effects . 396
4. Arnauld’s criticism: Descartes proof is circular . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 397
4.1. Arnauld’s criticism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 397
4.2. The analogy with the sphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 397
4.3. The answer based on memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 398
5. Truth and existence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 399
5.1. Existence is not included in the mathematical perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 399
5.2. The limits of the analogy between mathematics and metaphysics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 400
6. Conclusion: Descartes’ God and Pascal’s God . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
385


The mathematical analogy in the proof of God’s existence by Descartes
387
1. Introduction: Descartes’ plan
Disillusioned with the scholastic education at the College of La Flèche, where people con-
fused science with erudition, thinking with quoting an author, and learning with knowing
by heart, René Descartes undertook to base his knowledge on the sole practice of his rea-
son. In this respect he was an heir of the Renaissance, when man became aware of the
autonomy of his mind in relation to religion and politics: My objective was never anything
more than an attempt to reform my own thoughts and to build on a foundation that was
entirely my own.1 (Discourse on method, A.T., VI, 15)2
1.1. The reconstruction of our knowledge on the basis of reason alone
To carry out his plan successfully, he has an instrument that everybody possesses, namely
his reason (or common sense): Common sense is the most equally distributed thing in the
world3 (D.M., A.T., VI, 1). Reason is the faculty of producing reasoned arguments, that is
putting ideas in order and judging about truth and falsehood. But why don’t men who all
have the same reason reach the same conclusions? Descartes answers: The diversity of our
views does not arise because some people are more reasonable than others, but simply from
the fact that we guide our thoughts along different paths and do not think about the same
things4 (D.M., A.T., VI, 2). Men don’t use their reason in the same way; some of them use
it correctly, others incorrectly; some of them proceed methodically, others don’t: It is much
better never to try and seek the truth about anything, than to do so without method5 (Rules
for guiding One’s Intelligence, rule IV). But how should one ﬁnd a method? Indeed, you
will only know if a method is right once you have tried it and have been successful. There
is no method to ﬁnd a method. So, you have to begin a practice and, only afterwards, the
results of the method become apparent.
1.2. Mathematics as a model for metaphysics
Descartes’ metaphysical plan was clearly outlined in his letter to the theologians of the
Sorbonne, in which he announced his Meditations. He wanted to prove the existence of
God and the immortality of the soul, to convince the inﬁdels by means of natural reason. If
you want to convert them to faith and at the same time maintain that faith is a gift of God,
you argue in a vicious circle. You therefore have to show that everything one can know
1Jamais mon dessein ne s’est étendu plus avant que de tâcher à réformer mes propres pensées, et de bâtir dans
un fonds qui est tout à moi. (Discours de la méthode, in: Oeuvres et Lettres, Bibliothèque de la Pléiade, Paris,
1953, p. 135)
2References are to A.T.: Oeuvres de Descartes, published by Charles Adam and Paul Tannery, Léopold Cerf,
Paris, 1897–1913.
3Le bon sens est la chose du monde la mieux partagée.
4La diversité de nos opinions ne vient pas de ce que les uns sont plus raisonnables que les autres, mais seulement
de ce que nous conduisons nos pensées par diverses voies, et ne considérons pas les mêmes choses.
5Il est [...] bien préférable de ne jamais chercher la vérité sur aucune chose plutôt que de le faire sans méthode.

388
J.-M. Nicolle
Fig. 1. René Descartes. Science Photo Library.
about God, can be discovered through the effort of one’s own mind; you have to give them
natural proofs: I think that nothing more useful can be done in philosophy than to seek
carefully, once and for all, the best of all those reasons and to expound them so accurately
and so clearly that it is established for everybody once and for all that they are true proofs6
(A.T., IX-1, 6).
Descartes didn’t claim that he provided new proofs, only that he put them in order, so that
they will gain assent from everybody, like the proofs from Archimedes, Apollonius, Pappus
and others ... (A.T., IX-1, 6). Descartes announced straightaway that in metaphysics he
would take mathematics as a model and that he would make his metaphysical proofs at least
as certain and obvious as geometrical proofs. We shall now examine this mathematical
analogy in the proof of the existence of God. We’ll see that it is consistently used by
Descartes. Is this analogy an ordinary imitation of mathematical proofs, or is the proof of
the existence of God really a mathematical proof? In the present paper we will investigate
Descartes’ use of mathematics as a model for metaphysics.
2. Mathematical truth as an example
First, Descartes turned to mathematics, which was ﬂourishing at that time. According to
him, mathematics is the most certain and easiest science; all you need to reach the truth,
6Je crois qu’on ne saurait rien faire de plus utile en la philosophie, que d’en rechercher une fois curieusement et
avec soin les meilleures et plus solides, et les disposer en un ordre si clair et si exact, qu’il soit constant désormais
à tout le monde, que ce sont de véritables démonstrations.

The mathematical analogy in the proof of God’s existence by Descartes
389
indeed, is to know how to deduce consequences. You need not confront experience to
conﬁrm its propositions. Moreover, mathematics applies to all the other sciences (physics,
astronomy, mechanics) and is exemplary for all forms of research. Until 1630, mathematics
was Descartes’ main concern.
2.1. Descartes’ involvement with geometry
In 1631, he solved a very difﬁcult mathematical problem, Pappus’ problem. Here is the
beginning of the formulation of the problem: with 3 or 4, or more line segments, given
with their positions, a point is required, so that you may draw other lines to the given ones
which determine given angles, and so that the products of the line segments, two by two, are
equal7 (A.T., VI, 377–378). The elements of this problem are extremely general and awk-
ward. Descartes chose two lines as axes for coordinates, AB and BC, which he postulates
as given and which he calls x and y. He invented what we now call “Cartesian coordi-
nates”. It allowed him to represent each line by means of an equation; he “algebraised”
geometry. To resolve Pappus’ problem, he used a trick: he assumed he had already found
the point he tried to ﬁnd; he then deduced the consequences and inferred the causes of
these consequences to discover the unknown term. This practice is called the “analysis”.
In his Geometry, in 1637, he deﬁned it as follows: You go over the difﬁculty according to
the links between the lines. You put each unknown line into an equation, and, gradually,
you reduce all the unknown lines to known ones. He thought that he had rediscovered the
geometrical analysis of the Greeks.8
Analytic geometry, the simpliﬁcation of the algebraic notation, and the invention of the
Cartesian coordinates are all great successes of Descartes’ methodical mind.
2.2. Towards a general method
In the light of his experience, Descartes could make progress in his search for a new
method. It was his investigation of logic, geometry and algebra that prompted Descartes to
demand a new method.
Logic has two advantages: it imposes good practice and discipline on young minds,
and it teaches one how to explain properly truths already known. However, in Descartes’
time, logic was badly taught and had two disadvantages: it was useful to explain something
already known, but it was useless to discover anything new, and it contained among many
good rules, so many others mixed up with them that are either harmful or superﬂuous9
(D.M., A.T., VI, 17), in other words rules that unsettle and deceive the mind.
7Ayant 3 ou 4 ou plus segments de droites, données par position, on demande un point tel qu’on puisse mener
d’autres droites sur les droites données qui fassent avec elles des angles donnés et que les produits deux à deux
des segments soient égaux.
8The Greeks wrote down their mathematical proofs in a synthetic way. They found these proofs, undoubtedly,
often by means of analysis: starting from what one wants to prove, one works backwards towards postulates,
deﬁnitions or propositions that have already been proved. Very little is known about the precise way in which the
Greeks practised this analysis.
9tant d’autres mêlés, qui sont ou nuisibles, ou superﬂus.

390
J.-M. Nicolle
In geometry, Descartes appreciated the analytical resolution of problems, but he recog-
nised two disadvantages: it concerns very abstract questions which seem to have no use10
(D.M., A.T., VI, 17)—Descartes wanted sciences to be useful—and, above all, geometry
is bound to the observation of shapes. This contemplation of geometric ﬁgures he deemed
dangerous for four reasons: 1 – it gives a solution of particular cases, but not one of ab-
solute generality and as a result may lead to serious omissions; 2 – it concentrates the mind
on certain lines chosen because of their classical properties (bisectors, medians, angles,
and so on) and it prevents it from developing a global view of the problem; 3 – it tires the
mind by being about pictures, not about ideas; 4 – it leads the mind to pseudo-proofs where
the imagination sees the solution without understanding.
Finally, algebra makes it possible to economize on writing down the reasoning about
abstracted quantities. Descartes had learned algebra from Clavius’ textbook and he re-
proached Clavius for his difﬁcult and confused algebra: in the latter, one is so constrained
by certain rules and symbols11 (D.M., A.T., VI, 18).
At the end of this critical investigation, Descartes could list the four characteristics of a
good method: By “method”, however, I mean easy and reliable rules such that those who
use them carefully will never accept what is false as true and will arrive at a true knowledge
of everything within their capacity without wasting their efforts but constantly increasing
their scientiﬁc knowledge12 (Rules for guiding One’s Intelligence, rule IV). Here we ﬁnd:
1 – certainty by the elimination of risks of error, 2 – ease of thought by avoiding every
useless effort, 3 – fertility by increasing knowledge, 4 – wisdom of the mind. Descartes
began to write his ideas down—the Rules for guiding One’s Intelligence—in 1628, but he
had to stop at twenty one rules: there were too many and he had to simplify even more.
I thought that, instead of the multiplicity of rules that make up logic, I would have enough
in the following four13 (D.M., A.T., VI, 18). The famous four rules of the Cartesian method
are enumerated in the Discourse on Method (1637). We mention only the ﬁrst one, called
the rule of obviousness. It consists of ﬁve precautions concerning obviousness. He does not
mean a primary obviousness (that which is immediately obvious and seems true without
any reﬂection), but a secondary obviousness, that is an obviousness worked out on the basis
of critical thought. These precautions are: 1 – to carefully avoid haste, because otherwise
you may think that you can skip stages and draw conclusions before you have obtained
obviousness; 2 – to carefully avoid prejudices, that is false ideas picked up during one’s
childhood from parents, teachers and public opinion; 3 – to entertain only ideas that are
clear—that is directly present in the mind, 4 – and distinct, that is speciﬁc, deﬁnite, and
unmixed with others; 5 – to accept only knowledge that is certain and indubitable, so that
nothing can call it into question. With such obviousness, you may begin a real work.
Descartes was proud of his discovery. He was certain of its universality: All things that
can fall within the scope of human knowledge follow from each other in the same way14
10à des matières fort abstraites et qui ne semblent d’aucun usage.
11on s’est tellement assujetti, en la dernière, à certaines règles et à certains chiffres.
12Par méthode, j’entends des règles certaines et faciles, grâce auxquelles tous ceux qui les observent exactement
ne supposeront jamais vrai ce qui est faux, et parviendront, sans se fatiguer en efforts inutiles mais en accroissant
progressivement leur science, à la connaissance vraie de tout ce qu’ils peuvent atteindre.
13Au lieu de ce grand nombre de préceptes dont la logique est composée, je crus que j’aurais assez des quatre
suivants.
14toutes les choses qui peuvent tomber sous la connaissance des hommes s’entresuivent en même façon.

The mathematical analogy in the proof of God’s existence by Descartes
391
(D.M., A.T., VI, 19). This universality can be understood in two ways: all problems about
any matter are such that the method can be applied to them, and anybody will be able
to solve these problems, if he uses these four rules carefully: There cannot be anything
so remote that it cannot eventually be reached nor anything so hidden that it cannot be
uncovered15 (D.M., A.T., VI, 19).
2.3. Certainty and simplicity
Mathematics is a science which need not go out into nature and gather its truths. It dif-
fers from the natural sciences by two characteristics: the independence of experience and
the direct knowledge of its objects based on reasoning. That is why Descartes had great
conﬁdence in mathematics: Arithmetic and geometry are much more certain than other
disciplines. The reason is that they alone are concerned with an object that is so pure and
simple that they need not presuppose anything that experience might render uncertain, but
consist exclusively of conclusions that are deduced by reason. They are therefore the easi-
est and clearest of all disciplines, and they have the kind of object that we require since it
seems that, in their case, it is scarcely possible for someone to be mistaken except by not
paying attention16 (Rules for guiding One’s Intelligence, rule II, A.T., X, 365).
However, we have to admit that mathematics is not easy. Descartes refers to the long
chains of inferences, all of them simple and easy, that geometers normally use17 (D.M.,
A.T., VI, 19). Everybody is always surprised by this famous statement by Descartes. If the
chains of inferences are long, how could they be easy? Why did Descartes write “simple
and easy”? If they are simple, aren’t they easy and vice versa? Unless simple is not so easy.
To resolve a problem, I ﬁrst have to subdivide each of the problems that I was about to
examine into as many parts as would be possible and necessary to resolve them better18
(D.M., A.T., VI, 18). In every investigation, you have to begin with the simple things. But
the simplest is not necessarily the easiest.
Descartes begins his sixth rule of the Rules for guiding One’s Intelligence as follows: In
order to distinguish the simplest things.19 If you need to distinguish them, it is because sim-
plicity requires work. For example, Descartes calls God, soul, motion, extension, circle,
“simple natures”, not because of they are easy to know, but because they are not compound.
As a result the mind is able to understand them directly. Here is his deﬁnition: We apply the
term “simple” only to those [entities] the knowledge of which is so clear and distinct that
they cannot be divided by the mind into other things that are more clearly known. Shape,
15Il n’y en peut avoir de si éloignées auxquelles enﬁn on ne parvienne, ni de si cachées qu’on ne découvre.
16L’arithmétique et la géométrie sont beaucoup plus certaines que toutes les autres sciences : c’est que leur objet,
à elles seules, est si clair et si simple qu’elles n’ont besoin de rien supposer que l’expérience puisse révoquer en
doute, et qu’elles ne consistent entièrement que dans des conséquences à déduire par la voie du raisonnement.
Elles sont donc les plus faciles et les plus claires de toutes les sciences, et leur objet est tel que nous le désirons,
puisque, à moins d’inadvertance, il semble à peine possible à un homme de s’y égarer.
17Ces longues chaînes de raison, toutes simples et faciles, dont les géomètres ont coutume de se servir.
18diviser chacune des difﬁcultés que j’examinerais en autant de parcelles qu’il se pourrait et qu’il serait requis
pour les mieux résoudre.
19Pour distinguer les choses les plus simples.

392
J.-M. Nicolle
extension, motion, etc., are examples of this20 (Rules for guiding One’s Intelligence, rule
XII). It is not their being easy to know that makes simple natures simple, but their sim-
plicity, their not being compound. Simplicity is not given; it has to be sought patiently.
Simplicity is difﬁcult to get hold of.
Descartes applied this concept of simplicity in geometry, when he had to choose curves:
as the simplest curves should not just be considered those that can be described the most
easily, nor the ones which make the construction or the demonstration of the problem
easier, but mainly those that belong to the simplest kind that can be used to determine the
required quantity21 (Geometry, L. III, §1). It would be a mistake to use a more complicated
curve (of a higher degree) instead of a simpler one, if it is possible to ﬁnd a solution with
the simplest one. Simplicity is not necessarily easiness. Sometimes, simplicity requires a
difﬁcult approach.
3. The ontological proof of God’s existence
At ﬁrst sight, it seems as if Descartes repeats the famous proof by Saint Anselm in his
Proslogium. Caterus, the author of the ﬁrst objections against Descartes’ Meditations, men-
tions Thomas of Aquinas’ criticisms against Saint Anselm. However, Descartes subscribes
to these criticisms because he thinks that his own proof is totally different: Saint Anselm
relies on the deﬁnition of a name (the name of God denotes a thing that is such that noth-
ing larger can be formed) from which he can only deduce truths in his mind, not in the
things themselves, while Descartes maintains that he is investigating an essence: What
we understand clearly and distinctly belonging to the nature, or to the essence, or to the
immutable and true form of something, may be truly asserted about this thing (First set
of replies, A.T., X, 91). That is why he denies that there is any ﬁliation between him and
Saint Anselm.
3.1. The ontological proof
We will examine the text in A.T., IX-1, 51–54, and follow its argument in detail. First,
Descartes shows that essences are independent of his mind: I ﬁnd I have innumerable ideas
of certain things [...] which are not, however, invented by me22 (Meditation V, A.T., IX-1,
51). The text begins as an internal exploration of the mind. I ﬁnd in it, says Descartes, ideas
which impose themselves on me and which I couldn’t have invented myself. Such is the
case for the ideas of inﬁnity, perfection, and others. These ideas have their own true and
immutable natures.23 They not only impose themselves on the mind, but they have all the
20nous appelons simples celles-là seulement dont la connaissance est si nette et si distincte que l’intelligence ne
peut les diviser en plusieurs autres connues plus distinctement : telles sont la ﬁgure, l’étendue, le mouvement, etc.
21par les plus simples on ne doit pas seulement entendre celles qui peuvent le plus aisément être décrites, ni celles
qui rendent la construction ou la démonstration du problème proposé plus facile, mais principalement celles qui
sont du plus simple genre qui puisse servir à déterminer la quantité qui est cherchée.
22je trouve en moi une inﬁnité d’idées de certaines choses [...] qui ne sont pas feintes par moi.
23ont leurs natures vraies et immuables.

The mathematical analogy in the proof of God’s existence by Descartes
393
characteristics of eternal ideas. Descartes could have given the example of the idea of God,
but he prefers to give that of the idea of a triangle: For example, when I am imagining a
triangle.24 The verb “to imagine” doesn’t mean to create by means of one’s fancy, but to
present the triangle as a shape in space. Imagination is the faculty of reproducing an object
in the mind’s eye, as a picture. Although an external object which exactly corresponds
to the picture may not exist, it clearly has some determined nature or essence or form,
immutable and eternal, which has not been constructed by me and does not depend in any
way on my mind.25 The entire scholastic vocabulary is apparent—nature, form, essence—
from which Descartes cannot free himself. It does not matter for the moment whether a real
object called a “triangle” exists outside of the mind, in the physical world. The main thing
is that the essence of the triangle is not freely chosen or deﬁned by myself. This essence
imposes itself on my mind. I can examine it and deduce various properties, for example,
that its three angles are equal to two right angles, that the biggest angle is subtended
by the longest side.26 This property (Euclid, Elements, I, 32) is not obvious at ﬁrst sight.
An examination of the triangle is necessary to discover these properties. Even if I never
thought of them previously when I imagined a triangle, I now know them clearly whether
I want to or not, and therefore they were not invented by me.27 There is no invention, no
construction. The independent object has imposed itself on the mind, and the mind has
discovered the properties. Descartes rejects the hypothesis of the acquired origin for the
idea of triangle, in other words, that the idea of a triangle could come from the observation
of a triangular thing in nature, for he ﬁnds innumerable other shapes that have never been
observed by senses and which are nevertheless clearly and distinctly understood. Then, in
the following paragraph, Descartes makes the delicate link between truth and being. He
makes this formidable assertion: and therefore they are something and not simply nothing;
for it is obvious that whatever is true is something.28 He joins two essential assertions:
1 – what I clearly and distinctly understand is true; 2 – what is true exists. How should we
understand this connection?
An idea is not only an internal picture of external things, like a painting. An idea has
its own reality. In an idea Descartes distinguishes its objective reality (realitas objectiva)
and its formal reality (realitas formalis). The objective reality of an idea is its way of
existence in the mind, that is to say some representing content which does not necessarily
correspond to something outside. The formal reality of an idea is the actual reality, the real
thing that the idea represents. For example, the objective reality of the sun is the sun in
the mind, while its formal reality is the sun in the sky. The metaphysical question then is
this: do ideas whose objective reality forces me to admit their formal reality, independent
of my mind, exist? According to Descartes, only the idea of God, by its objective reality,
24par exemple, lorsque j’imagine un triangle.
25il ne laisse pas néanmoins d’y avoir une certaine nature, ou forme, ou essence déterminée de cette ﬁgure,
laquelle est immuable et éternelle, que je n’ai point inventée, et qui ne dépend en aucune façon de mon esprit.
26à savoir que ses trois angles sont égaux à deux droits, que le plus grand angle est soutenu par le plus grand
côté.
27lesquelles je reconnais très clairement et très évidemment être en lui, encore que je n’y aie pensé auparavant
en aucune façon, lorsque je me suis imaginé la première fois un triangle.
28Et partant elles sont quelque chose, et non pas un pur néant ; car il est très évident que tout ce qui est vrai est
quelque chose.

394
J.-M. Nicolle
forces me to admit its formal reality outside of my mind. Descartes has now proved the
two premises that he needs in order to turn to the ontological proof itself, that is to say that
essences impose themselves on one’s mind and that essences are true. He can now apply
his reasoning to God.
From these premises he can now deduce an argument to demonstrate God’s existence.29
The verb “to demonstrate” shows that this is not a simple intuition or an immediate obvi-
ousness, but a deduction as in a mathematical demonstration. This demonstration proceeds
with three analogies between God and a mathematical object: 1 – The idea of God imposes
itself on me no less than the idea of the triangle: Certainly I ﬁnd within me an idea of
God—that is, of a supremely perfect being—just as much as I ﬁnd an idea of any shape
or number.30 2 – The deduction of his existence from his nature is known as clearly and
distinctly as the deduction of a property of the triangle from its nature: I understand that it
belongs to God’s nature that he always exists, as clearly and distinctly as I understand that
whatever I demonstrate about any shape or number belongs to the nature of that shape
or number.31 3 – God’s existence is a conclusion as certain as the conclusions about the
properties of numbers and shapes: Therefore [...] I should attribute to God’s existence at
least the same degree of certainty that I have attributed to mathematical truths until now.32
When he ﬁnishes his demonstration, Descartes doesn’t allow the reader to catch his
breath, and he immediately adresses the possible suspicion that his argument is based on a
sophism: it seems to be some kind of logical trick. And he explains this sophism: Because I
am used to distinguishing existence from essence in everything else, I easily believe that it is
also possible to separate existence from the essence of God, and, in that way, that one could
think of God as not existing.33 Descartes reminds the reader of the ordinary precaution that
prevents one from deducing existence from essence about any idea. But is the idea of
God an exception? Yes, it is: But it is clear to whoever thinks about it more carefully that
existence can no more be separated from God’s essence than one can separate from the
essence of a triangle the fact that the three angles are equal to two right angles, or than
one could separate the idea of a valley from the idea of a mountain.34 The analogy is now
threefold: God’s existence is to his essence what the property that the sum of the three
angles equals two right angles is to the triangle and what the valley is to the mountain. The
common link is the necessary connection; existence necessarily belongs to God’s essence,
or negatively, it is a contradiction to think God without existence. So, God necessarily
exists.
29une preuve démonstrative de l’existence de Dieu.
30Il est certain que je ne trouve pas moins en moi son idée, c’est-à-dire l’idée d’un être souverainement parfait,
que celle de quelque ﬁgure ou de quelque nombre que ce soit.
31Et je ne connais pas moins clairement et distinctement qu’une actuelle et éternelle existence appartient à
sa nature, que je connais tout ce que je puis démontrer de quelque ﬁgure, ou de quelque nombre, appartient
véritablement à la nature de cette ﬁgure ou de ce nombre.
32Et partant [...] l’existence de Dieu doit passer en mon esprit au moins pour aussi certaine, que j’ai estimé
jusques ici toutes les vérités des mathématiques, qui ne regardent que les nombres et les ﬁgures.
33Il semble y avoir quelque sophisme [. . . ] Ayant accoutumé dans toutes les autres choses de faire distinction
entre l’existence et l’essence, je me persuade aisément que l’existence peut être séparée de l’essence de Dieu, et
qu’ainsi on peut concevoir Dieu comme n’étant pas actuellement.
34Mais néanmoins, lorsque j’y pense avec plus d’attention, je trouve manifestement que l’existence ne peut non
plus être séparée de l’essence de Dieu, que de l’essence d’un triangle rectiligne la grandeur de ses trois angles
égaux à deux droits, ou bien de l’idée d’une montagne l’idée d’une vallée.

The mathematical analogy in the proof of God’s existence by Descartes
395
Descartes returns to the suspicion of sophistry in another way, although he had already
answered it in the second paragraph. Indeed, somebody might object to Descartes that he
considers his desires as reality; it is not because he imagines God as necessarily existing
that he is really so: My thought imposes no necessity on things.35 And now, about the
analogy with the mountain, he concedes that if he cannot separate the mountain and the
valley, it is a necessity of thought, but there is no necessity in the existence of the things.
However, the necessity of God’s existence is not only a necessity of thought; it is not just
a connection freely established by thought: It is not that my thought makes this happen
or imposes any necessity on any thing; on the contrary, the necessity of the thing itself,
namely the existence of God, makes me think this way. I am not free to think of God without
existence.36 Descartes reverses the relation between thought and things. Concerning the
mountain and the triangle, the inferences of the mind are necessary, but they don’t involve
the existence of things, while concerning God, it is the reality of the thing that imposes
itself on the mind. I am not free to think of God as existing or not. The analogy between
God and mathematical truths that Descartes had carefully maintained until now seems
to break down suddenly with this radical difference about existence. Indeed, there is a
difference between metaphysics, which studies existence, and mathematics, which doesn’t
care. This difference might destroy Descartes’ systematic analogy. But before discussing
it, let us consider the ontological proof in the context of the Meditations.
3.2. The position of the ontological proof in the wider context of Descartes’ meditations
The ﬁfth meditation, which contains the ontological proof of God’s existence, is called
“About the Essence of Material Things; and consequently about God, that he exists”.37
The question is no longer that of the truth of God’s existence which has been discussed in
the third meditation, “About God, that he exists”.38 In other words, the link is no longer that
between God and truth, but that between God and essence. However, in spite of its title,
the ﬁfth meditation is not a demonstration of the existence of material things from their
essences. It is an examination of the essences, in the ﬁrst place mathematical essences.
I know these essences through my clear and distinct ideas. For example, the idea of a
particular triangle, even if such a ﬁgure exists nowhere outside of my mind, has some
determinate nature or form or essence, immutable and eternal39 (A.T., IX-1, 51), as is
apparent from the fact that I can deduce various properties of this triangle. The truth of
these essences has been guaranteed since the third meditation when Descartes proved that
God exists and that he doesn’t deceive.
In the third meditation Descartes proves the existence of God as follows: The only pos-
sible explanation of man possessing the clear and distinct idea of God is God’s existence.
35ma pensée n’impose aucune nécessité aux choses.
36non pas que ma pensée puisse faire que cela soit de la sorte, et qu’elle impose aux choses aucune nécessité ;
mais, au contraire, parce que la nécessité de la chose même, à savoir de l’existence de Dieu, détermine ma pensée
à le concevoir de cette façon. Car il n’est pas en ma liberté de concevoir un Dieu sans existence.
37De l’essence des choses matérielles; et, derechef de Dieu, qu’il existe.
38De Dieu, qu’il existe.
39une certaine nature ou forme ou essence déterminée [...] immuable et éternelle.

396
J.-M. Nicolle
The fact that we have such a clear and distinct idea of God implies therefore the existence
of God. This argument is obviously related to the cosmological proof of God’s existence
or the proof of God’s existence by his effects: God’s existence is needed to explain the ex-
istence of something else. Moreover, according to Descartes everything that is conceived
clearly and distinctly must have its origin in God. So, why did Descartes introduce a new
proof of God’s existence in the ﬁfth meditation? Why didn’t he treat it together with the
proofs from effects in the third meditation? In order to understand this, we ﬁrst have to
consider the strong link between God and the triangle. The ontological proof is developed
in analogy with a theorem on the triangle to show that the certainty of a theorem and the
certainty of the ontological proof are of the same kind. The mathematical analogy is an
analogy concerning certainty. Now, mathematical truths are clear and distinct ideas and
God guarantees the objective reality of clear and distinct ideas. That is why Descartes
writes “now” at the beginning of the ﬁfth meditation: now, having recognized what should
be avoided and what should be done to reach the truth40 (A.T., IX-1, 50); now that the
truth of the clear and distinct ideas has been proved, the ontological proof becomes pos-
sible. Moreover, the idea of God is, at least as certain41 (A.T., IX-1, 54) as mathematical
truths; it is the clearest and the most distinct of all essences. So, it is natural to begin with
this idea when we begin to examine essences.
The order between the proofs of God’s existence is justiﬁed as follows: the proofs from
effects guarantee God’s existence and this existence guarantees the objective reality of
the essences. Since the ontological proof is based on the examination of the essences, it’s
natural to give it after having discussed the essences. Consequently, the proofs from effects
in the third meditation are the main proofs and the ontological proof is second.
3.3. The particular character of the ontological proof with respect to the proofs based on
God’s effects
The ontological proof is a argument entirely different from the proofs from God’s effects.
The latter are investigations about the idea of inﬁnity or about the idea of perfection which
are in my mind; the idea is an effect and I have to seek its cause. From the ideas of an
inﬁnite and perfect being, I conclude that an inﬁnite and perfect being necessarily exists,
for he is the cause of the ideas of inﬁnity and perfection. But the ontological proof doesn’t
consist in an investigation about a cause. It consists in an examination of the idea of God,
considered as a mathematical essence, to ﬁnd its necessary properties. God’s necessary
existence is deduced as a property included in his essence. Item 14 of the Principles of
Human Knowledge asserts: The existence of God is implied by the fact that necessary
existence is included in our concept of God42 (A.T., IX-2, 31). God’s existence is no longer
the cause of an effect, but the necessary property of an essence. It is another reason why
Descartes has separated this proof from the two proofs from the effects.
40après avoir remarqué ce qu’il fallait faire ou éviter pour parvenir à la connaissance de la vérité.
41au moins aussi certaine.
42on peut démontrer qu’il y a un Dieu de cela seul que la nécessité d’être ou d’exister est comprise en la notion
que nous avons de lui.

The mathematical analogy in the proof of God’s existence by Descartes
397
4. Arnauld’s criticism: Descartes proof is circular
4.1. Arnauld’s criticism
In the fourth objection to the Meditations, Arnauld thinks that there is a vicious circle in
Descartes’ ontological proof: God, with his veracity, guarantees the clear and distinct ideas,
while Descartes uses clear and distinct ideas to prove God’s existence: I have one more
difﬁculty. How does he avoid committing the fallacy of a vicious circle when he says that
we are certain that what is perceived clearly and distinctly is true only because God exists?
But we can be certain that God exists only because we perceive it clearly and distinctly.
Therefore before we are certain that God exists, we have to be certain that whatever we
perceive clearly and distinctly is true43 (A.T., IX-1, 166). Descartes seems to infringe his
principle of the geometrical order, the same order as in Euclid’s Elements: The things which
are set ﬁrst must be known without the following ones, and the following things must be set
so that they would be deduced from the ﬁrst ones44 (A.T., IX-1, 121).
This criticism by Arnauld is linked with a criticism of the certain knowledge of mathe-
matical truths, obtained by examining their essence. Arnauld gives the example of some-
body who knows the theorem that says that a triangle inscribed in a semi-circle is a right-
angled triangle (Euclid, Elements, III, 31), but who doesn’t know the theorem attributed to
Pythagoras (Euclid, Elements, I, 47). This man would know the essence of the right-angled
triangle, but wouldn’t know one of its main properties. For he will say: I clearly and dis-
tinctly perceive that this triangle is right-angled, but I still doubt whether the square on the
base is equal to the squares on the sides. Therefore it is not essential to the triangle that
the square on the base is equal to the squares on the sides45 (A.T., IX-1, 157). This ob-
jection by Arnauld is directed at Descartes’ famous argument to prove his own existence,
I think, therefore I am, cogito ergo sum, and at the separation of body and soul. But it may
be understood with reference to the knowledge of the essences. If we apply this objection
against the ontological proof, it implies that we are able to know God’s essence without his
existence. Therefore, Descartes cannot convince an atheist.
4.2. The analogy with the sphere
In his fourth set of replies Descartes maintains the constant analogy between theologi-
cal truths and mathematical truths. Concerning the inscribed triangle in a semi-circle, he
43il ne me reste plus qu’un scrupule, qui est de savoir comment il se peut défendre de ne pas commettre un cercle
lorsqu’il dit que «nous ne sommes assurés que les choses que nous concevons clairement et distinctement sont
vraies, qu’à cause que Dieu est ou existe». Car nous ne pouvons être assurés que Dieu est, sinon parce que nous
concevons cela très clairement et très distinctement; donc, auparavant que d’être assurés de l’existence de Dieu,
nous devons être assurés que toutes les choses que nous concevons clairement et distinctement sont toutes vraies.
44qui consiste en cela seulement que les choses qui sont proposées les premières doivent être connues sans l’aide
des suivantes et que les suivantes doivent après être disposées de telle façon qu’elles soient démontrées par les
seules choses qui les précèdent.
45car, dira-t-il, je connais clairement et distinctement que ce triangle est rectangle ; je doute néanmoins que le
carré de sa base soit égal aux carrés des côtés ; donc il n’est pas de l’essence de ce triangle que le carré de sa base
soit égal aux carrés des côtés.

398
J.-M. Nicolle
comes up with three additions: 1 – Pythagoras’ theorem is not about a substance while the
cogito is about a substance; 2 – if you admit Pythagoras’ theorem, you must admit that
this property belongs to a right-angled triangle, while you may clearly and distinctly un-
derstand soul without body, and vice versa; 3 – if you know the essence of the right-angled
triangle without knowing Pythagoras’ theorem, however, you cannot deny the existence of
a proportion between the base and the sides, and you cannot deny the proportion expressed
in Pythagoras’ theorem. With these three points, Descartes insists on the difference be-
tween essence and property, and he insists on the necessary link between an essence and
its properties.
Descartes introduces a new mathematical analogy inspired by Archimedes’ work on the
sphere. Indeed, Descartes deﬁned God as “causa sui”. Arnauld reproaches him for not dis-
tinguishing the cause and the effect. Nothing can be, at the same time, its own cause and
its own effect. Descartes replies that on the basis of such an argument atheists would not
admit God as a ﬁrst cause for they would require another efﬁcient cause different from
God himself. Descartes compares Arnauld to an imaginary Archimedes who, after having
proved the properties of the sphere on the basis of an analogy between sphere and rec-
tilinear ﬁgures inscribed in it, would have refused to consider the sphere as a rectilinear
ﬁgure with inﬁnitely many sides (Cf. Archimedes, About sphere and cylinder, I, 24). In
other words, if he would have maintained the speciﬁc difference between rectilinear and
curvilinear ﬁgures, Archimedes wouldn’t have been able to use his exhaustion method and
wouldn’t have succeeded. This reply means that the passage to the limit is permitted in
mathematics and therefore it’s permitted in metaphysics as well. Descartes is not anticipat-
ing the inﬁnitesimal calculus before Leibniz here, but he shows that the same proof, when
it doesn’t concern the essence of the objects, is as good for the limited as for the unlim-
ited. This analogy between theology and Archimedes’ work on the sphere legitimises, once
more, the mathematical analogy in the ontological proof of God’s existence.
4.3. The answer based on memory
Descartes’ reply concerning the vicious circle is already discreetly present in the ﬁfth med-
itation: But once I perceived that God exists and had also understood, at the same time,
that everything else depends on him and that he is not a deceiver, I concluded that all
those things that I clearly and distinctly perceive are necessarily true. And even if I no
longer consider the reasons on account of which I made that judgement about its truth,
no contrary reason can be found—as long as I remember having perceived it clearly and
distinctly—that would make me doubt it46 (A.T., IX-1, 55–56). God guarantees the truth
of my clear and distinct ideas; that doesn’t mean that he guarantees the accuracy of my
memory. Indeed, I may have false memories or I may not remember a truth accurately. But
God guarantees an obviousness felt in the past. So, all I have to do is to remember I have
well understood such a truth, while I have forgotten the reasons why, and this truth remains
46Mais après que j’ai reconnu qu’il y a un Dieu, parce qu’en même temps j’ai reconnu aussi que toutes choses
dépendent de lui, et qu’il n’est point trompeur, et qu’en suite de cela j’ai jugé que tout ce que je conçois clairement
et distinctement ne peut manquer d’être vrai : encore que je me ressouvienne de l’avoir clairement et distinctement
compris, on ne me peut apporter aucune raison contraire, qui me le fasse jamais révoquer en doute.

The mathematical analogy in the proof of God’s existence by Descartes
399
certain through the vicissitudes of time. That’s why, to break the vicious circle suspected
by Amauld, you have to distinguish between what we actually perceive clearly and what
we remember having perceived clearly some time earlier47 (A.T., IX-1, 190). One has to
distinguish obviousness in the present and obviousness in the past. So, when Descartes
says that the idea of God, which is a clear and distinct idea, is a true idea, he refers to the
third meditation. He doesn’t use this obviousness to give a basis to the ontological proof.
Descartes reverses the relation: he uses God’s existence to guarantee the truth of clear and
distinct ideas. His reply is short and accurate: For we are certain, initially, that God exists
because we consider the reasons that prove if. Subsequently, however, it is enough that we
remember that we perceived something clearly in order to be certain that it is true. This
would not be enough if we didn’t know that God exists and that he does not deceive48 (A.T.,
IX-1, 190). Chronology and hierarchy are clear. Chronologically, we learn that God exists
and, then, that he guarantees the truth of clear and distinct ideas all the time. Hierarchi-
cally, we learn that God exists and, then, we deduce the truth of clear and distinct ideas.
The suspicion about a vicious circle comes from a careless mistake about the chronological
difference: when I prove God’s existence, when I understand God’s essence in a clear and
distinct idea, I remember that this idea is true, but I don’t need to remember the reasons,
namely the proof of God’s existence from effects, to give a foundation for the ontological
proof.
Descartes refuses to say more about the presence of a vicious circle in his argument,
and he considers his reply to Arnauld as sufﬁcient and deﬁnitive.49 The divine veracity
guarantees all knowledge based on the memory of an obviousness in the past.
5. Truth and existence
5.1. Existence is not included in the mathematical perspective
Unlike the idea of inﬁnity, whose power forces my awareness of my own limited being to
admit the existence of an unlimited being, the idea of God possesses a logical link with ex-
istence. Once more Descartes gives a mathematical demonstration: from the deﬁnition of
an object, he rationally deduces all its properties. Descartes comes up with another mathe-
matical analogy to reply to a “petitio principii”. He might have deﬁned God as having all
kinds of perfections, in particular that of existence, and then pretended that he had discov-
ered God’s existence in the conclusion. He might also have believed that all quadrilateral
shapes can be inscribed in a circle50 (A.T., IX-1, 53), and then have deduced that the rhom-
bus can be inscribed in a circle, which would have been a false conclusion. This would be
47faire distinction des choses que nous concevons en effet fort clairement, d’avec celles que nous ressouvenons
d’avoir autrefois fort clairement conçues.
48premièrement, nous sommes assurés que Dieu existe, parce que nous prêtons notre attention aux raisons qui
nous prouvent son existence; mais après cela, il sufﬁt que nous ressouvenions d’avoir conçu une chose clairement,
pour être assurés qu’elle est vraie ; ce qui ne sufﬁrait pas si nous ne savions que Dieu existe et qu’il ne peut être
trompeur.
49Quant à ce que vous ajoutez ensuite, j’y ai déjà sufﬁsamment répondu.
50penser que toutes les ﬁgures de quatre côtés se peuvent inscrire dans le cercle.

400
J.-M. Nicolle
a disgraceful manipulation. But, this is not the case: Whenever I choose to think about the
ﬁrst and highest being and, as it were, to draw out the idea of God from the treasury of my
mind, I must necessarily attribute all perfections to him51 (A.T., IX-1, 53). Descartes didn’t
place the property of existence in God’s essence, like an artiﬁcial stone among diamonds,
and didn’t pretend to discover it at the end of his reasoning. He attentively examines the
clear and distinct idea of God’s essence and discovers his necessary existence, just as a di-
amond merchant examines the treasure he has received to extract each precious stone one
by one. In the same way, if he had pretended to believe that all quadrilateral shapes can be
inscribed in a circle, he would have invented a confused idea of quadrilateral shapes, while
the clear and distinct idea of quadrilateral shapes rules out the deduction that it is possible
to inscribe them all in a circle.
The mathematical analogy in the proof of God’s existence is at the same time strong and
feeble. It is strong because it shows very well that the way to truth is the same for divine
truths and for mathematical truths. When he replies to Gassendi, Descartes points out that
the way to truth is one: you are wrong when you say that we don’t prove God’s existence
such as we prove that every triangle has its angles equal to two right angles, for the reason
is the same in the two proofs, except that the proof of God’s existence is much simpler and
more obvious than the other52 (Fifth set of replies, in: Descartes, Oeuvres et lettres, Paris,
éd. Gallimard, 1953, p. 504). On the other hand, the analogy is feeble because it ignores an
essential difference between metaphysics which deals with the question of existence and
mathematics which rules out this question.
Such a difference has already been used; it is the difference between mathematical truths
and the truth of the cogito argument. The latter truth is an essential certainty acquired
when the subject coincides with himself, purely and simply, regardless of the content of
his thoughts, while a mathematical truth is a certainty in relation to a content, a certainty
acquired by a careful examination of an essence in the mind. The cogito argument gives
a basis to the existence of the thinking subject. Mathematics, however, develops the con-
tent of an idea. That is why the cogito argument is more solid; it is immune to the Evil
Genius argument. Even when an Evil Genius is distorting our thought, we are thinking.
Mathematical truths are in principle vulnerable to the deceptions of such an imaginary
Evil Genius. That is why Descartes needs divine veracity to save mathematics, while the
cogito argument gives a foundation of its own truth without divine veracity.
5.2. The limits of the analogy between mathematics and metaphysics
Mathematics gives a foundation to the objective reality of its essences, while metaphysics
proves that existence corresponds to my idea of God. Therefore, we have to consider again
the breakdown in the analogy between mathematics and ontology. On the one hand, there
51Toutes les fois qu’il m’arrive de penser à un être premier et souverain, et de tirer, pour ainsi dire, son idée du
trésor de mon esprit, il est nécessaire que je lui attribue toutes sortes de perfections.
52vous vous trompez grandement lorsque vous dites qu’on ne démontre pas l’existence de Dieu comme on
démontre que tout triangle rectiligne a ses trois angles égaux à deux droits; car la raison est pareille en tous les
deux, hormis que la démonstration qui prouve l’existence en Dieu est beaucoup plus simple et plus évidente que
l’autre.

The mathematical analogy in the proof of God’s existence by Descartes
401
are many similarities, since God’s existence is proved in the style of geometers, with cer-
tainty and obviousness. On the other hand, there is a manifest difference since mathemat-
ics doesn’t prove the existence of its objects. Descartes also points out that the analogy
between God and a triangle concerns the necessity of the link between an essence and
a property (the property that the sum of three angles is equal to two right angles for the
essence of the triangle, and the existence for God’s essence), but the link is not between
essence and existence about these two objects: the existence of the triangle must not be
compared with God’s existence because, in God, existence has obviously a different link
with the essence than in the triangle53 (Fifth set of replies, in: Descartes, Oeuvres et let-
tres, Paris, éd. Gallimard, 1953, p. 503). The similarities are consistently maintained in the
analogy between God and a triangle. The difference is suddenly introduced: [...] rather
than I cannot think of God without existence54 (A.T. IX-1, 53).
At this moment, the reader may think that Descartes’ entire enterprise is in ruins. What
is the use of this mathematical analogy if it leads to this particular exception of the idea of
God? Somebody may again suspect a sophism: Descartes tries to prove in the style of the
geometers an idea which is not at all mathematical. To rediscover the Cartesian rationality,
we have to remember that the idea of God and the idea of triangle are innate ideas. I can
recall these ideas in my mind, as I want, but I cannot decide about their content; they have
been given, ready-made, eternal and immutable: the mathematical truths which you call
eternal have been drawn up by God and depend entirely on him, like all other creatures
(Letter to Mersenne, April the 15th 1630, A.T. I, 145). I cannot modify the properties of
my innate ideas. I cannot modify things in such a way that the three angles of the triangle
are not equal to two right angles, and I cannot modify my ideas in such a way that God
doesn’t exist. In other words, the main similarity between these two ideas is the necessity
of the link between the essence and its properties. To think of a triangle whose three angles
don’t equal two right angles is not to think of a triangle. To think of God without existence
is not to think of God. I am not free to modify the content of the innate ideas. My mind
imposes no necessity on things, while the innate ideas impose their own necessity on my
mind. Necessity: this is the real link which is the basis, beyond the apparent difference, of
the analogy between God and a triangle.
In addition, this analogy makes it possible to re-establish an essential religious truth.
Indeed, if necessity were only a demand of my mind, it would impose restrictions on God’s
essence and deny his freedom. Now, since God has given me my innate ideas, of which he
has freely chosen the content, I am not free to deﬁne God as I desire. It is he that gives
me the knowledge that I have of him. This knowledge is a free and incomprehensible
revelation, because God is beyond human understanding, and therefore we love him all the
more.
Twenty-ﬁve years later, Molière makes Dom Juan say: I believe that two and two are
four, Sganarelle, and that four and four are eight55 (Dom Juan, Act III, scene 1). The
atheist admits only mathematical truths. I don’t deny that an atheist can clearly know that
the three angles of a triangle equal two right angles, but I only maintain that he doesn’t
53l’existence du triangle ne doit pas être comparée avec l’existence de Dieu parce qu’elle a manifestement en
Dieu une autre relation à l’essence qu’elle n’a pas dans le triangle.
54au lieu que, de cela seul que je ne puis concevoir Dieu sans existence.
55Je crois que deux et deux font quatre, Sganarelle, et que quatre et quatre font huit.

402
J.-M. Nicolle
know it with a true and certain knowledge56 (A.T., IX, 111). According to Descartes, an
atheist cannot be a geometer, for mathematical truths, however certain they may seem to
natural reason, need to be guaranteed by a metaphysical truth, that of a God who has given
us innate ideas and who doesn’t deceive us.
6. Conclusion: Descartes’ God and Pascal’s God
Descartes is a rationalist and his theory about God is largely based on his philosophy. His
God is the God of philosophers and scientists. His theology is, in spite of his precautions,
a theology which serves his theory of knowledge. When we read his meditations, it is
obvious that God is only an argument in his philosophy. God is the creator of the eternal
truths, in particular of mathematical truths. Moreover, God guarantees truth, in particular
the truth of the cogito argument. God is not a deceiver; God is distinguished from the Evil
Genius. In this context it is remarkable that Descartes ﬁrst proves his own existence as a
thinking being, before he proves God’s existence.
Pascal doesn’t put up with Descartes’ rationalism: I cannot forgive Descartes; he would
have liked to develop his entire philosophy without God, but he couldn’t avoid letting
him put the world in motion; afterwards he didn’t need God anymore57 (Thought 77B).
Pascal’s God is the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. He is the God of faith. His theology
is revealed theology, separated from philosophy. According to Pascal, the proofs of God’s
existence don’t lead to faith; reason has to admit that there are innumerable things that it
doesn’t understand. God is known by the heart, not by reason. The example of Jesus shows
this: Jesus doesn’t prove things, he talks in parables. He speaks to the heart.
Descartes’ God is the creator of human nature; he has created me as a reasonable be-
ing, with innate ideas; he has left his marks in my mind, namely the idea of perfection.
Descartes uses this mark as a proof of his existence. Descartes is sure that he is able to
rationally prove God’s existence. Descartes’ God comes with human reason; he helps me
to understand and to correct my mistakes, to control my will when I want to go beyond
my understanding. God is the reason in the world; he is the incomparable beauty of this
immense light58 (A.T., IX-1, 41).
According to Pascal, man cannot ascend to God by the power of his reason, but God
comes down to man and offers his love, his grace. Man has to respond to this proposal
of God; in his famous debate against the Jesuits, the Provincial letters, Pascal defends
Jansen’s work, Augustinus (1640), which expounds the theory of double predestination.
When somebody is born, God gives his grace or withholds it. Those who do not receive
grace shall be damned. Those who have it may or may not cultivate it. Those who don’t cul-
tivate it lose this grace and shall be damned. Those who cultivate it shall be saved. Pascal’s
Christianity is pessimistic. There is not much space for human freedom. Man is predestined
56Or, qu’un athée puisse connaître clairement que les trois angles d’un triangle sont égaux à deux droits, je ne le
nie pas; mais je maintiens seulement qu’il ne le connaît pas par une vraie et certaine science.
57Je ne puis pardonner à Descartes : il aurait bien voulu, dans toute sa philosophie, pouvoir se passer de Dieu ;
mais il n’a pu s’empêcher de lui faire donner une chiquenaude, pour mettre le monde en mouvement ; après cela,
il n’a plus que faire de Dieu.
58l’incomparable beauté de cette immense lumière.

The mathematical analogy in the proof of God’s existence by Descartes
403
by God’s choice. The largest part of mankind is predestined to damnation because of orig-
inal sin. Without God, alone, with only his reason, man is ruined. That is the theme of the
misery of man without God. God is a mystery which inﬁnitely exceeds us. While Descartes
talks about light, according to Pascal Jesus is a truly hidden God59 (Thought 751 B). God
is obscure. Reason cannot save man. Reason cannot prevent him from sinning. The wager
argument which we read in Thought 233B is based on the probability calculus to prove that
it is better to bet that God exists than that he doesn’t. This argument is not a proof of God’s
existence. It is only a means to disconcert a libertine and to lead him to prayer.
References
[1] Oeuvres de Descartes, published by Charles Adam and Paul Tannery, Léopold Cerf, Paris, 1897–1913.
[2] Descartes, Oeuvres et lettres, Gallimard, Paris, 1953.
[3] Y. Belaval, Leibniz critique de Descartes, Gallimard, Paris, 1978.
[4] J.-M. Beyssade, La philosophie première de Descartes, le temps et la cohérence de la métaphysique, Flam-
marion, Paris, 1979.
[5] E. Boutroux, Des vérités éternelles chez Descartes, Librairie Félix Alcan, Paris, 1927.
[6] P. Boutroux, L’imagination et les mathématiques selon Descartes, Alcan, Paris, 1900.
[7] L. Brunschvicg, La raison et la religion, Alcan, Paris, 1939.
[8] H. Gouhier, La pensée métaphysique de Descartes, Vrin, Paris, 1962.
[9] M. Gueroult, Descartes selon l’ordre des raisons, 2 tomes, Aubier-Montaigne, Paris, 1968.
[10] J.-L. Marion, Sur l’ontologie grise de Descartes, P.U.F., Paris, 1975 (2de éd. 1993).
[11] J.-L. Marion, Sur la théologie blanche de Descartes, P.U.F., Paris, 1981.
[12] J.-L. Marion, Questions cartésiennes, II, P.U.F., Paris, 1996.
[13] J. Vuillemin, Mathématiques et métaphysique chez Descartes, P.U.F., Paris, 1960.
59Jésus est un Dieu véritablement caché.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 21
Pascal’s Views on Mathematics and the Divine
Donald Adamson
Dodmore House, The Street, Meopham, Kent, DA 13 0AJ, United Kingdom
Contents
1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407
2. Characteristics of God . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408
3. God’s Salvation-Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412
4. Heart and reason
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 413
5. The Wager argument (418) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414
6. Mathematical aspects of presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 416
7. Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 418
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 420
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
405


Pascal’s views on mathematics and the divine
407
1. Introduction
Pascal’s mathematical achievement is fourfold. Lacking Descartes’s algebraic expertise, he
chose to work in the traditional ﬁeld of synthetic rather than analytic geometry, and thus
contributed to the study of conic sections. Six years later, in The Treatise on the Arithmeti-
cal Triangle and in its ﬁrst appendix Multiple Numbers, he published his ﬁndings on the
theory of number (prime numbers and magic squares), propounding the method of com-
binatorial analysis known as ‘Pascal’s Triangle’, and applying properties of the binomial
theorem. In collaboration with Fermat, and at the prompting of his gambling acquaintance
the Chevalier de Méré, he laid the foundations of modern probability theory. And towards
the end of his life, in his History of the Cycloid, he resolved various problems in the geom-
etry of indivisibles, thereby helping to create the inﬁnitesimal calculus: this, though falling
short of the generalized formulation which made Newton’s integral calculus possible, nev-
ertheless established the geometric laws applicable to a curve.
Such intermittent but highly concentrated scientiﬁc activity conﬁrms him as one of the
seventeenth century’s greater mathematicians, yet in a famous letter he disparages such
intellectual labours and pours scorn upon his arithmetical and geometric achievement.
‘I would not go two steps out of my way for geometry’s sake’, he writes, adding that so
different is the work on which he is currently engaged that he has almost forgotten about
mathematics; ‘for, to be frank with you about geometry, it is, in my opinion, the highest
of mental exercises; but I also see that it is so useless that I draw hardly any distinction
Fig. 1. Pascal’s death mask. Courtesy of the Principal and Fellows of Newnham College, Cambridge.

408
D. Adamson
between a mere geometrician and a skilled workman’; ‘whilst geometry was a good means
of testing one’s mental powers, it was not a good means of employing them’ (522).1
Nor is this disparagement of mathematics an isolated instance in Pascal’s writings. The
‘abstract sciences are not mankind’s proper concern’ (687). Descartes, he maintains (553),
probed too deeply into science—by which he principally means mathematics—and should
be censured accordingly. Moreover, ‘I think it is right that one should not look closely into
Copernicus’s opinion; however, it affects our whole life that we should know whether the
soul is mortal or immortal’ (164).
Pascal reﬂects this situation in his celebrated Thought on the ‘geometric’ and the ‘in-
tuitive outlook’ (for want of a better word to translate the admirably termed ‘esprit de
ﬁnesse’). In this antithesis the ‘geometric outlook’ is that of deductive, a priori reason-
ing, the reasoning of mathematics, whilst the ‘intuitive outlook’ not only embodies in-
ductive, a posteriori reasoning—the thinking processes of natural philosophy—but also
encompasses all the nuances and perceptions of human living, those very subtleties which
the court-functionary Leibniz, the lawyer Fermat, the soldier turned Royal tutor Descartes
(who in his Treatise on Man was also a natural scientist) and even Pascal’s father, the tax
commissioner Étienne Pascal, dealt with in the course of their professional careers. This
Thought 512, in which almost the whole of Pascal’s intellectual achievement is encapsu-
lated, acknowledges that each of the two ‘outlooks’ and methods has its own particular
validity—indeed its own necessity—within its sphere of inﬂuence. Pascal’s so-called ‘geo-
metric’ method foreshadowed the quasi-mathematical logic of the lemmas of Spinoza’s
Ethics as a method of reasoning geometrically from seemingly indubitable ﬁrst principles.
To present the argument of this article: the characteristics of a God who is ﬁrmly em-
bedded in human history suggest to Pascal a salvation-plan for the world that has been
divinely created. God, it is suggested to and by Pascal, can be apprehended by both heart
and mind. His existence, though not indubitable, can rightly be regarded as matter for in-
formed mathematical speculation. A demonstration of the mathematical aspects of Pascal’s
religious dialectic concludes the article.
2. Characteristics of God
Pascal holds that, rare and admirable as the ‘geometric outlook’ may be, it does not have
any bearing upon what is truly important in human life. What is essential from this stand-
point is the ‘intuitive outlook’; yet whereas the excogitations of the ‘geometric outlook’ do
at least produce results that are universally acknowledged, those of the ‘intuitive outlook’
yield no similar certainty. Does God exist? Like Voltaire (somewhat disingenuously) a cen-
tury later, Pascal maintains that belief in God should be the supremely important issue in
the lives of his fellow men; yet not even the God of deism can be conclusively proved by
mathematics; the God of revealed religion still less so! Mathematics is, he believes, ‘use-
less in its profundity’ (694); nor can the divine existence be proved by any of the traditional
arguments of the schoolmen (Anselm’s ontological argument or the Thomist arguments of
1The plain numbers within brackets denote some of Pascal’s lesser known Thoughts as laid out in the second of
L. Lafuma’s editions (Seuil, 1962). The bold numbers within brackets refer to the pagination of Pascal’s collected
writings edited by J.L.A. Chevalier (Pléiade, 1954).

Pascal’s views on mathematics and the divine
409
the Prime Mover, First Cause and Necessary Being), nor indeed by any moral argument
nor by those from design or natural law.
In short, whether mankind has been created randomly or by a good God or a wicked
demon cannot be decided by any individual’s natural powers alone (131), though the nat-
ural order does indeed suggest that ‘a necessary, eternal and inﬁnite being’ may well exist.
Within nature there are, he says, powerful signs that God does exist and these in themselves
are more cogent, if not more coherent, than the so-called metaphysical proofs, for the latter
are interdependent and (in a manner of speaking) syllogistic so that not all of them can
easily be comprehended at any one time, with the result that only an hour after a person
has acknowledged their force they are all too easily confused, misunderstood and put to
one side (190).
On the contrary, the God of Christianity is much more than the God of deism, natural
religion being as distant from Christianity as is atheism itself—and both being equally ab-
horrent (449, 781). ‘The Christian God’, Pascal asserts, ‘is not simply a God who is the
author of geometric truths and of the natural order’; and therefore ‘I shall not undertake
here to prove by natural reasons either the existence of God or the Trinity, or the immortal-
ity of the soul, or anything of that kind, not only because I do not feel myself sufﬁciently
able to ﬁnd in nature proofs to convince hardened atheists, but also because this knowledge
is useless and barren without Jesus Christ ...’ (449).
Pascal identiﬁes three of the four principal attitudes towards divine belief as those of ‘the
Pyrrhonist, the deist and the Christian’ (170): these are agnosticism, deism and Christian-
ity, and ‘doubt, assurance and submissiveness’ are their distinctive features respectively.
From this analysis he excludes atheism, refusing to make it central to his thesis. His ref-
erence in Thought 449 to ‘hardened atheists’ deﬁnes and circumscribes the main aim of
his Apologia; this comprehensive defence of Christianity, as wide-ranging as those of St.
Thomas Aquinas, Chateaubriand, Kierkegaard or Teilhard de Chardin, was a project upon
which he had embarked at the urgent request of the Jansenist-inclined Duc de Roannez:
intended to convert the agnostic rather than the atheist, it was a work which he contem-
plated for many years and for which his Thoughts were preparatory jottings. Doubt, which
is the focus of the projected Apologia, characterizes the Pyrrhonist because, like Arcesi-
laus, Montaigne and Charron, he resists and refutes dogmatic attitudes. On the other hand,
whereas the deist’s attitude is one of complacent self-assurance, the Christian believer ap-
proaches his God reverently and submissively because he trusts in a personal Deity who
has uniquely revealed himself in history and the Scriptures.
Never at any time does Pascal give us a palpable apprehension of the Godhead beyond
afﬁrming that he is the soul’s ‘path, object and ﬁnal goal’ (551), ‘an inﬁnite and immutable
object’, ‘the sole principle ... and sole end of all things’: thus, in the purely abstract sense
of the philosopher rather than the visionary, we know what is meant by him. Pascal resorts
to arithmetic in order to explain the necessary haziness of man’s perception of the Godhead:
we do not know what God is like, he argues, just as in mathematics we are incapable of
forming a mental picture of the inﬁnite (418).
In mathematics Pascal sees the outlook of inﬁnity; and the conviction which this gives
him of the existence of some sort of inﬁnite being adds vibrancy to his apologetic whilst
also ﬁlling him with the same spacious and serene tranquillity expressed by Spinoza in
his Ethics and by Plato in the Timæus. But whereas Spinoza is said by Balzac (in Cousin

410
D. Adamson
Bette) to have ‘proved the existence of God by mathematics’, such was never Pascal’s
intention. His God is no mathematical abstraction (449), nor is he the teleological Creator
as seen by Aquinas and Bonaventura although the doctrine of divine grace undoubtedly
has a teleological aspect. Nor is he the Prime Mover of the universe ‘who sets the world
in motion with the ﬂick of a ﬁnger’ (1001), which is how Pascal describes the God of
Descartes’s Discourse on Method.
On the contrary, Pascal’s Godhead is voluntaristic, going much beyond the Deity in
whom Newton believed, to the extent that through the Person of Jesus, through the Holy
Spirit, through prophecy, miracles and Scriptural revelation, he actively intervenes in the
unfolding of world-history, sustaining his Church throughout its tribulations, and putting
each human soul to the test though by no means leading mankind into error. And therefore
he is a personal God: not the Divinity ‘of the philosophers and scientists’ but the ‘God of
Abraham, God of Isaac and God of Jacob’ whom he so vividly perceived during the two
hours or so of a mystical vision and of whom, in his metaphor of tongues of ﬁre, he has left
a record in his Memorial. Pascal is indeed the ‘God-inebriated man’, to borrow the phrase
invented for Spinoza by Novalis.
Pascal’s Godhead, in his interventions in the unfolding of world-history, is the hidden
God of whom Isaiah prophesied; the God who, through the Holy Spirit, has inspired all
prophetic utterance and who has shed some light but not too much, wishing to blind some
people and enlighten others. He is the ‘God of Jesus Christ’ (913), without whom we can-
not know the Father, for ‘Jesus Christ is ... the true God of mankind’. And being through
Jesus the epitome of self-sacriﬁce, he is also the God of love, ‘humbled’, ‘cruciﬁed’, and
even actually ‘lost’ or ‘destroyed’: not quite abandoned upon the Cross, as Vigny was later
to envisage his death, but ‘lost’ and ‘destroyed’ at the very heart and in the very fullness of
the Godhead itself (471). Echoing in this respect all three Synoptic Gospels, Pascal empha-
sizes in The Mystery of Jesus that, though the Son may, in his humanity, have wished not to
have to taste the bitterness of death, yet he was not abandoned by the Father: ‘he prays but
once that the cup may pass from him, which he does submissively, and twice he prays that
it may come to him if such be the will of God’. And it is this disquieting perception of both
Father and Son being ‘lost’ or ‘destroyed’ which, through original sin, exactly mirrors the
Fall of Man.
This God who has loved and redeemed us we must also love, and Pascal well real-
izes that there is a world of difference between knowing about God and actually loving
him. ‘We must’, he says (618), ‘love only him, and not our transient fellow-creatures’—
acknowledging him in our hearts as ‘saviour, father, priest, host, nourishment, king, sage,
lawgiver, sufferer, pauper, and one who must produce a people whom he will lead, feed,
and bring into the Promised Land’ (607).
Hence the fundamental Pascalian concept of a God of contradictions, or contrariétés,
as he tends to call them: the Word who at his Nativity was unable to speak a word, the
child who is God, the outsider who is King, the Messiah who is the spiritual rather than
the secular saviour not merely of his own people but of all peoples, the Triune God in time
yet out of time, who is of obscure birth and yet not so obscure that there are no signs of
him. These are indeed the sorts of contradiction—reidentiﬁed and reiterated by Pascal—
which, across most if not all denominations, have been the familiar substance of Christian
worship and theology from the Fathers of the Church to the present day; and it is a tenet of

Pascal’s views on mathematics and the divine
411
Pascal’s faith that in the Second Person of the Trinity, ‘Jesus Christ, all contradictions are
reconciled’.
Within Pascal’s view of God there are, however, two sorts of contradiction. There are
the traditional contradictions previously mentioned, and these, perhaps better than anyone,
he turns to convincing apologetic use: the fact, to which Isaiah bears witness, that in God’s
revelation of Jesus to mankind there is enough clarity for some to discern in him the God-
Man but also enough darkness and obscurity for others to be mistaken. Likewise with the
parables, of which Jesus himself says that he has told them to so many ‘that seeing they
might not see, and hearing they might not understand’. The shedding of light—and even
the bestowal of faith—is ‘a gift of God’: it is not something of human origin.
Over and above the traditional contradictions, however, there are also those which, look-
ing in at Pascal’s conception of God from a standpoint which is not his, we equally perceive
as being present. Predominantly, these contradictions are to be found in his attitude towards
the doctrines of the Fall of Man, original sin, and predestination, matters which are con-
fronted in his four Writings On Grace written in 1657–1658 although indirectly, in 1656,
they had also been the subject of his earliest Provincial Letters.
Pascal, though not a theologian in the formal sense, assimilated a great deal about the-
ology through the writing of these epistolary masterpieces, which, with their vivid and
ironical dialogue, came brilliantly to the Jansenists’ rescue in their struggle against the Je-
suits. This dispute, which continued for well over a century, was between modernizers and
traditionalists. Focusing on aspects of moral theology, upon the doctrines of sufﬁcient and
efﬁcacious grace and upon the impact upon practical daily behaviour of any relaxation of
moral teaching, it culminated in the Jansenists’ defeat when, in 1713, their teaching was
condemned in a Papal bull. In Pascal’s particular phase of this prolonged acrimonious de-
bate the intellectual ammunition concerning the Jesuits’ doctrinal and ethical laxity was
prepared for him by his friends at Port-Royal; but he, better than anyone, knew how to hit
his target. And it is arguments about sufﬁcient and efﬁcacious grace that preoccupy him in
his ﬁrst three Provincial Letters.
In the Bible—and especially in Matthew’s and Mark’s Gospels and in the Pauline and
supposedly Pauline Epistles—much is said about predestination, the Elect and the doctrine
of divine grace. This central aspect of Christian teaching is nowadays understated to the
extent that the Pelagianism or semi-Pelagianism once championed by the Jesuits has be-
come the common currency of the Church’s belief; but from any reading of the Epistle to
the Romans it is clear why Augustine fervently denounced Pelagius and why, at the Synod
of Carthage, Pelagianism was condemned as heretical as long ago as the ﬁfth century.
Whereas Pelagius had denied original sin, teaching that the human will is equally free
to do evil or good and thereby save one’s soul, Augustine argued that God has an absolute
will to save those who will be saved but, conversely, a conditional will to damn those who
will be damned. Original sin, vehemently denied by Pelagius and of which (in Pascal’s
thought) the ‘lost’ or ‘destroyed’ God is so bold a metaphor, stems from the temptation
by the serpent, the Fall of Man and the expulsion from the Garden of Eden—Adam, and
through him all men, having thereby failed to fulﬁl God’s plan for the salvation of the
world.
Geometric and algebraic skills being close in nature to the logical syllogism and sorites,
it is these which Pascal repeatedly uses in respect of the existence of the Christian God,

412
D. Adamson
the divine plan for the salvation of mankind, the Church’s teachings on sufﬁcient and efﬁ-
cacious grace, and, again in the Provincial Letters, the casuistical methods of probabilism
and probabiliorism (e.g., 715–719); to some extent Pascal also defends the doctrine of pre-
destination in like manner. This apologetic activity, beginning with the Provincial Letters,
was at its most coherent and singleminded in the Writings on Grace and continued until
the end of his life, when he was preoccupied by his Thoughts.
3. God’s Salvation-Plan
In the Writings on Grace these quasi-mathematical skills are applied to the consequences
of Augustine’s view of divine grace as Pascal tries to resolve some of the riddles and
contradictions which that involves.
(1) The Fall of Man. In the beginning of things, he argues, the divine plan was that all
people should be saved; all therefore received sufﬁcient grace to enable them, with
freewill, to work out their salvation (965–967). After the Fall of Man not only Adam
but all his descendants became worthy of punishment. It is God’s conditional will
that some, but not all, shall be so punished (952–954).
(2) Proximate Power. Those whom God elects for salvation receive his efﬁcacious
grace, in addition to which a proximate power is needed to enable them to per-
sist in prayer (976–977). A syllogism endeavours to establish that sometimes this
proximate power is withheld even from the Elect:
(a) if all the Elect have a proximate power to pray ‘in the next instant’, they must
also have a proximate power to persist in prayer;
(b) if the Council of Trent has laid down that not all the Elect are capable, at all
times, of such persistence; then
(c) it is contrary to the teaching of the Council of Trent to say that a proximate
power to pray ‘in the next instant’ is always given to the Elect.
(3) Efﬁcacious Grace. However, the salvation of the Elect is assured because they have
that perseverance in faith which is God-given through Jesus Christ. But the non-
Elect cannot be saved because they do not have the efﬁcacious grace which is re-
quired for salvation.
(4) Prayer. Regular and devout prayer is sufﬁcient to procure grace which will be efﬁ-
cacious in procuring salvation. Yet God can still abandon the prayerful man, perhaps
because he can foresee the sins that he will commit of his own free will (951, 953,
965).
(5) Moral Laxity. Pascal denies that the belief that one belongs to the Elect may encour-
age in that person a lax attitude towards morality.
(6) Scope for Human Effort. He urges all men and women to do everything that could
contribute to their salvation.
(7) Ambivalence. Pascal is reluctant to accept that ‘God would have made the world in
order to damn it’ (864, cf. 725), or that he would damn an innocent child (131) or
those people born before the Redemption. And if a man cannot achieve his salvation
through faith and commitment, what is the point of an apologetic exercise?

Pascal’s views on mathematics and the divine
413
The four Writings on Grace were the closest Pascal ever came to writing theology. Al-
though, broadly speaking, they projected the Jansenists’ theological point of view, it does
not follow that Pascal himself entirely shared the beliefs he had analysed and defended in
the Provincial Letters—great as was his admiration for Arnauld, Nicole etc. as human be-
ings. In the aftermath of the Jesuit–Jansenist controversy, as also in many of his scientiﬁc
discoveries, this for ever non-systematic man formulated his meditations in response to an
adventitious stimulus. It was very far indeed from his intention to construct a theologi-
cal system of his own. He was, on the whole, exceedingly content to abide by Scriptural
revelation and the teachings of synods and ecumenical councils.
4. Heart and reason
In this all-important matter of the foundations of a belief in God Pascal’s position should be
distinguished from the positions of, say, Rousseau or Kant. To Jean-Jacques, unwavering in
his religious belief, the two clearest evidences of God were ‘the spectacle of nature’ (Mil-
ton’s ‘harmony divine’, Addison’s ‘spacious ﬁrmament on high’) and that ‘inner voice’ of
conscience and the moral law which also underlay Kant’s conviction of the divine exis-
tence. But whereas Pascal agreed with Kant and Rousseau that religion could not strictly
be founded on the a priori principles of mathematical reasoning, he held that the ‘ﬁrst prin-
ciples’ which are the basis of all deductive thinking are mediated to mankind by the heart,
claiming that it was ‘useless for reasoning, which has no part in the matter, to try to combat
them... For the knowledge of ﬁrst principles, of space, time, movement and numbers, is
as solid as any that is given to us by reasoning, and it is upon such knowledge, conveyed by
heart and instinct, that reason has to rely’ (110). These ﬁrst principles, the postulates of the
laws of physics, are of an arithmetical or geometric kind and therefore—as was thought at
that time about the common notions and postulates of Euclid—it might have been expected
that for Pascal the truthfulness of the existence of these ﬁrst principles was beyond ques-
tion. Yet he plays down the part that reason might have to play in such processes, arguing
that ‘except for faith and revelation, we have no certainty of the truth of these principles
other than the fact that within ourselves we have a natural feeling that they are true. How-
ever, this natural feeling is not a convincing proof of their truth, ... there being no certainty
outside faith’ (131). The heart, says Pascal (418), knows that the number of ﬁnite numbers
is inﬁnite though reason cannot prove that this is so: he chooses to regard this inﬁnitude of
ﬁnite numbers not as a postulate but as evidence of the primordial importance of faith and
revelation. It can, on the other hand, be demonstrated that ‘there can be no square numbers
one of which is double the other’: that, for him, is the province of reason, not of the heart.
For Pascal, therefore, the foundation of divine belief is ﬁrst and foremost a matter of the
heart, but it is not a case of the heart inspiring the ﬁrst principles from which reason can
conclude propositions from which belief can stem. Rather, the God-given ﬁrst principles
that are conﬁrmed to us by faith and revelation show the inadequacy and contingency of de-
ductive reasoning—and, a fortiori, of inductive reasoning too. Faith, the ultimate guarantor
of these ﬁrst principles, stems from the heart, and ‘those to whom God has given religious
belief through feelings of the heart are blessed indeed and very properly persuaded, but
those who have not that belief can only be given it by reasoning until such time as God will

414
D. Adamson
give it them through feelings of the heart, without which faith is merely human and quite
useless for salvation’ (110). This goes some way towards explaining the riddle that faith
is bestowed by God only upon the Elect, for a ‘merely human’ faith is said to be ‘quite
useless for salvation’ and reason is said to have little or no part to play in the conversion
to religious belief. Other religions, argues Pascal, have ‘suggested reasoning as the method
of attaining faith, but it does not lead to faith, for all that’. ‘Only two kinds of people can
be called reasonable: either those who serve God with all their hearts because they know
him, or those who seek him with all their hearts because they do not know him’. ‘The heart
has its reasons of which reason knows nothing’: what is meant by this strange paradox?
The reasoning mind proceeds, says Pascal, ‘by principle and demonstration’ whereas ‘the
heart’s method is different’: in the last analysis its apprehension of God is God-given. Faith
is mediated by the grace of God—and Pascal considers that the two ﬁrmest foundations of
religious belief are divine grace and miracles, ‘both of which are supernatural’ (861).
It is, then, a still stranger (though directly related) paradox that the avowed aim of the
Thoughts is to bring about religious conversions. Pascal’s God is not only the Deity who,
for their original sin, has consigned to ‘eternal damnation’ (131) those who lived before
the time of Jesus; he is also, and for the same reason, the God whose bestowal of mercy,
although sometimes withheld, is always undeserved (149). He is the dispenser of grace
which is not given to all but is necessary to all (110, 131, 984–991), yet in whom there is
merit in believing (509). For ‘denying, believing and doubting come as naturally to man as
does running to a horse’ (505); ‘religion ... is uncertain’; hence, says Pascal, a man would
not believe in God if there were no signs of him.
However, as is indicated by the analogy of the running horse, believing (religious faith)
also comes as naturally to man as do denying (atheism) and doubting (agnosticism); and
whether it be a case of joining battle, going to sea or walking along a plank, it is of the
very nature of human endeavour to be for ever engaged in risk-taking (travailler pour
l’incertain). Without being a mathematician, Augustine had also seen this element of risk
and this fact of human nature (577), but how much more reasonable and meritorious it is
to appreciate such things in the seventeenth rather than the fourth and ﬁfth centuries, in
the light of the probability calculus which he and Fermat happen to have pioneered! For
the probability calculus demonstrates that people must take risks; and thus we are led to
Pascal’s famous—almost notorious—argument of the Wager, a leap of faith which is the
most controversial aspect of the Thoughts and of his religious thinking generally.
5. The Wager argument (418)
Rather like the physical universe which he sees as being suspended between nothingness
and inﬁnity, Pascal portrays the individual human life as a sea-voyage on which man has
embarked from an uncertain origin towards an uncertain goal. Yet the fact that he is un-
certain of the goal does not mean that he should refrain from suppositions concerning it.
Pascal, notwithstanding any reservations he may have about the Elect being foreordained
to salvation, believes that all men should be mindful of the Last Things (death, judgment,
Heaven, Hell), weighing in the balance—in the form of a probability calculus—whether it

Pascal’s views on mathematics and the divine
415
is better to enjoy present worldly delights to the possible detriment of one’s eternal salva-
tion, or whether it is better to forgo concupiscence with a view to gaining an inﬁnitude of
happiness which may or may not await one in a possible Hereafter. Man, he argues, should
stake his present life for the sake of winning something inﬁnitely better in the world to
come. This is the broad sense of the Pascalian Wager, which, for all the apparent rigour of
its mathematical formulation, has been rejected by Voltaire, Diderot and Laplace.
Objections to the Wager Argument:
(i) Existence of the Gain. Contrary to the normal mathematical conventions of a wa-
ger, the interlocutor is urged to gamble on the possible existence of the prize.
(ii) Nature of the Gain. How does the mathematics of Pascal’s argument correlate to
the speciﬁc concept of the Christian Heaven?
(iii) Compulsion. The Pascalian Wager is not constructed on the normal model, where
the risks are undertaken of the gambler’s own free will. For reasons which are un-
clear Pascal says to his interlocutor that he must gamble because he has embarked.
But is wagering for God actually believing in him or merely making the effort to
do so?
(iv) Distaste for Immortality. Unbelievers may serenely face the prospect of total ex-
tinction; and likewise the unhappy recluse. Both for the libertine and the unhappy
recluse, but particularly for the former, the Wager argument should therefore have
reposed on the concept of Hell.
(v) Crypto-materialism of the Notion of Gain. Just as the Jesuits attacked the Provin-
cial Letters for ‘ridiculing holy things’ (779, cf. 750), so Pascal is also open to the
criticism that holy things are quantiﬁed and reiﬁed in the Wager argument.
(vi) Differential Rewards. Consequently, God might not reward inﬁnitely those whose
efforts to believe in him are prompted by mercenary considerations. And, rather
similarly, he might differentiate belief that is based on faith from belief that is based
on evidential reasons. Perhaps, therefore, different decision matrices are required
for different persons.
(vii) Disproportion. The lack of any recognizable relationship between the stake and
the gain is an almost insuperable obstacle to those wagerers whose top priority
is the maximization of gain. Conversely, the value that the stake still has for the
unbeliever in terms of secular pleasure is no less a sticking-point for those who
seek to minimize potential loss.
Both mathematically and otherwise the Wager argument perhaps therefore lacks the de-
cisive force for which its creator hoped. But (α) it may be wondered whether this argument
and the concept of divertissement were the speciﬁc expressions of a neurotic outlook; and,
consequently, (β) the quasi-mathematical argument of the Wager might not have become
supremely pivotal in opening the doorway from a pessimistic analysis of human nature
into the effulgence of the Christian revelation. On the contrary, it would very probably
have been one of the numerous convergent arguments used by Pascal in furtherance of his
apologetic goal: in Newman’s phrase, one of the ‘powerful and concurrent’ reasons—most
of them non-mathematical—the sum of which may work towards religious conversion.

416
D. Adamson
6. Mathematical aspects of presentation
What part is played by mathematics in Pascal’s apologetic achievement and in his percep-
tion of the Godhead?
(a) Proof. The object of Euclidean geometry is proof. In the ﬁnal part of the never-to-be-
ﬁnished Apologia it seems that Pascal would likewise have sought to adduce proofs—and
by a disproportionate process akin to that already noted in his Wager argument. There
would perhaps have been ﬁve proofs from the prophecies (274), various proofs from
Moses, i.e., from the Pentateuch (290–297), and there would certainly have been many
proofs of and from Jesus Christ: all of these proofs are adumbrated in the Thoughts.
(b) Probability Calculus. Pascal’s work with Fermat on probability had released the nat-
ural sciences from the conﬁnements of absolute certainty, establishing instead the concept
of a stochastic universe. These joint mathematical ﬁndings deeply inﬂuenced both Pascal’s
religious thought and its presentation: not all people will be saved, not all will be damned;
impossible though it is to read the mind of God, we know through his revealed word that
human salvation will depend upon the imparting of his grace, and human faith by itself
will not be enough. The salvation-plan is therefore to a large extent deterministic, but not
entirely so as human commitment is still required in order that that plan shall take effect. At
a religious level the mind that had grappled with mathematical probability was universally
aware of probability, including the casuistical methods of probabilism and probabiliorism.
Furthermore, in the Wager argument his work with Fermat is at the core of his presentation
of eschatological choice, although it can scarcely be said that the algebraic equations are
proportionate. Pascal recognized that it is both natural and right to take calculated risks.
(c) The Calculus of Indivisibles. Cavalieri’s work on maxima and minima, later perfected
by Roberval, became the foundation of the inﬁnitesimal and integral calculus. It would
be incredible to suppose that Pascal was unfamiliar with their work on the summation
of inﬁnite series, especially as Cavalieri’s Six Geometrical Exercises rapidly became a
cornerstone of seventeenth-century mathematics; and he must have known of the earlier
ﬁndings of Archimedes’s method of exhaustion and Kepler’s theory of inﬁnitesimally small
geometric quantities. Archimedes had calculated the area of a segment of a parabola by
constructing an inﬁnite sequence of triangles starting with one of area A and continuing to
add further triangles between the existing ones and the parabola; by the same method of
maxima and minima, or upper and lower limits, Cavalieri had calculated the quadrature of
areas enclosed by certain curves. So too with Pascal’s apologetic technique in the Thoughts,
where a somewhat similar technique of movement between extremes, for ever approaching
the resolution of the problem, was at the heart of his didactic purpose. ‘There are two
errors’, he says (252), ‘to take everything literally and to take everything spiritually’; ‘if
a man is boastful, I will humble him... And I shall go on contradicting him...’ (130);
‘I will not allow him to rest in either [view] so that, lacking both a stable base and peace
of mind, ...’ (464). However, for Pascal there is an Absolute Truth compared with which
all the contradictions of the phenomenal world (inconsistencies, for example, in the human
view of justice) are stark evidence of human fallibility and its causation in original sin.
(d) Inﬁnity. The mathematical concept of inﬁnity, so familiar to Pascal from his knowl-
edge of the summation of inﬁnite series, naturally comes to his mind whenever he consid-
ers the inﬁnite nature of God, and sometimes he thinks of it when he considers the cosmic

Pascal’s views on mathematics and the divine
417
situation of man: human beings are mysteriously suspended between two Inﬁnites (199);
‘unity added to inﬁnity in no way increases it ...’ etc. (418). There is an inﬁnite number
of ﬁnite numbers: this is asserted in no less than three Thoughts (663, 418, 110), and to
Pascal it is perhaps the clearest indication of the existence of an inﬁnite being.
(e) Syllogism. The Writings on Grace can also be seen not as the work of a theologian but
as speculation in the manner of a mathematician who, by means of syllogistic proof, seeks
an elegant resolution of apparent contradictions; and the same criticism has been levelled at
the Provincial Letters, that in some of them the mysterious relationships of human beings
with God have been treated as if they were a geometric problem. The quasi-mathematical
techniques of syllogism and sorites are primarily resorted to in the earlier letters’ discus-
sions of the rival doctrines of divine grace (e.g., Letters I–III) although they are also used
with deadly effect in Pascal’s mockery of the ethical implications of the Jesuits’ casuistical
devices (Letters VI, VII, XII). Even before embarking in earnest on the Thoughts Pascal
had perfected his mastery of syllogism in the Provincial Letters. Self-evidently, his mastery
of syllogism and near-syllogism must have contributed to a similar mastery of the apoph-
thegmic discourse, as in the self-referential paradox that ‘it is not certain that everything
is uncertain’ (521). Thought 192 is the best example of the near-syllogism: ‘knowledge of
God without knowing one’s wretchedness leads to pride. Knowledge of one’s wretchedness
without knowing God leads to despair. Knowledge of J.C. is the happy medium because in
him we ﬁnd both God and our wretchedness’. This Thought has the dialectical form of the
strict syllogism but is more in the nature of an elaborate antithesis.
(f) Antitheses are linked to syllogisms to the extent that they are the second term of the
dialectical process. In Pascal’s hands they become a sharply etched literary device which is
also a geometric one. ‘I should be much more fearful of being mistaken and ﬁnding that the
Christian religion was true than of not being mistaken in believing that it was true’ (387):
such antitheses reﬂect the elegant mathematical harmony of Pascal’s mind, a harmony that
was so much at variance with the condition of the actual human world as he conceived
it—damaged as that had been by original sin. Just as algebraic proofs could not, as we
have seen, demonstrate the truth of the Word made Flesh, so likewise, in the defence of
the Triune God, there is a danger that words themselves can be merely formulaic, their
syllogistic neatness assuming the character of a priori demonstrations without particular
reference to lived existence. This is particularly so when the antithesis almost amounts to
syllogism, as in Thought 462: ‘the prophets have predicted but were not predicted. In later
times the saints were predicted but were not predictors. Jesus Christ was both predicted
and a predictor’. But Pascal warns himself, just as much as his reader, against the danger
of false antitheses (559). The stark contrasts of antitheses such as ‘there is nothing on this
earth ...’, in Thought 468, are not literary bravura. They are strictly logical in function in
that they remind the reader of the categorical nature of the choice facing him, for Pascal
writes in the spirit of Jesus’s words (recorded in both Matthew and Luke) that ‘he that is
not with me is against me’, and this saying of Our Lord is quoted in Thought 775. The
best example of the syllogistic antithesis is the one in which Pascal suggests that there is
greater certainty about religion than that we shall live to see tomorrow (577). Perhaps this
Thought is a mere jotting and not a potential cornerstone, perhaps it would merely have
helped to ﬂesh out one of the ‘powerful and concurrent’ reasons; for the main philosophical

418
D. Adamson
objection to it is that such an argument could be applied to the defence of any religious,
political or other belief.
(g) Symbolism. Pascal’s training in geometry rather than algebra—but awareness of al-
gebra nevertheless—would have stood him in good stead if he had ever come to the point
of composing his Christian apologia; it has served him well in the Thoughts. For just as
algebra is numerical symbolism, and as the geometry within which he worked can itself
be made to perform exactly the same uses, so the Thoughts are permeated with the notion
of ﬁgures, or prophetic metaphor: through the symbolism of the Messiah, the Suffering
Servant, the Temple, the Babylonian Captivity and the Stone which the builders rejected
Pascal would have sought to demonstrate that Old Testament prophecy had been fulﬁlled
in Jesus’s life and death. For example, the Gospel words ‘I am the living bread’, echoing
Exodus XVI, are quoted in Thoughts 268 and 503, as Pascal thinks of Jesus as the manna,
or divine bread, come down from Heaven to feed mankind. Algebra cannot prove the divin-
ity of Jesus or that he is the living bread, but it is not surprising that Pascal, as a numerical
symbolist, saw the whole world as a divine metaphor.
Indeed, in a certain sense mankind is a ﬁgure of the Godhead, made in God’s image; and
Pascal, like Kepler, believed that, because man was made to resemble God, so he was ca-
pable of understanding the universe which God had created. Kepler, following Pythagoras
and Plato, also believed, however, that God had made the universe according to a math-
ematical plan and that consequently mathematics would provide a secure key to the un-
derstanding of the whole of that universe. Pascal had no such easy perception of the rela-
tionship of God and man. Original sin means that man’s apprehension of the world and (in
Kepler’s phrase) of the harmony of the world is necessarily imperfect; the role of reason
is limited. Inﬁnity, the mathematician’s concept to which Pascal always returns, terriﬁes
him or his alter ego in the phenomenal world (198, 201). It is the perfect metaphor for
eschatological uncertainty: ‘the never-ending silence of those inﬁnite spaces ﬁlls me with
dread’. ‘The last act is bloody’ (165); man on earth is like a prisoner in a dungeon or
death cell (163); human beings are like chained men watching their companions, one by
one, being put to death (434). As for the eschatological decision, man is alone. Yet the
relationship with God is not just a one-to-one relationship, for ‘true religion teaches us
our duties, our incapabilities, our pride and lusts; it also teaches us what the remedies are:
humility and self-mortiﬁcation’. The Christian religion is not only ‘the object and centre
towards which all things tend’, it is also the vehicle of a moral message; and Pascal em-
phasizes what virtuous men and women there are in the Christianity community, he extols
the good and happy lives they lead. This amounts to the important argument of Christian
witness.
7. Conclusion
What shape would Pascal’s apologia of the Christian religion ultimately have taken? Except
for a few disconnected jottings in readiness for a Provincial Letter that was never written,
practically nothing in the Thoughts seems irrelevant to the main purpose. What would he
have added or omitted? Could the eventual work have had the beautiful simplicity of a the-
orem? ‘The arrangement of the material is new’, he explains (696). ‘When playing tennis,

Pascal’s views on mathematics and the divine
419
Fig. 2. French postage stamp commemorating the tercentenary of Pascal’s death.
both players use the same ball, but one is better at handling it’: all would have depended
on the ﬁnal order. ‘The last thing you discover when you are writing a book is what you
have to put ﬁrst’ (976). And yet, more than on logical orderliness, everything would have
depended on Pascal’s incomparable literary skill, which, contrary to the situation usual at
that time, was modelled not on Latin authors but on Epictetus and Montaigne, the sceptical
writers whom he had discussed in his Conversation with M. de Saci: ‘I will write down my
thoughts in a disorderly manner though not perhaps in purposeless confusion. That is the
true order of presentation: in its very disorder it will always be indicative of the order I have
in mind’ (532). Thus the orderliness of the syllogism, the sorites, the dialectical antithesis
would have been traversed by an alternative if not higher order of literary and linguistic
presentation.
Pascal was a formal mathematician but not a formal philosopher, nor was he a formal
theologian. In Archilochus’s terms he was one of those who knew ‘one really good thing’—
and that thing did not belong to the realm of mathematics. Whether in religion, physics or
mathematics he was not concerned to construct a unitary system of thought, tending instead
to work brilliantly although sporadically in response to external stimuli (the vacuum exper-
iments, the help he gave Méré, the Jansenists’ controversy with the Jesuits, his involvement
in the cycloid challenge). Given the a priori character of the ‘geometric outlook’, there was
no way in which he could not have been a formal mathematician; but in philosophy and the-
ology, where lay the ‘one really good thing’ which he recognized for what it was worth, his
approach was quite the reverse. Pascal had undergone at least one unforgettable mystical
experience, when for those two hours during his ‘night of ﬁre’ (913) on 23–24 November
1654 he had a vision of the God of the Old Testament who is also the God of the New
Covenant, lapped, as was the Holy Spirit (Acts II 2–4), in tongues of ﬂame; and this expe-
rience had caused him to realize that insights which appear rational are essentially intuitive
and that the phenomenal world can only ever be imperfectly understood. Thus miracles
apparently contrary to the mathematical uniformity of the laws of physics would have had
their all-important place within his apologetic discourse; and the presentational ‘disorder-
liness within orderliness’ would have served as a metaphor for miracles’ disruption of the
orderly sequences of the natural world. It is a voluntaristic approach in keeping with Je-
sus’s conduct and assessment of his own ministry: ‘except ye see signs and wonders, ye
will not believe’.

420
D. Adamson
‘Contradiction’, says Pascal (177), ‘is not a sign of falsity, nor is the lack of contra-
diction a sign of truth’, and this is as applicable to the wonders that are miracles as it
is to the signs of the hidden God. And just as there are the twin aspects of contradic-
tion, so also there are the twin aspects of truth, of which the deductive and inductive
truths of mathematics/physics are but one aspect—and by no means the more impor-
tant. Though he is deeply committed to Christian doctrine, Pascal dislikes the formulaic
repetition of dogma, and in his Writings on Grace he explores the full implications of
that doctrine, working them out in the manner of a mathematical problem. A facet of his
seemingly random responsiveness to external stimuli is his devotion to truth at all costs:
thus, he does not resile from the empirical ﬁnding that the fall of the column of mercury
within the pipette or test tube is evidence of a vacuum, whatever the schoolmen may have
said about nature abhorring the void and God not existing if the existence of a vacuum
could be established. Pascal proves otherwise but still believes in God, and in Letters XII
and XVII of the Provincial Letters he extols truth as something God-given and eternal.
Likewise, the purpose of the Thoughts is to disseminate truth: ‘wherever disputes occur,
people enjoy seeing the clash of opinions—but as to the discovery and contemplation of
truth? they have no interest in that’ (773). Yet, he warns, ‘truth itself becomes an idol,
for truth without charity is not God: rather, it is his image and an idol which is neither
to be loved nor worshipped, and still less must one love or worship its opposite, which is
falsehood’ (926).
This is a modern conception of the Christian religion, except for Pascal’s seeming com-
mitment to the Jansenists’ cause, whose eventual defeat by the semi-Pelagianism of the
Jesuits he did not foresee (662). The fact that his religious thought was unsystematic—in
other words, that it was not, and did not purport to be, a philosophy or a theology—does
not in any way subtract from its intrinsic value as an urgent eschatological entreaty, nor as
the categorical outline of a way of life.
References
[1] D. Adamson, Blaise Pascal. Mathematician, Physicist, and Thinker about God, 1995.
[2] V. Alexandrescu, Le Paradoxe chez Blaise Pascal, 1997.
[3] J.H. Broome, Pascal, 1965.
[4] H.M. Davidson, Blaise Pascal, 1983.
[5] I. Hacking, The Emergence of Probability. A Philosophical Study of Early Ideas about Probability, Induction
and Statistical Inference, 1975.
[6] K. Hara, Pascal et l’induction mathématique, Revue d’Histoire des sciences et de leurs applications, 1962.
[7] R.C. Jeffrey, The Logic of Decision, 1983.
[8] I. Kummer, Blaise Pascal: Das Heil im Widerspruch, 1978.
[9] J. Lützen, The Relationship between Pascal’s Mathematics and his Philosophy, Centaurus, 1980.
[10] J.L. Mackie, The Miracle of Theism, 1982.
[11] J. Miel, Pascal and Theology, 1969.
[12] T. Penelhum, Religion and Rationality, 1971.
[13] J. Pucelle, La Dialectique du Renversement du pour au contre et l’antithétique pascalienne, Méthodes chez
Pascal, 1979.
[14] C. Ruhia, The Physics of Chance: From Blaise Pascal to Niels Bohr, 1992.
[15] F. Russo, Pascal et l’analyse inﬁnitésimale, Revue d’Histoire des sciences et de leurs applications, 1962.
[16] L. Thirouin, Le Hasard et les Règles: le modèle du jeu dans la pensée de Pascal, 1991.

Pascal’s views on mathematics and the divine
421
[17] D.T. Whiteside, Patterns of mathematical thought in the later seventeenth century, Archive for History of
Exact Sciences, 1961.
Some technical observations on Pascal’s wager
[18] G. Brown, A defence of Pascal’s wager, Religious Studies, 1984.
[19] J. Cargile, Pascal’s wager, Philosophy, 1966.
[20] W.K. Clifford, The ethics of belief, The Ethics of Belief Debate, G.D. McCarthy, ed., 1986.
[21] I. Hacking, The logic of Pascal’s wager, American Philosophical Quarterly, 1972.
[22] A. Hájek, The illogic of Pascal’s wager, Proceedings of the 10th Logica International Symposium, 1997.
[23] J. Jordan (ed.), Gambling on God: Essays on Pascal’s Wager, 1994.
[24] P. Lønning, Cet Effrayant pari. Une ‘Pensée’ pascalienne et ses critiques, 1980.
[25] M. Martin, Pascal’s wager as an argument for not believing in God, Religious Studies, 1983.
[26] T. Mishima, Interprétation mathématique de l’argument du pari de Pascal, Actes du XIIe Congrès interna-
tional d’histoire des sciences, vol. IV, 1971.
[27] T.V. Morris, Pascalian wagering, Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 1986.
[28] G. Mougin, E. Sober, Betting against Pascal’s wager, Nous, 1994.
[29] M.T. Nelson, Utilitarian eschatology, American Philosophical Quarterly, 1991.
[30] N. Rescher, Pascal’s Wager: A Study of Practical Reasoning in Philosophical Theology, 1985.
[31] H. Sobel, Pascalian wagers, Synthèse, 1996.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 22
Spinoza and the Geometrical Way of Proof
Ger Harmsen
Dominee Veenweg 58, 8456HS De Knipe, The Netherlands
Contents
1. Spinoza’s time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 425
2. The Jews in the Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 426
3. Descent and youth
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 426
4. Inﬂuences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 427
5. Interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 429
6. The mathematical way of reasoning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 431
7. Social philosophy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 435
8. Living nature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 437
9. Summum bonum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 438
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 439
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
423


Spinoza and the geometrical way of proof
425
1. Spinoza’s time
Spinoza (1632–1677), the greatest and most widely admired Dutch philosopher, was born
in Amsterdam into a Spanish–Jewish family. Spinoza’s major work, Ethics, represents an
interesting link between metaphysics and mathematics because the book is written more
geometrico (in the way of geometry). Spinoza applied to metaphysics the same method
that Euclid had applied to mathematics when he wrote The Elements. However, before we
can turn to the way in which mathematics and the divine are related in Spinoza’s work, we
must ﬁrst devote some attention to the time and the society in which Spinoza lived.
In the Eighty Years’ War (1568–1648) the Republic of the United Netherlands had
fought itself free from the Spanish–Habsburg empire and the bourgeoisie had taken the
place of the nobility. At the time of Spinoza the revolutionary spirit had disappeared but
the social, economic and cultural gains remained. In the middle of the 17th century the
provinces Zeeland and Holland were the centre of a powerful republic of merchants with
vast colonial possessions, ruled by an oligarchy of regents and merchants led by a Grand
Pensionary. The wars that the republic fought with England were about the hegemony on
the seas and in the world.
The people lived under the spiritual discipline of Calvinist ministers to whom the broad-
mindedness, the looser way of life and the greater wealth of the elite was a thorn in their
ﬂesh. The regents stimulated culture, art, philosophy and science, the character of which
frequently did not harmonise with the views of the Christian orthodoxy. The freethinkers
among them were on their guard against expressing their views.
At the time Amsterdam could rightly be called a multi-ethnic and multi-cultural society.
Next to the Protestant state church the regents tolerated the Lutherans, the Baptists, the
Catholics and other faithful as long as they avoided being conspicuous. Spinoza wrote
in Tractatus Theologico-Politicus: “Taken the city of Amsterdam, whose enjoyment of this
Fig. 1. Benedict de Spinoza (1632–1677). Portrait from the 1677 edition of the Opera Posthuma.

426
G. Harmsen
freedom has made it great and greatly admired by the whole world. In this ﬂourishing state,
this city without a peer, men of every race and sect live in the greatest harmony [...] and no
sect whatsoever is so detested that its members (provided that they harm no one, give every
man his own, and live decent lives) are refused the protection of the civil authorities”.1
2. The Jews in the Netherlands
The Dutch Jewish community had grown very much in the 16th and 17th centuries. This
was caused by the fact that in 1492 the Roman Catholic monarchy had driven the Moors
out of their last bulwark, Granada, and consequently from the entire Iberian peninsula.
This meant the end of centuries’ long peaceful and fertile co-operation between Jews and
Arabs, also in philosophy. Persecution and the burning of heretics took on considerable
proportions. In 1580 Portugal came under Spanish rule and in this country also, which
already had a moderate inquisition, the Jews were persecuted in a bloody way by the fa-
natically Roman Catholic monarchy. Even the new Christians (called Marranos, which
means “swines”), who had converted to the Roman Catholic faith—at least for the outside
world—did not escape persecution. Some of them emigrated and the wealthy businessmen
among them, taking their networks of European customers with them, were seeking refuge
in, amongst other cities, Hamburg and Amsterdam. The ﬁrst Roman Catholic Jews arrived
in Amsterdam in 1598. The Calvinist governors of the city requested them not to profess
their religion in public. In 1602, however, Uri Ha Levi, who preached the undiluted Jew-
ish faith came to Amsterdam from Emden in Germany. The regents permitted him to stay
because in their eyes Roman Catholicism was actually worse than the Jewish faith. Syna-
gogues were built and both orthodox and liberal persuasions of the Jewish faith developed.
However, freethinking was not tolerated. For example, Uriel da Costa (1585–1640), the
son of a Jewish mother and a Portuguese nobleman, was excommunicated twice with all
the accompanying humiliations, and he ﬁnally committed suicide in 1640. Spinoza was
seven years old when everybody around him talked about this event.
For the Calvinist part of the population as well, openly expressed doubt or denial of
the truths of faith could lead to heavy punishments. This happened to Adriaan Koerbagh
(1633–1669), who belonged to Spinoza’s circle. After a severe sentence to imprisonment
Koerbagh died in jail as a result of the barbaric regime there.
3. Descent and youth
Baruch de Spinoza came from a family of Spanish–Jewish merchants but he himself was
born in Amsterdam. His father was a prominent merchant and furthermore played an im-
1“Urbs Amstelodamum exemplo sit, quae tanto cum suo incremento, et omnium nationum admiratione, hu-
jus libertatis fructus experitur. In hac enim ﬂorentissima republica et urbe praestantissima omnes cujuscunque
nationis et sectae homines summa cum concordia vivunt [. . . ] et nulla omnino tam odiosa secta est cujus sec-
tarii (modo neminem laedant, et suum unicuique tribuant, honesteque vivant) publica magistratuum authoritate
et praesidio non protegantur”. Quoted from: Benedict de Spinoza, The Political Works, edited and translated by
A.G. Wernham, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1958, pp. 240–241.

Spinoza and the geometrical way of proof
427
portant role in the government of the synagogue. Baruch’s increasingly free religious con-
victions were not in keeping with those of his family and the orthodoxy of the rabbis and,
when attempts to convince him of the incorrectness of his views or to let him keep silent
about them, failed, he was put under a ban. After he was banned from the Jewish com-
munity no one was allowed to associate with him any more. Because of this he could no
longer practice his profession as a Jewish merchant.
After his expulsion Spinoza became a member of a group of Collegiants of which Men-
nonites were also a part. They were non-ecclesiastical Christians who met in living rooms.
The Calvinist ministers followed the Collegiants with Argus eyes because they were not
very dogmatic. Several of those who participated in the meetings became Spinoza’s friends
and pupils. However, he was always on the alert for people who sought contact with him
with the hidden intention of interrogating him and eliciting blasphemous statements from
him. Later, he had a rose and the word caute (careful) engraved in his signet ring. Yet, the
idea that he led a quiet and withdrawn life is not in accordance with the facts. He not only
received his Collegiant friends but philosophers and scientists as well. In 1660 the munic-
ipal regents considered it advisable to let him disappear from Amsterdam for a couple of
months and accommodated him on a large country estate. Spinoza did not return to Ams-
terdam but established himself in Rijnsburg where the Collegiants met several times a year.
Whenever he had the impression that he had got himself talked about, and for other reasons
as well, he thought it safer to move. After Rijnsburg he subsequently lived in Voorburg and
The Hague.
Numerous edicts were issued against his Tractatus Theologico-Politicus (1670) by ec-
clesiastical and lower governmental bodies. However, he had powerful protectors among
the regents. One of them was the Grand Pensionary, Johan de Witt, who had published
an authoritative book about mathematics: Elementa curvarum linearum (1659). The edicts
were prevented or remained as long as possible a dead letter. After Johan de Witt and his
brother had been tortured and lynched by fanatical followers of the house of Orange, oth-
ers continued to protect Spinoza, for example, Johan Hudde, a burgomaster of Amsterdam
and an important mathematician as well. None of the regents, however, would ever want
to have been seen with Spinoza. After 1770 it seemed to Spinoza unadvisable to publish
other texts and he came back on his plans to do so. Yet he apparently loved publishing and
he had a need to propagate his own views, of which he had no low opinion. Spinoza was a
fearless and self-conscious man; yet, like many freethinkers he attempted above all not to
give offence. Reliable biographical data about Spinoza are rare.2
4. Inﬂuences
What were the spiritual inﬂuences that Spinoza underwent in his younger years? In partic-
ular around 1900 much work was done and published on this subject. Der Junge Spinoza;
Leben und Werdegang im Lichte der Weltphilosophie (1910) by Stanislaus von Dunin
Borkowski, S.J., is still a classic on this point. Since then substantial factual research has
2The well-wrought and balanced biography by Theun de Vries ([27], in Dutch) gives short shrift to several
popular myths concerning Spinoza.

428
G. Harmsen
been done, but nevertheless much remains speculative. The list of books in Spinoza’s li-
brary, however, offers a lead.3 It shows in any case the books that he actually possessed and
probably read as well. Spinoza underwent the inﬂuence of the Jewish–Arabic philosophy
(Averroës, Maimonides) and via them he came into contact with Greek thought. This hap-
pened not only in this indirect manner but also directly. He had the works of Greek and Ro-
man philosophers, historians and poets in his bookcase: Aristotle, Seneca, Cicero, Livius,
Tacitus, Sallustius, Homerus, Ovidius and Vergilius. Of the great minds of the Renaissance
he was familiar with Giordano Bruno, Tommaso Campanello and others. However, in the
course of time, the rationalism of Descartes (1569–1650)became more and more important
for him. Spinoza frequented the Flemish Roman–Catholic philosopher Franciscus van den
Enden (1602–1674) at whose school he not only learnt Latin but became familiar with the
philosophy of Descartes as well. At the same time he became here acquainted with the ex-
act natural sciences. Moreover, Van den Enden would not have kept the radical-democratic
views that appeared posthumously in his Free Political Theses (Vrije Politieke Stellingen)
for himself.
For a good understanding of Spinoza it is necessary to make a few remarks about
Descartes’ views. Descartes did not want to base himself on mediaeval scholastical phi-
losophy, while, as for the big philosophical questions, he did not want to base himself on
sensory perceptions either. Where Spinoza straight out based himself upon God, Descartes’
starting point was his own ego and radical doubt—cogito ergo sum—although in the end,
according to Descartes, the existence of a perfect God could not be doubted because an
imperfect human being would not be able to make up the notion of such a God. Everything
that was “clear and distinct” had to be true. Descartes held next to God two completely
separate substances, thought (mind) and extension (matter), that could not inﬂuence one
another. In this way Descartes left philosophers after him, like Spinoza, who was 36 years
younger, with the task of relating mind and matter in one way or another.
Descartes and Spinoza had completely different ideas about religion. Descartes spent
20 years in the Dutch Republic where he continued to profess the Roman Catholic faith
with all the dogmas included. He denoted them as the tri mirabilia (three miracles): the
creation from nothing, the free will and the incarnation of the Son of God, although in
his philosophy there was no place for the ﬁrst and the last. Descartes’ rationalism caused
commotion among the Calvinist ministers in the Netherlands because it implied the sov-
ereignty of reason and the separation of philosophy and religion. His view that philosophy
should not be the handmaiden of theology—geem philosophia ancilla theologiae—raised
mistrust among, in particular, the theologians in Utrecht. They foresaw consequences of
his philosophy that Descartes himself did not draw. That is why the theologians, among
them the professor of divinity Gisbertus Voetius (1589–1667), feared his writings. They
feared them less, however, than they would later fear the philosophy of Spinoza, so that
several of Spinoza’s followers pretended to be Cartesians.
Spinoza defended freethinking and rejected all religious coercion categorically. More-
over, according to Spinoza, philosophy had to be emancipated from theology and politics,
from church and state. As a philosopher Spinoza made no concessions. On the basis of ra-
tional arguments he rejected every revealed religion and for him God, nature and substance
3J. Freudenthal, Die Lebensgeschichte Spinoza’s in Quellenschriften, Urkunden und nichtamtlichen Nach-
richten, 1899.

Spinoza and the geometrical way of proof
429
(in the sense of the fundamental principle of everything) were identical notions: Deus sive
natura. He considered people who believed in miracles to be atheists because they denied
the unshakeable causality of nature inherent to God.
Yet Spinoza saw the established church as a moral force that kept the masses under
control, with the Bible in its hand. The masses ought to continue to go obediently to church.
The state church, however, ought to avoid theological quarrels and deal only with “external
acts of piety and worship; not of inward piety and the inward worship of God [...] inward
worship and piety are part of the inalienable right of the individual”.4 The task of the church
was only to preach justice and charity. According to Spinoza all revealed religions had
justice and charity in common and this is what the morality of his philosophy, according to
his own words, amounted to.
5. Interpretation
At the heart of Spinoza’s philosophy is the idea that there are not, as Descartes held, three
substances, God, mind and body, but there is only one unique inﬁnite substance: God. The
attributes of a substance are what the intellect perceives as constituting the essence of the
substance. God has inﬁnitely many attributes. Thought and Extension are two of them: God
is a thinking thing and God is an extended thing. The implication of this view is that mind
and body are one and the same thing conceived differently: conceived under the attribute
of Thought it is mind, conceived under the attribute of Extension it is body.
Henricus Regius (1598–1679), physician and professor in Utrecht and a friend of
Descartes, argued that thought and extension were not independent of each other and
not equivalent either. As a physician he considered the mind as dependent on the body.5
Spinoza criticised these ideas. For Spinoza there is strict parallellism between mind and
body. For Spinoza this parallellism implies that there is no free will. In a letter to a young
German who studied at the University of Leiden, Ehrenfried Walther von Tschirnhaus,
Spinoza wrote about a stone set in motion by an external cause:
Conceive now, if you will, that while the stone continues to move, it thinks, and knows that as
far as it can, it continues to move. Of course since the stone is conscious only of its striving, and
not at all indifferent, it will believe itself free, and to persevere in motion for no other cause that
because it wills so. And this is that famous human freedom which everyone brags of having, and
which consists only in this: that men are conscious of their appetite and ignorant of the causes by
which they are determined. So the infant believes that he freely wants the milk; the angry boy that
he wants vengeance; and the timid, ﬁght.6
In spite of the geometrical argumentation that is the subject of this present essay, the phi-
losophy of Spinoza can be interpreted in more than one way, so that for several centuries
4“[. . . ] de pietatis exercitio et externo religionis cultu; non autem de ipsa pietate et Dei interno cultu [. . . ]
internus enim Dei cultus et ipsa pietas uniuscujusque juris est quod in alium transferri non potest”, Tractatus
Theologico-Politicus, Chapter XIX. Quoted from: Benedict de Spinoza, The Political Works, edited and translated
by A.G. Wernham, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1958, pp. 204–205.
5M.J.A. de Vrijer, Henricus Regius, een ’cartesiaansch’ hoogleraar aan de Utrechtsche hoogeschool, 1917.
6Quoted from: Benedict de Spinoza, A Spinoza Reader, The Ethics and other works, edited and translated by
Edwin Curley, Princeton University Press, 1994, pp. 267–268.

430
G. Harmsen
the discussion has been about the correct interpretation. In many of these interpretations
mathematics plays no role whatsoever. First Spinozism got a place within the context of
Descartes’ rationalism. This rationalism mistrusted sensual perception (empiricism) in phi-
losophy and based itself on reason (ratio). After Spinoza’s death the theologians fought him
for more than a century as an immoral atheist and his writings were ofﬁcially forbidden for
a long time. Although this was still the case in the second half of the eighteenth century,
underground Spinozism had exerted considerable inﬂuence, in particular in Germany.7 At
the time the emphasis was on the pantheistic implications and the view that body and mind
were expressions of the same thing. Remarkably, Christian faith does not exclude this. Al-
though Spinoza had no afﬁnity whatsoever with living nature, the experience of the unity
of all forms of life was part of the Spinozism of the poet-thinker Goethe. It is expressed in
the following ode on nature:
Nature! It surrounds us and holds us—we cannot step outside her, and we cannot go deeper into
her. Uninvited and without warning she draws us into the circulation of her dance [. . . ] One obeys
her laws, even when one resists them [. . . ] Her crown is love. Only through love one can get closer
to her.8
Goethe’s poem Prometheus met with considerable resistance because in it man takes the
place of God and points out God’s shortcomings.
In the course of the nineteenth century Spinoza became popular among the freethinking
workers and citizens outside the universities. In the same vein we see that around 1900
leading social-democrats viewed Spinozism as a philosophical foundation for Marxism.
In the spirit of Plechanov a young Georgian bolshevist wrote in his book Anarchism or
socialism: “The one and undividable nature, expressed in two forms, the material and the
ideal; the unique and undividable social life, expressed in two forms: the material and the
ideal: this is how we must view the development of nature and social life”.9 This young
revolutionary would later become known as Stalin.
Around 1900 Spinozism was considered by many as a form of mysticism, although with-
out much argumentation (Carl Gebhardt, Stanislaus von Dunin Borkowski, Ernst Cassirer,
Heinz Pﬂaum, Anna Tumarkin, Johannes Diderik Bierens de Haan, Johan Herman Carp).
It was an unreligious mysticism in which individuals break through their own boundaries
and transcend themselves. Lalande gives the following deﬁnition of mysticism: “Strictly
speaking the belief in the possibility of an intimate and direct union of the human mind
with the fundamental principle of being”.10 Some students of Spinoza perceive a mystical
touch only in the early works of Spinoza, but for some others this holds for the complete
7Cf. The publication of Jacobis Spinoza Büchlein in 1912. Moreover, not long before his death G.E. Lessing
had expressed his agreement with Spinozism and, when this became known, it stimulated extensive discussions.
8“Natur! Wir sind von Ihr umgeben und umschlungen—unvermögend aus ihr herauszutreten, und unvermögend
tiefer in sie hinein zu kommen. Ungebeten und ungewarnt nimmt sie uns in den Kreislauf ihres Tanzes auf [. . . ]
Man gehorcht ihren Gesetzen, auch wenn man ihnen widerstrebt [. . . ] Ihre Krone ist die Liebe. Nur durch sie
kommt man ihr nahe”, J.W. Goethe, Sämtliche Werke, 1949 (Artemis-Edition), 16, p. 921. Although Goethe did
not write this text, he agreed with it.
9Ger Harmsen, The attention for Spinoza in the socialist and communist workers’ movement before 1970 (De
aandacht voor Spinoza in de socialistische en communistische arbeidersbeweging van voor 1970). In Dutch. In
Bulletin Nederlandse Arbeidersbeweging, 1995, nr. 39, p. 56 and further.
10“Proprement croyance à la possibilité d’une union intime et directe de l’esprit humaine au principe fondamen-
tale de l’être”, Vocabulaire de la philosophie (1902, 1968).

Spinoza and the geometrical way of proof
431
works and they attribute this to the inﬂuence of mystically inclined Jewish, Arabic Italian
and Spanish thinkers. In particular the inﬂuence of Leone Ebreo (Juda Abravanes) (1460–
1535) is supposed to have been important.11 Spinoza possessed his book Dialogos de amor.
Love is viewed as a uniting and transcending force. According to Pﬂaum, in Spinoza a pas-
sive knowledge of God (an experience of God that happens to him) is replaced by an active
love (amor dei intellectualis). Man is no longer God’s slave, but man ﬁnds in himself the
power to ﬁnd the way to God. The mind begins to play a more active role, for example
by means of the mathematical way of reasoning. God mathematically proven, transcended
from the hic et nunc (here and now). Yet in none of these interpretations does the geomet-
rical deduction as such play a decisive role.
Although at the universities Spinoza’s views were, for a long time, contested, in particu-
lar by the theologians, and he remained the philosopher of laymen outside the universities,
admirers have appeared at the universities during recent decades, say since 1970. From
Paris the Spinozistic structuralism of the Marxists–Leninists spread. This led to a consid-
erable number of dissertations and other texts, mainly written by ex-communists who con-
tributed their interpretations to the inﬂuence of Louis Althusser, Pierre Macherey, Martial
Guéroult, Etienne Balibar and Antonio Negri. Furthermore, they meticulously explored the
intellectual environment of Spinoza in search of friends, acquaintances and sympathisers.
A unanimous reading is, however, further away than ever. After three centuries of diverg-
ing and even contradictory interpretation, because Spinoza offers everybody something
and there is a case for every reading, I am inclined to consider all these explanations with
scepticism. In any case interest in Spinoza is great and text editions and monographs of
high quality are appearing regularly.
6. The mathematical way of reasoning
During the Renaissance the inﬂuence of Plato made itself felt again and because of the
simultaneous need for independent observation of organic and inorganic nature, Aristo-
tle temporarily retreated into the background. Descartes and Spinoza were not the ﬁrst in
European philosophy who, after antiquity, made use of mathematics in their philosophy. I
will mention two great minds who used mathematics in their philosophy. Nicholas of Cusa
(1401–1464), on the border of the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, wrote De docta igno-
rantia, still partially in the tradition of the scholastics. Cusanus wrote in Chapter XI of De
docta ignorantia: “mathematica nos iuvet plurimum in diversorum divinorum apprehen-
sione”. Dijksterhuis described Cusanus’ views as follows: “Inﬁnity may be unknowable
directly for our reason, but there are means” to get to know it “and it is mathematics that
gives us these means. Mathematics is concerned with ﬁnite ﬁgures, but the consideration
of their properties can open a way to the inﬁnite”.12 Cusanus deeply inﬂuenced Spinoza.
Giordano Bruno (1548–1600) is fully representative of the Renaissance. He died at the
stake. In his work Bruno repeatedly refers to Cusanus. Bruno uses dry mathematical argu-
mentation, but, as a reaction to this, also uses the more artistic form of the dialogue, as did
Spinoza in his earliest work.
11H. Pﬂaum, Die Idee der Liebe bei Leone Ebreo, 1926, p. 105
12E.J. Dijksterhuis, De mechanisering van het wereldbeeld, 1950, p. 249.

432
G. Harmsen
Spinoza lived in a cultural climate in which mathematics and the exact sciences (astron-
omy and mechanics) were a tremendous success and brought about a scientiﬁc revolution.
According to Galilei the book of nature is written in mathematical language, the letters are
triangles, circles and other geometrical ﬁgures, and without these means it is humanly im-
possible to understand one word.13 And indeed, the principles of the philosophy of nature
as given by Newton in his Principia are mathematical principles and the book is structured
in a mathematical way. The condemnation of Galilei’s heliocentric views by the Roman
Catholic Church authority shocked the scientiﬁc world and in particular Descartes, who
had at the time a text ready for the printer, but withheld it.
I shall restrict myself to a concise comment on the signiﬁcance and the position of the
mathematical argumentation in the philosophy of Spinoza. I shall not go into the ques-
tion of what he himself contributed or what he took from others: Descartes, Hobbes, Frans
van Schooten.14 Some experts (Lodewijk Meyer, Léon Brunschvicg, Guéroult, Herman
de Dijn) view the geometrical argumentation as indispensable and essential; according to
others (Harry Wolfson, Fritz Mauthner), it can easily be spared.15 Among the Spinozists,
Mauthner is the most extreme in his rejection of the signiﬁcance of the geometrical style,
but he adds: “It is irrelevant that Spinoza came in a scholastic way to his consistent great
world view. Jesus came on a donkey too”16 Guéroult screened and veriﬁed the argumen-
tation in the ﬁrst two books of Ethica. He found that philosophy and geometrical proof
form in Spinozism an unbreakable unity. Ethica supplied its own interpretation, as long as
we were prepared to judge the argumentation of this book on its own merits. Even if this
were in accordance with Spinoza’s intentions, it still says nothing about the tenability and
truth content of this mode of thought. However, Spinoza himself wrote to a young critic:
”I do not pretend to have found the best philosophy, no, I know that I understand the true
philosophy” just as much as “the three angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles”.17
In two of his works Spinoza carried out the geometrical argumentation.The ﬁrst was: Re-
nati Descartes Principiorum philosophiae more geometrico demonstratae (1663), to which
he added Cogitata Metaphysica. Although at the time he himself already held the view that
there is only one substance which he equated to God or nature, he gave a mathematical
proof of the fact that there are, according to Descartes, two substances: mind and exten-
sion. In his main work, Ethica, he proceeds in an entirely geometrical way, while in his
earlier Short Treatise about God, Man and his Well-being (Korte verhandeling over God,
de Mensch en deszelvs Welstand) the mathematical method received only a modest place
at the end. Yet this work deals to a large extent with the same metaphysical problems as
Ethica.
Nowhere does Spinoza go into the question as to when and why he uses the mathematical
argumentation. He left it to his friend Lodewijk Meyer to defend it brieﬂy in his introduc-
13Dirk Struik, Het land van Stevin en Huygens, 1958, p. 81.
14Dirk Struik, Het land van Stevin en Huygens, 1958, p. 93.
15N.A. Brunt sees no good in the mathematical argumentation and as a physicist he rejects the philosophy of
Spinoza completely [6].
16“Es tut nichts, daß Spinoza auf scholastischem Wege zu seiner einheitlich grossen Weltanschauung kommt.
Auch Jesus kam auf einem Esel [. . . ]” [16, p. 70].
17“Want ik heb niet de pretentie de beste ﬁlosoﬁe te hebben gevonden, neen, ik weet dat ik de ware wijsbegeerte
begrijp”, in a letter to Albert Burgh. F. Akkerman, H.G. Hubbeling, A.G. Westerbrink, Spinoza, briefwisseling
(Spinoza, correspondence in Dutch), Wereldbibliotheek, Amsterdam, 1977.

Spinoza and the geometrical way of proof
433
tion to the 1663 edition of Spinoza’s Descartes’ “Principles of Philosophy”. Meyer wrote
in this introduction:
All those who are striving for more insight than ordinary people possess, agree that the method
of the mathematicians for investigation and exposition of scientiﬁc knowledge—the method in the
course of which with cogency conclusions are drawn from deﬁnitions, postulates and axioms—is
the best and safest way to seek and teach the truth.
Although Spinoza was occupied with mathematics and although he possessed a con-
siderable number of books about mathematics, he himself did not accomplish anything
special in this ﬁeld. Johan de Witt and the above mentioned Johan Hudde were involved in
mathematics as well, but Spinoza did not participate in their discussions about this subject.
It goes without saying that for Spinoza Descartes’ mathematical work was of overriding
importance. Descartes was not only the founder of modern philosophy but, at the same
time, a pioneering mathematician following in the footsteps of François Viète (1540–1603)
and others. In the 16th and 17th centuries it was no longer a matter of Euclid’s Elements,
of synthetic geometry in the Greek way. In his Géométrie (1637), which appeared as an
appendix of the Discours de la Méthode, Descartes made the move that brought the entire
classical geometry within the reach of algebra, such that from now on geometrical and
algebraic methods could inseminate each other.18 Spatial ﬁgures can be expressed in terms
of numbers and numbers can be interpreted in terms of ﬁgures. Descartes himself made
limited use of mathematical methods in philosophy, although Mersenne with whom he
kept in close contact urged him to do this in his entire work. Descartes wrote about the
question of which subjects lend themselves to mathematical argumentation and which do
not:
Already mathematicians in Antiquity in their writings made use of synthetic argumentation, not
because they were entirely ignorant of analysis, but because they [. . . ] reserved it for themselves
alone, like an important secret. For me, I only followed the analytical road in my Méditations, be-
cause she seems to me to be the truest, and the most suitable way to teach, but as for the synthesis,
she is not always so well applicable to matters belonging to metaphysics.19
According to Descartes this was caused by the fact that in metaphysics no unanimous
and compelling axioms could be phrased, as one could in the exact sciences. All the same,
in order to please Father Mersenne, Descartes cast some metaphysical thoughts in a syn-
thetic form.
However, for the development of Spinoza’s metaphysics analytical geometry was of a
fundamental heuristic signiﬁcance. It helped him to conquer the gap between thought and
extension and in doing so develop his own metaphysics. According to Dunin Borkowski
“like the formula is nothing different from the spiritualized curve, thought, the ideas are
only the spiritual side of material reality”.20 And elsewhere Borkowski wrote: “The ideas
18Cf. [18, p. 102].
19“non qu’ils ignorassent entièrement l’analyse, mais parce qu’ils [. . . ] la réservaient pour eux seuls, comme
un secret d’importance. Pour moi, j’ai suivi seulement la voie analytique dans mes Méditations, parce qu’elle
me semble être la plus vraie, et la plus propre pour enseigner; mais, quant à la synthèse [. . . ] elle ne convient
pas toutefois si bien aux matières qui appartiennent à la métaphysique”. Descartes, Méditations, Objections et
réponses, Descartes, Oeuvres et lettres, p. 388.
20“Wie die Formel nichts anders ist als die vergeistigte Kurve so ist das Denken, die Idee, nur die geistige Seite
der stofﬂichen Realität” [8, p. 404].

434
G. Harmsen
follow from each other in exactly the same way as the things (ordo idearum idem est ac
ordo rerum). [...] The body is the geometrical ﬁgure, the soul is the formula”:21 Two to-
tally different spheres and yet expression of one and the same and this cleared the way from
the Aristotelian and later Scholastic notion of substantia to a complete transformation of
this fundamental notion.22 God is eternal, uncreated and as causa sui the cause of himself.
I suppose that for Spinoza the power of the geometrical argumentation in philosophy was
due to the fact that mathematics does not depend on empirical data from the outside world
and concerns a construction of thoughts. The mathematical method gives Spinoza in his
philosophical development the certainty and clarity that he needs.23 Secondly, in mathe-
matical argumentation no steps are omitted as happens easily in syllogistic argumentation.
Thirdly, no teleological moment can sneak in and the argumentation remains strictly causal.
Fourthly, anthropomorphic thoughts in thinking about God are avoided and mathematics
eliminates the individual subjectivity. As was usual in his time, Spinoza tied in with the
synthetic argumentation in Euclid’s Elements: deﬁnitions, axioms, propositions, proofs.
In particular the deﬁnitions are of great importance. Dunin Borkowski pointed out that
Spinoza was familiar with Hobbes De Cive, but also with the genetic deﬁnition in Hobbes’
book De Corpore. This deﬁnition is an elaboration of the Euclidean way of deﬁning. The
sphere is deﬁned by constructing it and not by means of its description. A deﬁnition should
give the cause of a thing, its becoming.24 A century later, in the wake of Guéroult, Herman
de Dijn would emphasise this aspect. Ethica starts with Deﬁnitiones, Axiomata, Propo-
sitiones and Demonstrationes, but, unlike Euclid, Spinoza goes beyond that. Sometimes
there is, next to the proof of a proposition, an Aliter (another proof). There are exten-
sive Explicationes, Corrolaria, Scholia (additions) and Lemmata (auxiliary propositions).
Some of them take up more space than the proof in the strict sense does. Also in his choice
of words Spinoza uses geometrical metaphors and clarifying mathematical examples. The
geometrical argumentation is completely absent in numerous books on Spinoza’s philos-
ophy. Apparently in the judgment of all these authors the geometrical argumentation can
be missed without hampering understanding. For the reader of Ethica too, the geometrical
argumentation remains rather accidental, somewhat external. Korte Verhandeling (Short
treatise) shows that it can be done as well without the mathematical argumentation. So the
question is whether it is more than a ﬁgure of speech. Mauthner’s judgement is severe:
One should simply delete all proofs, moreover all deﬁnitions and theorems that are only meant to
ﬁll the holes in the system. Instead of this one orders the additions and explications, the prefaces
and corollaries, one adds the necessary texts from his big treatises and from his wonderful letters,
and at last the world will be able to read the unforgettable philosopher.25
Recently Henri Krop and Wiep van Bunge wrote about Ethica:
21“die Ideen folgen aus einander genau wie die Dinge (ordo idearum idem est ac ordo rerum). [. . . ] Der Körper
ist die geometrische Figur, die Seele die Formel” [8, p. 405].
22[24, p. 28] and further.
23Yet mathematics served many practical goals: military science, astronomy, mechanics, shipping, bookkeeping,
etc.
24[8, p. 410].
25“Man lasse doch sämtliche Beweise einfach weg, dazu alle die Deﬁnitionen und Lehrsätze, die nur die Lücken
des Systems auszufüllen bestimmt sind. Man ordne dafür die Zusätze und Erläuterungen, die Vorreden und An-
hänge gut zusammen, man füge aus seinem grossen Traktate und aus seinem herrlichen Briefen das Nötige hinzu,
und die Welt wird den unvergleichlichen Philosophen endlich lesen können” [16, p. 43].

Spinoza and the geometrical way of proof
435
On the face of it, this book could not have been written differently from the way it was written.
However, the fact that Spinoza appeared to be able to put his views into words in so many different
ways, could very well indicate that also the famous ‘geometrical’ argumentation must be seen as
a strategic choice.26
However, it may be that non-philosophical circumstances exerted inﬂuence on the radi-
cal application of the geometrical argumentation. One should remember that Spinoza had
weak health. He suffered from tuberculosis and would die from it. His youth was not easy.
As a young man he had to do without his mother and there was further mortality in his
family. His expulsion from the Jewish community must surely have left traces. This all
resulted in a stoic attitude to life and a ﬂight into the restfulness of mathematical argu-
mentation. His work radiates stillness. It is more related to Vermeer than to Rembrandt.
The art historian Valentiner writes about this, after pointing out the mathematical construc-
tions in Vermeer’s work: “We have seen that Spinoza’s rationalistic ideas were in many
ways opposed to Rembrandt’s. And while his spirituality was on the same high level, his
philosophy had more in common with Vermeer”,27 someone of his own generation.
The Dutch theologian Antonius van der Linde compares Spinoza’s work with the paint-
ings of Ruysdael: “It resembles Ruysdael’s melancholic landscapes that one hardly dares
to approach without fearing to disturb the quiet loneliness”.28
7. Social philosophy
In Spinoza’s eyes, contrary to the inner life, political and social subjects do not
lend themselves to the mathematical argumentation. His Theological-Political Treatise
(Theologisch-Politiek Tractaat) and Ethica are methodologically separate: the one is—
also because of Spinoza’s knowledge of Hebrew—a pioneering and subtle historical–
philological analysis of the Jewish and Christian faith of divine revelation in which no
mathematical argumentation enters, and the other is a strictly rational exposition about
God. Mathematical and historical analysis seem to be square with each other here. Yet
Spinoza had intended to study human beings as if they were geometrical ﬁgures. In math-
ematics there was no good and evil, no sense and nonsense. He reprimands a child who
screams of pain from a gallstone, because the screams would amount to a circle complain-
ing not to be a sphere.
The philosophical views that Spinoza developed were certainly revolutionary, but his
social conviction was moderately liberal. In Het land van Rembrandt (The Land of Rem-
brandt) Busken Huet writes: “Spinoza is a conservative with a revolutionary method”.29
26“Het heeft er alle schijn van dat dit boek niet anders geschreven had kunnen worden dan het geschreven is.
Dat Spinoza echter in staat bleek zijn denkbeelden op zoveel verschillende manieren onder woorden te brengen,
zou er wel eens op kunnen wijzen dat ook die vermaarde “geometrische” betoogtrant als een strategische keuze
moet worden gezien” [14, p. 21].
27W.R. Valentiner, Rembrandt and Spinoza. A study of the spiritual conﬂicts in seventeenth-century Holland,
1957, p. 79.
28“Es gleicht jenen wehmüthigen Landschaften von Ruysdael denen man kaum wagt nahe zu treten, ohne
zu befürchten, dasz man die stille Einsamkeit derselbe stört”. A. van der Linde, Spinoza. Seine Lehre. Eine
philosophisch-historische Monographie, 1862, Diss.
29Conrad Busket Huet, Het land van Rembrand, 1987, p. 611.

436
G. Harmsen
Spinoza chooses a realistic point of departure that has nothing to do with geometry. Men
are driven by their own interest and by ambition to persist in their own existence. This
principle, often referred to as the conatus30 doctrine is very fundamental in Spinoza’s phi-
losophy. He thought less negatively about the masses than did Thomas Hobbes, to whom,
next to Descartes, Spinoza owes so much. Like Hobbes he embraces the positive effect of
a ﬁctitious social contract in which people for their own good successfully put power in
the hands of a state authority. Spinoza differs from Hobbes in the sense that this need not
be an absolute sovereign; he prefers a restricted form of democracy.
Spinoza was an austere human being but he did not ﬁnd it necessary that people should
deny themselves everything. They were allowed to enjoy modestly whatever they acquired
or conquered as long as it did not become a goal in itself, like the interest of the masses in
money: “However, money has supplied a token for all things, with the result that its image
is wont to obsess the minds of the populace, because they can scarcely think of any kind of
pleasure that is not accompanied by the idea of money as its cause”.31 He did not view the
possession of money as wrong. Spinoza wrote: “But this vice is characteristic only of those
who seek money not through poverty nor to meet their necessities, but because they have
acquired the art of money-making, whereby they raise themselves to a splendid estate”.32
The greatest happiness, however, was in man himself. Spinoza felt that his metaphysics and
his conception of life were only suitable for a philosophical elite. He adopted the Cicero’s
saying: “All excellence is as difﬁcult as it is rare” (Omnia praeclare tam difﬁcilia quam
rara sunt).
The mathematical argumentation did not keep Spinoza from strong prejudices, such as
with respect to the lower ranks of society that he called lecherous and indolent. Sometimes,
however, he emphasised that it is shameful to restrict the failings that are characteristic of
all people only to the rabble: “However, we let merely outer appearance and a certain
reﬁnement blind us and that is why we often, when two people do the same thing, say that
one can do it without punishment and the other cannot, not because the act is different, but
because the perpetrator is different”.
He expressed himself positively on the small businessmen that he associated with and
he considered them competent to judge in matters of state. The statement at the end of
Tractatus Theologico-Politicus about women is severe:
Yet if nature had made women equal to men, and had given them equal strength of mind and in-
tellectual ability, in which human power and therefore human right mainly consists, surely among
so many different nations some would be found where both sexes ruled on equal terms, and others
where the men were ruled by the women and brought up in such a manner that they had less ability.
But since this has nowhere happened, I am fully entitled to assert that women have not the same
30Spinoza expressed this conatus doctrine (from the Latin conatus = striving) as follows: “Each thing, as far as
it can by its own power, strives to persevere in its being” (Ethica, Part III, Proposition 6).
31“Verum omnium rerum compendium pecunia attulit, unde factum, ut ejus imago Mentem vulgi maxime oc-
cupare soleat; quia vix ullam Laetitiae speciem imaginari possunt, nisi concomitante nummorum idea, tanguam
causa”, Ethica, IV, Appendix 28. Quoted from: Benedict de Spinoza, Spinoza Complete works, Translations by
Samuel Shirley. Edited with Introduction and Notes by Michael L. Morgan, Hacket Publishing Company, Indi-
anapolis/Cambridge, 2002, p. 361.
32“Sed hoc vitium eorum tantium est qui non ex indigentia, nec propter necessitates nummos quaerunt; sed quia
lucri artes didicerunt, quibus se magniﬁce efferunt”, Ethica, IV, Appendix 29 , Quoted from op. cit.

Spinoza and the geometrical way of proof
437
right as men by nature, but are necessarily inferior to them; so that it is not possible for both sexes
to rule on equal terms.33
This inferiority could not be deduced from reason so Spinoza had to make an appeal
to the sensory perception that he as a rationalist had taught to mistrust. But Spinoza had
another argument in store, pleading against the equal association of men and women, sex:
If we also consider human passions, and reﬂect that men generally love women out of mere lust,
judge their ability and wisdom by their beauty, are highly indignant if the women they love show
the slightest favour to others, and so on, we shall easily see that it is impossible for men and women
to govern on equal terms without great damage to peace.34
Spinoza’s negative judgment of women cannot be deduced just as such from the spirit of
the time, nor from the mathematical argumentation. Maybe this attitude can be explained
by the lack of ties with educated women. With one exception, his circle of acquaintances
consisted of married men. Descartes, on the other hand, had an extensive, affectionate and
learned correspondence with two women (Princess Elisabeth of Bohemia who had ﬂed to
the Netherlands with her parents, and Kristina Wasa, Queen of Sweden). Moreover, in the
Netherlands he had a love affair with a housemaid, Hélène Jansz. They had a daughter that
Descartes called Francine in honour of his fatherland. When she died at the age of six,
Descartes spoke of ”the greatest sorrow of his life”.
8. Living nature
Like the author of the book of Genesis in the Bible Spinoza possessed no respect for living
nature:
Except for mankind, we know of no individual thing in Nature in whose mind we can rejoice,
and with which we can write in friendship or form some kind of close tie. So whatever there is
in Nature external to man, regard for our own advantage does not require us to preserve it, but
teaches us to preserve or destroy it according to its varying usefulness, or to adapt it to our own
use in whatever way we please.35
33“Quod si ex natura foeminae viris aequales essent, et animi fortitudine et ingenio, in quo maxime humana po-
tentia et consequenter jus consistit, aeque pollerent, sane inter tot tamque diversas nationes quaedam reperirentur
ubi uterque sexus pariter regeret, et aliae ubi a foeminis viri regerentur, atque ita educarentur ut ingenio minus
possent. Quod cum nullibi factum sit, afﬁrmare omnino licet foeminas ex natura non aequale cum viris habere
jus, sed eas viris necessario cedere; atque adeo ﬁeri non posse ut uterque sexus pariter regat, et multo minus ut
viri a foeminis regantur”. Quoted from: Benedict de Spinoza, The Political Works, edited and translated by A.G.
Wernham, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1958, pp. 442–445.
34“Quod si praeterea humanos affectus consideremus, quod scilicet viri plerumque ex solo libidinis affectu
foeminas ament, et earum ingenium et sapientiam tanti aestiment quantum ipsae pulchritudine pollent, et praeterae
quod viri aeggerrime ferant ut foeminae quas amant aliis aliquo modo faveant, et id genus alia, levi negotio
videbimus non posse absque magno pacis detrimento ﬁeri ut viri foeminae pariter regant”. Quoted from op. cit.
pp. 444–445.
35“Praeter homines nihil singulare in natura novimus, cujus Mente gaudere, et quod nobis amicitia, aut aliquo
consuetudinis genere jungere possumus; adeoque quicquid in rerum natura extra homines datur, id nostrae utili-
tatis ratio conservare non postulat; sed pro ejus vario usu conservare, destruere, vel quocunque modo ad nostrum
usum adaptare nos docet”. Ethica, IV, Appendix 23. Quoted from: Benedict de Spinoza, Spinoza Complete works,
Translations by Samuel Shirley. Edited with Introduction and Notes by Michael L. Morgan, Hacket Publishing
Company, Indianapolis/Cambridge, 2002, p. 361.

438
G. Harmsen
This was written in a period in which Leonardo da Vinci, Albrecht Dürer, Antoni van
Leeuwenhoek, Jan Swammerdam and Dodonaeus teach us to see the beauty of nature.
Spinoza, on the other hand, brings about a timeless mathematisation of nature. The be-
coming in the abstract form of mechanical movement is, in Spinoza’s terminology, nothing
more than an inﬁnite modus and does not possess the status of an attribute. The operari is
turned into the sequi. The mathematical aspect of reality is no longer the expression of re-
ality but takes its place. A gap between God (substantia) and the empirical world, between
eternity and ﬁniteness, eliminates in fact the historical dimension and the uniqueness of the
course of the world.
9. Summum bonum
When Spinoza talked about human happiness he thought primarily of God and not of hap-
piness between people. Yet he was a proponent of a church based on the love between
people. In everything, however, God is the point of departure. The love of God is man’s
highest happiness (amor dei intellectualis). The individual is not in the centre as in human-
ism. The beginning of the Tractatus de intellectus emendatione points this out. The pursuit
of possessions, money, power, honour, pleasure can only give temporary satisfaction. It
does not yield the true, permanent and highest happiness (summum bonum). His practical
philosophy of life is thoroughly inspired by Stoicism, but without the radical “suffer depri-
vation so that you won’t suffer deprivation”.36 He would not hear of the gloomy Calvinism
that takes sinfulness as its starting point. Spinoza’s maxim is: “A free man thinks of nothing
less than of death, and his wisdom is a meditation on life, not on death”.37 Man is allowed
to enjoy himself, although not too much.
In the ﬁfth book of Ethica Spinoza indicates the road that leads to the knowledge of
God and to spiritual freedom. Spinoza distinguished three kinds of knowledge.38 The least
reliable knowledge is based on reports from others or it comes to us from random experi-
ence, without interference of the intellect. The second kind of knowledge we have when
the essence of a thing is inferred from another thing. The third kind of knowledge we have
when a thing is perceived through its essence alone or through knowledge of its proximate
cause. Spinoza illustrated this classiﬁcation by means of a mathematical problem: ﬁnd x
when a : b = c : x when a, b, and c are given. If we use a rule that we once learned without
understanding why it works, or if we apply a rule that we have found by trial and error, we
acquire knowledge of the ﬁrst kind (imaginatio). If we understand proposition 19 of book
7 of Euclid’s Elements, which says that a : b = c : d is equivalent to a ∗d = b ∗c, and apply
it to the problem involved, we acquire deductive knowledge: the second kind of knowledge
(ratio). The third kind of knowledge is intuitive knowledge and it is to be preferred. In the
case of the equation 1 : 2 = 3 : x we can immediately, intuitively, without deduction see
that x = 6 is the correct solution. This is the kind of knowledge that proceeds from an idea
36This is how the German poet Johann Heinrich Voss (1751–1826) characterised Cato’s stoicism: “Damit du
nichts entbehrst, war Catos weise Lehre, Entbehre”.
37“Homo liber de nulla re minus, quam de morte cogitat, et eieus sapientia non mortis, sed vitae meditatio est”.
Ethica, IV, Proposition 67.
38Ethica, II, Proposition 40, Schol. 2.

Spinoza and the geometrical way of proof
439
of the attributes of God to knowledge of the essence of things. It is not a matter of feeling
but of reason. Is this a rational mysticism?
The nature of God is strictly deterministic and freedom is the insight in the necessity
of things. There is no free will. The ﬁfth book concerns the spiritual freedom that results
from the control of passion. Mankind ﬁnds himself to a certain extent at the mercy of
the lower passions: lust, the desire for esteem, riches and wealth. An intellectual elite,
however, craves a higher, spiritual happiness, for “the smell of higher honey”.39 In Spinoza
the way to the eternal love for God leads in the end to such delight that in comparison all
earthly enjoyments become insigniﬁcant. The amor dei intellectualis leads to a way of life
that consists of laetare et bene agere (rejoice and act well, Ethica, IV, Proposition 73).
W. Meijer called Spinoza the happy messenger of the mature mankind. The Christian idea
that virtue would eventually be rewarded, in other words the idea that only the prospect
of a reward in an afterlife brings people to live virtuously, was alien to him. The reward
for a virtuous life was in the perpetration of virtue itself. According to Spinoza God loves
only himself and not people; that is why he who loves God cannot desire that God should
love him in return (Ethica, V, Proposition 19). This love for God cannot be deﬁled by
envy or jealousy. The more people are joined to God by this bond of love, the stronger
it gets (Ethica, V, Proposition 20). Spinoza’s opus magnum, the Ethica, begins and ends
with God. Proposition 21 in Ethica, V, seems to imply that the soul (mind) perishes together
with the individual body. It says that the mind cannot imagine anything, nor remember past
things, except as long as the body exists. Yet Ethica, V, Proposition 23 reads: “The human
mind cannot be completely destroyed together with the body, but something of it remains
which is eternal”. Insofar as the human mind participates in the one and only substance,
God, via the amor intellectualis dei, the mind is eternal. Clearly this does not concern the
individual inner life (imagination, memories) but the general moment of the mind. Does
not this thought remind us of the intellectus agens in the Destruction destructionis (1180)
of Averroës?40 In the end more mind than matter and no strict parallellism. This has not
much to do with mathematics.
References
[1] F. Akkerman, H.G. Hubbeling, A.G. Westerbrink, Spinoza, briefwisseling, Wereldbibliotheek, Amsterdam,
1977.
[2] N. Altwicker (Herausg.) Texte zur Geschichte des Spinozismus, Darmstadt, 1971.
[3] J.C.H. Blom, R.G. Fuks-Mansfeld, I. Schoffer, Geschiedenis van de joden in Nederland, Amsterdam, 1995.
39In the poem “The song about the foolish bees” by the Dutch poet Martinus Nijhoff (1894–1953) the bees leave
their ﬂowers, their houses, their gardens, their people because of “a smell of higher honey”. The trip results in
their death and their dead bodies return to the garden accompagnied by snowﬂakes.
40Ibn Roschd, or Averroës (1126–1198), as he was called by the Latins, was an Arabian philosopher and physi-
cian. He was very much inﬂuenced by Aristotle. His work Tehafot al Tchafot (Incoherence of the Incoherence),
or in Latin Destructio Destructiones was a refutation of Al-Ghazali’s Destructio Philosophorum. Al-Ghazali had
argued: Islam is true, and where the philosophers contradict it they are wrong. Averroës reproduced the text
of Al-Ghazali’s book and commented on it. An important question concerned the individual mind. Al-Ghazali
maintained that the individual human soul survives the death of the body. Averroes found this illogical. The vis-
ible world and also human bodies are moved by the intellectus agens. It is eternal, according to Averroës. The
individual human intellect is not.

440
G. Harmsen
[4] L. Brunschvicg, Spinoza at ses contemporains, PUF, Paris, 1951.
[5] L. Brunschvicg, Les étapes de la philosophie mathématiques, Félix Alcan, Paris, 1929.
[6] N.A. Brunt, De wiskundige denkwijze in Spinoza’s philosoﬁe en in de moderne natuurkunde, Leiden, 1955.
[7] E. Cassirer, Spinoza, in [2, pp. 172–215].
[8] S.J. von Dunin Borkowski, Der Junge Spinoza; Leben und Werdegang im Lichte der Weltphilosophie, As-
chendorffsche Buchhandlung, Münster i.W., 1910.
[9] R. Descartes, Descartes, Oeuvres et lettres, Editions Gallimard, 1953, p. 388.
[10] H. de Dijn, Spinoza’s geometrische methode van denken, Tijdschrift voor Filosoﬁe 35 (1973), 707–765.
[11] F. van den Enden, Vrye politijke stellingen, en consideratien van staat, Raep, Amsterdam, 1665 (Reprint,
Wereldbibliotheek, Amsterdam, 1992, with an introduction by W. Klever).
[12] J. Freudenthal, Die Lebensgeschichte Spinoza’s in Quellenschriften, Urkunden und nichtamtlichen
Nachrichten, 1899.
[13] G. Harmsen, De aandacht voor Spinoza in de socialistische en communistische beweging van voor 1970,
Bulletin Ned. Arbeidersbeweging 39 (1995), 56–79.
[14] H. Krop, W. van Bunge (eds.), De draagbare Spinoza, Prometheus, Amsterdam, 1992.
[15] A. van der Linde, Spinoza. Seine Lehre. Eine philosophisch-historische Monographie, 1862, Dissertatie.
[16] F. Mauthner, Spinoza. Ein Umriss seines Lebens und Wirkens, Carl Reisner, Dresden, 1921.
[17] H. Pﬂaum, Die Idee der Liebe bei Leone Ebreo, 1926.
[18] D. Struik, A concise history of mathematics, 1967.
[19] B. de Spinoza, Benedict de Spinoza. The Political Works, edited and translated by A.G. Wernham, Clarendon
Press, Oxford, 1958.
[20] B. de Spinoza, The Political Works, edited and translated by A. G. Wernham, Clarendon Press, Oxford,
1958.
[21] B. de Spinoza, A Spinoza Reader, The Ethics and other works, edited and translated by Edwin Curley,
Princeton University Press, 1994, pp. 267–268.
[22] B. de Spinoza, Spinoza Complete works, translations by Samuel Shirley, edited with Introduction and Notes
by Michael L. Morgan, Indianapolis/Cambridge, Hacket Publishing Company, 2002.
[23] W.G. van der Tak, Bento de spinoza, zijn leven en gedachten over de wereld, den mensch en den staat, Den
Haag, 1928.
[24] A. Tumarkin, Acht Vorlesungen gehalten an der Universität Bern, Quelle und Meyer, 1908.
[25]
A.M. Vaz Dias (met medewerking van W. G. van der Tak), Spinoza mercator et autodidacticus. Oorkonden
en andere authentieke documenten betreffende des wijsgeers jeugd en diens betrekkingen, Den Haag, 1932.
[26] T. de Vries, Spinoza als staatkundig denker, Leiden, 1963.
[27] T. de Vries, Spinoza, biograﬁe, Amsterdam 1971, 1991.
[28] M.J.A. de Vrijer, Henricus Regius, een ‘cartesiaansch’ hoogleraar aan de Utrechtsche hoogeschool, 1917.
[29] H.A. Wolfson, The Philosophy of Spinoza, New York, 1934, 1958.

CHAPTER 23
John Wallis (1616–1703):
Mathematician and Divine∗
Philip Beeley
Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Leibniz-Forschungsstelle, Rothenburg 32, D-48143 Münster, Germany
E-mail: beeley@uni-muenster.de
Siegmund Probst
Leibniz-Archiv, Waterloostraße 8, D-30169 Hannover, Germany
E-mail: siegmund.probst@mail.nlb-hannover.de
Contents
1. The controversy with Thomas Hobbes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 444
2. Wallis’ defence of the Trinity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 450
3. Mathematics and calendar reform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 453
*The authors would like to thank Michael Hunter for his comments on an earlier draft of part of this chapter. They
are also indebted to the eminent Wallis scholar and historian of mathematics, Christoph J. Scriba, with whom both
have the privilege of working. It is to him that this chapter is dedicated.
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
441


John Wallis (1616–1703): mathematician and divine
443
Against the backdrop of political and religious strife which characterised seventeenth-
century England from the time of the Civil Wars (1642–1649) up to the Glorious Rev-
olution of 1688, few scholars survived as well as the Savilian professor of geometry at
Oxford, John Wallis. Appointed to this professorship on 14/24 June 1649, just a matter of
weeks after England had been declared a republic, and largely in recognition of his ser-
vices to Parliament as a decipherer during the military conﬂict, he retained it up to his
death in October 1703. As is well known, during this time he succeeded in making major
contributions to mathematics, most notably through his Arithmetica inﬁnitorum (1656), to
physics—his Mechanica (1670/71) was rightly acclaimed at the time—and also played a
founding role1 in the Royal Society, of which he subsequently became one of the most
proliﬁc members. But from his training Wallis was a theologian. Ordained by the Bishop
of Winchester in 1640, he became one of the secretaries to the Westminster Assembly of
Divines in 1644, and participated in numerous theological debates throughout his active
life, on topics ranging from justiﬁcation to the Trinity, and from the calculation of Easter
to infant baptism. It was in this ﬁeld in particular that dangers abounded, as is evidenced
by the fate of many less compliant and more outspoken contemporaries after the Restora-
tion. Wallis survived, however, not only on account of his continued importance as more
or less ofﬁcial decipherer,2 but also because of the course he chose to adopt. He describes
this clearly in his autobiography, written in January 1696/7 for his friend Thomas Smith,
at that time librarian at the Cottonian Library:
“It hath been my endeavour all along, to act by moderate Principles, between the Extremities on
either hand, in a moderate compliance with the Powers in being, in those places, where it hath
been my Lot to live, without the ﬁerce and violent animosities usual in such Cases, against all,
that did not act just as I did, knowing that there were many worthy Persons engaged on either side.
And willing whatever side was upmost, to promote (as I was able) any good design for the true
Interest of Religion, of Learning, and the public good; and ready to do good Ofﬁces, as there was
Opportunity”.3
But if moderation is true of his political and theological stance, things are quite different
when it comes to scientiﬁc affairs in general and to mathematics in particular. There was
probably no other scholar in the Seventeenth Century who got embroiled4 in quite as many
disputes as the Savilian professor of geometry: disputes with Huygens (e.g. over Neile’s
priority in rectifying a curve of any kind), with Fermat and Frenicle (over questions in
number theory), with Roberval (on priority in rectifying the Archimedean spiral), and so
on. However, the most bitter and certainly the most long drawn-out battle was that with
his fellow-countryman Thomas Hobbes, which ran from the publication of De corpore
in 1655 until its author’s death in 1679. And while it is true that the numerous disputes
with Continental scholars are not without their religious and political overtones—due to
1See: John Wallis, A Defence of the Royal Society. In Answer to the Cavils of Dr. William Holder, London, 1678,
especially pp. 7–10. Cf. Joseph Frederick Scott, The Mathematical Work of John Wallis, D.D., F.R.S. (1616–1703),
London 1938 (reprint: New York, 1981), pp. 8–14.
2Wallis held the ofﬁcial post of decipherer (together with his son-in-law William Blencowe) from April 1701
onwards. See Ofﬁcials of the Secretaries of State (1660–1782), compiled by J.C. Sainty, London, 1973, pp. 59,
66, 114.
3See Christoph J. Scriba, The Autobiography of John Wallis, F.R.S., in: Notes and Records of the Royal Society
of London 22 (1967), 17–46, 42–43.
4See: Scott, Mathematical Work, pp. 80–82.

444
P. Beeley and S. Probst
Fig. 1. John Wallis. Science Photo Library.
increasingly strong religious and national rivalries—only in that with Hobbes is there an
immanent relation between mathematical and theological considerations.
1. The controversy with Thomas Hobbes
After the publication of Leviathan (1651) Thomas Hobbes was attacked by a number of
divines of the Anglican Church. Among them was the Savilian professor of astronomy at
Oxford, Seth Ward, who published his Philosophicall Essay (1652) as an antidote against
the theological impact of Hobbes’ book. Ward tried to demonstrate the creation of the world
by rejecting actual inﬁnity in mathematics and thereby negating the basis of the concept
of inﬁnite duration.5 Hobbes who maintained that it was impossible to argue for a ﬁnite
age of the world from natural reason only, repeated his doctrine in De Corpore (1655).
This time, Ward shared the task of answering Hobbes: while he prepared an answer6 to
the philosophical parts of De Corpore, Wallis reacted immediately to the shortcomings of
the geometrical part of De Corpore, especially to the attempted solutions of the classical
unsolved problems (the quadrature of the circle, the trisection of the angle, and the dupli-
cation of the cube), in his Elenchus geometriae Hobbianae (1655). During the following
years, an avalanche of polemical treatises was published; the dispute involved a number of
5Seth Ward, A Philosophicall Essay Towards an Eviction of the Being and Attributes of God. The Immortality
of the Souls of Men. The Truth and Authority of Scripture, Oxford, 1652. See Siegmund Probst, “Inﬁnity and
Creation: the Origin of the Controversy between Thomas Hobbes and the Savilian Professors Seth Ward and John
Wallis”, in: British Journal for the History of Science 26 (1993), 271–279.
6Seth Ward, in: Thomae Hobbii philosophiam exercitatio epistolica, Oxford, 1656.

John Wallis (1616–1703): mathematician and divine
445
British and continental mathematicians, among them Brouncker, Rooke, Huygens, Sluse,
and Mylon.7
It is important to emphasise that Wallis (like Ward before him) vindicated his scientiﬁc
critique of Hobbes with his religious motivation: In the dedicatory letter8 of the Elenchus,
addressed to John Owen, vice-chancellor of the University of Oxford, Wallis claimed that
Hobbes’ mathematical writings had no impact on the mathematical public. He would not
have troubled his mind with refuting the pretended solutions of the classical problems had
the author not been Hobbes—whose inﬂuence in philosophy was a danger to religion. The
destruction of Hobbes’ reputation in the ﬁeld of mathematics aimed at undermining the
epistemological basis of Hobbes’ mechanical philosophy.
Wallis explicitly declares differences in the ﬁeld of theology to be the main reason for
the dispute; he mentions speciﬁcally the Leviathan and the theses put forward there to be
stumbling blocks:9 theses concerning God, sin, the Bible, non-corporeal substances, and
the immortality of the soul (“tremenda plane & horrida, de Deo, de Peccato, de Scriptura
sacra, de Substantiis incorporeis universim omnibus, de hominis Anima immortali, caeter-
isque gravioribus Religionis apicibus”).10
The question of the beginning of the world was taken up by Wallis in Hobbius Heauton-
timorumenos (1662), a sarcastic polemic reaction to the attacks of Hobbes against him in
the Examinatio et emendatio mathematicae hodiernae (1660). Wallis accused Hobbes of
favouring atheism:
“For, one while they ﬁnd him afﬁrming, That, beside the Creation of the World, there is no Ar-
gument to prove a Deity: Another while, That it cannot be evinced by any Argument, that the
World had a beginning; and, That, whether it had or no, is to be decided not by Argument, but by
the Magistrates Authority: And, Jeering upon every turn at Immaterial Substances: But, no where
proving either the Impossibility, or the Non-existence of them”.11
Hobbes answered the reproaches in a short biographical essay, written in the third per-
son and entitled Considerations upon the Reputation, Loyalty, Manners, and Religion of
Thomas Hobbes (1662), in no way conﬁning himself to the defence of his person, but as-
serting that Wallis had committed treason against King Charles I by deciphering royalist
letters immediately before the battle of Naseby.12 Hobbes did not enter into a discussion
of the contention of Wallis that his philosophy undermines the belief in the existence of
7See Siegmund Probst, Die mathematische Kontroverse zwischen Thomas Hobbes und John Wallis (Diss. Univ.
Regensburg), 1997, and Douglas M. Jesseph, Squaring the Circle: The War between Hobbes and Wallis, Chicago,
1999.
8The epistle dedicatory is dated 10/[20].X.1655, whereas the date for the completion of the manuscript is given
as 27.VIII/[6.IX].1655.
9John Wallis, Elenchus geometriae Hobbianae, Oxford, 1655, sig. A3r: “Verum quidem est, hunc nostrum
Philosophiae instauratorem de ipsius in Mathematicis peritia opinionem concepisse quam maximam, aliosque
omnes sive Philosophos sive Mathematicos (quasi solus ipse haec intelligat) e longinquo despicere; idque adeo ut
siquos ipsi in Theologicis aut Philosophicis contravenientes videat, aut dictata sua minus admissuros, supercilioso
hoc putet responso amandandos, quod, cum Geometriae si[n]t imperiti, haec sua non intelligant”.
10Wallis, Elenchus, sig. A2v.
11John Wallis, Hobbius Heautontimorumenos, Oxford, 1662, p. 6.
12Thomas Hobbes, The English Works, ed. W. Molesworth, 11 volumes, London, 1839–1845, IV, pp. 416–
17; Hobbes already mentions the affair in the Examinatio and in the Dialogus. See Thomas Hobbes, Opera
philosophica quae latine scripsit omnia, ed. W. Molesworth, 5 volumes, London, 1839–1845, IV, pp. 55, 290.

446
P. Beeley and S. Probst
God but met the charge of atheism by referring to his obedience to the Bible. Neverthe-
less, he conﬁrmed his objection to philosophical arguments about the beginning of the
world:
“For a third argument of atheism, you put, that he [sc. Hobbes] says: besides the creation of the
world, there is no argument to prove a Deity: and, that it cannot be evinced by any argument that
the world had a beginning: and, that whether it had or no, is to be decided not by argument, but
by the magistrate’s authority. That it may be decided by the Scriptures, he never denied; therefore
in that also you slander him. And as for arguments from natural reason, neither you, nor any other,
have hitherto brought any, except the creation, that has not made it more doubtful to many men
than it was before”.13
For a second time, the problem of the creation of the world was discussed by Wallis
in his answer to the leaﬂets of Hobbes addressed to the Royal Society in 1671.14 After
the refutation of his Rosetum geometricum (geometrical rose garden) in the Philosophical
Transactions15—Wallis qualiﬁed the work as “ﬁmetum” (dung-hill)—Hobbes addressed
the Royal Society in public. He had a leaﬂet printed in which he repeated the main argu-
ments from the Rosetum against a theorem of Wallis and asked for an ofﬁcial expert judge-
ment from the Royal Society on his dispute with Wallis. Moreover, Hobbes presented his
paper (and two sequels) to King Charles II who demanded an expertise from the Society.
Wallis was forced to react to the attack.16 As soon as Wallis’ An Answer to three Papers
of Mr. Hobbes, lately published in the months of August and this present September had
come out in the form of a leaﬂet, Hobbes replied in the Considerations upon the Answer
of Dr. Wallis, leaving just enough time for Wallis to add a few comments for the reprint of
his paper in the Philosophical Transactions for September 1671.
13Hobbes, English Works IV, pp. 427–428.
14Since the founding of the Royal Society, Hobbes had sought to obtain public recognition from it as a leading
natural philosopher. But his geometrical works had been repeatedly confuted by Wallis, Brouncker and Huygens,
all three prominent members of the Society. Moreover, from 1666 on, his publications were critically reviewed
in the Philosophical Transactions, mostly by his arch-enemy Wallis. See Review of Hobbes’ De principiis et
ratiocinatione geometrarum, in: Philosophical Transactions No. 14 (2 July 1666), pp. [253]–254; Animadver-
sions of Dr. Wallis, upon Mr. Hob’s late Book, De Principiis & Ratiocinatione Geometrarum, in: Philosophical
Transactions No. 16 (6 August 1666), pp. 289–294; Review of Wallis’ Quadratura circuli, Cubatio sphaerae,
Duplicatio cubi, confutata, in: Philosophical Transactions No. 48 (21 June 1669), pp. 971–972; Review of Wal-
lis’ Quadratura circuli, Cubatio sphaerae, Duplicatio cubi (secundo edita), Denuo refutata, in: Philosophical
Transactions No. 55 (17 January 1669/70), pp. 1121–1122; Review of Hobbes’ Rosetum geometricum, in: Philo-
sophical Transactions No. 72 (19 June 1671), pp. 2185–2186; Wallis, An Answer of Dr. Wallis to Mr. Hobbes’
Rosetum geometricum, in: Philosophical Transactions No. 73 (17 July 1671), pp. 2202–2209; Wallis, An Answer
to Four Papers of Mr. Hobs, in: Philosophical Transactions No. 75 (18 September 1671), pp. 2241–2250; Review
of Hobbes’ Lux mathematica, in: Philosophical Transactions No. 86 (19 August 1672), pp. 5047–5048; Wallis,
Dr. John Wallis’ Answer . . . to the Book, Entituled Lux Mathematica, in: Philosophical Transactions No. 87 (14
October 1672), pp. 5067–5073; Review of Hobbes’ Principia & Problemata aliquot Geometrica, in: Philosoph-
ical Transactions No. 97 (6 October 1673), p. 6131; Review of Decameron physiologicum, in: Philosophical
Transactions No. 138 (25 March 1678), pp. 965–967. Hobbes disappointment about this is clearly expressed in
a letter to Aubrey a few years later. See Hobbes–Aubrey 24.II/[6.III].1675, in: The Correspondence of Thomas
Hobbes, ed. N. Malcolm, 2 volumes, Oxford, 1994, II, pp. 751–752.
15Wallis, An answer of Dr. Wallis to Mr. Hobbes’ Rosetum geometricum.
16Cf. Oldenburg–Wallis 5/[15].VIII.1671, in: The Correspondence of Henry Oldenburg, ed. A. Rupert Hall and
Marie Boas Hall, 13 volumes, Madison, Milwaukee, London, 1965–1986,VIII, pp. 184–185.

John Wallis (1616–1703): mathematician and divine
447
Besides the rejection of the application of algebraic methods to geometry, the main
concern of Hobbes was to discuss the use of inﬁnite numbers by Wallis. He therefore
started by quoting his own translation of part of the ﬁrst proposition of chapter ﬁve of
Wallis’ Mechanica—a theorem on inﬁnite rows which the Savilian professor employed in
order to deduce formulas for calculating the areas of higher parabolas, hyperbolas, and
similar problems:
“If there be understood an inﬁnite row of quantities beginning with 0 or 1/0, and increasing con-
tinually according to the natural order of numbers, 0, 1, 2, 3, &c. or according to the order of their
squares, as 0, 1, 4, 9, &c. or according to the order of their cubes, as 0, 1, 8, 27, &c. whereof the
last is given; the proportion of the whole, shall be to a row of as many, that are equal to the last, in
the ﬁrst case, as 1 to 2; in the second case, as 1 to 3; in the third case, as 1 to 4, &c”.17
In order to provoke a dismissal of this theorem by the Royal Society, Hobbes asked
several questions concerning the nature of inﬁnity; (1) whether there can be understood an
inﬁnite row of quantities, whereof the last can be given; (2) whether a ﬁnite quantity can
be divided into an inﬁnite number of lesser quantities, or a ﬁnite quantity can consist of an
inﬁnite number of parts; (3) whether there be any quantity greater than inﬁnite; (4) whether
there be [...] any ﬁnite magnitude of which there is no centre of gravity; (5) whether there
be any number inﬁnite.18
Wallis ﬁrst tried to conceal his use of the actual inﬁnite by referring to the hypothetical
character of the axioms of a mathematical theory, using Hobbes’ deﬁnition of science as
conditional knowledge against him, and asserted that his methods were in accordance with
Euclid’s procedures. Hobbes was not impressed and pointed to these weak points of Wallis’
argumentation. In the end, Wallis defended the new inﬁnitistic mathematics overtly with
the progress achieved in quadratures of inﬁnitely extended curves, etc.
On the other hand, the Doctor of Divinity Wallis was not at all a supporter of the eman-
cipation of political and philosophical thinking from theology. Thus he tried to discuss the
question of the inﬁnite in a ﬁeld more dangerous for Hobbes than for himself—again the
cosmological problem of the beginning of the world:
“Let him ask himself, therefore, if he be still of opinion, that there is no argument in nature to
prove, the World had a Beginning; 1. Whether, in case it had not, there must not have passed an
Inﬁnite number of years before Mr. Hobs was born. (For, if but Finite, how many soever, it must
have begun so many years before.) 2. Whether, now, there have not passed more: that is, more
than that inﬁnite number. 3. Whether, in that Inﬁnite (or more than inﬁnite), number of Years,
there have not been a Greater number of Days and Hours: and, of which hitherto, the last is given.
4. Whether, if this be an Absurdity, we have not then (contrary to what Mr. Hobs would perswade
us) an Argument in nature to prove, the world had a beginning”.19
Wallis argued further that Hobbes could not choose the alternative of rejecting the in-
ﬁnite in the ﬁeld of mathematics while conceding it in physics—a way out analogous to
the one that Wallis claimed for the mathematician who considers the objects of his science
17Hobbes, English Works VII, pp. 431–432, col. 1. Apparently for reasons of symmetry, Wallis equates the
value of 0 with that of its reciprocal 1/0; this identiﬁcation, which is of course at odds with modern views, has
however no effective signiﬁcance in the calculation, nor does Wallis use it in the equivalent proposition 44 of his
Arithmetica inﬁnitorum. Cf. Scott, Mathematical Work, pp. 30, 34.
18Hobbes, English Works VII, p. 432, col. 1.
19Wallis, An Answer to Four Papers, p. 2243.

448
P. Beeley and S. Probst
Fig. 2. Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679). Science Photo Library.
only hypothetically and is not subject to the ﬁniteness of existing physical bodies. Hobbes
was now confronted with the dilemma of having to object simultaneously to the incom-
patible standpoints of Ward and Wallis: the former’s rejection and the latter’s acceptance
of actual inﬁnity in mathematics. His answer consisted of two parts: ﬁrst, he transferred
the argument from the object world to the object God in order to show the danger of this
argument for religion, as he did in the dispute with Ward. In a second step, he tried to
point out the absurdity of inﬁnite numbers by constructing an inﬁnite number smaller than
inﬁnite:
“To this I answer, not willingly, but in service to the Truth, that by the same Argument, he might
as well prove that God had a beginning. Thus: in case he had not, there must have passed an
Inﬁnite length of time before Mr. Hobbes was born; but there hath passed at this day more than
that Inﬁnite length by eighty four years. And this day, which is the last, is given. If this be an
Absurdity, have we not then an Argument in Nature to prove that God had a beginning? Thus ’tis
when men intangle themselves in a Dispute of that which they cannot comprehend. But perhaps he
looks for a Solution of his Argument to prove that there is somewhat greater than Inﬁnite; which I
shall do so far, as to shew it is not concluding. If from this day backwards to Eternity be more than

John Wallis (1616–1703): mathematician and divine
449
Inﬁnite, and from Mr. Hobbes his birth backwards to the same Eternity be Inﬁnite, then take away
from this day backwards to the time of Adam, which is more than from this day to Mr. Hobbes his
birth, then that which remains backwards must be less than Inﬁnite. All this arguing of Inﬁnites is
but the ambition of School-boyes”.20
Hobbes’ way out of the dilemma is the categorical rejection of the inﬁnite, and even
of an argumentation that draws on the paradoxical attributes of the inﬁnite in order to
conclude a negation of it. Of course, this standpoint is logically unassailable. The prob-
lem arises that not only have the questions of the beginning and of the extension of the
world to be excluded from natural philosophy—as was done consequently by Hobbes in
De Corpore21—but that, already by the middle of the seventeenth century a great deal of
the achievements in mathematics was based on a more or less unrestrained handling of the
inﬁnite and had consequently to be regarded as unscientiﬁc according to Hobbes.
Not surprisingly, Wallis protested against Hobbes’ transfer of the argument to the object
God. As much as he favoured the application of algebraical concepts to different ﬁelds of
mathematics, he could not accept an application of arguments from natural philosophy in
the domain of theology:
“What he would therein insinuate concerning God (that we may as well prove Him to have had
a Beginning, as that the World had) smells too rank of Mr. Hobs. We are not to measure Gods
Permanent Duration of Eternity, by our successive Duration of Time: Nor, his Intire Ubiquity, by
Corporeal Extension”.22
There is no further dispute about the creation of the world in the last publications of
the controversy.23 Hobbes’ ﬁnal statement on inﬁnity is to be found in chapter XIII of
his Principia et problemata of 1674. Hobbes denied that of two inﬁnitely extended lines,
starting from different points on a given ﬁnite line, one could be considered as longer than
the other and that the same were true of eternal periods of time. Cautiously, Hobbes avoided
asserting the equality of these inﬁnites, and explicitly characterized the relation between
them as non-inequality.24 So Hobbes seems to have arrived at the conclusion that the law
of the excluded middle is not valid in the case of these inﬁnites; more than a century later,
Immanuel Kant, confronted with the same problem, deﬁned the relation between these
inﬁnites as dialectical opposition.25
20Thomas Hobbes, Considerations upon the Answer of Dr. Wallis, London, 1671, p. 1; English Works VII,
pp. 445–446.
21Hobbes, Opera philosophica I, pp. 334–336; English Works I, pp. 410–412.
22Wallis, An Answer to Four Papers, p. 2250.
23See Thomas Hobbes, Lux mathematica, London 1672; idem, Principia et problemata aliquot geometrica,
London 1674; idem, Decameron physiologicum: or Ten Dialogues of Natural Philosophy, London, 1678.
24Hobbes, Opera philosophica V, p. 212: “Ergo de inﬁnito secundum sensum hunc dici non potest aliud alio
majus esse. [. . . ] Itaque semidiametri sphæræinﬁnitæa quolibet centro [. . . ] sunt inter se non-inæquales. Non est
ergo una linea inﬁnita major quam alia. [. . . ] Per eandem ratiocinationem, si linea AB ponatur pro ﬁnito tempore,
probari potest duo æterna inæqualia esse non posse”.
25Immanuel Kant, Kritik der reinen Vernunft, A 504/B 533. Cf. also Dieter Wandschneider, Il problema
dell’inizio del mondo in Kant e Hegel, in: Kosmos. La cosmologia tra scienza e ﬁlosoﬁa, ed. Umberto Curi,
Ferrara, 1989, pp. 55–65.

450
P. Beeley and S. Probst
2. Wallis’ defence of the Trinity
As the controversy with Hobbes documents, Wallis sought to maintain a clear distinction
between his work on mathematics and his work on theological topics. One of the few
areas where he departed from this, albeit only in the employment of an analogy, was in the
course of the most extensive religious dispute in which he was involved, namely that on the
Trinity. Here, the trading of positions by the various parties was already underway when
Wallis entered the fray in 1690 with a published reply to the leading exponent of English
Socinianism at the time, Stephen Nye (1648?–1719). It had been Nye’s Brief History of
the Unitarians26 which had reopened the antitrinitarian discussion in 1687; since then the
theologian William Sherlock (1641?–1707), who became Dean of St. Pauls in 1691, had
defended27 the Trinity, only to be rebuffed by authors of the opposing faction including
Nye28 and William Freke.29
Wallis’ strategy in upholding the orthodox Anglican doctrine in the light of Socinian
attacks was to retain the fundamental inexplicability of the Trinity as a matter of faith
and at the same time to show that it was not inconsistent with reason—a strategy not
unlike that adopted by Leibniz30 on the same topic. In this respect Wallis distinguishes the
question of the possibility of the Trinity from that of its truth, which, as he emphasises,
are to be approached from different ways, the one from natural reason, the other from
revelation: “There is nothing in natural reason (that we know of, or can know of) why
it [sc. the Trinity] should be thought Impossible; but whether or not it be so, depends
only upon Revelation”.31 In other words, while much in religion goes beyond reason, it
is not therefore repugnant to it, but nevertheless cannot be discovered by rational means
alone. Precisely herein lies for him the key to defeating the Socinian arguments against the
Trinity: by showing that the concept of three divine persons in the one God is rationally
sustainable, using the analogy of the mathematical cube, Wallis is in effect aiming to defeat
the opponents with their very own tools.
The fundamental idea incorporated in the Athanasian Creed, in which the concept of
the Trinity favoured by the Council of Nicaea in 325 found its fullest expression,32 is that
of worshipping one God in the Trinity and the Trinity in the Unity.33 The three godly
26Stephen Nye, A Brief History of the Unitarians, called also Socinians, in 4 letters, London, 1687; second
edition: London, 1691.
27William Sherlock, The Acts of Great Athanasius, with Notes on his Creed; and Observations on the learned
Vindication of the Trinity and Incarnation, [London] 1690.
28See e.g. Stepehen Nye, Some Thoughts upon Dr. Sherlock’s Vindication of the Doctrin of the Holy Trinity, in
a Letter, London, 1690.
29See e.g. William Freke, A Vindication of the Unitarians against a Late Reverend Author on the Trinity, London,
1690.
30See G.W. Leibniz: Sämtliche Schriften und Briefe, VI, 1, Leipzig, 1930 (reprint: Berlin, 1990), p. 515.
31John Wallis, The Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity Brieﬂy Explained, in a Letter to a Friend, London, 1690, p. 8.
Reprinted (with other pieces) in: Wallis, Theological Discourses containing VIII Letters and III Sermons Con-
cerning the Blessed Trinity, London, 1692. See also Wallis, The Resurrection Asserted, in a Sermon. . . Preached
on Easter Day, 1679, Oxford, 1679, p. 24; Wallis, An Explication and Vindication of the Athanasian Creed; In a
Third Letter, persuant of two former, concerning the Sacred Trinity, London, 1691, p. 23.
32See Wallis, An Explication and Vindication of the Athanasian Creed, p. 12.
33Wallis, An Explication and Vindication of the Athanasian Creed, p. 8. See also Wallis, Three Sermons Con-
cerning the Sacred Trinity, London, 1691, p. 19.

John Wallis (1616–1703): mathematician and divine
451
persons are in some ways no more than distinguished, whereas the Arian view, rejected
at Nicaea, emphasised the differences more. For the Socinians on the other hand it was
inconceivable that three persons might somehow be in the one God. Inconceivable means
however inconsistent with reason; Wallis’ aim in using a mathematical analogy was to
show that this is not the case.
Taking the example of a die, which as a material body belongs to “the most gross of ﬁnite
beings”,34 he notes that the three dimensions length, breadth, and height can be easily
distinguished, and not only in the imagination, but are nevertheless one cube. “There is
no Inconsistence therefore, that what in one regard are Three (three Dimensions) may, in
another regard, be so united as to be but One (one Cube). And if it may be so in Corporeals,
much more in Spirituals”.35
In fact, Wallis proceeds to develop this analogy further, supposing ﬁrst that each of the
dimensions be inﬁnitely continued, “there being no limits in nature, greater than which a
cube cannot be”, so that an inﬁnite cube encompassing all possible imaginary space results,
and second, that this inﬁnite cube and so also its dimensions be eternal. From this he is then
able to conclude that the Trinity is not rationally inconsistent: “here is a fair resemblance
(if we may parvis componere magna) of the Father, (as the Fountain or Original;) of the
Son (as generated of him from all Eternity;) and of the Holy-Ghost (as eternally Proceeding
from both:) And all this without Inconsistence”.36
The analogy of the cube, which Wallis claims37 to have discussed at Oxford already
in 1649 with Seth Ward, featured prominently in the series of published letters and tracts
putting forward the opposing views from 1690 to 1693. From the antitrinitarian point of
view the fundamental ﬂaw in the comparison was that while it is said of every person
in the Trinity that he is God, it cannot be said of any one dimension that it be a cube.38
Wallis however seeks to counter this by drawing on the philosophical distinction between
the abstract and the concrete, claiming that “though we cannot say (in the Abstract) that
length is a Cube (and so of the rest;) yet (in the Concrete) this Long thing (or this which is
Long) is a Cube”39 and that therefore the analogy can indeed be shown to hold true.
Such ﬁne distinctions were of course not able to convince his opponents who saw in
them almost the return to the worst side of scholasticism40. In their opinion, the plainest
scriptures supported the Unitarian view, while Trinitarians like Wallis “have no scriptures
34Wallis, The Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, p. 10.
35Wallis, The Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, p. 12. See also Don Cupitt, The Doctrine of analogy in the Age of
Locke, in: Journal of theological Studies NS 19 (1968), 186–202, 191.
36Wallis, The Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, p. 13.
37See John Wallis, An Explication and Vindication of the Athanasian Creed, p. 42; idem, A Fourth Letter, Con-
cerning the Sacred Trinity; in Reply to what is Entituled, an Answer, to Dr. Wallis’ Three Letters, London, 1691,
p. 18.
38W.J. Wallis 23.IX/[3.X].1690, Oxford, Bodleian Library MS Eng. Th. e. 22, f. 16r—printed in: John Wallis,
A Second Letter Concerning the Holy Trinity. Persuant to the former from the same hand; Occasioned by a letter
(there inserted) from one unknown, London, 1691, p. 5; [Anonymous], Dr. Wallis’ Letter Touching the doctrine
of the Blessed Trinity, answer’d by his Friend, 1691, pp. 8–9; [Anonymous], Observations on the Four Letters of
Dr. John Wallis, Concerning the Trinity and the Creed of Athanasius, London, 1691, pp. 4–5.
39Wallis–? 27.IX/[7.X].1690, in: John Wallis, Second Letter Concerning the Holy Trinity, p. 9; [Anonymous],
Dr. Wallis’ Letter, pp. 14–15.
40See for example [Anonymous], Observations on the Four Letters, p. 5: “So it is; when they ﬁnd themselves
distrest, by clear either Argument or Answer, they ﬂy to Metaphysicks, and Terms of the canting Schools. Then

452
P. Beeley and S. Probst
left, but those that are obscure”.41 One author (who appropriately distinguishes himself
from the Socinians), suggests that the problem of the approach chosen by Wallis reﬂects
the limits of discursive reason when it comes to comprehending divine mysteries and ﬁnds
that these limits are reﬂected in the sciences themselves:
“Neither is it only in Divine Truths that we ﬁnd our Consequences uncertain and fallacious, but
also in Natural Truths, that lies more within the Compass of our Understanding; and even in that
Order and Kind of natural Truths, that are thought of all others, to be most evident and demon-
strable, I mean Geometry and Mechanicks. How many have found the Perpetual Motion and the
Quadrature of the Circle, if their Consequences be true; for they generally begin from true Prin-
ciples, and pursue them with all the Care and Exactness they are able, and conclude with a great
Assurance that they have committed no Error, that their Deductions are clear and distinct, and
consequently their Conclusion is as infallible as humane Wit can make it: Yet the World is satis-
ﬁed, that neither the Circle is squared, nor the Perpetual Motion found out; and consequently that
humane Ratiocinations, though from true Principles, are very subject to Error”.42
In fact, Wallis himself was forced to accept that his analogy was far from perfect. But
this was, he argued, something which rather reﬂected the limits of the deﬁnitions which
we employ—just as the deﬁnitions of mathematical concepts in different authors often
deviated from one another:
“ ’Tis well known, that a Cone in Euclide doth not signiﬁe just the same as in Apollonius nor a Tri-
angle in Euclide, just the same as in Theodosius, and others, who write of Sphericks: But when we
meet with these words in Euclide, we must there understand them as they are deﬁn’d by Euclide;
and when in others so as they are deﬁn’d by those others, And so when we speak of Persons in the
Deity, we must be so understood as we there deﬁne: that is, for somewhat Analogous, but not just
the same, with what is meant by, when applyed to Men; and, particularly, not so distinct as to be
three Gods”.43
Precisely Wallis’ cautious approach using the method of analogy avoided the implication
of tritheism44 which could be found in the writings of Sherlock and which thus played into
the hands of the Socinians.45 Wallis, who nevertheless defended46 Sherlock, conﬁned his
discourse to a single point: that there is no impossibility in the Trinity.47 And this he saw
as being sufﬁcient for his purpose, namely to defeat the antitrinitarian arguments while at
the same time retaining the essential mystery of the Christian doctrine.
come in Abstract, Concrete, Paternity, Personality, and an Inﬁnity of other barbarous and insigniﬁcant Words:
only to hide clear Truth from Persons, who can be shifted off with obscure and sensless Words; Words which
denote nothing that is really existent in Nature, but only the Chimera’s of the Metaphysician”. The author later
suggests that “Tis somewhat surprizing, that a Mathematician should not be more considerate; in giving an In-
stance belonging to his Profession”.
41[Anonymous], Dr. Wallis’ Letter, p. 4.
42W.J., The Third Letter from W.J. to the Reverend Doctor Wallis, Professor of Geometry in Oxford, upon the
Subject of two former Letters to him, concerning the Sacred Trinity, London, 1693. pp. 7–8.
43John Wallis, An Eighth Letter Concerning the Sacred Trinity; Occasioned by some Letters to him on that
Subject, London, 1692, p. 13.
44See W.J.–Wallis 32.IX/[3.X].1690, Oxford, Bodleian Library MS Eng. Th. e. 22, f. 15r–15v.
45See Cupitt, Doctrine of analogy, p. 191.
46See Wallis, An Explication and Vindication of the Athanasian Creed, p. 42. Cf. Wallis–Elys 7/[17].III.1690/1,
Oxford, Bodleian Library MS Eng. Th. e. 22, f. 130r–130v.
47See John Wallis, A Fifth Letter, Concerning the Sacred Trinity; in Answer to what is Entituled, the Arians
Vindication of himself against Dr. Wallis’ Fourth Letter on the Trinity, London, 1691, pp. 7–8.

John Wallis (1616–1703): mathematician and divine
453
3. Mathematics and calendar reform
That England in the second half of the seventeenth century began to play an increasingly
important role in the advances made in mathematics in Europe generally was to a large part
due to the efforts of Wallis, who from early on was an active participant, both through pub-
lications48 and correspondence,49 in the contemporary scientiﬁc discussion. In this sense
the Savilian professor can be truly seen as a modernizer, but at the same time—and here he
reﬂects the fundamentally historical orientation of many Protestant scholars50—he held a
deep respect for tradition, as is particularly evident in his critical editions of classical texts
such as Ptolemy’s Harmonica51 and Archimedes’ Arenarius,52 as well as that of the text
De pascha computus,53 (incorrectly) ascribed to the church father Cyprian. As he explains
in his autobiography, not only in mathematics, but also in other studies “I made it my busi-
ness to examine things to the bottom; and reduce effects to their ﬁrst principles and original
causes. Thereby the better to understand the true ground of what hath been delivered to us
from the Antients, and to make further improvements of it”.54
As both theologian and mathematician, Wallis demonstrated this historical orientation
in no context more consistently than in the late seventeenth-century debates in England on
calendar reform, where his opinion precisely on account of his competence on both ﬁelds
was seen to carry a great deal of weight. In this respect, already in 1684 Wallis had made
clear where his priorities lay, when an Oxford almanac appeared in which St. Matthias’ day
was incorrectly set—no adjustment had been made for that year being a leap year. Soon
after its appearance, Wallis wrote55 to John Fell, who as Bishop of Oxford was responsible
for printing the almanac, and while he was cautious not to offend him, he spoke of it being
a reasonable presumption56 that the church should not depart from ancient practice and
therefore also from the received rules of Ecclesiastical computation.
The question of introducing the Gregorian calendar into England naturally represented
a far greater challenge.57 While repeated moves to bring about reform had in the past been
48Especially his monumental Opera mathematica, 3 volumes, Oxford, 1693–1699 (reprint Hildesheim, New
York, 1972).
49See The Correspondence of John Wallis (1616–1703), ed. Philip Beeley and Christoph J. Scriba, vol. 1, Oxford,
2003.
50See Charles Webster, The Great Instauration. Science, Medicine and Reform 1626–1660, London, 1975, p. 15.
51Claudii Ptolemaei Harmonicorum libri tres. Ex. Cod. mss. Undecim, nun primum Graece editus. Johannes
Wallis, Oxford, 1682; reprinted in: Wallis, Opera mathematica III, Oxford, 1699.
52Archimedis Syracusani arenarius et dimensio circuli. Eutocii Ascalonitae in hanc commentarius. Cum versione
et notis Joh. Wallis, Oxford, 1676; Reprinted in: Wallis, Opera mathematica III, Oxford, 1699.
53Cypriani de Pascha computus, (cum notis,) nunc primum ex mss. editus. Johannes Wallis, in: Sancti Caecilii
Cypriani Opera recognita et illustrata per Johannem Oxoniensem Episcopum [John Fell], Oxford, 1682.
54Scriba, Autobiography, pp. 40–41.
55Wallis–Fell ?.1684, Oxford, Bodleian Library MS Tanner 107, f. 50r–61v; MS Savile 56, f. 54r–65v. See also
Wallis’ Advertisement concerning St Matthias Day, MS Savile 56, f. 53v. and Wallis–Blencowe 8/[18].I.1694/5,
MS Savile 56, f. 1r–1v.
56Wallis–Fell ?.1684, Oxford, Bodleian Library MS Tanner 107, f. 50v; MS Savile 56, f. 54v.
57See Wallis–Sloane 27.VII/[6.VIII].1699, London, British Library MS Sloane 4025, f. 320r: “I hear, it hath
been under consideration, whether (at this time) to change our Julian Year, for the Gregorian. Of which (upon
occasion of a Letter from the Lord ArchBishop of Canterbury) I have signiﬁed my thoughts to his Grace; who
(if it be desired) will, I presume, impart it if there be occasion”. See further Michael Hoskin, The Reception of

454
P. Beeley and S. Probst
fought off, the pressure at the end of the century was considerable: not only was the dif-
ference between the Gregorian and the Julian calendar about to extend in 1700 from ten
to eleven days, but also and more importantly the Protestant German states were them-
selves about to change.58 And after the Imperial Diet had unsuccessfully sought to per-
suade William III to follow its decision, Leibniz had written to the Royal Society to the
same end.59 Added to which the Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Tenison, appeared to
sympathise with moves for reform.
In part, the debate focussed again on the tradition established by the Council of Nicaea,
at which the whole Christian church had adopted the Julian calendar as part of a project
to ﬁx a common date for Easter—an issue which had long caused contention and even
schism.60 According to Nicaea, Easter was to be celebrated on the Sunday following the
ﬁrst full moon after the Vernal equinox. From an astronomical point of view this required
two things: the determination of the Spring equinox and thus of the exact length of the
tropic year, and, secondly, the calculation of the length of time required for the synodic
circulation of the moon and the establishment of the days in the year on which the full
moon appears. In both these calculations errors had crept in during the course of the cen-
turies which meant that certain demands of the celebration could no longer be fulﬁlled.
Put simply, the Julian calendar was about eleven minutes a year too long, so that, even
with the insertion of a leap year every four years, the beginning of Spring, which at the
introduction of the calendar under Julius Caesar in 46 BCE had occurred on 25 March, had
gradually moved forward: at Nicaea it fell on 21 March and by the seventeenth century
it fell a full ten days earlier than this on 11 March.61 In addition, the employment of the
cyclical calculation of the occurrence of the full moons using the 19 year metonic or lunar
cycle had in the context of the Julian calendar led to a signiﬁcant deviation from the actual
appearance of the heavens.62 The Gregorian reform of 1582, drawn up under Christoph
Clavius,63 removed the excessive ten days to bring the calendar back to the same relation
to the heavens which it had in 325 and introduced a modiﬁed pattern of leap years to keep
it there.64 Additionally, in place of the 19 year lunar cycle a system of so-called epacts was
introduced, enabling a more exact calculation of the full moons.
the Calendar by Other Churches, in: Gregorian Reform of the Calendar, ed. G.V. Coyne, S.J., M.A. Hoskin, and
O. Pedersen, Vatican City, 1983, pp. 255–264.
58See Jürgen Hamel, Erhard Weigel und die Kalenderreform des Jahres 1700, in: Erhard Weigel: 1625 bis 1699.
Barocker Erzvater der deutschen Aufklärung, ed. R.E. Schielicke, K.-D. Herbst, and S. Kratochwil, Thun and
Frankfurt am Main, 1999, pp. 135–156, especially pp. 147–149.
59See Leibniz–Sloane 20/30.I.1700, London, Royal Society, Letter Book XII, pp. 314–315; The Conclusion of
the Protestant States of the Empire, of the 23rd of Sept. 1699. Concerning the Calendar, Communicated by Mr
Houghton F.R.S., in: Philosophical Transactions No. 260 (January 1700), pp. 459–463; Robert Poole, “Give us
our eleven days!”: Calendar Reform in Eighteenth-Century England, in: Past & Present 149 (1995), 95–139,
108.
60Poole, “Give us our eleven days!”, pp. 105–106.
61See Wallis–Barlow 21/[31].XII.1677, Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Savile 56, f. 6r–52v; f. 7r and f. 9r;
Wallis–Blencowe 14/[24].V. 1698, in: Philosophical Transactions 240 (May 1698), 185–189, 188.
62See Wallis–Blencowe 14/[24].V. 1698, p. 189.
63Christoph Clavius, Romani calendarii a Gregorio XIII pontiﬁce maximo restituti explicatio, in: Opera mathe-
matica, V Tomis distributa, Mainz 1611–1612; volume 5.
64Wallis–Barlow 21/[31].XII.1677, f. 7r.

John Wallis (1616–1703): mathematician and divine
455
The proposal for introducing the Gregorian reform in England found no favour with
Wallis, who suspected “a latent Popish interest”65 behind it, since it would mean in prac-
tice “a kind of tacit submission to the Pope’s supremacy, or owning his Authority”. Even
tacit agreement to papal authority was of course anathema to Anglicans, particularly those
with strong Presbyterian leanings like Wallis. The question of calendar reform therefore
had at once both political and religious dimensions, as already the case of John Greaves,
Seth Ward’s predecessor as Savilian professor of astronomy, had made clear. In a letter to
William Lloyd, the Bishop of Worcester, Wallis points out that Greaves’ proposal66 to in-
troduce the calendar during the Civil Wars had served to prejudice the King’s cause in the
eyes of those on the parliamentary side who supposed him “to be too much inﬂuenced by
Popish Councils”.67 The implication was thereby that this was still very much a relevant
issue in 1699.
In putting the case against reform Wallis was able to bring forth numerous arguments.
He referred for instance to the “more simple composition”68 of the Julian calendar in com-
parison to its Gregorian rival and to the fact that the question of Easter—which was ap-
parently Gregory XIII’s primary motivation—concerned only the Ecclesiastical year and
could therefore be rectiﬁed without affecting the civil year at all.69 The computation of
Easter, as he made clear, did not require that the relation of the civil year to the heavens
be as it was at the time of the Nicene Council, for the Vernal equinox was simply reputed
to be on 21 March of the Julian calendar, irrespective of the astronomical calendar. The
fundamental rule of Nicaea for computing Easter day was thus understood as being that
Sunday which falls upon,70 or next after, the ﬁrst full moon which happens next after 21
March on the civil calendar: “For we are not to judge, either the Equinox, or the Full moon,
according as they happen in the Heavens, or in the Almanacks; but according to the Paschal
Tables, ﬁtted to the time of the Nicene Council”.71
In fact, it was precisely here where Wallis saw the possibility of rectifying the errors in
the calculation of Easter. It could, as he explained to the Secretary of the Royal Society,
Hans Sloane, be left to the care of the astronomers to calculate the equinoxes and full
65Wallis–Tenison 13/[23].VI.1699, in: Philosophical Transactions No. 257 (October 1699), pp. 343–348; p. 345.
66See John Greaves, Reﬂexions made on the foregoing paper [sc. Report by the Lord Treasurer Burleigh ], in:
Philosophical Transactions No. 257 (October 1699), pp. 356–359; Poole, “Give us our eleven days!”, p. 107.
67Wallis–Lloyd 30.VI/[10.VII].1699, in: Philosophical Transactions No. 257 (October 1699), pp. 350–354;
p. 354. See also Wallis postscript to Wallis–Tenison 13/[23].VI.1699 (dated 31.VIII/[10.IX].1699), in: Philo-
sophical Transactions No. 257 (October 1699), pp. 348–349; p. 349.
68Wallis–Sloane 11/[22].V.1700, London, Royal Society Early Letters W2, No. 66.
69Wallis–Tenison 13/[23].VI.1699, p. 346.
70Wallis always maintained that according to the correct understanding of the Easter rule, if the ﬁrst full moon
after the Vernal equinox falls on a Sunday that Sunday is Easter day. He thus corrects what he sees to be a fault
in Leibniz’s letter to Sloane of 20/30 January 1700—see Wallis–Sloane 11/[22].V.1700: “But, when Mr Leibniz
(speaking of the Day of the Ful-moon next after the Vernal Aequinox) says quam sequens proxime dominica dies
debet esse Paschalis; he should rather have sayd in quam Incidens, vel proxime sequens, &c. For, if that Full-
moon be Sunday; Easter is to be That Sunday; not, the Sunday next After. (There is, I confess, such a mistake in
the Rule for Easter, in our Common Prayer Book; but, in the Tables, it is rectiﬁed.)”. See also Wallis–Fell ?.1684,
MS Tanner 107, f. 60v; MS Savile 56, f. 64v; Wallis–Barlow 21/[31].XII.1677, f. 9r.
71Wallis–Blencowe 14/[24].V.1698, p. 186.

456
P. Beeley and S. Probst
moons, as they do for the rest of the almanac, thus allowing that the Easter rule be employed
as it had been originally formulated at Nicaea.72
“For if, in the Rule for Easter, instead of saying Next after the One and Twentieth of March, it be
sayd Next after the Vernal Equinox; the work is done. (And we may be excused the trouble of the
Paschal Tables, and the Intricate Perplexities of the Gregorian Epacts.)”73
Nevertheless, he also points out that there are no compulsive theological grounds for
rectifying the Julian calendar at all, for “the celebration of Easter a Week or Month sooner
or later, doth nor inﬂuence at all our solemn commemoration of Christ’s resurrection”.74
The exact computation of the date is of secondary importance to the religious component
of the feast itself.
In allowing that moveable feasts such as Easter be determined astronomically, Wallis
took up a standpoint very similar to that of the Protestant states in Germany, which in
order to redress the inconvenience to commerce with their Roman Catholic neighbours
adopted the Gregorian calendar as their civil year in 1700, but continued to maintain an
Ecclesiastical calendar independent from Rome, by having their Easter day calculated by
astronomers rather than according to the Gregorian formula.75 Indeed, Wallis sympathised
with the situation of the Protestant states and applauded their solution.76 He found himself
however unable to extend the argument to England, not least on account of the need for a
common calendar with that employed in Scotland.77
Aside from such pragmatic considerations Wallis found little if anything good in the
Gregorian reform. Not only had its introduction “caused a Confusion in Stile throughout
Christendome”,78 but also the goal which it sought to achieve, namely the alignment of
the civil and the celestial year back to the time of the Nicene CouncilCouncil of Nicaea|)
was both arbitrary and ﬂawed.79 In particular, he writes, “it was never pretended that the
Civil year must needs agree (exactly to a minute) with the Celestial”; such is moreover
impossible to be had “for the solar year and the sidereal year, differ more from each other,
than the Julian from either, which is a middle betwixt them”.80 He notes also the dangers
of removing temporal landmarks for our understanding of historical events: “such changes
may have a further prospect than Men at ﬁrst sight are aware of”, leaving us at a loss “in
History to judge distinctly of dates”.81
72Wallis–Sloane 11/[22].V.1700.
73Wallis–Sloane 6/[16].IX.1699, London, Royal Society, Early Letters W2, No. 74, p. 4. See also Wallis–Lloyd
30.VI/[10.VII].1699, pp. 352–353.
74Wallis–Tenison 13/[23].VI.1699, p. 346.
75The Conclusion of the Protestant States, especially pp. 459–460. This suggestion had originally been made
by Kepler and was later taken up by Erhard Weigel. See Max Caspar, Johannes Kepler, fourth edition, Stuttgart
1995, pp. 270–271; H.M. Nobis, The Reaction of Astronomers to the Gregorian Calendar, in: Gregorian Reform
of the Calendar, ed. G.V. Coyne, S.J., M.A. Hoskin, and O. Pedersen, Vatican City, 1983, pp. 243–251; Hamel,
Erhard Weigel und die Kalenderreform, pp. 142–145.
76See Wallis–Sloane 11/[22].V.1700.
77Wallis–Tenison 13/[23].VI.1699, p. 346; Wallis–Lloyd 30.VI/[10.VII].1699, pp. 350–351.
78Wallis–Sloane 11/[22].V.1700. See also Wallis–Tenison 13/[23].VI.1699, p. 344.
79See Wallis–Lloyd 30.VI/[10.VII].1699, p. 353; Wallis–Sloane 6/[16].IX.1699, p. 4.
80Wallis–Tenison 13/[23].VI.1699, p. 346. See also Wallis–Sloane 6/[16].IX.1699, p. 2.
81Wallis–Lloyd 30.VI/[10.VII].1699, p. 351. See also Wallis–Tenison 13/[23].VI.1699, p. 344. Evidence of this
aspect is provided Wallis’ work on ﬁnding the Julian period given the number of the solar and lunar cycles, as

John Wallis (1616–1703): mathematician and divine
457
Mathematics and religion coincide in Wallis in his understanding of the importance of
historical tradition. Just as he saw the need in mathematics to return to the ancients, to
comprehend what results they had achieved, and to make improvements on these, so too
the established practice of the church over the centuries was to be upheld, while at the
same time allowing for minor adjustments and improvements as the need arose. Both these
aspects merged in the question of the calendar and its relation to astronomical calculations.
Although he did not acknowledge or simply disregarded the fact that the Julian calendar
differs to a greater extent from the astronomical year than the Gregorian, Wallis was never-
theless correct to point out that astronomers necessarily base their calculations employing
historical data on the former. And thus even those who subscribe to the Gregorian reform
“are fain (or ﬁnd it advisable) ﬁrst to Adjust their Calculations to the Julian Year, and
thence transfer them to the Gregorian”.82 At a time when the criterium of usefulness pro-
vided an important guiding line for scientiﬁc achievement, this was an argument which
was hard to refute.
well as that of the Roman indictions for any year. See John Wallis, De periodo Juliana, in: idem, Exercitationes
tres, London, 1678; Wallis–Oldenburg 16/[26].XI.1667, Correspondence of Henry Oldenburg III, pp. 598–601.
82Wallis–Lloyd 30.VI/[10.VII].1699, p. 352. See also Wallis–Tenison 13/[23].VI.1699, p. 347; Wallis–Sloane
6/[16].IX.1699, p. 3.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 24
An Ocean of Truth
Cornelis de Pater
Department of the History and Social Aspects of Science, Faculty of Science, Vrije Universiteit,
De Boelelaan 1081, NL-1081HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
E-mail: c.de.pater@few.vu.nl
Institute for History and Foundations of Science, Utrecht University, Buys Ballotlaboratorium,
P.O. Box 80000, NL-3508 TA Utrecht, The Netherlands
E-mail: c.depater@phys.uu.nl
Contents
1. In search of ultimate truth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 461
2. Natural philosophy and mathematical principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 462
3. Anticartesianism: passive matter and active principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 466
4. Prisca theologia and prisca sapientia
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 470
5. Prophecy and comets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 473
6. Prisca geometria and ﬂuxions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 477
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 481
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
459


An ocean of truth
461
1. In search of ultimate truth
In his old age, shortly before his death, Newton looked back on his life, which had been
long and fruitful. He asked himself who he had been and what the signiﬁcance of his
achievements was. He answered in the form of a self-portrait as an (inﬁnitesimally) small
boy on the wide beach of a vast ocean. He expressed it in one sentence:
“I don’t know what I may seem to the world, but, as to myself, I seem to have been only like a
boy playing on the sea shore, and diverting myself in now and then ﬁnding a smoother pebble or a
prettier shell than ordinary, whilst the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me”.1
The modern reader, for whom Newton is the eminent scientist and mathematician, may
wonder whether there isn’t an element of false modesty in this ‘undiscovered ocean’. The
harvest hadn’t been that lean. Was the Principia with its famous theory of gravitation not
a pearl of great beauty? And were the optical ‘pebbles’ and the mathematical ‘shells’ not
ﬁne specimens in Newton’s collection? The impression that the ‘collector’ had made with
these beautiful ﬁnds had been so great that he had received adulation from all sides in his
lifetime.
This veneration for the great man was linked with a certain view of his achievements.
For the generations after him in the enlightened eighteenth century he was the founder
of the clockwork universe that had been set in motion by God in the beginning, and that
had kept itself going ever since. The Enlightenment thinkers were aware that Newton had
also dabbled in, for them, objectionable subjects like theology and chronology, but they
relegated these activities to the post-Principia era of the older Newton, and they never
doubted that Newton had kept science and religion strictly separate.
They considered him as the man who not only had disclosed the fundamental laws of
the cosmos, but who in doing so had demonstrated what can be achieved by the human in-
tellect. Many members of the intellectual elite had become convinced that the Newtonian
method had opened the way to a splendid future for mankind. From this perspective he
became the hero of the Enlightenment. Modern research by historians (of science) like
Westfall, Dobbs, McGuire, Force, Snobelen and many others who have made the Newton
manuscripts accessible, has shown this view to be totally wrong. The picture of the two
Newtons that had been created by the Enlightenment—the young physicist genius and the
old, declining theologian—has been relegated to the realm of fantasy.2 Newton’s concep-
tion of God was very different from the deistic view, and he was not in the least interested
in isolated knowledge of the natural world as an aim in itself. His concern was the all-
embracing truth about God, history and nature; or rather, he was seeking knowledge of the
one true God and the one truth of His self-revelation and His acting in nature and history.
It is precisely this religious aspect that links the seemingly disparate areas in which he was
active.
The historical truth of many stories with a large dose of heroism has been equally
doubted. This includes Newton’s self-portrait as the playing boy, which for many histo-
rians is no more than an amusing anecdote that was meant to show how modest the great
1Fara, Newton, pp. 206, 294 n.28; cf. Brewster, Memoirs, II, pp. 407–408; I, p. 462; Westfall, Never at rest,
p. 863; Dobbs, Janus faces, p. 12.
2Castillejo, Exp. force, pp. 15, 78; Force/Popkin, Newton and religion, p.x; Ramati, Hidden truth, p. 418ff; cf.
Gjertsen, Newton’s success, pp. 23–41.

462
C. de Pater
Fig. 1. Isaac Newton. Science Photo Library.
man was. There are actually many indications that modesty was not Newton’s forte. And
yet it seems to me that his deepest feelings are appositely expressed in this simile. How
could someone who seeks to see God through nature and history, who sees the biblical
prophecies are decipherable codes of God’s works, who is convinced that both morality
and religion, and science are time and again perverted and who therefore attempts to ﬁnd
the true original doctrine, how could somebody like that not be aware of his limitations,
even though he was convinced that he was one of the happy few, chosen by God to redis-
cover the original teaching. It is not surprising that somebody with such a heavy burden on
his shoulders should have to recognize at the end of his life that the great ocean of truth
still lies undiscovered before him.3
2. Natural philosophy and mathematical principles
More than anyone else, Dobbs has emphasised that “the unity and consistency of Newton’s
thinking lay in his overwhelming religious concern to establish the manner of God’s act-
ing in the world”.4 His investigation of the natural world also served this purpose. When
the Principia and the Opticks are considered only as ‘science’, the religious–metaphysical
3Fara, “Tales of genius”, Newton, pp. 202–213; Force, Sleeping arg., pp. 118–119; Kochavi, One prophet,
pp. 116–117; Ramati, Hidden truth, p. 417 and 417 n.2; Hutton, Seven trumpets, p. 167; cf. Dobbs, Janus faces,
p. 12; Westfall, Never at rest, pp. 862–863.
4Dobbs, Janus faces, p. 12; cf. Dobbs, Unity, p. 108.

An ocean of truth
463
background and therefore the historical context is lost sight of. Newton and his contem-
poraries were not engaged in doing ‘science’ in the modern sense. The domain of natural
philosophy was the investigation of natural bodies, their forces, natures, actions and in-
teractions, the religious aspect of which was of fundamental importance. In the words of
Schuster:
“Every system of natural philosophy (. . . ) purported to describe and explain the entire universe and
the relation of that universe to God, however conceived. The enterprise also involved, explicitly, a
concern with the place of human beings and society in that universe”.5
The essential difference with modern science is that natural philosophy considers God
and His creation. This orientation towards God was taken for granted and there was no need
for an author to state it explicitly. However, if a natural philosopher had an unorthodox
view of God and His relation with the creation, he would have to deﬁne his position clearly
and defend it against attacks. There was strong opposition to supposed atheist tendencies
in prevailing systems. The rise of the mechanist natural philosophy in the seventeenth
century occasioned ﬁerce polemics between representatives of the old Aristotelianism and
those of the new mechanist philosophies (Descartes amongst others), while Newton and
his eighteenth-century followers opposed Cartesianism. Newton in his turn was attacked
by Leibniz and others, who rejected his philosophy to a large extent on religious grounds.
They felt that Newton had endowed absolute space with the properties of God, and that a
God who had to interfere with His creation had created an imperfect world, which implied
that Newton’s God was Himself imperfect.6
Newton defended his cosmology against these accusations in the Scholium Generale
included in the second edition of the Principia (1713), in which he gave an account of
God’s properties and the way He governs the cosmos. In this context he remarked that “to
treat of God from phenomena is certainly a part of natural philosophy”.7 The debate was
continued in 1715 by Leibniz and Clarke, who propounded the Newtonian standpoint, and
ended only with Leibniz’s death in 1716. The controversy shows how strongly cosmologi-
cal problems and questions about God’s relation to the cosmos were interconnected in the
natural philosophies of Newton and Leibniz.8
That Newton thought that the Principia was suitable to be used for apologetic purposes
is apparent from his correspondence with Richard Bentley (1692), who wanted to use the
theory of gravitation as a weapon in the struggle against atheists and deists, and who asked
the author of the Principia for advice. Newton’s reply begins with the well-known sen-
tence:
“When I wrote my Treatise about our Systeme, I had an eye upon such Principles as might work
w[i]th considering men for the beleife of a Deity & nothing can rejoyce me more than to ﬁnd it
usefull for that purpose”.9
5Cunningham, How the Principia, pp. 380–381; McGuire/Rattansi, Pipes, 1966, p. 138; Gabbey, Active powers,
p. 329ff; Schuster, Scientiﬁc revolution, pp. 224–225; cf. Reif, Textbook trad., pp. 17–32; Dobbs, Janus faces,
p. 89; cf. Snobelen, God of gods, p. 202ff.
6Cunningham, How the Principia, pp. 382, 384; Force, Nature, p. 270.
7Newton, Principia, third ed., transl. Cohen, p. 943.
8Alexander, Leibniz–Clarke; Meli, Leibniz–Clarke, pp. 460–463.
9Turnbull, Corr. III, pp. 233–256, in part. p. 233; Cohen, Papers, pp. 271–394, in part. p. 280; cf. “Therefore
Newton’s excellent treatise will stand as a mighty fortress against the attacks of atheists; nowhere else will you

464
C. de Pater
Although the foundations of Newton’s main work had been laid in 1665–1666, the gen-
eral law of gravitation was still far away at that time. Many problems had to be overcome
before the Principia could be published in 1687, a process in which an inspiring visit by
Edmond Halley in 1684 and his involvement in the following years had been most helpful.
After the example of Euclid’s Elements the work is made up of deﬁnitions, axioms and
propositions.10 The deﬁnitions concern matter, motion and forces. The axioms comprise
three laws of motion, from which propositions can be derived on all kinds of motions under
the inﬂuence of forces, both in vacuum (book I) and in resisting media (book II). Together
they form the actual mathematical principles of the mathematical physics that Newton de-
velops in books I and II. In book III he applies these principles to celestial phenomena, and
he derives the general law of gravitation which explains planetary motion, the fall, the tides
and various other phenomena. It seems therefore as if there is a certain dichotomy in the
Principia, which is more or less conﬁrmed by Newton’s critics, who highly esteemed the
mathematical pyrotechnics of book I and II, but who refused to accept the physical reality
of gravitation presented in book III, because it lacked a mechanist explanation.
The American historian of science I.B. Cohen is of the opinion that Newton’s method is
characterized by a particular revolutionary ‘Newtonian style’, which is claimed to consist
in a sharp separation between the domains of mathematical ﬁction and physical reality.
In the ﬁrst area (books I and II), within the mathematical systems, or ‘mathematical con-
structs’ as Cohen calls them, propositions are derived that apply to points and bodies under
the inﬂuence of mathematical forces. The proofs are furnished with the help of lines, tan-
gents and curves.11 Cohen recognizes that Newton’s constructs are not entirely arbitrary,
as the choice of his problems of motion and the way they are worked out show that in the
mathematical domain Newton always had the real world in view as a physical horizon. To
forestall his critics Newton emphasises again and again that he treats forces only mathe-
matically, without making any claims about their physical character. In the Preface of the
Principia he points out that the gravitation of Book III is meant as an illustration of how
the propositions of Books I and II can be applied. In a critical reaction to Cohen’s ‘New-
tonian style’ Dobbs points out that gravitation is a cornerstone of the Principia rather than
just an example of how the principles of the ﬁrst two books can be applied.12 Newton’s
contemporaries recognised this as well. John Locke, for example, writes:
“There are fundamental truths that lie at the bottom, the basis upon which a great many others rest,
and in which they have their consistency. These (. . . ) give light and evidence to other things, that
without them could not be seen or known. Such is that admirable discovery of Mr. Newton, that
all bodies gravitate to one another which may be counted as the basis of natural philosophy”.13
ﬁnd more effective ammunition against that impious crowd. This was understood long ago (. . . ) by (. . . ) Richard
Bentley (. . . )”, Newton, Principia, Cotes, preface second ed., transl. Cohen, p. 398.
10Westfall, Never at rest, pp. 402–468; Roche, Principia, pp. 43–61; Christianson, Presence, pp. 281–331; Gjert-
sen, Handbook, pp. 455–502; Dobbs/Jacob, Newton, pp. 38, 45; Newton, Principia, transl. Cohen, pp. 416–417
(axioms).
11Cohen, Newt. Revolution, pp. 52–154; Newton, Principia, transl. Cohen, par. 3.5, pp. 61–64; cf. Whiteside,
Math. Papers, VIII, p. 455, 455n.40.
12Newton, Principia, transl. Cohen, p. 382; Dobbs/Jacob, Newton, pp. 38, 45.
13Aarslef, State, p. 104; comparison with Locke’s second example shows the importance of gravity for him:
“Our Saviour’s great rule, that ‘we should love our neighbour as ourselves’, is such a fundamental truth for the
regulating human society”, Aarslef, State, p. 104.

An ocean of truth
465
Bechler rejects Cohen’s dichotomy, as it is based on the idea that science has an au-
tonomous core that is free of hypotheses, within a surrounding physical interpretation that
can only be hypothetical and therefore does not belong to the essence of science. On Co-
hen’s assumption Newton would have freely used the concept of centripetal force, without
actually believing in a physical action at a distance. Bechler claims that Newton actu-
ally had an entirely different philosophy of science. He was concerned about truth and
certainty. His famous statement “Hypotheses non ﬁngo” has nothing to do with a retreat
into a hypotheses-free zone of mathematical constructions, but it criticises strongly the
hypothetico-deductive method of Descartes and others, because their hypotheses were not
deduced from the phenomena and therefore uncertain and perhaps untrue.
Another point concerns Cohen’s ‘physical horizon’. Newton supposedly adjusted and
reﬁned his models into more and more complex mathematical models, while keeping an
eye on the physical world. According to Bechler he rather transformed his overly simplistic
mathematical models into a physical theory. Newton starts with the simple mathematical
model of a mass point that moves under the inﬂuence of a central force, and then he makes
the transition to a physical model. The centre of force becomes a material source and
the mass point becomes an extended mass. It follows from the laws of motion that the
central mass of the system cannot be stationary if a direct and immediate action of the
central body is assumed. This is exactly what Newton does. Strictly speaking his planetary
system is therefore not Keplerian, and this is not an observable fact, but something that is
necessitated by the physical theory. Because the direct action on the planets of an attractive
force residing in the sun is an hypothesis, the law of gravitation derived from it is also
hypothetical in character, as was noticed by Roger Cotes, the editor of the second edition
of the Principia.14
This raises the question of why Newton thought his theory of gravitation superior to that
of his opponents. This point is closely linked with the place in Newton’s system of God,
who acts on His creation through gravitation. Hughes has pointed out that we encounter
God far less in Newton’s Principia than in Descartes’ Principia Philosophiae. Newton
apparently separates starting-points from ﬁnal goals, i.e. physics, which takes its starting
point in the world of phenomena, from metaphysics, which is the ﬁnal aim, but this separa-
tion should not mislead us. For Newton the two form one single whole. Physics deals with
bodies in space and time, but space and time exist because God exists and has His abode
in them and is in this way permanently linked with His creation. This inﬁnite God and
Creator dwells in an inﬁnite world that is forced by His inﬁnite power to obey strict and
exact laws. In his extensive discussion of space and time Newton implicitly provides the
logical and philosophical foundation of his mathematics.15 Just as for Galileo, the book of
nature is for Newton written in mathematical language. His natural philosophy is therefore
founded on mathematical principles, which are the tools to discover the laws inﬁxed by
God in the creation and in this way to refute anybody who excludes God from the cosmos.
The theory of gravitation could explain a large number of phenomena on the basis of just a
14Cohen, Newt. Revolution, p. 113; Turnbull, Corr. II, p. 440 and V, p. 392; Bechler, Introduction, pp. 2–12;
Bechler, Newton’s physics, pp. 283–286; Newton, Principia, transl. Cohen, p. 943 (“I do not ‘feign’ hypotheses”);
cf. Koyré, Newt. Studies, pp. 273–282.
15Hughes, Phil. persp., pp. 3–4; cf. Markley, Fallen Languages, p. 139; Bechler, Introduction, pp. 12–14;
McGuire, Tradition, pp. 15–16.

466
C. de Pater
few principles. It seems that for Newton this was a decisive principle of harmony to claim
the truth of the theory, the more so as a mechanist explanation seemed impossible without
divine intervention.16
3. Anticartesianism: passive matter and active principles
In the second edition of the Principia Newton defended himself against both physical and
metaphysical accusations by Leibniz and others, but a quarter of a century earlier he had
confronted Descartes in his book. Even in the title he seems to oppose the (mathematical)
principles of his (natural) philosophy to those of Descartes.17
As a student in the early 1660s Newton had become acquainted with the works of the
French philosopher and he had been converted permanently to the idea that natural phe-
nomena have to be explained in terms of moving particles. The ﬁrst traces of this view
can be found in the Questiones.18 A growing number of critical questions in the following
years shows that Newton was inﬂuenced by the well-known Cambridge Platonists Ralph
Cudworth and Henri More. Just like them, Newton in the end rejected the separation of
mind and matter advocated by Descartes, Hobbes and others, who accepted only material
causes as explanations of phenomena in the physical world, a view that seemed to have all
kinds of atheist and materialistic implications.
Before the publication of the Principia, Newton already attacked Descartes in De Grav-
itatione, in particular his conceptions of space, place and body. He rejected the strictly
mechanistic type of explanation according to which phenomena of motion are purely the
effect of contact between passive particles of matter. By denying the existence of a me-
chanically active medium that ﬁlls all space, he rejected a cornerstone of Cartesianism, the
identiﬁcation of space and extension.19 This had a deeper religious background:
“If we say with Descartes that extension is body, do we not manifestly offer a path to Atheism,
both because extension is not created but has existed eternally, and because we have an absolute
idea of it without any relationship to God, and so in some circumstances it would be possible for
us to conceive of extension while imagining the non-existence of God?”20
At ﬁrst sight this accusation directed at Descartes seems undeserved. In his Principia
Philosophiae he had explicitly proved the existence of God. However, the French philoso-
pher wanted to derive natural phenomena only from his principles on matter and motion—
principles that he had actually partially adopted for religious reasons. From these principles
16Cunningham, How the Principia, p. 380; Mandelbrote, Duty, p. 301; Leshem, Newton on math., pp. 20, 31.
17Newton, Principia, transl. Cohen, pp. 43–49; cf. Whiteside, Prehistory, p. 34.
18Newton, ed. McGuire, Certain phil., pp. 317–320.
19Westfall, Never at rest, pp. 301–302; Dobbs, Janus faces, pp. 144–146; in Dobbs’ opinion (p. 144) De grav-
itatione was written as late as 1684, but others think that Newton completed the work already in the late 1660s;
Newton, ed. Hall/Hall, Sc. papers, pp. 90–114, 122–150, cf. 76–85; Turnbull, Corr. III, p. 244; Cohen, Papers,
p. 310.
20Newton, ed. Hall/Hall, Sc. papers, pp. 142–143, 144; in Newton’s opinion extension was only one of the
properties of matter, Newton, Principia, transl. Cohen, pp. 795–796; Hall/Hall, Sc. papers, pp. 138, 141–142;
Newton, Opticks, ed. 1952, pp. 400–403; Dobbs, Janus faces, p. 114.

An ocean of truth
467
he deduced the present state of the entire cosmos, so that God was actually made super-
ﬂuous in the Cartesian system. This consequence was unacceptable for Newton, as is clear
from the Scholium Generale of the Principia:
“This most elegant system of the sun, planets, and comets could not have arisen without the design
and dominion of an intelligent and powerful being. And if the ﬁxed stars are the centers of similar
systems, they will all be constructed according to a similar design and subject to the dominion of
One . . . ”21
In his active involvement with the creation God is sovereign and free. When the claim
that the total quantity of motion—the sum total of all products of the amount of matter and
velocity of all particles—in the universe is constant is derived from God’s immutability,
as was done by Descartes, God’s freedom and power become limited. Therefore feigning
these kinds of hypotheses has to be strongly rejected. It is the natural philosopher’s task to
discover what God has actually accomplished in the creation, and not what He should have
or might have accomplished because our thinking prescribes this to Him. In other words,
Newton is not satisﬁed with anything but the truth.22
In the Principia, mathematics appears to be a welcome ally of religion when Newton
confronts Descartes’ natural philosophy with the phenomena. Descartes assumed that the
planets are dragged around the sun in a vortex of subtle ﬂuid. In book II Newton calculated
the ratio between the period of the matter in such a vortex and the distance to the centre.
The result is inconsistent with the ratio described in Kepler’s third law. It seems that the
second book of the Principia plays a key role in Newton’s efforts to deliver the ﬁnal blow
to the Cartesian cosmology.23 The successful overthrow of Cartesianism must have given
Newton a great deal of satisfaction, as it seemed to have made the identiﬁcation of matter
and extension impossible.
Newton was concerned about other questions, in particular about the phenomenon of
life. Already in the late 1660s he became convinced that a mechanist explanation of vital
processes was doomed to fail. The great richness of forms was a problem in itself: for him
it was inconceivable how the mathematical properties of particles all moving in the same
way could produce the great richness of forms in the living world. His mature conclusion
was clearly formulated in the third edition of the Principia (1726):
“No variation in things arises from blind metaphysical necessity, which must be the same always
and everywhere. All the diversity of created things, each in its place and time, could only have
arisen from the ideas and the will of a necessarily existing being”.24
This leaves the question of how God’s interaction with the created world comes about.
For an Arian theologian as Newton was, this was an immense difﬁculty. While according
to the orthodox doctrine of the Trinity Father, Son and Holy Spirit are coequal, in Arianism
God the Father is a totally transcendent deity, who is entirely outside the material world.
The Son is a lower being, created by God, the ﬁrst and most important of all creatures.
21Newton, Principia, transl. Cohen, p. 940; cf. “(. . . ) I do not think explicable by mere natural causes but am
forced to ascribe it to ye counsel and contrivance of a voluntary Agent (. . . )”, Newton to Bentley, ed. Turnbull,
Corr. III, p. 234; Cohen, Papers, p. 282.
22Newton, Principia, Scholium generale, transl. Cohen, pp. 393, 943.
23Newton, Principia, transl. Cohen, pp. 187–188, 779–790; McGuire, Tradition, p. 190.
24Newton, Principia, third ed., transl. Cohen, p. 942.

468
C. de Pater
He is not only an intermediary between God and His creatures in soteriology, but also in
cosmology. God the Father communicates with his creatures through this Arian Christ. As
a result, in the 1670s Newton became more and more convinced that God as the primary
cause of everything does not do directly what He can do through the intermediary of sec-
ondary causes, as this agrees better with his essence.25 If passive particles of matter cannot
explain vital processes and the richness of forms in nature, there should exist, by analogy
with Christ as mediator, some intermediary divine agent that produces the visible order
and organisation of life.
The spiritual dimension of this problem led him to alchemy, which was the area where
natural and divine principles met. At the end of the 1660s Newton started an thorough
investigation to ﬁnd an answer to the insistent problems with which the mechanist philoso-
phy of nature presented him. From the start he was keen to ﬁnd evidence for the existence
of a vegetative principle active in the cosmos. Early on, probably in 1669, he advocated in
a number of ‘Propositions’ the existence of such a vital agent, universal in its operation and
diffused through all things. First he called this agent mercurial spirit, then fermental virtue
or vegetable spirit and ﬁnally (in the Opticks) force of fermentation. This vital agent is basi-
cally anti-mechanistic, and it does not work by pressure or impact of particles, but in a way
that suggests conscious acting. Newton was thinking of an uninterrupted purposive process
of disorganisation to formless matter and of reorganisation to new forms of organisation.
The vital agent was apparently the cause of seemingly spontaneous processes like fermen-
tation, putrefaction, generation and vegetation, the last term denoting all processes having
to do with life and growth. God used this agent in order to carry out his will concerning
the organisation of matter in the cosmos.
This early conviction of the existence of a universal animating spirit was soon reinforced
by the views of the Stoics, who postulated the existence of a world ether, a cosmic pneuma
or spirit, an all-pervasive warm breath of life, consisting of air and ﬁre. At the top of the
ladder of being there is the deity, the most creative and subtle form of pneuma, entirely
creative ﬁre, from whom all things receive their form and essence. In an alchemist treatise
entitled Of natures obvious laws & processes in vegetation (ca. 1672) Newton describes
a vitalistic ether, that replaces the mechanistic ether from the Questiones. The earth is a
living being that breathes in and out. The etherial breath regulates vegetation, the vital
processes that are the same for plant, animal and mineral. The mechanical (the mechanic
action of particles of matter) and the vegetable (vegetation as divinely guided activity) are
sharply contrasted, a pair of concepts that is later denoted as passive vs. active.26
Newton’s own optical investigations, started in 1666, may have played a role here. For
him, as a seeker after the truth about God and the cosmos, light did not just belong to
physics but also to metaphysics. Both in Christianity and in Neoplatonism, light bore the
hallmark of the divine. In addition there is a strong parallelism between the ﬁre of the
Stoics and the light of the Neoplatonists as cosmic vegetative principles.
In various writings it is apparent that Newton’s view of natural processes was strongly
inﬂuenced by these traditions. In An hypothesis explaining the properties of light (1675),
for example, he suggests that all bodies are composed of certain etherial spirits or vapours,
25McGuire, Tradition, p. 227n.156; Dobbs/Jacob, Newton, p. 53; Henry, Pray, p. 133.
26Dobbs, Janus faces, pp. 29–33; Dobbs/Jacob, Newton, pp. 25–30.

An ocean of truth
469
ether and light, that are condensed to a different extent and in different forms. The force
to produce this formation and coagulation was initiated by God when he ordered his crea-
tures to increase and multiply. One of these spirits is the ether. A second, that is dispersed
through the ﬁrst one, is light. These two spirits, ether and light, interact continually, so
that ‘nature is a perpetual worker’. In Newton’s later work, when his ideas have matured,
we ﬁnd similar statements. In the ‘Queries’ of the Opticks there are many remarks about
interactions between bodies, light and ether.27
Especially in the alchemist tradition Newton found a close relation between light and
God’s activity in the cosmos, and there is a strong emphasis there on active principles that
act on passive matter. As Newton was convinced of the ‘analogy of nature’, he concluded
that not only in alchemy, but elsewhere as well, active principles were operative. Newton’s
abhorrence of materialism, atheism and deism explains his unremitting efforts in the area
of alchemy, in search of a proof of providential divine acting.28
Especially Dobbs has shown in her publications how important alchemy was for New-
ton’s views of the interaction of God and the material world through active principles:
“Alchemy offered Newton access to spiritualistic guiding principles in the natural world and pro-
vided hints for the experimental examination of them and of non-mechanical causation in general.
An effective demonstration of such principles at work in the organization of matter would have
been a demonstration of divine activity in nature. Through the argument of design, a proof of di-
vine interaction with the material world would not only have been an experimental proof of the
existence of God (and thus a resounding blow struck against both skepticism and atheism) but
also a decisive refutation of the materialistic and deistic [and even atheistic, d.P.] implications of
Cartesian mechanism”.29
This conception of active forces operative in nature was ﬁrst applied by Newton to celes-
tial phenomena as described in the theory of gravitation of the Principia. Although in the
Principia Newton seems to have little interest in the cause of gravitation, he was actually
intensively engaged with the problem. Far from being a positivist, here as elsewhere he
was a seeker after truth.30
As is apparent from the Questiones, in 1664 Newton still accepted the Cartesian idea of
an etherial medium that caused gravity on earth through contact. The introduction of the
vitalist ether in 1672, mentioned above, was a radical correction of Descartes’ mechanist
system in general terms, but Newton continued to explain gravity mechanistically. In 1675
the mechanist and the vitalist action of the ether were even more closely linked and the
action was extended to the entire solar system. After having proposed a few more variants
on this mechanist theme, he rejected, according to Dobbs around 1684/85, a mechanist
explanation, as it was—as we saw earlier on—inconsistent with the observed celestial mo-
tions, which obey Kepler’s laws. In the Principia Newton did have a mathematical law to
calculate the effects of gravitation, but he had no physical explanation.
In 1690 Newton seems to have expressed his sympathy with the new mechanist expla-
nation proposed by Nicolas Fatio, a young Swiss mathematician. As appears from his later
27Turnbull, Corr. I, p. 366; Dobbs, Janus faces, pp. 29–33; Newton, Opticks, 4th ed., pp. 348ff, 374 (Qu 18ff,
30).
28Dobbs, Janus faces, pp. 4–5, 52; Dobbs/Jacob, Newton, p. 51; Newton, Principia, transl. Cohen, p. 794;
Newton, Opticks, 4th ed., pp. 376, 397; Hall/Hall, Sc. papers, p. 307; McGuire, Force, pp. 193, 198.
29Dobbs, Unity, p. 110; cf. Bono, Paracelsus, p. 75.
30Dobbs, Janus faces, pp. 92, 146, 149–150, 169, 185ff, in part. p. 188.

470
C. de Pater
report, Fatio was proud of Newton’s interest, but it is remarkable that he added the follow-
ing observation: “...he would often seem to incline to think that gravity had its foundation
only in the arbitrary will of God”.31 As Newton was convinced of the ‘analogy of nature’ he
favoured the notion of active principles, actually divine principles that mediated between
God and the world. Not only in fermentation, heat, electricity, stimulus conduction and
magnetism, but also in gravitation, active principles are operative, spiritual agents through
which God interacts with the material world. It is precisely to the fact that Newton sup-
plemented the narrow mechanist categories with other principles derived from alchemy,
Stoicism and Neoplatonism, which were linked with his theological views, that Newton
owes his lasting fame as scientist.32
4. Prisca theologia and prisca sapientia
God’s involvement with His creation not only concerns the material world, according to
Newton, but also the moral world. Alchemy recounts the story of God’s lasting involvement
with the material world through active principles, and history shows us God’s providential
acting in the moral world. Just like many Renaissance authors, Newton was convinced
that mankind had lapsed from the pristine Noachian religion, so that not only religion, but
also science was corrupted, as without true religion no right conception of the Creator and
therefore of His creation is possible. From the religious perspective that we know God only
from His works, Newton made a thorough study not only of alchemy, but also of (church)
history, biblical prophesy and chronology in order to gain a better understanding of His
providential care.
These prisca theologia and prisca sapientia are treated extensively by Newton in his
manuscript Theologiae gentilis origines philosophicae.33 Originally all nations knew the
same religion, which consisted in the precepts of the sons of Noah. The two pillars of
this religion were the love of God and the love of one’s neighbour. This original religion
was handed down to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Later Moses became acquainted with it,
and he passed it on to the people of Israel. The evangelists added on to it the doctrine
that Jesus was the Christ, whose coming had been foretold by the prophets of Israel. After
His resurrection He instructs His disciples to preach conversion and forgiveness of sins.
For Newton sin, as he writes in the Irenicum, is the transgression of the fundamental laws
that together, for Jesus, constitute the great commandment of the law, the love of God
31van Lunteren, Fatio, p. 56; Dobbs, Janus faces, pp. 188–189.
32Newton, Principia, Rule III, transl. Cohen, p. 795 (“. . . nor should we depart from the analogy of nature, since
nature is always simple and ever consonant with itself”); cf. Newton, Opticks, 4th ed., pp. 376, 379; McGuire,
Tradition, pp. 190–191; Dobbs, Newton’s alch. . . act. princ. of grav, pp. 53–74; Dobbs, Janus faces pp. 92–121,
130–150, 185–212, 218–230; Dobbs/Jacob, Newton, pp. 30, 34–37, 45–56; Leshem, Newton on math., pp. 88–
92,99ff; Turnbull, Corr. III, pp. 253–254; Cohen, Papers, pp. 302–303; Henry, Pray, p. 141 (contra Cohen, Hall
and Koyré): “[Newton] believed gravity to be a superadded inherent property of body which was capable of acting
at distance”, cf. pp. 126, 145n.28); Koyré, Newt. Studies, p. 149 (“ It is well known that Newton did not believe
gravity to be an ‘innate, essential and inherent property of matter’ ”).
33See a.o. Castillejo, Exp. force, p. 57ff; Manuel, Religion, pp. 53–79; Westfall, Is. Newton’s Theol. Gent.,
pp. 23–30; Ramati, Hidden truth, pp. 418–422; McGuire/Rattansi, Pipes; Goldish, Judaism, pp. 39–55; Goldish,
Of the Church, pp. 145–154; Knoespel, Interpr. strateg., pp. 179–202.

An ocean of truth
471
and the love of one’s neighbour. The true religion was not limited to Israel. The Greek
Pythagoras, for example, became acquainted with it during his travels in eastern countries,
and he passed it on to his disciples. As a result other peoples learned about it. Therefore
this pristine Noachian religion can be called the Moral Law of all nations. In the course
of time this religion became involved in a cycle of corruption and restoration, even in
the Christian era. After Jesus had puriﬁed it again, a new force of decay crept into the
true religion when in the fourth century the reprehensible dogma of the trinity entered
the church thanks to Athanasius. As we saw, Newton sided with his adversary Arius. The
decay of the true religion became visible in the rise of tyrant governments. Tyranny was
for Newton a pernicious characteristic of the Church of Rome with its papal hierarchy, a
church that had been corrupted by the doctrine of the trinity anyway, just like the Church
of England. Not surprisingly, Newton was ﬁercely anti-Roman-Catholic.34
De prisca theologia had also been corrupted by the Cabbala, by Platonism and by Gnos-
ticism, because these schools had introduced metaphysics into theology, which had per-
verted the original Christianity, as Holy Scripture has not been given to man to teach it
within metaphysics, but in order to teach him the morality of the double commandment
of love. In addition these metaphysical schools assume creation by emanation instead of
creatio ex nihilo, so that the supreme power of the omnipotent Creator is undermined. Ema-
nation myths degraded God by creating a throng of co-substantial gods, so that the original
monotheism was changed into polytheism. God, however, is one and indivisible. Divisi-
bility is pre-eminently a property of matter. Only monotheism is the true fountainhead of
good science, which after all aims at ﬁnding the unifying cause of all natural phenomena.
The law of simplicity applies both to the interpretation of Holy Scripture and to the book
of nature; we saw already that ‘nature is very consonant and conformable to her self’.35
An incorrect view of the Creator and the creation not only corrupts religion in its founda-
tions, but it also corrupts science. Products of this corruption, according to Newton, are the
geocentric worldview of antiquity, and the contemporary Cartesian philosophy that tries
to explain all processes mechanistically. A consequence of this approach is that not only
true religion, but also true science is to be found in a distant past. In concrete terms this
means that Newton was convinced that the true nature of the creation, the structure of the
cosmos, was fully known to Pythagoras and other thinkers in antiquity. In his view, the
Pythagorean philosophy was the ﬁrst and the most authentic representative of the origi-
nal prisca theologia and sapientia, as this philosophy knew about atoms and gravitation,
at least according to Newton. This means that both heliocentrism and the law of gravita-
tion, assumed to be explicable in non-mechanistic terms, are to be found in Pythagoras and
other ancient philosophers. Implicitly this shows of course that Newton viewed himself as
the one who had exposed the (Cartesian) corruption of science and who had revealed the
original true science.36
34McLachlan, Theol. manuscr., pp. 28, 31, 48, 52–53, 129–141; Iliffe, Anti-cathol., pp. 97–119.
35Coudert, Rosicr. Enl., pp. 31–32, 35–36; Goldish, Kabbalah, pp. 89–90, 92–93, 95–96; McLachlan, Theol.
manuscr., pp. 49–50; Castillejo, Exp. force, pp. 65ff; Manuel, Religion, pp. 48–49; Newton, Opticks, 4th ed.,
p. 476 (cf. note 32).
36Coudert, Rosicr. Enl., p. 36; McGuire/Rattansi, Pipes, pp. 198–199; Ramati, Hidden truth, p. 432; Leshem,
Newton on math., p. 153.

472
C. de Pater
In his published works Newton refers only sparingly to ancient writers, but in his man-
uscripts such references are common. A well-known example is a treatise from 1686 that
describes the planetary system in a popular way. It was originally part of the Principia, but
Newton had replaced it by a more mathematical treatment in book III. It was published
shortly after his death in 1728 under the title De systemate mundi. This work begins as
follows:
“The most ancient opinion of the Philosophers was that the ﬁxed stars stood motionless in the
highest parts of the world, and that the planets revolved about the Sun beneath these stars; that
the Earth likewise is moved in an annual course, as well as with a daily motion about its own
axis, and that the Sun or heart of the Universe rests quietly at the centre of all things. For this
was the belief of Philolaus, of Aristarchus of Samos, of Plato in his riper years, of the sect of
the Pythagoreans, and (more ancient than these) of Anaximander and of that most sage king of
the Romans, Numa Pompilius (. . . ) Afterwards Anaxagoras, Democritus and several others taught
that the Earth stands unmoved in the middle of the world”.37
After the publication of the Principia Newton wrote a number of notes in which he
extensively discussed the knowledge the ancients had of gravitation and questions linked
with it. They were probably meant to be included in the second edition as scholia with the
propositions IV-IX of book III. They were never published, perhaps for fear of criticism.
Newton, however, did give them to the mathematician David Gregory, who used them in
the preface of his Astronomiae physicae & geometricae elementa.38
The manuscript is known under the name ‘Classical Scholia’ and contains a detailed col-
lection of physico-astronomicalconjectures derived from a great variety of ancient sources.
In one of the scholia there is a passage in which Newton ‘proves’ that the law of gravita-
tion can be derived from the well-known relation between proportions of string lengths
and harmonic sounds. He relates the story of the experiments Pythagoras performed in the
blacksmith’s shop and of the musical scale, and he concludes:
“Pythagoras afterwards applied the proportion he had thus found by experiments, to the heavens,
and from thence he learn’d the harmony of the spheres. And by comparing these weights of the
planets, and the intervals of the tones produced by the weights, with the interval of the spheres;
and lastly, the lengths of strings with the distances of the planets from the center of the orbs; he
understood, as it were by the harmony of the heavens, that the gravity of the planets (according
to whose measures the planets move) were reciprocally as the squares of their distance from the
sun”.39
Not only did the ancient writers mentioned know the correct cosmological system, but
according to Newton they were also convinced that for the existence of matter and its
motion a deity, however interpreted, was necessary. The question that Newton asks in a
draft variant to query 23 of the Opticks (Latin ed. 1706) he answers as follows:
“The ancient Philosophers who held Atoms & Vacu[u]m attributed gravity to Atoms without
telling us the means unless perhaps in ﬁgures: as by calling God Harmony & representing him
and matter by the God Pan & his Pipe, or by calling the Sun the prison of Jupiter because he keeps
37Casini, Scholia, pp. 1, 20n.1; Newton, The System of the World, in Newton, Principia, transl. Motte/Cajori,
p. 549.
38Casini, Scholia, pp. 2, 47–58.
39Casini, Pyth. myth, pp. 196–198; Casini, Scholia, pp. 9, 32–33, 57–58; Gouk, Harm. Roots, pp. 120–124;
McGuire/Rattansi, Pipes, pp. 115–117; Leshem, Newton on math., pp. 102, 108, 153, 186.

An ocean of truth
473
Fig. 2.
the Planets in their Orbs. Whence it seems to have been an ancient opinion that matter depends
upon a Deity for its laws of motion as well as for its existence”.40
In the Scholium Generale of the Principia Newton speaks of the ubiquity and omnipo-
tence of God, the Pantocrator, and in a note he adds that this was also the view of the
ancients, Pythagoras, Thales, Anaxagoras and others.41
Different lines of argument come together here. Newton’s conception of God requires a
permanent involvement with the creation. His criticism of Descartes is connected with this
point and makes him look for non-mechanistic agents in nature. Alchemy showed him the
existence of active principles. Gravitation, one of these principles and prominently present
in the Principia, he traces back to the ancients, in whom he also ﬁnds indications of the
true religion and the notion of God as the cause of gravitation.
5. Prophecy and comets
In Newton’s quest for traces of God’s providential acting in history the study of the Biblical
prophecies plays a key role. Especially the books of Daniel and Revelations were studied
extensively by Newton. He points out that a book written in a foreign language is only
accessible if one has a thorough command of the language. This is also the case with
the Biblical prophecies. They contain coded messages, which Newton tried to decipher.
According to Newton all prophets used “one and the same mystical language”. Once the
“necessary signiﬁcations” of this language has been found, all other interpretations have to
be rejected as the “offspring of luxuriant fancy”, because “no more signiﬁcations are to be
admitted for true ones than can be proved”.42
This is reminiscent of the ﬁrst rule of reasoning in book III of the Principia: “No more
causes of natural things should be admitted than are both true and sufﬁcient to explain their
40Casini, Scholia, pp. 2, 20n.2; McGuire/Rattansi, Pipes, p. 118.
41Newton, Principia, third ed., transl. Cohen, pp. 940–942; Casini, Scholia, pp. 2, 20 n.4.
42Castillejo, Exp. force, p. 32; Mandelbrote, Duty, p. 296; McLachlan, Theol. manuscr., p. 120; cf. Manuel,
Religion, p. 117; Newton, Observations, pp. 16ff.

474
C. de Pater
phenomena”.43 In his explanation of this rule Newton states that nature delights in simplic-
ity. We ﬁnd this same notion of simplicity in his Rules for methodizing the Apocalyps. In
one of the relevant passages he himself makes the link between nature and prophecy:
“Truth is ever to be found in simplicity, and not in the multiplicity and confusion of things. As
the world, which to the naked eye exhibits the greatest variety of objects, appears very simple in
its internall constitution when surveyed by a philosophic understanding, and so much the simpler
by how much the better it is understood, so it is in these visions. It is the perfection of ⟨all⟩
God’s works that they are all done with the greatest simplicity. He is the God of order and not of
confusion. And therefore as they that would understand the frame of the world must indeavour to
reduce there knowledg [sic] to all possible simplicity, so it must be in seeking to understand these
visions”.44
When such rules reduce things to the greatest possible simplicity, as Newton of course
assumes of his own ‘constructions’, this is sufﬁcient. In that case no attention need be paid
to other keys to the Apocalypse, except if there are evident ﬂaws in the rules that have been
used. The methodological parallel of this rule is to be found in the Principia, where Newton
states in his fourth rule of reasoning that inductive generalisations have to be considered
true or nearly true, except if there are empirical grounds showing that they need correction.
Clearly, the method in science and that in theology are parallel, or rather there is only one
method. God’s simplicity justiﬁes inductive reasoning both in reading the book of nature
and reading the books of the prophets. The inductive method is justiﬁed by our theological
understanding of the nature of God. Whoever rejects this method, actually makes Him as
irrelevant.45
It was not Newton’s intention to predict future events with the help of the Bible, but
rather to ﬁnd a code to interpret the prophecies and to conﬁrm that Holy Scripture was right.
This would make God’s providence visible to the world. If events take place that have been
foretold ages ago, this will be convincing proof that the world is governed by providence.
In a number of cases the reader can derive a scheme of the course of future events from the
facts and keys provided by Newton. Only in this sense it can be said that Newton makes
predictions, for strictly speaking his calculations never go further than his own time.46
Because of the complicated calculations there is a direct link between mathematics and
the explanation of the prophetic books, and in addition Newton calls in the assistance of
astronomy to date events. Then there is a more indirect relation through temples and other
sanctuaries. Castillejo speaks of a “triple alliance between the Temple, the Universe, and
the political-mystical events of an ecclesiastical community”. The constituent parts of the
universe are recognized by Newton in the parts of the temple:
43Newton, Principia, transl. Cohen, p. 794.
44Manuel, Religion, p. 120 (rule 9); Rogers, Guarant. God, p. 233; Force, Ancients, p. 244; as to the “necessary
signiﬁcations” of a “prophetic phrase” Newton remarks: “I received also much light in this search by the analogy
between the world natural and the world politique. For the mystical language was founded in this analogy (. . . )”,
Castillejo, Exp. force, p. 32; The ‘Rules for methodizing the Apocalyps’ form part of the ﬁfteen ‘Rules for
interpreting the words and language in Scripture’, Manuel, Religion, pp. 116ff; Kochavi, One prophet, pp. 108–
109; Force, Ancients, pp. 244–247; cf. quotation in note 32.
45Rogers, Guarant. God, p. 234; Manuel, Religion, p. 12; Castillejo, Exp. force, pp. 32–33; Newton, Principia,
transl. Cohen, p. 796.
46Newton, Observations, p. 251; Castillejo, Exp. force, p. 34; Murrin, Apocalypse, pp. 205 n.9, 217; Snobelen,
Newton, heretic, pp. 391–392; cf. for some calculations based on Newon’s data: Castillejo, Exp. force, pp. 53–55.

An ocean of truth
475
“[They] have the same signiﬁcation with the analogous parts of the world. For Temples were
anciently contrived to represent the frame of the Universe as the true Temple of the great God.
Heaven is represented by the Holy place or main body of the ediﬁce, the highest heaven by the
most Holy or Adytum, the throne of God by the Ark, the Sun by the bright ﬂame of the ﬁre of the
Altar or by the face of the Son of man shining through this ﬂame like the Sun in his strength, the
moon by the burning coals upon the Altar convex above and ﬂat below like an half moon, the stars
by the lamps (. . . ) And all these parts of the Temple have the same signiﬁcation with the parts of
the world which they represent”.47
Solomon’s temple seems to be the model here for Newton’s interpretation of temples
and sanctuaries in general. His temple studies lead to two important conclusions. On the
one hand in its physical shape the temple is a representation of the cosmos, including
the heliocentric system. Sanctuaries therefore represent the scientiﬁc knowledge of the
ancients. On the other hand the temple is the place where the Son of man is present and the
scene of the events in the book of Revelation. The temple service with all its ceremonies is
a model for Christian worship and the government of the church. Every object and every
ceremony has a prophetic meaning. This interpretation is fundamental for Newton’s entire
theology.
We also come across the relation between cosmos and sanctuary in Newton’s Origenes.
He focuses there on the prytaneum—the central hearth of a city in ancient Greece, rep-
resenting the unity and the vitality of the community—or rather on the sacred ﬁre itself
contained in such a building. In its most developed form this ﬁre is a manifestation of the
original religion:
“The religion most ancient & most generally received by the nations in the ﬁrst ages was that of
the Prytanea or Vestal temples. (. . . ) The placing of ye ﬁre in the common center of the Priests
court & of ye outward court or court of ye people in the Tabernacle & in Solomons Temple [&
the framing ye Tabernacle & Temple so as to make it a symbol of the world] is a part also of ye
religion wch ye nations received from Noach. For they placed ye ﬁre in ye middle of ye Prytanaea.
And as the Tabernacle was a symbol of the heavens, so were the Prytanaea amongs ye nations. The
whole heavens they recconed to be ye true & real Temple of God & therefore that a Prytanaeum
might deserve ye name of his Temple they framed it so as in the ﬁttest manner to represent the
whole systeme of the heavens. (. . . )”48
Newton assumes that the circumambulatory movements of the priests symbolised the
motions of the planets. Striking again is the close relation between theology and natural
philosophy in Newton’s view. To some extent they can even be said to coincide:
“So then was one design of ye ﬁrst institution of ye true religion to propose to mankind by ye
frame of ye ancient temples, the study of the frame of the world as the true temple of ye great God
they worshipped. And thence it was yt ye Priests anciently were above other men well skilled in
ye knowledge of ye true frame of Nature & accounted it a great part of their Theology”.49
This intimate relation between natural philosophy and theology provides us with a key
to combine Newton’s view of the conﬂagration of all things as described in II Peter with
his treatment of comets in the Principia. Already in the Questiones we ﬁnd the following
remarks on the end of the world under the heading ‘Of Earth’:
47Castillejo, Exp. force, p. 33.
48Goldish, Judaism, p. 95; Knoespel, Interpr. strateg., pp. 194–195.
49Knoespel, Interpr. strateg., p. 196.

476
C. de Pater
“Its conﬂagration testiﬁed Peter 2, Chapter 3, verses 6, 7, 10, 11, 12. The wicked probably to be
punished thereby, Peter 2, Chapter 3, verse 7. The succession of worlds is probable from Peter 2,
Chapter 3, verse 13, in which text an emphasis upon the word “we” is not countenanced by the
original. Revelations, Chapter 21, verse 1; Isaiah, Chapter 65, verse 17, Chapter 66, verse 22. Days
and nights after the judgment, Revelations, Chapter 20, verse 10”.50
The expression ‘succession of worlds’ shows that early on Newton reckoned with the
possibility of cyclical return of events in the universe. In his later view comets play a key
role so that prophecy, astronomy and conic sections are closely interwoven. The extensive
analysis of the comet of 1680 in the Principia is closely linked with the conﬂagration at
the end of time, but also with the expectation of a new world as formulated in Peter’s
Letters. Comets provide both the fuel for a conﬂagration and the seeds for a new world. In
the Principia Newton compares the indispensability of vapours rising from the sea for the
growth of vegetation on earth and the signiﬁcance of comets:
“. . . comets seem to be required, so that from the condensation of their exhalations and vapors,
there can be a continual supply and renewal of whatever liquid is consumed by vegetation and
putrefaction and converted into dry earth (. . . ). I suspect that that spirit which is the smallest but
most subtle and excellent part of our air, and which is required for the life of all things, comes
chieﬂy from comets”.51
Dobbs points out that in the post-Principia era Newton had a predilection for regular-
ity in his interpretation of both natural phenomena and historical processes. He therefore
needed a physical agent that acted with ‘majestic regularity’, but that at the same time could
explain unusual happenings, including those of sacred history. According to a memoran-
dum of Gregory (May 1694) Newton held the opinion that the great differences between
planets and comets, particularly their eccentricities, constitute evidence of a divine hand,
which has apparently destined the comets for a different purpose than the planets. A few
years before his death he revealed his thoughts on this point to John Conduitt. His idea was
that the coagulating vapours and light emanating from the sun would in successive phases
solidify into a body, then into a primary planet and ﬁnally into a comet. After a number
of revolutions this comet would approach the sun more and more closely, and ﬁnally by
coagulation be able ‘to recruit and replenish the sun’, just as new fuel stimulates a ﬁre,
with serious consequences for the earth. The comet of 1680, which according to Newton
and Halley had a period of more than 500 years would probably bring this about.52
Newton’s ideas about comets are closely linked with his tour de force as found in the
Principia to tame the until then elusive comets into members of the solar system, moving
around the sun in narrow ellipses and like the other celestial bodies subject to the law
of gravitation. For Newton these celestial bodies with their now regular motions were no
longer harbingers of doom, but themselves agents of destruction:
“With comets, then, Newton had found a precise mechanism, described by his mathematical prin-
ciples, by which the dissolution of this world could be effected. The dissolution would take place
through natural law, but this law operated under divine guidance. Newton’s ideas had roots in
Judeo-Christian texts (. . . ) and were congruent with the Stoic doctrine of ekpyrosis; yet one must
50McGuire/Tamny, Certain phil., pp. 374–376, 375–377; Dobbs, Janus faces, p. 234.
51Newton, Principia, transl. Cohen, p. 926.
52Dobbs, Janus faces, pp. 233–234; Turnbull, Corr. III, pp. 334, 336; Markley, Fallen Languages, p. 159; cf.
Newton, Principia, transl. Cohen, pp. 937, 938.

An ocean of truth
477
in addition recognize that within the rigorous mathematical system of the world for which he is
so justly famous, Newton had ﬁrmly established a providential God—at least as he himself under-
stood what he had done”.53
The unity of Newton’s thought, strongly emphasised by Dobbs, here assumes concrete
shape: mathematics, astronomy and gravitation are linked through the comets to prophecy
and the providence of a God who is Lord over nature and history.
6. Prisca geometria and ﬂuxions
In the quotation above Dobbs emphasises God’s providence, but at the same time she in-
dicates the fundamental role of Newton’s mathematical principles. The great importance
she attaches to the unity of Newton’s thought also concerns the “mathematical principles
of God’s design”, and the question arises how these are connected with Newton’s concept
of God and his ideas about prisca scientia and with his thought as a whole.
Newton’s interest in mathematics was aroused in 1664 when he studied the works of
Viète, Descartes, Wallis and others and became acqainted with the ‘new analysis’ of the
seventeenth century. It took him only a few months to make himself familiar with the
new ideas and techniques, and already during the winter of 1664–1665 he produced a ﬁrst
important contribution of his own to the new area with the binomial theorem named after
him. He also occupied himself with series expansion. In 1666 he laid the foundations for
his most important contribution to analysis, the calculus of ﬂuxions, which he applied to a
wide range of problems in 1670–1671. This was a new method of doing calculations with
ﬁnite and inﬁnitely or indeﬁnitely small quantities, with the extra rule that A + a = A, if
A is a ﬁnite quantity and a an inﬁnitely small quantity.54
From the start the kinematic orientation dominated in Newton’s calculus of ﬂuxions.
In his Methods of series and ﬂuxions (1670) he considered quantities “as though they
were generated by continuous increase in the manner of a space which a moving object
describes in his course.” A continually moving point generates a line and a continually
moving line generates a plane. Such quantities generated by ‘ﬂow’ are called ‘ﬂuents’ by
Newton, and their instantaneous velocities ‘ﬂuxions’, while the “inﬁnitely small additions
by which those quantities increase during each inﬁnitely small interval of time” are named
‘moments’. These moments were considered by Newton at that time as proportional to
their ‘speeds of ﬂow’, that is, their ﬂuxions. In the notation he used after 1690: if x is the
ﬂuent at time t and ˙x the ﬂuxion, then the moment is ˙xo, if o is the inﬁnitely small period
of time, so that the quantity in question equals x + ˙xo at time t + o. Newton warns the
reader not to identify the time t with the absolute real time, as any ﬂuent with constant
ﬂuxion can play the role of ﬂuxional time.55
With his new method Newton could successfully tackle all kinds of problems, such as
determining maxima and minima, quadratures, tangents, arc lengths, surface areas and
centres of gravity. Newton’s great achievement was to reduce all these problems to two
53Dobbs, Newton as alch., p. 137; Newton, Principia, transl. Cohen, pp. 888–938; cf. Hughes, Princ. and comets,
pp. 53–74; Dobbs, Janus faces, pp. 235–237.
54Leshem, Newton on math., pp. 19ff; Guicciardini, Reading, pp. 17–18, 20–22.
55Whiteside, Math. papers, III, pp. 72–73, 78–81; Guicciardini, Reading, pp. 21ff; Arthur, Fluxions, pp. 334ff.

478
C. de Pater
fundamental questions, viz., to ﬁnd the ﬂuxion with a given ﬂuent, and vice versa, and
in addition to prove the fundamental theorem that these two operations are each other’s
inverse.56
In his early works Newton prided himself as a promoter of the ‘new analysis’, but in the
course of the 1670s this changed. Two factors seem to play a role here. In the ﬁrst place
there is his anticartesianism. His growing opposition to Descartes’ mechanism, which in
his view leaned towards atheism, seems to have made him critical of everything produced
by the French philosopher, including the new analytical method in mathematics. Secondly,
there was his preoccupation with the prisca scientia. In his quest for lost knowledge he en-
countered again the geometry of the Greeks. He considered their synthetic method superior
to the analytic method of the moderns: it was simple and elegant, and it could be interpreted
in terms of actually existing objects, so that it could be converted more easily into ordinary
language than a algebraic calculation, as he argues in Three books of geometry (1693). Of
the modern mathematicians Descartes was singled out for criticism, while of the ancients,
in addition to Euclid and Apollonius, Pappus was often mentioned with approval. Pappus
was also adduced as an authority in the Preface of the Principia.57 Newton pointed out
that, although the ancients made their discoveries with the help of analysis, they furnished
the ﬁnal proof by way of synthesis. That was the way of truth and certainty, “for the force
of geometry and its every merit lay in the utter certainty of its matters, and that certainty in
its splendidly composed demonstrations”.58
Newton never abandoned this new position of criticism of the moderns and praise of
the ancients. Although this was the main component of his attitude, on the other hand it is
certainly true that he continued to use and develop the new analysis. His ideal remained the
restoration and improvementof the old geometry, although actually his mathematical meth-
ods transcend the boundaries of classical geometry. There are two elements in Newton’s
geometry that are completely absent in Greek mathematics, viz., motion and the inﬁnitely
small. This is clear in the Principia, where Newton’s argumentation is strictly geometrical.
An argument is linked to a ﬁgure, from which ratios and proportions are read off that are
then reduced until the desired result has been obtained, again in terms of proportions, as
is for example the case with the law of gravitation. The great innovation compared to the
ancients is that Newton always checks what form the relations that have been obtained take
when some elements in the ﬁgure reach certain boundary values or become inﬁnitesimally
small. Newton speaks of ‘ﬁrst and ultimate ratios’, and he discusses them in the Principia
in the very ﬁrst section, apparently aware of the novel character of this geometrical ap-
proach. A second important point in which Newton differs from Euclid and Apollonius
is that his geometry is full of kinematic notions. This means that here there is actually a
rift with the ancients, as they only studied constant quantities and ﬁgures, while Newton’s
quantities and ﬁgures often change over time and approach boundary values.59
56De Gandt, Force, pp. 209–210, 225; Guicciardini, Reading, pp. 26, 212–213.
57Guicciardini, Reading, pp. 20, 28–29, 222–223; Whiteside, Math. papers, III, p. 33; cf. IV, pp. 221–222, 222–
223, 274n4, 276–277: “their method is more elegant by far than the Cartesian one”, cf. p. 423: “(. . . ) more simply
effected by synthesis”, p. 450; VII, pp. 199, 199n67 (Newtons esteem for Huygens), pp. 251, 342; Newton,
Principia, Preface, transl. Cohen, p. 381.
58Whiteside, Math. papers, VIII, pp. 451, 453, 455 (relation between motion and geometry).
59Newton, Principia, transl. Cohen, pp. 433–443; Guicciardini, Reading, pp. 34–35, 99–117; De Gandt, Force,
pp. 224–226.

An ocean of truth
479
Newton uses his earlier discoveries in the calculus of ﬂuxions, but he replaces the cal-
culus of ﬂuxions by a geometry of ﬂuxions. He denotes the new approach as the synthetic
method of ﬂuxions, which he distinguishes from his earlier analytic method of ﬂuxions.
Later in his polemics with Leibniz there is a third element. In his Quadrature of curves
(1691ff) he writes:
“Mathematical quantities I here consider not as consisting of least possible parts, but as described
by a continuous motion. Lines are described and by describing generated not through the appo-
sition of parts, but through the continuous motion of points (. . . ) times through continuous ﬂux,
and the like in other cases. These geneses take place in the reality of physical nature and are daily
witnessed in the motion of bodies. And in much this manner the ancients by ‘drawing’ mobile
straight lines into the length of stationary ones, taught the genesis of rectangles”.60
In addition to the appeal to the ancients we ﬁnd here the express rejection of Leibniz’s
inﬁnitesimals, in which the ontological content of the method of ﬂuxions plays an explicit
role. Fluents and ﬂuxions are realities, or to use the words of his anonymous review of the
Commercium epistolicum (1713): “whilst indivisibles upon which the Differential method
is founded have no being either in Geometry or in nature”.61
Hall has pointed out in his Philosophers at war, in which he describes the controversy
between Newton and Leibniz about the discovery of the calculus, that Leibniz’s calculus
and Newton’s method of ﬂuxions “are products of very different minds”. Newton’s cal-
culus of ﬂuxions is based on the continuity in time of a permanently present God, and
Leibniz’s inﬁnitesimal calculus on the discontinuity between monads in a world in which
God does not interfere. This difference raises the question, asked by Force in 1990, of what
is the relation between mathematics and metaphysics, particularly in the Principia, if an
‘integrated system of thought’ is ascribed to Newton.62 Force emphasises that behind the
mechanical framework of the Principia there is the image of Newton’s God. He is con-
vinced that this is a God of continuous dominion, who is not only the Creator, but also
the one who maintains and governs His creation either via the normal way of secondary
causes or via the unusual, but always possible way of direct mediation on the basis of the
free exercise of His will. Newton owes his fame as a scientist to the link between mathe-
matics and the empirical world, but both facets of his method are inextricably linked with
his voluntarist conception of God. Even the ordinary concourse of a law of nature together
with its mathematical description is inconceivable without a God who maintains the regular
operations of nature that He has created.
According to Force, Newton’s method of ﬂuxions is also closely linked with his con-
ception of God because it is based on the continuity of ﬂow as supervised by the God of
dominion, who maintains the current state of natural law. Several scholars have discussed
Force’s question. In a paper on ﬂuxions (1990) Arthur points out that the method of ﬂux-
ions enabled Newton to treat mathematics and physics within the one framework of his
conception of space and time, which is inextricably connected with his conception of God.
60Whiteside, Math. papers, VIII, pp. 122, 123; Guicciardini, Reading, p. 35.
61Guicciardini, Reading, p. 35; Whiteside, Math. papers VIII, pp. 597–598; Hall, Phil. at war, p. 295 (Appendix,
p. 205); Ramati, Hidden truth, p. 343.
62Hall, Phil. at war, p. 258; Force, Newton’s God, pp. 88, 100n.38.

480
C. de Pater
The mathematics of continually changing quantities and the mathematics of geometrical
physics form an indivisible whole.63
In a number of publications in which he builds on the work of Dobbs, Snobelen, Force,
McGuire, Guicciardini, De Gandt, Arthur and others, Ayval Ramati (aka Ayval Leshem)64
has again made a link between the calculus of ﬂuxions and Newton’s God. He extensively
discusses Newton’s quest for the truth about nature and history, which ﬁnds its unity in
the one God who as Lord of dominion, as Pantocrator, is in touch with the material world
through space as his sensorium, and who exercises his dominion over both human history
and the natural world.65 Ramati says that there are reasons to assume that calculating ﬂux-
ions should help the wise man to obtain the objective perspective of God and achieve the
simplicity of true worship. Our perspective is distorted, because we are part of the physical
world in which we perceive objects. Bodily perceptions are subject to the law that every
action evokes an equal and opposite reaction. When impressions reach our sensorium, the
centre of perception in the brain, they arrive there through the mediation of the senses be-
tween the objects without and our sensorium within, which leads to confusion, error and
corruption. But because God is omnipresent and everything has its existence in Him, every-
thing is present in Him and He observes all objects directly, without distortion. This means
that our perception of things differs from God’s objective uniformly ﬂowing perception.
From this Ramati concludes that Newton may have viewed his mathematical method of
ﬂuxions as a divine path through which people can purify their bodily senses. With the help
of the method of ﬂuxions it is possible to calculate the distortions that curves representing
continually ﬂowing quantities suffer. In the context of the world of phenomena this enables
human beings to purify their senses and eventually to convergewith God’s inﬁnite objective
sensorium. Ramati points out how important tangents are in Newton’s method of ﬂuxions.
In every curved path of a physical body the tangents express at every moment the inertial
ﬂow of the body, provided that the vis insita at the time in question has not been disturbed.
Tangents are actually ﬂuxions ﬂowing along the equable ﬂow of God’s endurance. They
are informative devices, as they recover the equable ﬂow of God’s absolute, mathematical,
true and pure time. Ultimately, Ramati argues,
“that we have good reasons to see Newton’s association of his ﬂuxions with God’s absolutes, time
and space, as well as his Principia project, as a modern form of the old religious worship of Noah
and his sons around vestal ﬁres, incorporating the mathematical concepts inherent in the ceremony
reﬂecting the motion of the planets around the sun”.66
In this way prisca scientia, prisca theologia, physics, history and even morals are linked
with mathematics, “the ﬁttest of all languages to describe God’s governance over cre-
ation”.67 This is in perfect agreement with Dobbs who has emphasised again and again
the unity of Newton’s thought:
63Arthur, Fluxions, pp. 325–326.
64See Leshem, Newton on math., p. 75n.1.
65Newton, Opticks, 4th ed., p. 403 (“to move bodies in his boundless uniform sensorium”); Ramati, Hidden
truth, p. 418; cf. Snobelen, God of gods, pp. 175–180, 202ff.
66Ramati, Hidden truth, pp. 427, 433, 435; Leshem, Newton on math., p. 75, cf. pp. 26, 34, 62–63, 66, 80–81,
118; Dobbs, Alchemy, pp. 73–74; Westfall, Origines, pp. 22–24.
67Leshem, Newton on math., p. 85, cf. pp. 78–79, 84; cf. Markley, Corruption, p. 140: “(. . . ) Mathematics
becomes akin to revelation, both analytical method and moral shield against the corruption of the physical world”;
Newton, Opticks, 4th ed., pp. 405–406.

An ocean of truth
481
“For Newton, true knowledge was all in some sense a knowledge of God. Truth was one, its unity
guaranteed by the unity of God. Reason and revelation were not in conﬂict but were supplementary.
God’s attributes were recorded in the written Word, but were also directly reﬂected in the nature of
nature. Natural philosophy thus has immediate theological meaning for Newton, and he deemed it
capable of revealing to him those aspects of the divine never recorded in the Bible or the record of
which had been corrupted by time and human error. By whatever route one approached truth, the
goal was the same. Experimental discovery and revelation; the productions of reason, speculation,
or mathematics; the cryptic, coded messages of the ancients in myth, prophecy, or alchemical
tract; the philosophies of Platonists, atomists, or Stoics—all, if correctly interpreted, found their
reconciliation in the ultimate unity and majesty of the Deity”.68
References
[1] H. Aarslef, The state of nature and the nature of man in Locke, John Locke: Problems and perspectives,
A collection of new essays, J.W. Yolton, ed., Cambridge, 1969, pp. 99–136.
[2] H.G. Alexander (ed.), The Leibniz–Clarke Correspondence, Manchester, 1956.
[3] R.T.W. Arthur, Newton’s ﬂuxions and equably ﬂowing time, Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
26 (1995), 323–351.
[4] Z. Bechler, Introduction: some issues of Newtonian historiography, in: Bechler, Contemporary, pp. 1–20.
[5] Z. Bechler (ed.), Contemporary Newtonian Research, Dordrecht, 1982.
[6] Z. Bechler, Newton’s Physics and the Conceptual Structure of the Scientiﬁc Revolution, Dordrecht, 1991.
[7] J.J. Bono, From Paracelsus to Newton: the word of God, the book of Nature and the eclipse of the “emblem-
atic world view”, in: Force/Popkin, Newton and Religion, pp. 45–76.
[8] D. Brewster, Memoirs of the Life, Writings, and Discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton, 2 vols. Edinburgh/Boston,
1855, 21860.
[9] P. Bricker and R.I.G. Hughes (eds.), Philosophical Perspectives on Newtonian Science, Cambridge, MA,
1990.
[10] P. Casini, Newton: the classical scholia, History of Science 22 (1984), 1–58.
[11] P. Casini, The Pythagorean myth: Copernicus to Newton, in: Olschki, Copernico, pp. 183–199.
[12] D. Castillejo, The Expanding Force in Newton’s Cosmos, Madrid, 1981.
[13] G.E. Christianson, In the Presence of the Creator, New York/London, 1984.
[14] I.B. Cohen, The Principia, universal gravitation, and the “Newtonian style”, in relation to the Newtonian
revolution in science, in: Bechler, Contemporary, pp. 21–108.
[15] I.B. Cohen (ed.), Isaac Newton’s papers & letters on natural philosophy, Cambridge, MA, and London,
1958, 21978.
[16] I.B. Cohen, Newton’s third law and universal gravitation, Journal of the History of Ideas 49 (1987), 571–
593; also in: Scheurer/Debrock, Newton’s legacy, pp. 25–53.
[17] I.B. Cohen, The Newtonian revolution with illustrations of the transformation of scientiﬁc revolutions, Cam-
bridge, 1980.
[18] I.B. Cohen and G.E. Smith (eds.), The Cambridge Companion to Newton, Cambridge, 2002.
[19] A. Cunningham, How the Principia got its name; or, taking natural philosophy seriously, History of Science
29 (1991), 377–392.
[20] A.P. Coudert, Newton and the Rosicrucian Enlightenment, in: Force/Popkin, Newton and Religion, pp. 17–
43.
[21] F. De Gandt, Force and geometry in Newton’s Principia, Princeton, NJ, 1995.
[22] B.J.T. Dobbs, The Foundations of Newton’s Alchemy or ‘The Hunting of the Green Lyon’, Cambridge, 1975,
21989.
[23] B.J.T. Dobbs, The Janus faces of genius: The role of alchemy in Newton’s thought, Cambridge, 1991.
[24] B.J.T. Dobbs, “The unity of truth”: An integrated view of Newton’s work, in: Theerman/Seeff, Action and
Reaction, pp. 105–122.
68Dobbs, Unity, pp. 108–109.

482
C. de Pater
[25] B.J.T. Dobbs, Newton as alchemist and theologian, in: Thrower, Standing, pp. 128–140.
[26] B.J.T. Dobbs, Newton’s alchemy and his ‘Active Principle’ of gravitation, in: Scheurer/Debrock, Newton’s
legacy, pp. 55–80.
[27] B.J.T. Dobbs and M.C. Jacob, Newton and the Culture of Newtonianism, New Jersey, 1995, including a
bibliography, pp. 125–135.
[28] P. Fara, Newton: The Making of Genius, London, 2002.
[29] J. Fauvel et al. (eds.), Let Newton Be! A New Perspective on His Life and Works, Oxford, 1988.
[30] J.E. Force, Newton’s “Sleeping argument” and the Newtonian synthesis of science and religion, in:
Thrower, Standing, pp. 109–127.
[31] J.E. Force, The nature of Newton’s “Holy alliance” between science and religion: from the Scientiﬁc Revo-
lution to Newton (and back again), in: Osler, Rethinking, pp. 247–270.
[32] J.E. Force, Newton’s God of dominion: the unity of Newton’s theological, scientiﬁc, and political thought,
in: Force/Popkin, Essays, pp. 75–102.
[33] J.E. Force, Newton, the Lord God of Israel and knowledge of nature, in: Popkin/Weiner, Jewish Christians,
pp. 131–158.
[34] J.E. Force, Newton, the “Ancients,” and the “Moderns”, in: Force/Popkin, Newton and Religion, pp. 237–
257.
[35] J.E. Force and R.H. Popkin (eds.), Essays on the context, nature, and inﬂuence of Isaac Newton’s theology,
Dordrecht, 1990.
[36] J.E. Force and R.H. Popkin (eds.), The Books of Nature and Scripture: Recent essays on natural philosophy,
theology, and biblical criticism in the Netherlands of Spinoza’s time and the British isles of Newton’s time,
Dordrecht, 1994.
[37] J.E. Force and R.H. Popkin (eds.), Newton and Religion: Context, Nature, and Inﬂuence, Dordrecht, 1999.
[38] A. Gabbey, Newton, active powers and the mechanical philosophy, in: Cohen/Smith, Cambridge Compan-
ion, pp. 329–357.
[39] D. Gjertsen, The Newton Handbook, London and New York, 1986.
[40] D. Gjertsen, Newton’s success, in: Fauvel, Let Newton Be!, pp. 23–41.
[41] M. Goldish, Newton on Kabbalah, in: Force/Popkin, Newton and Religion, pp. 89–103.
[42] M. Goldish, Newton’s Of the Church: Its contents and implications, in: Force/Popkin, Newton and Religion,
pp. 145–164.
[43] M. Goldish, Judaism in the Theology of Sir Isaac Newton, Dordrecht, 1998.
[44] P. Gouk, The harmonic roots of Newtonian science, in: Fauvel, Let Newton Be!, pp. 101–125.
[45] N. Guicciardini, Reading the Principia: The debate on Newton’s Mathematical Methods for Natural Phi-
losophy from 1687 to 1736, Cambridge, 1999.
[46] A.R. Hall and M.B. Hall (eds.), Unpublished Scientiﬁc Papers of Isaac Newton, Cambridge, 1962, 21978.
[47] A.R. Hall, Philosophers at War: The Quarrel Between Newton and Leibniz, Cambridge, 1980.
[48] J. Henry, “Pray do not ascribe that notion to me”: God and Newton’s gravity, Force/Popkin, Books,
pp. 123–147.
[49] D.W. Hughes, The Principia and comets, Newton’s Principia and its Legacy, D.G. King-Hele and A.R. Hall,
eds., London, 1988; Notes and records 42 (1988), 53–74.
[50] R.I.G. Hughes, Philosophical perspectives on Newtonian science, in: Bricker/Hughes, Philos. persp., pp. 1–
16.
[51] S. Hutton, The seven trumpets and the seven vials: Apocalypticism and christology in Newton’s theological
writings, in: Force/Popkin, Newton and Religion, pp. 165–178.
[52] R. Iliffe, Those “whose business it is to cavill”: Newton’s anti-catholicism, in: Force/Popkin, Newton and
Religion, pp. 97–119.
[53] M.Z. Kochavi, One prophet interprets another: Sir Isaac Newton and Daniel, in: Force/Popkin, Books,
pp. 105–122.
[54] K.J. Knoespel, Interpretive strategies in Newton’s Theologiae gentilis origines philosophicae, in:
Force/Popkin, Newton and Religion, pp. 179–202.
[55] A. Koyré, Newtonian Studies, London, 1965.
[56] A. Leshem [=A. Ramati], Newton on Mathematics and Spiritual purity, Dordrecht, 2003.
[57] J.E. McGuire, Force, active principles, and Newton’s invisible realm, Ambix 15 (1968), 154–208; also in:
McGuire, Tradition, pp. 190–238.

An ocean of truth
483
[58] J.E. McGuire, Tradition and Innovation: Newton’s Metaphysics of Nature, Dordrecht, 1995.
[59] J.E. McGuire and P.M. Rattansi, Newton and the Pipes of Pan, Notes and Records of the Royal Society of
London 21 (1966), 108–143.
[60] J.E. McGuire and M. Tamny (eds.), Certain Philosophical Questions: Newton’s Trinity Notebook, Cam-
bridge, 1983.
[61] H. McLachlan (ed.), Sir Isaac Newton Theological Manuscripts, Liverpool, 1950.
[62] M. Mamiani, Newton on prophecy and the Apocalypse, in: Cohen/Smith, Cambridge Companion, pp. 387–
408.
[63] S. Mandelbrote, ‘A duty of the greatest moment’: Isaac Newton and the writing of biblical criticism, The
British Journal for the History of Science 26 (1993), 281–302.
[64] S. Mandelbrote (ed.), Newton and Newtonianism, Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, Part A 35
(2004), 415–680.
[65] F. Manuel, The Religion of Isaac Newton, Oxford, 1974.
[66] R. Markley, Fallen Languages: Crises of Representation in Newtonian England 1660–1740, Ithaca/London,
1993.
[67] R. Markley, Newton, Corruption, and the tradition of universal history, in: Force/Popkin, Newton and
Religion, pp. 121–143.
[68] D.B. Meli, Newton and the Leibniz–Clarke correspondence, in: Cohen/Smith, Cambridge Companion,
pp. 455–464.
[69] M. Murrin, Newton’s Apocalypse, in: Force/Popkin, Newton and Religion, pp. 203–220.
[70] I. Newton, Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, London, 11687; Cambridge 21713; London,
31726); translation: I.B. Cohen and A. Whitman (eds.), The Principia, Mathematical Principles of Natural
Philosophy: A New Translation, preceded by ‘A guide to Newton’s Principia’, Berkeley/Los Angeles, 1999.
[71] I. Newton, Sir Isaac Newton’s mathematical principles of natural philosophy and his system of the world.
Translated into English by Andrew Motte in 1729. The translations revised, and supplied with an historical
and explanatory appendix, by Florian Cajori, Berkeley/Los Angeles, 1934, 21966.
[72] I. Newton, De gravitatione et aequipondio ﬂuidorum, in: Hall/Hall, Unpublished, pp. 89–156.
[73] I. Newton, Opticks: or a Treatise of the Reﬂections, Refractions, Inﬂections and Colours of Light. (. . . ),
London, 17041, 17314; reprint: New York, 1952.
[74] I. Newton, Observations Upon the Prophecies of Daniel, and the Apocalypse of St. John, London, 1733;
repr. Cave Junction, OR, 22000.
[75] L.S. Olschki (ed.), Copernico e la Questione Copernicana in Italia dal XVI al XIX Secolo, Firenze, 1996.
[76] M.J. Osler, Rethinking the Scientiﬁc Revolution, Cambridge, 2000.
[77] H. Pemberton, A View of Sir Isaac Newton’s Philosophy, London, 1728.
[78] R.H. Popkin, The third force in 17th-century Philosophy: Skepticism, Science and Biblical Prophecy, Nou-
velles de la Republique des Lettres 1 (1983), 35–63.
[79] A. Ramati, The hidden truth of creation: Newton’s method of ﬂuxions, The British Journal for the History
of Science 34 (2001), 417–438.
[80] P. Reif, The textbook tradition in natural philosophy, 1600–1650, Journal of the History of Ideas 30 (1969),
17–32.
[81] J. Roche, Newton’s Principia, in: Fauvel, Let Newton Be!, pp. 43–61.
[82] G.A.J. Rogers, Newton and the guaranteeing God, in: Force/Popkin, Newton and Religion, pp. 221–235.
[83] R. Rynasiewicz, By their properties, causes and effects: Newton’s Scholium on time, space, place and
motion (I: the text, II: the context), Studies In History and Philosophy of Science, Part A 26 (1995), 133–
153 and 295–321.
[84] P.B. Scheurer and G. Debrock (eds.), Newton’s Scientiﬁc and Philosophical legacy, Dordrecht, 1988.
[85] J.A. Schuster, The scientiﬁc revolution, Companion to the History of Modern Science, R.C. Olby et al., eds.,
London/New York, 1990, pp. 217–242.
[86] S.D. Snobelen, Isaac Newton, heretic: the strategies of a Nicodemite, The British Journal for the History of
Science 32 (1999), 381–419.
[87] S.D. Snobelen, “God of gods, and Lord of lords”: The theology of Newton’s General Scholium to the
Principia, Osiris sec. ser. 16 (2001), 169–208.
[88] P. Theerman and A.F. Seeff (eds.), Action and Reaction: Proceedings of a Symposium to Commemorate the
Tercentenary of Newton’s Principia, Newark, 1993.

484
C. de Pater
[89] N.J.W. Thrower (ed.), Standing on the shoulders of giants: A longer view of Newton and Halley, Berkeley,
1990.
[90] H.W. Turnbull et al. (eds.), The correspondence of Isaac Newton, 7 vols., Cambridge, 1959–1977.
[91] F. van Lunteren, Nicolas Fatio de Duillier on the mechanical cause of universal gravitation, Pushing Grav-
ity: New Perspectives on Le Sage’s Theory of Gravitation, M.E. Edwards, ed., Montreal, 2002.
[92] R.S. Westfall, Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton, Cambridge, 1980.
[93] R.S. Westfall, Isaac Newton’s Theologiae gentilis origines philosophicae, The Secular Mind: Transforma-
tions of Faith in Modern Europe, F.L. Baumer and R.W. Townsend, eds., New York/London, 1982, pp. 15–
34.
[94] D.T. Whiteside (ed.), The Mathematical Papers of Isaac Newton, 8 vols., Cambridge, 1967–1981.
[95] D.T. Whiteside, The mathematical principles underlying Newton’s “Principia mathematica”, Journal for
the History of Astronomy 1 (1970), 116–138.
[96] D.T. Whiteside, The prehistory of the “Principia” from 1664 to 1686, Notes and Records of the Royal
Society of London 45 (1991), 11–61.

CHAPTER 25
God and Mathematics in Leibniz’s Thought
Herbert Breger
Leibniz Archiv Waterloostraße 8, D-30169 Hannover, Germany
E-mail: herbert.breger@mail.nlb-hannover.de
Contents
1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 487
2. The best of all possible worlds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 489
3. The binary system and creation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 491
4. A staircase leading to God . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 493
5. The existence of God . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 496
6. Concluding remark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 497
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 498
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
485


God and mathematics in Leibniz’s thought
487
1. Introduction
Unlike many other philosophers, Leibniz published no major work in which he expounded
on his philosophical system. His thought has to be reconstructed from numerous remarks
scattered throughout several books and a number of published articles as well as from
a huge number of letters and drafts in his Nachlass. Nevertheless, the result of such a
reconstruction is fairly coherent.
Leibniz believed in the God of Christianity and he also had an extraordinarily high es-
teem for reason and its capabilities. One might try to develop part of his thought on the
topic from these two suppositions. Firstly, it follows that there is a concept of God, not
just a vague imagination of him. This concept must evidently be that of “the most perfect
being” [16, ser. VI, vol. 4B, p. 1531]. The most perfect being is necessarily the most ra-
tional being. The principle of sufﬁcient reason ensures us that for all decisions and acts
of God there is a rational reason. Since knowledge is a perfection,1 the most perfect be-
ing must be omniscient. As being active is more perfect than being passive, God has to
be all-powerful. To be more precise, the most perfect being has to be almighty insofar as
it is logically possible to be almighty. In other words, the deﬁnition of “almighty” should
not be contradictory. Intellectual conundrums such as discussing the question whether God
can create a stone which is so heavy that he himself cannot lift it, do not ﬁt into Leibniz’s
style of thought. As for the moral dimension, Leibniz is ﬁrmly convinced that there is a
close connection between rationality and goodness: the most perfect being will always act
according to the maximum of goodness which is characteristic of him. This necessarily
implies that God will create the best of all possible worlds [16, ser. VI, vol. 4B, pp. 1533–
1534] because otherwise he would either not be almighty, or not be absolutely good, or
not be omniscient. Leibniz seems to be aware of the imperfections of this world we live in,
but the principle of the best possible world is a direct consequence of his high esteem for
rationality. Incidentally, Leibniz anticipates how a mathematician might possibly object: a
mathematician faced with an increasing inﬁnite sequence knows that there need not be a
maximum. So Leibniz states: if it were true that for every good possible world there exists
a better possible world, then God would not have created any world at all, because in this
case there would not have been sufﬁcient reason for selecting and creating this particular
world which exists [15, VI, pp. 107, 364]. The absolutely rational being will never act
arbitrarily.
Before we continue with this consideration of God, two remarks might be useful. Firstly,
Leibniz’s project of a characteristica universalis should be discussed brieﬂy. Leibniz was
well aware of the fact that our philosophical reasoning often lacks the cogency of math-
ematical reasoning (cf. [15, IV, p. 468]). There are no Euclidists and Archimedians in
mathematics, as there are Aristotelians and Platonists in philosophy [16, ser. VI, vol. 4A,
p. 695]. Whereas mathematicians have their own means of discovering possible mistakes,
philosophers, who do not have such means at their disposal, should adopt rigorous reason-
ing all the more [16, ser. VI, vol. 4A, p. 705; ser. II, vol. 1, pp. 475, 478; 15, IV, p. 469].
Rationality should be such as to allow for a mathematisation of our thought; just as math-
ematicians have introduced letters and other symbols to designate mathematical objects
1Qualities which do not have a maximal degree—like velocity or number—cannot be considered to be perfec-
tions [15, IV, p. 294; 16, ser. VI, vol. 4B, p. 1531].

488
H. Breger
and rules for operating with them, Leibniz proposed ﬁnding symbols and rules, in order
to formalize a considerable part of our thought [20,10]. Then two philosophers with dif-
ferent opinions on a philosophical topic would no longer need to quarrel; they could say
to each other “calculemus” (let’s calculate) [16, ser. VI, vol. 4A, p. 493]. Therefore, Leib-
niz’s invention of a calculating machine had a strong philosophical relevance. And besides,
Leibniz tells us, this characteristica universalis will be an efﬁcient means of converting pa-
gans, because the true religion is the most rational religion, and it is impossible to resist
rational arguments. In addition, apostasy will no longer occur, just as a mathematical truth,
once understood, is never rejected.2
Leibniz made several efforts to ﬁnd suitable symbols for the representation of our think-
ing. A very simple and nonetheless very interesting one was his idea that there are primary
or irreducible notions and composite notions. If this is true, a map from notions to nat-
ural numbers can be deﬁned, mapping primary notions to prime numbers and the relation
“implies” between notions to the relation “is divisible by” between numbers. For illustra-
tion’s sake, Leibniz gives the example of the traditional deﬁnition of the human being as
the rational living being. If the notion “rational” is mapped to the number 2 and the no-
tion “being alive” to the number 3, the notion “being a human being” has to be mapped
to the number 6 [16, ser. VI, vol. 4A, pp. 182, 201–202]. As there is an inﬁnite number
of prime numbers, the model is more powerful than it might seem at ﬁrst glance. In other
drafts, Leibniz maps every notion to an ordered pair of a positive and a negative integer
[16, ser. VI, vol. 4A, pp. 224–256]. As Leibniz is aware, even with such a characteristica
universalis the deduction of an individual statement like “Caesar was murdered on the ides
of March” would be impossible, because such a statement involves an inﬁnity of causes
and an individual notion like Caesar is composed of an inﬁnity of elements.
The use of numbers for a characteristica universalis even has a metaphysical foundation.
Leibniz quotes [16, ser. VI, vol. 4A, p. 263; cf. also ser. I, vol. 12, p. 72 and 15, VI, p. 604]
the well-known statement [Plato, Philebos 55e; Sapientia Salomonis 11, 21] that God made
everything according to measure, number and weight. Admittedly, Leibniz continues, some
entities do not have weight, and some entities do not have parts and therefore lack mea-
sure. But there is nothing which does not allow for a number. So number is “quasi ﬁgura
quaedam metaphysica” [16, ser. VI, vol. 4A, p. 264], and arithmetic is therefore a doctrine
for the exploration of the powers of things, and thereby the perfection of God’s creation.
The second remark concerns the difference between human and divine reason. Accord-
ing to Descartes, if God had wanted, he could have decided that the radii of a circle have
different lengths, that the sum of 1 and 2 is different from 3, or that the sum of the angles of
a rectangular triangle is different from two right angles3. Leibniz argues that mathematical
truths are not ﬁctions; on the contrary, they do exist in the region of ideas [15, VII, p. 305],
which is nothing other than God’s reason [15, VI, p. 614; II, pp. 304–305; 16, ser. VI,
vol. 6, p. 447]. They do not depend upon his will [16, ser. VI, vol. 4A, pp. 1532–1533; 15,
VI, p. 226, p. 614]; God would not be able to change the necessary truths without abol-
ishing himself [4, p. 310]. One might interpret this as mathematics being autonomous. In
ﬁnding mathematical truths, human beings discover part of God’s reason. This is not only
2[16, ser. VI, vol. 4A, p. 269; ser. II, vol. 1, p. 491]. Nearly twenty years later Leibniz was more sceptical: there
are people who even reject indisputable arguments [16, ser. I, vol. 13, pp. 553–554].
3R. Descartes, Œuvres, ed. by Adam/Tannéry, vol. 1, Paris 1969, pp. 145, 152; vol. 2, Paris 1972, p. 118.

God and mathematics in Leibniz’s thought
489
valid for mathematics and logic, but also for a number of truths in metaphysics, including
some statements on goodness, justice and perfection. Leibniz calls these truths necessary
or eternal truths as opposed to contingent truths. Necessary truths are valid in every possi-
ble world, whereas contingent truths depend on the particular structure of this world which
God created and which he could have created otherwise. So Kepler’s laws, Galilei’s law for
bodies falling in a vacuum and the proposition “Caesar was murdered” are all contingent
truths.
That part of reason which human beings possess is compatible with the whole; it differs
from the whole only as a drop of water differs from the ocean, or, more precisely, as the
ﬁnite differs from the inﬁnite [15, VI, p. 84]. Thus, reason is a property common to God
and man; it is not only what links all human society and is the basis of friendship, but is also
the link between God and man [17, pp. 10–11]. “The true quietness which can be found in
the Holy Scriptures, in the writings of the Church Fathers and in reason is achieved through
liberation from the external pleasures of the senses, in order to listen to God’s voice, that
is, the inner light of eternal truths”.4 In this respect, doing mathematics seems to be a way
of listening to God’s voice and might even be comparable to divine service, although of
course the active endeavour for the welfare of others would be indispensable for a Christian
anyway [9, pp. 194–195, 202–203].
2. The best of all possible worlds
Now imagine God considering all possible worlds in order to decide which one is to be cre-
ated (this formulation is not meant to imply a temporal order, because God does not exist
in time). There must be a rational basis for God’s decision. Given that, for Leibniz, thought
has a fundamentally mathematical structure, God’s reasoning about possible worlds must
be precise and, in principle, understandable for a mind of sufﬁciently high capabilities.
God must be a perfect mathematician [16, ser. VI, vol. 4B, p. 1616; 15, II, p. 105; 15, III,
p. 52; 15, IV, p. 571] calculating all possible worlds and selecting the best one. The ancient
idea of God as mathematician [19] is given an emphatically new meaning by Leibniz. “As
God calculates and executes thought, the world comes into being”.5 The act of creation is
done by “divine mathematics”,6 and is nothing other than the solution of an extreme value
problem. Among all the possibilities, God selects the maximum of essences compatible
with each other. This selection is much more complicated than it might seem. It does not
simply mean a maximum of material objects, but rather the essences of all living creatures
having all possible courses of life. Moreover, all kind of perfections, such as moral good-
ness, justice, ontological variety and so on, have to be taken into account. For example,
God decided to create lions although they are dangerous to human beings, but without any
lions the world would have been less perfect [15, VI, p. 169]. In addition, there is the tem-
poral dimension. There might have been a possible world which would have been better up
4[16, ser. I, vol. 5, p. 600]: “La veritable Quietude qu’on trouve dans la Sainte Écriture, dans les Peres, et dans
la raison est de se detourner des plaisirs exterieurs des sens, aﬁn de mieux écouter la voix de Dieu, c’est à dire la
Lumiere interieure des Verités eternelles”.
5“Cum Deus calculat et cogitationem exercet, ﬁt mundus” [16, ser. VI, vol. 4A, p. 22].
6“Mathesis quaedam Divina” [13, VII, p. 304].

490
H. Breger
to the present time, but which would have contained less possibilities for future progress
and was, therefore, not selected [15, VI, p. 237]. Obviously we cannot understand how God
calculated all this. But in all things, Leibniz argues, there is a principle of determination,
which is the maximum of effect achieved with a minimum of expenditure [15, VII, p. 303].
Time and space, or generally the capacity of the world, are to be considered as expenditure
or terrain on which to erect the building of the world, whereas the variety of its forms and
the number and elegance of its rooms constitute the effect. To elucidate the principle of
determination Leibniz poses that a triangle has to be made. If no constraints are given, an
equilateral triangle will be the wise man’s choice [16, ser. VI, vol. 4B, p. 1617]. If two
points are to be connected, the shortest line will be the best solution. Liquids in heteroge-
neous matter tend to form spheres, which are the most voluminous shapes. These are just a
few examples of the principle of determination [15, VII, p. 304]. To create a maximum of
essences requires using very simple laws for their interaction. Otherwise God would have
been like an architect using round bricks, which cost more space than they take up [16,
ser. II, vol. I, p. 478].
As God created this world according to this construction principle, Leibniz can state the
fundamental rule of his philosophy, or in other words, the fundamental rule for our knowl-
edge of this world: the reason of things is the same everywhere, but the forms and degrees
of perfection vary inﬁnitely [16, ser. VI, vol. 6, pp. 71, 72, 472, 490]. The philosopher
should think of the unknown or only vaguely known objects according to the same pattern
as the distinctly known objects; thus philosophy becomes easy with respect to the reason
of things, and it will be very rich with respect to the different manners of execution. Nature
varies these manners inﬁnitely with as much order and decoration as can ever be imagined.
Three hundred years later we tend to have questions such as this: Is it really possible
that mathematics, even divine mathematics, can solve the huge problem of calculating all
possible worlds? As every individuality implies an inﬁnity of aspects [16, ser. VI, vol. 6,
pp. 289–290], it must be very difﬁcult to calculate the life of one single person alone. We
know that there are systems of differential equations which cannot be solved formally, and
thus God, being bound to proven mathematical results, could not solve them either. In fact,
Leibniz himself indicates a kind of limitation to God’s capacity of calculation by exposing
an analogy between real numbers on the one side and all truths on the other [16, ser. VI,
vol. 4B, pp. 1616, 1657–1658]. The necessary truths correspond to the rational numbers;
the necessary truths can be proved in a ﬁnite number of steps just as the rational numbers
can be calculated in a ﬁnite number of steps producing a ﬁnite or a periodical decimal
representation. The contingent truths correspond to the irrational numbers; the contingent
truths could be proved only in an inﬁnite number of steps, just as the irrational numbers can
be calculated only in an inﬁnite number of steps giving an inﬁnite non-periodical decimal
representation. For Leibniz there is only potential inﬁnity in mathematics [6, pp. 320–323];
therefore even God cannot ﬁnish an inﬁnite calculation: the impossibility of ever being
ﬁnished is the very essence of inﬁnity. So Leibniz makes it unmistakably clear that God
cannot calculate in a strict sense the inﬁnity of contingent truths for each possible world.
Admittedly, in some cases a ﬁnite calculation might be sufﬁcient. Although we are not
able to execute an inﬁnity of additions in order to ﬁnd the sum of the geometrical series,
we are nevertheless able to calculate the sum. But here Leibniz is not referring to this fact;
evidently he accepts the impossibility of the calculation of contingent truth in general.

God and mathematics in Leibniz’s thought
491
(Incidentally, this impossibility has some advantage for Leibniz’s theory of freedom). This
does not imply that God does not know what he is doing, because he possesses the ability of
vision: God sees at once the result of an inﬁnity of calculations, although even he would not
be able to ﬁnish all the steps one after the other. So our questions are not really answered,
but at least it is difﬁcult to raise further objections in this respect.
The discussions about the paradoxes of set theory suggest further objections. The to-
tality of all possible worlds does not seem to be well deﬁned; it seems possible to give
analogies of Russell’s paradox and Richard’s antinomy for possible worlds. If this is true,
Leibniz’s God cannot overcome these difﬁculties, and Leibniz would have to reformulate
his theory of possible worlds, using neither Cantor’s nor Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory [11,
pp. 103–105].
3. The binary system and creation
There is another relation between mathematics and the act of creation. In a letter to Duke
Rudolf August of Wolfenbüttel in 1697, Leibniz suggested stamping a medal to demon-
strate the analogy between the creation of the world out of nothing and the binary number
system [16, ser. I, vol. 13, pp. 116–125; cf. also ser. I, vol. 12, pp. 66–72]. The medal was
to carry the words “image of creation”, “To develop everything out of nothing, unity is
sufﬁcient” and “One is necessary”.7 Furthermore some numbers in binary notation would
be shown as well as an example of addition and of multiplication. In the 17th century,
the Latin word “nullum” meant “zero” as well as “nothing”. The words “One is neces-
sary” may be considered as an allusion to Jesus’ words to Martha [Luke 10, 42] [16, ser. I,
vol. 13, p. 119, line 24–25; p. 120, line 6–7; 22, 1973, p. 49], but they probably also refer to
Leibniz’s notion of God as the necessary being; we will return to this later in the discussion
of Leibniz’s proofs for the existence of God.
In his letter to Rudolf August, Leibniz explains that void and darkness (Genesis 1, 1)
correspond to zero and nothingness, whereas the spirit of God hovering above the waters
(Genesis 1, 1) correlates with the Almighty One.8 The analogy goes further than might at
ﬁrst be expected; Leibniz repeatedly states that all creatures have their perfection from God
and their imperfection from themselves ([15, VI, pp. 603, 613; IV, p. 476]; cf. also [13, VII,
p. 239; 16, ser. I, vol. 15, p. 560]). In a slight change of terminology, Leibniz claims in a
tract on mystical theology that all creatures derive from God and nothing; their “essence”
is from God, whereas their “nothingness” or “bad condition” is from themselves.9 This is
demonstrated in a wonderful way by numbers, as Leibniz continues, and the essence of all
things is equal to numbers.10 Every creature has some nothingness, otherwise it would be
7“Imago creationis”, “Omnibus ex nihilo ducendis sufﬁcit unum”, “Unum est necessarium”.
8Leibniz was not the only one in the 17th century to compare God with the number 1 [K. Radbruch, Mathema-
tische Spuren in der Literatur, Darmstadt, 1997, pp. 30–31].
9“Selbstwesen” or “Unwesen” [21, p. 130]; the latter word means the negation of existence as well as evil
essence. Leibniz was an adherent of the traditional theory authored by Plotin according to which evil is a privation,
a lack of perfection, instead of anything positive.
10In other passages Leibniz refers to this famous saying from the Pythagorean tradition in a weaker sense,
namely: the essence of all things is as if it were numbers ([16, ser. I, vol. 12, pp. 66, 71]; cf. also [22, pp. 43–48]).

492
H. Breger
Fig. 1. Medal designed by Leibniz on the binary systems.
God. The lack of perfection in the creatures is darkness in knowledge, vacillation in will,
passion, limitation of their essence. On the other hand, in our essence there is inﬁnity, a
footprint, even an image of God’s omniscience and omnipotence [21, pp. 128, 130], and
sometimes Leibniz even compares human beings to small gods [16, ser. VI, vol. 6, p. 389;
15, II, p. 125; IV, p. 479]. In other words, the creatures might by analogy be considered as
certain mixtures of 1 and 0.
The analogy with the binary system illustrates not only the creation out of nothing, but
also the beauty and the perfections of the world [16, ser. I, vol. 13, p. 117; vol. 12, pp. 69–
70]. In the decadic number systems regularities are not so easily seen; in the binary system
every column has its own periodicity, if the numbers are written one beneath the other.
Similarly, the disorder which seems to be present in God’s creation disappears if the right
perspective is found; then beauty and harmony prevail (another example of this would
be the Copernican system [15, VII, p. 120]). In the same way, periodicities can be found
if, for example, the square numbers or the cubes or the multiples of any natural number
are written beneath each other [22, pp. 245, 255–256]. In another letter Leibniz takes the
analogy even further: 0 denotes the void which preceded the creation. At the beginning of
the ﬁrst day of creation, there was 1, that is God. At the beginning of the second day there
was two, that is heaven and earth, which had been created before. Finally, at the beginning
of the seventh day, everything had been created, and that is why this day is the most perfect
day or the sabbath; the seven is 111 in the binary system and thus immediately shows the

God and mathematics in Leibniz’s thought
493
perfection of the seventh day, which is the sacred day. Moreover, the sign 111 refers to the
trinity [22, p. 285].
Evidently, Leibniz is entering here, if he had not earlier, the region of traditional number
mysticism. Some other examples of relations to traditional mysticism may be mentioned.
In some passages Leibniz seems to agree with a traditional mystical saying, according
to which God is like a circle the centre of which is everywhere whereas the periphery is
nowhere [16, ser. VI, vol. 1, p. 531; 12, pp. 31, 49; 15, VI, p. 604, cf. also IV, p. 562; 3,
pp. 24–25]. Leibniz could have read this in the writings of Pascal, More and others [17,
pp. 19–34].
Leibniz’s remark “God enjoys odd numbers”11 (in his publication of the later so-called
Leibniz series for pi divided by four) might seem to be another example of number mys-
ticism. But this is a quotation from Virgil [Eclogae 8, 75] [22, p. 41], and it seems rather
natural for an educated scholar of the 17th century to refer to this classical statement on
such an occasion.
The Italian mathematician Grandi had also tried to illustrate the creation of the world out
of nothing by mathematical means. He discussed the diverging inﬁnite series 1 −1 + 1 −
1+1 ···, remarking that 1+(−1+1)+(−1+1)··· = 1 and (1−1)+(1−1)+··· = 0. In
a similar way, God might have created something out of nothing. Leibniz considered this
not an inelegant illustration, but he objects that the mere repetition of an inﬁnity of zeros is
not comparable to God’s creation, which really brings about a new reality [13, V, p. 382].
Evidently, Leibniz did not agree with every possible analogy in this ﬁeld. Mahnke [18,
p. 21] claimed Pythagoreanism to be a fundamental trait of Leibniz’s metaphysics. It is
true that Leibniz’s quest for a characteristica universalis has its ultimate origin in ideas of
Rosicrucians or other religious mystics [17, p. 19; 9, p. 191]. On the other hand, Leib-
niz generally liked to give mathematical analogies for philosophical statements [15, II,
pp. 112, 258; III, p. 635; VI, pp. 261–262, 508]. These analogies were not necessarily re-
lated to (Neo-)Pythagoreanism. And Leibniz liked to combine as many thoughts of other
people as possible in his own thinking; he repeatedly made statements like “I have the
general maxim to despise few things and to beneﬁt from the good everywhere”.12 When
Leibniz was asked by one of his correspondents whether it would be possible to compose
a tract on theology using mathematical methods, he conﬁrmed this, but on the condition
that at least the relevant part of philosophy would have been formulated with mathematical
method before [16, ser. I, vol. 13, p. 551]. For Leibniz, mathematics, physics, philosophy
and theology are like the steps of a staircase leading to God. Let us have a look at these
interconnected steps of human knowledge.
4. A staircase leading to God
Knowledge of God is the foundation or origin of all knowledge and wisdom [15, III, p. 54;
21, p. 128]. Every newly found truth, every experiment or theorem is a new mirror of the
11[13, V, pp. 118–122, drawing 23 in the appendix: “Numero Deus impare gaudet”; cf. also 16, series I, vol. 12,
p. 66].
12[15, III, 384: “J’ay cette Maxime generale de mepriser bien peu de choses et de proﬁter de ce qu’il y a de bon
par tout.” Cf. also III, p. 620; II, p. 539; VI, p. 19; 13, VI, p. 236.]

494
H. Breger
beauty of God [16, ser. IV, vol. 1, p. 535]. Perfection of the mind, which results from the
progress of our knowledge, unites man with God [16, ser. II, vol. 1, p. 270]. Mathematics is
particularly suitable for entering the realm of ideas [15, IV, p. 571]; it pleases us by giving
us a glimpse of God’s ideas [15, VI, p. 262]. It is a divine science, a test for our thought, and
Leibniz confesses that he has an immoderate love for it [16, ser. II, vol. 1, pp. 475, 433]. An
important mathematical achievement is the surest sign of a sound mind [16, ser. II, vol. 1,
p. 492]. Leibniz hoped that his mathematical achievements would help to draw attention to
his philosophical and theological statements [16, ser. I, vol. 13, pp. 556–557; ser. II, vol. 1,
pp. 433–434, 491–493; cf. also ser. I, vol. 13, p. 516, line 24–25]. Here there is evidently a
parallel to Pascal; and whatever Descartes’ intentions may have been, there is little doubt
that his mathematical achievements supported him as a philosopher. On the other hand,
in a letter to the mathematician L’Hôpital, Leibniz complained about philosophical and
theological discussions, which were taking up his time [13, II, p. 219]. He certainly had
a genuine interest in mathematics and science, as, for example, was shown by his attitude
towards the Jesuit missionaries in China. They tried to use the superiority of European
mathematics and astronomy in order to impress the Chinese and to persuade them of the
superiority of Christian religion. Leibniz did not disapprove of this—according to him [12]
the ideas of the Chinese were fairly close to a reasonable Christianity anyway—, but he
was concerned that the Jesuits might thereby fail to learn from the Chinese as much as they
would otherwise do [16, ser. I, vol. 13, p. 516; ser. III, vol. 4, pp. 409–416; 14, vol. IV,
part 1, p. 82].
Cartesian mathematics dealt only with algebraic problems, but most scientiﬁc problems
are transcendental and therefore need inﬁnitesimal calculus. Leibniz gave a philosophi-
cal explanation for this fact: In nature everything bears the signature of an author with an
inﬁnite nature; therefore inﬁnitesimal calculus, which is a science of the inﬁnite, is essen-
tial for any application of mathematics in natural science [13, V, p. 308]. The difference
between nature and art (that is, engineering) is not a quantitative, it is a qualitative, one:
Whereas every machine made by man only has a ﬁnite number of organs, a living being
has an inﬁnite number, thus exhibiting the inﬁnite power and wisdom of its creator [15, IV,
pp. 396, 482, 505].
Moreover, as Leibniz explains, the principle of continuity derives from inﬁnity. Being
the foundation of inﬁnitesimal calculus [7], it is absolutely necessary in mathematics, but
it is also successfully applied in physics, because the author of all things acts as a per-
fect mathematician. In particular, the principle implies that Descartes’ laws of impact must
be wrong [15, II, p. 105; III, p. 52] because the prerequisites of one of the laws can be
transformed into the prerequisites of another of the laws by continual change, but the con-
sequences would not be transformed into each other by this change.
The demon of Laplace has a precursor in Leibniz’s writings: Everything in nature takes
place mathematically, which means, as Leibniz explains, inevitably. Someone with sufﬁ-
cient insight and memory and reason to calculate would be a prophet and would be able to
see the future in the present [15, VII, p. 118; IV, p. 557].
Not only is the world as a whole the solution of an extreme value problem, but the same
is true for several of its parts. A mathematical example may be given for this: If the line of
quickest descent (the brachystochrone) between two points has been determined, then the
same line is the line of quickest descent for any other two points situated on the original

God and mathematics in Leibniz’s thought
495
curve. In fact, the world as a whole is most perfect only because it is most perfect in all
its parts [15, VII, pp. 272–273]. Leibniz seems to have changed his opinion later; he states
elsewhere that a certain amount of disorder in parts is possible [15, III, p. 636], and the
parts of a beautiful thing need not be beautiful [15, VI, pp. 245–246]. There are not only
natural laws which state a relation between cause and effect, but also principles of ﬁnality.
A mechanical system is in a stable state if the centre of gravity is as low as possible [15,
VII, p. 304]. In optics, catoptrics and dioptrics, there is the principle of the easiest way:
light will always take the path with the least resistance [15, VII, pp. 273–278; IV, p. 506].
Leibniz’s thoughts on this topic are superior to those of a later mathematician, Maupertuis,
insofar as Leibniz claims only the existence of a most determinate case (a maximum or a
minimum) [15, VII, p. 270], whereas Maupertuis postulated a principle of God’s economy,
implying that in all processes of nature, action always takes a minimum (which is wrong).
Objections might be raised here from the point of view of today’s philosophy of science.
Whatever the causal laws of nature may be, it is probably always possible to express them
as principles of ﬁnality, with this or that physical expression becoming an extreme value
[11, pp. 106–109]. So the existence of ﬁnality principles in physics is probably due rather
to the efforts of physicists than to God’s wise creation.
After mathematics and physics, philosophy is the next step on the staircase to God.
Mathematicians ought to be philosophers, just as philosophers ought to be mathemati-
cians [15, I, p. 356]; in this quotation, “mathematician” (as opposed to geometer) prob-
ably includes physicists. “My fundamental considerations revolve round u n i t y and
i n f i n i t y”,13 Leibniz declares, the individual souls being the unities and material bod-
ies being inﬁnities, for the investigation of which inﬁnitesimal calculus would be nec-
essary. In the draft of a letter to L’Hôpital, Leibniz even contends “My metaphysics is
completely mathematical so to speak or could become so”.14 Evidently he was thinking of
his project of a characteristica universalis when making this statement. Leibniz confessed
that he would prefer to have metaphysics proven than to ﬁnd a treasure [16, ser. II, vol. 1,
p. 475]. In another letter Leibniz uses only slightly different terms: Mathematics is closely
related to the art of making new inventions, which is true logic, and metaphysics is hardly
different from this art; metaphysics is natural theology, and God is the origin of all our
knowledge [16, ser. II, vol. 1, p. 434; cf. also ser. I, vol. 13, p. 554].
The next step is the step from philosophy to theology. “I start as a philosopher, and I end
up as a theologian”.15 Knowledge of God can be gained if philosophy has a ﬁrm foundation
in mathematics. This epistemological claim is defended against Descartes, who had main-
tained that ﬁnite beings cannot know anything about the inﬁnite [Descartes: Œuvres, ed.
by Adam/Tannéry, vol. 8, Paris 1905, pp. 14–15]. Yet mathematics proves the contrary. Not
only do we know about asymptotes and the sum of inﬁnite series, but also about inﬁnite
geometrical ﬁgures (like Torricelli’s inﬁnite solid) having a ﬁnite volume [15, IV, pp. 360,
570]. The philosopher F.M. van Helmont had argued that the Messiah was a being between
God and man. Had he known more about mathematics, Leibniz argued, he would not have
said that: Anything between the ﬁnite and the inﬁnite must itself be either ﬁnite or inﬁnite.
13[16, ser. I, vol. 13, p. 90]: “Mes Meditations fondamentales roulent sur deux choses, sçavoir sur l’u n i t é et sur
l’i n f i n i”.
14[16, ser. III, vol. 6, p. 253]: “Ma metaphysique est toute Mathematique pour dire ainsi, ou la pourroit devenir”.
15[5, p. 58]: “Je commence en philosophe, mais je ﬁnis en theologien”.

496
H. Breger
Admittedly, there are different degrees of inﬁnity (as is indicated by second differentials,
etc.), but there is an inﬁnity of these degrees, so there should be an inﬁnity of Messiahs,
which is absurd [16, ser. I, vol. 11, pp. 18–19].
5. The existence of God
It will not come as a surprise that Leibniz trusted in being able to demonstrate the existence
of God. I will mention only two of these demonstrations, both related to my topic, without
trying to go into difﬁcult details. The ﬁrst one is the so-called ontological proof, originating
from Anselm of Canterbury and agreed to by Descartes. Its main idea is roughly this:
God is the most perfect being; lack of existence would imply lack of perfection, therefore
the most perfect being must exist. Leibniz’s criticism of this reasoning (and his efforts to
improve upon it) may remind mathematicians of the discussion about the paradoxes of set
theory at the beginning of the 20th century. According to Leibniz the ontological proof is
correct, if, in addition, proof is given that the notion of most perfect being is consistent [15,
VI, p. 614; VII, p. 310, IV, pp. 405–406; 16, ser. VI, vol. 4B, p. 1531]. The second proof
starts with the statement that there are eternal or necessary (in the sense of being valid in
every possible world) truths, the huge majority of them being truths of mathematics and
logic. The reality of these truths must be founded in something actually existing. That is, it
must be founded in the existence of a necessary being whose essence implies existence; in
other words, for which existence is the consequence of being possible [15, VI, p. 614; VII,
p. 305].
A particular problem of theology was of course that of the Trinity. Leibniz neither de-
nied the Trinity, as Newton did, nor could he accept that the doctrine of Trinity implied a
contradiction. The Athanasian creed states that there are three persons but only one God.
With reference to this creed, Leibniz comments: If B is A, and C is A, and B is not C, and
C is not B, then there are two As. The analogue of this statement for three entities B, C, D,
all of them being A but being different from each other, is also valid. He continues: “And
this is the origin of numbers”.16 Leibniz’s solution is that the notion “A” (that is, “God”) is
used in two different senses: God in an essential sense denotes the divine essence, which is
one and of which the three persons partake, whereas God in a personal sense denotes any
one of the Trinitarian persons.
In other passages, he compares the problem with a mind reﬂecting upon itself. The
reﬂecting entity and the entity it is reﬂecting upon are active or passive, respectively,
and therefore different, but they are nonetheless the same. In a similar way the differ-
ence within the Trinity might be derived from the three fundamental roots of all rational
action, namely power, knowledge and will, all of them belonging to the same essence
[4, p. 313; cf. also 16, ser. VI, vol. 4B, p. 1461; vol. 4C, p. 2292]. So for Leibniz the
doctrine of the Trinity is not contrary to reason, although it is above reason, because
we do not completely understand it. Leibniz does not try to prove the Trinity—as he
claims to have proven monotheism—but rather to refute the charge of inherent contra-
diction made against the Trinity. Not everything in religion can be explored by reason,
16“Atque haec origo est Numerorum” [2, pp. 2, 10 (footnote 7)]; cf. also [16, series VI, vol. 4A, pp. 552, 2291–
2292, and 15, VI, pp. 63–64].

God and mathematics in Leibniz’s thought
497
Fig. 2. German stamp in commemoration of Leibniz.
but religion must be founded on reason, otherwise it would be superstition [4, p. 309;
cf. also 16, ser. VI, vol. 6, p. 494]. Leibniz is careful not to provoke criticism from
orthodox theologians, but the general impression is that he always stressed the com-
mon ground between Catholicism and Protestantism, and that he also stressed the com-
mon ground with the Mosaic religion, Islam, and what he considered to be Chinese reli-
gion.
6. Concluding remark
The topic of this article has led us to concentrate on Leibniz’s rationalism. But there are
some tendencies in his thought which should at least be mentioned in order to avoid a bi-
ased view. In particular the idea of individuality is certainly as important in his thought
as rationality. There is no uniformity in the world; not only is every living being different
from every other, but any two leaves, any two eggs, and in general any two bodies are dif-
ferent from each other [15, IV, p. 554]. So the power of rational abstraction and similarity
everywhere is supplemented by the inﬁnite variety of individual entities. The importance
of “small perceptions” in his philosophical thought may be another example. Finally, Leib-
niz’s idea of an inﬁnity of living creatures in every particle of matter might even shock
today’s rationalists. And one does not expect a typical rationalist to argue for mathematical
investigation of games by saying: “The human mind shows itself more clearly in games
than in serious matters”.17
17[16, ser. VI, vol. 6, p. 466]: “l’esprit humain paroissant mieux dans les jeux que dans les matieres les plus
serieuses”. Cf. also [15, IV, p. 570; VI, p. 639].

498
H. Breger
References
[1] E.J. Aiton, Leibniz. A Biography, Bristol, Boston, 1985. [A very good biography giving particular attention
to mathematics and science.]
[2] M.R. Antognazza, Leibniz de Deo Trino: philosophical aspects of Leibniz’s conception of the Trinity, Reli-
gious Studies 37 (2001), 1–13.
[3] P. Beeley, Points, extension, and the mind-body problem. Remarks on the development of Leibniz’s thought
from the Hypothesis physica nova to the Système nouveau, Leibniz’s ‘New System’, R.S. Woolhouse, ed.,
Firenze, 1996, pp. 15–35.
[4] E. Bodemann, Ein Glaubensbekenntnis Leibnizens, Zeitschrift des Historischen Vereins für Niedersachsen,
1899, 308–315.
[5] E. Bodemann, Die Leibniz-Handschriften der Königlichen öffentlichen Bibliothek zu Hannover, Hannover,
Leipzig, 1895.
[6] H. Breger, Leibniz, Weyl und das Kontinuum, Beiträge zur Wirkungs- und Rezeptionsgeschichte von Got-
tfried Wilhelm Leibniz, A. Heinekamp, ed., Stuttgart, 1986, pp. 316–330.
[7] H. Breger, Analysis und Beweis, Internationale Zeitschrift für Philosophie, Heft 1 (1999), 95–106.
[8] H. Holzhey and W. Schmidt-Biggemann (eds.), Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophie. Die Philosophie
des 17. Jahrhunderts, vol. 4, Basel, 2001, chapter on Leibniz, pp. 995–1159. [Concise informations on
every aspect of Leibniz’s activities. A bibliography is included.]
[9] A. Heinekamp, Leibniz und die Mystik, Gnosis und Mystik in der Geschichte der Philosophie, P. Koslowski,
ed., Darmstadt, 1988, pp. 183–206.
[10] P. Jaenecke, Wissensdarstellung bei Leibniz, Leibniz und die Gegenwart, F. Hermanni and H. Breger, eds.,
München, 2002, pp. 89–118.
[11] Leibniz: Le meilleur des mondes, ed. by A. Heinekamp and A. Robinet (Studia Leibnitiana, Sonderheft 21),
Stuttgart, 1992. [Articles by various authors on the problems of the best of all possible worlds.]
[12] Leibniz: Discours sur la theologie naturelle des Chinois, ed. by W. Li and H. Poser, Frankfurt/Main, 2002.
[13] Leibniz: Mathematische Schriften, ed. by C.I. Gerhardt, 7 volumes, Berlin, Halle 1849–1863; Reprint:
Hildesheim, 1971.
[14] Leibniz: Opera omnia, ed. by L. Dutens, 6 volumes, Genève, 1768.
[15] Leibniz: Philosophische Schriften, ed. by C.I. Gerhardt, 7 volumes, Berlin 1875–1890; Reprint: Hildesheim,
1965, 1978 .
[16] Leibniz: Sämtliche Schriften und Briefe, ed. by the Academies of Göttingen and Berlin, 8 series, Darmstadt
1923 seqq. [39 volumes have been published, but the edition is not yet complete].
[17] D. Mahnke, Unendliche Sphäre und Allmittelpunkt. Beiträge zur Genealogie der mathematischen Mystik,
Deutsche Vierteljahresschrift für Literaturwissenschaft und Geistesgeschichte, vol. 23, Halle, 1937.
[18] D. Mahnke, Die Rationalisierung der Mystik bei Leibniz und Kant, Blätter für deutsche Philosophie, vol. 13,
1939/40, pp. 1–73.
[19] F. Ohly, Deus Geometra, Tradition als historische Kraft, N. Kamp and J. Wollasch etc., eds., Berlin, New
York, 1982, pp. 1–42. [General information on the topic, only one paragraph on Leibniz.]
[20] E. Scheibe, Calculemus! Das Problem der Anwendung von Logik und Mathematik, Leibniz. Tradition und
Aktualität. Vorträge des V. Internationalen Leibniz-Kongresses, vol. 2, Hannover, 1989, pp. 341–349.
[21] F. Vonessen, Reim und Zahl bei Leibniz. Zwei kleine philosophische Schriften von Leibniz, Antaios 8 (1967),
pp. 99–133 [on pp. 128–133 Leibniz’s tract “Von der wahren Theologia mystica“ is printed].
[22] H.J. Zacher, Leibniz’ Hauptschriften zur Dyadik, Frankfurt/Main, 1973.

CHAPTER 26
Berkeley’s Defence of the Inﬁnite God in Contrast
to the Inﬁnite in Mathematics
Wolfgang Breidert
Universität Karlsruhe (TH), Fakultät für Geistes- und Sozialwissenschaften, Institut für Philosophie,
Kaiserstraße 12, D-76128 Karlsruhe, Germany
E-mail: wolfgang.breidert@philosophie.uni-karlsruhe.de
Contents
1. Berkeley’s intent
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 501
2. God and inﬁnity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503
3. Mathematical exactitude . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505
4. The astounding results of modern mathematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 506
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
499


Berkeley’s defence of the inﬁnite God
501
1. Berkeley’s intent
George Berkeley, Anglican theologian and Bishop of Cloyne from 1734–1753, fostered an
ambiguous attitude towards mathematics and mathematicians. His ﬁrst publications (Arith-
metica/Miscellanea mathematica) strove to promote mathematical enthusiasm in students,
since he highly valued mathematics for its educational merits. It would therefore be mis-
taken to surmise a broad aversion regarding mathematics in Berkeley’s thinking. But in
spite of those early writings on mathematics and science, Berkeley was convinced that he
must safeguard the Christian revelation against hostile assault. Foremost, he considered
the deists and freethinkers to be opponents of religion, viewing some of them as disguised
atheists. In reality, these spiritual trends did not constitute one uniform movement. Some
authors dealt with the liberty of religion, desiring emancipation from regimentation by ec-
clesiastical authority; others denied various dogmas (e.g. the Trinity, miracles), and yet
others rejected Christian revelation in favour of rational or “natural” religion. Berkeley’s
mathematical and scientiﬁc attainments can be appropriately appreciated when considered
in light of his motivation to defend the Christian faith, although they should not be judged
solely from that perspective. Though it is perhaps true that the impetus to Berkeley’s con-
ceptions and reasonings is founded deeply in his religious convictions, it demands exami-
nation from an epistemological viewpoint. The logic of discovery differs from the logic of
justiﬁcation. Berkeley himself claimed to proceed scientiﬁcally rather than dogmatically.
As we know from Berkeley’s early private notes (Philosophical Commentaries, here-
after cited as PC), at the time he wrote them he had already planned to impair the great
reputation of mathematicians–referring to them invectively as “nihilarians”; the denotation
“freethinker” was not yet common. Berkeley’s essays published in the Guardian (1713) at-
tacked the freethinkers as “minute philosophers”, unable to see the beauty of the whole uni-
verse as would ﬂies on a cathedral pillar, and recommended that they expand their narrow
minds by studying astronomy. “Astronomy opens the mind, and alters our judgment, with
regard to the magnitude of extended beings; but Christianity produceth an universal great-
ness of soul”. Berkeley answers the presumptiveness of the scientists with an arrogance of
the Christian religion, which “ennobleth and enlargeth the mind beyond any other profes-
sion or science whatsoever” (Works, VII, p. 208). Around 1730, when Berkeley thought
that the failure of his Bermuda project—the foundation of a college for Christianising
America—could be due to resistance by the freethinkers, his opposition to them grew. The
unfortunate disappointment Berkeley sustained at Newport was the immediate occasion
for writing his great works concerning freethinkers (Alciphron, Analyst), but the essen-
tial thrust for publishing these books is readily recognisable in his earliest writings. The
underlying dichotomy, i.e. the relation between religion and science, disquieted Berkeley
himself, who was a scientist as well as a pious man. Therefore, he asked explicitly: “Shall
we not admit the same method of arguing, the same rules of logic, reason, and good sense,
to obtain in things spiritual and things corporeal, in faith and science?” (Alciphron, VII,
Sect. 8). He replies to this rhetorical question by calling his opponents to the common
“maxim, that the same logic which obtains in other matters must be admitted in religion”
(ibid.). “There is no need to depart from the received rules of reasoning to justify the belief
of Christians” (Alciphron, VII, p. 15). Berkeley’s disregard for mathematicians is not based
on a vague appeal to the irrationality of religion, as might be found in obscure mysticism.

502
W. Breidert
Fig. 1. George Berkeley. Science Photo Library.
On the contrary, he requests that mathematicians observe the rationality which they them-
selves claim, as he would use it in theology. Religion must not admit any point contrary to
reason, but must be above reason. Moreover, mysteries might “with better right be allowed
of in Divine Faith than in Human Science” (Analyst, Sect. 50, Qu. 61 f.).
In Berkeley’s view, the scope of divinity was threatened by modern science on points
such as these:
(1) Modern mathematics increasingly occupied the domain of inﬁnity, which formerly
had been reserved for theology.
(2) Regarding the paradigm of exactness (akribeia), mathematics claimed more author-
ity than was conceded to theology.
(3) The marvellous results reached by the mathematical sciences in terms of theoretical
explanation of the world as well as in mathematically inﬂuenced technical practice
diminished esteem for the Christian religion of revelation, being based on mysteries.
(4) Materialistic and physicalistic philosophies were supported by such successes, and
therewith undermined the prestige of the Christian religion, since its God is spirit
(Joh. IV, 24).
Altogether, Berkeley considered most of the mathematicians as potential foes of the Chris-
tian religion, but faced with the results of modern science, he was compelled to specify his
opposition to “the” mathematicians.
In his Philosophical Commentaries we ﬁnd entry No. 375: “Mathematicians have some
of them good parts, the more is the pity”. On several occasions Berkeley refers to New-
ton as the most famous exception to contemptible mathematicians (No. 372). He explic-
itly mentions his high esteem for Newton’s “original and free genius”, characterising him

Berkeley’s defence of the inﬁnite God
503
as “an extraordinary mathematician, a profound naturalist, a person of the greatest abili-
ties and erudition” (Defence, Sect. 13 and Appendix, Sect. 2), and particularly advocates
Newton’s religious attitude, which had been derided by mathematicians (Analyst, Sect.
50, Qu. 58). Whereas many of the most famous mathematicians—e.g. Pascal, Leibniz,
Euler—combined their mathematical pursuits with active engagement in faith, others more
or less kept their distance from the church. Edmond Halley, former professor of geometry
at Oxford, was among them. Generally he was not assumed to be a Christian, but he was
considered an extraordinary astronomer with solid knowledge of the world and splendid
skills in methods of mathematical proof. Since in matters of faith personal reputation is
not unimportant, Berkeley was not unreasonable regarding that suspicion. Once Addison
told him about a learned mathematician who supported his inﬁdel attitude concerning an-
other inﬁdel mathematician. As Berkeley’s ﬁrst biographer, Stock, reported, Halley could
be identiﬁed as this inﬁdel mathematician inﬂuencing Samuel Garth, who was both a doc-
tor and a poet and acquainted with both Berkeley and Addison. Before he died in 1719,
Garth met Addison but refused all religious discussions, being convinced by Halley that
the Christian doctrine would be incomprehensible and that religion was nothing more than
deception (Works IV, 56 f.). The Halley episode had long passed when the Analyst was
published; thus it was not the immediate occasion for writing that book, but in any case
Berkeley did consider Halley an important representative of the freethinkers.
In Berkeley’s view, most mathematicians—with few exceptions—constitute a conspired
scientiﬁc community, structurally no different than a communion, an idea similar to
the slightly modiﬁed notion of scientiﬁc community as applied to scientists by Thomas
S. Kuhn.
In his controversy opposing the mathematicians Berkeley pursues several aims:
(1) He tries to undermine the signiﬁcant authority exercised by the mathematicians.
(2) Mathematics and theology should be distinctly separated with the former subordi-
nate to the latter.
(3) It must be shown that theology can be justiﬁed as thoroughly as mathematics or
physics. In support of this point Berkeley refers to the struggle between the Carte-
sians, the Leibnizians, and the Newtonians over the physical notion of force. Their
instances of “force” were as opaque as the theological notion of “grace” (Alciphron
VII, Sect. 6 f.).
(4) On the levels of ontology and theory of science Berkeley tries to overcome atheistic
materialism with his philosophy of immaterialism. “Existence is percipi or percipere
or velle i.e. agere” (PC, No. 429, 429a).
2. God and inﬁnity
In European philosophy the question of inﬁnity gained increasing signiﬁcance beginning
with the patristical thinkers of the church, who made inﬁnity to be the most important at-
tribute of God. Enthusiastic study of inﬁnity reached a preliminary culmination during the
age of scholasticism, then it entered mathematics and science in the seventeenth centuries,
when not only the concept of Newtonian space was developed, but also inﬁnity of science
itself and that of scientiﬁc evolution was welcomed, whereas Nicolaus Cusanus had written

504
W. Breidert
as a man of his time: mathematical things are ﬁnite. Due to that development the groups of
theologically-orientated scholars split into two different parties: some authors recognised
the danger that the outstanding attribute of God, i.e. inﬁnity, could be claimed by the other
sciences; the rest of the scholars considered inﬁnity in mathematics or sciences to be a
mundane trace of God. Berkeley demanded that the inﬁnite be reserved for God alone.
Therefore he rejected any acceptance of inﬁnity in mathematics (inﬁnite space, inﬁnite ex-
tension, inﬁnite division etc.). He also refused entirely every idea intending to attribute any
extension to God, because an extended God would be in danger of becoming a mundane
thing, which, in the end, could be eliminated by materialistic science.
In De Motu (Sect. 54) it is evident that Berkeley considered Newtonian space to be a
threat to theology because this space was considered to be something “which cannot be
annihilated”, and that “it exists necessarily of its own nature, and that it is eternal, uncre-
ated, and even shares the divine attributes”. In a letter to Samuel Johnson (1730) Berkeley
wrote: “I know some late philosophers have attributed extension to God, particularly math-
ematicians, one of whom, in a treatise De Spatio Reali, pretends to ﬁnd out ﬁfteen of the
incommunicable attributes of God in Space. But it seems to me that they all being nega-
tive, he might as well have found them in Nothing”. The philosopher in question is Joseph
Raphson, who in a treatise characterised paradigmatically the absolute space with divine
attributes, namely as something actu inﬁnitum and aeternum. From Berkeley’s early paper
Of Inﬁnites it is obvious that he had knowledge of Raphson’s book at that time. The inﬁnity
of space and the Spinocistic tendency to an extended god repeatedly irritated Berkeley. For
the same reason one of the rhetorical questions at the end of the Analyst is: “Whether ex-
tension can be supposed an attribute of a Being immutable and eternal?” Berkeley rejected
any endeavour to make plausible the religious mysteries by mathematical analogies, such
as was undertaken by John Wallis, the famous mathematician and theologian, who illus-
trated the Holy Trinity in terms of a three-dimensional cube, which is one cube, but has
three dimensions (length, breadth, height). In Berkeley’s opinion mathematics should not
be misused for religious analogies, and, he argues, someone who admits such absurdities
as an abstract general triangle into his demonstrations should at least also admit the Holy
Trinity itself (Alciphron VII, Sect. 8). Berkeley held the notion of an abstract general trian-
gle to be empty because no triangle exists which is neither acute-angled nor right-angled
nor obtuse-angled (Defence, Sect. 45). To reserve inﬁnity for God alone it is necessary
that all of the mundane sciences, including mathematics, either renounce the inﬁnite or
limit themselves to the application of potentially inﬁnite considerations, only, i.e. that they
admit quantities of arbitrary, but ﬁnite, magnitude. For that purpose Berkeley was com-
pelled to restrict each mathematical reasoning to ﬁnite quantities. Therefore, he criticised
the doctrines of calculus for both the Newtonian theory of ﬂuxions and the Leibnizian
inﬁnitesimals. In his opinion, which was founded on his theory of perception, geometry
should employ only perceptible quantities of ﬁnite extensions. Since in the perception of
extended things there are minimal quantities, Berkeleyan geometry would be restricted to
discrete quantities. Nevertheless, Berkeley admits the divisibility of arbitrarily assignable
quantities. To divide a minimal quantity it is necessary to replace it by a more extended
one. This representative is further divisible. If needed, these proceedings may be iterated.
Because of these sequences of representatives Berkeley applies the usual expression used
for divisibility of geometrical extension, but in his view that way of speaking did not force

Berkeley’s defence of the inﬁnite God
505
one to accept quantities which are actually inﬁnite. Accordingly, Berkeley asked rhetori-
cally at the end of the Analyst, “Whether there be any need of considering quantities either
inﬁnitely great or inﬁnitely small?”
With his perspicuous view of the difﬁculties in which eighteenth century mathematics
was involved, Berkeley was concerned with the problem of the angle of contiguity, i.e. the
angle between a circle and its tangent. It seemed to be evident that these lines constitute
an angle but it also seemed to be evident that this angle is smaller than any assignable an-
gle. Whereas John Wallis concluded that the angle of contiguity should be a non-quantum,
Berkeley held that problem to be a further argument for his assertion that the notions in
mathematics were not sufﬁciently clear (Alciphron VII, Sect. 15). To substantiate that im-
putation he referred to the deﬁnition of an angle delivered by Pardies: “When two lines
meet in a point, the aperture, distance, or inclination between them is called an angle”
(PC, No. 432). According to Berkeley’s opinion, the notion of an angle of contiguity must
be rejected generally, because it contradicts the Aristotelian principle of homogeneity by
putting in relation a right line and a curve and that relation is said to be logically unaccept-
able (PC, No. 309). Berkeley attacks the use of inﬁnites not only in mathematics but also
in physics. Therefore, he dismisses speaking of the “inﬁnity of impact”, which was under
discussion according to the conviction that the force of impact or the kinetic energy is in-
ﬁnitely greater than the static force (De Motu, Sect. 14; Alciphron VII, Sect. 6). To avoid
the notion of limit involved in the integrations corresponding thereto Berkeley insisted on
the Aristotelian doctrine of heterogeneity of “forces”.
3. Mathematical exactitude
Berkeley recognises clearly that the mathematicians’ endeavour for exactitude shares com-
mon roots with the subtlety exercised in scholastics. Thus mathematicians behaved similar
to scholastics (PC, No. 327). Also in the doctrine of motion Berkeley tries to argue that
modern scientists approach Aristotelian scholastics (De Motu, Sect. 19). As they follow
Aristotle, the mathematicians similarly blindly follow Newton with “ipse dixit” (Defence,
Sect. 50; Alciphron VII, Sect. 9).
Even if one were to object that, contrary to the mathematicians the scholastics were dom-
inated by dogmatic thinking, Berkeley would reply that even mathematical books could
be read subject to dogmatism, namely following the author with no comprehension (PC,
No. 335). And he imputes such dogmatic narrow-mindedness to most of the mathemati-
cians in their blind admiration for Newton (Analyst, Sect. 50, Qu. 15; Defence, Sect. 3
and 7). Mathematicians of this type, Berkeley thought, should be designated as “believers
of mysteries” (Defence, Sect. 50). In any case, reverence for mathematicians is unwar-
ranted, since one could achieve the same results by common sense (PC, No. 368).
Previously, in his Philosophical Commentaries, Berkeley had censured the lack of exac-
titude in mathematical works of his time. He especially reproved the use of inﬁnitesimals
in mathematics. In his paper Of Inﬁnites he attacks with disdain the mathematics of inﬁn-
itesimals with respect to Leibniz, who had rejected scrupulosity in mathematics. Indeed,
Leibniz intended thereby to justify formulas such as
x = x + dx.

506
W. Breidert
Clearly, Berkeley recognised that it seems to be an inconspicuous postulate used in calculus
but nevertheless it was employed by the mathematicians as “a corner-stone or ground-work
of their speculations” (Analyst, Sect. 6). On the contrary, he insisted on the principle of
exactitude (akribeia) as a scientiﬁc pattern prevailing since antiquity (Cf. Aristotle, Meta-
physics 982a13; De Anima 402a2). In Berkeley’s view the mathematicians using calculus
abandoned the endeavour for exactness by neglecting some quantities (i.e. inﬁnitesimals)
used in their calculations. In any case the inﬁdelity of freethinking is not a necessary con-
sequence or result of mathematical exactitude. That mathematics by itself would imply
disbelief is an opinion Berkeley explicitly rejected (Defence, Sect. 5).
He accepted not in the least for himself the part of a zealous inquisitor, which was
imputed to him by his immediate opponents, namely Jurin and Walton (Defence, Sect. 8 f.;
Appendix, Sect. 4).
4. The astounding results of modern mathematics
Even Berkeley was not able to disavow the great results reached by the new calculus.
Therefore, he was compelled to deliver a justiﬁcation for the supposed fact that some
methods, which he held to be unfounded—and which were unfounded in his time!—
nevertheless produced many useful results. By his schooling in logic he knew that true
conclusions may be drawn from false premises by logically correct inferences. Using that
knowledge he asserted that the mathematicians would obtain their great results with the
help of a “compensation of error”.
Berkeley considered the computation of the subtangent of a parabola as a plain example
(for the case of derivation).
By similar triangles
TP
y =
dx
dy + z
Berkeley’s argumentation is as follows. On the one hand, the mathematicians take dy in-
stead of dy + z, i.e. a quantity less than the true quantity, putting
TP
y = dx
dy .
(1)
On the other hand, dy may be calculated by their rules of derivation from the original
equation y2 = px, namely,
2y dy
dx = p,
therefore
dy = p dx
2y .
(2)

Berkeley’s defence of the inﬁnite God
507
Fig. 2. y2 = px, TP = subtangent, AP = x, PB = y, PM = BR = dx, RN = dy, NL = z.
But this value—Berkeley argues—is bigger than the true value, as may be seen by substi-
tution of y by y + dy and y by x + dx, because then we have
y2 + 2y dy + (dy)2 = p dx + p dx,
therefore
dy = p dx
2y −(dy)2
2y .
If y designates a ﬁnite value, in accordance with the ﬁgure, then the values of dy both in
(1) and (2) are wrong, and the errors do compensate each other, as Berkeley emphasised.
Some modern interpreters met with difﬁculties in understanding Berkeley’s argumentation
because they erroneously took dy and dx to be differentials resp. inﬁnitely small quantities,
but Berkeley insists strictly on the suppositions made at the beginning, where the quantities
dx, dy, and z were introduced as quantities differing from zero.
Berkeley’s intent was to use only ﬁnite quantities and in fact there is neither any inﬁn-
itesimal nor any limiting value included in his explanations. Indeed, some errors may be
found in his considerations but it is strange to see that they were not clearly recognised in
any case by either Berkeley’s contemporaries or by his modern interpreters. For example,
Berkeley never discussed the question of whether the supposed method of compensation
of error, which he demonstrated in the case of the parabola, would also work in a more
general case. He was never asked such questions. Strangely enough, his opponents did not
attack him where he was mathematically most vulnerable. One of the most famous of these
weak points is his consideration in Sections 28 and 29 of the Analyst, where his aim is to
demonstrate the “derivation” of xn without the application of inﬁnitesimals. There he is
comparing some analytical terms with some geometrical ﬁgures (surfaces) and his opinion
is that it would be possible to adjoin homological terms corresponding to each other in a
natural way. He does not drop any hint of a deﬁnition of “homology” between an alge-
braical term and a geometrical quantity, much less how to ﬁnd it out. Perhaps Berkeley
was seduced on this point by the antique principle of homogeneity allowing the compar-
ison of solely homogeneous quantities, i.e. lines with lines, surfaces with surfaces, and

508
W. Breidert
bodies with bodies. It seems that Berkeley’s opponents did not notice the weakness of this
argumentation or that they recognised that the evidence of an error in one of Berkeley’s
demonstrations would not in the least conﬁrm the foundations and methods of their calcu-
lus.
Bibliography
[Where as all the titles concerning the Analyst controversy would be relevant, the bibliography includes only a
selection thereof.]
[1] G. Berkeley, Works, A.A. Luce and T.E. Jessop, eds., 9 vols., Edinbourgh, 1948–1957. Reprint: Nendeln,
1979.
[2] G. Berkeley, Philosophical Commentaries, George H. Thomas, ed., Alliance, Ohio, 1976.
[3] G. Berkeley, Schriften über die Grundlagen der Mathematik und Physik, Wolfgang Breidert, ed., Frankfurt
a.M., 1979, 1985.
[4] R.J. Baum, George Berkeley’s Philosophy of Mathematics, Ann Arbor, Michigan University Microﬁlms.
[5] R.J. Baum, Instrumentalist and formalist elements in Berkeley’s philosophy of mathematics, Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science 3 (1972), 119–134.
[6] D. Berlioz, Berkeley et la polémique du calcul inﬁnitésimal, Entre forme et histoire: la formation de la
notion de développement à l’âge classique, Olivier Bloch, Bernard Balan and Paulette Carrive, eds., Paris,
1988, pp. 71–85.
[7] M. Blay, Deux moments de la critique du calcul inﬁnitésimal: Michel Rolle et George Berkeley, Revue
d’Histoire des Sciences 39 (1986), 223–253.
[8] W. Breidert, Berkeley’s Kritik an der Inﬁnitesimalrechnung, 300 Jahre “Nova methodus” von G.W. Leibniz
(1684–1984), Albert Heinekamp, ed., Stuttgart, 1986, pp. 185–190 (Studia Leibnitiana, Sonderheft No. 14).
[9] W. Breidert, George Berkeley 1685–1753, Basel, Boston, Berlin, 1989 (Vita mathematica, 4).
[10] W. Breidert, Theologie und Mathematik: Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte ihrer Beziehung, Mathematik-
geschichte und Unterricht, Bd. 1, Michael Toepell, ed., Hildesheim, Berlin, 1998, pp. 78–88.
[11] G. Cantor, Berkeley’s Analyst revisited, Isis 75 (1984), 668–683.
[12] D.M. Jesseph, Berkeley’s philosophy of geometry, Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie 72 (1990), 301–
322.
[13] D.M. Jesseph, Berkeley’s Philosophy of Mathematics, Chicago and London, 1993.
[14] R.N. Lokken, Discussions on Newton’s inﬁnitesimals in eighteenth-century Anglo-America, Historia Math-
ematica 7 (1980), 142–155.
[15] H.M. Pycior, Mathematics and philosophy: Wallis, Hobbes, Barrow, Berkeley, Journal of the History of
Ideas 48 (1987), 265–286.
[16] J.A. Robles, Percepcion y inﬁnitesimales en Berkeley, Dianoia 26 (1980), 151–177, and 27 (1981), 166–185.
[17] D. Sherry, The wake of Berkeley’s Analyst: rigor mathematicae?, Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science 18 (1987), 455–480.
[18] D. Sherry, The logic of impossible quantities, Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 22 (1991),
37–62.
[19] B. Vermeulen, Berkeley and Nieuwentijt on Inﬁnitesimals, Berkeley Newsletter 8 (1985), 1–7.
[20] R.H. Vermij, Bernhard Nieuwentijt and the Leibnizian calculus, Studia Leibnitiana 1 (1989), 69–86.
[21] J.O. Wisdom, Berkeley’s criticism of the inﬁnitesimals, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 4
(1953), 22–25.

CHAPTER 27
Leonhard Euler (1707–1783)
Rüdiger Thiele
Universität Leipzig, Medizinische Fakultät, Karl-Sudhoff-Institut für Geschichte der Medizin
und der Naturwissenschaften, Augustusplatz 10/11, D-04109 Leipzig, Germany
E-mail: thieler@medizin.uni-leipzig.de
Contents
1. Historical background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 511
2. Life
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 511
3. Euler on religion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 515
4. Physico-theological arguments in Euler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 519
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 520
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
509


Leonhard Euler (1707–1783)
511
Every man may rest assured that, from all eternity, he entered into the plan of the universe. [. . . ]
How ought this consideration to increase our conﬁdence and our joy in the providence of God, on
which all religion is founded!
Leonhard Euler, Letters to a German Princess, January 3, 1761.1
1. Historical background
The Enlightenment changed the established ways of living. This movement of thought and
belief was concerned with concepts of God and reason. It was convinced that every problem
could be settled by the proper use of reason and therefore everything was “dragged” before
the court of pure reason. The established ways of thinking and believing were also under
attack because of the rise of modern science; and as a by-product of science anti-Christian
rationalism arose. It is often assumed that the essential developments in the Age of Rea-
son took place in philosophy (and it is then named after Voltaire, Locke or some other
philosopher). It was, however, also a great time for the natural sciences, a time in which a
new framework of scientiﬁc thinking was established. The new mechanics of Isaac Newton
(1643–1727) are a beautiful example. Newton’s theory offered an impressive explanation
of the way the universe functions. It was the progress of the natural sciences that inﬂu-
enced the rise of industry and, as a consequence, increasingly determined the conditions of
human life up to this day.
What about Christian faith under the rule of the sharp sword of pure reason? Did the
spirit of the time, which contrasted sharply with religion, allow for any Christian belief or
any “enlightened religion”? The life of Leonhard Euler is an interesting example in this re-
spect. He was without doubt the leading natural scientist of the 18th century. A century after
Euler’s death the German historian Hermann Hankel (1839–1873) correctly remarked that
Euler was the best representative of the scientiﬁc consciousness in the middle of the 18th
century.2 In our day, Clifford Truesdell (1919–2000) has estimated that in the 18th century
Euler alone wrote about one third of all the mathematical works (including mathematical
physics) that appeared in that period. It seems interesting to investigate Euler’s religious
belief, the belief of an outstanding natural scientist of the day. Indeed, the relationship of
the Christian religion and the natural sciences during the Enlightenment determined the
entire life of Leonhard Euler.
2. Life
Euler’s father, Paul Euler (1670–1745) was a protestant minister. His mother, Margaretha
Brucker (1677–1761), was the daughter of a minister. Euler was born in Basel in 1707,
but in 1708 the family moved to Riehen. In this little village, a place two or three miles
1Chaque homme peut être assuré, que de toute éternité il est entré dans le plan du monde. [. . . ] Combien
cette considération doit-elle augmenter notre conﬁance et notre amour pour la providence Divine, sur laquelle est
fondée toute la religion.
2H. Hankel, Untersuchung über die unendlich oft oszillierenden und unstetigen Funktionen, Mathematische
Annalen 20 (1882), 63–112, quotation p. 64: “Euler, der das wissenschaftliche Bewußtsein in der Mitte des
vorigen Jahrhunderts am vollständigsten vertritt [. . . ]”.

512
R. Thiele
Fig. 1. Leonhard Euler (1707–1783).
from Basel with about one thousand inhabitants, Leonhard Euler grew up with his par-
ents and later with his two younger sisters in the two rooms of the parsonage. He was
surrounded by educated people, most whom were both ministers of religion and mathe-
maticians. His learned father, who had been a pupil of the famous mathematician Jakob
Bernoulli (1645–1705), gave Leonhard his ﬁrst instruction, including mathematics. Later,
when the young Leonhard moved to Basel to attend a grammar school in which mathemat-
ics was not taught, he received private instruction in mathematics from a Calvinist minister,
Johann Burckhardt (1691–1743).
Among the mathematicians and theologians Euler encountered in his youth, it seems
that, in addition to his father, it was above all Burckhardt who played an important role
in Euler’s education and in forming Euler’s beliefs. The young Leonhard had intensive,
liberal discussions on the modern views of the planetary system (Copernican theory) and
of the biblical account of creation, and more generally of the relationship of scientiﬁc
knowledge and religious belief. On the other hand, the Calvinist clergy—even its most
pious members—strongly advocated “law and order”, mainly for political reasons. This
created an ambiguous religious situation, and it is this spirit of submission to religious
discipline in which Leonhard Euler grew up and that he upheld later in Berlin and St.
Petersburg. He remained a devout Calvinist all his life. The doctrines he held throughout
his life were those of Calvinism: he was pious and full of devotion. Every evening Euler
conducted family prayers for his whole household, usually ﬁnishing with a sermon. He
handled parish affairs in the same spirit to the very end. In Berlin he was a member of

Leonhard Euler (1707–1783)
513
the parish council (Gemeindeältester) and it was in the spirit of his father that he reformed
certain affairs like the instruction given to candidates for conﬁrmation and that he promoted
the printing and distribution of sermons. When Euler gave the example of “a man who,
on hearing a beautiful sermon, is affected by it, repents, and is converted [...]”3 in the
Letters to a German Princess, January 6, 1761, he stressed the value of a good sermon. He
was convinced that man can do nothing by himself; everything depends on divine grace.
Therefore Euler advocated prayer (letter of January 3, 1761). Although the human will is
free, by supplying motives God can inﬂuence human decisions.
Paul Euler wanted his son to follow him into the church. In October 1720, at the age
of 13, as was quite usual then, Leonhard Euler enrolled in the University of Basel, which
had been founded in 1460 as the ﬁrst university in Switzerland. The famous Dutch scholar
Erasmus of Rotterdam (1469?–1536) had taught at this university, making the city a centre
of humanism in the 16th century. A central purpose of humanism was to serve religion.
At this traditional university Euler started to study theology. Although the glorious days
of Erasmus were long past, under Johann Bernoulli (1667–1748), a younger brother of
Jakob Bernoulli, the University of Basel again became a centre of learning in Europe,
this time with the main focus on mathematics. At this small university, then one of the
smallest in Europe with 19 professors and only about 100 students, it was inevitable that
the student Leonhard Euler and the leading mathematician, Johann Bernoulli, would meet
each other. Indeed, Euler’s mathematical abilities soon earned him the esteem of Bernoulli
who advised him to study mathematics. Leonhard Euler’s passion for mathematics grew
stronger and stronger, so that his father ﬁnally gave in and allowed him to follow the bent
of his genius. In 1723 Euler, now a Master of Arts, left the Faculty of Theology and began
the study of mathematics under the supervision of Bernoulli. In 1727 Euler moved to St.
Petersburg. First he became an associate of the St. Petersburg Academy of Sciences, but in
1733 he succeeded Daniel Bernoulli (1700–1782) to the chair of mathematics.
Theology remained one of Euler’s favorite interests, and it would be wrong to regard
Euler’s transition from theology to mathematics as implying that he lost interest in the-
ology. On the contrary, theology remained very important for him. It was Galileo Galilei
(1564–1642) who had spoken of the two books that God had given mankind: Holy Writ
and Nature. The language of the book of nature, the language of a world well-ordered
by the Creator, was mathematics, the science of order. The study of mathematics would
lead necessarily to an insight into the Creator’s construction programme. However, the
rise of natural science had actually led to a serious problem: the success of the scientiﬁc
method pressed in the direction of the autonomy of science, free from religious inﬂuence,
and in the direction of Deism or even Atheism. Later, above all in the environment of the
liberal deïst, King Frederick II (1712–1786), in his Berlin period (1741–1766), Leonhard
Euler defended the Christian faith against freethinkers and atheists. He also strongly op-
posed the rationalism (monadology) of Leibniz and Wolff,4 and he took part in several
3“Si, par exemple, un pécheur en entendant un beau sermon, en est frappé, rentre en soi même et se convertit
[. . . ]”.
4The monadology is Leibniz’s metaphysics which is expressed in its mature form in the correspondence with
Burcher de Volder (professor of philosophy at the University of Leyden). Monads are the basic individuals, they
are immaterial entities without spatial parts. Each monad is unique and indestructible, distinguished from other
monads by its degree of consciousness. God created the universe in such a way that the monads are perfectly

514
R. Thiele
ﬁerce philosophical–theological debates, the most sensational of which was the ill-famed
controversy on Maupertuis’ celebrated Principle of Least Action. The debate became in-
tense and turned into an outright conﬂict. Voltaire (1694–1778) and even King Frederick
II were involved. On this occasion Leonhard Euler supported the President of the Prussian
Academy, Pierre-Louis Moreau de Maupertuis (1698–1759).5 Euler’s physico-teleological
attitude was rather ambiguous: because he interpreted the principle as a theological one, he
was compelled to defend religion against the hated ideology of free-thought; on the other
hand, he correctly formulated the principle for some cases in dynamics, and he strongly
believed that nature generally operates in such a teleological way. This belief is expressed
early on in his book “Methodus inveniendi” (A method for discovering curved lines, 1744),
a book on the calculus of variations:
“For, since the fabric of the Universe is most perfect and the work of a most wise Creator, nothing
at all takes place in the Universe in which some rule of maximum or minimum does not appear”.6
Although the King of Prussia often employed Euler to perform calculations with respect
to money, the fountains of Sans Souci (the summer residence of the king), the Finow canal,
salt mines, calendars, maps, and other practical problems, Euler was unpopular at Freder-
ick’s court, mainly because Frederick preferred French culture and its representatives: the
deist Voltaire, and the Roman Catholic Maupertuis. King Frederick, but also many others,
in Berlin were put off by Euler’s penetrating attacks against free-thought (“the rabble of
freethinkers (die Rotte der Freygeister), these wretched people (diese elenden Leute)”).7
The situation in Berlin ﬁnally led to Euler’s return to Russia, where he had started his
career and where he was to end it. Blind, but active to the end, Leonhard Euler died in St.
Petersburg on September 18, 1783, at the age of 76 years, 5 months, and 3 days. 22 3
4 years
earlier, on January 13, 1761, in his “Letters on different subjects in natural philosophy
addressed to a German Princess”, he had written on the subject of death:
“It is also the inﬂuence of the soul upon the body which constitutes its life, which continues as
long as this union subsists. [. . . ] Death, then, is nothing but the dissolution of this union, and
the soul has no need to be transported elsewhere; for as it resides in no place, all places must be
indifferent to it. [. . . ] This supplies us with a clear elucidation of the omnipresence of God: his
power extends to all bodies contained in the universe. [. . . ] God is everywhere present. [. . . ] It is
only bodies that cannot be in two places at the same time; but there is nothing to prevent spirit,
which has no relation to place. [. . . ] We can form some idea of the state of the soul after death.
As the soul, during life, acquires all its knowledge by means of the senses, being deprived by
death of the information communicated through the senses, it no longer knows what is happening
in the material world; this state is more or less similar to that of a man who suddenly becomes
blind, deaf, dumb, and deprived of the use of all the other senses. [. . . ] Sleep likewise furnishes
synchronised in preestablished harmony (illustrated by two well-synchronised clocks). In the 18th century har-
mony is often understood in the sense of action (effort). Euler rejected the monadology because in the system of
preestablished harmony no freedom of the will would be possible (no spirit can act on bodies). Freedom, however,
is a condition of spirits, just as extension is one of bodies (see Letters December 9 & 13, 1760; January 3, 1761).
5The principle of the least action is based on the idea that whenever something moves in nature, this happens
in the most efﬁcient way, i.e. some quantity assumes a minimum value. Maupertuis was in fact accused of having
taken this principle from Leibniz, which he had not.
6Cum enim Mundi universi fabrica sit perfectissima atque a Creatore sapientissimo absoluta, nihil omnino in
mundo contingit, in quo non maximi minimive ratio quaepiam eluceat. (Methodus inveniendi. Additamentum I.
Opera omnia I/24, p. 231)
7Rettung der göttlichen Offenbarung, §53; also in: Opera omnia III/12.

Leonhard Euler (1707–1783)
515
us with something like an example of this state. [. . . ] Thus, after death, we will ﬁnd ourselves in a
more perfect state of dreaming, which nothing shall be able to discompose. [. . . ] And this, in my
opinion, is just about all we can say of it, at least with any appearance of reason”.8
3. Euler on religion
During Euler’s lifetime the role of Christianity became problematic: atheism and unortho-
dox religious attitudes such as natural theology9 and deism appeared, and conﬂicts arose
between them and traditional Christianity. Euler took part in these religious discussions
and conﬂicts. His religious belief is expressed chieﬂy in two publications: the celebrated
“Letters to a German Princess” (1760–1762) and the “Rettung der göttlichen Offenbarung
gegen die Einwürfe der Freygeister” (The Deliverance of Divine Revelation from the Cen-
sures of the Freethinkers, 1747), and it is touched on in some philosophical controver-
sies, especially in the debate on Maupertuis’ famous principle of least action (1744–1759).
(Incidentally, the ﬂagship publication of the Age of Enlightenment, the French “Ency-
clopédie” in 17 volumes, was published between 1751 and 1772.) While atheists and deists
attacked the literal interpretation of the Scriptures as divine revelation, Euler defended the
trustworthiness of the Bible by comparing it with that of science. There are contradictions
and paradoxes in science too, even in mathematics, and yet no sane person will ever doubt
the trustworthiness of science. The same approach is found in the critique of the calculus by
George Berkeley (1685–1753): “Whether mysteries may not with better right be allowed
of in Divine faith than in Human Science?” (The Analyst, Question 62).
For Euler there are three fundamentally different classes of knowledge: there is the truth
of the senses (experience), that of understanding (reasoning), and that of belief (history),
and the true foundation of human knowledge is different for each of them. Each class of
knowledge requires its own type of proof of its trustworthiness:
8C’est aussi l’inﬂuence de l’ame sur le corps qui en constitue la vie, qui dure aussi longtems que cette liaison
subsiste. [. . . ] La mort n’est donc autre chose que la destruction de cette liaison: ensuite l’ame n’a pas besoin
d’être transportée autre part; car puisqu’elle n’est nulle part, elle est indifférente à tous les lieux. [. . . ] Cela nous
fournit un bel éclaircissement pour concevoir comment Dieu est partout; c’est que son pouvoir s’étend à tout
l’univers et à tous les corps qui s’y trouvent. [. . . ] Dieu est présent par tout. [. . . ] Ce ne sont que les corps qui
ne peuvent être en même tems en deux endroits, mais pour les esprits qui n’ont aucun rapport aux lieux en vertu
de leur nature. [. . . ] On peut se former quelque idée de l’etat de l’ame après la mort. Comme l’ame pendant la
vie tire toutes ses connoissances par le moyen des sens, étant dépoulliée par la mort de ce rapport des sens, elle
n’apprend plus rien de ce qui se passe dans le monde matériel; elle parvient à peu près dans le même état, où
se trouveroit un homme, qui seroit devenu tout d’un coup aveugle, sourd, muet, et privé de l’usage de tous les
autres sens. [. . . ] Le Sommeil nous fournit aussi un bel échantillon de cet état. [. . . ] Ainsi après la mort nous nous
trouverons dans un état des songes les plus parfaits, que rien ne sera plus capable de troubler. [. . . ] Et c’est à mon
avis à peu près tout ce que nous saurions en dire de positif.
9Natural theology in the 18th century bases itself on knowledge of God drawn from nature and can be charac-
terised as establishing religious truth (existence of God, immortality of the soul, God’s providential control of the
world, etc.) by rational arguments and without referring to God’s revelations. Natural theology is distinguished
from revealed theology as well as is contrasted with it (no access to the existence of Jesus Christ).

516
R. Thiele
“I have seen or felt, is the proof of the ﬁrst class; I can demonstrate it, is that of the second: we
likewise say, I know it is so. Finally, I receive it on the testimony of persons worthy of credit, or I
believe it on solid grounds, is the proof of the third class”. (April 4, 1761)10
These three different species of knowledge, which comprehend all human knowledge,
must be considered equally certain. They correspond to the only sources of human knowl-
edge, derivation from our own experience, reasoning, and reports of others.11 Religious
belief belongs to the third kind of knowledge. But, how to handle the different kinds of
knowledge? Euler remarked:
“The three sources from which our knowledge is derived all require certain precautions, which
must be carefully observed, in order to acquire assurance of the truth; but it is possible, in each, to
carry matters too far, and one should always steer a middle course. The third source clearly proves
this”. (April 18, 1761)
“Therefore, as logic prescribes rules for correct reasoning, where intellectual truth is concerned,
there are equally certain rules for the ﬁrst source, that of our senses, and for the third, that of
belief”. (April 11, 1761)12
The theology of revelation explains the articles of faith in that it rests upon the Bible
as the only source of religious truth (sacra doctrina); on the other hand, natural theology
approaches God and his creation with the help of pure reason. It is exactly this difference
that Euler had discussed earlier with his father and the professors of theology in Basel: Did
God in the Bible reveal the physical structure of our world? Euler rejected any literal inter-
pretation of biblical texts as scientiﬁc explanations, and in his “Rettung” he gave reasons
why God has not supplied us with a revelation of the fabric of the universe. The opening
line reads: “Our mental powers manifest themselves in two capacities, one of which is
called the understanding (Verstand), the other the will (Wille). Because all supreme hap-
piness consists in perfection, the supreme happiness of the soul can only be promoted by
the perfection of the understanding and the perfection of the will”.13 The understanding
serves to ﬁnd truth, and by the will our duties are then deduced from truth. The aim of
life is bliss or complete happiness and both powers serve to complete our bliss. This means
that to increase our bliss we have to perfect both powers. But God’s revelation is concerned
10Je l’ai vu ou senti, est la preuve de la premiere classe: Je puis le démontrer, est la preuve de la seconde classe,
de laquelle on dit aussi, qu’on sait les choses: Enﬁn, Je le tiens par le témoignage de personnes dignes de foi: ou
je le crois par des raisons solides; c’est la preuve de la troisieme classe.
11With a similar intention to distinguish knowledge and faith Immanuel Kant (1742–1804) noted in his “Critique
of Pure Reason” (second edition 1787): “I have therefore found it necessary to abolish knowledge in order to make
room for faith”. (Ich mußte also das Wissen aufheben, um zum Glauben Platz zu bekommen. In: Kritik der reinen
Vernunft, 1787. Vorrede zur 2. Auﬂage, B XXX.)
12Toutes les trois sources d’où nous tirons nos connoissances, exigent chacune certaines précautions, qu’on
doit bien observer pour être assuré de la vérité, mais dans chacune on peut pousser la chose trop loin, et il faut
toujours tenir un certain milieu. La troisieme source ne prouve cela que trop ouvertement.—Donc comme la
Logique prescrit les regles des raisonnemens justes qui nous mettent à l’abri de l’erreur à l’égard des vérités
intellectuelles, il y a aussi des regles également certaines, tant pour la premiere source, de nos sens, que pour
la troisieme, de la foi.—Euler used rigorous demonstrations in his philosophical (or theological) expositions.
Because Kant’s work is so well known Euler’s role and importance are overshadowed.
13§1. Die Kräfte der Seele äussern sich in einem gedoppelten Vermögen, davon man eines den Verstand, das
andere den Willen nennet. Da nun alle Glückseeligkeit in der Vollkommenheit bestehet, so kan die Glückseligkeit
einer Seele nicht anders als durch die Vollkommenheit des Verstandes, und durch die Vollkommenheit des Willens
befördert werden. (Rettung, §1; Opera omnia, III/12, p. 268.)

Leonhard Euler (1707–1783)
517
with our will only, not with our understanding. Why is this? Our complete happiness rests
upon the complete submission of our will to God’s will. However, the more we extend our
knowledge, the more we extend our duties which depend on the state of our knowledge.
A revealed knowledge, i.e. an absolute knowledge, would involve an inﬁnite set of duties
which would make complete acquiescence impossible. To prevent this dilemma, in his in-
ﬁnite goodness God has taken our limited mental capacities into account. In addition, the
biblical revelation not only proscribes duties but also supplies advice.
Euler’s rejection of metaphysics rests on this insight: our ability to acquire knowledge is
too limited to supply a sufﬁcient theory of cognition. However, we can admire the eternal
works of God.14
While the Prussian Kant said that the majesty of duty has nothing to do with enjoyment
of life (Critique of Practical Reason), according to the Swiss Euler we will taste enjoyment,
but not before there is a complete correspondence of human and divine will. In Euler we
ﬁnd Descartes’ dualism of body and soul, but in an extended form. In a letter concerning
the nature of spirit we read:
“To think, to judge, to reason, to feel, to reﬂect and to will, are qualities incompatible with the
nature of bodies; and beings invested with them must be of a different nature. Such are souls
and spirits; and He who possesses these qualities in the highest degree is God. There is, then,
an inﬁnite difference between body and spirit. Extension, inertia, and impenetrability—qualities
which exclude all thought—are the properties of body; but spirits are endowed with the faculty of
thinking, of judging, of reasoning, of feeling, of reﬂecting, of willing, or of determining in favour
of one object over another. There is here neither extension, nor inertia, nor impenetrability; these
material qualities are inﬁnitely remote from spirit. [. . . ] It is asked, What is spirit? I acknowledge
my ignorance in this respect; and I reply, that we cannot tell what it is, as we know nothing of the
nature of spirit. [. . . ] This union of the soul with the body undoubtedly is, and ever will be, the
greatest mystery of the Divine Omnipotence—a mystery which we shall never be able to unfold.
[. . . ] These two species of beings are nevertheless most intimately united; and upon their union
principally depend all the wonders of the world, which are the delight of intelligent beings, and
lead them to glorify their Creator. It is certain that spirits constitute the principal part of the world,
and that bodies are introduced into it merely to serve them”. (November 29, 1760)15
14It is precisely this attitude that is expressed by Kant (Critique of Practical Reason, 1787): “Two things ﬁll the
mind with ever new and increasing admiration and awe: the starry heaven above me and the moral law within me”.
(Zwei Dinge erfüllen das Gemüt mit immer neuer und zunehmender Bewunderung und Ehrfurcht, je öfter und
anhaltender sich das Nachdenken damit beschäftigt: Der bestirnte Himmel über mir, und das moralische Gesetz
in mir; Kritik der Urteilskraft, Beschluß, S. 191.)
15Penser, juger, raisonner, sentir, réﬂéchir et vouloir sont des qualités incompatibles avec la nature des corps; et
les êtres, qui en sont revêtus, doivent avoir une nature tout-à-fait différente. Ce sont des ames et des esprits, dont
celui qui possede ces qualités au plus haut degré, est Dieu. Il y a donc une différence inﬁnie entre les corps et les
esprits. Aux corps il ne convient que l’étendue, l’inertie, et l’impénétrabilité, qui sont des qualités, qui excluent
tout sentiment: pendant que les esprits sont doués de la faculté de penser, de juger, de raisonner, de sentir, de
réﬂéchir, de vouloir ou de se décider pour un objet plutôt que pour un autre. Ici il n’y a ni étendue, ni inertie,
ni impénétrabilité; ces qualités corporelles sont inﬁniment éloignées des esprits. [. . . ] Mais on demande ce que
c’est qu’un esprit? sur cela j’aime mieux avouer mon ignorance et répondre que nous ne saurions dire ce que
c’est qu’un esprit, puisque nous ne connoissons rien du tout de la nature des esprits. [. . . ] Or cette même union de
chaque ame avec son corps est sans doute et restera toujours le plus grand mystere de la Toutepuissance Divine,
que nous ne saurions jamais pénétrer. [. . . ] Cependant ces deux especes d’êtres sont liées ensemble de la maniere
la plus étroite, et c’est principalement de ce lien que dépendent toutes les merveilles du monde, qui ravissent
les êtres intelligens et les portent à gloriﬁer la Créateur. Il n’y a aucun doute que les esprits ne constituent la
principale partie du monde et que les corps n’y soient introduits que pour leur service.

518
R. Thiele
Elucidating the nature of spirits Euler continued:
“To ask, In what place does a spirit reside? would be for the same reason an absurd question, for
to connect spirit with place is to ascribe extension to it. No more can I say in what place an hour
is; though assuredly an hour is something; something, therefore, may exist without being attached
to a certain place. [. . . ] Just as it may be with truth afﬁrmed of the hour now passing, that it exists
neither in my head nor outside of my head. A spirit exists, then, though not in a certain place; but
if our reﬂection turns on the power which a spirit has of acting upon a body, the action is most
undoubtedly performed in a certain place”. (January 10, 1761)16
Euler dealt with the liberty of spirits, “a stumbling-block in philosophy” (Euler):17
“But [in comparison with bodies] spirits are of a very different nature, and their actions depend
on principles directly opposite. Liberty, entirely excluded from the nature of body, is the essential
portion of spirit to such a degree that without liberty a spirit could not exist; and this it is which
renders it responsible for its actions. This property is as essential to spirit as extension or impene-
trability is to body; and as it would be impossible for the Divine Omnipotence itself to divest body
of these qualities, it would be equally impossible for it to divest spirits of liberty. A spirit with-
out liberty would no longer be a spirit, as a body without extension would no longer be a body”.
(December 16, 1760)
“It is accordingly of importance to remark, that God acts in a manner totally different towards
bodies and spirits. God has established for bodies laws of rest and motion, conformably to which
all changes necessarily take place; as bodies are merely passive beings, whereas spirits are suscep-
tible of no force or constraint, but are governed of by God through precepts and prohibitions. [. . . ]
When it is said to be the will of God that men should love one another, we mean by that expression
a commandment which men ought to obey; but this is very far from being the case. God does not
force men to it, this would be contrary to the liberty which is essential to them. [. . . ] It always
depends on the will of man whether he is to obey or not. In this sense we are to understand the
will of God, when it refers to free actions of spiritual beings”. (December 27, 1760)18
16Ce sera donc aussi une question absurde de demander, en quel lieu un esprit existe? car dès qu’on attache
un esprit à un lieu, on lui suppose une étandue. Je ne saurois dire non plus en quel lieu se trouve une heure,
quoiqu’une heure soit sans doute quelque chose: ainsi quelque chose peut être, sans qu’elle soit attachée à un
certain lieu. De la même maniere je puis dire, [. . . ] aussi peu que l’heure d’à-présent, dont je puis dire véritable-
ment, qu’elle n’existe ni dans ma tête ni hors de ma tête. Un esprit existe donc sans qu’il existe dans un certain
lieu; mais si nous faisons réﬂexion au pouvoir, qu’un esprit peut avoir d’agir sur un certain corps, cette action se
fait sans doute dans un certain lieu.
17This point was later (independently) picked up by the German philosopher Johann Gotthelf Fichte (1762–
1814) in his philosophical system Wissenschaftslehre (theory of science), outlined above all in two books “Grund-
lage der gesamten Wissenschaftslehre” (Foundations of the entire Wissenschaftslehre, 1794) and “Grundriß der
Eigentümlichkeiten der Wissenschaftslehre” (Outline of the Distinctive Character of the Wissenschaftslehre,
1795). Fichte arrived at the contradiction: “If the self [Ich] posits itself as determined, it is not determined by
the not-self [Nicht-Ich]; if it is determined by the not-self, it does not posit itself as determined (Science of
Knowledge). So he deduced: “What sort of philosophy one chooses depends, therefore, on what sort of person
one is”.
18Mais les esprits sont d’une nature entierement différente, et leurs actions dépendent de principes directement
opposés. Comme la liberté est entierement exclue de la nature des corps, elle est la partage essentiel des esprits;
de sorte qu’un esprit ne sauroit être sans la liberté; et c’est la liberté qui le rend responsable de ses actions. Cette
propriété est aussi essentielle aux esprits, que l’éntendue ou l’impénétrabilité l’est aux corps; et comme il seroit
impossible, même à la Toutepuissance Divine, de dépouiller les corps de ces qualités, il lui est également im-
possible de dépouiller les esprits de la liberté. Car un esprit sans liberté ne seroit plus un esprit, tout de même
qu’un corps sans étendue, ne seroit plus un corps. [. . . ] Aussi est-il fort important de remarquer que Dieu agit
d’une maniere tout-à-fait différente envers les corps et les esprits. Pour les corps, Dieu a établi les loix du repos
et du mouvement, conformément auxquelles tous les changemens arrivent nécessairement, les corps n’étant que

Leonhard Euler (1707–1783)
519
From this point of view Euler deduced the existence of evil and sin:
“The origin and permission of evil in the world is an article which has in all ages greatly perplexed
theologians and philosophers. To believe that God, a supremely good Being, should have created
this world, and to see it overwhelmed with such a variety of evil appears so contradictory, that some
found themselves reduced to the necessity of admitting two principles, the one supremely good, the
other supremely evil. This was the opinion entertained by the ancient heretics known in history by
the name of Manicheans. [. . . ] Though the question be extremely complicated, this single remark,
that liberty is a quality essential to spirits, dispels at once a great part of the difﬁculties which would
otherwise be insurmountable. [. . . ] In this respect, therefore, the government of God over spirits,
or rational beings, is inﬁnitely different from that which men exercise over men like themselves,
and we greatly err if we imagine that a government which appears the best in the eyes of men
is really so in the judgment of God. This is a reﬂection of which we ought never to lose sight”.
(March 14, 1761)19
For Euler it is “an established truth that Christ has risen from the dead” and that “the
Divinity of Christ’s mission in this world cannot possibly be called into question”. From
this he argues that “we can absolutely trust in all the promises given in the Gospel”.20
4. Physico-theological arguments in Euler
Euler, one of the most distinguished scientists of the 18th century, deduced his philosophi-
cal and theological statements with the help of then modern arguments, i.e. he evaluated the
astronomical, physical, chemical, and biological progress in view of (physico-)theological
deductions. An example: because of the nature of the ether which produced friction, Euler
regarded it as a matter of fact that the present state of the planetary system could not be
in existence from eternity to eternity and in this way found conﬁrmation of the biblical
statement of the ﬁniteness of our world, which lasts from the creation to doomsday (Ret-
tung, §50). Euler’s physico-theological view was manifest in his defense of Maupertuis’
principle which stated that in all the changes which occur in nature, the cause will be the
smallest that can produce the effect. Maupertuis proclaimed his economy principle to be a
des êtres passif [. . . ] au lieu que les esprits ne sont susceptibles d’aucune force ou contrainte, et que c’est par
des commandemens ou des défenses que Dieu les gouverne. [. . . ] Quand on dit que Dieu veut que les hommes
s’aiment mutuellement, c’est une toute autre volonté de Dieu: c’est un commandement, auquel les hommes de-
vroient obéir; mais il s’en faut beaucoup qu’il soit exécuté. Dieu n’y force pas les hommes, ce qui seroit une
chose contraire à la liberté qui leur est essentielle. [. . . ] C’est sur ce pied qu’on doit juger de la volonté de Dieu,
quand elle se rapporte aux actions libres des êtres spirituels.
19L’Origine et le permission du mal dans le monde est un article, qui a de tout tems fort embarrassé les Théolo-
giens et les Philosophes. Croire que Dieu, cet être souverainement bon, ait créé ce monde et y voir fourmiller
tant de maux, paroit si contradictoire, que plusieurs d’entr’eux ont cru être forcés d’admettre deux principes,
l’un souverainement bon et l’autre souverainement méchant: c’étoit le sentiment des anciens hérétiques connus
sous le nom des Manichéens. [. . . ] C’est donc à cet égard que le Gouvernement de Dieu sur les esprits ou êtres
raisonnables est inﬁniment différent de celui que les hommes exercent sur leurs pareils; et on se trompe beau-
coup, quand on s’imagine, qu’un gouvernement qui paroit meilleur aux yeux des hommes, le soit réellement au
jugement de Dieu. C’est une réﬂexion que nous ne devons jamais perdre de vue.
20It is “eine ausgemachte Wahrheit, daß Christus von den Todten auferstanden” and it is clear that “die Gött-
lichkeit der Sendung Christi auf diese[r] Welt unmöglich in Zweifel gezogen werden kann”. Moreover, “Wir
können auch alle Verheissungen, welche uns in dem Evangelio [. . . ] gethan werden, mit der festesten Zuversicht
glauben”. (Rettung, §36)

520
R. Thiele
general law of nature, most worthy of the creator, whereas critics who mocked Maupertuis,
claimed that the principle turned the almighty God into a stingy, or at least a parsimonious,
creator.
Euler expounded the Principle as perfectly founded in the very nature of body, and he
had the strong belief that basic physical principles can always be expressed by certain min-
imal or maximal properties. But mathematically, in his paper “On the motion of bodies in a
non-resisting medium, determined by the method of maxima and minima” (Appendix II in
the “Methodus inveniendi”), he limited himself to a few special applications in dynamics.
He said explicitly that he would leave the general case to the Philosophers,21 and he did
not use the principle at all to prove the existence of God mathematically. Here he differs
from other celebrated physico-theological writers like William Derham (1657–1735), the
author of “Physico-theology or a demonstration of the Being and Attribute of God from
his Works of Creation” (1713), John Ray (1628–1705, “Three physico-theological dis-
courses”, 1692, and “The Wisdom of God Manifested in the Works of Creation”, 1691),
Johan Swammerdam (1637–1680, “Bybel der natuur”, The bible of nature or the history
of insects, ed. by Boerhave 1737), Bernard Nieuwentyt (1654–1718, “Het regt gebruik der
werelt beschouwingen, ter overtuiginge van ongodisten en ongelovigen aangetoont”, The
correct use of the world views, demonstrated in order to convince atheists and unbelievers,
1714). Most of them showed more industry in collecting examples for anthropomorphic
justiﬁcation of Divine Providence than in providing a sound theoretical foundation.
It is the self-conﬁdence of the rising bourgeoisie that interpreted the Creator like an ideal
human being (where there is order, there is mind). The optimistic physico-theological view
can also be regarded as a reaction to baroque nihilism. It failed to see any misfortune and
sorrow in the world because almost everything served to demonstrate the glory of God.
Although Euler was guided throughout by general teleological principles (by a priori con-
viction) his realistic view (the a posteriori corroboration of the principles by true and sound
dynamic methods) appears in the following lines taken from his “Methodus inveniendi”:
“Although this conclusion does not seem sufﬁciently conﬁrmed, nevertheless, if I show that it
agrees with a truth known a priori, so much weight will result that all doubts which could originate
on this subject will completely vanish. Even better, when its truth will have been shown, it will
be very easy to undertake studies in the profound laws of Nature and their ﬁnal causes, and to
corroborate this with the ﬁrmest arguments”.22
References
I. Original works
[1] Leonhard Euleri Opera omnia, ed. Andreas Speiser et al., Ser. III/11–12. Orell-Füssli, Zürich, 1960. Includes:
“Lettres à une Princesse de Allemagne, 1768–1772”, vol. 11–12, and “Rettung der göttlichen Offenbarung
gegen die Einwürfe der Freygeister, 1747”, vol. 12, pp. 267–286. Prefaces by A. Speiser in both volumes.
21Quod negotium aliis, qui Metaphysicam proﬁtentur, relinquo. (Methodus inveniendi, Additamentum I, Opera
omnia I/24, p. 308.)
22Quae conclusio etsi non satis conﬁrmata videatur, tamen, si eam cum veritate iam a priori nota consentire
ostendero, tantum consequetur pondus, ut omnia dubia, quae circa eam suboriri queant, penitus evanescant. Quin-
etiam, facilius erit in intimas Naturae leges atque causas ﬁnales inquirere hocque assertum ﬁrmissimis rationibus
corroborare. (Methodus inveniendi, Additamentum II, Opera omnia I/24, p. 298).

Leonhard Euler (1707–1783)
521
[2] L. Euler, Lettres à une Princesse de Allemagne, St. Petersburg, 1768–1772; German ed.: Leipzig, 1769–
1773, English: 1795, our quotations in English are taken from David Brewster’s translation “Letters of Euler
on different subjects in Natural Philosophy. Addressed to a German Princess”, with additional notes by John
Griscom. Harper, New York, 1833. Russian, Dutch, Swedish, Italian, Danish and Spain translations 1768–
1772, 1786–1787, 1785, 1787, 1792, and 1798, respectively.
[3] L. Euler (anonymous), Die Rettung der Göttlichen Offenbarung gegen die Einwürfe der Freygeister, Haude
und Spener, Berlin, 1747. Italian and French translations 1777 and 1805. [Nikolaus Fuss in his “Éloge de M.
Euler” (St. Petersburg, 1783) attested Euler as the author, see “Opera omnia Euleri”, Teubner, Leipzig, 1911,
ser. I, vol. 1, p. xviii.]
II. Biographies
[4] R. Thiele, Leonhard Euler, B.G. Teubner, Leipzig, 1983. Ukrainian ed.: 1983, Bulgarian ed.: 1985, Ital-
ian ed.: 1999. Shortened English version: Euler. Episodes from his life and work, in: Proceedings of the
CSHPM/SCHPM 23rd Annual Meeting, Memorial University, St. John’s, Newfoundland, 1997, pp. 1–27.
[5] A.P. Youschkevitch, Leonhard Euler, Biographical Dictionary of Mathematics, C. Gillespie, ed., Scribner’s,
New York, 1991, Vol. 2, pp. 736–753 (unaltered reprint from the Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography, New
York, 1970).
III. Secondary literature
[6] F.G. Hartweg, Leonhard Eulers Tätigkeit in der französisch-reformierten Kirche von Berlin, Die Hugenot-
tenkirche 32 (4) (1979), 14–15; 32 (5) (1979), 17–18.
[7] M. Raith, Der Vater Paulus Euler—Beiträge zum Verständnis der geistigen Herkunft Leonhard Eulers, Leon-
hard Euler. Gedenkband des Kantons Basel-Stadt, Johann Jakob Burckhardt et al., eds., Birkhäuser, Basel,
1983, pp. 459–470.
[8] R. Thiele, Euler und Maupertuis vor dem Horizont des teleologischen Denkens. Über die Begründung des
Prinzips der kleinsten Aktion, Schweizer im Berlin des 18. Jahrhunderts, Martin Fontius and Helmut Holzhey,
eds., Akademie-Verlag, Berlin, 1994, pp. 373–390.
[9] A. Tholuck, Vermischte Schriften, Bd. 1, Hamburg, 1839.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 28
Georg Cantor (1845–1918)
Rüdiger Thiele
Universität Leipzig, Medizinische Fakultät, Karl-Sudhoff-Institut für Geschichte der Medizin
und der Naturwissenschaften, Augustplatz 10/11, D-04109 Leipzig, Germany
E-mail: thieler@medizin.uni-leipzig.de
Contents
1. The mathematician Cantor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 525
2. Short vita of Cantor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 527
3. Mathematics and metaphysics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 528
4. Mathematics and religion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 533
5. Paradoxes and truth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 540
6. Religious denomination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 543
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 547
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
523


Georg Cantor (1845–1918)
525
Credo, ut intellegam.
(I believe in order to understand.)
Anselmus1
1. The mathematician Cantor
Any reader of a modern mathematical textbook will be confronted with notions and con-
cepts that were introduced by Georg Cantor, the founder of set theory. He founded this
highly original theory in a series of only a few papers from 1874 to 1897. However, this
unique work in which Cantor extended mathematics into philosophy and in which he vio-
lated the principles of religion was the subject of much criticism as well. Laurence Young
(1905–2000) wrote in his book “Mathematicians and Their Times”:2
“In times of rule of thumb authoritarianism, regardless of truth, even the best mathematicians can
be quarrelsome and intolerant, especially to someone who breaks not only with longstanding math-
ematical traditions but [also with] established beliefs outside mathematics, such as the authorship
of Shakespeare’s plays, and the Immaculate Conception”.
However, among Cantor’s supporters, les Cantoriens, as Henri Poincaré (1854–1912)
called them, were the leading mathematicians of Göttingen. At the beginning of the 20th
century when antinomies began to appear in set theory, it was David Hilbert (1862–1943)
who said:
“No one shall expel us from the paradise that Cantor has created for us”.3
It is rather remarkable that Hilbert uses here a biblical metaphor like the mathematicians
of the bygone 18th century used to do. The reason to take up biblical images such as this
might root in the estimation of Cantor by Hilbert who regarded him as the profoundest
mathematician of our age. And it was Stanislaw Ulam (1909–1984) who put Cantor into a
line with Jesus (0?–33?), Karl Marx (1818–1883),and Sigmund Freud (1856–1939).David
Hilbert praised Georg Cantor as a scholar who is unrivalled by all mathematicians from
Euler to Einstein.4 On the other hand, it was no other than Henri Poincaré who regarded
Cantor’s set theory as an illness, “un beau cas pathologique”.5
Who was this mathematician, Georg Cantor, who created the revolutionary set theory
and the concepts of inﬁnity, but who never lectured on these topics at a university.6 What
were the beliefs of that outstanding mathematician whose theological writings destroyed
1The paradox “Credo quia absurdum” (I believe because it is absurd) is ascribed to Tertullian (155–220). Au-
gustine opposed this idea with the words “Crede ut intellegas”. Anselmus of Canterbury (1033–1109) echoed
Augustine’s words.
2North Holland, Amsterdam, 1981, p. 232.
3“Aus dem Paradies, das Cantor uns geschaffen, soll uns niemand vertreiben können”. Quoted from Über das
Unendliche. Lecture delivered in Münster 1925. Mathematische Annalen 95 (1925), also in the 7th edition of
Grundlagen der Geometrie, Teubner, Leipzig, 1930.
4“kein Mathematiker aller Zeiten von Euler bis Einstein” übertrifft ihn. Draft of a letter, Niedersächsische
Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Göttingen, Handschriftenabteilung, Cod. Ms. D. Hilbert 457.
5L’avenir des mathématiques, in: Atti del IV congresso internazionale dei matematici, vol. 1, G. Castelnuovo,
ed., Academia dei Lincei, Roma, 1909, p. 182.
6Yet, in the summer of 1885 Cantor called his class on number theory an “Introduction to the theory of order
types”, with an oblique reference to the revolutionary theory that he was developing. Moreover, he lectured on
set theory in seminars.

526
R. Thiele
his friendship with the good-natured Hermann Amandus Schwarz (1843–1921), a fellow-
student of his college days in Berlin. It perturbed Schwarz that his old friend quoted the
Fathers of Church to elucidate irrational numbers:
“Now that I have had the opportunity to study the text at leisure I cannot hide the fact that I regard it
as pathological aberration. What in the world have the early fathers to do with irrational numbers?
I deeply trust it will not prove that our patient has arrived at that crooked course from which the
unhappy Zöllner7 never found his way back to occupation with concrete tasks”.8
On the occasion of the ﬁrst International Congress of Mathematicians in Zurich 1897,
Adolf Hurwitz (1859–1919) openly expressed his great admiration of Cantor, we read in
a history of set theory.9 On the other hand, at the same time Hermann Minkowski (1864–
1909), a close friend of Hurwitz, wrote to David Hilbert:
“Hurwitz’s brother writes that Cantor of Halle has been offered a chair in Munich. Seems rather
peculiar. The chair of Shakespearology?”10
And Georg Cantor himself? He was unhappy with both his unsatisfying position in Halle
and the lacking appreciation of his set-theoretic work. Nevertheless, guided by his philo-
sophical mind he declared (here in the words of Hilbert): “There are many objections which
are of interest only for whom who makes them”.11
For Cantor, however, scientiﬁc knowledge and religious belief were untearably con-
nected, both were rolled into one, united in the end. Understanding the (earthly) theory of
inﬁnite sets was for Cantor a necessary condition to begin to understand the inﬁnity of God:
“If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe, if I tell you of heavenly
things”? (John 3:12)
7Johann Karl Friedrich Zöllner (1834–1882), physicist, astrophysicist, founder of astrophotometry, belonged to
the staff of the University of Leipzig which is not far from Cantor’s hometown Halle. In the end, Zöllner turned
towards “spiritism”.
8“Nachdem ich Gelegenheit erhalten habe, den Aufsatz [Mitteilungen zur Lehre vom Transﬁniten, I, Zeitschrift
für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik 91 (1887), 81–125, 251–270; also Gesammelte Abhandlungen,
pp. 240–265] mit Muße anzusehen, kann ich nicht verhehlen, daß mir derselbe als eine krankhafte Verirrung
erscheint. Was haben denn in aller Welt die Kirchenväter mit den Irrationalzahlen zu tun? [...] Möchte sich
doch die Befürchtung nicht bewahrheiten, daß unser Patient auf derselben schiefen Linie angelangt sei, von der
unglückliche Zöllner den Rückgang zur Beschäftigung mit concreten Aufgaben nicht mehr gefunden hat”. Letter
to Weierstraß of October 17, 1887.
9P.E. Johnson, A History of Set Theory, Boston, MA, 1972.
10“Hurwitz’ Bruder schreibt, dass Cantor aus Halle nach München berufen sei. Die Nachricht klingt sehr selt-
sam. Etwa auf einen Lehrstuhl für Shakespearology”? H. Minkowski, Briefe an David Hilbert, L. Rüdenberg,
ed., Springer, Berlin, 1973, p. 97. The 105 letters are preserved in the Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitäts-
bibliothek Göttingen, Handschriftenabteilung. Nachlass Hilbert, Cod. Ms. D. Hilbert 258.—Minkowski hints at
Cantor’s habit to leave mathematics which often took place after Cantor suffered a period of depression and
then turned towards religion, philosophy and literature. For example, Cantor was deeply convinced and defended
strongly his belief that Francis Bacon (1561–1626) wrote the plays of William Shakespeare (1564–1616), see
Section “Religious denomination”. He published some pamphlets on this subject, the ﬁrst of them was “Resur-
rectio Divi Quirini Baconi”, Halle 1896. Invited to the 500th anniversary of the foundation of the University of St.
Andrews in Scotland in 1911, Cantor (mis)used the opportunity and talked at length on that Bacon–Shakespeare
question.
11“Es gibt viele Einwendungen, die nur für den Interesse haben, der sie macht—pﬂegte Cantor zu sagen”.
Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Göttingen, Handschriftenabteilung, Cod. Ms. D. Hilbert 681,
Bl. 19.

Georg Cantor (1845–1918)
527
2. Short vita of Cantor
Georg Cantor was born in St. Petersburg, Russia, in 1854 where his father Woldemar Georg
Cantor (1813?–1863) was a successful merchant. As Herbert Meschkowski (1909–1990)
noted
“the letters to his son [Georg] attest to a cheerfulness of spirit and deep appreciation of art and
religions”.12
Among the ancestors of his mother Marie Böhme (1819–1896)were some well-known mu-
sicians, and Georg Cantor described himself also as “rather artistically inclined”. His father
was Protestant, his mother was Roman Catholic. Georg Cantor married Vally Guttmann
(1849–1923) in 1874. They were married by a Protestant minister and their six children re-
ceived their ﬁrst communion at the Protestant St. Bartholomew church in Halle. So Cantor
was a Protestant, but the fact that his mother was a Roman Catholic may have had some
inﬂuence on him. As a matter of fact, because of Cantor’s philosophical ideas concerning
the inﬁnite he developed links with Catholicism, as we will see. In the end Georg Cantor
was buried by a Protestant priest in Halle at the Giebichenstein cemetery (i.e. he was, at
least formally, a parishioner of a Protestant community). He was later interred in a new
grave when this cemetery was transformed into a park in the 60s.
In 1856, Cantor’s father became ill, and the family moved from St. Petersburg to Ger-
many. After a short period at the University of Zürich, Cantor went to the University of
Berlin where he attended the lectures of Karl Weierstraß (1815–1897), Leopold Kronecker
(1823–1891), and Ernst Eduard Kummer (1810–1893). In 1867 he wrote his dissertation
“De aequationibus secundi gradus indeterminandi” (On indeterminate equations of sec-
ond order), and was habilitated two years later in Halle in 1869. His friend Schwarz, then
professor at the University of Halle, managed to install Cantor in Halle when he left for
Zürich in 1869. Although Cantor started his Halle career without a salary he remained for
the rest of his life in the small Prussian town. In a letter to Charles Hermite (1822–1901)
he thanked God for his being in Halle:
“I am only grateful to God, the all-wise and inﬁnitely kind that he denied me the fulﬁllment of these
desires [a call from Berlin or Göttingen],13 for in doing so he compelled me, through penetration
into the theology, better to serve him and his Holy Roman Catholic Church then I had done with
my poor mathematical talent, through extension exclusively to mathematics”.14
From 1884 Cantor suffered sporadically from mental illness (manic depression) and in all
he spent more than four years in hospitals. Nevertheless, he remained active in mathematics
and in organizing mathematical congresses, the foundation of the German Association of
Mathematicians (Deutsche Mathematiker-Vereinigung), etc. At the turn of the century, his
work was ﬁnally accepted as fundamental to mathematics, moreover his set theory was
12Biographical Dictionary of Mathematicians, vol. 1, Scribners, New York, 1991, p. 400.
13It was Cantor’s dream to receive a call from Berlin (or, at least, from Göttingen).
14“Allein nun danke ich Gott, dem Allweisen und Allgütigen, daß er mir die Erfüllung dieser Wünsche [Beru-
fung nach Göttingen oder Berlin] versagt hat, denn so hat er mich gezwungen, durch ein tieferes Eindringen in
die Theologie Ihm und seiner heiligen römischen-katholischen Kirche beßer zu dienen, als ich es, nach meinem
wahrscheinlich schwachen mathematischen Talent, durch ausschließliche Beschäftigung mit der Mathematik
hätte tun können”. Letter to Hermite of January 24, 1894.

528
R. Thiele
Fig. 1. Georg Cantor. Courtesy of the University of Hamburg.
regarded as a landmark in human thought. Hilbert’s ﬁrst problem in the famous collection
delivered at the Paris Congress in 1900 concerned the celebrated Continuum Hypothesis
(CH), a conjecture that without Cantor’s set theory could not even be formulated. The
problem was only solved half a century later by Kurt Gödel (1906–1978), Paul Cohen
(born 1924), and Petr Vopenka (born 1935).15
3. Mathematics and metaphysics
From Antiquity until the end of the nineteenth century, in mathematics the “potential inﬁ-
nite” was rigorously distinguished from the “actual inﬁnite”. Aristotle (384–322 BC), René
Descartes (1596–1650),Blaise Pascal (1623–1662),and Carl Friedrich Gauß (1777–1855),
just to mention a few names, had rejected the actual or complete inﬁnite as unknowable
and avoided its application like the devil avoids holy water. At the time of Cantor’s life
Leopold Kronecker was probably the most zealous defender of such views. However, not
all mathematicians, opposed the actual inﬁnite. Here we can mention Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibniz (1646–1716) and Bernhard Bolzano (1781–1848).
In this tradition of discussions on inﬁnity Cantor was a major participant. A very brief
description of his mathematical results would run as follows. He turned arbitrary collec-
tions of things into mathematical objects and in a very general sense of the word he counted
15It was solved negatively, in the sense that it became clear that CH is independent of the other axioms of set
theory.

Georg Cantor (1845–1918)
529
Fig. 2. Georg Cantor. Science Photo Library.
these collections and calculated with the resulting numbers (the ﬁnite and transﬁnite num-
bers). A possible consequence of this approach could be that mathematics is nothing more
than a generalized set theory, which would imply that all foundational problems of mathe-
matics would be reduced to the problems of the foundation of set theory.
A decisive circumstance in Cantor’s consideration was the fact that not all inﬁnite sets
have the same power or mathematical size (Mächtigkeit). In Weierstraß’s seminar Cantor
had learned that the set of rational numbers can be counted in the sense that with every
rational number corresponds a unique natural number. In 1873 Cantor wrote to Richard
Dedekind (1831–1916) that the set of real numbers cannot be counted (letter of Decem-
ber 7, 1873; in: Briefe, 1991, pp. 35–36). In 1874 the result was published in Cantor’s
paper “Über eine Eigenschaft des Inbegriffs” (About a property of the totality)16 and this
publication can be legitimately seen as the birth of set theory. Cantor expresses the power
of an inﬁnite set by means of so-called transﬁnite cardinal numbers. The development of
Cantor’s conception of the cardinal numbers can brieﬂy described as follows. First, from
1877 until 1885 Cantor viewed a cardinal number as a “determined set, consisting of only
ones [units]”.17 In a letter to Dedekind of August, 1899, we ﬁnd a cardinal number deﬁned
as an equivalence class18 and ﬁnally after 1899 Cantor introduced a cardinal number as the
ﬁrst number of a number class.
16Crelle Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik 77 (1874), 258–262.
17Beiträge zur Begründung der transﬁniten Mengenlehre, Mathematische Annalen 46 (1895), 481–512. Also in
Gesammelte Abhandlungen, p. 283.
18In: Briefe, 1991, pp. 405–413.

530
R. Thiele
Fig. 3. Concept of a letter written on Sept. 14, 1891 by Georg Cantor to Prof. Lossen in Heidelberg. Courtesy of
the Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Göttingen.
We will now proceed with a brief introduction to the theory of transﬁnite numbers.
In the “Grundlagen einer allgemeinen Mannigfaltigkeitslehre” (Foundations of a general
theory of manifolds) of 1883 Cantor’s research reached a milestone. The transﬁnite ordinal
numbers were presented as a coherent extension of the natural numbers. The transﬁnite
ordinal numbers can be introduced as follows. The sequence of natural numbers 0, 1, 2,
3, 4, ... can be obtained by the repeated addition of a unit. There is no largest element.
Yet, we can imagine a ﬁrst transﬁnite ordinal number ω that follows the entire sequence of
natural numbers. Once we have ω we can go on adding units and we get
0,1,2,3,4,...,ω,ω + 1,ω + 2,ω + 3,...
Again, we can imagine a ﬁrst number ω + ω that follows this entire sequence. In this way
Cantor goes on, precisely deﬁning the way in which this sequence of transﬁnite ordinal

Georg Cantor (1845–1918)
531
numbers continues:
0,1,2,3,4,...,ω,ω + 1,ω + 2,ω + 3,...,ω + ω,ω + ω + 1,ω + ω + 2,...,
ω + ω + ω,ω + ω + ω + 1,...
A remarkable property of the sequence of ordinal numbers is that each number corresponds
to the well-ordered set of numbers that proceeds in the sequence: if we count {0,1,2} we
get 3, if we count {0,1,2,3,...,ω,ω + 1,ω + 3} we get ω + 3, etc.19
The addition of ﬁnite ordinal numbers can be deﬁned as follows. 7 + 3 means: count
till seven and add three more units; the result is 10. For the transﬁnite ordinal numbers
Cantor deﬁned the addition in the analogous way. α + β means: count till α and add β
more units. In other words: Take well-ordered sets A and B so that α and β correspond
to A and B respectively; α + β is then the numbering of the well-ordered set obtained by
considering the ordered elements of A followed by the ordered elements of B. Clearly,
addition is associative; however, it is not commutative, because 3 + ω is by deﬁnition of
addition the numbering of the well-ordered set {0,1,2,0,1,2,3,4,...}. This set has the
ordinal number ω, which is unequal to ω + 3. In the “Grundlagen” Cantor convincingly
showed that such transﬁnite ordinal numbers possess all properties that are required of a
regular mathematically interesting number system.
An important notion in Cantor’s set theory is the notion of power. Two sets are of the
same power, if there is a one-to-one correspondence between their elements. For example,
the set of natural numbers and the set of even natural numbers are of the same power. If we
map by means of the mapping n →2n the natural numbers 0,1,2,3,...,n,... on the even
numbers 0,2,4,6,...,2n,... respectively, we have a one-to-one correspondence, which
proves it. One of Cantor’s ﬁrst results was the discovery (1873) that the set of natural
numbers N and the set of real numbers do not have the same power: R is as for power
essentially larger than N. This was a very remarkable result. It implies that R is non-
denumerable; it is not possible to ﬁnd a well-ordering of R such that the ordinal number of
the set is ω.
In the “Grundlagen” Cantor does not yet treat these powers of sets as transﬁnite num-
bers. Yet, in 1883, the year of publication of the “Grundlagen”, he was already aware of
the fact that powers of sets can be considered as numbers. For example, all sets of two
elements obviously have the same power, by deﬁnition this is the ﬁnite cardinal number 2.
The smallest transﬁnite cardinal number is the number of the set of natural numbers N.
Cantor represented it as ℵ0 (aleph-zero) using the ﬁrst letter of the Hebrew alphabet. ℵ0
is the cardinal number of many sets: the even natural numbers, the integers, the prime
numbers, the rational numbers, etc. The sequence of cardinal numbers starts as follows:
ℵ0,ℵ1,ℵ2,ℵ3,ℵ4,.... Cantor deﬁned an arithmetic for cardinal numbers as well. Expo-
nentiations is deﬁned as follows: 2ℵ0 is by deﬁnition the power of the set of all functions
from a set of two elements to N. The repeated application of the operation of exponentation
quickly leads to huge cardinal numbers. 2ℵ0 is the cardinal number of the set of all subsets
of N; ℵ1 the cardinal number of the set of R, the numbers of points of a line (and astonish-
ingly in any Euclidean space, etc.). The equality 2ℵ0 = ℵ1 is in fact the above mentioned
19Systematically: ∅= 0, {0} = 1, {0,1} = 2, {0,1,2,} = 3, etc.

532
R. Thiele
Fig. 4. Balancing on an aleph, Cantor, who felt he derived the foundation of his theory of the inﬁnite from “the
ﬁrst cause of all things created”, feels secure facing the attacks of his critic Kronecker (drawing by Barbe).
Continuum Hypothesis (CH). It expresses that there are no sets with a cardinality between
the cardinalities of N and R. Cantor thought CH was true, but he did not succeed in prov-
ing it. He was troubled by the fear he could not prove the “continuum hypothesis”, and he
was right. The question was whether the order of inﬁnity of the real numbers was the next
after that of the natural numbers. In Cantor’s picture of set theory as a staircase of alephs
leading to God’s throne (the absolute and complete inﬁnity) the ﬁrst step of the stairs is
already missed. Today we know there is a bifurcation at the beginning of the staircase, and
at present most mathematicians use that part of the stairs which is formed in a series of
stages, the iterative hierarchy delivered by the Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms (ZFC).
Let us shortly look back. Cantor started with well-ordered sets which consisted of de-
numerably elements. The totality of such well-ordered sets represents a new number class
which is called second number class. The sets contained in this second number class are
non-denumerable. Proceeding in the same way we arrive at a third number class, etc. In
this way different orders of inﬁnity are built up. The procedure coincidences with our usual
understanding for ﬁnite sets: Every transﬁnite multiplicity, that is, every consistent transﬁ-
nite set, must have a deﬁnite aleph as its cardinal number. However, all was not going well.
David Hilbert was the ﬁrst, yet before Cesare Burali-Forti (1861–1931) in 1897 and even
before Cantor himself in 1895, who publicly referred to contradictions in totalities of set
theory (we will in detail deal with later).20
20O. Hölder, Die mathematische Methode, Springer, Berlin, 1924, p. 547; cf. also B. Rang and W. Thom, Zer-
melo’s discovery of the ‘Russel Paradox’, Historia Mathematica 8 (1981), 15–22.

Georg Cantor (1845–1918)
533
The system of transﬁnite ordinal numbers enabled Cantor to study questions concerning
incredibly large sets. Cantor’s arithmetic of inﬁnite sets touches on the old question of the
limits of human ability to handle the inﬁnite. The human mind is ﬁnite, limited. To what
extent is it possible for such a limited human brain to grasp the inﬁnite, to transmit and ex-
press it in ﬁnite terms? Can we conceive of the inﬁnite or represent it in ﬁnite terms? Such
structures constructed by Cantorian concepts appear to come from a different world, from
a world beyond that of our senses, i.e. are we able at least to get a glimpse of it as in Plato’s
famous allegory of the Cave? Cantor’s paradise of set theory does not seem to be part
of our (physical) world. The philosophical question is: Does the Inﬁnite (“Transﬁnitum”)
exist and in what sense? The Greeks were the ﬁrst to study such questions. In Platonic
thought eternal truth cannot come from the world of changing and temporal things; man is
not able to encounter the world of Ideas and eternal Truth through the senses. Getting in
touch with the Ideas is a spiritual affair. Augustine (354–430) picked up Plato’s views and
in his religious interpretation the Platonic world of Ideas becomes a Divine world of truth.
In this view mathematical truth exists before human being knows it, such truth is a creation
of God.
Cantor was greatly attracted by such mathematical-philosphical-theological consider-
ations, and that is why he was strongly inﬂuenced by the philosophical works of such
scholastic Catholics as Augustine and Nicholas of Cusa (1401–1464). Felix Klein (1849–
1925) pointed out in his lectures on the development of Mathematics in the 19th century:
“If we strip away this mantel from the scholastic sophistries which superﬁcially appear purely
theological sophistries, it turns out that they are frequently the most concrete beginnings of what
we now call the theory of sets. So even Georg Cantor, the creator of set theory, learnt his craft by
the scholastics”.21
Laurence Young wrote that concepts of inﬁnity introduced by Bradwardine (about 1295–
1349) and other contemporaries had to wait 600 years to be developed by Georg Cantor.
Moreover, Cantor extended his mathematical research to the metaphysical foundation of
mathematics and, furthermore, to theological doctrines. Hilbert described Cantor’s work
as one of the most beautiful realization of human activity in the domain of the purely
intelligible. All in all, regarding such new questions how to distinguish powers in the realm
of the inﬁnite and such new extensions to the metaphysical foundation of mathematics
using a biblical metaphor we can say with Cantor the dawn of the eighth day of Creation
had come.
4. Mathematics and religion
Gioacchino Pecci (1810–1903) became Pope Leo XIII in 1878. For Leo XIII Thomas
Aquinas (1225?–1274) was the authoritative theologian and philosopher, the Dr. ecclesiae.
On August 4, 1879 Leo XIII issued the encyclical “Aeterni Patris”. The result of “Aeterni
21“Entkleidet man die scholastischen Spitzﬁndigkeiten dieses Gewandes, das sie dem oberﬂächlichen Blick
als reine theologische Spitzﬁndigkeit erscheinen läßt, so erweisen sie sich häuﬁg als die konkretesten Ansätze
dessen, was wir heute als “Mengenlehre” bezeichnen. [...] Tatsächlich ist denn auch Georg Cantor, der Schöpfer
der Mengenlehre, bei den Scholastikern in die Schule gegangen”. In: Vorlesungen über die Entwicklung der
Mathematik im 19. Jahrhundert, Springer, Berlin, 1925, vol. 1, p. 52.

534
R. Thiele
Patris” was that the interest in science among Roman Catholic intellectuals grew consider-
ably. Constantin Gutberlet (1837–1928), in 1888 founder of the “Philosphisches Jahrbuch
der Görres-Gesellschaft”,22 a review journal of clear neo-Thomistic signature, was one
of them. Others were Father Esser (1850–1920), and Cardinal Johannes Baptist Franzelin
(1816–1886). The goal of the encyclical was a revival and modernization of Christian phi-
losophy along Thomistic lines. According to the neo-Thomists the developments in science
had led to false philosophies: materialism, atheism, liberalism. Leo XIII envisioned a rec-
onciliation of modern science with Christian philosophy. In the encyclical he argued that
modern science could greatly proﬁt from Scholastic philosophy. It was the interest of these
Roman Catholic intellectuals in scholastic philosophy and the inﬁnite that was brought
Cantor into contact with them. In February 1896 Georg Cantor expressed himself on the
encyclical to father Thomas Esser, SJ, as follows:
“In this sense, I believe, in the encyclical Aeterni Patris and on many other occasions the holy
Father Leo XIII urges the philosopher to study the natural sciences (and consequently mathematics
as well, because without it science cannot exist) in order that the Christian philosophy as revitalized
by the great pope, will not look like an Egyptian mummy, but rather represent an image of Adam,
the Adam as he emerged from the hand of the Creator and was breathed upon by Him before the
moment of the tragic Fall”.23
In 1891 Cantor wrote to the Jesuit Tilman Pesch (1836–1899) that he is very pleased to
see that the order (Society of Jesu) is taking more and more interest in higher mathematics
(letter of September 8, 1891). As we see in a letter to Father Thomas Esser, SJ, Cantor also
wished to contribute:
“It would please me best if my work would to be of beneﬁt to the Christian philosophers dearest
to my heart, to the ‘philosophia perennis’[lasting philosophy]”.24
A few month later he wrote that there is
“an inseverable bond which links metaphysics with theology” (unzerreiß bares Band, das Meta-
physic mit Theologie verbindet) and “the foundation of the principles of mathematics and natural
sciences devolves upon metaphysics” (die Begründung der Mathematik und Naturwissenschaften
fällt der Metaphysik zu).25
22Joseph von [since 1839] Görres (1776–1848) was an inﬂuential catholic author and from 1827 to 1848 profes-
sor of literary science in München. After the foundation of the German Reich in 1871 from 1872 a confrontation—
called “Kulturkampf” (culture war)—occurred between in particular the Prussian state and the catholic church.
In 1876 at the one hundredth anniversary of Von Görres as an answer to the Kulturkampf catholic intellectu-
als founded the Görres-Gesellschaft (Görres Society) for the advancement of the sciences (excluding theology).
Under Leo XIII (pope since 1878) the culture battle was arranged.
23“In diesem Sinn wird, glaube ich, in der Encyclica “Aeterna Patris” und auch sonst bei vielen Gelegenheiten
vom heil.[igen] Vater Leo XIII das Studium der Naturwissenschaften (und folglich auch der Math.[ematik], ohne
welche jene nicht durchführbar sind) dem Philosophen an’s Herz gelegt, damit die vom großen Papste repris-
tinirte [wieder belebte] christliche Philosophie nicht einer ägyptischen Mumie gleiche, sondern vielmehr ein
Bildnis Adams sei, und zwar Adams, so wie [er] aus der Hand des Schöpfers hervorgegangen [ist] und von ihm
angehaucht vor dem Zeitpunkt des traurigen Sündefalls beschaffen war”. Quotation from a letter to father Esser
of February 1, 1896, in: H. Meschkowski, Aus den Briefbüchern Georg Cantors, Archive for History of Exact
Sciences 22 (1962–1966), 503–519, quotation is on p. 512.
24“Am Meisten würde es mich aber freuen, wenn meine Arbeiten der meinen Herzen am nächsten stehenden
christlichen Philosophen, der ‘philosohia perennis’ zu Gute käme”. Letter of December 19, 1895.
25Letter to Father Esser February 1, 1896.

Georg Cantor (1845–1918)
535
Mathematical research corresponds to considerations on Creation, and its results are there-
fore steps towards God. In different ways Cantor expressed repeatedly the intimate in-
volvement of mathematics with the Divine via metaphysics. According to him mathemat-
ical research corresponds to considerations on creation, and its results are therefore steps
towards God. For Cantor mathematics serves metaphysics and religion, and set theory is
even integrated into metaphysics (as science of the existing). In a letter to Father Thomas
Esser he wrote:
“Every extension of our insight into the origin of the creatively-possible therefore must lead to an
extension of our knowledge of God”.26
The statement has a physico-theological ring: the extension of our scientiﬁc knowledge
leads us to a theological truth. Moreover, on the other hand metaphysics is essentially
involved in science:
“In my opinion, without a modicum of metaphysics no foundation of any exact science is possi-
ble”.27
And a few lines later Cantor explained his Platonic thinking:
“As I view it, Metaphysics is the science of the existing, the world as it is, and not as it appears
to us to be. Everything that we perceive with the senses and all that we conceive with our abstract
thinking is non-existing, and thus at most a clue to that which exists of itself”.28
From this Cantor deduced that in any metaphysical discussion theology is necessarily pro-
foundly involved and that each actual progress in metaphysics enlarges the precepts of
theology.
Cantor distinguished sharply between in concreto and in abstracto (concrete and ab-
stract).29 Those oriented toward Platonic philosophy accepted actual inﬁnity in abstracto
but not in concreto whereas Cantor believed that the actual inﬁnitum (Transﬁnitum) occurs
as well concretely and abstractly (in concreto and in abstracto). Cantor was convinced that
in concreto the atoms of our physical world form an actually inﬁnite set with cardinality
ℵ030 and he believed that the set of the atoms of the universal ether is essentially bigger
and possesses the power ℵ1 of the continuum, i.e. has the cardinality 2ℵ0.
With Cardinal Johannes Baptist Franzelin Cantor discussed whether inﬁnite sets occur
in abstracto or in concreto in God’s Creation and whether Creation is a necessary con-
sequence of God’s completeness. Cantor believed in the transﬁnitum in concreto in the
26“Jede Erweiterung unserer Einsicht in das Gebiet des Creatürlich-möglichen muß daher zu einer erweiterten
Gotteserkenntnis führen”. Quoted from the Archive for History of Exact Sciences 2 (1965), 511.
27“Ohne ein Quentchen Metaphysik läßt sich meiner Überzeugung nach, keine exacte Wissenschaft begründen”.
Page of the Nachlass, about 1913.
28“Metaphysik ist, wie ich sie auffasse, die Lehre vom Seienden, also von der Welt wie sie an sich ist, nicht wie
sie uns erscheint. Alles was wir mit den Sinnen wahrnehmen und mit unserm abstracten Denken uns vorstellen,
ist Nichtseiendes und damit höchstens eine Spur des an sich Seienden”. Page of the Nachlass, about 1913.
29By means of the ontological question that the theory of sets brought up and the contradiction (paradoxes)
associated with the theory in combination with the attempts to neutralize them, Cantor shook the platonic way
of thinking in mathematics. For David Hilbert the main foundational problem concerning formal mathematical
systems did not concern truth or meaning, but certainty (consistency). Apparently, Cantor himself did not notice
this shift in focus concerning the foundations of mathematics, that he had caused.
30In 1931 Sir A. Eddington computed the total number of electrons and protons in the universe as 1.3 × 1079
each.

536
R. Thiele
created world (in natura naturata or in the universe) and in the transﬁnitum in abstracto in
thought (transﬁnite numbers in human knowledge). He wrote:
“This groundwork, which I consider to be the sole correct one, is held only by a few. While
possibly I am the very ﬁrst in history to take this position so positively, [...] I know for sure that I
shall not be the last”.31
The Cardinal agreed that Cantor deduced the possibility of a Transﬁnitum from the concept
of the all-mighty of God, however, he disagreed when Cantor deduced the necessity of
the Creation of a Transﬁnitum from the inﬁnite Goodness and Glory of God. Cardinal
Franzelin regarded the necessity of Creation by God as a contradiction in itself and he
argued that on the contrary God’s freedom to create is essential. Franzelin pointed out that
Cantor’s view that the transﬁnite exists in nature is a dangerous view, because any attempt
to identify God’s inﬁnity with the natural world seemed to be closed to pantheism. Politely
in his answer in 1886, Cantor weakened the arguments into that of our subjective feeling
for a necessity of Creation. He wrote that one ought not forget the distinction between the
absolute inﬁnite and the actual inﬁnite. The actual inﬁnite we can grasp in our set-theoretic
considerations. The absolute inﬁnite, however, we cannot know. With that distinction the
cardinal could live and saw no longer danger to religious concepts in Cantors transﬁnitum.
Elsewhere Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz maintained: God is pleased with odd numbers.
In a speech Cantor’s teacher Ernst Eduard Kummer explained this statement. Numbers
are God’s not man’s Creation, they are therefore objects like those in natural science. In
Cantor (like Hilbert) all that is needed for mathematical objects to exist is that there is
no logical contradiction in their concept. In mathematics the Almighty Creator is (only)
bond to this logical basic; in nature, however, the Creator has freedom to formulate laws
(i.e. to determine gravitation as depending on mass and distance in this or that manner).
This physico-theological view is found in Baron Christian Wolff (1679–1754), a century
before Cantor professor in Halle, for instance in his “Theologia naturalis”,32 and accepted
by Cantor. However, Cantor insisted that the nature of mathematics consists in its free-
dom (within the bonds, of course, with logic). The theologian Friedrich Schleiermacher
(1768–1834) who was in Halle for some time (1804–1809), would have sided rather with
Cantor. A modern theologian Hans-Georg Fritzsche (1926–1986) says in this connec-
tion:
“The world is as it is, however only founded on fact, but not on any absolute necessity. God is
more than the totality of the laws of nature. Despite he created these laws, he could have had in
mind quite another laws and could have created those”.33
One of the leading 19th century German neo-Thomists, Constantin Gutberlet, a disciple
of Cardinal Franzelin, wrote the book “The inﬁnite regarded metaphysically and mathe-
31“Auf diesem Boden, den ich für den einzig richtigen halte, stehen nur wenige, vielleicht bin ich zeitlich der
erste, der diesen Standpunkt mit voller Bestimmtheit [...] vertritt, doch das weiß ich sicher, daß ich nicht der
letzte sein werde, der ihn verteidigt!”. In: Gesammelte Abhandlungen, p. 372.
32Halle, 1739, Reprint 1978, esp. §799.
33“Die Welt ist, wie sie ist, doch nur faktisch so, aber nicht aus einer ihr zukommenden absoluten Notwendigkeit.
Gott ist mehr als der Inbegriff der Naturgesetze, die Gott zwar geschaffen, die er aber auch ganz anders hätte
wollen und schaffen können”. In: Lehrbuch der Dogmatik, Teil II: Lehre von Gott und der Schöpfung, Evangelis-
che Verlagsanstalt, Berlin, 1967, p. 124.

Georg Cantor (1845–1918)
537
matically”.34 Gutberlet used Cantor’s transﬁnite numbers to support his own ideas on the
absolute inﬁnity of God’s existence. With this author Cantor discussed the way in which the
arguments were presented in the book (and which Cantor found rather scholastic). Never-
theless, in these discussions Cantor acquired a great deal of his knowledge of the scholastic
philosophy. To the mathematician Ivar Bendixson (1861–1935) Cantor wrote that the au-
thor is a Catholic theologian and this would explain much of his style (letter of November
11, 1886).
In his textbook “Allgemeine Metaphysik” (General Metaphysics) which appeared in
1879 and saw a third edition in 1897, Gutberlet dealt in Chapter 8, which is called “Die
Vollkommenheit” (The Perfection), with inﬁnite sets. In the Preface to the ﬁrst edition Gut-
berlet mentions “an unassailable principle of the holy Thomas [of Aquino] about relative
inﬁnity”. Thomas had corrected Aristotle’s conception of inﬁnity. Aristotle only accepted
potential inﬁnity. Thomas had argued that although a “constructive” notion of the actually
inﬁnite is inconsistent, it is perfectly acceptable to study the “relative actually inﬁnite”
(inﬁnitum actu secundum quid). We cannot actually construct the set of natural numbers,
because it has no maximum element. Yet, we can consistently consider the totality of all
natural numbers as an actually inﬁnite set by, as it were, stepping out of the process of
construction and look at it from the outside. In the second edition of his book Gutberlet
mentions Cantor, whose “brilliant works about the theory of manifolds and the transﬁnite
numbers” have strengthened the opinion of the author:
“With much perspicacity the brilliant mathematician G. Cantor defends the actually inﬁnite set
and he has even created a mathematics of the transﬁnite number which he explained and founded
in numerous writings”.35
Gutberlet also quotes Louis Couturat (1868–1914) which considered Cantor’s works as
ﬁtting answers to the objections of G.W. Leibniz and Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) and for
whom “the giddy piling of inﬁnities on top of each other”36 was in existence.
Gutberlet demonstrated that there is no contradiction in the concept of an actually inﬁnite
set; the headline of §4 in Chapter 4 in his book “Metaphysik” reads: In the concept of
an actually inﬁnite set we cannot point out contradictions.37 From this point of view he
found Cantor’s set theory as a support of his concepts. We read: “By G. Cantor’s stroke
of genius on set theory the opinion of the author concerning the inﬁnite entities has got a
very strong mainstay”. (Metaphysik, Preface of the second edition 1890). However, there
were differences between Cantor and Gutberlet too. Cantor wrote in the mentioned letter
to Bendixson: “You will note that he [Gutberlet] is not everywhere successful in defending
of the actual inﬁnite because among others he tries to deduce the actual inﬁnite from the
differentials and so misses his aim completely because differentials represent a potential
34Das Unendliche, metaphysisch und mathematisch betrachtet, Mainz, 1878.
35“Mit vielem Scharfsinn vertheidigt der geniale Mathematiker G. Cantor die actual unendliche Menge und[, er]
hat sogar eine Mathematik der transﬁniten Zahl geschaffen und in zahlreichen Schriften erklärt und begründet”.
Allgemeine Metaphysik, 3rd edition, p. 183.
36Gutberlet in his Metaphysik (3rd edition, p. 184) quotes in German and gives as source: Couturat, De l’inﬁni
mathématique, Paris, 1896. “Cet échafaudage vertigineux d’inﬁnis superposés, qu’ils croyaient inconcevable,
existe aujourd’hui, construit par un subtil et profond mathématicien [Cantor]”, p. 456.
37Kapitel 8, §4: “In dem Begriff einer actual unendlichen Menge [...] läßt sich kein Widerspruch nachweisen”,
Allgemeine Metaphysik, Theissing’scher Verlag, Münster, 1879, 3rd edition 1897.

538
R. Thiele
inﬁnite only”.38 In a letter to Franz Goldscheider (1852–1926) from September 24, 1886
Cantor regarded the “actual inﬁnitely small quantities” (actual unendlich kleinen Größen)
as “paper entities” (papierne Größen) because that “triﬂing objects does exist only on paper
of their inventors and partisans”.39
A central idea in Thomism (called the fourth way) is that all objects of everyday world
are ﬁnite but they point beyond themselves to the inﬁnite and, moreover, they demand for
completion. Entities participating in such a perfection do not belong to everyday world
(a world without inﬁnitum actu in natura), they must have received that perfection from
something else, not from the surrounding world. In the ﬁeld of mathematics for example,
S. Thomas Aquinas (1225–1274) said there are no kinds of inﬁnite numbers (“nulla autem
species numeri est inﬁnita”),40 i.e. there does not exist a largest natural number. However,
if one wishes to have such an upper bound for all natural numbers it cannot exist within
the set of natural numbers but is to be considered as an exterior element (ideal element)
belonging to another kind. Cantor coined for that kind of numbers the word “transﬁnite
number”. Again, for the kind of transﬁnite numbers limiting natural numbers there does
not exist a major element, and the process begins again, etc. From this point of view we can
read Thomas in a new sight: “The existence of an actual inﬁnite multitude is impossible.
[...] Sets of things are speciﬁed by the number of things in them”.41
The difference between Thomas and Cantor is: Thomas did not accept actual inﬁnities
in the real world, and he attributed the absolute (actual) inﬁnite to God. However, he re-
garded certain relatively inﬁnite sets as admissible. Cantor, however, was convinced that
he had found a principle to insert such (relatively) actual inﬁnities of different kinds, the
transﬁnite numbers (actu inﬁnite), into logic and mathematics and into the real world as
admissible objects. For this purpose Cantor extended the successor function as used in
ﬁnite aggregates to inﬁnite multiplicities just by means of transﬁnite numbers. Cantor’s
biographer Herbert Meschkowski once remarked: “For Cantor the theory of sets was not
only a mathematical discipline. He also integrated it into metaphysics, which he respected
as a science. He sought, too, to tie it in with theology, which used metaphysics as its ‘sci-
entiﬁc tool’. Cantor was convinced that the actually inﬁnite really existed ‘both concretely
and abstractly’ ”.42
At any rate, we should take into account that the concept of inﬁnity is predominant
philosophical (logical and mathematical, respectively) and that is why although Thomas
and Cantor travelled the same route in the end they went into different directions. In the
Sacred Scripture inﬁnity is found in such concepts as God’s omnipotence and almighty,
but also in God’s incomparable love. Let us quote Herbert Meschkowski once more:
38See Cantor’s letter to Aloys von Schmid (1825–1910) of March 26, 1887, and the given arguments for the
inﬁnitely small quantities (differentials) as only a potentially inﬁnite; in: Briefe, 1991, p. 287.
39“weil diese Dingerchen nur auf dem Papiere ihrer Entdecker und Anhänger existieren”. Letter from Octo-
ber 20, 1895. Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Göttingen, Handschriftenabteilung, Math.-
Archiv 47.
40Summa theologica I, q. 7, a. 4.
41Unde impossibile est esse multitudinem inﬁnatam actu [...] Unde necesse est quod sub certo numero omnia
creat comprehendatur, Summa theologica I, q. 7, a. 4. See also on Thomas’ views Gianfranco Basti’s paper on
inﬁnity in the Dizionario Interdisciplinare di Scienza e Fede, Giuseppe Tanzella-Nitti and Alberto Strumia, eds.,
Rome, 2002. Available in English on the web at http://www.disf.org/en/Voci/13.asp.
42Biographical Dictionary of Mathematicians, vol. 1, C. Gillespie, ed., Scribner’s Sons, New York, 1991, p. 404.

Georg Cantor (1845–1918)
539
“To the end Cantor believed that the basis of mathematics was metaphysical, even in those years
when Hilbert’s formalism was beginning to take hold. Found among his papers after his death was
a shakily written penciled note (probably from 1913) in which he reafﬁrms his view that “without
some grain of metaphysics” 43 mathematics is unexplainable. By metaphysics he meant ‘the theory
of being’ ”.44
This echos Kant’s view: “There will always metaphysics in the world, and what is more in
everyone, especially in every thinking man”.45
All numbers comply with rules that are given by the Creator and that is also true for
Cantor’s transﬁnite numbers and their arithmetic developed by Cantor. Transﬁnite numbers
therefore can be subsumed under the words of the Scripture (Wisdom 12: 11):
“You have ordered all by means of number, measure, and weight”. (Omnia in pondere, numero et
mensura disposuisti.)
It is remarkable that in the number system Cantor excluded non-archimedian systems, i.e.
he emphatically rejected inﬁnitesimally small magnitudes. In a letter to Franz Goldschei-
der46 he argued that the Archimedian axiom (axiom of measurability)47 is only a conse-
quence of the concept of linear magnitudes (which is indeed true if we presuppose the
continuity of the magnitudes in the system).48 Later Cantor toned down his rejection of
such quantities and regarded them as quantities that are brought into being only by writing
on paper (letter to Goldscheider, 24.9.1886) only whereas earlier he had even condemned
them as a dangerous “inﬁnitarian bacillus” that threatens Italy (inﬁnitäre Bacillus, der Ital-
ien bedroht; letter of December 13, 1893 to Guilio Vivanti (1859–1949)).49
43“Ohne ein Quentchen [old German measure in pharmacy, Lat. Quentinu)] Metaphysik läßt sich, meiner
Überzeugung nach, keine exacte Wissensachft begründen” (In my opinion, without some grain of metaphysics
it is impossible to found any exact science), in: H. Meschkowski, Mathematik und Realität, Bibliographisches
Institut, Mannheim, 1979, p. 96.
44Biographical Dictionary of Mathematicians, vol. 1, C. Gillespie, ed., Scribner’s Sons, New York, 1991, p. 405.
45I. Kant, Prolegomena zu einer jeden künftigen Metaphysik, Hartknoch, Riga, 1783, p. 367. Prolegomena to
Any Future Metaphysics (transl. by p. Lucas). Liberal Art Press, New York, 1951, p. 163. “Es wird also in der
Welt jederzeit und, was noch mehr, bei jedem vornehmlich nachdenkenden Menschen Metaphysik sein”.
46After Cantor had difﬁculties in March 1885 to publish his theory of types in the Acta mathematica (Letter
to G. Mittag-Lefﬂer of February, 21 and March 15, 1885, in: Meschkowski and Nilson, 1991, pp. 240–242),
he found in the Berlin teacher (Gymnasiallehrer) Franz Goldscheider, his former student, an interested partner
to whom he explained his theory in some quite detailed letters. The concepts of these letters can be found in
a book of letters (Briefbuch) in the Cantor Nachlass in the Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek
Göttingen, Handschriftenabteilung, Cod. Ms. G. Cantor 16–18.
47Euclid, The Elements, Book V, Deﬁnition. 4. “Magnitudes are said to have a ratio to one another which are
capable, when multiplied, of exceeding one another”. T. Heath’s edition, vol. 2 (reprint), Dover, New York, 1956,
p. 114.
48In Gesammelte Abhandlungen, p. 409.
49Let us recall the desperation of Blaise Pascal (1632–1662) that we are incapable of knowing both the inﬁnitely
large as well as the inﬁnitely small, we are wedged in between both extrema and neither bears any relation to us.
“Car enﬁn qu’est-ce que l’homme dans la nature? Un néant à l’égard de l’inﬁni, un tout à l’égard du néant, un
milieu entre rien et tout. Inﬁniment éloigné de comprendre les extrêmes, la ﬁn des choses et leur principe sont
pour lui invinciblement cachés dans un secret impénétrable, également incapable de voir le néant d’ou il est tiré,
et l’inﬁni où il englouti. [...] Qui suivra des étonnantes démarches? Le auteur de ces merveilles les comprend.
Tout autre ne le peut faire”. B. Pascal, Pensées, d’après l’édition de M. Brunschvigg [sic]. Preface E. Boutroux,
G. Crès, Paris, 1913, pp. 26–27; in Brunschvicg’s edition section II, no. 72.

540
R. Thiele
5. Paradoxes and truth
The belief that inﬁnity is paradoxical persisted until the 19th century, and a majority of
mathematicians had therefore avoided the introduction of the actual inﬁnite. Then Cantor
tried to grasp and, moreover, to manipulate inﬁnity using rigorous logical demonstration in
a ﬁnite rational thought. Do his considerations open the way to a complete understanding
of the (at least mathematical) inﬁnite or even of God’s Creation?
Cantor’s theory faced opposition, but the theory generated its own internal problems as
well. Surprisingly contradictions appeared, ﬁrst that of Cesare Burali-Forti in 1897, later
the more inﬂuential great paradox of Bertrand Russell (1872–1970) in 1902.50 Burali-Forti
considered the entire succession of all ordinal numbers and argued that it had to have a cor-
responding ordinal number, bigger than all ordinal numbers, i.e. bigger than itself. Russell
considered the set of all sets that are not an element of itself and showed that such a set
cannot exist. In these counterexamples we again encounter the limits to rational thought,
in view of self-referential reﬂections clearly pointed out by Kurt Gödel in 1931.
Strictly speaking Cantor’s theory did not exclude such arguments and the counter exam-
ples shocked many mathematicians. Actually Cantor himself discovered the inconsistent
sets (like, for example, the superset of all sets) in 1895 or even earlier. Some attempted
to rescue set theory by excluding inconsistent sets (axiomatic systems of Ernst Zermelo
(1871–1953) or Abraham Fraenkel (1891–1965)). Such axiomatic systems are meant to
save set theory by erecting walls against enormous quantities, against non-sets. Henri
Poincaré, who rejected the actual inﬁnite, asked whether after the ﬂock of sheep is fenced
in, the wolf might have already been among the ﬂock.
By Karl Friedrich Heman (1839–1919) Cantor was asked about the relation of two sen-
tences I and II, and in a in a letter June 21, 1888 we read:
“I. The world and its time begun before a ﬁnite space of time, or, in other words, the bygone time
of the world (e.g. measured by hours) is ﬁnite, which is a true sentence and a Christian dogma
(article of faith).
II. There are no actual inﬁnite numbers, which is false and haethen and therefore no Christian
dogma.”
Cantor distinguished the different levels of the statements and his response reads as fol-
lows: Sentence I refers to “concrete world creatures” (concrete creatürliche Welt) and sen-
tence II to the “ideal realm of numbers” (ideale Gebiet der Zahlen) and the truth of sentence
I is no consequence of the truth of sentence II. Finally he remarked: “I do not know which
Roman Catholic misguided you to consider sentence II as a secret of faith”.51 Moreover,
Cantor was absolutely sure that the late Cardinal Franzelin who was versed in scholastic
philosophy would tolerate this opinion.
50Cf. R.M. Sainsbury, Paradoxes, 2nd edition, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995; cf. footnote 20.
51“Es wird von Ihnen das Verhältnis der beiden Sätze: I. Die Welt hat sammet der Zeit vor einem endlichen
Zeitabschnitt angefangen oder was dasselbe sagt, die bisher verﬂossenen Zeitdauer der Welt ist (mit dem Maaß
etwa einer Stunde gemessen) eine endliche, welcher wahr und christlicher Glaubenssatz ist, und II. Es giebt keine
actual unendlichen Zahlen, welcher falsch und heidnisch ist und daher kein christlicher Glaubenssatz sein kann.
[...] Ich weiß nicht, welcher Katholik Sie zu dem gefährlichen Irrtum verleitet hat, den Satz II gewissermaßen
für einen Glaubenssatz zu halten”. Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Göttingen, Handschriften-
abteilung, Cod. Ms. G. Cantor, Briefbücher 16.

Georg Cantor (1845–1918)
541
Fig. 5. Frontispiece of Ex Oriente Lux. Courtesy of the Universitäts- und Landesbibliothek Halle.
Much of mathematics is or can be founded on the concept of the inﬁnite, and there-
fore the discovery of inconsistent sets shocked the axiomatic wing in mathematics ﬁrst of
all. Such inconsistencies did not really bother Cantor. He was aware of the complexity and
reach of inﬁnity, only because of the long Western tradition in which God is identiﬁed with
the inﬁnite. In a hierarchical system of inﬁnity God is its completion, he is the Absolute.
That is why no ultimate answer can be given by a ﬁnite human mind. Reason alone cannot
decide the foundation of science, we need some grain of metaphysics which in Cantor’s
belief is supplied by God’s existence. Cantor revolutionized the metaphysical foundation
of mathematics by boldly insisting on the existence of actually inﬁnite sets as mathemat-
ical objects. However, for Cantor the existence of inconsistent sets was in a certain way
quiet necessary because our limited mind cannot completely grasp the whole inﬁnite God
and his creations in their total existence; inconsistent sets simply belong to God’s Creation
too. Cantor solved the mathematical problem created by inconsistencies by considering
consistent sets only (“a set considered as ﬁnished“; eine als fertig gedachte Menge, letter
to D. Hilbert of October 2, 1897) and pointed that fact out to be his most distinguished and
most minded Theorem in set theory (“zum wichtigsten und vornehmsten Satz der Mengen-
lehre”, same letter to D. Hilbert).

542
R. Thiele
From Emmy Noether (1882–1935) we have Cantor’s impressive description of his con-
cept of a set:
“As to the concept of a set, Dedekind said that he regards a set as a pursed sack, a sack that contains
certain speciﬁc things, but you do not see them and know nothing of them other than that they are
speciﬁc and present. Some time later, Cantor gave his own idea of a set. He draw himself up to
full height, described with his arm a grandiose gesture, and, with inscrutable gaze, breathed: ‘I
visualize a set as an abyss’ ”.52
Noether’s comparison of Cantor and Dedekind is not accidental, because Cantor and
Dedekind had mathematical interests in common, which included the merging theory
of sets; moreover, they were close friends. In his booklet “Was sind und was sollen
die Zahlen”? (What are and what should the numbers?) of 1887, in the Sections 1
through 5 Dedekind considered systems of things or totalities (called “Systeme”, “Man-
nigfaltigkeiten”, “Inbegriffe”, and “Gesamtheiten” by Dedekind), that are very similar to
Cantor’s notion of set. Dedekind characterized the inﬁnity of a system by means of the
property that it is similar to one of its real part (Section 5). Already in 1882 Dedekind had
written Cantor about this characterization. Cantor wrote about the difference of opinion
with Dedekind that was impressively described by Noether as follows:
“My other opposition to Dedekind consists, as you know, in the fact that he considers every deter-
mined multiplicity as consistent, that means he does not admit the difference between consistent
and inconsistent multiplicities”.53
Inconsistencies did not shock Cantor. Moreover,his theory had generated other paradoxical
results. In a letter to Dedekind of June 20, 1877 he had demonstrated the equal cardinality
of certain sets in Geometry with different dimensions. Cantor did not dare to express his
astonishment on that paradoxical result in his native language but wrote in French: “Je le
vois, mais je ne le croix pas!” (I see it but I don’t believe it).54
A demonstration of the existence of God is not intended to convince any Atheist but
presupposes the Christian belief as such and then unfolds or elucidates certain religious
properties. It is exactly this background against which Cantor deduced from God’s inﬁnite
goodness and glory the necessity of the actual Creation of a Transﬁnitum (aus Gottes “All-
güte und Herrlichkeit auf die Notwendigkeit der tatsächlichen erfolgten Schöpfung eines
Transﬁnitums” schloß).55 Cantor was quite sure of God’s existence. Our knowledge will be
extended to the Absolute step by step, i.e. to God. Set theory is integrated in this procedure.
52“Dedekind äußerte hinsichtlich des Begriffs der Menge: er stelle sich eine Menge vor wie einen geschlossenen
Sack, der ganz bestimmte Dinge enthalte, die man aber nicht sehe, und von denen man nichts wisse, außer daß
sie bestimmt und vorhanden seien. Einige Zeit später gab Cantor seine Vorstellung einer Menge zu erkennen: Er
richtete seine kolossale Figur auf, beschrieb mit erhobenem Arm eine großartige Geste und sagte mit einem ins
Unbestimmte gerichteten Blick: ‘Eine Menge stelle ich mir vor wie einen Abgrund’ ”. In: R. Dedekind, Werke,
Vieweg, Braunschweig, 1932, vol. 2, p. 449.
53“Mein anderer Gegensatz zu Dedekind besteht, wie Sie ja wissen, darin, daß er jede bestimmte Vielheit für
consistent [widerspruchsfrei] hält, also den Unterschied von consistenten und inconsistenten Vielheiten nicht
zugiebt”. Letter to D. Hilbert of January 27, 1900 in: Briefe, 1991, p. 427. The other opposition to Dedekind that
Cantor mentions concerns the character of the axioms. There is a difference of opinion with Gauß as well; the
reason here is that Gauß considers all inﬁnite multiplicities for inconsistent.
54Quoted by Fraenkel in Cantor’s Gesammelte Abhandlungen; also conﬁrmed by Wilhelm Stahl, a grandchild
of Cantor.
55Letter to Cardinal Franzelin, January 22, 1886.

Georg Cantor (1845–1918)
543
Gerhard Kowalewski (1876–1950)who during his Leipzig period about the turn of the cen-
tury at the joint meetings of the Mathematicians of Leipzig and Halle (in a mathematical
circle [“Kränzchen”] every two weeks) regularly met Cantor reported in his autobiography
“Bestand und Wandel” (Duration and Change):
“The cardinal numbers, Cantor’s alephs, were for Cantor something holy, steps so to say leading
upwards to the thrown of Inﬁnity, to the thrown of God”.56
Both the paradoxes of set theory and the concept of the Almighty God are rather similar.
Already in Pascal the Almightiness of God is questioned: Can God create a stone so heavy
that he cannot pick up it? Because God is inﬁnitely beyond our comprehension we are
incapable of determining his inﬁnite properties from our ﬁnite viewpoint.57 Reason cannot
solve this question completely; if we try to do so, we get concepts without content (in
the sense of Kant). In the 18th century some minds distinguished between mathematical
necessity and physical possibility in a physico-theological manner in their reﬂections, i.e.
they separated form and content in their considerations.58 The mathematical necessity rests
on the logical Theorem of contradiction and once the logical rules were given by God, the
Creator himself was bound to follow them. However, he is free in his choice in the sense of
that physical possibility that bears no relation to logic (Theorem of sufﬁcient reason, Satz
vom zureichenden Grund).
6. Religious denomination
Like his father Georg Cantor belonged to the Protestant faith, and he remained a Protestant
throughout his life. Although for metaphysical reasons he was rather interested in Catholic
dogmas he never did change his denomination. However,
“I am not a Catholic, yet judge the unholy confusion within Protestantism quite similar as Adeo-
datus59 and as a positive Christian I am inwardly, and if need be outwardly, on good terms with
Catholicism and its spiritual leader [...] and I by no means share the fundamental enmity of the
majority of Protestants toward all that Catholicism holds to”,60
he wrote to Heman (letter of July 28, 1887). It seems quite clear that he was not strictly
denominational and formed a belief of its own between Catholic and Protestant doctrines.
In a letter to Constance Pott (1833–1915) he confessed a decade later:
“As to religious questions and relations my point of view is not denominational as I do not belong
to any of the existing denominations [false]. My religion is that of a Trinitarian and my theology is
56“Die Mächtigkeit, die Cantorschen Alephs, waren für Cantor etwas Heiliges, gewissermaßen die Stufen, die
zum Thron der Unendlichkeit, zum Thron Gottes emporführen”. Oldenburg, München, 1950, p. 201.
57For a more detailed discussion cf. R. Thiele, Hilbert’s 24th problem, American Mathematical Monthly 110
(2003), 1–24.
58An important German philosopher in this respect is Johann Nicolaus Tetens (1736–1807), cf. J.N. Tetens, Die
philosophischen Werke, vols. III–IV, J. Engfer, ed., Olms, Hildesheim, 2005.
59Aurelius Adeodatus (pseudonym), author of a book on Thomas’s philosophy (Colon, 1887).
60“Ich bin kein Katholik, beurtheile aber die heillose Zerfahrenheit innerhalb des Protestantismus ganz ähnlich
wie Adeodatus und stehe als positiver Christ innerlich und, wenn nöthig, auch nach Außen hin freundschaftlich
zum Katholicismus und dessen geistigem Oberhaupt [...] und ich theile sicher nicht mit der Mehrzahl der Protes-
tanten die grundsätzliche Feindschaft gegen alles zum Catholicismus gehörige”.

544
R. Thiele
founded in the God’s word and work revealed by himself whereas above all I revere as my masters
also the Apostolic Fathers, the Early Fathers, and the most respected Masters of the Church during
the ﬁrst 15th centuries of our era (i.e. the time before the Reformation of Church in the 16th
century)”.61
Cantor believed in a personal God not in abstract metaphysical supreme Being. When
Cantor grew older his interests shifted. He considered obscure historical affairs far removed
from mathematical research. To his correspondent Charles Hermite, a Catholic colleague,
Cantor confessed:
“Metaphysics and theology, I can but confess, have laid siege to my soul that I ﬁnd too little time
for my ﬁrst love, mathematics”.62
In a writing he even considered the question who was the actual Father of Jesus Christ. In
a letter to Philip Jourdain (1879–1919), the English translator of the mentioned pamphlet,
Cantor gave an answer to Jourdain’s question, what he thinks of Christ’s resurrection:
“As to Christ’s resurrection I believe in it as a matter of fact and do not muse on the ‘how’ of it, it
is attested best and to the fullest in the Scriptures of the New Testament”.63
During the last decades of his life such odd interests of Cantor were probably effected
by his mental illness; in that period Cantor somewhat lost the right track. A course on
Leibniz’ philosophy delivered by Cantor at the University of Halle ended in disaster: the
initial number of about 20 students rapidly decreased to zero. Cantor regarded Francis Ba-
con (1561–1626) as the true author of the works of William Shakespeare (1564–1616),
and he held some public lectures on the topic. He tried to prove his opinion in public
lectures, papers, and pamphlets.64 He was, moreover, completely convinced that Bacon
was the greatest Englishman who had ever lived and also in the end Bacon had come
very close to the Roman Catholic faith (letter to Hermite, 30.11.1895). Cantor asked his
Catholic colleague to inform the Rector Maurice Lesage d’Hautecour d’Hulst (1841–1896)
of the Catholic University of Paris on this fact. Cantor hoped to bring d’Hulst to a revised
and enlarged edition of the old book “Christianisme de Bacon” in two volumes (1799)
by Jacques André Emery (1732–1811). And in 1896 Cantor even felt the necessity to set
Pope Leo XIII (1810–1903) right concerning the true confession of Bacon (“confessionem
ﬁdei Baconi [...] in memoriam revocare opportunum existimavi”). Cantor was invited by
d’Hulst to attend a planned Congress of learned Catholics at Freiburg, in the Black For-
est, however, as a member of a Protestant university, though. Cantor hesitated, considered
61“In religiösen Fragen und Beziehungen ist mein Standpunkt kein confessioneller, da ich keiner der beste-
henden organisierten Kirchen angehöre. Meine Religion ist die vom dreieinigen Gott, einem und einzigen Gott
selbst geoffenbarte und meine Theologie gründet sich auf Gottes Wort und Werk, wobei ich außerdem als meine
Lehrer hauptsächlich die apostolischen Väter, die Kirchenväter und die angesehensten Kirchenlehrer der ersten
15 Jahrhunderte unserer Zeitrechnung verehre (d.h. der Zeit, welche der Kirchenrevolution des 16. Jahrhunderts
vorangegangen ist)”. Letter of March 7, 1896.
62“Metaphysik und Theologie haben, ich will es offen bekennen, meine Seele in einem solchen Grade ergriffen,
daß ich verhältnismäßig wenig Zeit für meine erste Flamme [Mathematik] übrig habe”. Letter of January 24,
1894.
63“Was die Auferstehung Christi betrifft, so ist sie durch die Schrift des Neuen Testaments auf’s Beste und
Umfassendste bezeugt; ich glaube fest daran, als eine Tatsache und grüble nicht über das ‘Wie’ derselben”.
64Confessi ﬁdei Baconi, Halle, 1896; Resurrectio divi Quirium Baconi, Halle, 1896; Die Rawleysche Sammlung
von 32 Trauergedichten auf Bacon, ed. by Cantor with a Preface, Halle, 1897; Shakespeareology and Baconism,
Magazin für Literatur 69 (1900), col. 196–203.

Georg Cantor (1845–1918)
545
attending anonymously, and in the end did not take part. On paper Cantor was rather re-
served, in real life, however, people were impressed by “his unconventional friendliness”
(Grace Chisholm-Young (1868–1944)).
Another example of Cantor’s own sight is to be found in a letter to Bertrand Russell
(1872–1970):
“I am a Baconion in the Bacon–Shakespeare question and I am quite an adversary of Old Kant,
who, in my eyes[,] has done much harm and mischief to philosophy, even to mankind; as you [can]
easily see by the most perverted development of metaphysics in Germany in all that [sic; who]
followed him, as in [sic] Fichte, Schelling, Hegel, Herbart, Schopenhauer, Hartmann, Nietzsche,
etc. etc., on to this very day”. (Letter of September 19, 1911; in Cantorian English)
We ﬁnally mention Cantor’s pamphlet “Ex oriente lux” written during a stay in a neu-
ropathic hospital (Universitätsnervenklinik) in Halle and published in 1905. In a letter
to Grace Chisholm-Young, who together with her husband William Young (1863–1942)
wrote a book “Theory of sets of points” (1906), Cantor announced his booklet:
“The muse65 afforded to [granted] me I employed to a renewed study of our Bible with opened
eyes and postponing all prejudices. The result has been highly remarkable, as you will see by a
little pamphlet (anonymous) of half a sheet, that I will send you [in] perhaps in [sic] a week; it
is now in the printing ofﬁce. The title is: ‘Ex Oriente lux. Gespräche eines Meisters mit seinem
Schüler über wesentliche Puncte des urkundlichen Chistenthums. Bericht vom Schüler selbst’.
Erstes Gespräch”. (Cantorian English)66
In the pamphlet Cantor rejects the Immaculate Conception and tries to demonstrate Joseph
of Arimathaea (town in Judaea) to be the father of Jesus and not Joseph of Nazareth (town
in Galilee), who is the foster-father of Jesus only. This Joseph of Arimathaea is not men-
tioned in Bible with the exception of his request to bury Jesus Christ (Mark 15:43; John
19:38). Cantor identiﬁed this patrician of Arimathaea as a former Roman ofﬁcer named
Josephus Pandera who was for a short time married to Mary and begat Jesus then. Cantor’s
demonstration is founded in such quotations from John:
“They asked, ‘Where is your [human] father’? Jesus replied ‘You know neither me nor my Fa-
ther’ ”.67
We quote the concluding remark of the Master:
“By our comprehension [...] we deal a mighty blow at all present-day theological tendencies,
and shake profoundly at the existing, mutually hostile, ecclesiastical organizations. We deprive
orthodox Jewry, too, of its grounds for denying Christ the Messiah. But there remains for all time,
reposing unshakably upon the Rock of Christ, the Church Invisible, that he has founded. He is The
Supreme, and has need of no vicar on Earth”.68
65Cantor meant leisure (in German Musse or Muße) not muse (in German Muse).
66Letter of April 5, 1904; “Ex oriente lux. Conversation of a Master with his Pupil on essential points of docu-
mented Christianity. Reported by the pupil. First Conversation”.
67John 8:19. See also Cantor’s letter to Jourdain, May 3, 1905.
68“Mit unserer Auffassung [Joseph von Arimatheae ist der leibliche Vater von Jesus] treffen wir, wie mit einem
wuchtigen Hiebe, alle theologischen Richtungen der Gegenwart und erschüttern auf’s Tiefste die bestehenden,
sich gegenseitig anfeindenden kirchlichen Organisationen. Auch entziehen wir der jüdischen Orthodoxie den
Grund, warum sie Christo die Anerkennung der Messianität bisher versagt hat. Es bleibt aber bis zum Ende der
Tage auf einem unerschütterlichen Fels, Christo selbst ruhend, die unsichtbare Kirche, welche Er gegründet hat,
bestehen. Er ist ihr Oberhaupt, das keinen Statthalter auf Erden braucht (pp. 11–12).

546
R. Thiele
Fig. 6. Cantor’s grave in Halle. Photo: Rüdiger Thiele.
Indeed, this is a very strong critique of churches, above all the foundation of the Roman
Pope as the Vicar of Christ is clearly neglected. Moreover, “I am only answerable to God”
(Ich bin nur vor Gott verantwortlich), he wrote to Constance Pott (letter of March 13,
1896).
In his lifetime Cantor always had to ﬁght for his revolutionary views and this militant
character revealed itself also elsewhere. He did not recoil from the defense of any rad-
ical viewpoint when he was convinced of its correctness. He did not take such matters
personally but for its own sake. In 1883 he had written to his friend Gösta Mittag-Lefﬂer
(1846–1927):
“Far be it from me to take credit personally for my discoveries. I am merely the tool of a higher
power, that will pursue its course when I am gone, even as it revealed itself thousands of years ago
in Euclid and Archimedes”.69
In conclusion we might express this statement in Biblical language: “The wind bloweth
where it listeth; and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh,
and whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the spirit” (John 3:8).
69“Ich bin weit davon entfernt, mir meine Entdeckungen zum persönlichen Verdienst anzurechnen, denn ich bin
nur ein Werkzeug einer höheren Macht, die nach mir weiter wirken wird, ebenso wie sie vor Jahrtausenden in
Euclid und Archimedes sich offenbart hat”. Letter of December 23, 1883.

Georg Cantor (1845–1918)
547
References
[1] Georg Cantor, Gesammelte Abhandlungen mathematischen und philosophischen Inhalts, including Cantor’s
vita by A. Fraenkel, E. Zermelo, ed., Springer, Berlin, 1932. Reprints 1962, 1980.
[2] Georg Cantor, Ex oriente lux, Selbstverlag, Halle, 1905. 12 p.
[3] Georg Cantor, Nachlass, Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Göttingen, Handschriften-
abteilung, Cod. Ms. G. Cantor 1–18, 34, 35; in it: Briefbücher Georg Cantor’s, Cod. Ms. G. Cantor 16
(20.10.1884–2.7.1888), 17 (5.9.1890–13.10.1895), 18 (15.10.1895–29.3.1896).
[4] Letters of Cantor to Goldscheider, Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Göttingen, Hand-
schriftenabteilung, Cod. Ms. Mathe.-Archiv 47 (22 letters).
[5] Georg Cantor, Briefe, Selection edited by H. Meschkowski and W. Nilson. Springer, Berlin, 1991. Includes
a bibliography of Cantor’s work, a rich bibliography of secondary literature, many facsimiles and a preface.
[Letters quoted without source are taken from this book.]
[6] H. Meschkowski, Aus den Briefbüchern Georg Cantors, Archive for History of Exact Sciences 2 (1962–
1966), 503–519.
[7] W. Ewald (ed.), From Kant to Hilbert, vol. 2, Clarendon, Oxford, 1996, pp. 843–877. [Section with the
early correspondence between Cantor and Dedekind.]
[8] Letters of Schwarz to Weierstraß, Nachlaß Schwarz, No. 835. Archiv der Berlin-Brandenburgischen
Akademie Berlin.
[9] J.W. Dauben, Georg Cantor and Pope Leo XIII, philosophical and theological dimensions of transﬁnite set
theory, Journal of the History of Ideas 38 (1977), 85–108.
[10] J.W. Dauben, Georg Cantor, His Mathematics and Philosophy of the Inﬁnite. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge (Mass.), 1979. Reprint by Princeton University Press, 1989; Chinese translation: Nanjing Uni-
versity Press, Nanjing, 1989.
[11] J.W. Dauben, Georg Cantor, The Personal Matrix of his Mathematics, Isis 69 (1978), 534–550.
[12] A. Kertész, Georg Cantor, 1845–1918. Schöpfer der Mengenlehre, Acta historica Leopoldina, Nr. 15. Halle,
1983.
[13] H. Meschkowski, Probleme des Unendlichen, Vieweg, Braunschweig, 1967; later extended edition as Georg
Cantor. Bibliographisches Institut, Mannheim, 1983.
[14] G.H. Moore, A. Garciadiego, Burali–Forti’s paradox, Historia Mathematica 8 (1981), 319–350.
[15] W. Purkert, Georg Cantor und die Antinomien der Mengenlehre, Bulletin de la Société Mathématique de
Belgique 38 (1986), 313–327.
[16] W. Purkert, H.J. Ilgauds, Georg Cantor, Teubner, Leipzig, 1985; later extended edition, Birkhäuser, Basel,
1987.
[17] G. Schenk, R. Meÿer (eds.), Beförderer der Logik, Philosophische Denker in Halle. Abt. 3, Bd. 2,1. Schenk,
Halle, 2002 [includes a chapter on Cantor].
[18] P. Séguin, Vom Unendlichen zur Struktur, Lang, Münster, 1996.
[19] R. Thiele, Physikotheologisches Denken in Mathematik und Physik, Wissenschaft und Musik unter dem
Einﬂuß einer sich ändernden Geisteshaltung, M. Büttner, ed., Universitätsverlag Brockmeyer, Bochum,
1992, pp. 53–67.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 29
Gerrit Mannoury and his Fellow Signiﬁcians
on Mathematics and Mysticism
Luc Bergmans
Départment d’Etudes Néerlandaises, Université de Paris IV—Sorbonne,
108 Boulevard Malesherbes, F-75850 Paris cedex 17, France
E-mail: lbergmans.cesr@wanadoo.fr
Contents
1. The search for unifying explanations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 551
2. Convictions and ideologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 552
3. Does 2 + 2 = 4 and is there a God to an all-levelling relativist? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 554
4. Frederik van Eeden on the foundational status of uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 556
5. Gerrit Mannoury on the foundational status of uncertainty
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 561
6. Beyond psychological foundations of mathematics: the unobjectiﬁable subject and the idea of the unre-
ligious separation of subject and object . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 562
7. Uncertainty and docta ignorantia. The role of negation in signiﬁcs, intuitionism and theology . . . . . . 564
8. Johan J. de Iongh. Shared longing as the religious meaning of mathematical dialogue
. . . . . . . . . . 565
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 567
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
549


Gerrit Mannoury and his fellow signiﬁcians on mathematics and mysticism
551
1. The search for unifying explanations
This chapter will deal with the way in which the Dutch philosopher and mathematician
Gerrit Mannoury (1867–1956), as well as his pupils and friends, who were active in the
so-called Dutch signiﬁc movement, established a link between mathematics and the higher
concerns of the human mind.
In the last decades of the nineteenth century and the ﬁrst decades of the twentieth the
Netherlands saw the rise of currents of ideas which, dealing with subjects like society,
science and the arts, sought to give all-encompassing explanations of human faculties
and behaviour. Among these currents we must count Neo-Hegelianism, represented by
G.J.P.J. Bolland, and psychic monism, advocated by G. Heymans.1 Bolland and Heymans
both inﬂuenced Gerrit Mannoury who was to become the main representative of a third
current of ideas known as Nederlandse signiﬁca (Dutch signiﬁcs).
As an unconventional and independent thinker, Mannoury, partly through a formal cur-
riculum but largely through autonomous study, developed into one of the most many-sided
scholars of Dutch intellectual life in the twentieth century. Mannoury was ﬁrst of all a
mathematician and, about the results of his purely mathematical research, his pupil David
van Dantzig remarked: “[They are] viewed in the light of their time and environment,
Fig. 1. Gerrit Mannoury.
1There were also those individualistic thinkers who developed all-encompassing systems of thought that were
too personal to lead to the founding of a school. The most fascinating among those scholars was no doubt Johan
Andreas Dèr Mouw, a poet, mathematician, Sanskritist and philosopher. In a considerable number of poems he
expressed the joy he felt at realising that his deepest Self was Brahman. In this so-called Brahman-poetry, he did
not hesitate to use mathematical imagery. Dèr Mouw characteristically chose the nom de plume Adwaita (Sanskrit
for “He who is without two-ity”).

552
L. Bergmans
[...] quite outstanding and possess an uncommon and quite individual beauty” [26, p. 1].
Through his friendship with Frederik van Eeden, Mannoury became acquainted with sig-
niﬁcs. It was Lady Victoria Welby, lady in waiting to Queen Victoria, who coined the word
signiﬁcs and launched this new discipline which espoused to purify and enhance human
communication and understanding through the clariﬁcation of words and concepts used in
different realms of intellectual activity and through the criticism of metaphors in literary
and non-literary contexts.
Frederik van Eeden had befriended Lady Welby and corresponded with her over many
years. He developed his own views on language and communication, and summarised them
in a series of theorems, published as Redekunstige Grondslag van Verstandhouding (Log-
ical foundations of understanding), which is considered to be the ﬁrst signiﬁc treatise in
the Netherlands. What Mannoury held to be the main contribution of Redekunstige Grond-
slag was its leading idea of the “ultimate connection of all concepts”. One of the main
objectives of Van Eeden’s treatise was indeed to show the basic unity of everything that is
experienced or expressed, and to shed light upon the gradual transitions, which link up the
clear-cut and unambiguous formulae of mathematics and formalised science to the ﬂuid
and evocative expressions of poetry and religious language. The interrelation of the most
divergent phenomena of human life remained one of the dominant themes in signiﬁc liter-
ature as well as in the discussions among the members of the different study groups that
were formed in the course of the history of the signiﬁc movement.
2. Convictions and ideologies
Strikingly divergent convictions and ideologies were to be confronted in the lively debates
among the signiﬁcians,who believed as much in the art of distinguishing as in the art of
connecting. The evolving network of friends included Frederik Van Eeden, an unorthodox
religious mind, who, in later years, converted to Catholicism; Luitzen Egbert Jan Brouwer,
whose religious views were inﬂuenced by Eastern and Western mystical literature; Jacob
Israël de Haan, who remained very attached to his Jewish origins; Henri Borel, an orien-
talist, who studied the religions of India, China and Japan; and Jacques Van Ginneken,
who was a Catholic priest. Gerrit Mannoury himself had embraced communism, which
he interpreted in his own personal way. He recognised the scientiﬁc importance of the
Marxist analyses of society and human conduct, but more strongly believed in the spread-
ing of communism as a heartfelt conviction in which volition and emotion had to play
the dominant part. In this respect Mannoury’s opinions must be viewed as akin to those
of the communist Dutch poets Herman Gorter and Henriëtte Roland Holst. Mannoury’s
Mathesis en Mystiek. Een SigniﬁeseStudie van Kommunisties Standpunt (Mathematics and
mysticism. A signiﬁc study from a communist point of view), which is no doubt one of his
wittiest and most personal writings, must be interpreted as an attempt to convince Catholic
workers of the importance of belief in communist ideology.
There was room for faith in communism, but not for the old faith. In order to reach
his end, Mannoury ﬁrst analyses the simplest acts of counting and measuring, detecting in
each of them an element that escapes denotation. One cannot count, nor can one measure

Gerrit Mannoury and his fellow signiﬁcians on mathematics and mysticism
553
Fig. 2. Frontispiece of Mathematics and Mysticism.
without including something which goes beyond that which is counted or measured. Elab-
orating this point in the second section, Mannoury shows how any cognitive act involves
the workings of the will. The third and last section of Mathematics and Mysticism deals
with further reaching goals as expressed in religious and unreligious ideologies. Mannoury
there ﬁercely opposes the old faith of Catholicism, which in his eyes fosters an asceticism
hostile to human happiness and which uses symbols and imagery hopelessly out of tune
with the aspirations of modern humanity. As the last pages of Mathesis en Mystiek show, to
Mannoury the new belief needed to free man materially as well as spiritually, is the burning
conviction of the struggling communist worker.

554
L. Bergmans
Through discussions and publications the signiﬁcians aimed to improve understanding
among people with diverging opinions. They did not generally eliminate this divergence,
nor was it in most cases their aim to do so. They did feel, however, that disentangling the
denotative content from the emotional or volitional value of expressions clariﬁed the dis-
cussion and revealed the nature of the divergence. Clearly Jacques van Ginneken, the tra-
ditionalistic, Catholic member of the Signiﬁc Circle could only see Mannoury as a radical
opponent in matters ideological and, moreover, as a zealous opponent trying to tear away
the Catholic worker from the bosom of the church. There is no more convincing example
of the emotional and volitional basis of ideologies and of the signiﬁc claim, worded by
Wim Scheffer as “wanneer Uw gevoel spreekt, dàn spreekt U waarheid” [10, p. 17] [When
your emotion speaks, then you speak the truth], than this lively exchange of ideas and
troubled friendship between Gerrit Mannoury and Jacques van Ginneken. In the archives
of Mannoury’s son Jan, there is a handwritten copy of a letter which reveals itself to be
most informative as to the pain caused by the ideological opposition of the two friends
and in particular by the way in which Mannoury used signiﬁcs as a weapon against the
church. In this letter, Mannoury asks for forgiveness, using the very religious language of
his opponent and friend.
The heartfelt honesty about his own pain shows that there is reason to believe that Man-
noury at one point felt very close to Catholicism and that his communist convictions were
the result of inner struggle. If this is so, Mannoury provides us with a perfect illustration
of his own views on ideological convictions as based on a strong emotional negation (see
Section 7).
In Mannoury’s mind, communism and relativism were inseparable. In the article “Lenin
en Trotski” published in De Tribune of 25 August 1925, he refers to “the dialectical or
relativistic way of thinking, which I [Mannoury] feel ought to be the real foundation of our
communist conviction” [15, p. 45]. Mannoury was perceived as unorthodox by many fel-
low party members. He was particularly ﬁercely attacked A. de Vries, who reproached him
for his “systematic urge to doubt” [15, p. 77]. Mannoury responded that the so-called facts,
which in De Vries’ eyes were solely capable of convincing any opponent of communism of
his/her error, belong to “science-in-the-narrow-sense”,e.g. to the outer shape of communist
ideology. Conviction, however, grows from within and develops through shared strength
and enthusiasm. By refusing founding status to facts and attributing founding status to be-
lief, Mannoury no doubt shocked many. It was, however, his concern with preserving what
should be living and in continuous progress from being narrowed down and pin-pointed
that inspired these views. This same concern led him to encourage the leadership of his
party to abandon all idolatry of words and persons. As a signiﬁcian, Mannoury indeed ab-
horred slogans that were bereft of their living content. As an admirer of Lenin, Mannoury
believed that the communist cause, e.g. Lenin’s cause, was better served by cremating the
latter’s remains than by embalming them. The frankness with which Mannoury voiced
these ideas caused his exclusion from the Dutch communist party in 1929.
3. Does 2 + 2 = 4 and is there a God to an all-levelling relativist?
Gerrit Mannoury quite naturally extended his relativism to every domain of human action
and thought. In particular, he believed it possible to be a relativist as a mathematician.

Gerrit Mannoury and his fellow signiﬁcians on mathematics and mysticism
555
In this domain too, he met with ﬁerce criticism, coming in particular from the protestant
Th. Van Vollenhoven, who in his De Wijsbegeerte van de Wiskunde van Theïstisch Stand-
punt (The philosophy of mathematics from a theistic point of view) criticised Mannoury’s
“alles nivelleerend relativisme” [35, p. 238] [all-levelling relativism]. As Mrs. Vuysje-
Mannoury, Gerrit Mannoury’s daughter, told the author in a personal communication in
1985, her father gladly accepted the honorary sobriquet “all-levelling relativist”.
Mannoury’s writings contain several formulations of the problem of the certainty at-
tributed to expressions like 2 + 2 = 4. In one case he states that 2 + 2 = 4 is uncertain
because it is not clear which uncertainty is suppressed by it. Mannoury indeed perceives
certainty and uncertainty as fundamentally related to one another. Certainty can neither
exist nor be understood by itself, but presupposes the uncertainty from which it springs.
A more elaborate explanation of mathematical certainty in general is given where Man-
noury focuses on the principle of identity and where he remarks that the psychic factors
which underlie expressions like 1 = 1 do not allow for rigorous observation or clear-cut de-
ﬁnition. On many occasions Mannoury denounces the seemingly self-evident deﬁniteness
of mathematical objects. Deﬁniteness is seen by him as proceeding from an effort to de-
ﬁne. In Methodologisches und Philosophisches zur Elementar-Mathematik (Methodologi-
cal and philosophical comments on elementary mathematics) Mannoury asks his reader to
consider what seems to be the simplest and at the same time least indispensable mathemat-
ical concept: the concept of unit (Einheit), i.e. the concept of deﬁniteness (Bestimmtheit).
Regarding the question of the origin of this concept, Mannoury remarks that nothing in
nature, nothing in the exterior world, presents us with clear-cut units, so that we do not
have any other choice but to look for the foundational conditions of the concept in the in-
ner world (Innenwelt), i.e. in our own mind. But, however hard we try to isolate one single
sensation, which would then seem indivisible to us, the numerous and manifold relations
which link up this sensation to other similar or dissimilar ones, always impose themselves
upon us. There is no escape from this tight network of connections. When we, for example,
try to imagine a single spot of light, we can only do so by mentally situating this spot in our
ﬁeld of vision, i.e. by relating it to other spots, which we either represent or remember. To
all this Mannoury proposes the following conclusion. Since it is the case that even within
ourselves we are not able to observe anything that would satisfy the notion of a single unit,
then the mathematical unit, which can only be a product of our mind, must inevitably dis-
play this fundamental characteristic of indeﬁniteness and relativity. It is only insofar as we
are able to forget or disregard the imperfection of the concept of unit, that we shall be able
to attribute an appearance of exactness to mathematics.
Mannoury’s relativistic remarks regarding deﬁniteness and certainty in mathematics re-
veal the polar nature of the human mind. Mathematics seeks deﬁniteness but cannot free
itself from the indeﬁniteness that it is trying to repel. Mysticism, which, according to Man-
noury’s use of the word, includes any strife for the all-encompassing or ultimate reality,
turns away from deﬁniteness, but still uses deﬁnite landmarks as points of departure in
order to perform this expanding movement of the mind.
The notion of polarity, which is crucial in Mannoury’s thinking, involves two aspects:
contrariety and connectedness. Both of these features determine the efforts as well as the
limitations of the human mind. Contrariety is that which urges one to ask the most radical
questions, connectedness is that which makes these questions impossible to answer and

556
L. Bergmans
even to ask. This is the conclusion which follows from Mannoury’s train of thought in
Mathesis en Mystiek:
Is er een God [...] Is er iets, dat waarlijk is? Onzeggelik, en toch beleefbaar, onomvattelijk en
toch vermoedbaar, ontelbaar-en-onmeetbaar-en-onweetbaar en toch werkelik, levend, zijnd? [...]
De vraag, die ik heb gesteld, of liever: die ik vergeefs getracht heb te stellen, is niet voor beant-
woording vatbaar. Niet voor beantwoording door ja of neen, maar ook niet voor beantwoording
door “misschien” of “ik weet het niet”. Want de vraag naar het algemene is een, menselikerwijs
gesproken, natuurlike vraag, waar ons rekenen en meten, ons weten en willen, redelikerwijs toe
leidt, maar toch is het geen redelike vraag, omdat, wie haar uiteindelijk stelt, daarmede het biezon-
dere stelt.
En evenzeer natuurlik en evenmin redelik is die àndere vraag, waar de tegengestelde gedachten-
gang onverbiddelijk op uitloopt: is er ‘n waarheid buiten het leven, is tweemaal-twee vier? [14,
pp. 92, 93, 99].
[Is there a God? [...] Is there something which really is? inexpressible, but still liable to experi-
ence, undeﬁnable, but still presumable, uncountable-and-unmeasurable-and-unknowable but still
real, living and existent? [...]
The question, which I asked, or rather: which I vainly tried to ask, is not liable to response; it
cannot be answered by yes or no, neither can it be by “maybe” or by “I do not know”. Because
the question regarding the general is—speaking from a human point of view—a natural question,
to which our counting and measuring, our knowing and our striving naturally lead, but yet it is not
by itself a reasonable question, because, whoever ultimately asks it, thereby posits the particular.
And equally natural and equally unreasonable is that other question, to which the opposite train of
thought inescapably leads: is there truth outside life, does two times two equal four?]
4. Frederik van Eeden on the foundational status of uncertainty
As we observed before, Gerrit Mannoury admired Frederik van Eeden (1860–1932) for
his ability to bring alive in Redekunstige grondslag van verstandhouding the ultimate con-
nection of all concepts. The entanglement of the divergent tendencies of the human mind
had been sharply observed by Frederik van Eeden. The same idea became a major theme
of Mannoury’s writings. His conclusion, “voert de mathesis tot mystiek en de mystiek tot
mathesis” [14, p. 100] [Mathematics leads to mysticism and mysticism to mathematics],
formulated in the last pages of Mathesis en Mystiek, expresses the very core of his thinking.
Besides the establishment of a connection between opposite tendencies, there is another
feature of Van Eeden’s signiﬁc views which is equally important to the understanding Man-
noury’s trains of thought regarding the foundations of mathematics. This is the idea that
the opposite tendencies do not have equal status. Van Eeden links the deﬁnite propositions
of mathematics and formalised science with the ﬂuctuating evocations of poetry, but there
is no doubt in his mind as to which of the two types of expression more directly, more
eloquently and more deeply render the truth.
As a member of the Dutch literary movement of the 1880s, the so-called “tachtigers”,
Van Eeden had assimilated Percy Bysshe Shelley’s romantic view on the status of poetry.
In this view, it is the privilege of the real poet to have at the same time the best insight into
truth and the best means of describing this insight. Only music, which is unhindered by the
misleading symbolic character of words, can surpass poetry in nearing truth. When poetry
is at its best, it can hardly be distinguished from the emotion from which it springs and, as
we have seen, from a signiﬁc point of view, emotion is truth. Formulae of mathematical and

Gerrit Mannoury and his fellow signiﬁcians on mathematics and mysticism
557
Fig. 3. Frederik van Eeden by Jan Veth.
scientiﬁc language do not have this close connection with truth. The rules which govern
formal language are unable to contain that which essentially resists ﬁxation and clear-cut
distinction. Mathematical and scientiﬁc language are removed from truth and are derived,
whereas poetical language is fundamental.
It is easy to see then that the title of Van Eeden’s treatise, Redekunstige Grondslag van
Verstandhouding (Logical foundation of understanding), is misleading, for ultimately no
foundation can be expected from logic. As we learn from the preface, it is the author’s aim
to make concessions to the reader who expects rigorous reasoning and believes “in de vlot-
tende aandoeningen van poëtische beelding en fantasie [...] geen genoegzame bevrediging
te kunnen vinden” [29, p. 7] [not to be able to ﬁnd sufﬁcient satisfaction in the ﬂuctuating
sensations of poetical imagery and phantasy]. Van Eeden, therefore, strictly applies a logi-
cal method. Redekunstige Grondslag van Verstandhouding presents itself as a well-ordered
series of theorems, not unlike the ones that can be found in Spinoza’s Ethica or Wittgen-
stein’s Tractatus. The ideas conveyed through this clear and rigorous reasoning, however,
are largely meant to relativise the importance of logic and systematic philosophising as
means of expressing the deepest truth. It seems that Van Eeden temporarily gives in to
the reader’s need for ﬁxedness in order to subsequently deliver him of the idea that ﬁxed

558
L. Bergmans
concepts, expressions and notations could ever be reliable in the pursuit of truth. It is the
language of the poet which is capable of the most intimate contact with truth and which,
therefore, deserves the deepest trust. In other words, Van Eeden himself ﬁnds “satisfaction
in the ﬂuctuating sensations of poetical imagery and phantasy” and he hopes to bring his
reader closer to ﬁnding the same satisfaction.
Van Eeden’s philosophy of language is in line with his more general views on the status
of certainty and uncertainty. When in his later years he developed a project for an ideal
city in co-operation with the architect Jaap London [30], the maps that accompanied the
description of this Lichtstad (City of Light) showed a concentric pattern, the inner circles
of which were entirely designed for religious activity. In Van Eeden’s project every world
religion was indeed to be represented by a temple situated in a heilige ring (holy circle).
However, in the middle of this holy ring, i.e. at the very centre of the City of Light, was to
be constructed het Godshuis (the House of God), which, lacking any reference to particular
religions, was to become the temple of the searching human soul. Hence, as was reﬂected
by the very structure of the City of Light, any guidance which this holy place could offer
the world would be coming, not from certainty, but from search.
Similarly, Frederik van Eeden describes the structure of a person’s inner life in a way
that associates uncertainty with depth. People, so Van Eeden says, are like kingdoms that
border each other. Successful communication between the kingdoms is possible as long as
matters regarding the peripheries are the subject of conversation. In these outward zones the
well-established language of daily social intercourse guarantees the certainty of superﬁcial
understanding. As soon as more central needs and strivings are concerned, however, this
guarantee disappears. At the very heart of a person’s inner kingdom dwells “een Farao, die
van de goden afstamt en sterrenwichelt” [28, p. 74] [a Pharaoh, who descends from the
gods and divines]. In the most secret, but also most fundamental, part of his inner self, a
human being is at the same time the closest to the divine and the furthest removed from a
certainty expressible through words.
Van Eeden voiced his idea on certainty in the most pregnant and dramatic way in the
play De Heks van Haarlem. Treurspel der Onzeekerheid (The witch of Haarlem. Tragedy
of the uncertainty). The title character comments on the events of the play in a way that is
not unlike Macbeth’s witches and sings the following cryptical song:
Wat eindt dat schijnt.
Wat schijnt dat eindt.
Dood is zeker.
Zeker is dood.
Maar wie weet leeft nog [31, pp. 33–34].
[What ends [only] appears to be.
What [only] appears to be [necessarily] ends.
Death is certain.
Certain[ty] is death.
But Who knows [?] is still alive.]
It becomes clear from the context of the scene that the certainty referred to is the certainty
of the dead letter of the Scripture and of the unalterable moral rule or law of the land. The
tragedy of the play is directly related to one of the main characters’ unconditional clinging
to such exterior standards of conduct, thereby causing the death of his child. The young

Gerrit Mannoury and his fellow signiﬁcians on mathematics and mysticism
559
Fig. 4. The City of Light seen from the air.

560
L. Bergmans
Fig. 5. The House of God (outside).

Gerrit Mannoury and his fellow signiﬁcians on mathematics and mysticism
561
Fig. 6. The House of God (inside).
woman who dies is called Sterre (Star). Her name suggests the eternally unattainable. What
provokes Sterre’s death is her father’s unquestioned obedience to the strict terms of the law.
Terms terminate, if people do not question them. What Van Eeden seems to be saying is
that, above all, one should be unwavering in asking “Who knows?”. It is by rejecting the
formalism of words and rules that we respect the unattainable character of truth. It is by
allowing for uncertainty that we keep alive the search for truth.
5. Gerrit Mannoury on the foundational status of uncertainty
All of these ideas have to be kept in his mind when trying to understand Gerrit Mannoury,
whose manner of thinking in the ﬁelds of philosophy and mathematics was so closely
akin to that of his signiﬁc colleague and friend Frederik Van Eeden. In the article Breekt
(Break!) published in De Tribune, Mannoury stated: “Een weten dat het vragen verleerd
heeft is het weten niet waard” [15, p. 10] [A type of knowing which has lost the ability
to ask is not worth knowing], a principle which he applied as strictly to mathematics as
to any other ﬁeld of knowledge. Mathematics is a type of learning which no doubt better
than others covers up its asking. That is why to the layman, mathematics simply knows
and does not ask. In order to bring this idea alive, Mannoury introduces the distinction

562
L. Bergmans
between spreekwiskunst (speaking/spoken or active mathematics) and hoorwiskunst (hear-
ing/heard or passive mathematics). The latter has to be interpreted as a catalogue of eternal
truths and unalterable formulae. The epitome of hoorwiskunst is the logarithmic tables.
Calculated and printed a long time ago, they do not seem liable to change. However, as
Mannoury continues to show with shrewdness and perseverance, spreekwiskunst remains
a prerequisite to any accomplishment in the ﬁeld of mathematics. Certainty is born of the
seeking mind, and any future result which can be expected from mathematics will require a
new commitment of the seeking mind. The history of this discipline changes as a result of
continuous tension between active and passive mathematics, the former of which inevitably
brings about a turn to uncertainty. To use a distinction made by Henri Poincaré, Mannoury
uncovers the often forgotten science qui se fait (science in the process of being practiced
or produced), which hides under the misleading stability of the science faite (science as
accomplished results). In doing so, Mannoury points to the subjective nature of all mathe-
matical knowledge. This link between the outer shape of mathematics and the subject of the
mathematician may be unconsciously repressed or consciously ignored for reasons of con-
venience, but there is no way denying its existence, for that would mean denying progress,
renewal and creativity in mathematics. In Mathesis en Mystiek, Mannoury expresses this
as follows:
’t Is het oude liedje: de spreek-wiskunst en de hoor-wiskunst liggen overhoop! [...] Spreek-
wiskunst zoekt, vermoedt, gist, raadt of raadt mis, geniet en lijdt, duizelt en slaat spijkertjes, maar
hoor-wiskunst blijft er kalm bij en verschanst zich in kant-en-klare deﬁnities en laat logarith-
metafels drukken, met stereotypplaten. En wil zijn moeder niet meer kennen! Ja, als niet komt tot
iet ... [14, p. 31].
[It is the old song. Speaking mathematics and hearing mathematics are at loggerheads! [...] Speak-
ing mathematics searches, supposes, wagers, guesses right or wrong, enjoys or suffers, feels dizzi-
ness and hits nails, but hearing mathematics stays calm and entrenches itself in ready-made deﬁn-
itions and has logarithmic tables printed, with stereotypes. And does not want to know its mother
any more! Oh well, when one rejects one’s origins ...]
Mannoury insists that however far mathematics develops in the direction of pure formal-
isation, and however radically it reduces its number of basic distinctions, there is no way
such a reductionist program could set aside the subject of the mathematician.
6. Beyond psychological foundations of mathematics: the unobjectiﬁable subject
and the idea of the unreligious separation of subject and object
Gerrit Mannoury and his fellow signiﬁcians lived at a time when the psychological way of
expressing ideas was fashionable. Mannoury, moreover, developed a general psychological
framework destined to harmonise subjective and objective types of expression [19,20]. One
might, therefore, be easily led to think that he perceived psychology as the discipline that
could ultimately provide the foundations of mathematics. The title Fondements Psycho-
linguistiques des Mathématiques (The psycholinguistic foundations of mathematics) is
downright misleading in this respect. A thorough reading of Mannoury’s entire work shows
that the situation is considerably more complex. What is mathematically true cannot pos-
sibly be derived from an objectifying description of what goes on in the mathematician’s
mind. This insight, which was sharply formulated by Husserl, became very prominent

Gerrit Mannoury and his fellow signiﬁcians on mathematics and mysticism
563
in Mannoury’s address on leaving the University of Amsterdam. This lecture—no doubt
one of the most profound ever delivered by Mannoury—bore the title De schoonheid der
wiskunde als signiﬁsch probleem (The beauty of mathematics as a signiﬁc problem) and
ended as follows:
De volmaakte zekerheid der wiskunde mag dan slechts schijn en menselijk bedenksel zijn, het is
dan toch in elk geval een stralend schone schijn en een bewonderingwekkend bedenksel. En deze
schoonheid en deze bewonderende ontroering zijn geen schijn, want zij zijn mijn beleving zelf, zij
zijn mijzelf, en dus voor nadere ontleding of helderder belichting niet vatbaar. De vlam verlicht
zichzelve niet! [17, p. 201].
[The perfect certainty of mathematics may be no more than illusion and human fabrication, it is
at any rate an illusion of radiant beauty and a fabrication that inspires admiration. And this beauty
and this emotion of admiration are no illusion, because they are what I live through, they are
myself, and hence not liable to any further analysis or further illumination. The ﬂame does not
shed light upon itself.]
What these words mean is that there is an aspect to mathematics which is essential to its
meaning but which cannot be deﬁned by the mind or captured by any formula. The subject
of the mathematician in its active pursuit of truth does not allow for objectiﬁcation. It does
not receive the light it sheds.
It is important for the history of the Dutch philosophy of mathematics to take
into account the close relationship between Mannoury’s thinking and intuitionism.
L.E.J. Brouwer, the father of Dutch intuitionism and an active member of the signiﬁc
movement, was a pupil and close friend of Mannoury. As Brouwer made clear in an ad-
dress to Mannoury, it was the latter who made his student Brouwer aware of the fact that
mathematics was something more than a sterile catalogue of unalterable true statements.
The young Brouwer learned from his master that there was room for enthusiasm and for the
experience of beauty in mathematics. In other words, he was made to see the importance
of spreekwiskunst, of active and lively mathematics.
Just as in the case of Mannoury’s signiﬁc views on mathematics, there has been a ten-
dency to interpret intuitionism as an attempt to ﬁnd psychological foundations for math-
ematics. Brouwer, however, clearly rejects the idea of objectiﬁed mathematical truth. The
subject of the mathematician is the sovereign guard of truth. This self freely creates the
mathematical objects and freely contemplates its creations. Inaccessible to psychological
reduction, it moreover keeps intact the link with its creations. Any objectifying would im-
ply a limitation of the subject’s freedom, and Brouwer insists in his doctoral dissertation
[5] that mathematics is a free creation of the mind. There is no other foundation of mathe-
matical truth than the unhindered workings of the self.
Brouwer considers any attempt at separating the subject from something which is not
this subject as a fatal and unreligious act. An essential feature of his intuitionistic mathe-
matics is, therefore, its explicit safeguarding of an intimate link with the subject.2 This can
be illustrated by means of a passage from the notes of Brouwer’s Cambridge lectures on
intuitionism:
2Reﬂections regarding truth in its relationship with the subject in mathematics, mysticism and philosophy were
also at the heart of G.F.C. Griss’ realm of ideas (see [11, p. 30]). Griss developed an idealistic world-view which
he combined with a radical type of intuitionism. In recent years, Jan Bauwens has taken up the idea of the
necessarily subject-related nature of mathematical truth in his Mathematica Christiana [1].

564
L. Bergmans
Only after mathematics had been recognized as an autonomous interior constructional activity
[...] the criterion of truth and falsehood of a mathematical assertion was conﬁned to mathematical
activity itself, without appeal to logic or to hypothetical omniscient beings. An immediate con-
sequence was that for a mathematical assertion a the two cases of truth and falsehood, formerly
exclusively admitted, were replaced by the following three:
(1) a has been proved to be true;
(2) a has been proved to be absurd;
(3) a has neither been proved to be true nor to be absurd, nor do we know a ﬁnite algorithm
leading to the statement either that a is true or that a is absurd [27, p. 92].
Brouwer opens up the binary system of classical mathematics in a typically signiﬁc attempt
at rendering the language of the ﬁeld under consideration, i.e. the language of mathemat-
ics, more expressive and more precise. The accuracy of the intuitionistic reﬁnements of
mathematical language lies above all in the preservation of the indeﬁnite character of the
inﬁnite as well as in the rejection of bold statements about the inﬁnite. Brouwer achieves
this reﬁnement and precision by explicitly recognising the active role of the subject of the
mathematician in the assignment of truth. In cases (1) and (2) above, the subject is capable
of constructing a proof for a or for the absurdity of a, respectively. In (3) the subject is not
capable of such construction. It is especially through the introduction of this third option
that Brouwer manages to overstep the limitations of classical mathematics. Cases (1) and
(2) roughly correspond to the traditional binary system, which strictly respects the princi-
ple of the excluded third (a is either true or false/absurd). By complementing (1) and (2)
with (3), the intuitionist relativises this logical principle and expresses himself in a more
careful way on the inﬁnite, to which the subject of the mathematician does not have direct
access.
7. Uncertainty and docta ignorantia. The role of negation in signiﬁcs, intuitionism
and theology
It is not surprising that Brouwer, the signiﬁcian and admirer of Van Eeden, makes reference
to a type of uncertainty in his tripartite truth-assignment. Option (3) in the passage from
the Cambridge lectures quoted above allows for openness, and it is this openness which
makes the intuitionist language more precise. It is no more surprising that Brouwer breaks
the rigidity of a well-established logical principle by using new distinctions which bring
to the fore the workings of the subject. Frederik van Eeden had already shown in Logical
Foundations of Understanding that ... no foundations can ever be expected from logic!
Logic is no more than an outward scheme. Foundations have to be looked for elsewhere,
namely in the more central emotions and sensations, to which the poet, who remains unhin-
dered by logical constraints, has direct access. There can be no doubt then that, according
to Brouwer, the author of De onbetrouwbaarheid der logische principes (The untrustwor-
thiness of the logical principles) [6], the mathematician and the poet display great afﬁnity
in their search for truth.
Referring again to the witch’s song in De Heks van Haarlem, one might say that the
dead formulae of the logical principles, which yield no more than a deceptive certainty,
should be broken through in order to free the searching subject, whose uncertainty allows
for unlimited openness.

Gerrit Mannoury and his fellow signiﬁcians on mathematics and mysticism
565
Brouwer does indeed introduce into the language of mathematics (which belongs to
the abstract, derived and formalised language-types) particular elements that allow him
to pierce right through to the other pole of the mind, thereby re-establishing the sacred
link with the subject and its emotions and volitions. Among these elements, negation is no
doubt the most important.
Mannoury, too, attributes special status to negation in signiﬁcs and draws the attention
of his reader to the existence of a type of negation which is purely emotional or volitional.
Such radical negation repels vigorously without bringing to the mind a well-deﬁned al-
ternative to what is being repelled. This is typical of expressions of conviction (religious,
political or other) and underlies words such as inﬁnity, which belong to what Mannoury
terms the language of the general.
Although Mannoury’s and Brouwer’s views on negation are different in a number of
respects, one can safely say that a radical and volitional negation is at work in Brouwer’s
option (3): a has NEITHER been proved to be true, NOR to be absurd, NOR do we know
a ﬁnite algorithm leading to the statement either that a is true or that a is absurd.
As an expression of the will this negation is naturally associated with the subject of the
mathematician. In addition, it signiﬁcantly expresses the idea that the searching subject is
in a state of relative ignorance (nor do we know...). To Brouwer, the explicit admission of
ignorance regarding the (as yet) unconstructed entities is to be considered an advance on
classical mathematics, which expresses itself too boldly in this respect, namely taking for
available that which can only be suspected to be.
Regarding the inﬁnite, Brouwer’s thinking may be said to display the wisdom of the
well-known unknowing. There are, therefore, very serious reasons for establishing the
analogies between intuitionism and the views on mathematics expressed in the works of
Nicholas of Cusa, the father of the docta ignorantia. This was attempted by A.F. Heijerman
[12].
The role of negation in expressions such as option (3) in Brouwer’s assignment of truth-
values may be compared to the role which negation plays in negative or apophatic theology.
Just like intuitionistic negation, which expresses relative ignorance and allows one to hint
at mathematical entities that are beyond the reach of the constructing subject, negation
in negative theology allows one to allude to that which is inaccessible to any attempt at
pinpointing it through names, predicates or concepts.
8. Johan J. de Iongh. Shared longing as the religious meaning of mathematical
dialogue
Johan J. de Iongh (1915–1999), professor of mathematics at the University of Nijmegen,
belonged to the second generation of signiﬁcians. As a pupil of Mannoury, an associate of
Brouwer and a good friend of both, he developed a view on the philosophy of mathematics
which was termed by his own pupil, Wim Veldman, “a platonically tinged intuitionistic
one” [34, p. 17].
Very much aware of the need for precise formulation as well as for restraint in the dis-
cussion of matters that verge on human incomprehensibility, he advocated the reﬁnements
of intuitionistic language in his courses on the foundations of mathematics.

566
L. Bergmans
Fig. 7. Johan Jilles de Iongh.
De Iongh’s view on human limitations, which, when recognised, allow for openness and
advance, was not conﬁned to these reﬁnements but concerned mathematics as a whole. In
one of his very few publications—De Iongh took Plato’s critique of the written word very
seriously—he stated the following:
Deze worsteling van de mensheid om op dit beperkte gebied grotere duidelijkheid, grotere zeker-
heid, omvattende waarheid te bereiken [is] voor mij een van de diepste ervaringen, zowel door
de grootsheid van de bereikte partiële resultaten als door de principiële noodzaak van een blij-
vend falen, een blijvende spanning tussen het bereikte en de niet positief vast te leggen, maar
wel analoog en in dit falen ook negatief ervaren, dit bereikte transcenderende, waarheidsidee [8,
p. 256].
[This struggle, which humanity has to take up in order to achieve greater clarity, greater certainty
and all-encompassing truth in this limited ﬁeld [viz. that of mathematics], is to me one of the
deepest experiences, and this is so as much because of the impressiveness of the achieved partial
results, as because of the fundamental necessity of continuous failure, of a continuous tension
between that which has been achieved, and the idea of truth, which transcends the achieved, and
which cannot be pinned down positively, but which can be experienced in an analogical and,
through failure, also in a negative, way.]
The awareness of imperfection and non-achievement intensiﬁes the search of the mathe-
matician, and it is this enthusiasm, this longing for truth, which two equally gifted friends

Gerrit Mannoury and his fellow signiﬁcians on mathematics and mysticism
567
feel, when they set their minds on the solution of a problem, that, in De Iongh’s eyes,
becomes fundamental for mathematics. Veldman remarks in this respect:
[A]s Plato explains in his Seventh Letter, truth may show itself, unexpectedly and suddenly, as
a spark of ﬁre, by something like divine grace, where friends have been patiently seeking after
it together, possibly for a very long time. Johan shared Plato’s hankering after such events [34,
p. 17].
Just like Brouwer, De Iongh feels that the truth of mathematics is ultimately founded in the
subject of the mathematician, but more than Brouwer, De Iongh insists that the fundamen-
tal intention of the subject is a shared longing.
In a handout for a lecture “Signiﬁese beschouwingen over de grondslagen van de
wiskunde” (Signiﬁc reﬂections on the foundations of mathematics) held in 1948, De Iongh
concluded:
Wordt deze scheiding tussen wiskunde en wiskundige opgeheven, dan krijgt de vraag naar de
waarheid en de dan daarmee vrijwel samenvallende schoonheid van de wiskunde een nieuwe, niet
meer matematiese, maar nog wel redelijke, intersubjectieve, nu wijsgerig-religieuze zin [7, p. 2].
[If this separation between mathematics and the mathematician is removed, the question of the
truth of mathematics as well as the question of its beauty, which then almost coincides with its
truth, receives a new meaning, which is no longer mathematical, but still reasonable and inter-
subjective and which reveals itself as philosophical and religious.]
In particular, the mathematical dialogue between friends and the growing enthusiasm that
accompanies their limited search for truth call up something much deeper, namely the ques-
tion of the unlimited truth and the hoped for unlimited dialogue with the Divine Subject.
References
[1] J. Bauwens, Mathematica Christiana. Over wiskunde en teleologie, Serskamp, 2004.
[2] L. Bergmans, Gerrit Mannoury and the intellectual life in the Netherlands at the beginning of the twentieth
century, Methodology and Science 20 (1) (1987) 4–23.
[3] L. Bergmans, Dutch signiﬁcs and intuitionism and their association wiht neo-Kantian philosophy, Studies
in Netherlandic Culture and Literature, M.A. Bakker and B.H. Morrison, eds., University Press of America,
Lanham/New York/London, 1994, pp. 99–108.
[4] L. Bergmans, Désirer, faillir et feindre d’atteindre dans la poursuite de la vérité. Réﬂexions sur la négation
volitionnelle, Perspectives on Negation. Essays in honour of Johan J. de Iongh on his 80th Birthday / Per-
spectives sur la Négation. Hommage à Johan J. de Iongh pour son 80e Anniversaire, H.C.M. de Swart and
L.J.M. Bergmans, eds., Tilburg University Press, Tilburg, 1995, pp. 1–9.
[5] L.E.J. Brouwer, Over de Grondslagen der Wiskunde, Van Suchtelen, Amsterdam/Leipzig, 1907.
[6] L.E.J. Brouwer, De onbetrouwbaarheid der logische principes, Tijdschrift voor Wijsbegeerte 2 (1908) 152–
158.
[7] J.J. De Iongh, Signiﬁese beschouwingen over de grondslagen van de wiskunde, 1948 (handout of a lecture
given on 24/08/1948).
[8] J.J. De Iongh, Losse Gedachten over Wiskunde en Logica als Schaduwen van een Antwoord op de Vraag
naar de Methode van de Wijsbegeerte, Methoden van Wijsbegeerte. I. Methode der existentiële Feno-
menologie. Annalen van het Thijmgenootschap. XLVIII.III, 1960, pp. 253–256.
[9] H.C.M. De Swart, Filosoﬁe van de wiskunde, Martinus Nijhoff, Leiden, 1989.
[10] W. Esch, De Ideale Uitdrukking. Signiﬁsch-Philosophische Ideeën, Querido, Amsterdam, 1930.

568
L. Bergmans
[11] M. Franchella, Negation in the work of Griss, Perspectives on Negation. Essays in honour of Johan J. de
Iongh on his 80th Birthday / Perspectives sur la Négation. Hommage à Johan J. de Iongh pour son 80e
Anniversaire, H.C.M. de Swart and L.J.M. Bergmans, eds., Tilburg University Press, Tilburg, 1995, pp. 29–
40.
[12] A.F. Heijerman, Intuition and the Intellect. On the relation between mathematics, philosophy and mysticism
in the work of L.E.J. Brouwer, including a comparison with Nicholas of Cusa, University of Utrecht, Utrecht,
1981.
[13] G. Mannoury, Methodologisches und Philosophisches zur Elementar-Mathematik, P. Visser, Haarlem, 1909.
[14] G. Mannoury, Mathesis en mystiek. Een signiﬁese studie van kommunisties standpunt, Uitgeverij voor goede
en goedkoope lectuur, Amsterdam, 1925.
[15] G. Mannoury, Weten en willen, Drukkerij De Strijd, Amsterdam, 1927.
[16] G. Mannoury, Les deux pôles de l’esprit. Etude de psychologie linguistique du point de vue communiste,
Librairie du Travail, Paris, 1933.
[17] G. Mannoury, De schoonheid der wiskunde als signiﬁsch probleem, Synthese 2 (6) (1937) 197–201.
[18] G. Mannoury, Les fondements psycho-linguistiques des mathématiques, Editions du Griffon, Neuchatel,
1947.
[19] G. Mannoury, Polar-psychological concept synthesis, Synthese 7 (4/5) (1948) 305–317.
[20] G. Mannoury, Polairpsychologische begripssynthese, F.G. Kroonder, Bussum, 1953.
[21] P. Natorp, Philosophie; Ihr Problem und Ihre Probleme. Einführung in den Kritischen Idealismus, Vanden-
hoeck & Ruprecht, Göttingen, 1911.
[22] B.J.H. Ovink, De Zekerheid der Menschelijke Kennis, W.J. Thieme, Zutphen, 1928.
[23] L. de Pesloüan, Les Systèmes logiques et la logistique, Rivière, Paris, 1909.
[24] H.W. Schmitz, De Hollandse Signiﬁca. Een reconstructie van de geschiedenis van 1892 tot 1926, Van
Gorcum, Assen/Maastricht, 1990.
[25] A. Van Bochove, Waarom het leger de oorlog verloor. Het debat tussen Gerrit Mannoury en Otto Neurath
over taal en kennis 1937–1940, University of Groningen, Groningen, 1986.
[26] D. Van Dantzig, Gerrit Mannoury’s signiﬁcance for mathematics and its foundations, Nieuw Archief voor
Wiskunde 3 (V) (1957) 1–18.
[27] Van Dalen, Brouwer’s Cambridge Lectures on Intuitionism, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1981.
[28] F. Van Eeden, Gorter’s verzen, Studies, eerste reeks, W. Versluys, Amsterdam, 1890, pp. 73–104.
[29] F. Van Eeden, Redekunstige Grondslag van Verstandhouding, Studies, derde reeks, W. Versluys, Amster-
dam, 1897, pp. 7–84.
[30] F. Van Eeden, Het Godshuis in de Lichtstad, W. Versluys, Amsterdam, 1921.
[31] F. Van Eeden, De Heks van Haarlem.Treurspel der Onzeekerheid, 4th edition, W. Versluys, Amsterdam,
1930.
[32] H.W. Van Tricht, Frederik van Eeden. Denker en strijder, Lankamp & Brinkman, Amsterdam, 1934.
[33] Th. Van Velthoven, Gottesschau und Menschliche Kreativität; Studien zur Erkenntnislehre des Nikolaus von
Kues, Brill, Leiden, 1977.
[34] W.H.M. Veldman, In memoriam J.J. de Iongh (1915–1999), Nieuw Archief voor Wiskunde 5 (1) (March
2000) 16–17.
[35] D.H.T. Vollenhoven, De wijsbegeerte der wiskunde van theïstisch standpunt, Van Soest, Amsterdam, 1918.

CHAPTER 30
Arthur Schopenhauer and L.E.J. Brouwer:
A Comparison
Teun Koetsier
Department of Mathematics, Vrije Universiteit, Faculty of Science,
De Boelelaan 1081, NL-1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
E-mail: t.koetsier@few.vu.nl
Contents
1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 571
2. From Kant to Schopenhauer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 572
3. Brouwer, the prophet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 574
4. Life, art and mysticism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 576
5. Schopenhauer and Brouwer: A comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 583
5.1. Brouwer’s philosophical mysticism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 583
5.2. A further comparison of Brouwer’s and Schopenhauer’s views . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 584
6. The turn to mathematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 587
7. Brouwer compared to Gödel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 589
8. Final remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 592
Acknowledgement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 592
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 593
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
569


Arthur Schopenhauer and L.E.J. Brouwer: a comparison
571
Fig. 1. L.E.J. Brouwer. Courtesy of the Brouwer Archive.
1. Introduction
Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer1 (1881–1966) is one of the few truly great Dutch mathe-
maticians.2 Brouwer’s intellectual development is full of surprises. In 1905 he published a
controversial booklet, Leven, Kunst en Mystiek (Life, Art and Mysticism, [2,26]), in which
science and technology are attacked; the human intellect and everything it brought about
are depicted as evil. Yet this did not stop Brouwer from exploiting his own intellectual
capacities and pursuing an academic career. In 1907 he defended his doctoral dissertation,
Over de grondslagen van de wiskunde (On the Foundation of Mathematics, [3]). Moreover,
after proving in the period 1908–1912 a number of topological theorems that made him fa-
mous, Brouwer became in 1912 professor of mathematics at the University of Amsterdam.
At the end of World War I, Brouwer’s work once more radically changed course. In 1917 he
started developing mathematics without use of the principle of the excluded third, the un-
reliability of which he had already shown in 1908. The consequences were dramatic: in so-
called intuitionistic mathematics considerable parts of classical mathematics—including
Brouwer’s topological results—do not in fact occur.
1His friends called Brouwer Bertus, but in the literature he is almost exclusively called L.E.J. Brouwer or
Brouwer.
2Next to Christiaan Huygens, Simon Stevin and Thomas Jan Stieltjes. I add Stevin, whom the Dutch share with
the Belgians because he was born in Flanders, but spent more than half his life in the Netherlands. Stieltjes was
born in Holland, but moved to France, so I guess we share him with the French.

572
T. Koetsier
Elsewhere [13] it is shown that there is no real opposition between Brouwer’s topologi-
cal work and his intuitionistic work. If one considers Brouwer’s intellectual development,
it is clear that his pre-1917 intuitionism was immature in the sense that he believed that
most of the hard core of classical mathematics was sound and could be saved intuitionisti-
cally. Brouwer’s topological work was closely related to his intuitionistic views at the time.
In the foundation of mathematics that he presented in 1907 topological notions played a
central role and his later work in topology was a very natural continuation of parts of the
dissertation. Moreover, although Brouwer rejected the use of the principle of the excluded
third from 1908 on, before 1917 in his view the principle continued to possess important
heuristic value. When he used the principle while proving his spectacular topological re-
sults in the period 1908–1912, he assumed that in the course of time the classical proofs
would be eventually replaced by intuitionistic ones. Only after 1917 did Brouwer realise
that this would be very difﬁcult.
In this paper I wish to concentrate on the other seeming opposition in Brouwer’s intel-
lectual development: the opposition that appears to exist between Life, Art and Mysticism,
on the one hand, and Brouwer’s career as a mathematician, on the other hand. Van Stigt
has discussed this matter [25] and he has ended the intolerable inaccessibility of the text
of Life, Art and Mysticism (LAM) by publishing an English translation [26].3 Yet LAM
remains controversial. In the present paper I wish to emphasise that it is wrong to consider
it as a weird mix of ideas from different sources, written down by a frustrated young man.
In the book the young Brouwer philosophically chooses a position and he does it very se-
riously. I will show that his position has much in common with the views of the German
idealist Schopenhauer. I will also show that there is no real opposition between Brouwer’s
criticism of the role of the intellect, on the one hand, and his academic career, on the other
hand.
Inspired by a paper by Van Atten and Tragesser, I will at the end of the paper put
Brouwer’s views on mathematics and the divine into a different perspective by compar-
ing them with the views of the great twentieth century logician and mathematician Kurt
Gödel.
2. From Kant to Schopenhauer
The German philosopher Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) brought about what he himself
called a “Copernican revolution” in metaphysics. Kant argued that it had always been as-
sumed that knowledge must conform to objects outside of our mind and he compared this
view to the geocentric hypothesis. The revolution that he brought about consisted in the
introduction of the view that the objects of our knowledge are to a large extent the product
of certain a priori conditions on the part of the knowing subject; he compared this view to
the heliocentric hypothesis. This new hypothesis enabled Kant to explain the existence of a
3Unless stated otherwise the translations into English from Dutch or German are mine. It is not easy to translate
a literary text like LAM, written in a Dutch that, on the one hand, reﬂects the way in which Dutch was written a
century ago, but on the other hand shows Brouwerian peculiarities. Van Stigt published a complete translation of
LAM [26]. Yet I decided to use my own translations which are less elegant, but stay somewhat closer to the word
order of the original.

Arthur Schopenhauer and L.E.J. Brouwer: a comparison
573
Fig. 2. Brouwer talking to F.E. Hacket at the Royal Society in 1960. Courtesy of the Brouwer Archive.
priori knowledge like mathematics and logic. If such knowledge were empirical knowledge
of an abstract kind, its necessity would be inexplicable.
Let us take a simple illustration. Take the experience of watching an apple lying on a
table. This experience is the result of, on the one hand, some ultimate material—the apple
and the table in and of themselves (“die Dinge an sich”, the things in themselves)—and,
on the other hand, an activity of the mind. This mental activity consists of two elements:
sensibility (the receptivity of the mind for the impressions generated by the apple and
the table) and understanding (which deals with concepts and their relations). Sensibility
positions the apple and the table in space and time. Space and time are in this view a
product of the mind; they are the a priori forms of sensibility. The apple and the table are
ﬁnally recognised by the observer as an apple and a table only because of understanding:
without the concepts of apple and table, the apple and the table would not be recognised
as such. In this view mathematics deals with the a priori forms of sense intuition, space
and time. Logic essentially differs from mathematics: it deals exclusively with the laws of
understanding, i.e. the relations between concepts. The mental activity that leads to things
being positioned in space and time is described by Kant as a mental construction. One
could probably say that in Kant’s view doing mathematics boils down to doing mental
constructions without empirical input. The idea of causality is for Kant also an a priori
concept. If we remove the table, the apple falls. Whatever happens in space and time, it
must have a cause; we cannot think reality differently.
Kant was not a romantic philosopher. The emphasis in his philosophy is on the isolation
of the a priori elements in our knowledge. The post-Kantian German idealist philosophers
were, on the contrary, all inﬂuenced by Romanticism, deﬁned here as the cult of subjec-
tivism, of feeling and passion. A beautiful example is Arthur Schopenhauer (1788–1860),
the philosopher of pessimism. Schopenhauer’s major work, Die Welt als Wille und Vorstel-
lung (The world as will and idea) dates from 1818. His other work is at heart a further

574
T. Koetsier
elaboration of themes already present in this book. Schopenhauer follows Kant with re-
spect to the spatio-temporal world, that is subject to the law of causality. However, where
the things-in-themselves are for Kant unknowable, Schopenhauer maintained that they ac-
tually constitute one unitary principle that explains the whole of nature, including individ-
ual human nature. This principle he termed the “Will”. It is an energy that manifests itself
everywhere, in physical forces, but also in individual desires and in unconscious instincts.
While for Kant the multiplicity of phenomena constitutes reality, Schopenhauer, who was
inﬂuenced by the Indian Upanishads, views the phenomena negatively; they are merely
appearance. For him, mathematics and physics deal with an illusion brought about by our
mental structure. The Will, on the other hand, is, in Schopenhauer’s view, the only true
reality. However, Schopenhauer’s Will is not the result of a rational weighing of possibili-
ties; it is the basic urge, the basic passion that controls us. The Will that manifests itself in
nature is a blind force that is never satisﬁed and never comes to rest. In human life the Will
manifests itself in a perpetual desire for happiness and pleasure that are never reached, or,
if reached, quickly vanish. The Will also brings about consciousness and the idea that it is
necessary to chase worldly things, like wealth, women, etc. Split up into numerous objec-
tivations in space and time, the Will is hopelessly divided: everybody and everything wills.
Everything that becomes an individual in space and time is at war with everything else. In
the end, there is always only suffering and pain. From Schopenhauer’s point of view, the
superﬁcial optimist goes on living with the illusion that the world can be improved. The
philosopher, however, understands the treacherous game of the Will. He should say “no”
to life and try to release himself from the spell of the Will. For the metaphysical pessimist
Schopenhauer, there are two ways of escaping from the sad world. There is the temporary
escape in aesthetic contemplation and there is the lasting escape consisting in the denial of
the will to live. Christian, Hindu and Buddhist saints exemplify this lasting solution.
In the following two sections I shall present the way in which the young Brouwer, as a
student in Amsterdam, experienced and viewed himself and the world. I shall quote rather
generously from his correspondence and from LAM. In Section 5, I shall compare the views
of Brouwer and Schopenhauer.
3. Brouwer, the prophet
On August 9, 1903, Bertus Brouwer wrote to his friend, Carel Adama van Scheltema, the
following:
“It is unfortunate that a king has a body, like his subordinates, which is only a remnant from
an earlier period of development, but which he has nevertheless and must lead properly to the
grave. This does not make the task of the king easier; the subordinates are not allowed to know his
corporeal troubles.
And this corporeal trouble is for us much heavier, yes almost impossible. This body with its life of
passions in the troubled brain, needs warmth of soul, and human warmth of soul ﬂows downwards;
who gives something to the King?” 4
4“ ’t Is jammer dat een koning ook een lichaam heeft, zooals zijn onderdanen, een overblijfsel weliswaar uit
een vroegere ontwikkelingsperiode, maar hij heeft het, en moet het behoorlijk naar ’t graf geleiden. Dat maakt
de koningstaak niet lichter; de onderdanen mogen zijn lichamelijke zorgen niet weten. En die lichamelijke zorg

Arthur Schopenhauer and L.E.J. Brouwer: a comparison
575
On November 15, 1903, Brouwer wrote:
“The ﬁnal harmonisation of our life seems to proceed in the heaviest, the slowest, the most labori-
ous way for people of our kind. It seems, that in the succession of the generations of each parental
pair the eldest child may not be sent away innocently in the large stream [...] but must be made as
opening sacriﬁce to the Gods of consciousness, the in the earthly ﬂux sterile consciousness—by
way of compensation these Gods give up their rights with respect to the other children.
So let these holy sacriﬁcial animals be conscious of their role and not be jealous of the rough
ryebread of the common members of the herd.
Oh yes, my dear fellow-sufferer and brother-in-arms, the purest of ourselves, the resignation and
the dedication to our task lives best in solitude. Association with people is necessary, but so dif-
ferent from our heart’s jewels, as ryebread, which is also necessary, from ambrosia”.5
These quotations express that Brouwer saw himself as a prophet, as a messenger of God,
blessed with insight, but at the same time suffering from his lonely position far above the
crowd. In the August 9, 1903, letter he put it quite succinctly:
“chosen ones are we—not for our pleasure in the world—we are the prophets, who, messengers
between God and mankind, guide and inspire its development, working, growth and blooming”.6
On June 16, 1904 Brouwer ﬁnished his studies at the University of Amsterdam with hon-
ours and became ‘doctorandus’. On July 4, 1904 he wrote to his friend Adama van Schel-
tema:
“During the coming winter I will be either in Blaricum [...] working on a philosophical profes-
sion, that will be the prologue of my work—or in London [...] for my dissertation ‘The Value of
Mathematics’. If I were searching for a kingship on earth, it would be good maybe, to immure my-
self in mathematics, and let me crown as a pope in the Vatican, captive on his throne. But I desire
a kingship in better regions, whereby not the goal but the driving force of the heart is primary. We
are not on earth for our pleasure, but with a mission, for which we have to render account”.7
The philosophical profession, Life, Art and Mysticism [2], and the dissertation, On the
Foundation of Mathematics [3], were both written and published. The two publications
belong together. They are the clue to the understanding of Brouwer’s entire work.
is óns veel zwaarder, ja haast onmogelijk. Dat lichaam met zijn passieleven in ’t troebel brein, heeft zielewarmte
noodig, en ’s menschen zielewarmte vloeit naar beneden; wie geeft den Koning wat?” [17, p. 40].
5“Die eindelijke harmonizeering van ons leven schijnt bij mensen van ons slag het zwaarst, het langzaamst, het
moeizaamst te gaan. Het schijnt, dat in den voortgang der generaties van ieder ouderpaar het oudste kind niet
onnoozel weg mag worden meegestuurd in den grooten stroom [...] maar als openingsoffer [...] moet worden
gebracht aan de Goden der bewustheid, der in ’t aardsch beweeg onvruchtbare bewustheid—ter compensatie doen
die goden dan afstand van hun rechten op de andere kinderen. Laten die gewijde offerdieren zich dus bewust zijn
van hun rol, en niet jaloersch worden op ’t grove roggebrood der kuddedieren. Ach ja, mijn beste lotgenoot en
medestrijder, het zuiverste van onszelf, de resignatie en overgave aan onze taak, dat leeft het best in eenzaamheid.
Omgang met mensen is nodig, maar van onze hartskleinodieën zo diep verschillend, als roggebrood, dat ook
nodig is, van ambrosia” [17, p. 44].
6“[...] uitverkorenen zijn wij—niet voor ons pleizier in de wereld—wij zijn de profeten, die, boden tusschen
God en het menschdom, de ontwikkeling, het werken, de groei, de ontbloeiing daarvan leiden en bezielen [...]”
[17, p. 40].
7“Den komenden winter zal ik zitten òf in Blaricum [...] werkend aan een ﬁlosoﬁsche belijdenis, die de proloog
van mijn werk zal zijn—òf in Londen [...] voor mijn dissertatie ‘De waarde der Wiskunde’ [...] Zocht ik een
koningschap op aarde, dan was het misschien goed, mij in de wiskunde te ommuren, en mij te laten kronen als
een paus in ’t Vaticaan, gevangen op zijn troon. Maar ik begeer een koningschap in betere gewesten, waarbij niet
het doel, maar de drijfveer in het hart primair is. Wij zijn op aarde niet voor ons plezier, maar met een zending,
waarvan wij rekenschap hebben af te leggen” [17, p. 52].

576
T. Koetsier
4. Life, art and mysticism
At school Brouwer was a brilliant pupil who excelled in all subjects. He registered at the
University of Amsterdam at the age of 16, two years earlier than usual, after having passed
with full honours the entire scale of secondary school examinations that existed in the
Netherlands at that time. Highly remarkable is the profession of faith that he read at the
age of 17, in 1898, in the Haarlem Remonstrant Church. With respect to God Brouwer
said:
“That I believe in God originates by no means in an intellectual consideration in the sense that
I should conclude from various phenomena that I observe around me the revelation of a higher
‘power’, but precisely in the utter powerlessness of my intellect. For to me the only truth is my
own ego of this moment, surrounded by a wealth of representations in which the ego believes,
and that makes it live. [...] My life at the moment is my conviction of my ego, and my belief in
my representations, and the belief in That, which is the origin of my ego and which gives me my
representations, independent of me, is directly linked to that. Hence something that, like me, lives
and that transcends me, and that is my God. One should by no means read in the many words that
I have used above, an intellectual deduction of the existence of God, for this belief in God is the
bedrock, from which can be deduced, but that itself is not deduced. The belief in God is a direct
spontaneous emotion in me”. [18, p. 18] (translated by van Dalen).
About other people Brouwer said:
“[...] hardly anywhere do I recognise my own thoughts and spiritual life: the shadows of men
around me are the ugliest part of my conceptual world”. (Ibidem, p. 20)
Fig. 3. Arthur Schopenhauer in 1815. Courtesy of the Stadt- und Universitätsbibliothek, Frankfurt am Main,
Schopenhauer-Archiv.

Arthur Schopenhauer and L.E.J. Brouwer: a comparison
577
One notices that the fragments from Brouwer’s letters to Adama van Scheltema show
that there is great continuity in the way Brouwer experienced life. This would never change.
Even when Brouwer was relatively happy, he would write (to Carel Adama van Scheltema,
August 7, 1906) something like:
“Life is a magic garden. With miraculously soft shining ﬂowers, but amidst the ﬂowers the little
people walk, that I am so afraid of, they stand on their heads, and the worst is, that they cry out to
me that I must also stand on my head, now and then I try it, and I burn with shame; but sometimes
the little people then shout that I do it very well, and that I am after all a real gnome too. But under
no circumstances are they going to make me believe that”.8
In Life, Art and Mysticism of 1905, which is the extended text of a series of lectures that he
gave at Delft University, Brouwer gave the “philosophical profession, the prologue of his
work”. It is also a controversial text, difﬁcult to discuss.9 In 1916, in the middle of World
War I, the Dutch author Frederik van Eeden wrote a review under the title “Een krachtig
brouwsel” (“A Potent Brew”—‘brouwer’ is Dutch for ‘brewer’) in which he said, ten years
after the publication of the book:
“It is unbelievable! for more than ten years this piece of prose can be read by the public. [...]
And nobody knows it, nobody talks about it, it lies there silently in its sweet, white cover, with
its threatening, terribly black words—and round about the gang laughs and blethers and swindles,
and philosophises and dances and shoots each other to death—while the gloomy Brouwer of that
infernal-heavenly brew walks around freely, now in a neat jacket, now in a stately robe, and is con-
sidered by everybody as a more or less interesting and not only harmless, but even very respectable
and useful individual that ﬁts in our society” [21, p. 75].10
Van Eeden wrote the review after Brouwer had become professor and he expressed his as-
tonishment. He assumed that the excellencies and highly learned who appointed Brouwer,
who even made him a member of the Royal Academy, had read it and that they must have
thought that it needed not be taken seriously.11 They must have thought, in Van Eeden’s
opinion, that the idea that logic is a false doctrine and the intellect a gift of the devil that
we must get rid of, were merely a juvenile sin of a 23 year old student. However, this is,
according to Van Eeden, a serious mistake. And, indeed, it was not a juvenile sin. Brouwer
always remained proud of LAM.
8“Het leven is een tovertuin. Met wonderzacht blinkende bloemen, maar tusschen de bloemen loopen de
kaboutermannetjes, daar ben ik zo bang voor, die staan op hun kop, en het ergste is, dat ze mij toeroepen, dat
ik ook op mijn kop moet gaan staan, een enkele maal probeer ik het, en schaam me dood; maar soms roepen
dan de kabouters dat ik het erg goed doe, en toch ook een echte kabouter ben. Maar dat laat ik me in geen geval
wijsmaken” [17, p. 68].
9Fearing misunderstanding or worse, only a small part of it was included by Heyting in Volume 1 of Brouwer’s
collected works. Van Stigt wrote to me that he originally intended to publish his translation as a book, but could
not ﬁnd a serious publisher. People feel uncomfortable with the text.
10“Het is ongeloofelijk! meer dan tien jaren ligt dat stuk proza oopenlijk ter leezing. Eenige honderden hebben
het den schrijver hooren voordragen, en vermoedelijk hebben nog eenige honderden het geleezen. En niemand
kent het, niemand praat er oover, het ligt daar maar stil, in zijn lieven, witten omslag, met zijn dreigende, ver-
schrikkelijke zwarte woorden—en rondom lacht en zwatelt en zwendelt de bende, en ﬁlosofeert en danst en
schiet elkander dood—terwijl de sombere Brouwer van dat helsch-heemelsche brouwsel vrij rondloopt, nu eens
in een net colbertje, dan weer in een deftige toga, en door iedereen wordt beschouwd als een in onze samenleving
passend, min of meer interessant en niet alleen onschadelijk, maar zelfs zeer achtenswaardig en nuttig individu”
[21, p. 75].
11Van Dalen, Brouwer’s biographer, believes that probably no one had bothered to have a look at the booklet.

578
T. Koetsier
The book consists of 9 chapters, 98 pages altogether. The structure of the treatise is rather
simple. The ﬁrst four chapters (I. The Sad World, II. Introspection, III. The Fall through the
Intellect, and IV. The Reconciliation) seem to contain the message that Brouwer wants to
convey. In the remaining ﬁve chapters (V. Language, VI. Immanent Truth, VII. Transcen-
dent Truth, VIII. The Liberated Life, and IX. Economics) Brouwer elaborates on several
aspects of the situation in which man ﬁnds himself. I will concentrate on the ﬁrst four
chapters and afterwards only brieﬂy discuss the rest of the treatise.
Brouwer’s message is indeed a powerful brew, a mixture of philosophical considerations
and the strong feelings with respect to existence that we met earlier.
In the ﬁrst chapter Brouwer writes down what is, from his point of view, wrong with the
world. Man does not live in harmony with nature. On the contrary, the world is sad and
characterised by heavy battles against nature and between men:
“The life of mankind as a whole is an arrogant eating away at its nests over the sound earth, a
messing about with her mothering crops, gnawing, violating, making sterile its rich creative power,
until it has devoured all life, and around the barren earth the human cancer withers away”.12
Man believes that he can change the world for the best. However, his theories are merely
castles in the air that are continuously replaced by others.
“The foolishness in their head that accompanies this, and makes them crazy themselves, they call:
‘Understanding the world’ ”.13
In this ﬁrst chapter Brouwer also indicates an explanation of this situation. In chapter III on
the fall through the intellect he would return to this problem. The cause of the sad world is
dissatisfaction; man wants always more. By means of the intellect man attempts to realise
his wishes. The intellect, however, is essentially limited in its possibilities:
“the mind never sees the world as a whole, and the means that it dictates in the direction of the
limited goal one has one’s eye on, will only do damage to the whole in unfathomable ways”.14
In this context Brouwer quotes the German mediaeval mystic, Meister Eckhart, with ap-
proval:
“If it were the case in this life that we would have all the time a mirror in front of us; in which
we would see and understand in one moment all things in one picture, then our actions and our
knowledge would not be a hindrance. However, because we must turn from the one thing to the
other we cannot stay with one without hindering the other”.15
12“Het leven van de mensheid als geheel is een arrogant uitvreten van haar nesten over de gave aarde, een
knoeien aan haar moederend gewas, knagend, schendend, een steriel maken van haar rijke scheppingskracht,
totdat ze alle leven heeft vervreten, en om de dorre aarde dort de mensenkanker weg” [2, p. 10]. At the end of his
career Brouwer repeated these views in a slightly altered formulation [5, p. 1242].
13“De dwaasheid in hun hoofd, die dát begeleidt, en hen zelf gek maakt, noemen ze: ‘De wereld begrijpen’ ” [2,
p. 10].
14“het verstand ziet nooit de wereld als geheel, en de middelen die het dicteert in de richting van het begrensde
in ’t oog gevatte doel, zullen langs ondoorgrondelijke wegen aan het geheel slechts schade doen” [2, p. 9]. Van
Stigt treats this text, which is given by Brouwer with quotation marks, as a quotation from Eckhart’s work. If this
is correct, it is remarkable that the original text is in Dutch, while in the rest of LAM all quotations from Eckhart’s
work are in German. The context, moreover, is such that the quotation marks could be meant rhetorically. That is
my assumption.
15“Wäre es so bestellt in diesem Leben, dass wir allezeit einen Spiegel vor uns hätten, in dem wir in einem
Augenblicke alle Dinge in einem Bilde sähen und erkennten, so wäre uns wirken und Wissen kein Hindernis. Da

Arthur Schopenhauer and L.E.J. Brouwer: a comparison
579
Fig. 4. Brouwer lecturing in Cambridge, about 1950. Courtesy of the Brouwer Archive.
In the second chapter, which is about God, Brouwer points to a solution and he urges the
reader to engage in introspection (Brouwer uses here the Dutch word ‘inkeer’, which means
introspection, but at the same time ‘repentance’; Brouwer means introspection but there is
a moral undertone). To a certain extent man controls the contents of his consciousness.
Moreover,
“you know within yourself, now and then, the religious feeling, which is to you, as if you are
withdrawing from your passions, your fear and desire, from time and space, from your entire
world of observation”.16
This introspection is not easy.
“However, if it is given to you, to conquer all inertia and go further, then passions will keep silent,
you will feel the dying off of the old world of observation, of time and space and all other plurality,
and the no longer bandaged eyes of a glad silence will open”.17
wir uns aber von einem zum anderen wenden müssen, darum können wir uns nicht bei dem einen aufhalten ohne
Hinderung des andern” [2, p. 9].
16“kent ge bij uzelf, nu en dan, het religieuze gevoel, waarbij het u is, alsof ge uit uw hartstochten, uit vrees en
begeerte, uit tijd en ruimte, uit de gehele aanschouwingswereld retireert” [2, p. 13].
17“Wordt het u niettemin gegeven, alle traagheid te overwinnen, en voort te gaan, dan gaan de hartstochten
zwijgen, ge voelt u afsterven van de oude aanschouwingswereld, van tijd en ruimte en alle andere veelheid, en de
niet langer gebonden oogen eener blijde stilte gaan open” [2, pp. 13–14].

580
T. Koetsier
Here Brouwer quotes the German mystics Eckhart and Jakob Böhme, who expressed the
same thought in a similar way. Böhme wrote:
“It is inside of you; and if all your willing and sensing allows you to be silent for an hour, then you
will hear unspeakable words of God”.18
Then Brouwer devotes two pages to the situation that results if the introspection is success-
ful:
“You feel free, to return at your own discretion into the shackles of plurality, separation, time,
space and bodily feeling, but you do not do it; or rather do it and do it not at the same time; while
you remain free outside, you live your tied bodily life in the world of men in clarity, you live in
your bonds, seeing, how you accept them yourselves in freedom, and how they only exist, as long
as you shroud yourself freely in mist”.19
This quotation points to the reconciliation, which is the subject of chapter IV. However,
Brouwer ﬁrst studies in chapter III the mechanism of the intellect:
“This Intellect does in the Life of Desire men the diabolic service of the goal-means bond between
two fantasies. The intellect points out to them, caught in the desire for the one thing, the pursuit of
the other thing as a means for that; for example, in order to move the bed of a river: the making of
a dam; in order to allow one’s jealousy of someone else to run its course: setting ﬁre to his house;
in order to be safe from beasts of prey: building one’s house on piles; in order to let the sun shine
on one’s house: the cutting of trees”.20
In fact the act always somewhat misses the goal. If this repeats itself several times, if
the jump from goal to means is repeated several times, it can happen that in the end one
counteracts the direction of the original goal. In this context Brouwer describes the coming
into existence of industry, a means to produce products in order to simplify the living
conditions, followed by the building of instruments to facilitate production, followed by
the development of science in the service of industry, etc.
Sometimes man regrets what he does. There is
“the melancholy about the lost Paradise, the vague conviction of the quiet happiness with life
that was originally marked out for man, the desire for bliss, for religious certainty, for the free,
surrendered life, this desire, stepping in the forms of the sad world, becomes hunger for higher,
elevating, for transcendent things”.21
18“Es ist in dir; und so du magst eine Stunde schweigen von allem deinen Wollen und Sinnen, so wirst du
unaussprechliche Worte Gottes hören” [2, p. 14].
19“Ge voelt u vrij, om naar willekeur terug te keren in de boeien van veelheid, scheiding, tijd, ruimte en lichaams-
gevoel, doch doet het niet; of liever doet het tegelijk wel en niet; vrij buiten blijvend, leeft ge uw gebonden
lichamelijke leven mee in helderheid in de menschenwereld, leeft in uw banden, ziende, hoe ge ze zelf in vrijheid
aanvaardt, en hoe de er slechts zijn, zoolang ge u in vrijheid omnevelt” [2, p. 15].
20“Dat Intellect doet in het Leven van Begeerte den menschen den duivelsdienst van den band doel-middel
tusschen twee fantazieën. Hun geeft, vastgeslingerd in ’t begeeren van het eene ding, het intellect het streven naar
een ander ding als middel daartoe aan; zoo om de bedding eener rivier te verleggen: het maken van een dam; om
op een ander zijn jaloezie uit te vieren: diens huis in brand te steken; om voor roofdieren beveiligd te zijn: zijn
huis op palen bouwen; om de zon op zijn huis te laten schijnen: boomen omhakken” [2, pp. 19–20].
21“de weemoed over het verloren Paradijs, de vage overtuiging van het stille levensgeluk, dat oorspronkelijk
den menschen was bestemd, de hang naar zaligheid, naar religieuze vastheid, naar het vrije leven in overgave, die
hang, die tredend in de vormen der droeve wereld, wordt honger naar hoogere, verheffende, naar transcendente
dingen” [2, p. 24].

Arthur Schopenhauer and L.E.J. Brouwer: a comparison
581
But conscience is being lulled. If it speaks in the bounded world, the attention for it is
diverted by the luxurious satisfaction of other needs or it is recognised as a need within the
system, susceptible to satisfaction. In this context Brouwer writes:
“Art and religion in the world are merely morphine-industry on a large scale; the desire for a better
life is being lulled, anaesthetised”.22
The result is that introspection is made difﬁcult. Yet it is possible and in chapter IV called
“Reconciliation” Brouwer describes the possibility of appeasement. He writes:
“In this way you are reconciled with the erring world, and you ﬁnd her disconsolateness self-
evident; but, moreover: you feel the fact that you are driven away from the Self, placed in Life,
where pain and work, desire and fear are your share, and all Truth is veiled for you, as your
accomplished Karma, that you are reconciled with and that you must fulﬁll; you view this life as
the direction of your duty and you live it directed from the Self, that is to say that you recognise
all bonds of the earth, that are your accomplished Karma until God releases you from them”.23
With approval Brouwer quotes Böhme, who argued that the fall is necessary to know the
light in its fullness:
“From the Contrarium one understands what is Love or Suffering”.24
Chapter IV is about language:
“The intellect is directly accompanied by language. With life in the intellect comes the impos-
sibility of relating to each other in a direct way—instinctively by gesture or glance of the eyes,
or even more immaterially, through all spatial separations—and they start to train themselves and
their offspring through harsh sounds, hard and—rather powerless, because so far never anybody
has communicated his soul to someone else”.25
This is followed by a further analysis of the role of language. For example:
“[...] people with language loose primary desires, that, although sinful, were much closer to the
Self; afraid of loneliness, their only fatherland, they become automatons in the service of the
monster machine: public interaction”.26
Moreover, according to Brouwer, if other forms of understanding show up, we immediately
subject them to scientiﬁc studies, instead of simply opening ourselves to them in an open-
minded way.
22“Kunst en religie in de wereld zijn slechts morﬁne-industrie op groote schaal; de hang naar beter leven wordt
er gesust, verdoofd” [2, p. 25].
23“Zoo zijt ge verzoend met de dwalende wereld, en vindt haar troosteloosheid vanzelfsprekend; maar meer
nog: ge voelt als uw voldongen karma, waarmee ge zijt verzoend en dat ge te vervullen hebt, u, weggedreven
uit het Zelf, geplaatst te zien in ’t Leven, waar pijn en werk, begeerte en angst, uw deel zijn, en alle Waarheid
voor u is omsluierd, ge ziet dat Leven als de richting van uw plicht en leeft het uit het Zelf gedirigeerd, dat wil
zeggen erkent alle banden der aarde, die uw voldongen karma zijn, en die zo lang, tot God er u van losmaakt”
[2, pp. 31–32].
24“An dem Contrarium wird erkannt was Liebe oder Leid sei” [2, pp. 33].
25“Het intellect gaat direct vergezeld van de taal. Met het leven in het intellect komt de onmogelijkheid, om zich
op directe wijze—door gebaar en blik van oogen instinctief, of nog materieloozer, door alle afstandsscheiding
heen—met elkaar in betrekking te stellen, en gaan ze zich en hun nakroost dresseeren op een teekenverstand-
houding door grove klanken, moeitevol en—vrij machteloos, want nooit nog heeft door de taal iemand zijn ziel
aan een ander meegedeeld [...]” [2, p. 37].
26“[...] menschen met taal verliezen primaire begeerten, die, hoe zondig ook, het Zelf veel nader waren; bang
voor de eenzaamheid, hun enig vaderland, worden ze automaten in dienst van de monstermachine: het publiek
verkeer” [2, p. 41].

582
T. Koetsier
In chapter V, “Immanent Truth”, Brouwer argues that the Self manifests itself every-
where within the context of our bounded life in the form of Truth. But in order to ﬁnd the
Self more than the Truth is needed; necessary is something that is
“above the forms of this world, and that can only be interpreted mystically with the word: Divine
grace”.27
Immanent Truth is Truth in the forms of the bounded world in so far as it points to the
collision of opposing and irreconcilable interests. This seems to mean that wherever in the
world there are essential oppositions that cannot be reconciled, there is Immanent Truth.
Transcendent Truth is different; it is Truth in the forms of the bounded world in so far as it
points to the possibility of Introspection to the Self.
About 15 pages are devoted to the concept of Immanent Truth. Often art shows us the
Immanent Truth. For example, according to Brouwer:
“Art, that is real truth, will everywhere belie common sense, causality and science: it will trample
down the optimism that keeps the foolish earthly doings going; it will see in every human life the
avenging Fate, it will see that the illusion of hopeful trust in worldly certainty turns into misery
high above the delusion of causality”28
and
“In times when there is no belief in other knowledge than in the intellect and in other forces of
nature than the ones that are placed in practical life, the immanent truth in art will imperturbably
continue to speak of magic, presentiments, murder by thought, resurrection of the dead, healings
through love, apparitions, celestial interventions; she will not see people die of tuberculosis and
gout and blood-poisoning, but, because their time has come”.29
From Brouwer’s point of view time is an illusion. Most clearly the tragedies show us this
Immanent Truth. When Hamlet dies he has lost all illusions, happiness, faith, love. It re-
quires only a slight extrapolation to see that life itself is an illusion. A tragedy can reveal
to us that time is an illusion; the plastic arts, on the contrary, can reveal to us the illusion
of space, the illusion of plurality.
At this point Brouwer proceeds with a characterisation of the woman as temptation:
“lust of power, cupidity, ambition; and [...] the illusion of the woman. Also the latter is karma
aggravation; because for no man is there room for the woman in the accomplished karma: she is a
siren that lures him from his path”.30
27“boven de vormen van deze wereld, en is alleen mystiek te duiden met het woord: ‘Goddelijke genade’ ” [2,
p. 47].
28“Kunst, die echte waarheid is, zal overal gezond verstand, causaliteit en wetenschap logenstraffen: het opti-
misme, dat het dwaze aardsch gedoe in gang houdt, vertrappen; in ieder menschenleven het wrekend Noodlot zien,
dat illusie van hoopvol vertrouwen op wereldsche vastheid verkeert in ellende hoog boven de causaliteitswaan”
[2, p. 49].
29“In tijden, dat niet wordt geloofd aan ander weten, dan in ’t intellect, en aan andere natuurkrachten, dan die
in het practische leven geplaatst zijn, zal de immanente waarheid in de kunst onverstoorbaar blijven spreken van
magie, voorgevoelens, moord door gedachte, doodenopstanding, genezingen door liefde, geestverschijningen,
zendingen des hemels, zij zal geen menschen zien sterven aan tuberculose en jicht en bloedvergiftiging, doch,
omdat hun tijd gekomen is [...]” [2, p. 49].
30“heerschzucht, geldzucht, eerzucht; en [...] illusie van de vrouw. Ook de laatste is karmaverzwaring; want
voor geen man heeft in ’t voldongen karma de vrouw een plaats: zij is een van zijn weg aﬂokkende sirene” [2,
p. 52].

Arthur Schopenhauer and L.E.J. Brouwer: a comparison
583
Actually, for a modern reader one of the striking elements of Brouwer’s thought is his
idea that women are essentially different from men. To this theme Brouwer devotes many
pages. For a man a woman represents a temptation that he must avoid. A woman, however,
is nothing without a man. It is her nature and her fate to serve and do the ignoble work for
man. She possesses no individuality. The situation in the sad world of a man was described
above. For a woman, the situation in the sad world is different. A woman who does not
wish to sin against her karma should totally sacriﬁce herself to the one she loves. She
should not try to possess him and she should not engage in male activities.
This part of the book contains several references to Shakespeare, Goethe and others.
Faust and Gretchen, Antonius and Cleopatra, Hamlet and Ophelia and other examples show
us the immanent truth: a woman is for a man merely a temptation that he should avoid while
it is a woman’s fate to love and serve man.
Brouwer closes this chapter with the statement:
“And in the most apparent way the immanent truth breaks through in the world in the eternal
occurrence of unhappiness within the forms of the pursuit of happiness. Unhappiness denies hap-
piness, by occurring within its forms as its frustration; the small houses of cards in which people
lock themselves up so fearfully, once will all collapse, to everyone who is dying it becomes visible
that another life was hollow, and a warning speaks that in spite of all labour and all bungling, Fate
keeps the world within its paths”.31
Those who know the immanent truth, that is the insight that whatever one tries in the world
is going to fail, are directed by that insight towards Transcendent Truth, that is introspec-
tion to the Self. In chapter VII, Brouwer writes about the manifestations of Transcendent
Truth in the world; for example in Bach’s music, but also, of course, in mystical literature.
chapter VIII returns to the way in which the life of a liberated man develops. In chapter IX
Brouwer argues that as long as a liberated man is still in some ways tied to society, he
should stay away from economics. A liberated man leaves the attempts to change society
to “fools with ambition” [2, p. 95].
5. Schopenhauer and Brouwer: A comparison
5.1. Brouwer’s philosophical mysticism
Let us brieﬂy compare the ideas of Brouwer with those of Eckehart (1260–1327) and
Böhme (1575–1624), from which they differ in several respects. In Eckehart’s sermons,
the central problem and the highest goal for a human being is the mystical union of the
human and the divine. In order to achieve this a process of puriﬁcation is necessary. Ecke-
hart spoke much about what this mystical union of the “spark of the soul” and the Divine
amounts to.
31“En het voelbaarst breekt de immanente waarheid in de wereld door in het eeuwig optreden van het ongeluk
binnen de vormen van het streven naar geluk. Het ongeluk loochent geluk, door binnen diens vormen als verijdel-
ing er van op te treden; de kaartenhuisjes waarbinnen de menschen zich zoo angstig opsluiten, storten éénmaal
álle in, aan ieder stervende wordt zichtbaar, dat weer een leven hol is geweest, en spreekt een waarschuwing, dat
trots alle arbeid en geknoei, het Noodlot de wereld binnen haar banen houdt” [2, p. 62].

584
T. Koetsier
In Böhme’s work there is a theoretical aspect, absent in Eckehart’s teachings. Böhme’s
central speculative problem was to show how good and evil, light and dark, etc. all emanate
from God. For Böhme the Creation was a process of giving birth, resulting in repeated
oppositions. In God, however, all these oppositions coincide. Böhme had considerable in-
ﬂuence on Hegel and others.
Characteristic of most mystical literature is that the author had a mystical experience,
sometimes of such intensity and of such a strange nature that only after a long time could
something coherent be written about it. A difference between Brouwer, on the one hand,
and Eckehart and Böhme, on the other, is that, as far as I know, Brouwer never had such
an experience. The following quotation from chapter VIII of LAM also seems to suggest
that Brouwer’s mysticism is based more on philosophical considerations than on intense
mystical experiences.
“In this way at the start he will have shared the habits and ideals of his environment humbly and
diligently in his intellect, carefully listening and patiently waiting for the relevation of the inner
contradiction of that intellect; and because he did not force this revelation, he will have received it
in the ultimate consequences of philosophy, in which he got jammed like in the top of a cone; but
then for him the delusion of the world had ﬂown away”.32 (italics added)
Another difference between Brouwer and other mystics is the great attention that Brouwer
pays to the role of culture: science, language, art, etc. In every respect Brouwer is much
closer to Schopenhauer than to the mystics.
5.2. A further comparison of Brouwer’s and Schopenhauer’s views
Schopenhauer’s works encompass a few thousand pages. LAM counts 99 pages. This im-
plies that a comparison is not unproblematic. Moreover, the early Brouwer never refers to
Schopenhauer.It cannot be excluded that Brouwer actually read at the time Schopenhauer’s
work or about Schopenhauer, but that he considered his own views to be rather different.
Quoting Schopenhauer would have meant agreement and there are subtle differences with
respect to almost every aspect of Schopenhauer’s philosophy. Yet, as I will show, Brouwer
and Schopenhauer are in many respects two of a kind.
Both Schopenhauer and Brouwer are obviously followers of Kant in the sense that for
them the objects of our knowledge are to a large extent the product of certain a priori
conditions on the part of the knowing subject.
Both modiﬁed the idealistic Kantian views. At heart Schopenhauer follows Kant with
respect to the spatio-temporal world and the law of causality. Yet for Schopenhauer the
principle of causality, interpreted in a very general sense as the principle of sufﬁcient rea-
son, plays a central role. It represents the essence of time: succession. He wrote:
32“Zoo zal hij in den aanvang gewoonten en idealen zijner omgeving gedwee en ijverig hebben meegeleefd in
zijn intellect, bij nauwlettend luisteren en geduldig afwachten naar de openbaring der innerlijke tegenstrijdigheid
van dat intellect; en daar hij die openbaring niet heeft geforceerd, zal ze hem eerst zijn geworden in de uiterste
consequenties der ﬁlosoﬁe, waarin hij als in den top van een kegel vastliep; maar toen was hem de waan der
wereld weggevlogen” [2, p. 84].

Arthur Schopenhauer and L.E.J. Brouwer: a comparison
585
“Succession is the form of the principle of sufﬁcient reason; succession is the whole essence of
time”.33
The principle of sufﬁcient reason also represents the essence of space:
“this [space] is the possibility of the mutual determination of its parts with respect to each other,
which is called position”.34
Compare this to Brouwer in LAM:
“The phenomena succeed each other in time, bound by causality, because you yourself, wrapped
up in haze, want the phenomena in that regularity”.35
Brouwer expressed himself much more clearly in his dissertation. There he compares his
own views with those of Kant. For Kant Euclidean three-dimensional space and measure-
less time cannot be separated from external experience; moreover they occur necessarily on
the basis of the organisation of the human intellect in the mathematical “receptaculum” of
experience. For Brouwer a priori knowledge is knowledge that follows immediately from
the primordial intuition of mathematics or the intuition of time. That means that only the
possibilities of mathematical construction that are implied by the primordial intuition of
time are a priori [3, Chapter 2].
It is quite possible to emphasise the differences between Brouwer and Schopenhauer, but
there remains much common ground. Clearly Schopenhauer at heart followed Kant with
respect to time and space, while Brouwer much more radically developed his own view.
With respect to the “Ding-an-sich” there are also differences. Brouwer seems to have been
more of a Kantian in this respect than Schopenhauer. Yet also in Schopenhauer’s work is
there the inclination to reduce time, space and causality to a simple primordial principle.
In the same way Brouwer’s notion of will is not exactly Schopenhauer’s Will. Brouwer’s
will is most of the time the individual will, but it plays the same negative role as Schopen-
hauer’s Will. This is clear from the passages from Böhme that Brouwer quoted in LAM.
Böhme wrote, for example:
“The ﬁrst property of nature is desire, like a magnet, as the possessiveness of the will, that wants
to be something and at the same time has nothing to make something from; that is why it moves to
an attractive object, impresses and attaches itself to a something, and yet it is nothing but an acute,
magnetic hunger, a bitterness, hardness and a coldness”.36
According to Böhme, in the end this possessiveness of the will leads to fear. Brouwer
agrees.
I have written that Schopenhauer was a metaphysical pessimist. What does this mean?
This pessimism consists, in the words of Copleston, in the conviction that
33“Succession ist die Gestalt des Satzes vom Grunde in der Zeit; Succession ist das ganze Wesen der Zeit” [24,
p. 35].
34“dieser [...] ist [...] die Möglichkeit der wechselseitigen Bestimmungen seiner Teile durcheinander, welche
Lage heißt” [24, p. 35].
35“De verschijnselen volgen elkaar in den tijd, gebonden door de causaliteit, omdat ge zelf in omneveling de
verschijnselen in dien regelmaat wilt” [2, p. 15].
36“Die erste eigenschaft der Natur ist die Begierde, gleich einem Magnet, als die Einfaszlichkeit des Willens, der
etwas sein will und doch nichts hat, woraus er etwas mache; und so führt er sich in eine Annehmlichkeit seiner
selbst, impreszt und faszt sich selber zu einem Etwas, und ist doch nichts als ein scharfer, magnetischer Hunger,
eine Herbigkeit, Härte und Kälte” [2, p. 77].

586
T. Koetsier
“the passing years, the succeeding phases of history, could only mean a progressive increase in
suffering and misery”.37
Logically this pessimism is based on:
“his conception of the Ding-an-sich, which he views as Will, an irrational, blind, self-conﬂicting
impulse to existence”.38
Brouwer shares the pessimism with respect to the course of history. He wrote:
“People lived originally separately, and each for himself attempted to keep this balance in the
supporting nature among sinful temptations; this ﬁlled their life, no interest in each other, no
worries for the morrow. So no work either, and no sorrow; no hatred, no fear; no pleasure either”.39
Dissatisfaction led to the world in which we live now:
“ever more painful labour for the suppressed, ever more infernal conspiracy for the rulers, and all
are suppressed and rulers at the same time; and the old instinct of separation lives on as pale envy
and jealousy”.40
According to Brouwer, an example of this development is the way in which the Dutch
disturbed the original subtle equilibrium which existed between them and the water by
building dykes [2, p. 7].
What is this pessimism based on? We saw above that the cause of the sad world is
dissatisfaction; man always wants more. Moreover, the intellect by means of which man
tries to realise his wishes is essentially limited in its possibilities.
Let us also compare Schopenhauer and Brouwer with respect to the solution that they
offer man. Above we saw that for Schopenhauer there are two ways of escaping the sad
world: the temporary escape in aesthetic contemplation and the lasting escape consisting in
the denial of the will to live. Suicide is for Schopenhauer no real solution because it repre-
sents no permanent solution from the shackles of the will. Death implies that our intellect
and our ego cease to exist, but as timeless will we continue to exist and we may reincarnate.
The real escape lies in the denial of the will to live. If that denial succeeds, nothing remains.
The atmosphere of Schopenhauer’s writings on this point is one of atheistic religiosity.
What does Brouwer say? On the one hand, unlike Schopenhauer, Brouwer often men-
tions God. However, Brouwer’s God is certainly not like the Christian God. In the pro-
fession of faith that he made at the age of 17 Brouwer described God as “that which is
the origin of my ego and which gives me my images; which is therefore independent of
me, something that like myself is alive and which is higher than me; that something is my
God”. This statement, but also the long quotations from the Bhagavad Gita, suggests that
Brouwer’s notion of God was close to Schopenhauer’s.
It seems fair to assume that Brouwer uses the notion of “karma” in the sense of the
Bhagavad Gita. The doctrine of action (karman) teaches that the actions of man, whether
37[6, pp. 74–75].
38[6, p. 75].
39“De menschen leefden uit oorsprong gescheiden, en ieder voor zich zocht te houden zijn evenwicht in de
dragende natuur tusschen zondige verleidingen; dát vulde hun leven, geen belangstelling in elkander, geen zorg
om den dag van morgen. Dus ook geen werk, en geen verdriet; geen haat, geen vrees; ook geen genot” [2, p. 7].
40“steeds pijnlijker arbeid voor de onderdrukten, steeds helscher samenspanning voor de machthebbers, en allen
zijn onderdrukten en machthebbers tegelijk; en het oude instinct van scheiding leeft voort als bleeke nijd en
jaloezie” [2, pp. 7–8].

Arthur Schopenhauer and L.E.J. Brouwer: a comparison
587
good or bad, produce a binding effect in the sense that they necessitate rebirth. The Gita
teaches that the binding quality of an act lies in the motive and in the desire that prompt it.
Gradually the desire should be abandoned.
Let us consider some other aspects of Schopenhauer’s and Brouwer’s work. Schopen-
hauer distinguished between the intuition and the abstractions of understanding. The clear
sunlight of the intuitive is, in Schopenhauer’s view, superior to the moonlight of the ab-
stract:
“As long as we follow our intuition everything is clear, ﬁxed and certain [...] But with abstract
knowledge, with reason, doubt and mistake entered theory and worry and pity entered practice”.41
The employment of abstract reasoning (peculiar to man) is only a temporary expedient.
Compare this to Brouwer in LAM when he writes that only in
“very narrowly circumscribed fantasies [...] understanding can be maintained rather long and
well; about ‘equal’, about ‘triangle’, little misunderstanding will be possible; yet while doing so
two people will never feel precisely the same, and even in the most restricted sciences, logic and
mathematics, that cannot really be separated sharply,42 no two individuals will think the same on
the fundamental notions that they are constructed from”.43
On women Schopenhauer and Brouwer also agreed. Schopenhauer described them in his
essay “On Women” in Parega and Paralipomena (1851) as the number Two of the human
race, incapable of undertaking an objective interest in anything, without a sense of justice
and with little sense of truth. However, in both Schopenhauer’s and in Brouwer’s work,
one can leave out all the passages on women without changing the core of their views.44
6. The turn to mathematics
When Brouwer wrote LAM he was already engaged in mathematical research. The follow-
ing quotation from a letter in 1908 shows his attitude towards mathematics:
“Korteweg and De Vries want to appoint me as ‘privaatdocent’ after the holidays, I want to escape,
resist, lay down conditions [...] and will perhaps yield in the end; I love that subject, and why then
not serve it in society as well? And if I should be more philosopher than mathematician, then it
will also break through that straightjacket yet”.45
41“Solange wir uns rein anschauend verhalten, ist alles klar, fest und gewiß. [...] Aber mit der abstrakten Erken-
ntnis, mit der Vernunft, ist im Theoretischen der Zweifel und der Irrtum, im Praktischen die Sorge und die Reue
eingetreten” [24, pp. 66–67].
42N.B. In his dissertation Brouwer had changed his mind on this point.
43“zeer eng afgegrensde fantazieën [...] daar is het elkander verstaan vrij lang en goed vol te houden; over
‘gelijk’, over ‘driehoek’, zal weinig misverstaan mogelijk zijn; toch zullen daarbij nooit twee personen precies
hetzelfde voelen, en zelfs bij de meest beperkte wetenschappen, logica en wiskunde, die eigenlijk niet scherp te
scheiden zijn, zullen bij de grondbegrippen, waaruit ze zijn opgebouwd, geen twee hetzelfde denken” [2, p. 34].
44By the way, it seems to me that this negative attitude towards women is psychologically interesting. It is also
remarkable that both Brouwer and Schopenhauer were obsessively occupied with their physical health and both
repeatedly felt unreasonably treated by others.
45Korteweg en De Vries willen mij na de vacantie privaat-docent maken, ik wil ontvluchten, stribbel tegen, stel
voorwaarden [...] en zal in ’t eind misschien toegeven; ik heb dat vak lief, en waarom het dan niet dienen ook in
de samenleving; wat is een God zonder altaren op aarde? En als ik meer philosoof dan mathematicus mocht zijn,
dan zal het ook door die dwangbuis nog wel heenbreken” [17, p. 85].

588
T. Koetsier
In 1907, two years after the publication of Life, Art and Mysticism, Brouwer defended
his doctoral dissertation, On the Foundation of Mathematics (Over de Grondslagen der
Wiskunde) [3]. Then followed his topological work and his career started.
How serious is the opposition between the ideas that Brouwer expressed in LAM and the
fact that he pursued a career in mathematics? As far as I know he himself never explicitly
answered that question.
I shall try to give an answer. First of all the views expressed in LAM do not at all exclude
work and an active participation in social life. The Bhagavad Gita, quoted by Brouwer,
says on this point:
“Therefore without attachment ever perform the work that thou must do; for if without attachment
a man works, he gains the Highest”. (Bhagavad Gita, III, 19; [11, p. 98])
In another translation:
“Therefore perform Thou that which Thou hast to do, at all times unmindful of the event; for the
man who doeth that which he hath to do, without attachment to the result, obtaineth the Supreme”.
(Bhagavad Gita, III, 19; [12, p. 19])
An Indian commentator, Rangacarya, explained that if a man works without attachment
“there is among all the things existing in this world not one which is related to him as an
object to be desired by him” [11, p. 98].
Well, is not a career in pure mathematics for someone who possesses the right talents the
ideal way to work without attachment to the material world? Brouwer must have thought
so. A passage by Brouwer, that was meant for but in the end not included in the dissertation,
seems to conﬁrm this:
“And that is why science is only meaningful as a factor in the struggle of men against nature for
their fellowmen by counting and measuring calculation, in other words, natural science has value
as a weapon, but otherwise does not touch life, yes, it is there as disturbing as everything that is
related to struggle. While mathematics, undertaken for its own sake, can acquire all the harmony
[...] of music and architecture and can give all the illicit enjoyments that lie in the free unfolding
of faculties without compulsion from outside”.46
Mathematics undertaken for its own sake is not attached to the material world. It does not
hinder the liberated human whose life is characterised by Brouwer in LAM as follows:
“Your journey through the sad world is a steady journey in a light colourful cloud, in love for all in
it that goes without saying, also for your wandering and desiring fellowmen, for you do no longer
see it as a reality separated from the Self, but directed out of the Self, and along with the Self”.47
Not only in this way is the dissertation very much in accordance with the ideas expressed in
LAM. In the dissertation Brouwer describes true mathematics as a free creation that consists
of mental constructions that are executed within the isolation of the individual human mind.
46“En daarom heeft de wetenschap ook alleen zin als factor in den strijd der mensen tegen de natuur om hun
medemensen door tellende en metende berekening, m.a.w. de natuurwetenschap heeft waarde als wapen, maar
raakt verder het leven niet, ja is er even storend, als alles wat aan strijd annex is. Terwijl wiskunde, om zichzelf
bedreven, alle harmonie [...] van muziek en architectuur kan krijgen en al de ongeoorloofde genietingen kan
geven, die liggen in de vrije ontplooiing van faculteiten, zonder dwang van buiten” [9, p. 30].
47“Uw gang door de droeve wereld is een gestadige gang in een lichte kleurenrijke wolk, in liefde voor al het
van zelf sprekende daarin, ook voor uw dwalende en begeerende medemenschen, want ge ziet haar niet meer als
een van het Zelf gescheiden werkelijkheid, maar gericht van uit het Zelf, en met het Zelf mee” [2, p. 16].

Arthur Schopenhauer and L.E.J. Brouwer: a comparison
589
Language is exterior to mathematics and merely an imperfect means to communicate one’s
mental constructions to others. Brouwer rejects logicism and formalism as solutions in the
foundations of mathematics because they are based on an attempt to found mathematics in
language.
It is not possible to discuss in this paper Brouwer’s work on the foundations of mathe-
matics and his topological work. A good introduction with considerable biographical detail
and many references can be found in [18]. For an elaboration on the point that there is in
Brouwer’s work a basic unity and that both his topological work and his intuitionistic work
are in perfect harmony with the idea that mathematics is a free mental construction I refer
to [13].
7. Brouwer compared to Gödel
Schopenhauer was very inﬂuential. Several of his doctrines reappeared with later philoso-
phers. He inﬂuenced Eduard von Hartman (1842–1906), author of the Philosophy of the
Unconscious. In the opinion of Richard Wagner (1813–1883), for example, Schopen-
hauer’s philosophy must be the deﬁnitive foundation of all spiritual and moral culture. Wil-
helm Busch was a follower of Schopenhauer and Nietsche was considerably inﬂuenced by
Schopenhauer. These ideas reached the Netherlands and although we do not know exactly
how this happened, it seems to me that I have convincingly shown that Schopenhauer’s
ideas must have reached and inﬂuenced Brouwer, directly or indirectly.48
Although Brouwer’s work in philosophy and in mathematics is not easily accessible, it
is a consistent whole. At the end of his book on Schopenhauer, Copleston writes that, al-
though the reader of Schopenhaueris rewarded by many passages of striking beauty, Cople-
ston did not succeed in discovering under the rhetoric a consistent systematic philosophy,
a coherent psychology, ethic or theory of value. This makes a very precise comparison of
the ideas of Schopenhauer and Brouwer difﬁcult.
As for Brouwer’s ideas on mathematics and the divine, it is clarifying to make another
comparison. I shall compare Brouwer’s views with the views of Kurt Gödel. It is remark-
able that although these two great minds were working in completely opposed mathemati-
cal research programmes, they shared an interest in mysticism.
First I must devote a few words to Gödel’s mathematical work. In the 1920s David
Hilbert (1862–1943), who was at the time one of the world’s leading mathematicians,
felt that Brouwer’s intuitionist mathematics represented a threat to classical mathemat-
ics. Hilbert’s defence was brilliant. He came up with the so-called formalist programme
to prove the consistency of classical mathematics. The central problem in the formalist
programme turned out to be the following: to prove the consistency of the classical theory
of natural numbers, the Peano arithmetic. In order to do so Hilbert represented the Peano
arithmetic by means of a formal system, i.e., a formal representation in such a way that
correct proofs of theorems are represented by sequences of formulae satisfying criteria so
simple that a machine could check them. Hilbert assumed that the intuitionist threat to
classical mathematics would be neutralised if one could give a intuitionistically acceptable
48After I ﬁnished this paper I discovered that in 1976 Eggenberger had already described Brouwer as a philo-
sophical continuator of Schopenhauer [22, pp. 54].

590
T. Koetsier
Fig. 5. Schopenhauer in 1859 (Photo by Johannes Schäfer) Courtesy of the Stadt- und Universitätsbibliothek,
Frankfurt am Main, Schopenhauer-Archiv.
proof of the formal consistency of this formal system.49 However, in 1931 Kurt Gödel
(1906–1978), became instantly famous when he published his incompleteness theorem:
For every formal system encompassing the Peano arithmetic one can show that if it is for-
mally consistent, the proof of this formal consistency requires more than the possibilities
of deduction that are captured in the formal system. Gödel’s result showed that Hilbert’s
programme could not be fully executed.
Let us now consider Gödel’s views on mathematics and the divine. According to Gödel
mathematics is not a mental construction but the description of a part of objective real-
ity. Although the abstract objects that mathematicians study differ from concrete things,
in Gödel’s view mathematical entities exist independently of the activities of the mathe-
maticians that study them. Gödel was an arch-rationalist who always sought rational order
behind apparent chaos [20, p. 2]. Gödel had a vivid theological interest. His rationalism led
him, for example, to an attempt to formalise Anselm’s ontological proof of the existence of
God: God’s existence follows from the assumption of his perfection [1]. Gödel argued in
private discussions that a system of postulates could be phrased for notions such as “God”
and the “soul”. He seems to have felt that in a purely rational way a theological Weltan-
schauung could be reconciled with all the known scientiﬁc facts [20, p. 210] or even that
the existence of God would in the end turn out to be logically necessary [20, p. 165].
49Such a proof would, for example, show the impossibility of deriving formally within the formal system a
formula of the form A&non-A.

Arthur Schopenhauer and L.E.J. Brouwer: a comparison
591
Gödel had an interest in mysticism. Rudy Rucker, who talked to Gödel in 1977, wrote:
“The central teaching of mysticism is this: Reality is One. The practice of mysticism consists in
ﬁnding ways to experience this higher unity directly. This One has variously been called the Good,
God, the Cosmos, the Mind, the Void, or (perhaps most neutrally) the Absolute. No door in the
labyrinthine castle of science opens directly onto the Absolute. But if one understands the maze
well enough, it is possible to jump out of the system and experience the Absolute for oneself. [...]
I asked Gödel if he believed there is a single Mind behind all the various appearances and activities
of the world. He replied that, yes, the Mind is the thing that is structured, but that the Mind exists
independently of its individual properties. I then asked if he believed that the Mind is everywhere,
as opposed to being localized in the brains of people. Gödel replied, ‘Of course. This is the basic
mystic teaching’. [...] then I asked him my last question: ‘what causes the illusion of the passage
of time’? [...] Finally he said this: ‘The illusion of the passage of time arises from the confusing
of the given with the real. Passage of time arises because we think of occupying different realities.
In fact we occupy only different givens. There is only one reality’ ” [23, pp. 170–171].
About another conversation with Gödel in 1972 Rucker wrote:
“I asked him how best to perceive pure abstract possibility. He said three things. (i) First one must
close off the other senses, for instance, by lying down in a quiet place. It is not enough, however,
to perform this negative action, one must actively seek with the mind. (ii) It is a mistake to let
everyday reality condition possibility, and only to imagine the combinings and permutations of
physical objects—the mind is capable of directly perceiving inﬁnite sets. (iii) The ultimate goal
of such thought, and of all philosophy, is the perception of the Absolute. Gödel rounded off these
comments with a remark on Plato: ‘When Plato could fully perceive God, his philosophy ended’ ”
[23, p. 169].
Van Atten and Tragesser have argued that a comparison of Brouwer’s views on mysticism
and mathematics with the views of Gödel [15] suggests a refutation of what they call the
common core thesis in mysticism (CCT). This thesis consists of two propositions:
(a) Mysticism holds that Reality is Good. Mystical practice aims to perceive this Good.
(b) This Good is objective, i.e. the same for all varieties of mysticism.
Put succinctly, Van Atten and Tragesser argue as follows:
(i) For Brouwer doing mathematics prohibits access to the Good or the Absolute,
(ii) For Gödel doing mathematics is the way of accessing the Good,
(iii) The conclusion from (i) and (ii) seems to be that Gödel and Brouwer are not talking
about the same Good. Ergo: we have an argument against the common core thesis.
Van Atten and Tragesser essentially make a logical point: The statements “X can never
be reached by means of method A” (Brouwer) and “Y can only be reached by means of
method B” (Gödel) can only both be true if at least one of the statements “X = Y” or
“A = B” is false. So if the two great men were both right and A = B then necessarily
X ̸= Y.
This point clariﬁes the situation. Yet it is not conclusive, as Van Atten and Tragesser
indeed also point out. It is obvious that Gödel and Brouwer had very different ideas about
how to reach the Absolute. Gödel felt that abstract notions lead us towards the Absolute,
while Brouwer thought that mathematics and even pure mathematics lead us away from
the Absolute. There are different ways of avoiding the conclusion that the CCT is wrong.
Indeed Gödel felt, like Plato, that ideas would have to lead the way, but like Plato he
may have envisaged the full perception of God as being more than philosophy, as in some
way transcending abstract thought. The opposition between the two great men, Gödel and
Brouwer, may primarily concern the way to get to the Absolute, not so much the experience

592
T. Koetsier
of the Absolute. So it is possible to maintain the CCT and assume that one of the two, Gödel
or Brouwer, was simply wrong, or to assume that they were both right, in the sense that
there are very different roads to reach the same goal.
8. Final remarks
In this paper I have tried to describe the ideas in LAM. I have not attempted to deal with
the question of whether Brouwer was in any way right. In a 1982 series of ﬁve articles on
Brouwer the Dutch author Rudy Kousbroek [14] discussed LAM. After praising the liter-
ary qualities of the text, Kousbroek made a number of very critical remarks. Kousbroek
confronts Brouwer’s mystical views with a “rational”, “scientiﬁc” view of the world. He
ﬁrst establishes that Brouwer’s description of the course of human history as a fall from an
ideal life without diseases and without war, in harmony with nature, to a situation of misery
and distress, is wrong if taken literally. It must obviously be read as a symbolic represen-
tation of our individual mental development: from a pure, unconscious, naked Self, on the
one hand, to a less pure conscious mind on the other hand. Kousbroek argues that from a
rational point of view there is nothing wrong here. There is only something wrong from
Brouwer’s mystical point of view: the symbolic opposition is taken literally and Brouwer
feels compelled to view the fall as sinful; the pure Self is depicted as divine and conscious-
ness as evil. Kousbroek ﬁnds this dangerous. If reason is rejected it becomes impossible
to distinguish between correct or wrong mystical insights and “intuition” becomes like
Pandora’s box, a potential source of totalitarian ideologies. At this point Kousbroek em-
phasises the solipsism in Brouwer’s ideas and its unattractive ethical consequences: other
people and their suffering are considered to be annoying. Real communication is impos-
sible and the limited communication that is possible is judged negatively. Compassion,
tolerance, democracy, the principle of equal rights for everybody all go down the drain. Of
course, Brouwer’s views on women are also in this respect used against him by Kousbroek.
I do no want to go into the question of whether or not Kousbroek is right. For our purposes
this is not important. I have mentioned his papers because Kousbroek is one of the very
few authors who took Brouwer’s mystical ideas seriously enough to discuss them.
There is a considerable literature on Brouwer and on Gödel as well. The literature on
their mystical interest is, however, limited. For the non-specialist the best places for further
reading are, undoubtedly, the biographies: Van Dalen’s biography of Brouwer [18] and
Dawson’s biography of Gödel [20]. As for Brouwer’s mysticism the reader should turn
to the original Life, Art and Mysticism ([2] or the English translation [26]). As for Gödel’s
mysticism the sources are very limited: beyond what Dawson tells us there are brief reports
of conversations by Rudy Rucker [23] and Hao Wang [28].
Acknowledgement
I am very grateful to Dirk van Dalen for his critical comments on an earlier version of this
paper.

Arthur Schopenhauer and L.E.J. Brouwer: a comparison
593
References
[1] R. Adams, Introductory note to *1970, in: K. Gödel, Collected Works, Vol. III: Unpublished essays and
lectures (editor-in-chief Solomon Feferman), Oxford University Press, New York, 1995, pp. 388–402.
[2] L.E.J. Brouwer, Leven, Kunst en Mystiek, Delft, 1905.
[3] L.E.J. Brouwer, Over de grondslagen der wiskunde, Amsterdam, 1907 (References are to the reprint [9]).
[4] L.E.J. Brouwer, On the foundation of mathematics, in [7, pp. 15–101] (English translation of [3]).
[5] L.E.J. Brouwer, Consciousness, philosophy and mathematics, Proceedings of the 10th International
Congress of Philosophy, Amsterdam, 1948, Vol. 3, pp. 1235–1249. Reprinted in [7, pp. 480–494].
[6] F.C.J.P. Copleston, Arthur Schopenhauer, Philosopher of Pessimism, London, 1975 (reprint of the 1946
edition).
[7] A. Heyting (ed.), L.E.J. Brouwer, Collected Works, Vol. 1, Philosophy and Foundations of Mathematics,
Amsterdam, 1976.
[8] H. Freudenthal (ed.), L.E.J. Brouwer, Collected Works, Vol. 2, Geometry, Analysis, Topology and Mechanics,
Amsterdam, 1976.
[9] D. van Dalen (ed.), L.E.J. Brouwer, Over de grondslagen der wiskunde, Reprint of [3], Amsterdam, 1981.
[10] D. Hesseling, Gnomes in the fog. The reception of Brouwer’s intuitionism in the 1920s, Dissertation, Uni-
versity of Utrecht, 1999.
[11] W. Douglas, P. Hill (eds.), The Bhagavadgita, Oxford University Press, 1966.
[12] W.Q. Judge, Bhagavat-Gita, Theosophical University Press, Pasadena, California, 1969.
[13] General topology, in particular dimension theory, in the Netherlands: The decisive inﬂuence of intuitionism,
Handbook of the History of General Topology, C.E. Aull and R. Lowen, eds., Vol. 1, Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht, 1997, pp. 135–180.
[14] L.E.J. Brouwer en de verbeeldingskracht, NRC-Handelsblad, 1982, 10 September, 24 September, 1 October,
15 October, 22 October.
[15] M. van Atten and R. Tragesser, Mysticism and Mathematics: Brouwer, Gödel, and the common core the-
sis, Klarheit in Religionsdingen, W. Deppert and M. Rahnfeld, eds., Leipziger Universitätsverlag, Leipzig,
2003, pp. 145–160.
[16] D. van Dalen, Brouwer: The genesis of his intuitionism, Dialectica 32 (1978), 291–303.
[17] D. van Dalen (ed.), Droeve snaar, vriend van mij: Brieven, De Arbeiderspers, Amsterdam, 1984 (In Dutch,
correspondence of Brouwer and his friend Adama van Scheltema).
[18] D. van Dalen, Mystic, Geometer and Intuitionist, The Life of L.E.J. Brouwer, Vol. 1: The Dawning Revolu-
tion, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1999.
[19] D. van Dalen, L.E.J. Brouwer 1881–1966, Een biograﬁe: Het heldere licht van de wiskunde, Uitgeverij Bert
Bakker, Amsterdam, 2001.
[20] J.W. Dawson Jr., Logical dilemmas, The life and work of Kurt Gödel, A.K. Peters, Wellesley, MA, 1997.
[21] F. van Eeden, Een machtig Brouwsel, reprinted in: Frederik van Eeden, Langs den Weg, verspreide opstellen,
J.J. Romen & zonen, Roermond, 1925, pp. 75–108.
[22] P.B. Eggenberger, The Philosophical Background of L.E.J. Brouwer’s Intuitionistic Mathematics, University
of California, Berkeley, Ph.D. Thesis, 1976 (Available in a 1992 UMI Dissertation Service edition).
[23] R. Rucker, Inﬁnity and the Mind, The Science and Philosophy of the Inﬁnite, The Harvester Press, Brighton,
Sussex, 1982.
[24] A. Schopenhauer, Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, Dritte Auﬂage, Stuttgart und Berlin, 1859.
[25] W.P. van Stigt, Brouwer’s Intuitionism, North Holland, Amsterdam, 1990.
[26] W.P. Van Stigt, Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer. Life, art, and mysticism (with an introduction by Van Stigt),
Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 37 (3) (1996), 381–429.
[27] H. Wang, Reﬂections on Kurt Gödel, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1988.
[28] H. Wang, A Logical Journey, From Gödel to Philosophy, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1996.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 31
On the Road to a Uniﬁed World View: Priest Pavel
Florensky—Theologian, Philosopher and Scientist
Sergei S. Demidov
Department of the History of Mathematics,
Institute of the History of Science and Technology, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Staropansky Per. 1/5, 103012 Moscow, Russia
Charles E. Ford
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science,
Saint Louis University, St. Louis, MO 63103, USA
Contents
1. Early years
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 597
2. Moscow University . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 598
3. Theological Academy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 600
4. The pillar and ground of the truth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 601
5. Concrete metaphysics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 603
6. Church and revolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 605
7. Religious and scientiﬁc work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 606
8. Enemy of the people . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 608
9. Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 610
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 611
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
595


On the road to a uniﬁed world view: priest Pavel Florensky
597
Fig. 1. Pavel Florensky in the uniform of a student at the Moscow Theological Academy.
1. Early years
The theologian, philosopher and scholarly encyclopedist Father Pavel Aleksandrovich Flo-
rensky was born 9 January (old style) 1882 in the township of Yevlakh, Yelizavetpol
district (present day Azerbaijan), where his father, a railway construction engineer, had
worked on the construction of the trans-Caucasian railway. His father was Russian, born
in Kostroma, his mother, maiden name Saparova (Saparian), was from a cultured Ar-
menian family of Karabakh nobility, which moved to Georgia. His childhood was spent
in Tiﬂis (Tbilisi) and Batumi, where his father worked on the construction of the mili-
tary Batumo-Akhaltsykhsky railway. His contact with the natural surroundings of the Cau-
casas left a profound impression on his creative senses [1]. In 1892 he entered the Second
Classical Gymnasium in Tiﬂis where his classmates included the future religious ﬁgure
A.V. Yelchaninov (1881–1934) and the philosopher V.F. Ern (1881–1917). (See [2, vol. 1,
pp. 3–6]. This article makes much use of the introduction to Florensky’s collected works [2,
vol. 1, pp. 3–36], written by Igumen Andronik (A.S. Trubachev), a grandson of Florensky.)
The family of Florensky, as with many intellectual Russian families of this period, was
not religious. This family shared the ethos of the broad circle of the Russian democratic
intelligentsia. The central component of this ethos was faith in science, the conviction
that science could be the panacea for the problems of society, enabling the construction
of a beneﬁcent and just society. The family shared this enthusiasm for science and its
technical applications. This ethos—including indifference to religion—was shared by the
youthful Florensky. “Educated in complete isolation from any religious notions and even
from simple fairy tales”, he later wrote [2, vol. 1, p. 6]. “I regarded religion as something
completely alien to me and any religious lessons in the Gymnasium drew from me only
hostility and mockery”.

598
S.S. Demidov and C.E. Ford
In the summer of 1899 he had a spiritual conversion. He described it in his Reminis-
cences [1, pp. 211–212]. He fell into a deep sleep, as if he had fainted, accompanied by
“a mystical experience of darkness, non-existence, conﬁnement”. He “experienced him-
self in a penal colony, maybe in the mines”. He “was in the grip of inescapable despair”
when “a thin, tiny ray, a light which could not be seen, a sound which could not be heard,
pronounced the name of God, ... I was confronted face to face with a new fact, as incom-
prehensible as it was unquestionable: there is darkness and death, but there is also salvation
from it ... For me this was a revelation, a discovery, a shock, a blow. Out of the darkness
of this blow I suddenly awoke ... and ... shouted out loud: No, it is impossible to live
without God!” At another time [1, pp. 214–215] he suddenly awoke from a spiritual jolt,
which “was so strong and decisive”, that he ran out to the yard which was awash in moon-
light. “At just this moment the event occurred for the sake of which I was drawn outside.
In the night air I heard a voice, distinct and loud, which called my name two times: ‘Pavel!
Pavel!’ ... I did not know and do not know to whom this voice belonged, but there is no
doubt that it came from a higher world”.
The sensation was so powerful that it led to a profound spiritual crisis, which ended in his
conversion. The limitedness and relativeness of scientiﬁc knowledge became apparent to
him and he took the ﬁrst deliberate step toward a religious point of view. During this period
he wanted to work among the common people, but his parents insisted that he continue his
education. The nineteenth century had seen in Russia the rise of revolutionary ideology and
the rejection of religion, especially among the intelligentsia. This movement accelerated in
the 1890s with the spread of marxism and eventually lead to the Bolshevik Revolution
of 1917. The conversion of Florensky was part of a countervailing movement that began
around 1900 and has become known as the Russian religious philosophical renaissance.
It saw some leading intellectuals turn, or return, to the Russian Orthodox Church. Pavel
Florensky was to become one of the most important ﬁgures in this movement.
2. Moscow University
In 1900 after graduating from the Gymnasium he entered the Mathematics Department
of the Physico-Mathematical Faculty of Moscow University. Beside his strong interest
in mathematics this choice is explained by the necessity of having a solid mathematical
foundation for constructing a world view for a philosophical and theological understand-
ing of the world, which the young Florensky had already chosen as his primary task. The
choice of Moscow University was very fortunate. In contrast to Petersburg mathematical
circles, which were dominated by positivism, the atmosphere of Moscow mathematics was
strongly inﬂuenced by the ideology of the so-called Moscow philosophical mathematical
school and its leader, the well known Moscow mathematician Professor N.V. Bugayev
(1837–1903). Bugayev was in fact a very interesting philosopher, the author of his own
philosophical system, evolutionary monodology. He was critical of the analytical world
view which dominated XIXth century science and promoted another world view, the math-
ematical foundation of which was the theory of discontinuous functions. He put forth his
own version, arithmology, which had many supporters and followers [3]. Among the topics

On the road to a uniﬁed world view: priest Pavel Florensky
599
proposed by Bugayev for his students for independent work was the question of discontinu-
ity, not regarded simply from a narrow mathematical perspective but in broad philosophical
context.
Florensky was both greatly surprised and extremely pleased to discover that the interests
which he had developed in the Gymnasium coincided with the interests of a well known
mathematician. Thus it happened that the topic chosen by Florensky already in his ﬁrst
year, discontinuity as a component of a world view, became the subject of his research
for the entire period of his University education. This work was entitled “On singulari-
ties of plane curves as places disturbing its continuity”. The ﬁrst part, “On singularities
of algebraic curves”, was presented as his dissertation for his Candidate Degree in 1904
[4]. The second part was never completed. Florensky was remarkably active during his
years at the University. He inherited from Bugayev a strong interest in the theory of dis-
continuous functions. He studied the works of Georg Cantor (1845–1918) on set theory.
He was attracted especially by its theological connections, the very thing which provoked
such strong negative reaction from the Petersburg mathematicians, with their strong posi-
tivist orientation. Florensky published the ﬁrst Russian language article about Cantor’s set
theory [5].
This article was published not in any scientiﬁc journal, but in the short-lived journal of
the Religious–Philosophical Society of Writers and Symbolists, in which Florensky had
earlier published two theological treatises. This Society held meetings from 1901 to 1903
in which church leaders and lay intellectuals came together to discuss the importance of
a revival of religious life in Russia [6, pp. 58–59]. It was an important episode in the
course of the Russian religious philosophical renaissance. In the meetings of the Society
various speakers stressed the importance of freeing the Church from control of the state,
to which it had been subordinated by Peter the Great. Such outspoken advocacy of Church
independence lead to the suppression of the Society in April 1903.
Florensky organized the Student Circle of the Moscow Mathematical Society [7] and
served as its ﬁrst secretary, a position which he later offered to his friend, the future math-
ematician N.N. Luzin. In the sessions of this Circle, Florensky himself, other students,
and sometimes even the professors, gave lectures on topics including set theory and the
theory of functions of a real variable. These activities of Florensky helped to create the
atmosphere in which one of the most important mathematical schools of the XXth cen-
tury was born, the Moscow School of the theory of functions [8]. Its birth is connected
above all with the names of Florensky’s teacher D.F. Egorov (1869–1931) and his friend
N.N. Luzin (1883–1950). The relationship between Egorov and Florensky is discussed in
[9,10]. Correspondence spanning eighteen years between Luzin and Florensky has been
published [11–14].
In addition to the study of mathematics, Florensky attended the lectures of the well
known philosopher L.M. Lopatin from the Faculty of History and Philology and visited
the seminar of the important philosopher S.N. Trubetskoy. He was intensely interested in
art history and poetry. In these years he was very close to the symbolists and became friends
with the son of N.V. Bugayev, the famous Russian poet Andrei Belyi (B.N. Bugayev, 1880–
1934). In 1907 he published his own collection of poems In Eternal Azure. In 1904 he
graduated from the University with the Candidate Degree. On the recommendation of the
famous applied mathematician N.Ye. Zhukovsky (1847–1921), who loved Florensky and

600
S.S. Demidov and C.E. Ford
was very interested in his work, he was offered a fellowship for post-graduate study. This,
however, he did not accept. To become a mathematician was not his goal. He explained
his real goal to his mother in a letter written in the spring of 1904 [2, vol. 1, pp. 8–9]. “I
do not think I will continue at the University ... To create a synthesis between religious
and secular culture ... to take all the positive teachings of the Church and a scientiﬁc,
philosophical world view, together with art and so on—this is my real goal”.
3. Theological Academy
His years at the University were also years of intense spiritual searching. In this period he
seriously considered entering monastic life. However, his spiritual father, starets Bishop
Antony (Florensov, 1847–1920), who lived in retirement in the Donskoi Monastery, rec-
ommended that he not rush into this decision but rather try other possibilities, ﬁrst of all to
receive a theological education at the Moscow Theological Academy. Florensky followed
this advice. In 1904 he entered the Moscow Theological Academy, located 60 kilometers
north of Moscow in Sergiev Posad.
The revolution of 1905 posed challenges to Florensky. One of his friends, V.F. Ern, like
Florensky a future priest, observed that Florensky was strongly opposed to any sort of
social activism, insisting instead that we should inﬂuence individual persons. Thus Ern
was quite surprised to learn from one of the seminarians that Florensky had been arrested
on 23 March and imprisoned in the Tagansky prison in Moscow. The Moscow Theological
Academy had the practice of allowing seminarians to preach in the Cathedral. On 12 March
Fig. 2. The Philosophers Pavel Florensky and Sergei Bulgakov. Painting by Mikhail Nesterov, 1917.

On the road to a uniﬁed world view: priest Pavel Florensky
601
1906 Florensky had preached sermon entitled “Appeal of Blood”. It was delivered during
Holy Week just when the news arrived of the execution of Lt. Pyotr Shmidt, one of the
activists of the revolution. Florensky spoke with great passion against the executions and
shootings then being carried out. His sermon was greeted with elation by the students, who
decided to print it on their own, avoiding censorship [12, note 2, p. 134]. The authorities
drew up orders for his arrest.
He was in prison for almost a week. Inﬂuential churchmen intervened for his release.
While in prison he wrote a treatise On the elements of the α number system. On the inside
cover he wrote “Responsibility for this work goes to F.V. Dubasov—dedicated by the grate-
ful author”. Admiral Dubasov was the governor of Moscow in the years 1905–1906 and the
organizer of the defeat of the armed uprising in December 1905 in Moscow. Shortly after
his release, Florensky wrote to Luzin, apologizing for not having written for nearly a year
[12, pp. 132–133; 14, p. 239]. “You, of course, know the troubled condition of our country,
even worse, it seems, the condition of mother (for me at least)—Church, and the muddle
and turmoil in the minds and hearts now ruling in Russia”. In 1908 Florensky graduated
from the Academy [13, pp. 336–338] and, after presenting two trial lectures “The cosmo-
logical antinomies of Kant” and “The general human roots of idealism”, was appointed
Docent in the Chair of the History of Philosophy.
Florensky’s interest in monastic life persisted and he came to know several monks per-
sonally. In 1908, for example he authored a treatise Salt of the earth about Hieromonk
Isidore whom he knew and loved [15]. He had known Father Serapion and would later
come to know Father Anatole, among others. The tension of ﬁnally turning away from
monastic life caused a crisis in Florensky’s life around the year 1910. In a letter to a friend
dated 14 March 1910 [16, note 17, p. 78], S.N. Bulgakov (1871–1944), a close friend of
Florensky wrote “P.Al. Florensky came somehow, stayed a long time, was inﬁnitely dear,
simple and sincere. I was not troubled because the crisis is not religious, but personal, hu-
man, partly on the grounds of overwork. He is upset with the Academy and again dreaming
of the priesthood and family life, but, alas, it can not be created on command”. Indeed, on
25 August 1910 Florensky was married to A.M. Giatsintova (1889–1973). Later this year
his friend Luzin wrote that Florensky “makes a very good impression now. He dreams
about a ‘son’, whom he is sure that he will have”. “He still dreams of ﬂeeing the Academy
for the ‘village’, or at least for the priesthood” [12, note 2, p. 162]. In fact the marriage
produced three sons and two daughters. In 1911 Florensky was ordained a priest.
4. The pillar and ground of the truth
In 1914 Florensky defended his magister dissertation On Spiritual Truth: An Essay of Or-
thodox Theodicy. In the same year he published a more complete version of this disserta-
tion: The Pillar and Ground of the Truth. An Essay in Orthodox Theodicy in Twelve Letters
[17] which became one of the greatest works in Orthodox theology in the XXth century
(French translation [18], English translation [19]). According to Florensky the world of
religious thought was divided, roughly speaking, into two parts, described by Igumen An-
dronik as follows [17, p. vii]. The ﬁrst “on the basis of faith and Church life, to secure a
foundation, to obtain The Pillar and Ground of the Truth (as the Church was designated

602
S.S. Demidov and C.E. Ford
by the Apostle Paul in 1 Timothy 3:15)”. The second “from this foundation to develop
the teaching about the world and the person” in communion with God. The ﬁrst he named
theodicy (using this term in a little different sense than usual) and the second anthropodicy.
The Pillar, as indicated in its title, is dedicated to theodicy.
The book is structured as a story about the path which leads the author to the world of the
Orthodox Church. The initial spiritual situation is an experience of the fallen world. The
goal is to obtain an absolute foundation, to achieve the Truth. The ﬁrst stage is to obtain
this through rationalistic philosophy. This leads to total failure—the Truth does not exist on
this path. In the second stage the author sets aside the intention to obtain the Truth but tries
to describe its main qualities on the assumption that the Truth exists. As a result he learns
many of these qualities, among them that the Truth exists in antinomies and (central for
Christianity) that the Truth is trinitarian. “The Truth is one essence with three hypostases
... the Trinity is of one substance and indivisible” [19, pp. 37, 39]. In this case there is
only one way to reach the Truth “to leave the domain of concepts and enter the sphere of
living experience” [19, p. 47]. And because the Truth is already revealed as a Trinity, for
the third stage there is only one path, to enter the Church. The central topic becomes the
Church—“The Pillar and Ground of the Truth”. The fundamental conceptions on which
the story constructs the basic philosophical themes of Pillar—existence before the fall, the
Fig. 3. Trinity. Icon by Andrej Rublev.

On the road to a uniﬁed world view: priest Pavel Florensky
603
connection between our existence and that before the fall—is the conception of Sophia,
Divine Wisdom. Because of this the philosophy of Pillar is included in the Sophiological
tradition, a branch of the metaphysics of all-unity. A large part of the book is devoted to
the problem of knowledge, in the interpretation of which (“knowledge expressed in love”)
Florensky followed the Russian philosophical tradition of “ontological gnoseology”—the
patristic fathers, A.S. Khomyakov, V.S. Solovyev. (About Russian philosophy and in par-
ticular about the conception of Sophia and the philosophy of all-unity see [20–22]. For
understanding the dialectic of Florensky we underscore the importance of his teachings
about antinomies.)
In this period it was totally unusual for a work on religious philosophy to introduce ma-
terial from mathematics and the natural sciences, questions from art history and linguistics.
The appearance of this book had an explosive effect on both religious and secular culture.
It became a major event in Russian theological and philosophical circles and gave its au-
thor wide exposure. The defense of his dissertation was a real triumph for Florensky. In
that same year, 1914, he was appointed as an Extraordinary Professor in the Chair of the
History of Philosophy at the Academy. From 1912 to 1917 he was editor-in-chief of the
journal of the Academy Theological Messenger.
5. Concrete metaphysics
The dramatic events of 1914–1922—theFirst World War, revolution, the Bolshevik seizure
of power, civil war and, ﬁnally, the establishment of the Soviet state—ruptured the life of
the country and the life of Florensky as well. Persecution of the Church began immediately.
In 1918 the work of the Academy was transferred to Moscow, where it was soon forced
to close. In 1921 the church in Sergiev Posad where Fr. Pavel served as priest was closed.
This difﬁcult time became a period of exceptionally creative activity. He applied all of his
energy to working out his anthropodicy, having earlier devoted himself to theodicy.
Florensky named his philosophy “concrete metaphysics” which he intended to present
in his monumental work On the Watersheds of Thought [23]. The connection between
phenomenon and thought, between phenomenon and nomenon is, for Florensky, mutual
[23, pp. 3–12]. Both together precisely explain each other and form a perfect diunity, the
symbol. The symbol is the central object of his philosophy. The central understandings
and conceptions with which he worked are translated, “concretized”, in the language of
symbols. Thus his “concrete metaphysics” is a form of philosophical symbolism.
Florensky considered nomena to exist in a special space which is in an “inverted”, “re-
versed”, or “imaginary” relationship with physical space. Both worlds, the physical and the
spiritual, are inseparable. Florensky interpreted them as lying on the two sides of a single
surface. Thus the two sides of a symbol, the phenomenal and the nomenal, are obtained
from each other by literally turning inside out. He worked this out in an interpretation of
complex numbers in his 1922 book Imaginary Values in Geometry, as is explained in [24].
The phenomenon expresses the nomenon perfectly only in the perfect being. In our fallen
being we do not have a symbolic expression of reality, we must receive it. This receiving is
anthropodicy. It is realized in the Church cult—the sanctiﬁcation of reality. The philosophy
of cult is the most important part of concrete metaphysics.

604
S.S. Demidov and C.E. Ford
The task of concrete metaphysics is the recognition and study of symbols. In this sense
it can be regarded as an exercise in practical symbolism which must describe the sym-
bols which exist in all areas of reality, classify them, and make a complete alphabet of
symbols. In Watersheds the classiﬁcation of symbols is made by means of perception—
visual perceptions, auditory perceptions, sense perceptions and so on. The basis for such
an approach is the correlation between man and the world, between man and the cosmic
order—in modern terminology, the anthropomorphic principle. The ﬁrst chapter of Wa-
tersheds is organized according to this principle, covering visual symbols (icons, pictorial
images, graphic images) and auditory symbols (the Name of God, proper names, words).
The kernel of the philosophical symbolism of Florensky consists of energy principles.
The connection between nomenon and phenomenon is realized by joining their energies.
This energy gives life to the symbol. On the basis of these energies, the origins of which
Florensky saw in the theology of energies of Saint Gregory of Palamas, he treats the word,
the name, language, the connection between thought and language, and the meaning of its
auditory aspects. The entirety of his symbolic picture of the world must be subject to “en-
ergization”. Florensky began the resolution of this problem but was not able to complete it.
In his philosophical and theological constructions Florensky touched on questions from
many different sciences. He studied seriously several contemporary problems: linguistics,
art history, and others. He can be regarded as one of the founders of modern semiotics. He
came surprisingly close to the general theory of information ﬂow. His concept of “pneu-
matosphere”, which has points of contact with the concept of “noosphere” of V.I. Vernad-
sky (1863–1945), is discussed today by philosophers and ecologists.
Florensky gave a special place to mathematics. Above all he regarded mathematics as
a means for understanding the structure of complicated phenomena in different ﬁelds, in-
cluding philosophy and theology. Many of his mathematical constructions served this pur-
pose. For example the hierarchy of transﬁnite sets facilitated an understanding of the divine
hierarchies [5]. The theory of Paul Dubois-Reymond about types of increasing functions
was used as a tool for understanding the possibilities for the perfection of persons [25].
Imaginary complex values enabled him to construct a model of a mutually inverted pair
of worlds, the spiritual and the physical [26,27]. These constructions, as Florensky him-
self underlined, “are not analogies or comparisons, but in fact indications of similarity
in essence, not something to be accepted or rejected depending on your goal but some-
thing the legitimacy of which is determined by properly formulated premises: brieﬂy—
necessary mental schemes” [2, vol. 1, p. 284]. Mathematical structures play a fundamen-
tal role in his explanation of how the phenomena of the physical world and the nomena
are united in a single entity by energies, the key to the understanding of which can be
found in his interpretation of imaginary values. In his approach mathematics and philos-
ophy are identical. Both have inﬁnity as their subject. For Florensky [28, p. 12] “inﬁnity
is not an ideal or material conception but something living, which can be perceived by the
senses”.
Florensky wanted to present his “concrete metaphysics” in his monumental work On
the Watersheds of Thought. The ﬁrst outline of this plan of which we are aware is dated
23 October 1917 (old style) on the eve of the October Revolution which was fatal to the
realization of this work. In the period from 1918 to 1922 he wrote a whole series of seg-
ments of the ﬁrst part. The tragic events of the Soviet period did not allow him to continue

On the road to a uniﬁed world view: priest Pavel Florensky
605
working with the same intensity. During his lifetime only some fragments of the work were
published. The entire work, only partly completed, has been published only in our own day
([23] and also as the two parts of volume 3 of [2]).
6. Church and revolution
During his years as a student at the Moscow Theological Academy Florensky became
involved with a group of Orthodox intellectuals centered around M.A. Novosyolov (1864–
1938). Correspondence between Florensky and Novosyolov had been published in a book
that contains an informative introduction by I.V. Nikitina and S.M. Polovinkin [29]. In 1907
this group ofﬁcially organized itself as the “Circle of Seekers of Christian Enlightenment”
[29, p. 19]. Novosyolov was a strong critic of state control of the Church. In 1910, for
example, he came out in print against Rasputin and his harmful inﬂuence on the Church,
for which he was viliﬁed by partisans of Rasputin [29, pp. 26–29].
On 6 October 1912 Novosyolov wrote Florensky to enlist his help in writing important
work related to the movement “Praisers of the Name” [29, pp. 31, 73]. Florensky became
one of the most convinced adherents of this movement. Arising in the Orthodox tradition,
it promoted a speciﬁc teaching about the respect, esteem, and honor due the Name of
God. The ideas of Florensky about the Name of God (and the nature of names in general),
especially as he would later formulate in Watersheds, correspond closely with the thought
of this movement [10; 19, pp. 303–311]. This teaching was propagated at the beginning
of the XXth century in the 1907 book On the Caucasian Mountains by the hermit monk
Ilarion, who lived in monastic isolation in the Caucasian Mountains. It provoked a serious
Fig. 4. The liturgy of hierarchs. Serbian Orthodox Fresco, Studenica, 1208/1209.

606
S.S. Demidov and C.E. Ford
conﬂict in Russian religious society. In 1913 open conﬂict erupted in the Church over this
movement [10, pp. 123–128].
As a result of the abdication of Emperor Nikolas II in March 1917 the Church was ﬁnally
freed from its subjugation to government control that had been established under Peter the
Great. Reform spread rapidly [30, pp. 25–30]. In August 1917 a Council of the Russian
Orthodox Church was convened that met until September 1918 [31, pp. 193–198]. Both
Florensky and Novosyolov were enlisted in the work of the Council [29, p. 32].
As a result of the Bolshevik seizure of power in October 1917 the Moscow Theological
Academy was closed in September 1918. However, the Academy continued to function
informally, ﬁrst at the Danilov monastery in Moscow and later at the Petrov monastery [2,
vol. 1, p. 24]. Already by the spring of 1918 members of the “Circle of Seekers of Chris-
tian Enlightenment” began presenting a series of theological lectures in the apartment of
its leader Novosyolov. In November 1919, Novosyolov moved into the Danilov Monastery
to continue this work [29, p. 33]. As the marxist onslaught against the Church intensiﬁed,
the Danilov Monastery became a center of resistance to compromise with the Bolsheviks.
Around 1921 Novosyolov secretly took monastic vows and in 1923 was secretly conse-
crated a bishop. About this time he began to undertake “catacomb” activities within the
Church that continued through much of the 1920s [10, p. 143; 29, p. 40].
Those interested in the “Praisers of the Name” movement included Florensky’s teacher
Egorov and the philosopher A.F. Losev (1893–1988), who was much inﬂuenced by Flo-
rensky. A discussion group formed around them that took a special interest in this move-
ment [32, pp. 108–112]. Egorov was able to meet with Patriarch Tikhon concerning the
movement [32, p. 111]. On 29 June 1921, Egorov sent a letter to Florensky indicating the
Patriarch’s personal interest and inviting Florensky to join in a conversation on the sub-
ject [10, p. 153; 29, pp. 235–236]. As suppression of the Church continued through the
1920s, people engaged in activities like those of Novosyolov, Egorov, and Losev became,
in effect, a “catacomb” church which became known as the “True Orthodox Church” [10,
pp. 141–144; 30, pp. 150–158]. The arrest of Novosyolov late in 1928 [29, p. 41] was a
major step in an attempt to suppress it. That arrest was followed by many more, including
Losev in April 1930 [32, p. 129] and Egorov in October 1930 [10, p. 140].
7. Religious and scientiﬁc work
Florensky continued to reside in Sergiev Posad until early 1921. In 1918, Professor
N.A. Berdyayev (1874–1948) and others established a “Free Academy of Spiritual Cul-
ture” in Moscow, which continued until Berdyayev and other intellectuals were expelled
from the Soviet Union in 1922 [31, pp. 206–207]. Florensky presented lectures under the
auspices of this Academy and other organizations well into the 1920s [27, note 67, p. 39].
He attended the church of Fr. Aleksei Mechev (1860–1923), which, at the beginning of the
1920s, was a meeting point for Russian religious intellectuals [27, note 61, p. 38]. Floren-
sky was one of the speakers in a series of debates between religious believers and atheists
that were sponsored by the Bolsheviks in the ﬁrst years after the revolution. They began to
draw huge crowds and, though stacked with party activists, often ended in applause for the
religious speakers. This led to their discontinuation by the regime [33, pp. 38–39].

On the road to a uniﬁed world view: priest Pavel Florensky
607
During this time Florensky worked very hard as the Scientiﬁc Secretary of the Com-
mission for the Preservation of Monuments of Art and Antiquity at the Troitse-Sergieva
Lavra, the great religious complex at Sergiev Posad [2, vol. 1, p. 25; 27, p. 8]. In addition
to the study of museums and the arts, his goal here was to preserve these sacred national
treasures from extermination. In particular, he was one of those who hid the relics of the pa-
tron Saint of Russia, Sergei of Radonezh, from the desecration that became normal during
these years of militant atheism. His work on this Commission earned him his ﬁrst public
denunciation—for trying to set up an “Orthodox Vatican”. Later when the Soviets closed
the famous Optina monastery Florensky launched a campaign to “Save Optina”.
During this time Florensky worked on a variety of questions in religious philosophy, art
history, the organization of museums, and on his Reminiscences [1, pp. 24–266]. His fa-
mous work Iconostasis was published in 1922 [34] (German translation [35], French trans-
lation [36], English translation [37]). This work overlaps into both art history and religious
philosophy. His ideas on the role of space in the arts, in particular his original theory of
inverse perspective, provoked great interest from painters and specialists in art history and
he was invited to join the faculty of The Higher Artistic Technical Studio (VKhUTEMAS).
He gave lectures there in 1921–1924 [38]. In these lectures he emphasized reverse perspec-
tive and its use in icons and other religious art. The orthodox view of icons as a window to
the divine corresponds well with Florensky’s views in Watersheds. He was later denounced
for supposedly creating an ‘idealistic coalition’ at this institution.
The year 1924 was a time of deep spiritual crisis, engendered by the oppressive antire-
ligious atmosphere. The state increased its persecution of the Church and attacked every
appearance of free philosophical thought that deviated in any way from ofﬁcial marxism.
In these conditions he turned his creative abilities to scientiﬁc and technological questions
as his theological and philosophical studies gradually went underground. After 1925 we
can ﬁnd no traces of such studies in any of his papers.
During these years he returned to his studies in mathematics and physics and worked
on technical problems in material science. In 1921 he began to work in different depart-
ments of Glav-Electro of the All-Union National Economy (VSNKh) of the RSFSR, the
newly created electriﬁcation commission of the Russian Federation. He worked in the Car-
bolite Commission, in the Departments of Mechanics and Chemistry, in the Section of
High-voltage Technology, in the State Experimental Electrotechnical Institute, and from
1925 served as the Chief of the Department of Material Science, a Department which he
himself had developed. In 1924 his monograph Dielectrics and its Technical Applications
appeared. His research was directed toward a search for new materials for the long-distance
transmission of high-voltage electricity.
In 1925 the future physicist I.Ye. Tamm worked at Glav-Electro with Florensky as a
young engineer and had the opportunity to observe him [39]. Some of Tamm’s impres-
sions of Florensky have been passed down verbally and were told to us by S.S. Khoruzhy.
Tamm thought that Florensky had the intellectual power to have discovered quantum the-
ory, but that his intellectual perspective prevented him from doing so, except in the realm
of electricity, where Tamm believed that Florensky had probably discovered, or at least
anticipated, the zone theory of semiconductors [40, p. 40].
In 1927–1933 Florensky was an editor of the Technical Encyclopedia and author of more
than 100 of its articles. The article on dielectrics, for example, begins with a page written

608
S.S. Demidov and C.E. Ford
by the well known physicist A.F. Ioffe and a page and a half by Florensky. In the second
edition of the Encyclopedia, after his arrest, all references to him were removed. In 1928
his book Carbolite, its Production and Qualities was published, describing an inexpensive
substitute for bakelite. In 1930 he became Assistant Director for Science of the All-Union
Electrotechnical Institute. Florensky continued to publish in scientiﬁc journals. As late as
1932 several of his articles appeared in the journal Socialist Reconstruction and Science
(SORENA). One of these [41] describes an analog calculator for approximate solutions to
algebraic equations of high degree. It gives a speciﬁc example of Florensky’s general thesis
that the entire structure of mathematical knowledge rests upon physical intuition.
8. Enemy of the people
The work of Florensky and others in preserving religious artistic treasures at Troitse-
Sergieva Lavra had met with some success. Several book were published about the re-
ligious treasures stored there, including one co-authored by Florensky entitled Amvrosy,
Troitsky Engraver from the XV Century, which appeared in 1927 [27, note 65, pp. 38–39].
Excursions of workers and others would visit the site [42, p. 24].
In May 1928 a major media campaign was launched against the Troitse-Sergieva Lavra
[2, vol. 1, pp. 29–30]. Newspaper and magazine articles and pamphlets thundered against
the “counter-revolutionary scum” gathered in this “nest of black-hundreds” just outside
of Moscow. One author, whose article appeared on 17 May in a major Moscow publica-
tion, speciﬁcally cited the book on Amvrosy. He was particularly incensed that “scholars”
working for a state scientiﬁc institution could publish religious books for mass distribu-
tion. “These must be really devious, insolent, persons to give, under the guise of a ‘scien-
tiﬁc book’ in the tenth year of the revolution, such trash to the Soviet reader when every
Pioneer knows that the legend of the existence of Christ is nothing but a piece of priestly
charlatanism” [42, p. 24].
Soon after, the museum’s archive was closed and a large number of people were arrested
and sent to Butyrki, a prison in Moscow. Florensky was sentenced to exile and on 14
July was sent to Nizhny Novgorod (renamed Gorky during the Soviet period). Inﬂuential
people intervened on his behalf, after which he was granted early release and by September
had returned to Moscow. Photographs of the time show that he still continued to attend
meetings of various scientiﬁc committees dressed in the priestly cassock and apparently
even wearing a pectoral cross.
As he continued his scientiﬁc work, in 1930 Florensky began to came under attack in
the Soviet science community. His most militant opponent was Arnost Kolman (1892–
1979), who was born in Czechoslovakia and became a prominent ideologue with inﬂu-
ence in Soviet science [43]. The ﬁrst attack came in an address by Kolman to the Soci-
ety of Mathematical-Materialist Dialecticians on 29 November 1930 [44]. Kolman began
by citing the religious philosophical tradition of Moscow mathematicians and mentioned
such ﬁgures as Bugayev, Florensky, and Egorov (who had just been arrested the previous
month).
Making speciﬁc reference to Imaginary Values in Geometry, Kolman railed against the
use of “mathematics in the service of religion”, “mathematics in the service of priestcraft”,

On the road to a uniﬁed world view: priest Pavel Florensky
609
“mathematics in the service of obscurantism”. He pointedly remarked that Florensky was
still working in institutions of Soviet science [44, p. 30]. The continued publication of
articles by Florensky in Soviet journals prompted a major article by Kolman in 1933 [45].
Referring to the 1932 article in SORENA mentioned above, he launched a vituperative
attack on Florensky. “Diplomaed lackeys of priestcraft right under our noses are using
mathematics for a highly masked form of religious propaganda” [45, p. 91]. By the time
this article appeared, however, Florensky was already in Siberia. He had been arrested on
25 February 1933 and on 26 July was sentenced to ten years in “corrective labor camps”
[2, vol. 1, p. 31; 42, pp. 24, 26; 46, pp. 142, 144].
In the labor camps Florensky continue to do important research. The ﬁrst year he spent
in BAMLag in eastern Siberia, where he studied the phenomenon of permafrost at the
scientiﬁc station in Skovorodino. He wrote on 27 November 1933 [2, vol. 4, pp. 48–49] “I
envision large tasks for the economy of the local region from studying and maybe using
permafrost etc. and I hope that in the future my special knowledge will be applicable and
proﬁtable for the state”. On 6 December he wrote [2, vol. 4, p. 51] “I am beginning a major
undertaking in the study of the physics of permafrost. ... In approximately two months
I will leave for the permafrost station, where it will be possible to perform experiments.
This work is, in the main, connected with part of the work I did in Moscow. I hope to do
something useful for the economic development of the regions where there is permafrost,
including, among others, the far east. Permafrost is connected to very many characteristics
and peculiar phenomena of the local nature”. In the spring of 1934 his group produced two
major manuscripts which were sent to the Academy of Sciences for its permafrost congress
[2, vol. 4, p. 109]. The results of this pioneering work on permafrost and the nature of
ice were later included in the book Permafrost and Construction on it, published in 1940
[2, vol. 1, p. 31], which was used as a guide to construction in areas with permafrost.
Florensky’s name is absent from the list of authors.
Upon receiving in the spring of 1934 the news that his extensive library collection had
been taken away by the OGPU [KGB] he wrote as follows to the head of construction
of the camp system [2, vol. 1, p. 33]. “My whole life has been devoted to scientiﬁc and
philosophical work, so much so that I have never allowed myself rest, recreation, or plea-
sure. To this service to mankind I gave not only all my time and all my strength, but also
most of my modest earnings, which I spent on the purchase of books, photographs, corre-
spondence, etc. ... But now the labor of my life has been lost ... [it is] a heavy blow to
me ... the annihilation of the results of my life’s work is a far more cruel punishment to
me than physical death”. In the fall of 1934 he was transferred to the camp at Solovetsky,
formerly a monastery on an island in the White Sea, where he developed and constructed
technology for the extraction of agar and iodine from seaweed. In 1937 Florensky saw the
destruction of the huge makeshift arrangement which he had organized for the production
of agar, just as had happened earlier with the production of iodine. He also learned that the
credit for his research into seaweed and permafrost had gone to others. “So everything is
taken away from me at which I worked, in which I attained results and in preparation for
which I expended great effort” [2, vol. 4, p. 702].
He then undertook to list the various ﬁelds in which he had worked, as a legacy for his
family. In a letter to his son Kirill dated 21 February 1937 Florensky summed up his life’s
work. “What have I been doing all my life? I have been studying the world as a single

610
S.S. Demidov and C.E. Ford
whole, as a coherent picture and reality, but at every moment, or rather at every stage of
my life I looked at it from a deﬁnite angle. I examined its correlations in a cross-section of
the world made in a deﬁnite direction and on a deﬁnite plane, and I tried to understand the
structure of the world according to the aspect of current interest to me. The planes of the
cross-section changed, but one did not cancel out another; on the contrary, one enriched
the other. Hence—the continuous dialectical quality of thinking (the change of planes of
observation), with an unchanging perception of the world as an integral whole” [2, vol. 1,
p. 35], [2, vol. 4, p. 672].
In one of his last letters, dated 4 June 1937, he wrote [2, vol. 4, p. 705] “Everything has
abandoned me (everything and everybody) ... above all I think about you, but with worry.
Life is dead and at the present time we, more than ever, feel ourselves isolated from the
mainland. It is June and there is no sign of summer, it is more like November”. During a
‘cleansing’ of the camp in November 1937 he was sentenced for the second time on 25
November by the special Troika of the UNKVD of the Leningrad district and condemned
to death. He was shot on 8 December 1937 [2, vol. 1, p. 35].
His name was placed on the list of ‘enemies of the people’. His works were excluded
from libraries. Even to mention his name in the press was strictly forbidden. Only at the end
of the 1960s was a procedure begun, very gradually at ﬁrst, to allow his name to return to
civil and religious culture. His works began to be published, in the Journal of the Moscow
Patriarchate, in the series Theological Works, and in Works on Symbolic Systems published
in Tartu Estonia. Eventually the ﬁrst studies of his ideas and conferences devoted to his
creative legacy were organized. Presently the creative legacy of P.A. Florensky is among
the most intensively studied subjects in both Russia and abroad.
9. Conclusion
Florensky has frequently been called the Russian Leonardo Da Vinci. This comparison is
appropriate if we consider the breath of his creative scope. In another sense, however, this
evaluation is profoundly mistaken. Florensky was not consumed by the thirst for knowl-
edge so characteristic of the Renaissance. His activity had a special goal—to construct a
uniﬁed world view which included both science and religion. Contemporary science does
not see itself bound by any limits in its expansion, rejecting in its methodology the ethical
norms of humanity. Pretexts for this include the claim that science is indifferent to ethics,
that only the utilization of science can be ethical or unethical. In the opinion of Florensky,
such a science, the paradigmatic ﬁgure of which was Leonardo, was destined for the same
dead end as the magical ideas of primitive societies, only “more severe, more merciless
because this science was itself merciless to man” [23, p. 350]. Florensky saw an escape
from this in the construction of a unitary religious world view in which science is included
as an organic part (these ideas of Florensky are described in [47]).
In his study of cultures, Florensky noted two which periodically alternated with each
other—medieval culture and renaissance culture. The ﬁrst type he characterized as “or-
ganic, objective, concrete, and having the ability to concentrate itself, while the second
is characterized by disunity, subjectivity, abstractness and superﬁcially” [2, vol. 1, p. 39].
He was convinced that “the Renaissance culture of Europe ... had come to an end at the

On the road to a uniﬁed world view: priest Pavel Florensky
611
beginning of the XXth century and from the ﬁrst years of the new century one could see
in all strands of culture the ﬁrst seeds of the culture of the other type” [2, vol. 1, p. 39],
that is of the high culture of the medieval type. All his creative activity was applied to the
task of its reconstruction. This was the life’s work of Father Pavel Florensky—theologian,
philosopher, scholar, and martyr for the faith.
References
[1] P.A. Florensky, My Children, Reminiscence of bygone days, Geneological Research, Letters from Solovet-
sky, Testament, Moskovsky Rabochy, Moscow, 1992 (in Russian).
[2] P.A. Florensky, Collected Works in Four Volumes, Mysl’, Moscow, Vol. 1, 1994, Vol. 2, 1996, Vol. 3(1),
1999, Vol. 3(2), 1999, Vol. 4, 1998 (in Russian).
[3] S.S. Demidov, N.V. Bougaiev et le creation de l’ecole de Moscou de la theorie des fonctions d’une variable
reelle, Leibniz Werk und Wirkung IV, International Leibniz Kongress Vortrage, II Teil, Hannover, 1985,
pp. 63–74.
[4] P.A. Florensky, Introduction to the dissertation “The idea of discontinuity as an element in a world-
view”, publication and notes S.S. Demidov, A.N. Parshin, Istoriko-Matematicheskiye Issledovaniya (Nauka,
Moscow) 30 (1986), 159–176 (in Russian).
[5] P.A. Florensky, On symbols of the inﬁnite (An essay on ideas of G. Kantor), Novyi Put’ 9 (1904), 173–235,
reprinted in [2, vol. 1, pp. 79–128] (in Russian).
[6] J.W. Cunningham, A Vanquished Hope, St. Vladimir’s Seminary Press, Crestwood, NY, 1981.
[7] S.M. Polovinkin, On the student mathematical circle of the Moscow Mathematical Society in 1902–1903,
Istoriko-Matematicheskiye Issledovaniya (Nauka, Moscow) 30 (1986), 148–158 (in Russian).
[8] S.S. Demidov, From the early history of the Moscow school of function theory, Istoriko-Matematicheskiye
Issledovaniya (Nauka, Moscow) 30 (1986), 124–130 (in Russian). English translation: Philosophia Mathe-
matica, Second series 3 (1) (1988), 29–35.
[9] C.E. Ford, Dmitrii Egorov: mathematics and religion in Moscow, The Mathematical Intelligencer (Springer
Verlag) 13 (2) (1991), 24–30.
[10] S.S. Demidov, Professor of Moscow University Dmitrii Fedorovich Egorov and Imyeslaviye in Russia in the
ﬁrst third of the XXth century, Istoriko-Matematicheskiye Issledovaniya, Second series (Yanus, Moscow) 4
(39) (1999), 123–156 (in Russian).
[11] S.S. Demidov, A.N. Parshin, S.M. Polovinkin, On the correspondence of N.N. Luzin with P.A. Florensky,
Istoriko-Matematicheskiye Issledovaniya (Nauka, Moscow) 31 (1989), 116–124 (in Russian).
[12] S.S. Demidov, A.N. Parshin, S.M. Polovinkin, P.V. Florensky (eds.), The correspondence of N.N. Luzin
with P.A. Florensky, Istoriko-Matematicheskiye Issledovaniya (Nauka, Moscow) 31 (1989), 125–191 (in
Russian).
[13] C.E. Ford, The inﬂuence of P.A. Florensky on N.N. Luzin, Historia Mathematica (Academic Press, New
York) 25 (1998), 332–339. A Russian translation appears in: Istoriko-Matematicheskiye Issledovaniya, Sec-
ond series (Yanus, Moscow) 2 (37) (1997), 33–43.
[14] C.E. Ford, N.N. Luzin as seen through his correspondence with P.A. Florensky, Modern Logic 7 (3–4)
(July–October 1997), 233–255.
[15] P. Florensky, Salt of the Earth, St. Herman of Alaska Brotherhood, Platina, CA, 1987.
[16] A.V. Yelchaninov, From meetings with P.A. Florensky (1909–1910), Vestnik Russkogo Khristianskogo Stu-
dencheskogo Dvizheniya (YMCA Press, Paris) 143 (1984), 68–78 (in Russian).
[17] P.A. Florensky, The Pillar and Ground of the Truth. An Essay in Orthodox Theodocy in Twelve Letters,
Put’, Moscow, 1914 (in Russian). Republished: Pravda, Moscow, 1990.
[18] P.A. Florensky, Le colonne et le fondement de la vérité, traduits par C. Andronikof, l’Age d’Homme, Lau-
sanne, 1975.
[19] P.A. Florensky, The Pillar and Ground of the Truth, translated by B. Jakim, Princeton University Press,
Princeton, 1997.
[20] N.O. Lossky, History of Russian Philosophy, International Universities Press, New York, 1951.

612
S.S. Demidov and C.E. Ford
[21] V.V. Zenkovsky, A History of Russian Philosophy, translated by G.L. Kline, Columbia University Press,
New York, 1953.
[22] G. Florovsky, Ways of Russian Theology, translated by R.L. Nichols, Nordland, Belmont, MA, 1979.
[23] P.A. Florensky, On the Watersheds of Thought, Pravda, Moscow, 1990 (in Russian).
[24] S.S. Khoruzhy, The philosophical symbolism of Florensky and its living sources, Istoriko-Filosofskiye Issle-
dovaniya (Nauka, Moscow) 1986, 180–201 (in Russian).
[25] P.A. Florensky, On types of growth, Bogoslovskii Vestnik 2 (7) (1906), 530–568, reprinted in [2, vol. 1,
pp. 281–317] (in Russian).
[26] P.A. Florensky, Imaginary Values in Geometry, Pomor’ye, Moscow, 1922 (in Russian).
[27] P.A. Florensky, Mnimosti v Geometrii, Moskva, 1922, Nachdruck nebst einer einführenden Studie von
Michael Hagemeister, Verlag Otto Sagner, München, 1985. Page references are to Hagemeister’s com-
mentary.
[28] Yu.A. Rostovtsev and P.V. Florensky, P.A. Florensky in the reminiscences of A.F. Losev, Kontekst 1990,
Nauka, Moscow, 1990, pp. 6–24 (in Russian).
[29] Priest Pavel Florensky, Correspondence with M.A. Novosyolov, Vodolei, Tomsk, 1998 (in Russian).
[30] D.M. Pospielovsky, The Russian Church under the Soviet Regime 1917–1982, two volumes, St. Vladimir’s
Seminary Press, Crestwood, NY, 1984.
[31] N. Zernov, The Russians and their Church, third edition, SPCK, London, 1978.
[32] A. Takho-Godi, Losev, Molodaya Gvardiya, Moscow, 1997 (in Russian).
[33] D.M. Pospielovsky, A History of Marxist–Leninist Atheism and Soviet Anti-Religious Policies, A History of
Soviet Atheism in Theory and Practice, and the Believer, vol. 1, St. Martin’s Press, New York, 1987.
[34] P.A. Florensky, Ikonostas [2, vol. 2, pp. 419–526] (in Russian).
[35] P. Florenskij, Die Ikonostase, Urachhaus, Stuttgart, 1988.
[36] P.A. Florensky, La perspective inverse / l’Iconostase, traduits par F. l’Hoest, l’Age d’Hommes, Lausanne,
1992.
[37] P.A. Florensky, Iconostasis, St. Vladimir’s Seminary Press, Crestwood, NY, 1996.
[38] P.A. Florensky, Analysis of Space and Time in Artistic and Graphic Works, Progress, Moscow, 1993 (in
Russian).
[39] TsGANKh, Fond 3429 (VSNKh SSSR i RSFSR), Opis 7, yed. xhr. 1801 (listed under Tsentral’ny elek-
trotekhnichesky soviet (TsES) Glavelektro VSNKh), 4. This number gives the minutes of a series of meet-
ings of the soviet during 15–18 March 1925. The list of commissions authorized begins on page 4. The ﬁrst
commission lists Florensky as a member and I. Tamm as an engineer.
[40] S.S. Khoruzhy, Florensky’s World View, Vodolei, Tomsk, 1999 (in Russian).
[41] P.A. Florensky, Physics in the service of mathematics, Sotsialisticheskaya Rekonstruktsiya i Nauka
(Moscow), no. 4 (1932), 43–63 (in Russian).
[42] V. Shentalinskii, The fate of greatness, Ogonyok (Moscow) 45 (November 1990), 23–27 (in Russian).
[43] C.E. Ford, Mathematics and Marxism, Studies in History of Mathematics Dedicated to A.P. Youschkevitch,
Proceedings of the XX International Congress of History of Science, vol. XIII, Eberhard Knobloch, Jean
Mawhin, and Serguei S. Demidov, eds., Brepols, Turnhout, Belgium, 2002, pp. 345–361.
[44] E. Kol’man, Politics, economics and ... mathematics, Za Marksistsko-Leninskoye Yestestvoznaniye (Go-
sudarstvennoye Sotsialno-Ekonomicheskoye Izdatelstvo, Moscow), no. 1 (1931), 27–40 (in Russian).
[45] E. Kol’man, Against the newest revelations of bourgeois obscurantism, Bol’shevik (Pravda, Moscow),
no. 12 (1933), 88–96 (in Russian).
[46] S.S. Demidov, C.E. Ford, N.N. Luzin and the affair of the ‘National Fascist Center’, History of Mathematics:
States of the Art, Joseph W. Dauben et al., eds., Academic Press, New York, 1996, pp. 137–148.
[47] A.N. Parshin, Science and religion in the view of P.A. Florensky, Vestnik Russkogo Khristianskogo Stu-
dencheskogo Dvizheniya (YMCA Press, Paris) 160 (1990) (in Russian).

CHAPTER 32
Husserl and Impossible Numbers:
A Sceptical Experience
François De Gandt
Université Charles de Gaulle, Lille, Prive: 63 rue Mirabeau, 94200 Ivry-sur-Seine, France
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 615
1. Beyond Hume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 615
2. Prelogical use of signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 616
3. Husserl’s philosophical quest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 617
4. Impossible concepts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 618
5. Natural selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 620
6. Structural mathematics and categorial connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 620
7. De facto truth and the need of a science of science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 622
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 623
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
613


Husserl and impossible numbers: a sceptical experience
615
Introduction
This is an unusual story. Mathematicians believe in the certainty of mathematics. Husserl
did not. Philosophers consider mathematics as the paradigm of science. Not Husserl. For
him mathematics was the central motif in an experience of deep scepticism, which is doc-
umented by a few published texts and several manuscripts and letters dating from the years
1887–1900, between the completion of his Habilitation on the concept of number and the
publication of the Logical Investigations. Much later, in 1928, Husserl told Shestov that
when he wrote the Logical Investigations, he was completely desperate about the possi-
bility of any real knowledge.1 This sceptical stage was a crucial event in the birth and
subsequent orientation of phenomenology, and gives a new and striking meaning to the
philosopher’s thesis about the “crisis of the sciences” and the role of philosophy as a sci-
ence of science.
1. Beyond Hume
Traditional scepticism à la Hume destroys our knowledge of regularities in matters of fact,
the ability of science to predict natural events. Very early on Husserl was a convinced
Humean in this respect, as we can infer from the ﬁrst thesis appended to his Habilitation
of 1887:
“Every natural law is a hypothesis”.2
Husserl’s scepticism went further. His doubt extended to relations of ideas, it concerned all
a priori sciences, especially mathematics and in particular the most robust core of mathe-
matics, arithmetic.
Reasoning itself was to be considered suspicious, insofar as it involved not ideas, but
signs. The problem lies with the signs. We do not think thoughts or concepts, we play with
signs, we operate on words and symbols. Blind thought (the cogitatio caeca of Leibniz) is
our principal and usual mode of thought. Intellectual life is based on signs, on what Husserl
calls “representation”:
“I have just called representation an extremely remarkable function. [...] In the ﬂux of conceptual
thought, in most cases the optical and acoustical ﬂow of words solely, or almost solely, represent.
[...]
[...] great and unresolved riddles are here; we are touching on the most obscure parts of epistemol-
ogy. What I have in mind is not the psychological clariﬁcation of this oversight and of the entire
state of affairs, although this would be basic for all which is to follow. Rather it is the possibility
of knowledge at all.
Scientiﬁc knowledge—the kind of knowledge which ﬁrst come to one’s mind here—rests entirely
on the possibility of abandoning oneself to the greatest extent to a merely symbolic or otherwise
extremely inadequate thinking or in being permitted (with certain precautions) to prefer it deliber-
ately to a more adequate thinking. But then how is understanding possible, how does one arrive in
such a fashion even at only empirically adequate results?
1K. Schuhmann, Husserl Chronik, Den Haag, 1977, pp. 330–331.
2“Jedes Naturgesetz ist eine Hypothese”, Husserliana XII, p. 339.

616
F. De Gandt
Mathematics is considered to be a model of exact science. But the arguments of its representatives,
which have dragged on through the centuries and have not even yet been resolved about the mean-
ing of its elementary concepts and the foundation of the soundness of its method, are in a peculiar
conﬂict with the supposedly thorough evidence of its procedures. In various periods of his life the
great mathematician Cauchy defended totally different theories of imaginary numbers. Which of
them actually guided his evident procedures? [...] Theories change, but the procedure remains the
same. The evidence produced by such a procedure—there is no doubt about this at all—is mere
illusion.
But how then can results be arrived at which agree to such an amazing degree with subsequent
“tests” or with experience and thus condition a corresponding measure of practical conﬁdence?
Since analogous difﬁculties hold for all the sciences (and also for ordinary thought), should we
return to the viewpoint of Humean scepticism and extend it further than its great originator did,
to mathematics and to all “a priori” sciences as well? We turn in vain to the old and to the new
logic for resolution of such doubts; logic here leaves us entirely in the lurch. Logic, the “theory of
science”, must concede if it is to be honest that all science is a mystery to it”.3
This text was published at the end of a study on intuition and representation in 1894, but
Husserl left many other texts unpublished, he remained almost silent until the publication
of the Logical Investigations in 1900, and the arguments which justify his position must be
sought in manuscripts and letters.
2. Prelogical use of signs
In principle signs should stand for something. But there are cases where signs do not rep-
resent and cannot represent. In his unpublished “Semiotic” of 1890, Husserl draws up a
list and a classiﬁcation of the uses and inadequacies of signs, of the possible distance be-
tween signs and objects.4 It may happen that signs fail to give access to the thing, because
things are too remote, or very difﬁcult to reach. It may even be the case that any reference
is excluded. The sign then stands for nothing, it cannot represent a thing, since the thing
is an impossible one. This extreme case of completely void symbols may seem rare at ﬁrst
glance, but Husserl, as we shall see, met important examples in “higher arithmetic” (or
“universal arithmetic”, the name given to algebra by Newton and others).
In general the use of signs can be a rather go-as-you-please practice, governed by the
sole interests of life and of comfort. It would be much too optimistic to believe that signs
obey rational rules, that they follow a respectable grammar. The most common case is
what Husserl calls a “prelogical use” of signs, or a “prelogical device”. Even when signs
are devised for the purpose of knowledge, they are most probably the fruit of chance and
their correct use is only a result of innumerable trials. The philosopher (or logician) may
then ask for a logical justiﬁcation of each symbolic procedure:
“Every artiﬁcial operation with signs serves in a certain way goals of knowledge; but not every
one leads to knowledge, in the true and authentic sense of logical insights. Only when the device
itself is a logical one, when we have the logical insight that, as it is and because it is so, it must
lead to truth, then the result is not only a de facto truth, but a knowledge of truth. Only then are we
3Husserl, Psychologische Studien zur Elementarlogik II (1894), transl. R. Hudson and P. McCormick, in:
Husserl, Shorter Works, ed. P. McCormick and F. Elliston, Univ. of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame, 1981,
pp. 140–141.
4“Zur Logik der Zeichen (Semiotik)”, Husserliana XII, pp. 340–373.

Husserl and impossible numbers: a sceptical experience
617
fully sure to be protected from error, and do we not judge from blind impulse (Drang), not out of a
more or less vivid conviction, but from a clear insight. In this sense, we distinguish (1) prelogical
sign operations, which aim at truth and perhaps attain it, although the application of these methods
(as already its invention) is not based on logical comprehension; (2) logical sign operations, whose
use is based on rigorous grounds of knowledge and for that reason produce not merely truth, but
guaranteed truth (gesicherte Wahrheit). [...]
It is useful to point out here that a systematic use of signs for the purpose of gaining knowledge,
is not necessarily a logical one. A systematic investigation and use of signs can already take place
at the prelogical level. One can easily notice that signs improve our knowledge, without being
at all clear about the grounds of this improvement. This will in particular be possible when the
propositions obtained in a symbolic way (symbolic judgments) by the transition from sign to
thought, lead to genuine judgments that legitimate themselves because they can, in each case, be
veriﬁed. That is the situation in mathematics”.5
Truth is not enough. Manipulating signs blindly may have led us to a truth, the ﬁnal result
being a statement endowed with meaning, which we can see to be true. We know from
somewhere else (not from the interplay of signs, but after the event and independently)
that it is true, we can check its adequacy. But how do we know that the procedure will
necessarily produce correct results? We have used it thousands of times, and generations
of men before us have, but where is the guarantee that it must be so? Each time we reach a
de facto truth, we hit on truth by chance, but we have not arrived at “guaranteed truth”, we
do not possess knowledge in the authentic sense.
3. Husserl’s philosophical quest
Are the procedures of mathematics logical or only prelogical devices? This question marks
the point that Husserl arrived at in 1890, in a long quest for certainty.
He had been trained as a professional mathematician by the best teachers, following the
courses of Weierstrass and becoming his assistent, after a doctoral dissertation devoted to
the foundations of the calculus of variations.6 There was no place in his dissertation for
philosophical considerations, but the subject is interesting for our purpose. Husserl tried to
give necessary and (if possible) sufﬁcient conditions for the existence of a function which
minimizes the value of an integral between two ﬁxed points. The problem was to avert
the danger of non-existence. Mathematicians run the risk of operating with objects which
evanesce under close scrutiny. Thus, as a mathematician, Husserl was perfectly aware of
the fact that a sequence of signs, seemingly meaningful and rich, may reveal itself as a
mere phantom. A similar and famous accident had occurred some years before, with an
important and fruitful theorem of Riemann.
While preparing his dissertation on the calculus of variations, Husserl became actively
interested in philosophy, and under the inﬂuence of Brentano, decided to become a philoso-
pher:
5Husserl, “Zur Logik der Zeichen (Semiotik)” (1890) in Philosophie der Arithmetik mit ergänzenden Texten,
Husserliana XII, Den Haag, 1970, pp. 368–369 (personal transl.).
6Beiträge zur Theorie der Variationsrechnung, 1882.

618
F. De Gandt
“Brentano’s lectures gave me for the ﬁrst time the conviction that encouraged me to choose phi-
losophy as my life’s work, the conviction that philosophy too was a serious discipline which also
could be and must be dealt with in the spirit of the strictest science”.7
Philosophy is a serious and noble task, and Husserl embarked on a vast project, the philo-
sophical analysis of the mathematical sciences. The themes current at that time, such as the
status of the new geometries and the euclidean character of space, seemed too ambitious,
and he felt the need to proceed from the simplest questions to more elaborate ones. He
worked on a philosophical clariﬁcation of arithmetic, starting with the deﬁnition of num-
ber. He employed the array of tools at his disposal: a rather crude theory of abstraction, a
classiﬁcation of relations in several groups and subgroups, and an already reﬁned analysis
of consciousness.
The difference between philosophical foundation and descriptive psychology was not
clear to him. But above all, he proceeded only one step in the large enterprise, and the
result could not be used for the next task, a clariﬁcation of arithmetic. He had given a kind
of genetic account of plurality and number: number is the fruit of a reﬂection upon acts of
“colligation” (or collective uniﬁcation, which is the act of consciousness corresponding to
the logical particle “and”). But this accounted only for very elementary numbers, 2, 3, 4.
How to explain and to justify the handling of large numbers? Even 0 and 1 were excluded
from the description, they had to be treated as artiﬁcial extensions of the directly given
numbers.
Arithmetic deals with arbitrarily large numbers, expressing them with the help of var-
ious symbolic tools, operating on them in computations governed by mechanical rules.
Mathematicians—and engineers or merchants—have invented new kinds of numbers, neg-
ative, fractional, decimal. These realms of numbers cannot be founded on the elementary
concept of number.8
4. Impossible concepts
The worst case was the use of imaginary numbers. They represented the greatest stumbling-
block in Husserl’s path. He explained his failure to Stumpf:
“Since I originally conceived signs only as related to signiﬁed concepts,
√
2, √−1 had to be
held to be representatives of “impossible” concepts. Therefore, I ﬁrst tried to clarify how thought
operations with contradictory concepts could lead to correct propositions”.9
A key element lies in the form of the result:
“I ﬁnally noticed that through the computation itself and its rules, as they are deﬁned for those
ﬁctitious numbers, the impossible disappears (wegfällt) and there remains a correct equation”.10
7Husserl, “Recollections of Franz Brentano” (from Kraus, Franz Brentano, Munich, 1919), transl. by R. Hudson
and P. McCormick, in: Husserl, Shorter Works, ed. P. McCormick and F. Elliston, Univ. of Notre Dame Press,
Notre Dame, 1981, p. 343.
8See a letter to Stumpf (1890), Studien zur Arithmetik und Geometrie, Husserliana XXI, pp. 244–251.
9Ibid., p. 247.
10Ibid.

Husserl and impossible numbers: a sceptical experience
619
Once the result is obtained, veriﬁcation is possible, directly and without recourse to the
signs representing the impossible:
“The computation process unfolds itself once more with the same signs, but related to valid con-
cepts, and the result is correct again”.11
Logical or metaphysical justiﬁcations, any discussion of the nature of the underlying real-
ity, are totally irrelevant:
“Therefore “possibility” or “impossibility” are irrelevant here. Even if I ﬁgured that the contradic-
tory has existence, even if I sustained the most absurd theories about the content of such numerical
concepts, as several great mathematicians have done, the computation will remain correct if it con-
forms to the rules. Therefore the signs themselves must do the job, with their rules (Also müssen
es die Zeichen machen, und ihre Regeln)”.12
It is a defeat for the philosophers: whatever you think or imagine about the content of those
symbols, the computation works. There is an impassable gulf between the computational
practice and the supposed logical or philosophical justiﬁcations.
The central and fundamental example, which Husserl mentions several times in the man-
uscripts and lectures of that period,13 is the “casus irreductibilis” of the equation of the third
degree.14 An equation is given, and we have a general formula (found by Cardano) to ﬁnd
its three roots. In cases where the three roots are real, the formula which furnishes them
involves imaginary numbers (square roots of minus one), which miraculously disappear
during the computation. The meaningless symbols are only auxiliary elements and their
meaninglessness has no importance.
Bombelli, who ﬁrst developed this treatment of third degree equation, studied for in-
stance the equation x3 = 15x + 4 which has the three real roots 4, −2 +
√
3, −2 −
√
3.
The formula which mechanically produces these three roots must contain imaginary num-
bers, which mutually cancel when operating according to the rules. Mathematicians tried
in vain to ﬁnd other expressions free from imaginaries. The detour through imaginaries
seemed unavoidable. This was a scandal which stimulated the thinking of many great
minds, d’Alembert and others.15
Husserl considered this case not as an isolated oddity, but as an example of a more
general pattern in mathematical procedures. Inﬁnitesimals or negative numbers have the
same status: they may be perfectly void of any content, they serve only as intermediates
in the chain of operations that leads to a meaningful and correct result.16 The result is
meaningful, that is it contains no inﬁnitesimals or empty symbols, and it is true, as can be
checked directly (this presupposes that a result which contains inﬁnitesimals or imaginaries
is not a result properly speaking, and needs further elaboration).
Husserl insists on the importance of the form of the result: the ﬁnal stage of the procedure
contains no meaningless symbols, the impossible (more precisely: the sign representing the
11Ibid.
12Ibid.
13See, for instance, the Vorlesungen for the winter semester 1889–1890, Studien zur Arithmetik und Geometrie,
Husserliana XXI, p. 236 ff.
14“Irreducible” not in the sense of Galois theory and XX century algebra.
15See the entry “cas irréductible” in the Encyclopédie.
16Studien zur Arithmetik und Geometrie, pp. 234–237.

620
F. De Gandt
impossible) has disappeared after it has played its computational role. The rules are devised
precisely in order to allow a vanishing or mutual cancellation of the empty signs.
Another aspect is equally important: it is possible, once the result has been obtained, to
check it via another route, one that involves no meaningless symbols. Once the roots of the
equation have been obtained, for instance, it is very simple to verify that they satisfy the
equation. We then have exactly what Husserl calls a de facto truth.
5. Natural selection
The lesson is devastating: higher arithmetic has no logical dignity, it is just an “intellectual
machine”,17 forged by generations of calculators in a long sequence of trials. In a supreme
blasphemy against the queen of the sciences, Husserl even treats arithmetic as a by-product
of natural selection:
“It can be claimed: universal arithmetic, with its negative, irrational and imaginary (“impossible”)
numbers, was invented and applied for centuries, before it was understood. The most contradictory
and incredible theories were held about the meaning of these numbers, but this did not impede their
use. Each time a proposition was derived with their help, one could become convinced of its cor-
rectness through an easy veriﬁcation, and after innumerable such experiences a natural conﬁdence
developed in the unrestricted applicability of these procedures, which were then increasingly ex-
tended and reﬁned—all without the slightest insight into the logic of the affair, which has made no
real progress in spite of many efforts since the time of men like Leibniz, D’Alembert and Carnot
untill now. [...]
Indeed, arithmetic in its fully developed form is independent of a logical understanding of its ar-
tiﬁcial procedures. Arithmetic has not emerged fully-ﬂedged from the head of a single individual;
it is the product of a development over many centuries. It originated through a kind of natural
selection (natürliche Auslese). In the struggle for existence, truth overcame errors that had become
untenable, and arithmetical methods were developed accordingly, as gradually modiﬁcations were
introduced that ruled out the remaining errors. The correctness of the result could serve as a touch-
stone of the method, since it was possible to convince oneself of the correctness of the result
without using the method (by way of the above mentioned veriﬁcation)”.18
The motives for doubt are now explicit: the success of the methods owes nothing to
logical clarity, it derives from long practice. Even more: the search for logical justiﬁcations
is useless, it is a priori “blocked” so to speak, since the symbols do not represent anything
and the various pseudo-justiﬁcations may well proliferate freely, they have nothing to do
with the blind mechanism which furnishes the results.
6. Structural mathematics and categorial connections
To this dark picture of science, objections can be raised. Why doesn’t Husserl pay attention
to the efforts to gain insight among mathematicians themselves? Mathematics is not only
the production of “results”, it is also a vast endeavour to understand itself. In the case of
17“Zur Logik der Zeichen (Semiotik)”, in Philosophie der Arithmetik und ergänzende Texte, Husserliana XII,
p. 368.
18Husserl, “Zur Logik der Zeichen (Semiotik)” (1890) in Philosophie der Arithmetik mit ergänzenden Texten,
Husserliana XII, Den Haag, 1970, pp. 369–371 (personal transl.).

Husserl and impossible numbers: a sceptical experience
621
equations and roots for instance, the discoveries of Galois, the elaborate constructions of
algebraic number theory, are at least remarkable steps towards answering the question of
“why it must be so”.
The texts I have quoted or paraphrased are of course not the end of the long Husserlian
story. They offer a striking contrast with the image of mathematics presented at the end
of the Prolegomena to Pure Logic of 1900. Whereas in 1890–1894 arithmetic and the
rest of mathematics are in the end nothing but a collection of recipes, a bunch of tricks
sanctiﬁed by long use, inherited from traditional know-how and vaguely safeguarded by
an array of criteria and precautions, in 1900 Husserl sings the eulogy of the great formal
constructions of audacious nineteenth-century theory builders like Hamilton, Grassmann,
Lie and Cantor.19
In short, Husserl discovered “structures”—he called them “Mannigfaltigkeiten”. The
texts on that theme are better known and well commented upon, for instance in Suzanne
Bachelard’s book on Husserl’s logic. What happened in the intermediate period? How did
Husserl proceed from the “intellectual machine” to the “Mannigfaltigkeiten”? We do not
as yet possess enough documents, Vorlesungen, etc. to be able to describe and understand
precisely the process of his conversion. We know that his reading of Bolzano played a
decisive role, and that one leading thread through his new reﬂections concerns the idea of
the unity of a theory: under which conditions is a science one?20
It also seems that the study of space in 1894–1896 opened new issues. Husserl began to
distinguish sharply between the study of lived space, through an analysis of the constitution
of our spatial intuition, and the formal study of possible systems of geometries. Observing
how euclidean geometry underwent formal re-elaborations, he arrived at the idea that a
mathematical theory possesses a strong unity, governed by the connecting laws that bind
the elements together. Such connections are not different in their essence from logical or
linguistic connections. Husserl calls them “categorial”.
We can very brieﬂy summarize his later position on mathematics by quoting a passage
from First Philosophy:
Geometry needs spatial intuition, its concepts must come back to a factual sphere, to spatiality. In
arithmetic on the contrary, there are concepts which express the modalities of something in general,
like set, plurality, and the evidence which is required here is in principle of the same kind as
the evidence gained with the logico-apophantic concepts of the consequence between judgments.
More precisely, the whole of arithmetic and indeed the whole of analytical mathematics are just
analytics, but oriented otherwise, just logic of consequence, but oriented otherwise; instead of
predicative position, of judgment, it is related to positions of “thought-objects”.21
The same ideal connections are at the basis of logical articulations and mathematical struc-
tures. A number and a judgment seem to be entities of a very different nature, but the
act of counting and the act of judging are not different in principle. Only the orientations
differ: in the ﬁrst case the posited object, number, seems to be endowed with a kind of
autonomy, whereas in the study of judgments the act of thought comes to the fore. The
19Prolegomena zur reinen Logik, Logische Untersuchungen I, §70.
20A technical solution of the problem of the imaginaries is even possible within the study of Mannigfaltigkeiten,
when these are “closed” in a certain sense (deﬁnit). See the 1901 conference “on the imaginary in mathematics”
(Husserliana XII).
21Erste Philosophie, Husserliana VII, p. 29 (a course from 1923).

622
F. De Gandt
progressive uniﬁcation of classical logic and mathematics, guided by the Leibnizian ideal
of a mathesis universalis, is the result of the fundamental kinship between several sorts of
ideal connections.22
7. De facto truth and the need of a science of science
The sceptical and silent years of Husserl in the period 1890–1900, his doubts about the
certainty of mathematics, are not a passing episode in a long quest. They give a richer
meaning, a weight, to central theses of Husserl that may appear as philosophical rhetoric
to a superﬁcial reader.
The constant attitude of deﬁance, the constant warning by Husserl against “techniciza-
tion” of science, from the Prolegomena (§4 etc.) in 1900 to the Krisis (esp. §9g) in 1935–
1937, must be viewed in this light. Science becomes a pure technique, uncertain and blind,
if
(1) it rests purely on success, on the attainment of de facto truth,
(2) it relies on the mechanical use of symbols.
The two conditions are linked: blind use of symbols is justiﬁed only by success, by veri-
ﬁcation après coup, not by logical clarity. And vice versa, the exclusive attention to ﬁnal
success, to de facto truth, allows an unlimited tolerance in the intellectual tools, until er-
rors arise. Certainty is the goal, logical clarity is the instrument. Uncertainty derives from
blindness.
The scandal of imaginary numbers shows that a pragmatic view of truth is possible even
in mathematics. Husserl was not satisﬁed with it. He was silent for a long time, but not
resigned. Philosophy, for him, starts with the attempt to go beyond de facto truth, beyond
a pragmatic conception of knowledge.
I have gained knowledge, but do I really possess it? Will it not ﬂy away on the next
occasion? The tools I have used have proved efﬁcient in all the cases I have had to deal
with. But how can I be certain that these tools will again lead to the truth in other situations?
In the Meno (98 a) Plato compares knowledge by chance to the statues of Daedalus. They
are so alive and free that they may walk away in the next instant if we do not bind their legs
with a chain. My knowledge is in danger of disappearing if I do not attach it ﬁrmly with
the chain of a cause, explaining why (dioti) it must be so. Then I become ametapeiston,
not susceptible to being convinced by the other side, ﬁrm in belief. The adjective describes
science in Aristotle’s treatise on demonstration.23
Husserl places himself in this tradition of Greek dialectic, which is for him the ﬁrst step
in the development of philosophy.24 Truth is not enough, science requires a second level,
it must give an account (Rechenschaft geben) of its own method. The idea of a science of
science is not a new slogan, it is for Husserl philosophy itself, from its beginning among
mathematical disciplines and various scientiﬁc practices.
22See Formale und Transzendentale Logik, esp. §§24–26 and 34–37.
23Aristotle, Post. Anal., I, 2, 72 b 4; ametapeiston occurs also in Top. V, 2 to characterize science.
24See Erste Philosophie, chapters I–III and Formale und Tr. Logik, Introduction.

Husserl and impossible numbers: a sceptical experience
623
References
[1] E. Husserl, Philosophie der Arithmetik mit ergänzenden Texten (1890–1901), Husserliana XII, Den Haag,
1970 (trad. franç., J. English, Paris, 1972).
[2] E. Husserl, Studien zur Arithmetik und Geometrie, Texte aus dem Nachlass (1886–1901), Husserliana XXI,
Den Haag, 1983.
[3] E. Husserl, Aufsätze und Rezensionen 1890–1910, Husserliana XXI, Den Haag, 1979.
[4] E. Husserl, Logische Untersuchungen, Husserliana XVII–XX, Den Haag, 1975–1984 (trad. franç. Elie H.
et al., Paris 1959–1972; Engl. transl. J. Findlay, London, 1970).
[5] E. Husserl, Erste Philosophie (1923–1924), Husserliana VII–VIII, Den Haag, 1956–1959 (trad. franç.
A. Kelkel, Paris, 1970).
[6] E. Husserl, Formale und Transzendentale Logik, Husserliana XVII, Den Haag, 1974 (trad. franç. S. Bache-
lard, Paris, 1965).
[7] E. Husserl, Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale Phänomenologie, Husser-
liana VI, Den Haag, 1976 (Engl. transl. D. Carr, Evanston, 1970).
[8] E. Husserl, Shorter Works, P. McCormick and F. Elliston, eds., Notre Dame, 1981.
[9] E. Husserl, Articles sur la logique, trad. par J. English, Paris, 1975.
[10] K. Schuhmann, Husserl Chronik, Denk und Lebensweg Edmund Husserls, Den Haag, 1977.
[11] S. Bachelard, La logique de Husserl, Paris, 1957 (Engl. transl. L. Embree, Evanston, 1968).
[12] R. Brisart, La découverte des processus signitifs dans la première oeuvre mathématique de Husserl, in:
J. Benoist et al., Liminaire phénoménologique, Recherches sur le développement de la théorie de la signiﬁ-
cation chez Husserl, Bruxelles, 1998.
[13] A.L. Cauchy, Cours d’analyse algébrique, Paris, 1821.
[14] D. Lohmar, Phänomenologie der Mathematik, Dordrecht, 1989.
[15] P. Miller, Numbers in presence and absence, A study of Husserl’s philosophy of mathematics, Den Haag,
1982.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 33
Symbol and Space According to René Guénon
Bruno Pinchard
Université Jean Moulin, Lyon 3, France
Contents
1. Life and work of René Guénon (Blois 1886 – Cairo 1951)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 627
2. The symbolism of space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 629
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 640
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
625


Symbol and space according to René Guénon
627
1. Life and work of René Guénon (Blois 1886 – Cairo 1951)
René Guénon’s timeless work is endowed with a strangely modern quality. His icy style, his
unshakable aloofness, ironic detachment and muted anger arguably make him singularly
adept at formulating a lucid synthesis of the past century. If we still remember Guénon
today, it is hardly because of his engagement with the problems of the century or because
of his contribution to the development of the Humanities. If he cannot be ignored, it is ﬁrst
of all because of his unique capacity for dialogue with what passes humanity by, what he
calls “the non-human”, as well as the unrivalled profundity of his judgement.
Yet it would be difﬁcult to imagine more modest beginnings than the birth of René
Guénon at Blois, on November 15, 1886, into a family of winegrowers of the Loire region,
where his father is architect expert for an insurance company. Nothing more banal, again,
than the curriculum of this exemplary pupil who is inﬂuenced by his philosophy teacher
and, following the latter’s example, will strive with utmost rigour to distinguish appearance
from reality.
But that would be to ignore Blois and its region, that peerless land of Celtic legends
and royal symbols, which throughout the centuries continued to foster exceptional individ-
uals invariably imbued with deep spirituality, whether a Guillaume Postel meditating on
Chambord or a Madame Guyon exiled at Blois.
Yet the course of Guénon’s life resembles that of none of his known predecessors. To
be sure, he marries in 1912 and pursues—in Blois, in the neighbourhood of Paris and
brieﬂy in Algeria—a career as a teacher of philosophy that was never to be crowned by
the agrégation, yet the essential part of his life remains hidden and belongs, so to speak,
to the realm of the invisible. Whether one views him as the culmination point of the entire
French esoteric tradition or as the dedicated spokesman of oriental masters, and regardless
of whether one considers him to have been expressly chosen to introduce Europe to the
viewpoint of Islamic esoterism, which he embraces as of 1912, the fact remains that René
Guénon in his early twenties already demonstrates a unique mastery of both eastern and
western theological and initiative traditions. But what strikes one most in this polyglot and
unrivalled theoretician is not so much his scholarship as his unshakable sense of mission,
the true nature of which remains to be explored.
It must of course be remembered that mathematics was not alien to this all-round edu-
cation, as Guénon had initially intended to enroll at the École polytechnique. Having been
forced to renounce this course for reasons of health, he would nevertheless remain in con-
tact with mathematics all his life, and his entire work can, as we shall see, be considered
as a complete geometrisation of Tradition.
The general orientation which his work is to take becomes clear as early as 1924, through
a book that will come to be seen as a milestone: Orient et Occident (East and West).
Guénon here shows himself at once a ruthless critic of Western civilisation in the aftermath
of the ﬁrst World War and a man capable of transcending the aesthetical temptations that
would plague a Malraux (who owes him a great debt: La Tentation de l’Occident dates from
1926), a man who could forge a new and reinvigorating link between the two tendencies
that vie for the destiny of the planet: that of the West, enthralled by the concept of quantity
ever since Descartes, and that of the East, which through appropriate traditions was able to

628
B. Pinchard
Fig. 1. René Guénon in Paris, ca. 1925 [10].
preserve a regular access to the invisible centre of the universe—not so much the God of
monotheism as the Universal Possibility illustrated by Tao, Vedanta and Suﬁsm alike.
These were the foundations upon which Guénon began to build his considerable produc-
tion, consisting of numerous books and countless essays in various esoteric and catholic pe-
riodicals, invariably resplendent with an imperturbable lucidity and a tireless indictment—
even in his prima facie most generous overtures—of the spiritualistic, syncretistic and
humanitarian values of modernity.
Guénon was beginning to gain a reputation, in spite of the distance which he deliber-
ately created between the various manifestations of humanism and the continually em-
phasised necessity of steering a fundamental course aimed at what is higher than human.
Then, in 1928, he suffered the twofold loss of his wife, leaving him childless, and his aunt,
Mme Duru, who had been sharing the family’s life both in Paris and in Blois.
Shaken by this emotional crisis, convinced that in Europe the worst was to come about as
a result of the conﬂuence—which he had denounced from the very start—of nationalism,
anti-Semitism and pan-Germanism, he left France on a study trip to Egypt in March 1930,
settling for good in Cairo where, having converted to the Muslim religion, he eventually
married and founded a family.

Symbol and space according to René Guénon
629
Guénon’s departure for Cairo, by its suddenness and its far-ﬂung implications, made the
author’s life the stuff of legends. Yet the choice of Cairo never meant that he had given in to
the temptations of orientalism. If Guénon can, in one sense, be considered the spiritual heir
of the great French travellers in the East, in reality he imparted a radically new meaning to
the Egyptian adventure. The latter was no longer the fruit of some egyptomania born of a
fascination with pyramids and occult sciences. Such motives would have been considered
by Guénon as a sign of the most obscure worrying affects. Rather, in a fundamentally
geopolitical and international perspective, he saw Cairo as the meeting point between East
and West, as well as the means to found, at a time when the world was about to collapse,
a kind of intellectual realm that would preserve the best parts of human knowledge till the
beginning of the next cycle of time.
Thus Guénon was to establish, through his books (on Dante, on the multiple states of
being, on symbolism, on initiation, on the modern world) and through his letters to corre-
spondents all over the world, a unique magisterium aimed at the broad acceptance of the
idea that, over and above the diversity of particular religions, there exists a primal Tradition
which would allow the most enlightened part of humanity to gain an understanding of the
course of history and to overcome the darkest phases of the cycle into which the West was
about to drag along the entire world.
It would be wrong to portray as incorporeal and a-historic a doctrine which only takes in-
terest in Eternity because it holds the key to Time. Guénon similarly refers to what is “non-
human” only because the infra-human dominates the world, whether it is Industry taking
hold of the body or Suggestion claiming possession of the mind. Thus Guénon attempts
to keep alive a spiritual vigil, rooted in the very reality of civilisations and whose central
focus invariably corresponds to the highest degrees of being. The force of his thought ul-
timately derives from the fact that it is based on none of the values which could be seen,
in his own times, to be gradually foundering: Nation, Man, History, Art, the Churches,
Ethics, the Unconscious—even Being itself... Hence it addresses itself to the peoples and
individuals who are condemned to outlive them.
Guénon’s work, no doubt, has the icy tone of the coming age. Its coldness rivals that of
modern terror. It lives up to its times. It is in this certainty that the author dies in Cairo, on
January 7, 1951, invoking the name of Allah.
2. The symbolism of space
In spite of Guénon’s rejection of systematisation of any kind, his doctrine of the symbolic
world is so rigorous and so closely articulated that it is difﬁcult to give a simple overview,
even if he himself relished the idea of an “aperçu”, a word that recurs in the title of several
of his books. It is true that the aperçu provides a vista on what Guénon calls “the multiple
states of being”. Yet one should not allow oneself to be fooled by this apparent modesty
of the argument. As soon as it broaches the fundamental dimension of space and mathe-
matical entities, Guénon’s symbolic knowledge gives rise to genuine axiomatisation, a fact
which (the message bears repeating) radically distinguishes the author’s enterprise from
all sorts of vague Pythagoreanism and precarious numerology. In the same way as Guénon
tried to reduce esoterism to a uniﬁed order, so his meditation on space hearkens back to

630
B. Pinchard
fundamental principles corresponding to the requirements of a metaphysic which is ﬁrst
of all a process of thinking according to principles. That such an enterprise should have
been applied to mathematics, in a century wholly absorbed by the quarrel over the latter’s
“foundations”, is not the least paradoxical aspect of a philosophical approach which was
not conventional enough to remain indifferent to the mathematics of its time. That, at least,
is what—within the limits of my competence—I intend to demonstrate.
I shall take as my starting point two remarks of René Guénon. The ﬁrst is a purely
metaphysical one which, nevertheless, immediately implies a link with geometrical ideas.
Freely paraphrasing Mircéa Eliade in a review published in the Revue de l’Histoire des
Religions in 1946, René Guénon writes that “only at the “Centre” it is possible to “break
through the levels”, to pass from one “cosmic region”, i.e. from one state of being, to
another” [11, XXV, p. 188]. A resolutely indeﬁnite boundless ontology like the one claimed
by the author, which allows all states of being, including the possibilities of manifestation
and non-manifestation, is no merely virtual ontology. It amounts to a hierarchical ordering
of states, admittedly undeﬁned as to their several dimensions but organised around a focal
principle, the “center”, that has both a metaphysical and a spatial meaning.
In Le symbolisme de la croix (Symbolism of the cross), which describes this imbrication
of states and spaces, we read this other fundamental proposition:
Space here symbolises the set of all possibilities, either of a particular being or of universal Exis-
tence [5, IV, p. 47].1
It is not, however, space in general which becomes a symbol with Guénon, but its con-
struction starting from a cruciform three-dimensional system, viewed as a coordinate sys-
tem whose function it is to centre that space [5, IV, p. 47]. This latter statement of Guénon
is extremely important. This three-dimensional cross is not ﬁrst and foremost a religious
sign. It is a system of coordinates to which the entire space, and not merely Euclidean
space, can be related:
It is obvious that the so-called “Euclidean” expanse, which is the object of ordinary geometry, is
but a special case of a three-dimensional expanse, as it is not the only conceivable modality [5,
XXX, p. 223].
Guénon does not fail to emphasise the strong “logical coherence” of the various non-
Euclidean geometries. Does this mean that these geometries exclude one another in the
construction of a rigorous spatial symbolism based on three dimensions?
The various Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries obviously cannot apply to one and the same
space; but this does not prevent the diverse corresponding spatial modalities from coexisting in
the totality of spatial possibilities, where each of them must be realised in its own way, according
to what we shall have to say on the effective identity of the possible and the actual [6, II, p. 20,
note 3].
The cross, then, here signiﬁes the introduction of a metric in a space which—the unicity
of the principle notwithstanding—comprises an inﬁnite number of dimensions:
The principle of universal manifestation, while being one and even unity itself, necessarily contains
multiplicity; and the latter, in all its indeﬁnite developments, and actualizing itself indeﬁnitely in
an indeﬁnite number of directions, proceeds entirely from that primordial unity [6, V, p. 39].
1The references are to the French editions of Guénon’s work. For some of the translations I have used:
http://www.cis-ca.org/voices/g/guenon-mn.htm.

Symbol and space according to René Guénon
631
If René Guénon has therefore rightfully been considered the most ruthless of critics of
the modern ways of life [and the modern world] and of the historicism of the various forms
of knowledge, on the other hand he is entirely in tune with the contemporary geometry
of his time, as long as the innovations which characterize it, in the realm of topology
in particular, do not serve to conﬁrm conventionalism or a mere axiomatic structuralism
lacking all ontological purport. While it is true that he refuses the facile solutions offered
by the “fourth dimension” much beloved by theosophists, he nevertheless posits that only
our temporal state anchors us within classical three-dimensional space [5, p. 135]. As soon
as the relationship with time changes, the fecundity of space increases. This is exactly what
could happen in a world bearing the imprint of Einsteinian relativity:
All that can be said in this regard is that, with the expansive tendency of space no longer opposed
and restricted by the compressive action due to the compressive tendency of time, space must hence
naturally experience, in one way or another, a dilatation which in a sense raises its indeﬁniteness
to a higher power [7, p. 159].
While this power can still be symbolically represented, it is nevertheless clear that it
transcends the classical physical and quantitative framework.
In any case the Guénonean symbolism, according to this cruciform pattern, unfolds nat-
urally through a succession of three-dimensional spaces resulting from a process of subdi-
vision, articulation and analogy (through a system of correspondences which “obviates the
need to go outside the three-dimensional expanse”, [5, XIII, p. 114], and which could, as
pointed out by Enrico Barazetti, be assimilated to a true fractal [16, p. 78, note 45]). This
choice is actually more pragmatic than ontological “the establishment of this correspon-
dence between the two representations, which allows an easy transition from one to the
other, obviates the need to go outside the three-dimensional expanse.” [5, XIII, p. 114; my
emphasis]. But this is easily understood to the extent that the use of spatial representations
has no other meaning than a symbolic one, and should never constrain thought by tying it
to a speciﬁc ontology (e.g., a neo-Pythagorean, a Cartesian or a Malebranchean one).
Fig. 2. The sphere, representing all possibilities, is projected on planes that symbolize receptive substrates of
these possibilities [16, p. 200]. The projections on different parallel planes represent the indeﬁnite number of
realizations of the same degree of existence.

632
B. Pinchard
It is indeed necessary to carefully distinguish between the calculability of space and its
symbolic function, which chieﬂy proceeds from the possibility of moving from a ﬁnite
starting point to an indeﬁnite dimension. As to ontology itself, it can be summarized in a
single proposition: “Being is Being” [5, XVII, p. 42]; any other consideration would cause
reﬂection to fall prey to dualism, which is certainly still within the domain of symbolism
(by polarisation), but no longer within that of pure thought. Therefore no choice of space
should be allowable that impinges directly on ontology, because no form of Quantity can
express the truth of a being which is essentially limitless. All geometric representations are
to some extent intrinsically imperfect; their value is determined by the degree of indeﬁnite-
ness which they allow:
We are naturally forced to position them in a particular space, within a determined expanse, and
space—even envisioned in its full possible extent—is no more than a special condition contained
in one of the degrees of universal Existence [5, XVIII, p. 148].
True metaphysical reﬂection attempts to enfranchise itself from such conditions. If in
philosophy this enfranchisement comes about through knowledge mediated by concepts,
for Guénon it can only be achieved by way of a symbol deployed in some appropriate
space.
The so-called “Hypergeometry”, as Guénon underscores, is particularly apt at appealing to the
imagination of those whose mathematical knowledge is insufﬁcient to allow them to understand
the true nature of an algebraic construct expressed in geometrical terms [7, XVIII, p. 125]; cf. [8,
XVI, p. 103].
Guénon’s mathematical competence guards him against such fetishism and enables him
to exploit mathematical analogy on a purely operational level, making it subservient to
the representation of the multiple states of being. His mathematical knowledge is never
mere knowledge of quantity per se, but of quantity to the extent that it opens up inﬁnite
dimensions in space. Nor is space valued for itself, but (only) to the extent that it is capable
of surpassing its own limitations through its own operations. This, by the way, confers to
continuous quantity its superiority over discontinuous quantity: that the latter can approach
the former through continuous variation only. Inﬁnitesimal calculus is the result of this
conversion of a discrete universe into a continuous one, where space has primacy:
The most perfect representation of continuous quantity is achieved by the consideration of quanta
which are no longer ﬁxed and determinate [. . . ], but variable, because in that way their variation
can itself be regarded as arising in a continuous fashion [8, IV, p. 37].
By way of space, even the world of numbers achieves true indeﬁniteness. One could nev-
ertheless ask why a thoroughly metaphysical way of thought should explicitly be framed
in terms of indeﬁniteness rather than inﬁnity. On this point, Guénon is unequivocal, and
it constitutes the essence of numerous criticisms which he directs at the ambiguities of
mathematicians from Leibniz onwards:
There can be no such thing as mathematical or quantitative inﬁnity—the expression itself is mean-
ingless, because quantity itself is a form of determination; numbers, space, time, to which some
would apply this notion of so-called inﬁnity, are determinate conditions which, as such, are neces-
sarily ﬁnite; they are particular possibilities, or particular groups of possibilities, along and outside
which there are others, which obviously implies their limited nature [8, 1, pp. 15–16].

Symbol and space according to René Guénon
633
This explicature is of fundamental importance, because it ﬁrmly positions the universe
of symbols in the realm of the indeﬁnite, while at the same time justifying its mathematical
representation, which is itself indeﬁnite. Guénon thus challenges both the simple conven-
tionalism of mathematicians, which would erect indeﬁnite operations into inﬁnity, and the
pretensions of an ontological interpretation of symbols that would view mere representa-
tions as full-blown manifestations of inﬁnity:
As far as the totality of being is concerned, an indeﬁnite entity is here being used as a symbol of the
Inﬁnite, to the extent that it is allowable to say that the Inﬁnite can be symbolically represented;
but it should be quite clear that this in no way means that the two are to be confounded, as is
habitually done by Western mathematicians and philosophers [5, XXVI, p. 198].
It is now necessary to come back to the symbolic function and to recognize that it could
not exist without reference to a centre in space. While it is important to refrain from reduc-
ing Guénon’s thought to alleged “sources”—his approach being solely based on intellectual
intuition and its capacity to proceed a priori—it must be recognised that this primacy of the
centre, apart from constituting a manifest reference to all traditional religions, retraces very
closely the teachings of Plotinus. Plotinus indeed deals with such a centripetal movement,
but he does so in order to distinguish geometry and the analogic use of geometry:
The soul is not a circle in the sense of the geometric ﬁgure but in that it at once contains the Primal
Nature as centre and is contained by it as circumference [. . . We] hold through our own centre to
the centre of all the centres, just as the centres of the great circles of a sphere coincide with that of
the sphere to which all belong. Thus we are secure [13, VI, 9, pp. 183, 14–22].2
And Plotinus goes on to show that the link between the soul and its centre is not local,
and that the souls do not lie around this centre, but that the relationship is one of intelligible
similitude and kindred. For Guénon, however, what constitutes the centre is not so much a
Nature as a more abstract form of centrality. The latter is not determined by the knowledge
which the soul has thereof, but speciﬁcally by its power of symbolic representation. If
Neoplatonism ultimately assigns everything to the soul, Guénonean speculation strives to
restrict itself to a resolutely symbolic and therefore metapsychic dimension.
Fig. 3. When the sphere is projected on a tangent plane this corresponds to “the all seeing eye” or “God looking
down” [16, p. 201].
2The translation used is the one given on http://www.essene.com/MysterySchool/Plotinus/Ennead.

634
B. Pinchard
Fig. 4. René Guénon in Cairo, ca. 1945 [10].
But the speciﬁc novelty of the Guénonean representation remains the relationship which
he establishes between the cruciform coordinate system linked to the three directions of
space, and its embedding within a sphere of indeﬁnite radius:
we view the three-dimensional cross as being traced from the centre of a sphere [5, V, p. 52].
Each and every state of being, whether singular or universal, must trace its meaning to
it, and this provides the occasion to explore a profound analogy of the world, because the
cosmoses, even those which modern science has ultimately invalidated from a physical
viewpoint, regain a dimension of truth through the spherical dimension which they em-
body. Such a proposition, however, is only admissible insofar as reﬂection transcends the
enclosed teleological aspect of these cosmologies and their latent geocentrism to contem-
plate Universal Possibility, which, alone, comprehends all dimensions of the metaphysical
object.
From this absolute perspective, the mind is able to conceive reality as pure vibration:
Thus, in order to convey the idea of totality, the sphere must [. . . ] be indeﬁnite, like the axes which
constitute the cross and which are three orthogonal diameters of the sphere; in other words the

Symbol and space according to René Guénon
635
sphere, which arises through the very radiation of its centre, never closes upon itself, the radiation
being indeﬁnite and ﬁlling the entire space with a series of concentrical waves, each of which
reproduces the two phases of concentration and expansion of the initial vibration [5, VI, pp. 58–
59].
One must read these texts in order to fully comprehend both the fertility and the lim-
itations of symbolism (any symbolism), which as a matter of course presumes that the
signiﬁed inevitably overbears the signiﬁer. This is nowhere more evident than where dis-
course reaches its ultimate term: the universal Vortex.
The unfolding of this spheroid is, in the end, nothing but the indeﬁnite propagation of a vibratory
(or undulatory, which is essentially the same thing) movement, no longer merely in a horizontal
plane but throughout the whole three-dimensional expanse, from a starting point which can in
fact be considered its centre. If one regards this expanse as a geometrical, that is to say spatial,
symbol of the totality of the Possible (a necessarily imperfect symbol, being constrained by its
very nature), we have arrived at a ﬁguration which represents—to the extent that this is possible—
the universal spherical vortex along which the realisation of all things is accomplished, and which
the metaphysical tradition of the Far East calls Tao, that is to say “the Way” [5, XX, p. 159-59].
This Vortex is not to be understood merely on its own, as an integrative force with respect
to the world of the possible. It provides, ﬁrst of all, the matrix of interintelligibility of all
the particular symbols transmissed by tradition. From such a Vortex spring the—invariably
centered—ﬁgures of the spiral, the staircase, the enclosure, the hemispheres, the swastika,
the pole, the Grail, the Sacred Heart, the Holy City, the Tree of Life..., which, along with
many others, ﬁll the pages of such an encyclopedic work as Symboles de la Science sacrée
(Fundamental Symbols of Sacred Science). But it could be said that the undeniable success
of that book would be deeply misleading if it were to be used as a kind of dictionary,
without being constantly related to the metaphysics of the multiple states of being. In the
middle of his symbolic constructions, Guénon never fails to remind us: “This multiplicity
of states of being, which constitutes a fundamental metaphysical truth...” [5, I, p. 21].
For it alone enables one to focus not only on the whole set of degrees of Existence, but
even more on the boundless domain of universal Possibility. And while the latter allows of
a speciﬁcally geometrical expression, it can equally be arrived at by other means, as was
brilliantly demonstrated in the work that would follow immediately after Symbolisme de
la croix, which announces it in its last lines: Les États multiples de l’être (The Multiple
States of Being), published in 1932. It, too, is concerned with Universal Possibility, but it
leaves out geometry, and the essential limitlessness of Universal Possibility is established
by a purely discursive argument.
In such a context, Man cannot provide the ground for any simple “humanist” assertions.
Man only ﬁnds his true symbolic meaning if he positions himself according to such a
dimensional arrangement and recovers his place as a cosmic one. Man is no subject, nor
an absolute; he is a state of being endowed with limitless extensions, provided that this
particular state recognizes its centre:
The integration of the human condition, represented by the horizontal cross, is part of the order of
existence, like an image of the very totalisation of being, represented by the vertical cross [5, VI,
p. 60].
But this viewpoint, which subsumes the action of the transcendental upon the immanent,
only makes sense if reference is made to the reﬂection of the centre upon itself:

636
B. Pinchard
If one only considers the horizontal cross, the vertical axis is represented in it by the central
point itself, which is the point where it meets the horizontal plane; thus every horizontal plane,
symbolising some particular state or degree of Being, has in that very point which can be called its
centre (as it is the origin of the coordinate system to which every point in the plane can be related)
that same image of immutability [4, VII, p. 66].
Everything is therefore traced back to the point, in other words to a reality which exists
outside any context of symbolisation and spatialisation. Just like space becomes symbolic
space only through representing a reality which eludes it, so every measure of the states
of being, even one devised by Man, is but the explosive dilatation of a point which eludes
all representation, both because of its fundamental incorporality and its primordial nature.
In this context, Guénon likes to recall an excerpt from Dante, who recognized two names
of God, I and El, declaring I, the point, to be absolutely the ﬁrst name of the Divinity
[14, Par. XXVI, v. 134–136]. Guénon also cites this commentary of Moses of Leon, which
summarises the teachings of the Kabbalah on this topic:
The mystery of forthbringing Thought corresponds to the hidden “point”. It is within the inte-
rior Palace that the mystery linked to the hidden “point” can be understood, because the pure and
elusive aether always remains mysterious. The “point” is the aether rendered tangible (by concen-
tration, which is the starting point of differentiation of whatever kind) in the mystery of the Interior
Palace or Holy of Holies [5, IV, p. 46].
Thus we see that Rabelais—who only makes us laugh all the more surely to guide us to
the “Manor of Truth” [15, Quart Livre, chapter LV, p. 668]—does not gratuitously deﬁne
himself as an abstractor of quintessence, the latter being the alchemistic representation of
an energy that existed prior to space and which holds primacy over all ulterior constructions
derived from it. Incidentally, the Jubilee of 1550 which concludes the work is nothing but
such a return to the principle of all forms before their ultimate recapitulation in a wine
which is a source of mystery [15, Cinquiesme livre, Prologue, pp. 723–724]; cf. [5, IV,
p. 42 and VII, p. 66; IX, p. 93]. In this way, by attending the interplay of point and space,
one is drawn into a rhythm of recapitulation and expansion which sums up what is best
in esoterical culture, which is ﬁrst and foremost a law of transition from chaos to order,
without any loss or exclusion.
From his position at the centre of the “cosmic wheel”, the perfect sage moves it imperceptibly, by
his mere presence, without partaking in its movement and without having to concern himself with
exerting any kind of action [5, pp. 70–71].
This ideal transcends that of ataraxy. It is truly speaking the deployment, as applied to
Man, of the symbolism of the centre and its various spatial projections. That symbolism
here is more than just a way of knowledge: it is also a particular conduct of the will which
signiﬁes for Man the return to the Primordial State, where the human state merges into the
ﬁgure of universal Man and ascends, along the vertical dimension, through the successive
states of being:
The “pivot of the norm” is what in almost all traditions is termed the “Pole”, that is to say [. . . ] the
ﬁxed point around which all revolutions of the universe take place, according to the norm or law
which rules all manifestations and which itself is but the direct emanation of the centre, in other
words the expression of the “Will of the Heavens” in the cosmic order [5, VIII, p. 76].
Here one ﬁnds again the centre of all geometries and cosmologies to which Plato referred
in the X book of the Republic:

Symbol and space according to René Guénon
637
[A place] where they could see from above a line of light, straight as a column, extending right
through the whole heaven and through the earth, in colour resembling the rainbow, only brighter
and purer. [. . . ] For this light is the belt of heaven, and holds together the circle of the universe,
like the under-girders of a trireme [12, 615 b-c, transl. Benjamin Jowett].3
It could be said that the entire oeuvre of Guénon was written in this at once central and
all-encompassing light, and that like Er, the hero mentioned by Plato, he is “the messenger
who would carry to men the report of the other world”, i.e. of the world of the invisible
[12, 614d].
Life and death, too, obey the order thus reconstituted, and to these must be added the
characteristic modalities of the human state as well as our various subtle corporeal and
psychical extensions which together constitute our “complete individuality”. The geometry
of the centre then allows a representation of the overall equilibrium of multiplicities which
traverse the human state and which only he who stands at that centre can comprehend
by way of an intuition which is at once a sense of eternity and a sense of unity. These
real multiplicities are such that they cannot be numbered: they are the very qualities of
universal existence and escape the laws of numeration and quantiﬁcation, thus evading the
grip of the false idea of “inﬁnite number”, which Guénon, after Leibniz and perhaps more
rigorously than he, refutes [8, II and III].
The geometry of a single being can thus become so complex that the only way to relate
it to all the other beings in the Universe is by stepping outside the three-dimensional ex-
panse. This proliferation of dimensions leads to the adage which is at the root of the work
of a Giordano Bruno: “Every point could be a centre, and it may be said that it is one in
potentia” [5, XII, p. 112]. Such a distinction between the potential and the actual never-
theless makes clear that Guénon does not yield to the temptations of an inﬁnitism of the
immanent, and his thought, in Leibnizean fashion, retains a focus on the singular, for he is
quick to add: “but in fact, a particular point needs to be determined”. Yet it remains true,
in the case of space as in that of the human body, that all individuality “in reality contains
an indeﬁnite multitude of coexisting modalities”, such as the indeﬁnite multitude of cells
each of which has its own existence [5, XIII, p. 116].
One of the most suggestive metaphors used by Guénon to explain his conception of the
construction of space is the process of weaving. Not only does it link the symbolism of the
cross to the imagery of the cloth, of writing, of books and nets, of the hairs of Shiva or the
thread of the Fates, but it also creates the possibility to unify two kinds of representation,
viz. the system of rectilinear coordinates and the system of polar coordinates: the cross in
the latter case is no longer part of a system of straight lines, but of a system of concentric
circumferences. Referring to the “spider’s web” in Hindu thought, for example, he points
to the reciprocal transformation which links these two cartographies of symbolic space:
The warp is here represented by the threads radiating from the centre, and the woof by the threads
laid out as concentric circumferences. To relate this to the customary model of weaving, it sufﬁces
to picture the centre as being at an indeﬁnite distance, such that the rays become parallel lines [5,
XIV, p. 123].
3I
used
Benjamin
Jowett’s
translation
on
http://www.worldwideschool.org/library/books/phil/
ancientmedievalorientalphilosophy/TheRepublic/chap10.html.

638
B. Pinchard
One is struck by the extreme ﬂexibility of these models and the necessity, for the sym-
bolic mind, to accustom itself to a plurality of representations, lest it become petriﬁed by
the constraints of a single vocabulary.
This is obviously a far cry from the prevailing reception of Guénon’s thought, of which
all too often only the results are remembered by those unable to reconnect the latter to
the truly indeﬁnite substrate which confers them their aura and which chieﬂy derives from
his laws of transformation. The Guénonean discourse, as we have said, is always but an
“aperçu”, caught in a never-ending rotation where only the centre remains ﬁxed. That is
why it is necessary to apply a principle of continuity which, alone, sheds light on the
symbolisms employed as well as any other form of ontological statement that accompanies
them. It must be stressed here that the universe envisioned by Guénon ultimately isn’t
that of the circle but that of the spiral, the inﬁnitesimal spiral, i.e. an open concentric
circumference. The sphere itself, for him, is neither closed nor planar [5, XXI, p. 163], just
as Universal Possibility can never be limited:
Its limitation would be inconceivable, as, having to comprise all Possibility, it could never be
conﬁned within it [5, XIV, p. 128].
In these conditions, any structuring system would, strictly speaking, be impossible,
whether it be a system of categories, an eternal Return or some principle of reincarnation.
This result is but the outcome of a rigorous application of the principle of indiscernibles,
an eminently metaphysical principle which, like the principle of continuity, Guénon shares
with Leibniz. In this universe nothing coincides—there is mere universal correspondence
which continues into inﬁnity. Here, once more, the notion recurs of a vibratory movement
propagating indeﬁnitely along some appropriate plane, like the surface of a liquid.
All the systems that we have mentioned are in reality but different positions of one and the same
system [5, XX, p. 157].
The very essence of the symbolism of the cross is that it suggests this kind of progres-
sive universalisation of the symbol by introducing an ever-increasing indeterminacy,i.e. the
ever higher powers to which inﬁnity is raised. Transcendence and immanence in the result-
ing Vortex, considered in its plurality of states, are never absolute. A state, by the very fact
that it is centered, is subject to transcendental inﬂuence only as an object of simultaneous
contemplation of a plurality of states. This means that the force of attraction of transcen-
dence in any case makes itself felt only through the centre of each state, “i.e. the point
where equilibrium is reached and wherein this manifestation resides” [5, XXIII, p. 172].
In other words, there is transcendence only in those environments which are harmonious
in the sense that they have attained the balanced conditions of their manifestation. Rather
than enforcing their identity, transcendence presupposes their capacity for centration. In
this sense it can be said above all to be non acting.
For a ﬁnite being, it is perceptible ﬁrst of all by the establishment of a speciﬁc direc-
tion within the expanse, the straightness or “rectitude” corresponding to the vertical axis.
Thus the indeterminate Absolute carries within itself a principle of determination, which
assuredly leaves it unaffected but which allows the individual to have access to a way of
perfection, if he manages to relate to this initial axis a horizontal plane whence he can
manifest itself according to his particular wholeness. Thus is obtained a comprehensive
construction of the individual according to the sundry directions of space, which could be

Symbol and space according to René Guénon
639
conceived as a true “incarnation”. But let us never forget that the individual plane upon
which the Ray of Heaven will operate can be any state, “as all states are perfectly equiva-
lent when viewed from Inﬁnity” [5, XXVII, p. 203], the former being but the inﬁnitesimal
variations of the latter. Every road is a road of reintegration towards the centre, and Paradise
and Hell, to the extent that they are linked to the universal vertical axis, are the symmetric
ways of the individual realization [5, XXV, p. 192].
This nevertheless requires an initial vibration to illuminate the chaos, after the fashion of
the ﬁat lux which sparks off cosmic creation. The individual unfolds in it like a lotus ﬂower
upon the waters, moving from the circumference of manifestation to the non-manifested
centre. The notions of holiness, grace, salvation, which are characteristic of the religious
outlook, are not thereby rejected but given their proper inﬁnite background, detached from
moralism and unfettered by naturalistic limitations of whatever kind. The conﬂicts of the-
ology are far removed from such a perspective based above all on a principle of continuity
applied to the full, which, alone, is worthy of the divine and allows a reconciliation of
the cross-currents which pervade orthodoxy and heresy alike. Compared with the liberty
offered by the symbolic world, theology, ethics and philosophy are held by Guénon to be
discriminating practices which correspond to certain aspects of the cosmic cycle, but can-
not without a thorough symbolic transformation lead to the perfection which is man’s own
and which is always achieved by synthesis rather than analysis.
Clearly, then, it is absolutely impossible to even begin approaching the meaning of the
great currents of René Guénon’s vast oeuvre without a thorough understanding of the math-
ematical symbolism that governs it from beginning to end. Whether he discourses upon
primordial Tradition, the King of the World, or regular initiation, or whether he criticises
modernity for being a space of solidiﬁcation, always the reader has to keep in mind that
his point of departure is an inﬁnitesimal and variational conception of states which, alone,
results in a correct understanding. While Guénon may borrow entire parts of his system
from theosophy, from anthropology, from his casual readings even, he always reinterprets
them within these holistic dynamics which result in a truly unique power of synthesis, thus
turning the tracing of his sources into a sterile endeavour. Every Guénonean postulate must
be engaged not through what it decrees, but through the perspectives it opens up. His re-
ﬂection is the least conﬁning one there is. Its value, once again, lies in the indeﬁniteness
which it conjures up; and it surely constitutes one of the most irrefutable proofs of the cor-
rectness of Guénon’s verdict on modernity, that the vibratile universe which he envisioned
should have been rigidiﬁed, by his enemies and by some of his disciples, into a universe at
once oppressive and reactionary.
Leaving aside these incomprehensions, it is important to say that these doctrines must
additionally be viewed in the light of two other stances. Firstly, these truths are not merely
the outcome of the modern scientiﬁc view of space. Rather, according to Guénon, modern
science itself is the product of traditional doctrine. Modern science has, above all, a residual
character, and this puts into a proper perspective the technical notation systems put to use
in the course of Guénon’s demonstrations. Secondly, and in the same line of thought, there
is not an ancient sacred text, no temple, shibboleth or symbol which has come down to us
which does not completely verify this representation of the universe or fails to conﬁrm it
by an anthropological truth corresponding to the theses ﬁrst expounded at the metaphysical
level.

640
B. Pinchard
Hence Guénon’s oeuvre, in an era of radical breakdown of knowledge, succeeded in
proposing the paradoxical notion of a universe of symbolic boundlessness, while at the
same time creating precise correspondences which unite history and geometry, the theory
of dreams and archaeology, the interpretation of sacred texts and cosmic life, in such a
way that it is just as impossible to fault it with respect to the accuracy of its factual data as
with respect to the rigour of its a priori argumentation. Against this backdrop of absolute
openness, it ﬁnally becomes possible to acknowledge the true qualities of this unique body
of work, which certain hurried readers have disqualiﬁed before acquainting themselves
with it; it is in fact these unfair judgements, which erect their intrinsic limitations into self-
evident criteria, which reveal themselves as the certain wellsprings of the most implacably
oppressive systems.
References
[1] P. Chacornac, La vie simple de René Guénon, Paris, 1958.
[2] M.-F. James, Esotérisme et Christianisme, autour de René Guénon, Paris, 1981.
[3] J.-P. Laurant, Le sens caché dans l’oeuvre de René Guénon, Lausanne, 1975.
[4] R. Guénon, Orient et Occident, Trédaniel, Paris, 1924, 1987.
[5] R. Guénon, Le Symbolisme de la Croix, Editions traditionnelles, Paris, 1931, 1996 (Symbolism of the Cross,
tr. by A. Macnab, Luzac, London, 1958).
[6] R. Guénon, Les Etats multiples de l’être, Trédaniel, Paris, 1932, 1984 (The Multiple States of Being, tr. by
J. Godwin, Larson, New York, 1984).
[7] R. Guénon, Le Règne de la Quantité et les signes des temps, Gallimard, Paris, 1945, 1972 (The Reign of
Quantity and the Signs of the Times, tr. by L. Northbourne, Penguin Books, Baltimore, 1972).
[8] R. Guénon, Les Principes du Calcul inﬁnitésimal, Gallimard, Paris, 1946 (The Metaphysical Principles of
the Inﬁnitesimal Calculus, tr. by H.D. Fohr, Sophia Perennis, New York, 2001).
[9] R. Guénon, Symboles de la Science sacrée, Gallimard, Paris, 1962 (Fundamental Symbols: The Universal
Language of Sacred Science, tr. by A. Moore, revised and edited by M. Lings, Quinta Essentia, Cambridge,
1995).
[10] R. Guénon, Les Dossiers H, L’Age d’Homme, 1984.
[11] R. Guénon, Comptes rendus, Editions traditionnelles, Paris, 1986.
[12] Platon, La République, trad. É. Chambry.
[13] Plotin, Ennéades, éd. Bréhier.
[14] Dante Alighieri, Divina Commedia, éd. Vandelli.
[15] F. Rabelais, Oeuvres complètes, éd. Huchon, “La Pléiade”, Paris, 1998.
[16] E. Barazzetti, L’espace symbolique—Développements du symbolisme mathématique des états multiples de
l’Etre, Archè – la Nef de Salomon, Milano, 1997.
[17] B. Pinchard, Chemins de la multiplicité selon René Guénon, in: L’Un et le Multiple, Cahiers du CESC,
no. 7, Archè, Milano, 1999.
[18] B. Pinchard, Méditations mythologiques, les Empêcheurs de penser en rond, Le Seuil, Paris, 2002.

CHAPTER 34
Eddington, Science and the Unseen World∗
Teun Koetsier
Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Science, Vrije Universiteit, De Boelelaan 1081,
NL-1081HV Amsterdam
E-mail: t.koetsier@few.vu.nl
Contents
1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 643
2. Astronomer and physicist
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 643
3. Quakerism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 645
4. The problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 645
5. The four-dimensional world . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 647
6. Eddington’s idealism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 648
7. Mind stuff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 649
The notion of the primacy of mind
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 649
The principle of permanence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 650
The notion of mind-stuff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 650
8. Concluding remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 651
Acknowledgement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 652
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 652
*The only recent paper that I know of about the relation between science and religion in Eddington’s thinking is
[1]. It contains many useful references. For a technical reconstruction of Eddington’s work on the fundamental
theory, I refer to [12].
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
641


Eddington, science and the unseen world
643
1. Introduction
Arthur Stanley Eddington (1882–1944) is remembered as a brilliant astronomer and physi-
cist with a great gift for popular exposition. However, Eddington was a philosopher of
science as well.1 He was, moreover, an active Quaker inclined towards mysticism. In this
paper I shall identify how the ideas of the physicist Eddington, the philosopher Eddington
and the Quaker Eddington are related. My goal in this paper is to demonstrate the coher-
ence of the three different aspects of Eddington’s intellectual life.
2. Astronomer and physicist
Eddington received his scientiﬁc training at Trinity College, Cambridge. From 1906 to
1913 he was chief assistant at the Royal Observatory in Greenwich. In 1913 he became
Fig. 1. Arthur Eddington. Science Photo Library.
1Some professional philosophers considered Eddington to be a philosophical amateur who did not really know
what he was talking about (cf. [15]). Others loved his writings; Merleau-Ponty considered him to be one of the
greatest thinkers of the twentieth century ([14], 1965).

644
T. Koetsier
Plumian professor of astronomy at Cambridge and, in 1914, director of the university ob-
servatory. He is famous for his studies of stellar motion and the internal constitution of
stars. In 1917 he became fascinated by Einstein’s theory of relativity and he played a cen-
tral role in one of the two expeditions to observe the total eclipse of the sun on May 29,
1919. Eddington participated in the expedition to Principe, an island off the west coast of
Africa in the Gulf of Guinea. The photographs that Eddington obtained there veriﬁed one
of the predictions of the theory of general relativity: stars observed close to the eclipsed
disk of the sun were slightly displaced away from the centre. This deﬂection of light by a
gravitational ﬁeld had not been suspected before the introduction of general relativity.
Eddington was extraordinarily gifted in popular exposition and his books, Space, Time
and Gravitation [5], written for the intelligent layman, and The Mathematical Theory of
Relativity [6], written for the specialist, did much to make the theory of relativity well
known to the English-speaking world. Soon after the publication of The Mathematical
Theory of Relativity in 1923, Dirac succeeded in showing how the special theory of rel-
ativity is completely consistent with the equation that describes the electron in quantum
mechanics, if it is written in the right form. This result had an enormous inﬂuence on Ed-
dington. During the last ﬁfteen years of his life he worked on a controversial and rather
speculative theory that should bring about the uniﬁcation of general relativity and quantum
mechanics. A guiding idea in this work, which is already present in his ﬁrst books, is that
the fundamental physical theories can be derived a priori and the experiment is merely used
to identify the constants that occur in the theory. On the basis of Dirac’s work Eddington
calculated a priori several numbers which physicists normally considered as experimental
results. He identiﬁed what he called the seven primitive constants of nature: (1) the mass
of an electron, (2) the mass of a proton, (3) the charge of an electron, (4) Planck’s con-
stant, (5) the velocity of light, (6) the constant of gravitation, (7) the cosmical constant.
Eddington developed a theory of their relationships:
“We may thus look on the universe as a symphony played on seven primitive constants as music
is played on the seven notes of a scale.” [10, p. 231]2
Eddington’s a priori calculations led to the number 1.848 for the ratio of the masses of
a proton to an electron, while the experimentally measured result was 1.836. Another con-
stant that Eddington calculated on the basis of purely theoretical considerations was the
ﬁne structure constant which occurs in the ﬁne structure of the lines in the hydrogen spec-
trum. Eddington calculated the value 137; the observed value was 137.036.3 The closeness
between the calculated values of these dimensionless constants and the measured values
only reinforced Eddington’s conviction that he was right. Most physicists, however, did not
share his ideas. As a result Eddington spent the last ten years of his life in isolation. He in-
sisted that the many constants that he had calculated were correct and that the experimental
results only had to be interpreted in the proper way.
2This has a somewhat Pythagorean ring, but it would be wrong to see Eddington as a twentieth century
Pythagorean. Eddington wrote a few years later: “if it were necessary to choose a leader from among the older
philosophers, there can be no doubt that our choice would be Kant. We do not accept the Kantian label; but, as a
matter of acknowledgement, it is right to say that Kant anticipated to a remarkable extent the ideas to which we
are now being impelled by the modern developments of physics” [11, pp. 188–189].
3The number 137 became a central number in his theory. Allegedly, he once told a colleague that he preferred
to put his hat on peg number 137 in the cloakroom of a conference hall [16, p. 146].

Eddington, science and the unseen world
645
3. Quakerism
One of the keys to understanding Eddington’s philosophy of physics is, as we shall see
below, his interest in relativity theory. Another key to a full understanding of Edding-
ton’s ideas is his Quakerism. Founded by George Fox, who emphasised the immediacy of
Christ’s guidance, Quakerism arose in the mid-17th century within the Puritan movement.
The early Quakers, the Society of Friends, worshipped without liturgy or appointed min-
isters. The Meeting gathered in silence, although in this silence some of the worshippers
might be led to speak. In the Quaker way of life the silent communion of the Meeting
is the centre. First hand experience has been characteristic of Quakerism throughout the
centuries. Although Quakers view their beliefs as consistent with the Bible and Christian
tradition, they criticise infallible doctrines and creeds. They believe that creeds tend to
crystallise thought and turn matters that cannot be put in words into a caricature of what
they are supposed to express. Friends have no form of observance of the sacraments. In
politics Quakers are inclined towards paciﬁsm. In such an atmosphere Eddington grew
up. The silent communion of the Meeting creates an atmosphere quite open to mystical
experiences. Eddington wrote in 1928:
“If I were to try to put into words the essential truth revealed in the mystic experience, it would
be that our minds are not apart from the world; and the feelings that we have of gladness and
melancholy and our yet deeper feelings are not of ourselves alone, but are glimpses of a reality
transcending the narrow limits of our particular consciousness—that the harmony and beauty of
the face of nature is at root one with the gladness that transﬁgures the face of man.” [8, p. 321]
4. The problem
If mystical experience reveals to us that our minds are part of a reality that transcends us,
a reality that expresses itself in nature as well, it seems natural to ask what the position of
science is with respect to this reality. Eddington discusses this problem, the “perplexing
dualism of spirit and matter” in The Domain of Physical Science [7, p. 202] as follows. On
the one hand,
“The spiritual phenomenon of consciousness is the one thing of which our knowledge is immediate
and unchallengeable.” [7, p. 202]
On the other hand, common sense and physics teach us of the existence of a material
world around us, in which the “ﬁrst reality”, consciousness, seems to be a very late arrival.
The physicist has no use for the notion of consciousness in his scheme. The religious mind
is puzzled here.
“It would welcome an admission from the physicist that his material world is not self-sufﬁcient
and would dissolve if it were not sustained by a spiritual reality, which, it is felt, must be deeper
than all material reality.” [7, p. 203]
The problem of the dualism of spirit and matter is related to other problems that concern
the seemingly contradictory ways in which the same part of reality can be experienced and
described. Eddington uses very suggestive examples to explain his point. For example, in
The Nature of the Physical World Eddington describes how Lamb in his classic Hydro-
dynamics [13] deals with the generation of waves by wind. After two pages ﬁlled with

646
T. Koetsier
impressive equations Lamb concludes: “Our theoretical investigations give considerable
insight into the incipient stages of wave-formation” [8, p. 316]. Eddington now puts this
description next to quite another description of the generation of waves by wind contained
in Rupert Brooke’s words:
“There are waters blown by changing winds to laughter
And lit by the rich skies, all day. And after,
Frost, with a gesture, stays the waves that dance
And wandering loveliness. He leaves a white
Unbroken glory, a gathered radiance,
A width, a shining peace, under the night.”
[2, p. 22]4
Eddington writes:
“The magic words bring back the scene. Again we feel Nature drawing close to us, uniting with
us, till we are ﬁlled with the gladness of the waves dancing in the sunshine, with the awe of the
moonlight on the frozen lake. These were not moments when we fell below ourselves. We do
not look back on them and say, ‘It was disgraceful for a man with his six sober senses and a
scientiﬁc understanding to let himself be deluded in that way. I will take Lamb’s Hydrodynamics
with me next time.’ It is good that there should be such moments for us. Life would be stunted
and narrow if we could feel no signiﬁcance in the world around us beyond that which can be
weighed and measured with the tools of the physicist or described by the metrical symbols of the
mathematician.” [8, p. 317]
Eddington continues as follows on the experience described in Brooke’s poem: “Of
course it was an illusion” (Ibidem) and he describes how vibrations of various wavelengths
set the mind to work and how, on the basis of meagre incoming material, the mind wove
an impression.
“It was an illusion. Then why toy with it longer? These airy fancies [. . . ] should be of no concern
to the earnest seeker after truth. Get back to the solid substance of things, to the material of the
water moving under the pressure of the wind and the force of gravitation in obedience to the laws
of hydrodynamics.” [8, p. 318]
And then he makes his point:
“But the solid substance of things is another illusion. It too is fancy projected by the mind into the
external world.” [8, p. 318]
This last thought, which indicates the idealistic nature of Eddington’s philosophy, is
illustrated elsewhere by means of the problem of the two tables. In the introduction to The
Nature of the Physical World [8] Eddington tells that he wrote the book while sitting at
a table that had been familiar to him from his earliest years: a table with an extension,
comparatively permanent, coloured and above all substantial. This is Table No. 1, a solid
thing, the opposite of empty space. At the same time, however, he wrote his book at Table
No. 2, a table less familiar to him. Actually the work of Rutherford in 1911 had revealed
the existence of Table No. 2 to Eddington. In nineteenth century physics the space inside
a solid was still well ﬁlled. However, Rutherford showed that the solid objects consist
4It is remarkable in Brooke’s poem that the description of the waves “blown to laughter”, that when frozen
leave a “white and unbroken glory”, is a metaphor for the young men killed in the Great War. Eddington seems
to read it as merely a description of nature.

Eddington, science and the unseen world
647
mainly of empty space. Only a one-billionth part of Table No. 2 is substantial and it is not
at all clear what kind of substance this is. In physics, elementary particles are described
by mathematical equations and by means of these equations the physicist can predict the
results of experiments. Eddington concludes that the world as it is revealed by physics has
become a world of shadows. Eddington:
“In the world of physics we watch a shadowgraph performance of the drama of familiar life. The
shadow of my elbow rests on the shadow table as the shadow ink ﬂows over the shadow paper.
It is all symbolic, and as a symbol the physicist leaves it. Then comes the alchemist Mind who
transmutes the symbols. The sparsely spread nuclei of electric force become a tangible solid; their
restless agitation becomes the warmth of summer; the octave of aethereal vibrations becomes a
gorgeous rainbow [. . . ].” [8, p. xvii]
5. The four-dimensional world
Apparently Rutherford’s work made Eddington wonder about the status of the material
world around us. However, relativity theory had an even greater impact on his views. In
relativity theory time and space have a different interdependency. This can be illustrated
by means of the strange and paradoxical implications of the so-called Lorentz-contraction.
Eddington, who was very good at ﬁnding entertaining examples, illustrated the contraction
of time as follows. Imagine an aviator travelling at 161,000 miles a second and imagine
that we have an agreement that says that at the moment he passes us, we will both light a
cigar and at the end of 30 minutes, when our cigars are ﬁnished, we will both give a signal.
Then will both discover that the other smoker’s cigar lasted twice as long as our own cigar
[5, pp. 24–25].
Relativity theory implies that space and time are no longer intrinsic qualities of the
world; they are brought about by the particular perspective that the mind has with re-
spect to the world. The universe should no longer be seen as a three-dimensional space
in which, in the course of time, things happen. No, the “World” in relativity theory is a
four-dimensional aggregate that encompasses past, present and future. The World consists
of point-events. Whenever a point-event or a relation of point-events is observed by an
observer, this happens at a certain moment in time in three-dimensional space, but the way
in which the World is “split” into a space-part and a time-part is different for different ob-
servers. In “The Domain of Physical Science” of 1925, Eddington expressed his agreement
with Hermann Weyl:
“It is a four-dimensional continuum which is neither time nor space. Only the consciousness that
passes on in one portion of this world experiences the detached piece which comes to meet it and
passes behind it as history, that is as a process that goes forward in time and takes place in space.”
[7, p. 211]
In relativity theory length and duration lost their status of things inherent in the external
world; they turned out to be merely relations of things in the external word to a speciﬁed
observer. This idea was only strengthened by general relativity theory, which also deals
with accelerated motion. In general relativity theory the existence of gravitation and the
laws of mechanics of matter can all be deduced from the geometry of the curved four-
dimensional continuum, the “World”.

648
T. Koetsier
6. Eddington’s idealism
According to relativity theory, our experience of the World depends on the particular ob-
server. However, Eddington went further. Relativity theory convinced him that the world
of physics as a whole is a product of the human mind. The mind is also responsible for our
experience of matter in space and time. While Eddington’s argument is rather technical, it
is also crucial: it turned Eddington into an idealist. In 1929 he wrote:
“I would like to recall that the idealistic tinge in my conception of the physical world arose out of
mathematical researches on the relativity theory. In so far as I had any earlier philosophical views,
they were of an entirely different complexion.” [8, p. viii]
The earliest published exposition of these idealistic views is two papers in Mind in 1920
[3,4]. The argument concerning matter is central to these publications. According to Ed-
dington [3, p. 146], experiences take place in space and time. Nevertheless, the space and
time of an experience are derived concepts and they are not intrinsic qualities of the World.
However, by means of mathematical notions like tensors we can get to intrinsic qualities
of the world. For example, the vanishing of a tensor denotes an intrinsic condition inde-
pendent of space and time. Relativity theory implies, for example,
Gµν −1
2gµνG = 0,
for empty space
and
Gµν −1
2gµνG = −8πTµν,
for mass present.
At this point Eddington objects to the usual view that the ﬁrst equation is a law inherent in
the continuum, while the second equation indicates how the continuum is disturbed when
matter intrudes. Eddington writes:
“I think there is something incongruous in introducing an object of experience (matter) as a foreign
body disturbing the domestic arrangements of the analytical concepts from which we have been
building a theory of nature. It leads to a kind of dualism.” [3, p. 151]
Eddington asks himself a rhetorical question: What impression do the two equations
make on our senses? He answers that the ﬁrst equation corresponds to the perception of
emptiness and the second equation to the perception of matter. Thus the two equations are
not inherent laws of the external world, but they describe how the quantity measured by
the expression Gµν −1
2gµνG (nowadays called the Einstein-tensor) is appreciated by the
human mind. The Einstein-tensor satisﬁes a condition of continuity which implies that if
space and time are measured in a speciﬁed number of ways matter will be permanent: if a
particle disappears, at a neighbouring point a corresponding mass will appear [3, p. 153]. In
this way Eddington arrives at a deﬁnition of matter in terms of the geometrical concepts of
relativity theory. There are many ways in which the mind could resolve a four-dimensional
continuum, he points out, but the mind singled out the familiar space and time. Why, asks
Eddington? The reason is the fact that the mind has a predilection for living in a permanent
universe. Eddington wrote:

Eddington, science and the unseen world
649
“The intervention of mind in the laws of nature is, I believe, more far-reaching than is usually
supposed by physicists. I am almost inclined to attribute the whole responsibility for the laws of
mechanics and gravitation to the mind, and deny the external world any share in them.” [3, p. 155]
In the second paper in Mind [4] Eddington repeats the same message:
“The mind is dealing with a real objective substratum; but the distinction of substance and empti-
ness is the mind’s own contribution, depending on the kind of pattern it is interested in recognising.
It seems probable that the reason for selecting the particular type of pattern is that this pattern has
(from its own geometrical character, and independently of the material in which it is traced) a
property known as Conservation. Reverting from the four-dimensional world to ordinary space
and time, this property appears as permanence.” [4, p. 420]
The same ideas return in Space, Time and Gravitation [5]:
“Mind ﬁlters out matter from the meaningless jumble of qualities, as the prism ﬁlters out the
colours of the rainbow from the chaotic pulsations of white light. Mind exalts the permanent and
ignores the transitory; and it appears from the mathematical study of relations that the only way
in which mind can achieve her object is by picking out one particular quality as the permanent
substance of the perceptual world, partitioning a perceptual time and space for it to be permanent,
and as a necessary consequence of this Hobson’s choice the law of gravitation and mechanics
and geometry have to be obeyed. Is it too much to say that the mind’s search for permanence has
created the world of physics?” [5, p. 198]
And somewhat further he adds:
“the conclusion is that the whole of those laws of nature which have been woven into a uniﬁed
scheme—mechanics, gravitation, electrodynamics and optics—have their origin, not in any special
mechanism of nature, but in the workings of the mind.” [5, p. 198]5
As a Quaker Eddington experienced the dualism of mind and matter as a problem. His
argument concerning the Einstein tensor changed the problem. It did not solve the problem
entirely because the problem of the dualism of the mind and the “meaningless jumble of
qualities” from which the mind “ﬁlters out matter” remained. Yet, on a heuristic level, this
could be felt as a step towards a ﬁnal solution.
7. Mind stuff
The idealistic views that Eddington expressed in Mind in 1920 didn’t undergo any signif-
icant change over the rest of his life. He elaborated on them in several publications. He
also related them to his solution to the perplexing dualism of matter and mind (in particu-
lar in [7–9]. In this section I shall try to give a sketch of this solution. It consists of three
elements.
The notion of the primacy of mind
First of all, the following view is like a postulate for Eddington: the one thing of which our
knowledge is immediate and unchallengeable is the content of our own consciousness. He
5On p. 199 Eddington points out that there is one law that bothers him, the law of atomicity: “Why does
that quality of the world which distinguishes matter from emptiness exist only in certain lumps called atoms or
electrons, all of comparable mass? The mind seems to prefer continuous perception”.

650
T. Koetsier
ﬁnds this self-evident. Eddington: “Mind is the ﬁrst and most direct thing in our experience;
all else is remote inference” [9, p. 24].
The principle of permanence
There exists an undeniable difference between a priori knowledge and a posteriori knowl-
edge; we need to distinguish between the two. A posteriori knowledge concerns the “exter-
nal world”. According to Eddington the motive for the conception of an external world lies
in the existence of other conscious beings. If I would be the only conscious being, there
would be no need for the construction of an external world, according to Eddington. How-
ever, because there are more conscious beings, we compare notes and place the elements
common to all conscious beings “in neutral ground—an external world” [7, p. 192]. In this
way the external world is in the ﬁnal analysis the mental synthesis of appearances from
all possible points of view. In daily life this implies that the external world is the synthesis
of the elements common to the consciousness of all mentally healthy human beings. What
happened in relativity theory is merely an extension of this attitude with respect to certain
aspects of reality. In relativity theory the traditional point of view is modiﬁed to include
the points of view of observers travelling at high velocities.
However, there is more. According to Eddington, there is a principle of selection play-
ing “the all-important part in determining whether a law such as the conservation of energy
shall take rank as a law of nature” [7, p. 213]. This principle is partly determined by the
fundamental idea that the external world shall embody the elements common to the expe-
riences of individuals, but on top of that
“The principle of selection followed by the mind appears to be primarily a search for the things
which are permanent.” [7, p. 213]
So, our conception of the external world, in the form it has in our daily life or in the form
it has in the fundamental theories of physics, is the result of a principle of selection which
includes the intersubjective and permanent and excludes the subjective and temporary.
The notion of mind-stuff
Our knowledge of the external world is structural knowledge. This is particularly clear in
the case of the physical theories. Talking about the theory of relativity Eddington writes:
“An yet, in regard to the nature of things, this knowledge is only an empty shell—a form of
symbols. It is knowledge of structural form, and not knowledge of content. All through the physical
world runs that unknown content, which must surely be the stuff of our consciousness. Here is a
hint of aspects deep within the world of physics, and yet unattainable by the method of physics.
And, moreover, we have found that where science has progressed the farthest, the mind has but
regained from nature that which the mind has put into nature.
We have found a strange foot-print on the shores of the unknown. We have devised profound
theories, one after another, to account for its origin. At last, we have succeeded in reconstructing
the creature that made the foot-print. And Lo! it is our own.” ([5, pp. 200–201], italics added.)

Eddington, science and the unseen world
651
The thought contained in the italicised sentences returns again and again in Eddington’s
work. Physical knowledge, say, of atoms is structural. However, there must be something
that possesses this structure, there must be content:
“Because we see that our precise knowledge of certain aspects of the behaviour of atoms leaves
their intrinsic nature just as transcendental and inscrutable as the nature of mind, so the difﬁculty
of interaction of matter and mind is lessened. We create unnecessary difﬁculty for ourselves by
postulating two inscrutabilities instead of one.” [7, p. 208]
“The mind-stuff of the world is, of course, something more general than our individual conscious
minds; but we may think of its nature as not altogether foreign to the feelings in our consciousness.”
[8, p. 277]
“The mind-stuff is not spread in space and time [. . . ] But we must presume that in some other
way or aspect it can be differentiated into parts. Only here and there does it rise to the level of
consciousness, but from some islands proceeds all knowledge. Besides the direct knowledge con-
tained in each self-knowing unit, there is inferential knowledge. The latter includes our knowledge
of the physical world.” [8, p. 277]
In the Tarner Lectures of 1938 [11], Eddington again returns to the same questions. In
the ﬁrst eight chapters he elaborates the doctrine that the laws of nature that are usually
classiﬁed as fundamental correspond to a priori knowledge and are wholly subjective. In
the remaining chapters he argues that the knowledge of the physicist is entirely structural.
The mind has primacy:
“Let us now consider the common root from which scientiﬁc and all other knowledge must arise.
The only subject presented to me for study is the content of my consciousness.” [11, p. 195]
The principle of selection is there. Eddington even writes that if it were necessary to
give a short name to his philosophy, he would hesitate between “selective subjectivism”
and “structuralism” [11, p. viii]. In 1919 Eddington had known that physical knowledge
was structural. Twenty years later, it became clearer. In 1939 he could write:
“it is the structure of the kind deﬁned and investigated in the mathematical theory of groups” [11,
p. 147]
and with even more emphasis he could give his solution to the dualism of mind and matter:
“The recognition that physical knowledge is structural knowledge abolishes all dualism of con-
sciousness and matter.” [11, p. 150]
In 1939 he did not repeat his ideas about mind-stuff; he restricted himself to the comment
that he had discussed mysticism elsewhere.
8. Concluding remarks
Many see their own consciousness as a strange, insigniﬁcant spark of spirit in a huge ma-
terial universe. Eddington totally rejected this idea. For him mind is the ﬁrst and most
direct thing in our experience; all else is remote inference. In Science and the Unseen
World [9] Eddington imagined how a passage in an obituary notice, which mentioned that
the deceased had loved to watch the sunsets from his country home, led to a long se-
ries of letters on the teaching of Copernicus. Everybody forgot the only thing that really
counted: the fact that the deceased man had looked out for an experience each evening and

652
T. Koetsier
not a creed [9, pp. 51–53]. Scientiﬁc knowledge is only preliminary knowledge of a very
restricted kind. Questions concerning good and evil, beautiful and ugly, meaningful and
meaningless are not touched upon by science. Such questions can only be answered by
“intimate knowledge” [8, p. 321]. Again and again Eddington emphasised that the sphere
of personal experience is primary and that the experiences of beauty or melancholy are
important. Within this personal experience Eddington emphasised the seeking. A mystic is
for Eddington someone who takes his or her intimate experiences seriously. He wrote:
“We have no creed in science, but we are not lukewarm in our beliefs. The belief is not that all the
knowledge of the universe that we hold so enthusiastically will survive in the letter; but a sureness
that we are on the road. If our so-called facts are changing shadows, they are shadows cast by the
light of constant truth. So too in religion we are repelled by that conﬁdent theological doctrine
which has settled for all generations just how the spiritual world is worked; but we need not turn
aside from the measure of light that comes into our experience showing us a Way through the
unseen world.” [9, pp. 55–56)]
Eddington’s philosophy is very much a search for an all-encompassing view of the world
and ourselves. It is a Quaker search. Summarising, we can say that the core of Eddington’s
solution to the problem of the dualism between mind and matter consists of the idea of
the primacy of mind, the principle of selection and the notion of mind-stuff. Because the
principle of selection concerns a particular activity of the mind as well, the solution in fact
boils down to a reduction of everything to “mind”.
Acknowledgement
A previous version of this text was read by Regis Cabral. I very much appreciate his useful
comments.
References
[1] A.A. Batten, A most rare vision: Eddington’s thinking on the relation between science and religion, Q. J. R.
Astronomical Society 35 (1994), 249–270.
[2] G. Keynes (ed.), The Poetical Works of Rupert Brooke, Faber and Faber Limited, London, 1970.
[3] A. Eddington, The meaning of matter and the laws of nature according to the theory of relativity, Mind 29
(1920), 145–158.
[4] A. Eddington, The philosophical aspect of the theory of relativity, Mind 29 (1920), 415–422.
[5] A. Eddington, Space, Time and Gravitation, an Outline of the General Relativity Theory, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1920.
[6] A. Eddington, The Mathematical Theory of Relativity, 1923.
[7] A. Eddington, The domain of physical science, Science Religion and Reality, J. Needham, ed., 1925,
pp. 187–218. (Reissued in 1970 by Kennikat Press, Port Washington, New York/London.)
[8] A. Eddington, The Nature of the Physical World, Cambridge University Press, 1929.
[9] A. Eddington, Science and the Unseen World, Swarthmore Lecture, 1929, George Allen & Unwin Ltd,
London, 1929.
[10] A. Eddington, New Pathways in Science, Cambridge University Press, 1935.
[11] A. Eddington, The Philosophy of Physical Science, Cambridge University Press, 1939.
[12] C.W. Kilmister, Eddington’s Search for a Fundamental Theory, A Key to the Universe, Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1994.

Eddington, science and the unseen world
653
[13] H. Lamb, Hydrodynamics, Cambridge University Press, 1916.
[14] J. Merleau-Ponty, Philosophie et théorie physique chez Eddington, Annales littéraires de l’Université de
Besançon, vol. 75, Les Belles Lettres, Paris, 1965.
[15] L.S. Stebbing, Philosophy and the Physicists, Methuen & Co. Ltd, London, 1937.
[16] A.V. Vibert Douglas, The Life of Arthur Stanley Eddington, Thomas Nelson and Sons Ltd, London etc.
1956.
[17] E. Whittaker, From Euclid to Eddington, A Study of Conceptions of the External World, Dover Publications,
New York, 1958.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER 35
The Divined Proportion
Albert van der Schoot
Department of Philosophy, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 657
1. No logo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 657
2. Elemental truths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 659
3. Potentia mirabilis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 661
4. Stupendous effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 663
5. The blueprint of the universe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 666
6. Unity in variety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 669
MATHEMATICS AND THE DIVINE: A HISTORICAL STUDY
Edited by T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
655


The divined proportion
657
Introduction
There is no doubt about the fact that around 300 BC the ancient Greeks were aware of the
ratio now generally referred to as the golden section. Euclid has us divide a line according
to this ratio and he also writes extensively about the pentagon and the dodecahedron. He
explains how to construct these and how to inscribe the one in a circle and the other in a
sphere.
But what Euclid coined the division in extreme and mean ratio is by far not yet a golden
or divine proportion. In this article, I shall trace how and when the deiﬁcation of an origi-
nally mathematical notion came about.
1. No logo
Roger Herz-Fischler, who has taken the trouble to track down the record of this divi-
sion from antiquity through the eighteenth century,1 lists a number of examples of pen-
tagrams (the ﬁgure typically used to show the golden section ratio) found in sources pre-
ceding the Christian era. Inscriptions of pentagrams in clay that were found in Egypt and
Mesopotamia have been archeologically determined as dating back from before 3000 BC.
The oldest Sumerian cuneiform pentagrams stem from the same period and a ﬂint scraper
from Palestine showing an incised pentagram may even be older:2 Yet, whatever the deno-
tation or symbolic meaning of these shapes may have been, there is nothing to suggest that
the golden section as such should have been of any importance to the oldest civilisations
around the Mediterranean. Documents like the famous Rhind papyrus from the seventeenth
century BC, an important source of our knowledge on Egyptian mathematics, do not make
mention of it.
Nor do the Pythagoreans, although known for their interest in proportions, add anything
as far as the golden section is concerned. Of course there is hardly any ﬁrst hand informa-
tion from the earliest generations of Pythagoreans. Our oldest source is Philolaus (late ﬁfth
century BC), whose writings we know through scattered fragments transmitted by later
writers. Some of these fragments enter into speciﬁc issues of mathematics and of music,
but none of the remarks on proportions has any bearing on the divine proportion.
The same goes for the later Pythagorean texts.3 The most informative sources on
Pythagorean mathematics date from the second to the ﬁfth centuries AD. Nicomachus of
Gerasa (beginning of the second century AD) is very explicit on the Pythagorean theory
of proportions and especially on their idea of mediation. Mediation is the intervention of
a third number to bring about a balance between two other numbers. Thus, the numbers
2 and 8 can be mediated by 4, since 2 : 4 = 4 : 8. The same numbers can also be medi-
ated by 5, since 8 −5 = 5 −2. And even 6 would qualify, since 2 : 6 = (8 −6) : (8 −2).
In this way, Nicomachus treats ten different types of mediation. Now, if the Pythagoreans
had shown any interest at all in the golden section, Nicomachus’ text would have been the
1A Mathematical History of Division in Extreme and Mean Ratio, Waterloo (Canada), 1987.
2A Mathematical History. . . , Ch. III.
3See K.S. Guthrie (ed.), The Pythagorean Sourcebook and Library (1920), Grand Rapids, 1987, for the classical
documentation of the Pythagorean school.

658
A. van der Schoot
Fig. 1. Flint scraper from Palestine, Herz-Fischler, 1987, p. 58.
place to ﬁnd the traces of such an interest. But again, there is nothing of the sort. Yet, Nico-
machus’ extensive dealing with mediation helps us understand why there was not, indeed
could not have been, any cultivation of the divine proportion among the Pythagoreans:
all his examples consist of numbers in the proper sense of the word; that is, of integers
(arithmoi). The divine proportion calls for a further level of abstraction, one that would in-
volve irrational quantities. Nicomachus could have taken this level into consideration had
he been dealing with the state of the art of mathematics in his own time, which he was
not; the mathematical simplicity of his account adds to the chance that we are dealing here
with authentic Pythagorean notions of proportionality. From the sources available to us it
becomes clear that the breakthrough in mastering the mathematical concept of irrational-
ity must have taken place around the fourth century BC. The most obvious confrontation
with an irrational ratio for a people thinking in geometrical forms rather than in abstract
quantities must have been the relationship between elements of one and the same ﬁgure;
how could these not be understandable from the same unit? The long history of reﬂections
on the problem of squaring the circle, as we ﬁnd with Cusanus and many others, goes to
show that the irrational relationship between the circle’s circumference and its diameter re-
mained counterintuitive for a long period of time. This question was even more pressing in
the light of the primordial status of circle and square in architecture; in treatises on Roman,
Greek-Orthodox and Islamic architecture we ﬁnd the importance of these two basic forms
conﬁrmed.
For Aristotle, writing in the middle of the fourth century BC, the ratio of the side and
diagonal of the same square is a frequently returning issue.4 At one point he uses it as
an indication of the distinction between laymen and those who have received a proper
education in mathematics. This passage also shows how closely mathematics is intertwined
with the divine. A mathematical (and, more generally, philosophical) education is the type
of instruction that helps to set man free; it is knowledge (επιστηµη) for its own sake, not
instrumental to something else, and man gains mental sovereignty when he surpasses the
4See the listing in David Fowler, The Mathematics of Plato’s Academy, Oxford, 1987, p. 295.

The divined proportion
659
stage of acquiring knowledge for production (ποιησις) or action (πραξις) and is ready for
pure contemplation (θεωρεια). In a sense, this is also what makes him superhuman:
For human nature is in many ways servile: so that (. . . ) God alone may have this prerogative; and
it is ﬁtting that a man should seek only such knowledge as becomes him. (. . . ) This science alone
may be divine, and in a double sense: for a science which God would most appropriately have is
divine among the sciences; and one whose object is divine, if such there be, is likewise divine.
Then, Aristotle goes on to show how the initially counterintuitive turns into the expected:
For all men begin, as we have said, by being amazed that things are as they are, as puppets are
amazing to those who have not yet understood how they work, or the solstices, or the incommen-
surability of a square’s diagonal with the side, for it seems curious that there is something which
cannot be measured even with the smallest unit. Finally, however, in the progress of our science,
the directly contrary and, as the proverb has it, the better state, is reached, the state reached by
those who, as in the cases mentioned, have accepted instruction; for there is nothing which would
surprise a geometer more than if the diagonal of a square became commensurable with the side.5
But if the irrationality of the divine ratio was a problem preventing the Pythagoreans
from recommending it as a proportion with special qualiﬁcations, could it then be that
they cherished it in its geometrical shape? Siegfried Heller, investigating the discovery
of the divine proportion by the Pythagoreans, speaks about the pentagram as being “das
Bundeszeichen der Pythagoreer”6 and this has been a widely accepted idea. But what is
this idea based upon? Much has been made of an isolated remark by an author from the
generation after Nicomachus. In fact, this is a strange remark, in a strange text, by a very
strange author. The notorious cynic Lucian of Samosata (±115–±200) found his inspira-
tion for writing the short text Pro lapsu inter salutandum (In defence of a slip of the tongue
in greeting) by accidentally using the wrong word when greeting a friend. Reﬂecting on
ways of greeting and on the words and symbols used for that purpose, he speaks about
“the pentagram, which they [i.e. the Pythagoreans] used as a token serving to recognise
the members of their sect”.7 The few other texts from antiquity mentioning the pentagram
with this function are merely repetitions of Lucian’s remark.
So much for the foundation of the belief that the pentagram is a Pythagorean sign: a
very weak basis for such an established conviction. Extensive studies of the Pythagorean
tradition, such as De Vogel’s, do not come up with any evidence that the pentagram was
recognised by the Pythagoreans as their logo. On the contrary: De Vogel showed that the
many southern Italian coins on which the image of the pentagram can be found date from
periods and places not dominated by the Pythagoreans.8
2. Elemental truths
Thus, irrationality is a key term in understanding why the divine proportion did not, in
reality, receive all the attention which later historiography ascribed to it. We would have a
5Metaphysics 982b29–983a20. See Aristotle, Metaphysics, transl. Richard Hope, Ann Arbor, 1960, pp. 8/9.
6S. Heller, Die Entdeckung der stetigen Teilung durch die Pythagoreer, Abhandlungen der deutschen Akademie
der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, Klasse für Mathematik, Physik und Technik, Nr. 6, 1958, p. 5.
7Quoted in De Vogel, Pythagoras and Early Pythagoreanism, Assen, 1966, p. 47.
8De Vogel, Pythagoras and Early Pythagoreanism, ch. III.

660
A. van der Schoot
better understanding of its impact on the Pythagorean mind and on its relation to the whole
of Pythagorean teaching if more contemporary accounts were available to us. It is very dif-
ﬁcult to evaluate the credibility of the many anonymous scholia and alleged emendations
that were added to the antique documents in later centuries. Could these monks and other
scholars really have known something that we cannot read in the surviving texts ourselves?
Conjecture is the name of the game; yet the answer to that question cannot be a categorical
negation. Sometimes their interpretations could indeed have been based on copies of man-
uscripts which they could still have disposed of, but which got lost afterwards. So much is
certain that, in the sources available to us, there is no unequivocal reference to the divine
proportion before it turns up, at the end of the fourth century BC, in Euclid’s Elements. In
Book VI, def. 3, Euclid deﬁnes: “A straight line is said to have been cut in extreme and
mean ratio when, as the whole line is to the greater segment, so is the greater to the less”.9
This is not the ﬁrst time, though, that this proportion occurs: in Book II, prop. 11, Euclid
instructs us to “cut a given straight line so that the rectangle contained by the whole and
one of the segments is equal to the square on the remaining segment”.10 This implies that
the division of AB in H must be made according to extreme and mean ratio (AE = EC,
EF = EB). (See Fig. 2.)
The same division is also involved in the construction of several polygons in Book IV.
Book VI, prop. 30 ﬁnally tells us straightforwardly “to cut a given ﬁnite straight line in
extreme and mean ratio”.11
Euclid’s Xth Book is explicit about the conceptions of incommensurability and irra-
tionality which the Pythagoreans still shunned. Understanding of these conceptions must
have grown during the fourth century in order for Euclid to be able to incorporate them into
his compilation; Van der Waerden12 credits Plato’s friend Theaetetus with the intellectual
ownership of the material dealt with in Book X as well as Book XIII. This latter book is
especially interesting to us because here Euclid treats a number of propositions concerning
Fig. 2. Euclid’s division in extreme and mean ratio, Elements II, 11.
9Euclid, Elements, Book VI, def. 3; see The thirteen books of Euclid’s Elements, transl. Th. Heath (1908),
Cambridge, 1926, Vol. II, pp. 188/9.
10Euclid, Elements, Book II, prop. 11, in The thirteen books . . . , Vol. I, p. 402.
11Euclid, Elements, Book VI, prop. 30, in The thirteen books . . . , Vol. II, p. 267.
12B.L. van der Waerden, Science Awakening I, Dordrecht, 1988 (1954), chs. V & VI.

The divined proportion
661
the division in extreme and mean ratio before proceeding to the inscription of the ﬁve reg-
ular solids in a sphere. Two later supplements to this book were considered for a long time
to be authentic Euclidean and referred to as Books XIV and XV. These contain additional
theorems concerning the pentagon and the regular solids.
It is, therefore, beyond any doubt that Euclid was thoroughly familiar with the divine
proportion and some of its peculiar properties. But it also becomes clear that terms like
“divine proportion”or “golden section”, with their typically evaluative connotations, are, in
fact, anachronistic when related to Euclid. Euclid deals with arithmetic and with geometry,
not with physical objects showing particular ratios. Moreover, the scattered distribution
of propositions involving the division in extreme and mean ratio shows that Euclid found
no reason to emphasise it. There is nothing in Euclid which makes this particular division
stand out among the other mathematical insights presented and used for further proofs, and
it is simply hilarious to call Euclid “above all, the man of the golden section ...”, as I have
read recently on the Internet in a description of Euclid’s appearance in Raphael’s School of
Athens.
3. Potentia mirabilis
Can we ﬁnd anything golden in Cusanus’ writings? We can, but not the golden section.
In 1459, Cusanus wrote down a theorem which he referred to as the aurea propositio in
mathematicis. The theorem claims that three straight lines, originating in the same point
and forming two equal angles of 45◦or less, are always in the same ratio to the boundary
line, whether this boundary line is a chord or an arc. In Fig. 3: ab + ah + ac is to bhc as
ab + ad + ac is to the arc bdc, etc.
Cusanus reﬂects on this theorem not only as a mathematician, but also as a theologian.
Mathematical contemplation opens the gate to loftier speculations beyond the sphere of
empirical perception. In his reﬂections on the squaring of the circle (as well as in other
texts, such as the Idiota de mente), Cusanus explains his belief in the importance of math-
ematics for theology: mathematical thinking resides in the highest regions of the mind, as
it regards the ﬁgures in their true Forms, that is, not contaminated by the tricks of ever
Fig. 3. Cusanus’ aurea propositio.

662
A. van der Schoot
changeable matter. Mathematics, therefore, assists the theologian in coming closer to the
understanding of the Form of Forms, the primary Form in which all the other forms coin-
cide.
The (in)commensurability of the linear and the curved is a recurring theme in Cusanus’
mathematical writings, by which he illustrates the incomparability between the objects of
the sublunary world and the austere power which has neither beginning nor end. This inﬁ-
nite power of eternity is as incommensurable to any ﬁnite power as the surface of the circle
is to any other surface.13 Yet, the golden proposition leads him to think of an inﬁnitely
large circle, with the implication that the difference between chord and arc would then be
dissolved. Referring to the common origin of the three lines, he ends his explanation of the
golden proposition by the statement that the highest speculation of the wise man will be
directed to the Trinitarian origin from which all things emanate.
Although it is clear that this golden proposition bears no relation to the golden propor-
tion, Cusanus’ comment is still helpful in understanding the vein of the exalted exclamation
which we ﬁnd added to one of the theorems concerning the divine proportion in another
manuscript: the thirteenth century translation of Euclid’s Elements by Johannes Campanus,
another mathematically gifted clergyman. This translation was later, in 1482, to become the
ﬁrst Euclid in print.
Admirable therefore is the power of a line divided according to the ratio with a mean and two
extremes; since very many things worthy of the admiration of philosophers are in harmony with
it, this principle or maxim proceeds from the invariable nature of superior principles, so that it can
rationally unite solids that are so diverse, ﬁrst in magnitude, then in the number of bases, then too
in shape, in a certain irrational symphony.14
This is the comment as we ﬁnd it added to book XIV, prop. 10—a theorem concerning
the proportional relationship between the volumes and the sides of a dodecahedron and
an icosahedron inscribed in the same sphere. As previously mentioned, the XIVth book is
not originally Euclidean, but it was considered as such during Campanus’ days (and long
after). And Campanus might just as well have written these words as a comment on the
authentic book XIII, with its many propositions concerning the properties of the division
in extreme and mean ratio.
One may consider Campanus’ statement a sign of aesthetic admiration for the golden
section but it certainly has nothing to do with art or with human creativity. It is aesthetic in
the sense that Campanus is impressed by the formal properties or, if you wish, the beauty
of this proportion, in much the same way as one may be aesthetically impressed by the
Pythagorean proposition or by one of its many proofs. Yet, it is a metaphysical rather than
an aesthetic statement, in the same vein as Cusanus’ reﬂections on the aurea propositio.
13Nikolaus von Cues, Die mathematischen Schriften, ed. J.E. Hofmann, Hamburg, 1952, p. 51.
14“Mirabilis itaque est potentia lineae secundum proportionem habentem medium duoque extrema divisae; cui
cum plurima ph[i]losophantium admiratione digna conveniant hoc principium vel praecipuum ex superiorum
principiorum invariabili procedit natura ut tam diversa solida tum magnitudine tum basium numero tum etiam
ﬁgura irrationali quadam simphonia rationabiliter conciliet”. Quoted after Pacioli’s edition of Campanus’ trans-
lation (Venice, 1509), p. 137v.

The divined proportion
663
4. Stupendous effects
We now turn to the author of the ﬁrst book on the golden section, the only book on the sub-
ject to appear before the middle of the nineteenth century. Like Campanus and Cusanus,
Fra Luca Pacioli (±1445–1517) combined his ecclesiastical duties (being a monk in the
order of the Minorites) with a professional interest in mathematics. He was the author of an
inﬂuential compilation of much of the mathematical knowledge of his time, the Summa de
Arithmetica, Geometria, Proportioni et Proportionalità (1494), and he taught mathematics
in many Italian cities. During the last few years of the ﬁfteenth century, before the city
was conquered by the French in the winter of 1499–1500, Pacioli was the humble servant
of Ludovico il Moro, at the Sforza court in Milan. So had been, since 1482, Leonardo da
Vinci—a happy coincidence, since Leonardo was eager to understand more about math-
ematics and to study Euclid, with the help of Fra Luca. In return, Leonardo took care of
the sixty illustrations in Pacioli’s peculiar study of 1498, which he named Divina Propor-
tione—thus coining a new name for the proportion hitherto known by its Euclidean name
of division in extreme and mean ratio.15 This study, dedicated to the duke, contains a lot
of expositions on the proportion in question, as well as on the ﬁve regular and a number
of semiregular bodies and on their stellated and truncated derivatives. The printed edition
of the Divina Proportione, which appeared in Venice in 1509, also included a treaty on
architecture (without any reference to the golden section, let alone to the idea of using the
golden section as a proportion in architecture), a geometrically well-considered alphabet,
to be used for engraving texts on buildings or monuments, and the translation of Piero della
Francesca’s treaty on the ﬁve regular bodies. The painter Piero della Francesca, an older
fellow-villager of Pacioli’s, had been his teacher of mathematics in earlier days.
In his approach to the divine proportion, Pacioli must have taken his cue from the single,
isolated statement in which Campanus praised this unique division. Pacioli also provided
for a new edition of Campanus’ translation of Euclid’s Elements, so there is no doubt that
he was well acquainted with the work of his thirteenth century predecessor.
Campanus’ awe as expressed in that short comment on an allegedly Euclidean propo-
sition has now turned into full-ﬂedged cultivation in the Divina Proportione. The tone of
the book proceeds with Campanus’ admiration for the peculiar properties of the division
according to extreme and mean ratio. Pacioli goes a number of steps further in almost
rewriting those parts of the Elements which deal in particular with the golden proportion,
mainly from Book XIII and the so-called Book XIV. It is instructive to compare Euclid’s
own phrasing of the peculiarities of this proportion with the elaborate descriptions that
Pacioli gives in the Divina Proportione, now and then addressing the duke to whom the
script is dedicated, and referring to contemporary persons and events. Each of the 13 stu-
pendi effecti of the divine proportion which Pacioli singles out is dealt with in a separate
chapter (the ﬁrst one, with some supplementary explanations to the duke, even takes four
chapters). Of course space does not allow a full rendering of this treatment but the mere
qualiﬁcations of the properties will sufﬁce to see how Euclid’s down-to-earth mathematical
statements have, under the baton of Maestro Luca, turned into movements of Campanus’
15After 500 years, the ﬁrst English translation is expected to appear soon: The divine proportion, New York,
2005.

664
A. van der Schoot
Fig. 4. Leonardo da Vinci’s illustration of the open dodecahedron.
simphonia irrationalis. These are the qualiﬁcations in Pacioli’s own volgare, each of which
is the heading for the exposition of one of the properties of the divine proportion:
– primo effecto de una linea divisa secondo la nostra proportione,
– suo secondo essentiale effecto,
– terzo suo singulare effecto,
– quarto suo ineffabile effecto,
– quinto suo mirabile effecto,
– suo 6◦innominabile effecto,
– septimo suo inextimabile effecto,
– effecto converso del precedente,

The divined proportion
665
– suo 9. effecto sopra glialtri excessivo,
– suo supremo effecto,
– suo 11. excellentissimo effecto,
– suo 12. quasi incomprehensibile effecto,
– suo dignissimo effecto.
Yet, in spite of these high-sounding qualiﬁcations, Pacioli does not add any new mathe-
matical insights to what can be found in Euclid’s Book XIII and the supplement known as
Book XIV. What he says in the sixteen chapters dealing with the stupendous effects shows
that he knows his Euclid, but it does not justify his qualiﬁcation of the admired proportion
as being divine. At ﬁrst sight, the choice of the term divine seems to ﬁt in with adjectives
like admirable, excessive and supreme, but the clergyman Pacioli takes it in a more literal
sense: he submits that the character of the division according to extreme and mean ratio is
inherently connected to the character of the Almighty. Pacioli illustrates this by explaining
exactly which properties the venerated ratio has in common with God—and this is where
his own ideas come to the fore, since these are not properties which he could have derived
from Euclid.
The ﬁrst property which God and the divine proportion have in common is their sin-
gularity. Neither belongs to a group that has more members; both are truly unique. The
second is the Holy Trinity. The divine power is made up of Father, Son and Holy Spirit,
and in much the same way, Pacioli believes, the divine proportion consists of three terms—
that is, of one middle term and two extremes. The third property is their irrationality, a term
taken here in the double meaning of “being beyond reason”, and “not being expressible as
the ratio of two integers”. There are no words that equal His name; there are no numbers
that equal this proportion. Both will always remain occult and secret. The fourth prop-
erty they share is their invariable continuity. Both connect the parts with the whole in a
way that does not allow for change. God is omnipresent; he is all in all as well as all in
every part. The proportion shows the same type of omnipresence, says Pacioli: whether
the parts are large or small, their ratio is always the same, both between the whole and
the larger part and between the parts themselves. Finally, there is a common ﬁfth property:
the instauration of the ﬁfth essence. Pacioli’s theo-mathematical association here is that the
dodecahedron, showing the divine proportion in its pentagonal faces and also in some of
its other properties, is the “ﬁfth body” that symbolises heaven.
To understand this last argument, the reader has to be familiar with Plato’s Timaeus,
in which the only ﬁve conceivable regular bodies are introduced (whence their alternative
name: Platonic bodies) and given their function in the creation of the cosmos. In the cos-
mogony as narrated by Timaeus, four of the regular bodies take care of the ordering of
the elements, which until then had not yet received a ﬁxed form. The sharp angles of the
tetrahedron make this the preferred form for ﬁre, the octahedron informs air, the swirling
of the waves calls for the twenty faces of the icosahedron to give a form to water, and the
solid cube is the obvious shape of earth. The ﬁfth shape, the dodecahedron, is called in
to sustain heaven. Although Plato is not quite clear about what function the dodecahedron
fulﬁls, this is the basis of the notion of a ﬁfth essence (or quintessence), which the tradition
has often related to a “ﬁfth element”; that is, to ether.
Pacioli’s explanations illustrate that he is dealing here with non-Euclidean mathematics
in the tradition in which Cusanus also conceived of mathematics as a gateway to the un-

666
A. van der Schoot
derstanding of divine power. Pacioli’s dual interpretation of the concept of irrationality is
the key to his understanding of the golden proportion as being divine, that is, supernatural.
More than anything else, it is the miscomprehension of this theological conception of irra-
tionality which has impeded later authors on the golden section from understanding what
is meant by Pacioli’s considering this proportion as divine, and why this divine section
will not be recommended in this text to be used as a proportional guideline for a human
craft like architecture. Incidentally, Pacioli refers to a biblical text to afﬁrm his point, for
instance when he compares the position of the divine proportion among the other propor-
tions with the position of Christ among the people. In the Sermon on the Mount, Christ
summons his followers: “Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets; I am
not come to destroy, but to fulﬁl” (Matthew 5:17). Well then, says Pacioli, such is also the
case of our proportion: sent from Heaven, it shares the conditions of all the run-of-the-mill
proportions, not to disqualify these, but to glorify them by invariably maintaining the reign
of unity, independent of the different quantities.16
Perhaps the text invites us to look for more associations. What are we to make of the
numbers of the properties in the two lists—13 stupendous effects, and 5 properties in com-
mon between God and the divine proportion? We know that 5 and 13 occur in the Fibonacci
Series, the series that evolved from the question “how many pairs of rabbits are born dur-
ing one year if each pair gives birth to one new pair every month, beginning in the second
month after its own birth?”. This was one of the riddles from the Liber Abaci (1202) by
Leonardo of Pisa, later nicknamed Fibonacci. Given the relationship between the golden
section and this series, could it be accidental that Pacioli mentions 13 effects and 5 proper-
ties, whereas he could easily have made these lists longer or shorter?
The answer, in all likelihood, must be: yes, that is accidental. Pacioli did not mean to
build in a hidden reference to the rabbit series. Nor did he choose these numbers to cele-
brate the existence of 5 regular and 13 semi-regular bodies. Attractive as these associations
are, they are ours, not Pacioli’s. Since only 6 semi-regular bodies are included in the Divina
Proportione, Pacioli probably was not even aware of their total number. It is true that he
was well acquainted with Fibonacci’s work. Yet, he never related the divine proportion to
the Fibonacci series. This is less surprising than it may seem at ﬁrst sight. Pacioli’s world
of mysticism and ineffability is totally opposed to the world of everyday experience in
which Leonardo of Pisa stages his riddles. It would have been impossible for him to un-
derstand his invariable celestial proportion as being related to the ever expanding additive
series of promulgating rabbits. The rabbit riddle in the Liber Abaci was just one out of
many, and there was no reason for Pacioli to start thinking about the connection between
this particular riddle and the ratio to which he had devoted his Divina Proportione.
5. The blueprint of the universe
So who, then, was the ﬁrst to realise the relationship between Pacioli’s divine proportion
and Fibonacci’s series? Here is a surprise from history: this was Johannes Kepler, who
16“Cosi questa nostra proportione dal ciel mandata con laltre sacompagna in difﬁnitione e conditioni e non le
degrada anci le magniﬁca piu amplamente tenendo el principato de lunita fra tutte le quantita indifferentemente e
mai mutandose . . . ” Divina Proportione, ch. VII.

The divined proportion
667
in the transitional period from the Renaissance to the mechanisation of the world picture
was better equipped than anyone to unite religious understanding with empirical observa-
tion. In his research, as laid down in monumental works like Mysterium Cosmographicum
(1596) and Harmonices Mundi (1619), Kepler united his two ﬁelds of study: theology and
astronomy. Both should lead him to a better understanding of the lock, stock and barrel of
Heaven.17
The problem in our understanding of Kepler today is that we are familiar with the an-
swers he found but have become alienated from the questions he asked. We have learned to
read Kepler’s work in the way Newton spelled it out for us. In that way, Kepler is the dis-
coverer of the three kinetic laws which describe the movements of the planets. But Kepler
himself was unaware of having discovered these three kinetic laws, for the simple reason
that he never asked a question to which mechanical laws could be the answer. For Newton,
a planet’s orbit results from the totality of forces exerted on it; for Kepler, on the other
hand, the orbit is the expression of how God had meant the universe to be. God devised his
Creation according to a plan, and Kepler saw it as his task to reveal God’s blueprint. He
received his inspiration from the Pythagorean tradition, which taught him that everything is
ordered according to number and form. The way in which number and form are accessible
to our senses is through music, and Kepler was sure that there must be a strong similarity
between the formal cause of the harmonic character of musical intervals and the formal
cause of the orbits of the planets. In fact, the Harmonices Mundi is the gospel of the music
of the spheres. It was meant as such, and only after Newton read it, it turned out to contain
the coping-stone of Kepler’s laws of planetary motion.
From the passages in the Harmonices Mundi and in the other writings in which Kepler
refers speciﬁcally to the division in extreme and mean ratio, it does not show that he him-
self had read Pacioli’s book. He knows that it is a proportion “which today’s geometers call
divine”,18 yet he does not follow Pacioli’s theological reasons for doing so. But although
he believes that the term “divine” was chosen only “because of its wonderful nature and
its many peculiar properties”,19 he does develop a new connection between the divine pro-
portion and the divine Creation: Kepler believes that the divine proportion is the archetype
of procreation. This was not a subject that Fra Luca had paid any attention to, and it shows
the difference between the two Renaissance scholars in their approach to form. Pacioli
sees the analogy between God and the divine proportion more in abstracto, in their com-
mon properties which elevate them above everyday knowledge. For Kepler, on the other
hand, the ineffable divine proportion is the preformation of the ongoing biological process
by which the similar is generated by the similar.20 We may say that in his search for a
17For a more extensive discussion of Kepler’s quest for the formal cause of the universe, see A. van der Schoot,
“Kepler’s search for form and proportion”, in Renaissance Studies, Vol. 15, No. 1, 2001, pp. 59–78.
18“(P)roportione illa, quam hodierni Geometrae Divinam appellant”; Strena Seu de Nive Sexangula, in Gesam-
melte Werke, Band IV, eds. M. Caspar and F. Hammer, München, 1941, p. 270.
19“Hodierni et sectionem et proportionem ejus cognominant Divinam, propter admirabile ejus ingenium, et mul-
tiplicia privilegia”. Harmonices Mundi (1619), Book I, def. xxvi, in Gesammelte Werke, Band VI, ed. M. Caspar,
München, 1940, p. 29.
20“Hanc ego geometricam proportionem puto Ideam fuisse Creatori ad introducendam generationem similis ex
simili: quae est etiam perennis (I believe that this geometrical proportion led the Creator to the Idea of introducing
the generation of the similar from the similar: for this, too, is perennial)”. Kepler wrote this on May 12, 1608, in
a letter to Joachim Tanck. Gesammelte Werke, Band XVI, ed. M. Caspar, München, 1955, p. 156.

668
A. van der Schoot
form that serves as a causa formalis for something yet to come, Kepler is really in the
middle between the static metaphysical conception of Pacioli, who accepts an irrational
and ineffable form as an eternal symbol for God’s hidden omnipresence, and the dynamic
mechanical conception of Newton, who took leave of formal causality in favour of effective
causality. Kepler is different from both in that he thinks Platonically: he tries to establish a
relationship between a supernatural Urbild (primordial image) and a natural Abbild (repre-
sentation), that is, his search is one for a primordial image of which the phenomena known
in our experience of nature partake.
So why does Kepler believe the divine proportion to be such an Urbild regarding natural
procreation?
Several indications point in the same direction—if one follows Kepler’s thinking, that
is. The reader is warned in advance that none of his arguments will sound more convincing
in our ears than did Pacioli’s criteria for the divinity of our proportion, and, moreover, that
their combination leads up to a very strange hotchpotch.
First of all, there is the argument from the regular bodies. Kepler has extensively stud-
ied Plato’s Timaeus, whose importance we have already seen in Pacioli. Kepler adopts the
notion of the dodecahedron as somehow being the shape of the heaven above the earth.
He expands that picture in his Mysterium Cosmographicum by separating the orbits of the
planets by means of the regular bodies: each time a different body between each pair of
planets (ﬁve bodies sufﬁcing for separating the six planets known in his time). The dodeca-
hedron is then situated between Earth and Mars, whereas Earth and Venus are separated by
the icosahedron. This was not just Kepler’s way of adorning the universe; he was convinced
that this was the model which God had materialised when creating heaven and earth. This
would imply that God had situated the earth, the only planet where procreation takes place,
in between the two bodies whose construction depends on the divine proportion.
Next to this argument from stereometry, there is also a planimetric argument. Like many
others, Kepler has noted that ﬂowers often show a pentagonal form. The pentagon is the
face of the dodecahedron and it is characterised by the divinely proportional relationships
between its sides and its diagonals. The fact that this very shape is visible in the ﬂowers
must be a symbol of their seminal faculty: “I believe that the ability to reproduce has come
about by analogy with this self-generating proportion: thus, in blooming, the authentic
pentagonal banner of reproductive ability leads the way”.21
This leads to the third argument, the argument from continuity. Here, Kepler comes
somewhat closer to Pacioli’s line of thinking. The continuity of the division according to
extreme and mean ratio implies that every new division will produce the same result, in
terms of proportion, output being equal to input. So this is really the birth of the similar
from the similar, in an endless continuation; Kepler understands that this property is unique
for this particular proportion.
And then, ﬁnally, there is the argument which Kepler derives from his insight into the
relationship between the golden section and the Fibonacci series. Kepler realises that in
every consecutive triad of Fibonacci numbers, the product of the ﬁrst and the third term is
21“Ad huius proportionis seipsam propagantis similitudinem, puto efﬁctam esse facultatem seminariam: itaque
in ﬂore praefertur seminariae facultatis γνησιον vexillum Quinquangulum”. Strena Seu de Nive Sexangula, p. 270.

The divined proportion
669
Fig. 5. Kepler’s geometrical sexology.
always (alternately) one unit larger or smaller than the squared middle term:
2,3,5:
2 × 5 = 32 + 1,
3,5,8:
3 × 8 = 52 −1,
etc.
Kepler gets entangled in surprising diagrams to show the morphological analogy between
this mathematical insight and the practice of animal procreation: are the two partners, who
produce the similar from the similar, not characterised by the fact that the male body shows
a protrusion (the “unit” of Kepler’s diagrams) which neatly ﬁts into the opening of the
female body? We are indeed dealing here with an author who tries to ﬁnd the archetypes
of God’s creation, and believes these can be found in mathematical constellations.
What I have to emphasise here is that Kepler’s juggling with the divine proportion stands
in complete isolation, both from the earlier, likewise theologically inspired speculations of
Pacioli, one hundred years before Kepler, and from the playful exposition of the procre-
ation of rabbits, as presented in the form of a riddle by Leonardo of Pisa, at the beginning
of the thirteenth century. Kepler is also completely isolated from the later developments
which link the divine proportion in particular to architecture and pictorial art. For centuries
after his death, Kepler’s writings on the divine proportion were either not accessible to
the educated readership (the Strena and the aforementioned letter to Tanck), or too com-
plicated and far-fetched to be met with much enthusiasm (the Harmonices Mundi). And
since Pacioli’s book was not very widespread either, it took more than two centuries after
Kepler’s death before the divine proportion appeared again on the scene, this time for a
larger audience.
6. Unity in variety
Adolf Zeising, the German philosopher responsible for this revival, knew nothing of ei-
ther Pacioli’s or Kepler’s involvement with the proportion to which he devoted his 1854

670
A. van der Schoot
monograph,22 referred to here as Neue Lehre; this in spite of his effort to ﬁnd out what
had happened earlier in the ﬁeld of preference for certain proportional relationships over
others, especially with regard to the appreciation of the shape of the human body. In the
ﬁrst part of his book, he discusses as many as eighty predecessors before ﬁnally presenting
his universal solution to all problems of proportional nature.
Zeising tries to mention every philosopher who had anything at all to say about pro-
portions, from Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle and Plotinus up until Burke, Kant, Hegel and
Schelling, as well as practising artists who left their ideas on proportions on record, with
an understandable emphasis on the artists from the Renaissance. He even does research
into the works of anthropobiologists and physicists who established norms for the pro-
portions of the human body: Quetelet, Hay, Camper, Carus and a host of others. And yet,
among those whom he fails to mention are the only two people who played a signiﬁcant
role in the previous history of his favourite proportion: Luca Pacioli and Johannes Kepler.
Leonardo da Vinci is considered, but only as the author of the Trattato della Pittura, not as
the illustrator of the Divina Proportione.
It is, therefore, without any appeal to his predecessors that Zeising reveals to the world
that for proportion to meet the demands of beauty, unequal parts must yet appear as being
parts of one totality. Therefore, their inequality in size must be balanced by an equality
of the ratio of the parts to one another and the ratio of part and whole.23 This is just
another way of phrasing the divine proportion, and it comes as no surprise that this is the
“morphological foundation” which the title of his book announces and which, in Zeising’s
view, is constitutive for all but every shape in nature, particularly the human body, as well as
for the proportional build-up of works of art, especially in architecture. Zeising now refers
to this proportion by the new term which had come into vogue among mathematicians
during the decades preceding the publication of his book: der goldene Schnitt, the golden
section.
Once he has established the golden section as the aesthetically most rewarding propor-
tion (and again: there is no evidence of any earlier author linking this particular proportion
to aesthetic attractiveness), there is no doubt in his mind that it must be traceable in the
shape which, in Zeising’s view, has always been the ideal of perfect proportional articula-
tion: the human ﬁgure. The structure of the human ﬁgure must, therefore, be understood
from nature’s applying the golden section in each and every detail of the body. (See Fig. 6.)
With Adolf Zeising, we have reached a framework of thinking completely different from
the theologically inspired speculations of Pacioli and Kepler. Yet, after having considered
the omnipresence of the golden section in nature, architecture, music and poetry, Zeising
ends his book with some reﬂections on the importance of the proportional law in the ﬁeld
of ethics and religion.
These reﬂections are based on the insight that life always presents us with a tension
between unequal forces; an ethical balance must be found in an equal validation of these.
22Neue Lehre von den Proportionen des menschlichen Körpers, aus einem bisher unerkannt gebliebenen, die
ganze Natur und Kunst durchdringenden morphologischen Grundgesetze entwickelt und mit einer vollständigen
historischen Uebersicht der bisherigen Systeme begleitet, Leipzig, 1854.
23“Wenn die Eintheilung oder Gliederung eines Ganzen in ungleiche Theile als proportional erscheinen soll: so
muss das Verhältniss der ungleichen Theile zu einander dasselbe sein, wie das Verhältnis der Theile zum Ganzen”.
Neue Lehre, p. 158.

The divined proportion
671
Fig. 6. Zeising’s golden dissection.

672
A. van der Schoot
Therefore, Zeising claims, neither eternal peace and communist equalising, nor continuous
war and social suppression are acceptable solutions for a humane society. A similar balance
has to be found in our conception of God: neither the strict, monotheistic religion of the
Jews, in which there is an unbridgeable gap between God and man, nor a polytheistic ar-
bitrariness that blurs the difference between the one Creator and the many creatures, could
satisfy our religious need. Fortunately, Christianity provides for a sensible synthesis in the
Divine Trinity, the perfect uniﬁcation of unity and multitude. Christ is the personiﬁcation
of this synthesis, being both the son of God and the son of man.
In this last argument, Zeising seems to get closer to the mental atmosphere of Pacioli
than in the earlier parts of his book. Yet, he is merely applying an idea shared by many
German thinkers of the ﬁrst half of the nineteenth century: the idea that, both in nature and
in culture, development results from a mediated confrontation between two polar opposites.
This principle of Polarität, advocated especially by Goethe and Schelling, was widely
adopted in those days, in physics even more than in the study of culture. The exact value
of the divine proportion has no meaning in this conception, but it does add the lustre of
scientiﬁc exactness to general convictions about the “truth being somewhere in the middle”.
The “golden section” has now left its mathematical past behind, and has become a synonym
of the “golden mean”.
In his later, equally voluminous book on Religion und Wissenschaft (1873), in which he
defends the Old-Catholic opposition against the dogma of papal infallibility, as proclaimed
by the First Vatican Council in 1870, Zeising does not return to the omnipresent proportion.
But the idea of the Neue Lehre struck root; and before too long, many art historians were
convinced that the golden section had been a leading device for artists in antiquity and the
Renaissance.
A more extensive account of the history of the golden section is to be found in A. van
der Schoot, Die Geschichte des goldenen Schnitts, Stuttgart, 2004.

Author Index
Roman numbers refer to pages on which the author (or his/her work) is mentioned. Italic numbers
refer to reference pages. Numbers between brackets are the reference numbers. No distinction is
made between ﬁrst and co-author(s).
Aarslef, H. 464, 481 [1]
Abbo of Fleury 181, 198
Abraham Herrera 208
Ackroyd, P.R. 241
Adam, J. 112, 120 [1]
Adams, R. 590, 593 [1]
Adamson, D. 420 [1]
Adeodatus, A. 543
Adwaita 551
Aetius 127, 131 [9]
Agrippa ab Nettesheim, H.C. 27, 28, 42 [1]
Aiton, E.J. 363, 498 [1]
Akkerman, F. 439 [1]
al-Bîrûnî 178 [2]
Alexander, H.G. 463, 481 [2]
Alexandrescu, V. 420 [2]
Allen, R.E. 101, 120, 120 [2]
Altwicker, N. 439 [2]; 440
Ambrose 150, 156
Anatolius 131 [6]
Andrews, W.E. 59 [1]
Annas, J. 112, 120 [3]
Antognazza, M.R. 496, 498 [2]
Apollinaris Sidonius 156
Apuleius 242
Archimedes 398, 453
Aristotle 260, 269
Armstrong, K. 42 [2]
Arnold, D. 64, 75 [1]
Arthur, R.T.W. 477, 480, 481 [3]
Athenagoras 127, 131 [8]
Aubert, C.A. 155, 159 [2]
Augustine 149–151, 153, 154, 182, 187, 263, 269
Aurioli, P. 267
Averroes 203
Azriel of Gerona 203–206
Bachelard, S. 623 [11]
Bähr, K.C. 211, 211 [1]
Baker, P.S. 181
Baldwin, M. 342, 346 [1]
Bandmann, G. 152, 156, 159 [3]; 159 [4]
Barazzetti, E. 631, 633, 640 [16]
Barnes, J. 82–84, 95, 97 [1]
Barnes, R.B. 307, 308, 309 [1]
Barozzi, F. 354
Batten, A.A. 641, 652 [1]
Baum, R.J. 508 [4]; 508 [5]
Baumer, F.L. 484
Bauwens, J. 563, 567 [1]
Beaujouan, G. 197
Bechler, Z. 465, 481, 481 [4]; 481 [5]; 481 [6]
Bechtle, G. 145
Becker, C.L. 31, 42 [3]
Beeley, P. 453, 493, 498 [3]
Beer, A. 364
Beer, P. 364
Beger, M. 324
Beierwaltes, W. 136, 141, 145
Belaval, Y. 403 [3]
Belhoste, B. 33, 42 [4]
Ben Shéshét, J. 206
Berggren, J.L. 178 [1]
Bergmann, W. 197
Bergmans, L. 24, 567 [2]; 567 [3]; 567 [4]
Berkeley, G. 508 [1]; 508 [2]; 508 [3]
Berlioz, D. 508 [6]
Berschin, W. 185
Besomi, O. 359
Best, E. 244
Beyssade, J.-M. 403 [4]
Biagioli, M. 359
Biancani, G. 354
Bianchi, U. 247
673

674
Author Index
Biéler, A. 157, 159 [6]
Blacker, C. 10, 14, 42 [5]
Blanke, H. 231
Blay, M. 508 [7]
Blom, J.C.H. 439 [3]
Blotkamp, C. 38, 42, 42 [6]; 42 [7]
Bodemann, E. 488, 495–497, 498 [4]; 498 [5]
Boethius 182, 188
Bolland, G.J.P.J. 551
Bono, J.J. 469, 481 [7]
Borel, H. 552
Borst, A. 196, 197
Boutroux, E. 403 [5]; 539
Boutroux, P. 403 [6]
Bouyer, L. 159 [7]
Bovon, F. 244
Bradwardine, T. 254, 263
Brady, D. 308, 309 [2]
Brandwood, L. 101, 120 [4]
Breger, H. 490, 494, 498 [6]; 498 [7]
Breidert, W. 289 [1]; 508 [8]; 508 [9]; 508 [10]
Brewer, E. 253
Brewster, D. 461, 481 [8]
Bricker, P. 481 [9]; 482
Brisart, R. 623 [12]
Brisson, L. 104, 108, 120 [5]
Brodrick, J. 253
Broome, J.H. 420 [3]
Brouwer, L.E.J. 552, 563–565, 567, 567 [5];
567 [6]; 571, 575, 578–588, 592, 593, 593 [2];
593 [3]; 593 [4]; 593 [5]
Brown, G. 421 [18]
Brunschvicg, L. 403 [7]; 440 [4]; 440 [5]
Brunt, N.A. 432, 440 [6]
Brusca, C.E. de 326
Bufﬁère, F. 236, 237
Burgess, J. 63, 75 [2]
Buridan, J. 261, 262, 265, 269
Burkert, W. 79, 92, 96, 97, 97 [2]; 97 [3]; 97 [4];
107, 120 [6]; 181
Butzer, P.L. 196
Byrhtferth 181
Cammann, S. 59 [2]; 59 [3]
Cantor, G. 508 [11]; 527, 534–538, 540, 542–546,
547 [1]; 547 [2]; 547 [3]; 547 [5]
Cargile, J. 421 [19]
Cartlidge, D.R. 232
Casini, P. 472, 473, 481 [10]; 481 [11]
Caspar, M. 364, 456
Cassiodorus 187
Cassirer, E. 284, 289 [2]; 289 [3]; 289 [4]; 440 [7]
Castillejo, D. 461, 470, 471, 473–475, 481 [12]
Cauchy, A.L. 623 [13]
Chacornac, P. 640 [1]
Chatterjee, B. 67, 68, 73, 75 [3]
Chaturvedi, M.D. 67, 68, 73, 75 [4]
Chebel, M. 178 [3]
Cherniss, H. 101, 120 [7]; 120 [8]
Chillingworth, W. 253
Christ, W. 181
Christian, D. 7, 40, 41, 42 [9]
Christianson, G.E. 464, 481 [13]
Clagett, M. 286, 289 [5]
Clavius, C. 356, 454
Clement of Alexandria 149
Clifford, W.K. 421 [20]
Clottes, J. 42 [8]
Clouzot, E. 158, 159 [5]
Cohen, I.B. 463–465, 470, 481 [14]; 481 [15];
481 [16]; 481 [17]; 481 [18]; 482, 483
Collins, A.Y. 237
Conzelmann, H. 244
Copleston, F.C.J.P. 586, 593 [6]
Coppleston, F. 15, 42 [10]
Cordoliani, A. 186
Cornelius, J. 326
Cornford, F.M. 104, 112, 120 [9]; 120 [10]
Coudert, A.P. 471, 481 [20]
Counet, J.-M. 283, 289 [6]
Crès, G. 539
Crombie, A.C. 20, 42 [11]; 42 [12]
Cross, R. 257, 266, 270
Cudworth, R. 253
Cunningham, A. 463, 466, 481 [19]
Cunningham, J.W. 599, 611 [6]
Cupitt 452
Curley, E. 363, 429
Cyprianus 453
Dales, R. 262
Dammann, R. 346 [2]
Daniélou, J. 150, 157, 159 [8]; 159 [9]
Dante Alighieri 636, 640 [14]
Dauben, J.W. 547 [9]; 547 [10]; 547 [11]
Dauvillier, J. 157, 159 [10]
Davenport, A.A. 228 [3]
Davey, F.N. 236, 241
Davidson, H.M. 420 [4]
Dawson, J.W., Jr. 590, 592, 593 [20]
De Angelis d’Ossat, G. 154, 159 [1]
De Dijn, H. 440 [10]
De Gandt, F. 478, 481 [21]
De Haan, J.I. 552
De Iongh, J.J. 549, 565–567, 567 [7]; 567 [8]
De Jager, H. 37, 43 [23]
De Pater, C. 42, 43 [37]

Author Index
675
De Pesloüan, L. 568 [23]
De Rijk, L.M. 263, 264
De Spinoza, B. 440 [19]; 440 [20]; 440 [21];
440 [22]; 557
De Swart, H.C.M. 38, 42 [13]; 567 [9]
De Vogel, C.J. 110, 659
De Vries, A. 554
De Vries, T. 427, 440 [26]; 440 [27]
De Vrijer, M.J.A. 440 [28]
Dear, P. 359
Debrock, G. 481, 482, 483 [84]
Declercq, G. 183
Dedekind, R. 542
Deichmann, F.W. 159 [11]
Delatte, A. 125, 129, 131 [3]; 131 [13]
Delebecque, E. 243
Demidov, S.S. 598, 599, 601, 605, 606, 609,
611 [3]; 611 [8]; 611 [10]; 611 [11]; 611 [12];
612 [46]
Dèr Mouw, A. 551
Derham, W. 520
Descartes, R. 387–392, 395–402, 403 [2]; 440 [9];
488, 495
Despland, M. 101, 102, 120 [11]
Détienne, M. 231
Diels, H.A. 85, 88, 97 [5]
Dijksterhuis, E.J. 431
Dillon, J.M. 125, 131 [1]
D’Israeli, I. 251
Dobbs, B.J.T. 461, 462, 464, 466, 468–470, 476,
477, 480, 481, 481 [22]; 481 [23]; 481 [24];
482 [25]; 482 [26]; 482 [27]
Dodds, E.R. 13, 14, 17, 42 [14]; 145
Douglas, W. 588, 593 [11]
Drake, S. 350, 354, 359, 360
Dumont, J.P. 236, 240
Duncan, A.M. 363
Duns Scotus, J. 269
Dupont-Sommer, A. 156, 159 [12]
Dvived¯ı, K.C. 69, 73, 75 [5]
Dvived¯ı, S. 66, 68, 73, 75 [6]
Eastwood, B. 196
Eddington, A. 644–652, 652 [3]; 652 [4]; 652 [5];
652 [6]; 652 [7]; 652 [8]; 652 [9]; 652 [10];
652 [11]
Edgerton, S.Y., Jr. 21, 42 [15]
Edwards, M.E. 484
Edwards, M.J. 247
Eggenberger, P.B. 589, 593 [22]
Eisler, R. 243
Emerton, J.A. 241
Emmerson, R.K. 295, 298, 309 [3]
Englisch, B. 191
Esch, W. 554, 567 [10]
Euclid 393, 397, 539
Euler, L. 520 [1]; 521 [2]; 521 [3]
Eusebius of Caesarea 151, 152
Evans, G.R. 181, 190, 198
Ewald, W. 547 [7]
Ezekiel 204
Fajen, F. 242
Fanning, B.M. 242
Fara, P. 461, 462, 482 [28]
Faulhaber, J. 315, 316
Fauvel, J. 482, 482 [29]
Favaro, A. 359
Feldhay, R. 359
Fichte, J.G. 518
Fields, J.V. 363
Finocchiaro, M.A. 353–356, 360
Florenskij, P. 607, 612 [35]
Florensky, P.A. 597–611, 611 [1]; 611 [2];
611 [4]; 611 [5]; 611 [15]; 611 [17]; 611 [18];
611 [19]; 612, 612 [23]; 612 [25]; 612 [26];
612 [27]; 612 [29]; 612 [34]; 612 [36];
612 [37]; 612 [38]; 612 [41]
Florensky, P.V. 599, 601, 604, 611 [12]; 612 [28]
Florovsky, G. 603, 612 [22]
Force, J.E. 461–463, 474, 479, 481, 482, 482 [30];
482 [31]; 482 [32]; 482 [33]; 482 [34];
482 [35]; 482 [36]; 482 [37]; 483
Ford, C.E. 599, 601, 608, 609, 611 [9]; 611 [13];
611 [14]; 612 [43]; 612 [46]
Fortunatus 151
Foster, D.A. 231
Foster Hopper, V. 153, 159 [13]
Fowler, D. 658
Fowler, D.H. 97, 97 [6]
Fox, M. 259, 270
Franchella, M. 563, 568 [11]
Freke, W. 450
Freudenthal, H. 593 [8]
Freudenthal, J. 440 [12]
Friedlein, G. 145, 181
Fritzsche, H.-G. 536
Frova, C. 197
Fuks-Mansfeld, R.G. 439 [3]
Funkenstein, A. 359
Fuss, N. 521
Gabbey, A. 482 [38]
Gaiser, K. 103, 120 [12]; 120 [13]
Gallop, D. 81, 97 [7]
Garcia, H. 233
Garciadiego, A. 547 [14]

676
Author Index
Gasten, A. 42 [16]
Gee, D. 244
Gerdes, E.W. 364
Gerdes, P. 43 [17]
Gerke, F. 158, 159 [14]
Gilly, C. 320
Gjertsen, D. 461, 464, 482 [39]; 482 [40]
Glanvill, J. 256
Goldhan, W. 346 [4]
Goldish, M. 470, 471, 475, 482 [41]; 482 [42];
482 [43]
Goldwin, J. 346 [3]
González Palencia, A. 228 [4]
Gorter, H. 552
Goudsblom, J. 10
Gouhier, H. 403 [8]
Gouk, P. 472, 482 [44]
Goulet, R. 144
Grabar, A. 143, 144, 156, 159 [15]; 159 [16];
159 [17]
Grant, R.M. 242
Greaves, J. 455
Gregory of Nazianzus 155
Gregory of Rimini 256, 257, 260–262, 265–268,
270
Gregory of Tours 155
Griss, G.F.C. 563
Grosseteste, R. 270
Grube, G.M.A. 112, 120 [14]
Gryson, R. 192
Guénon, R. 628, 630–639, 640 [4]; 640 [5];
640 [6]; 640 [7]; 640 [8]; 640 [9]; 640 [10];
640 [11]
Gueroult, M. 403 [9]
Guicciardini, N. 477–479, 482 [45]
Günther, S. 330
Gutberlet, C. 536, 537
Guthrie, K.S. 657
Guthrie, W.K.C. 81, 97 [8]
Hackforth, R.E. 102, 120 [15]
Hacking, I. 420 [5]; 421 [21]
Hadot, P. 139
Hájek, A. 421 [22]
Hall, A.R. 446, 466, 469, 479, 482, 482 [46];
482 [47]; 483
Hall, M.B. 446, 466, 469, 482 [46]; 483
Halliwell, S. 80, 97 [9]
Hamel, J. 454, 456
Hani, J. 159 [18]
Hankel, H. 511
Hara, K. 420 [6]
Harig, G. 228 [5]
Häring, N. 283
Harmsen, G. 440 [13]
Hartweg, F.G. 521 [6]
Hautecoeur, L. 151, 159 [19]
Heath, T.L. 90, 97, 97 [10]
Hebenstreit, J.B. 325, 326
Heck, Ch. 157, 159 [20]
Heijerman, A.F. 565, 568 [12]
Heijerman, E. 38, 43 [18]
Heinekamp, A. 489, 493, 498 [9]
Helbing, M. 359
Helgesen, M. 253
Heller, S. 659
Hellman, C.D. 364
Heman, P. 231
Henry, G.C., Jr. 36, 42, 43 [19]
Henry, J. 468, 470, 482 [48]
Hersh, R. 43 [20]
Herz-Fischler, R. 657
Hesseling, D. 593 [10]
Heymans, G. 551
Heytesbury, W. 265
Heyting, A. 593, 593 [7]
Hilbert, D. 525, 526
Hill, P. 588, 593 [11]
Hills, J.V. 232
Himmelfarb, M. 234
Ho Peng-Yoke 59 [4]; 59 [5]; 59 [6]; 59 [7]; 59 [8]
Hobbes, T. 254, 445–447, 449
Hofmann, H.-U. 299, 309 [6]
Hofmann, J.E. 228 [6]; 305, 306, 309 [4]
Hofmann, J.H. 286, 287, 289 [7]
Holder, A.G. 186
Hölder, O. 532
Holzhey, H. 498 [8]
Hopkins, J. 289 [8]; 289 [9]; 289 [10]; 289 [11]
Hopper, V.F. 181
Hoskin, M. 453
Hoskyns, E.C. 236, 241
Hoyrup, J. 237
Hubbeling, H.G. 439 [1]
Huet, C.B. 435
Huffman, C.A. 86, 87, 97, 97 [11]
Hughes, D.W. 477, 482 [49]
Hughes, R.I.G. 465, 481 [9]; 482, 482 [50]
Huizinga, J. 296, 309 [5]
Husserl, E. 562, 615–618, 620, 621, 623 [1];
623 [2]; 623 [3]; 623 [4]; 623 [5]; 623 [6];
623 [7]; 623 [8]; 623 [9]
Hutchison, J.A. 3, 43 [21]
Hutton, S. 462, 482 [51]
Ibn Badja 203
Ibn Tufayl 203

Author Index
677
Ihm, C. 158, 159 [21]
Ilgauds, H.J. 547 [16]
Iliffe, R. 471, 482 [52]
Iogna-Prat, D. 152, 160 [22]
Irenaeus of Lyon 149
Isaac the Blind 204, 205
Isidore of Seville 153, 187
Israel, J.I. 31, 43 [22]
Jaap London 558
Jacob, M.C. 464, 468–470, 482 [27]
Jaenecke, P. 488, 498 [10]
Jamblichus, Ps. 126, 131 [5]; 131 [10]
James, M.-F. 640 [2]
Jan, C. 125, 131 [2]
Jansen 402
Jardine, N. 359
Jeauneau, E. 283, 289 [12]
Jeffrey, R.C. 420 [7]
Jenkins, C. 185
Jensen, R.M. 232
Jérôme 150, 241
Jesseph, D.M. 445, 508 [12]; 508 [13]
John, C.St. 199
John Chrysostom 150, 157
Johnson, P.E. 526
Jones, C.W. 185, 186, 192
Jones, E. 10
Jordan, J. 421 [23]
Josephus 150
Joutsivuo, T. 228 [7]
Jouven, G. 154, 160 [23]; 160 [24]
Judge, W.Q. 588, 593 [12]
Jungmann, J.A. 152, 160 [25]
Junod, E. 246
Kaestli, J.D. 244, 246
Kant, I. 449, 516, 517
Kaplan, F. 234
Kartsonis, A. 245
Kaul, O. 346 [5]
Keefer, H. 313
Kepler, J. 323, 326
Kertész, A. 547 [12]
Keynes, G. 646, 652 [2]
Khatchatrian, A. 154, 160 [26]
Khoruzhy, S.S. 603, 607, 612 [24]; 612 [40]
Kilmister, C.W. 641, 652 [12]
King, D.A. 178, 178 [5]; 178 [6]; 178 [7]; 178 [8];
178 [9]; 178 [10]
King, K.L. 248
King-Hele, D.G. 482
Kitschelt, L. 151, 152, 158, 160 [27]
Klein, F. 533
Klotz, S. 346 [6]
Knoespel, K.J. 470, 475, 482 [54]
Knorr, W.R. 97, 97 [12]
Knorr von Rosenroth 208
Knuuttila, S. 270
Koch-Westenholz, U. 10, 11, 43 [25]
Kochavi, M.Z. 462, 474, 482 [53]
Koester, H. 234
Koetsier, T. 32, 42, 43 [24]; 43 [37]
Kol’man, E. 608, 609, 612 [44]; 612 [45]
Kovacic, F. 228 [8]
Kowalewski, G. 543
Koyré, A. 284, 289 [13]; 470, 482 [55]
Krafft, F. 364
Kraut, R. 101, 120, 120 [16]
Krautheimer, R. 143, 152, 160 [28]
Krop, H. 435, 440 [14]
Kumar, D. 64, 75 [7]
Kummer, I. 420 [8]
Lagrange, M.J. 244
Lam, L.Y. 59 [9]
Lamb, H. 645, 653 [13]
Lambert, W.G. 10
Lancelloti, M.G. 248
Landgraf, W. 323
Lang, P.D. 251
Lapidge, M. 181
Lasserre, F. 101, 120 [17]
Lassus, J. 157, 160 [29]; 160 [30]
Lattin, P.L. 197
Laurant, J.-P. 640 [3]
Layton, B. 247
Leibniz, G.W. 450, 487–497, 498 [11]; 498 [12];
498 [13]; 498 [14]; 498 [15]; 498 [16]
Leinkauf, T. 346 [7]
Lenin 554
Leshem, A. 470–472, 480
Leshem, A. [= Ramati, A.] 482 [56]
Lewis-Williams, D. 42 [8]
Li, Y. 59 [10]
Lietaert Peerbolte, L.J. 295, 309 [7]
Lih, K.-W. 60 [11]
Lindberg, D.C. 359
Lindgren, U. 196
Lloyd, G.E.R. 14
Loewe, M. 10, 14, 42 [5]
Logan, A.H.B. 247
Lohmar, D. 623 [14]
Lokken, R.N. 508 [14]
Lombard, P. 256
Lønning, P. 421 [24]
Lossky, N.O. 603, 611 [20]

678
Author Index
Luke 491
Luneau, A. 153, 160 [31]
Lunn, A. 253
Lützen, J. 420 [9]
Macaulay, T.B. 63, 75 [8]
Macbeth 558
MacDonald, R.D. 245
MacDonald Ross, G. 251
Machamer, P. 359
Mack, B.L. 236
Mackie, J.L. 420 [10]
Macrobius 182
Mahnke, D. 489, 493, 498 [17]; 498 [18]
Mahoney, M.S. 191
Maier, A. 257, 270
Maier, J. 206, 211 [2]
Maïmonides 203
Malcolm, N. 446
Mamiani, M. 483 [62]
Mancosu, P. 359
Mandelbrote, S. 473, 483 [63]; 483 [64]
Mandosio, J.-M. 359
Mango, C. 143
Mannoury, G. 549–567, 568 [13]; 568 [14];
568 [15]; 568 [16]; 568 [17]; 568 [18];
568 [19]; 568 [20]
Mannoury, J. 554
Manuel, F. 470, 471, 473, 474, 483 [65]
Marion, J.-L. 363, 364, 371, 373, 374, 403 [10];
403 [11]; 403 [12]
Maritain, J. 43 [26]
Markley, R. 465, 476, 480, 483 [66]; 483 [67]
Markschies, C. 247
Martin, M. 421 [25]
Mattéi, J.-F. 129, 132 [14]
Matthes, H.G. 37, 43 [23]
Matthews, C.R. 243
Maurus, H. 196
Mauthner, F. 432, 434, 440 [16]
Maximus the Confessor 156
Mc Vey, K. 156, 158, 160 [32]
McCluskey, S. 183, 191
McGuire, J.E. 463, 469–473, 476, 482 [57];
483 [58]; 483 [59]; 483 [60]
McLachlan, H. 471, 473, 483 [61]
McVaugh, M. 228 [9]
Meier, H.R. 234
Meier, R. 231
Meli, D.B. 483 [68]
Mennell, S. 10
Merleau-Ponty, J. 643, 653 [14]
Meschkowski, H. 527, 534, 539, 547 [6]; 547 [13]
Meyer, H. 181
Meyer, K. 364
Meyer, M. 239
Meÿer, R. 547 [17]
Miel, J. 420 [11]
Millás Vallicrosa, J.M. 228 [2]
Miller, P. 623 [15]
Milliet Dechales, C.F. 350
Minkowski, C.Z. 68, 70, 71, 75 [9]; 75 [10];
75 [11]; 75 [12]; 75 [13]
Minkowski, H. 526
Mishima, T. 421 [26]
Möbius, A.F. 330
Mögling, D. 322
Molière 401
Moore, G.H. 547 [14]
More, H. 256
Morgan, M.L. 436
Morris, T.V. 421 [27]
Morrow, G. 145
Mougin, G. 421 [28]
Mueller, I. 101, 109, 120 [18]; 120 [19]; 145, 181
Murbach, E. 231, 243
Murdoch, J. 257, 261, 270, 271
Murrin, M. 474, 483 [69]
Mynors, R.A.B. 187
Nagel, F. 285, 289 [14]; 289 [15]
Napier, I. 308, 309, 309 [8]
Natorp, P. 568 [21]
Navari, J. 196
Needham, J. 60 [12]; 60 [13]
Nelson, M.T. 421 [29]
Neubronner, J. 327
Neville, J. 195
Newton, I. 463–467, 469, 472–474, 476–478, 480,
483 [70]; 483 [71]; 483 [72]; 483 [73]; 483 [74]
Nicholas of Cusa 565
Nicolle, J.-M. 289 [16]
Nicomachus of Gerasa 125, 131 [4]
Nieuwentyt, B. 520
Nilson, W. 539
Nobis, H.M. 456
Normore, C. 271
Numbers, R.L. 359
Nussbaum, M. 120, 120 [20]
Nye, S. 450
Ó Cróinín, D. 190, 192
Ohly, F. 489, 498 [19]
Oldenburg, H. 446, 457
Olschki, L.S. 481, 483 [75]
O’Meara, D.J. 136, 138, 139, 145, 181, 236
Oresme, N. 254

Author Index
679
Origen 150
Osler, M.J. 359, 482, 483 [76]
Ovink, B.J.H. 568 [22]
Owen, G.E.L. 101, 120 [21]
Pais, A. 41, 43 [27]
Parshin, A.N. 599, 601, 610, 611 [11]; 611 [12];
612 [47]
Pascal, B. 402, 403
Paulinus of Nola 151, 156
Peck, R.A. 181
Peden, A.M. 181
Pemberton, H. 483 [77]
Penelhum, T. 420 [12]
Peri, I. 182
Perkins, P. 243
Perler, O. 155, 160 [33]
Petersen, W.L. 233
Petrovi´c, N. 154, 160 [34]
Pfeiffer, F. 251
Pﬂaum, H. 440 [17]
Photius 125
Picanyol, L. 357
Pietri, L. 156, 160 [35]; 160 [36]
Pinchard, B. 640 [17]; 640 [18]
Pingree, D. 65, 69, 70, 72, 75 [14]; 75 [15];
75 [16]; 75 [17]; 75 [18]
Plato 99, 101, 488, 566, 567, 637, 640 [12]
Plofker, K. 65, 75 [19]
Plotin 633, 640 [13]
Plotinus 205
Poeschel, E. 231
Poincaré, H. 562
Polovinkin, S.M. 599, 601, 611 [7]; 611 [11];
611 [12]
Poo, M.-C. 60 [14]; 60 [15]
Poole, R. 454, 455
Popkin, R.H. 461, 481, 482, 482 [35]; 482 [36];
482 [37]; 483, 483 [78]
Pospielovsky, D.M. 606, 612 [30]; 612 [33]
Prakash, G. 64, 75 [20]
Probst, S. 444, 445
Pseudo-Dionysius 152
Ptolemaeus, Claudius 453
Pucelle, J. 420 [13]
Purkert, W. 547 [15]; 547 [16]
Pycior, H.M. 508 [15]
Queen Victoria 552
Rabelais, F. 636, 640 [15]
Radbruch, K. 491
Raith, M. 521 [7]
Ramati, A. 461, 462, 470, 471, 479, 480, 483 [79]
Rang, B. 532
Rattansi, P.M. 463, 470–473, 483 [59]
Ray, J. 520
Reich, K. 309 [9]; 309 [10]
Reif, P. 483 [80]
Reilly, C. 346 [8]
Reindel, K. 191
Remmert, V.R. 356, 359
Rescher, N. 421 [30]
Reuchlin, J. 204
Richer 197
Rijnders, M. 38, 42 [7]
Rius, M. 178 [11]
Robin, L. 103, 120 [22]
Robles, J.A. 508 [16]
Roche, J. 464, 483 [81]
Rogers, G.A.J. 474, 483 [82]
Roland Holst, H. 552
Rombach, H. 284, 290 [17]
Romm, J.M. 243
Ross, G.M. 271
Rostovtsev, Yu.A. 604, 612 [28]
Roswitha 199
Roukema, R. 248
Rucker, R. 591, 592, 593 [23]
Rudloff, D. 231, 243
Rudolph, K. 247
Ruhia, C. 420 [14]
Russell, B. 79, 95, 97 [13]; 97 [14]
Russo, F. 420 [15]
Rynasiewicz, R. 483 [83]
Sachau, E. 70, 75 [21]
Saffrey, H.D. 117, 121 [23]
Sainsbury, R.M. 540
Saint Anselm 392
Sainty, J.C. 443
Salomono 488
Samsó, J. 178 [10]
Sauer, E. 160 [38]
Sauer, J. 151, 153, 160 [37]
Saxer, V. 149, 155, 157, 160 [39]
Scharlau, U. 346 [9]
Scheffer, W. 554
Scheibe, E. 488, 498 [20]
Schenk, G. 547 [17]
Scheurer, P.B. 481, 482, 483 [84]
Schilpp, P.A. 41, 43 [31]
Schlagel, R.H. 43 [32]
Schmidt-Biggemann, W. 346 [10]; 498 [8]
Schmitz, H.W. 38, 43 [18]; 568 [24]
Schneider, I. 314, 315
Schneider, M. 151, 152, 157, 160 [40]

680
Author Index
Schoffer, I. 439 [3]
Scholem, G. 203–205, 208, 210, 211 [3]; 212 [4];
212 [5]
Schopenhauer, A. 585, 587, 593 [24]
Schuhmann, K. 615, 623 [10]
Schuster, J.A. 483 [85]
Schwarz, H.A. 526
Schweitzer, F.-J. 251
Scott, J.F. 443, 447
Scriba, C.J. 443, 453
Seeff, A.F. 481, 483 [88]
Segonds, A. 145
Séguin, P. 547 [18]
Seidenberg, A. 12, 13, 43 [28]; 43 [29]; 43 [30]
Sheldrake, R. 259, 270
Shelley, P.B. 556
Shentalinskii, V. 608, 609, 612 [42]
Sherlock, W. 450
Sherry, D. 508 [17]; 508 [18]
Shorey, P. 121 [24]
Shukla, K.S. 66–69, 73, 75 [22]; 76 [23]
Shumaker, W. 20, 43 [33]
Simon, G. 369
Sinaceur, H. 34, 43 [34]
Siorvanes, L. 145
Sirat, C. 21, 43 [35]
Smith, G.E. 481 [18]; 482, 483
Smith, J.Z. 232, 235
Smith, M. 231, 247
Smith, R.J. 60 [16]
Snobelen, S.D. 463, 480, 483 [86]; 483 [87]
Sobel, H. 421 [31]
Sober, E. 421 [28]
Solmsen, F. 101, 121 [25]
Sorabji, R. 97 [15]
Speiser, A. 520
Staal, F. 8, 9, 43, 43 [36]
Stamhuis, I. 42, 43 [37]
Stange, A. 156, 160 [41]
Stebbing, L.S. 643, 653 [15]
Steel, C. 145
Steinberg, L. 232
Sterre 561
Stevens, W. 195
Stifel, M. 306, 310 [11]; 310 [12]
Stobaeus 127, 131 [11]
Stricken, B. 364
Struik, D. 433, 440 [18]
Stuloff, N. 290 [18]; 290 [19]
Stump, E. 271
Suarez, F. 255, 270
Subb¯aji, B. 71, 76 [24]
Swammerdam, J. 520
Swester Katrei 270
Sylla, E. 254, 255, 263–265, 271
Taeger, B. 195
Takho-Godi, A. 606, 612 [32]
Tamny, M. 476, 483 [60]
Tanner-Herter, U. 231
Tarán, L. 120, 121 [26]
Tardieu, M. 247
Tchalenko, G. 157, 160 [30]
Teilhard de Chardin, P. 42, 43 [38]
Tertullian 150
Tetens, J.N. 543
The Encyclopaedia of Islam 178 [4]
Theerman, P. 481, 483 [88]
Theodore of Mompsuestia 150
Theodoret 151
Theon of Smyrna 127, 128, 131 [7]; 131 [12]
Thesleff, H. 113, 121 [27]
Thiele, R. 521 [4]; 521 [8]; 543, 547 [19]
Thijssen, J.M.M.H. 271
Thirouin, L. 420 [16]
Tholuck, A. 521 [9]
Thom, W. 532
Thomas Aquinas, S. [= Aquinas, T.] 203, 269, 538
Thorndike, L. 22, 43 [39]
Thrower, N.J.W. 482, 484 [89]
Tishby, I. 203, 211, 212 [6]
Townsend, R.F. 12, 43 [40]
Townsend, R.W. 484
Tragesser, R. 591, 593 [15]
Troncarelli, F. 191
Trotski 554
Tumarkin, A. 434, 440 [24]
Turnbull, H.W. 463, 465–467, 469, 470, 476,
484 [90]
Turner, M.L. 247
Van Atten, M. 591, 593 [15]
Van Berchem, M. 158, 159 [5]
Van Bochove, A. 568 [25]
Van Bunge, W. 435, 440 [14]
Van Dalen, D. 564, 568 [27]; 575–577, 587–589,
592, 593, 593 [9]; 593 [16]; 593 [17]; 593 [18];
593 [19]
Van Dantzig, D. 551, 552, 568 [26]
Van de Vyver, A. 181
Van den Brœk, R. 248
Van den Enden, F. 440 [11]
Van der Linde, A. 440 [15]
Van der Schoot, A. 667, 672
Van der Tak, W.G. 440 [23]
Van der Waerden, B.L. 660

Author Index
681
Van Eeden, F. 43 [41]; 552, 556–558, 564,
568 [28]; 568 [29]; 568 [30]; 568 [31]; 577,
593 [21]
Van Ginneken, J. 552, 554
Van Helden, A. 42, 43 [37]
Van Lunteren, F. 470, 484 [91]
Van Stigt, W.P. 571, 572, 592, 593 [25]; 593 [26]
Van Tricht, H.W. 568 [32]
Van Velthoven, Th. 568 [33]
Van Vollenhoven, Th. 555
Vaneigem, R. 251
Vaz Dias, A.M. 440 [25]
Veldman, W.H.M. 565, 567, 568 [34]
Vermeulen, B. 508 [19]
Vermij, R.H. 508 [20]
Veyne, P. 231, 232
Vibert Douglas, A.V. 644, 653 [16]
Virgil 493
Vlastos, G. 79, 96, 97 [16]
Vollenhoven, D.H.T. 555, 568 [35]
von Cues, N. 662
von Dunin Borkowski, S.J. 433, 434, 440 [8]
von Euw, A. 196
Vonessen, F. 491–493, 498 [21]
Vuillemin, J. 403 [13]
Wald, R.M. 40, 43 [42]
Wallis, F. 183, 184
Wallis, J. 443, 445–447, 449–453, 455, 457
Walsh, M. 190
Wandschneider, D. 449
Wang, H. 592, 593 [27]; 593 [28]
Wang, R. 60 [17]
Ward, S. 444
Webster, C. 453
Weckweth, A. 151, 152, 160 [42]
Welby, Lady Victoria 552
Wernham, A.G. 429
Westerbrink, A.G. 439 [1]
Westfall, R.S. 461, 464, 466, 480, 484 [92];
484 [93]
White, A. 196
White, M. 30, 43 [43]
White, N. 112, 121 [28]
Whitehead, W.F. 26, 43 [44]
Whiteside, D.T. 421 [17]; 464, 477–479, 484 [94];
484 [95]; 484 [96]
Whitman, A. 483
Whittaker, E. 653 [17]
Wilkinson, L. 63, 72, 76 [25]
William of Ockham 261
Williams, M.A. 247
Wisdom, J.O. 508 [21]
Witsen, N. 8, 43 [45]
Witt, C. 81, 97 [17]
Wittgenstein 557
Wolfson, H.A. 440 [29]
Wolska, W. 150, 157, 160 [43]
Wood, R. 261
Woodham, A. 270
Wright, R.M. 296, 310 [13]
Yates, F.A. 22, 43 [46]
Yelchaninov, A.V. 601, 611 [16]
Young, L. 525
Young, R.F. 64, 70, 76 [26]; 76 [27]
Youschkevitch, A.P. 521 [5]
Zacher, H.J. 491–493, 498 [22]
Zaslavsky, C. 5, 43 [47]
Zeising, A. 669, 670
Zenkovsky, V.V. 603, 611 [21]
Zernov, N. 606, 612 [31]
Zhmud’, L. 96, 97 [18]
Ziehr, W. 245, 246

This page intentionally left blank

Subject Index
abacus
197
Abbo of Fleury
181, 197, 198
Abraham
189, 470
absolute
463, 466, 477, 480
abstract
535
abstraction
451, 452
achievement
461
acting
461, 462, 468–470, 473
act(ion)
476
action
463, 465, 480, 481, 483
action, appropriated
226
action, proper
226
active
461, 466–470, 473, 482
active mathematics
562–564
active power
463
activity, contingent
218
activity, inward
217, 218
activity, necessary
218
activity, outward
217, 218
Addison
413, 503
Adeodatus, Aurelius
543
Aegidius Romanus
257, 260
agent
467, 468, 470, 473, 476
ages of the world
185, 193
Aggiunti, Niccolò
356
Agnicayana
7
Agnicayana ritual
8
agnosticism
409, 414
agrimensores
190, 196
Agrippa, Cornelius
26, 27
al-Bîrûnî
169, 172, 174
al-Hâsib, Habash
174
al-Khalîlî
170, 171
al-Khâzinî
170, 172
al-Qazwînî
166
al-Sharafî
165
alchemical
481
alchemist
468, 469, 482
alchemy
468–470, 473, 480, 481
aleph
531, 532
Alfarabi
223
algebra
363, 366, 367, 616
algebraic number theory
621
Allah
51
allegory
181–183
altar
475
Althusser, Louis
431
Ambrose
150, 155
Ambrosi, Ambrogio
357
analogies, mathematical
504
analogous
475
analogy
450–452, 468–470, 474
analysis
389, 476–478
analytical
478, 480
analytical geometry
433
Anaxagoras
472, 473
Anaximander
472
Ancients
474
Anderson’s tale
58
Andreae, Johann Valentin
321
angels
251, 254–259, 263
angle of contiguity
505
Anglican Church
444
Anglican doctrine
450
Anglicanism
455
animal homiﬁcans
219
annual course
472
Anselm
408
Anselm (Anselmus) of Canterbury
216, 525
Anselmian
226
anti-mechanistic
468
anti-Roman-Catholic
471
anticartesianism
466, 478
Antichrist
293–296, 298
antiquity
471
antithesis
417–419
antitrinitarianism
450–452
Aphorismi de gradibus
223
Apocalypse
195, 474, 483
Apollonius
15, 478
apologetic
463
appropriated action
225
appropriated effort
226
Apuleius
190
683

684
Subject Index
Aquinas, St. Thomas
408–410
Arabia, astronomy in pre-Islamic
163
Arbor elementalis
215, 216, 219
Arbor scientiae
215
Arbuthnot, John
251
Arcesilaus
409
Archilochus
419
Archimedes
416
Archimedian axiom
539
architecture
658, 663, 666, 669, 670
Archytas
79–81, 86, 88–91
Arian(ism)
451, 467, 468
Arikh anpin
207
Aristarchus
472
Aristotel
505
Aristotelian
223
Aristotelianism
463
Aristotelians
260
Aristotle
14, 79, 80, 82–88, 91, 94, 95, 103, 116,
221, 321, 505, 506, 528, 537, 622
Aristotle, Physics II 2
221
arithmetic
138, 189, 191, 195
arithmetic of inﬁnite sets
533
arithmoi
658
Arius
471
Ark
149
Arnau of Vilanova
223
arrangements
337, 338
Ars demonstrativa
218
Ars generalis ultima
224
Ars inventiva veritatis
224
art
215, 221, 224
art of medicine
223
art, forms of
221
Arthur
480
artistic
223
arts, Aristotelian
215
ascesis
182
aspect
461, 463, 481
astrolabe
197
astrological calendar
52, 57
astrological omen texts
10
astrology
47–49, 187, 193
astronomical school (paks.a)
68, 69
astronomy
184, 191, 192, 284, 285, 474, 476,
477, 484, 501, 667
astronomy, folk, Islamic
163, 164
astronomy, mathematical, Islamic
164, 165
Athanasian Creed
450
Athanasius
471
atheism
409, 414, 445, 446, 466, 469, 478
atheist(ic)
463, 466, 469
atheists
501
atom
471, 472
atomist
481
attiqa qadisha
207
attribute
481
Augustine, St.
19, 150, 182, 183, 185–187, 190,
191, 260, 411, 412, 525, 533
aurea propositio
661, 662
Aurioli, Peter
267
authority
503
autonomy of mathematics
488
Autumn of the Middle Ages
296
Averroës
223, 439
Avicenna
260
axioms
138, 447, 464
axis
472
Aztec ceremonial calendar
12
Aztecs
11
Babylonian astrology
11
Bachelard
621
background
463, 466
Bacon, Francis
526, 544
Bacon, Roger
21
Baghdad
174
bagua
51
Balibar, Etienne
431
Balzac
409
Barnes
308
Bartholome, Johann
313
base
465, 474, 479
basis
464, 465, 479
beauty
139
beauty and harmony
492
beauty of mathematics
563, 567
Bechler
465
Bede
183–185, 191–195
Beger, Matthäus
324
being
463, 467, 468, 480
beleife
463
belief
472, 515
believe
465, 470
Bellarmine
356
Belyi, Andrei (Bugayev, B.N.)
599
Bendixson, Ivar
537
Bentley
463, 464, 467
Berdyayev, N.A.
606
Beréshit
210
Berkeley, George
31, 515
Bernoulli, Daniel
513
Bernoulli, Jakob
512, 513
Bernoulli, Johann
513
Bhagavad Gita
586, 588
Biancani, Giuseppe
356
Bible
183, 189, 190, 445, 446, 515, 516, 545

Subject Index
685
Bible/biblical
462, 470, 473, 474, 481–483
biblical numbers
313, 316–318, 320, 327–330
Big Bang
40
Bina
207, 209
binary number system
491
body
463–466, 468–470, 475, 476, 479, 480
Boethius
18, 19, 47, 89, 181, 188, 190, 195–197,
363
Bogdan
27
Böhme, Jakob
580
Böhme, Marie
527
Bolshevik Revolution
598, 603, 604, 606, 608
Bolzano, Bernhard
528, 621
Bombelli
619
Bonaventura
410
Book of Changes
47, 49–52, 54, 56
book of nature
321, 322, 353, 355
Book of Sentences
256
boundary
478
brachystochrone
494
Bradwardine, Thomas
254, 263
Brahman
551
brain
480
breath
468
Brentano
617
Brewer, Ebenezer
253
Bright Hall
48
Brodrick, James
253
Brotherhood of Purity
218
Brothers and Sisters of the Free Spirit
251, 255
Brouwer, L.E.J.
35, 39
Brucker, Margaretha
511
Brunschvicg, Léon
432
Buddhist
56
bugang
52, 53
Bugayev, N.V.
598, 599, 608
Bulgakov, S.N.
601
Burali-Forti, Cesare
532, 540
Burckhardt, Johann
512
Burgius, Justus
366, 369
Buridan
265
Byrhtferth of Ramsey
181–183, 186, 191, 195–
199
Cabbala
228, 319, 321, 471
Cai Yuanding
48
Calcidius
195
calculate
467, 469, 480
calculating machine
488
calculation
474, 477, 478
calculus
227, 477, 479, 480, 504, 506
calculus of indivisibles
416
calculus of variations
617
calculus, inﬁnitesimal
407, 416
calculus, integral
407, 416
calendar
181–183
calendar reform
453–457
calendar, astronomical calculation
454, 457
calendar, Gregorian
453–457
calendar, Julian
453–457
Calvinism
512
Candide
32
canon
222
Cantor, Georg
34, 523, 546, 599, 621
Cantor, Woldemar
527, 543
Cardano
313, 619
Cardinal Klesl
320
Carnot
620
Cartesian
467, 469, 471, 478
Cartesian coordinates
389
Cartesianism
463, 466, 467
Cartesians
503
Cassiodorus
187, 188, 190, 196
Castillejo
474
casuistry
417
casus irreductibilis of the equation of the third de-
gree
619
categorial
621
catholicism
552–554
Cauchy, Augustin-Louis
33, 616
causality
367, 368, 373
causation
469
cause
365, 466–469, 471, 473, 479, 483
causes
370, 374
Cavalieri, Buonaventura
349, 416
celestial
464, 469, 476
center
467, 472, 475, 630
central
465, 475
centre
141, 144, 465, 467, 472, 477, 480
centripetal
465
ceremony
475, 480
certainty
549, 567
certainty vs. uncertainty
549, 556, 567
Chambord (castle of)
627
chaos
127, 218, 220, 221, 224, 228
character
464, 465, 478
characteristic
471
Charlemagne
196
Charron
409
Chateaubriand
409
Chen Tuan
48
Cheng Hao
56
Cheng Yi
56
chiliasm
193, 194
Chillingworth, William
253
China
494
Chinese magic square
54

686
Subject Index
Chisholm-Young, Grace
545
Christ
286, 468, 470
Christian
471, 475, 476, 482
Christian gnosticism
23
Christianity
468, 471
chronology
184, 191, 461, 470
church
470, 471, 475, 482
church of England
471
circle
140–142, 144, 227
circle of perpetual vision
49
Circle of Seekers of Christian Enlightenment
605, 606
circle, quadrature of
227
circle, squaring
285
circular angles
140
circular lines
140
circumscriptive
254
Clarke
463, 481, 483
classical
478
Classical Scholia
472
Clavius, Christopher
355
Clement of Alexandria
149
coagulation
469, 476
code
474, 481
coded
473
Cohen, I.B.
464, 465
Cohen, Paul
528
coincidence of the opposites
275, 277–279, 282,
283, 287, 289, 346
Collegiants
427
colour
209–211
combinations
336–338
combinatorial analysis
407
combinatorial art
334, 335, 341
comet
467, 473, 476, 477, 482
comet of 1618, his interpretation
323–328
comets
475
commandment
470, 471
commentaries on the Sentences
260
common core thesis in mysticism (CCT)
591
common sense
505
communism
552–554
compensation of error
506–508
complexion, balanced
222
complexion, human
222
computation
619
computus
181–199
Comte, Auguste
32
conatus doctrine
436
conceive
463, 466
concept
465, 468, 477, 480
conception
461, 466, 469, 470, 473, 479
concrete
535
Condemnations of 1277
258
condensation
476
Conduitt, J.
476
conﬂagration
475, 476
Confucian Analects
47
Confucian ethics
56
Confucius
48, 50
conic sections
407
conjectural art
221
conjecture
227, 279–281
conjectures
278
consist
464, 468, 470, 479
consistency
462, 464
consistent(in-)
467, 469
constituent
474
constitution
474
construct
464, 467
constructability
367, 370
constructible
368, 369, 373
construction
465, 474
contagion
51
contemplation
182
context
463, 480, 482, 483
contingent
218
continual
469, 476, 477, 480
continuity
494, 665, 668
continuity(dis-)
479
continuous
226, 477, 479
continuum
257, 535
Continuum Hypothesis
528, 532
contracted
217
contrariétés
410, 411
contrivance
467
controversy
443–453, 463, 479
conventionalism
631, 633
Conversation with M. de Saci
419
conversion
470
conviction
549, 552–554, 565
conviction ideology
552
Copernican debate
356
Copernican theory
512
Copernicanism
353
Copernicus
408
correlatives
217, 219
corrupt
470, 471, 481
corruption
471, 480, 483
Cosmas Indicopleustes
156
cosmological
463, 472
cosmological forces
51
cosmology
182, 191, 192, 463, 467, 468
cosmos
461, 463, 465, 467–469, 471, 475, 481
cossic
371
cossics
366, 367
Council of Nicaea
450–456

Subject Index
687
Council of the Russian Orthodox Church
606
counsel
467
counted numbers
366, 371
counter-earth
49
counting numbers
366
Couturat, Louis
537
create
461, 463, 466, 467, 471, 479
creating
471
creatio ex nihilo
471
creation
182, 188, 189, 192, 193, 444, 463, 465,
467, 470, 473, 479, 480, 483
creation of the world by God
489, 491–493
creation, free
563
creative
468
creativity
562
Creator
465, 470, 471, 479, 481
creature
467–469
criticism
473, 478, 482, 483
cross
234, 235, 241, 245–248, 630
Cudworth, Ralph
253, 466
curriculum
137
curve
464, 480
curves, quadrature
444, 447
curves, rectiﬁcation
443
Cusanus, Nicolaus
23, 24, 37, 431, 503
cyberspace
42
cyclical
476
cycloid
407
da Costa, Uriel
426
Da-Dai Liji
47
Dai De
47
Daiichi
57
D’Alembert
619, 620
Daniel
473, 482, 483
Dao
50
Daodejing
50
Daoist
56
Daoist canon
50
Daoist liturgy
52
darkness
280
Dayan (Great Extension) number
51
Dayan suoyin
52, 54, 56
De Dijn, Herman
432
De Gandt
480
De gravitatione
466, 483
De quadratura et triangulatura circuli
227
De ratione conputandi sets
190
De systemate mundi
472
De Witt, Johan
427
decade
126, 128–131
decay
471
decipher
473
decipherable
462
deciphering
443, 445
Dedekind, Richard
34, 529, 542
deduce
465, 467
deductive
465
deﬁniteness
555, 556
deﬁnition
452, 464
deﬁnitive
254
deﬁnitive place
256
deﬁnitively
254
deism
408, 409, 461, 469
deist
463
deists
501
deities
125, 126, 131
deity
463, 468, 472, 481
demiurge
102, 103
Democritus
472
demon of Laplace
494
demonstration
469, 478
denotation
552
Derham, William
520
derive
464–467, 470, 472, 474
Descartes, dualism
517
Descartes, René
29, 330, 367, 372, 407, 408, 428,
463, 465–467, 469, 473, 477, 478, 528, 631
Deschamps
296
description of nature
352
design
467, 469, 475, 477
destruction
476
determination
140
Deus absconditus
207, 410
d’Hulst, Hautecour de
544
dialectic
622
dialectical
554
dialectical opposition
449
dialectics
283
dialogue
549, 565, 567
diatessaron
233
dichotomy
464, 465
Diderot
415
Dieterich, Dr.
327
differential
479
differentials
538
dignities
216, 217
dimensions
451
Din
209
Ding Yidong
56
Dionysius
91
Dionysius Exiguus
184
discover
465, 467
discovery
464, 478, 479, 481
discrete
226
discrete quantities
365
discursive thinking
136

688
Subject Index
D’Israeli, Isaac
251
dissolution
476
distance
465, 467, 470, 472
distortion
480
divertissement
415
divination
47, 48, 50–52, 57
divine
125–131, 136, 466, 468–470, 476, 480,
481, 558
Divine Grace
301
divine numbers
125
divine proportion
657, 672
Divine Providence
520
divinisation
135, 136
divinity
126, 131
divisibility
471, 504
division in extreme and mean ratio
657, 672
Dobbs, B.J.T.
461, 462, 464, 466, 468–470, 476,
477, 480
docta ignorantia
549, 564, 565
doctrine
462, 467, 470, 471, 476
dodecahedron
657, 662, 664, 665, 668
dogma
471
dogmatism
505
dominion
467, 479, 480, 482
doubt
554
Dubois-Reymond, Paul
604
Duns Scotus, John
258–260
Dürer
303
Dyad
127–129
earth
468, 469, 472, 475, 476
earth (di) numbers
49
Easter
181, 184, 192
Easter number symbolism
185
Easter, calculation of
443, 454, 455
eccentricity
476
Eddington, Sir Arthur
35, 535
Edinburgh
58
effective causality
668
Egorov, D.F.
599, 608
Egorov, D.F., arrest
606
eight Trigrams
47, 51
Eighty Years’ War
425
Einstein, Albert
259, 525
Einstein-tensor
648
Einsteinian relativity
631
Einstein’s equation
40
electricity
470
Electrotechnical Institute, Moscow
608
elements
128, 219, 464
elements (four), Plato’s treatment of
105–111
Elias, Norbert
358
ellips
476
emanation
471
Emery, Jacques
544
Emmerson, Richard K.
295, 297
emotion
552, 554, 556, 563–565
Empedocles
107
Emperor Matthias
318, 319
empirical
474, 479
end of the world
293, 303
endurance
480
Engels, Friedrich
32
England
453, 456
England, Civil Wars
443, 445, 455
England, Glorious Revolution
443
England, Parliament
443, 455
England, Restoration
443
Enlightenment
481, 511, 515
Enlightenment thinker
461
Ennead
129–131, 205
enthusiasm
554, 563, 566, 567
epacts
454
Epictetus
419
equality
140, 141
equinox, spring
192
equinox, vernal
184
Erasmus of Rotterdam
513
Ern, V.F.
597, 600
eschatology
185, 193, 194, 414, 416, 418, 420
essence
465, 468
essential
463, 470
Esser, Father
534, 535
ether(ial)
468, 469
eternity
444, 447–449, 451
Eucharist
255
Euclid
89, 109, 116, 196, 227, 228, 464, 478, 539
euclidean geometry
621
euclidean space
630
Euclid’s Elements
5, 660, 662
Eudoxus
15
Euler, Leonhard
503, 509, 521, 525
Euler, Paul
511, 513
Europe
453
Eusebius
194
Euthymius de Brusca, C.
326
evangelist
470
event
474–476
evidence
464, 468, 476
evident
474
evil
519
exactitude
505, 506
exactness
502, 555
exaltation of nine-and-ﬁve (jiu wu zhi zun)
49
examination
469
excluded third, principle of the
564
exegesis
181, 182, 186, 195

Subject Index
689
exemplarism
372
exhalations
476
exist
465–468, 478
existence
466, 468, 469, 472, 473, 480
experiment
472
experimental
469, 481
explain
463–465, 468, 469, 471, 473, 476
explanation
464, 466, 467, 469, 474
extension
466, 467
extreme value problem
489, 494, 495
Eyn-sof
204–212
faith
501, 502
fall
464
Fall of Man
410–412
Father
467, 468
Fathers, Apostolic
544
Fathers, Early
526, 544
Fatio, N.
469, 470, 484
Faulhaber, Johannes
308, 313
Ferdinand
319
Fermat
407, 408
fermental
468
fermentation
468, 470
Fibonacci series
666, 668
Fichte, Johann Gotthelf
518
Ficino, Marcilio
24
ﬁfth essence
665
ﬁgurate numbers
315
ﬁgurative mathematics
36, 37
ﬁgure, geometrical
277, 278, 283, 286
ﬁgure, theological
277, 283, 286, 287
ﬁnal causality
373
ﬁnalism
364
ﬁnalist
373, 374
ﬁnger-computation
194
ﬁre
468, 475, 476, 480
ﬁsh
236, 237, 239, 241–244
Fitzralph, Richard
258
Five Agents
49
Five Elements
49
Five Phases
49
Florensky
599
Florensky, arrest
608, 609
Florensky, arrested
600
Florensky, executed
610
Florensky, Kirill
609
Florensky, P.A.
597, 601, 603–607, 611
Florensky, Pavel
34
Florentinus de Valentia
322
ﬂow
477, 479–481
Fludd, Robert
365
ﬂuent
477, 479
ﬂuxion
477, 479–481, 483, 504
force
461, 463–465, 469–471, 473–476, 478,
503, 505
Force, J.E.
461–463, 469, 474, 479, 480
forgiveness
470
form
461, 464, 465, 467–469, 475, 478, 480
Form of Forms
662
Form of the Good
137
formal causality
668
formalisation
562
formalism
561, 565
formation
469
forms
136–138
forms, theory of
101–103, 109, 110, 112, 113
Foscarini, Antonio
356
foundation
464, 465, 470, 471, 477, 481, 541
foundations of mathematics
535
foundations, psychological
549, 562, 563
four seasons
51, 52, 58
fractal
631
Fraenkel, Abraham
540, 542
frame
474, 475
Franzelin, Cardinal
534–536, 540
Frazer, J.G.
51
Frazer’s ﬁrst law
52
Frederick II
513, 514
Free Academy of Spiritual Culture in Moscow
606
free will
301
free-thought
514
freedom
467
freethinkers
501, 503
French Revolution
32, 33
Freud, Sigmund
525
Fritzsche, Hans-Georg
536
Fuxi
47
Galen
222, 321
Galilei, Galileo
29, 367, 513
Galois
621
gamatria
195
games, mathematical investigation of
497
Gang of Four
58
Garth, Samuel
503
Gauß, Carl Friedrich
528
Gauss, Karl Friedrich
34
genera
218, 219
generalisation
474
generate
477, 479
generation
461, 468
genus
220
geocentric
471
geography
191
geography, mathematical, Islamic
164, 166–174

690
Subject Index
geography, sacred, Islamic
165, 166
Geometria Boethii I
196
Geometria nova
227
geometric outlook
408
géométric, esprit de
408
geometrical
363, 367, 369, 370, 373, 374, 478,
480
geometries
621
geometry
138, 139, 224, 369–372, 478, 479, 481,
504
geometry as an art
224
geometry, algebraic methods
447, 449
geometry, as an art
224
geometry, classical problems
444, 445
geometry, new conception
227
geometry, synthetic
407
Gerbert of Aurillac
196
Gerlandus Compotista
198
Germany, Imperial Diet
454
Germany, Protestant states
454, 456
Glanvill, Joseph
255
gnosticism
205, 232, 247, 248, 471
goal
465, 481
God
126–128, 130, 131, 143, 144, 254, 255, 263,
265, 445, 446, 450–452, 461–463, 465–475,
477, 479–483, 499, 503, 504
God as a mathematician
489, 490, 494
God, demonstration of his existence
496
God, is there a God?
549, 554, 556
God, power of
259
Gödel, Kurt
528, 540
Gödel’s incompleteness theorem
35
Gödel’s views on mathematics and the divine
590
gods
125–128, 130, 131
God’s blueprint
667
God’s intention
316, 320
God’s reason
488
God’s vision
491
Goethe
430
Gog and Magog
317, 319, 327
Golden Bough
51
golden mean
672
golden section
657, 672
Goldscheider, Franz
538, 539
Goldtbeeg, Julius Gerhardinus
324
Görres, Joseph von
534
govern
463, 474, 479
governance
480
government
471, 475
grace
503
grace, divine
412, 417
grace, writings on
411–413, 420
grammar
186
Grassmann
621
gravitation
461, 463–465, 469–473, 476–478,
481, 484
gravity
464, 469, 470, 472, 477, 482, 484
Great Extension number
55
Greece
475
Greek
471, 478
Greek science
63–65
Gregorian reform of the calendar
185
Gregory
260, 266, 267, 472, 476
Gregory of Palamas
604
Gregory of Rimini
256, 257, 259–261, 265
Gregory of Tours
155
Grosseteste
20, 263
Grosseteste’s metaphysics of light
21
ground
463, 474
Guénon, René
36, 37
Guéroult, Martial
431, 432
Guicciardini
480
Gustav Adolf
320
Gutberlet, Constantin
534, 536, 537
Guttmann, Vally
527
Habash al-Hâsib
169
Hagia Sophia
154
Halley, Edmond
464, 476, 503
Hamilton
621
Han China
47
Hankel, Hermann
511
harmonic
472
harmony
466, 472
Hé
207
heat
470
heaven
472, 475
heaven (tian) numbers
49
Hebdomad
129
Hebenstreit, Johann Baptist
324–326
Hebrew
201–212
Helgesen, Marty
253
heliocentric
475
heliocentrism
471
Hellenistic astrology
11
Heman, Karl
540, 543
Henry Jr., Granville C.
36, 41
Henry of Harclay
263, 266
Hermannus Contractus
197
Hermite, Charles
527, 544
Hésed
209
Hestia
127, 130
heterodoxy, protestant
322
Hetu Diagram
47, 48, 57
hexad
129
hexagrams
51, 57
Heytesbury, William
265

Subject Index
691
Hilbert, David
34, 525, 526, 532, 533, 535, 536,
541, 543
Hippocrates
223
historian
461, 464
historical
461, 463, 483
history
185, 186, 193, 461, 462, 470, 473, 476,
477, 480, 481, 483, 484
Hitotsubashi
57
Hobbes, Thomas
254, 256, 466
Hod
209
Hogendijk, Jan
174
Hokhma
207, 209
Hölder, Otto
532
Hong Kong
58
hoorwiskunst
562
Hortensius, Martinus
356
Hrabanus Maurus
191, 195, 196
Hrotswith of Gandersheim
199
Hudde, Johan
427
Huffman, C.A.
86
Huizinga
296
Hume
615
Hurwitz, Adolf
526
Husayn, Hasan
173
Husayn, Muhammad
173
Husserl, Edmund
32
hypothesis
465, 467, 468
hypothetical
465
Ibn al-’Arabî
218
Ibn al-Haytham
169
Ibn al-Wardî
164
Ibn Sab`în of Murcia
224
Ibn Surâqa
166
Ichiban
57
idea
465–467, 469, 476, 477
idea exemplares
369
ideas
125
identity, principle of
555
ideology
549, 554
idolatry
554
ignorance
565
image
141
imaginary numbers
618
imagination
138, 139, 393
immanence
204, 206
immaterialism
503
immortality of the soul
445
immutability
467
implicit mathematics
5
in abstracto
535
in concreto
535
incommensurability
659, 660, 662
indeﬁnite
477
indeﬁniteness
555, 564
indetermination
140
indivisible
471, 479
indivisibles
257, 258, 261
inductive
474
Industrial Revolution
32
ineffability
666, 667
inequality
140
infant baptism
443
inﬁnite
204, 206, 208, 215, 275, 277–279, 282,
284, 285, 287, 289, 343, 345, 346, 465, 477,
478, 480, 499, 533, 541, 564, 565
inﬁnite, absolute
228
inﬁnite, actual
265, 528, 536, 540
inﬁnite, potential
265, 528
inﬁnite, potentially
538
inﬁnitesimal
461, 478, 479
inﬁnitesimal calculus
632
inﬁnitesimals
505–507, 619
inﬁnitum
535
inﬁnity
204, 206, 416–418, 444, 447–449, 488,
490, 494–497, 503, 504, 541, 542, 565
inﬁnity of God
526
inﬁnity of impact
505
inﬁnity, actual
257
inﬁnity, orders of
532
inﬂuence
464–466, 468, 482
inherent
470, 480
innate knowledge
138
instruments
218
instruments for ﬁnding the qibla
171–174
integers
531
intellect
279, 281, 288, 289
intensity of qualities
224
intention
225
intentions, two
217
interaction
463, 467, 469
interfere
463, 479
interpretation
465, 471, 473, 475
intersubjective
567
interval
472, 477
intuitionism
549, 563–565
intuitionistic mathematics
571
investigation
462, 463, 468
involvement
464, 467, 470, 473
inwardly
218
Ioffe, A.F.
608
Irenicum
470
Irish computus of ca. 658
186–190, 192
irrationality
658, 667
irrationality of religion
501
Isaac
470
Isaiah
476

692
Subject Index
Isfahan
173, 174
Isidore of Seville
182, 187–190, 196
Islam
627–629
Islamic world
51
Israel
470, 482
Israel, Jonathan
31
Iyyun
209, 210
Jacob
470
Jansenism
411, 413, 419, 420
Japan
57
Jerome
150, 194
Jesuits
411, 415, 417, 420
Jesus
470, 471
Jesus Christ
409–412, 416–419, 515, 519, 525,
545
Jew
201–212
jiugong
53
jiugong nine-palaces
52
jiugongsuan
47
jiugongtu
47
Johann Fugger the Elder
328
Johannine Gospel
233, 237, 242
John Chrysostom
150
Johnson, Samuel
504
Joseph of Arimathaea
545
Joseph of Nazareth
545
Josephus
189
Jourdain, Philip
544, 545
Jupiter
472
Jurin
506
justice
129
justiﬁcation
443
Justus Cornelius
326
Kaaba
163–166
Kabbalah
21, 201–212
Kabbalism
215
Kairos
130
Kant, Immanuel
413, 516, 517, 537, 572, 601
Kepler, Johannes
29, 325, 326, 356, 416, 418
Kepler(ian)
465, 467, 469
Kéter
206, 207, 209
key
467, 473–476
Keynes, Maynard
30
Khomyakov, A.S.
603
Kierkegaard
409
kinematic
477, 478
Klein, Felix
533
knowledge
461, 472, 474, 475, 478, 481, 482,
535
knowledge, classes of
515
knowledge, foundation
515
knowledge, human
516
Koerbagh, Adriaan
426
Kolb, Noah
313
Kolman, Arnost
608, 609
Korea
57
Kousbroek, Rudy
592
Kowalewski, Gerhard
543
Kronecker, Leopold
527, 528
Kuala Lumpur
59
Kuhn
503
Kummer, Ernst
527, 536
language
465, 473, 474, 476, 478, 480, 483
Laozi
50
Laplace
415
latitude
222, 224
law
186, 461, 464, 465, 467–472, 476, 478–481
law of contiguity
51
law of similarity
51
law of the excluded middle
449
learned ignorance
275, 276, 278, 280, 282, 283,
287
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm
31, 408, 463, 466,
479, 481–483, 503, 505, 513, 528, 537, 615,
620, 622, 632
Leibnizian inﬁnitesimals
504
Leibnizians
503
Leitwissenschaft
358
length
472, 477, 479
Lenin, Vladimir Ilyich
32
Leo X
319
Leo XIII
533, 534, 544
Leonardo Da Vinci
610
Leshem
480
liangyi
51
Liber chaos
218
Liber de intentione
218
Liber de natura
220
Liber demonstrationum
218
Liber novus de astronomia
219
Liberal Arts
182, 190, 192, 195–198
Lie
621
life
461, 462, 467, 468, 476
light
209–211, 280, 289, 464, 468, 469, 474, 476,
483
limit
283, 505
limitation
140
limits
276
line
464, 477, 479
Locke, J.
464
logarithmic tables
562
logic
501, 506, 557, 564, 621
logic of discovery
501
logic of justiﬁcation
501

Subject Index
693
Logos
158
Lombard, Peter
256
longing
549, 565–567
Lopatin, L.M.
599
Lorentz-contraction
647
Losev, A.F.
606
Losev, A.F., arrest
606
love
464, 470, 471
Ludwig Schad
327
Lull, Ramon
22
Lullian Art
22, 23
lunation
185
Lunn, Arnold
253
Luoshu
47
Luoshu Chart
47, 48, 52, 57
Luoshui River
47
Luther
319
Lutheran movement
293
Luzin, N.N.
599
Macherey, Pierre
431
Macrobius
195
Maestlin, Michael
324
magic
51, 52
magic square
47, 48, 52–54, 303
magnetism
470
magnitudes, inﬁnitesimally small
539
Majorca, king of
215
Malapert, Charles
356
Malaysia
58
Malkhut
207, 209, 211
Mannigfaltigkeiten
621
Mannoury, Gerrit
39
map projections preserving direction and distance
to centre
172–174
maps for ﬁnding the qibla
171–174
Marchtaler, Conrad
319
Maritain, Jacques
34
Martianus Capella
195
Martinus Scriblerus
251
Marx, Karl
32, 525
Marxism
552
Marxism–Leninism
32
mass
465
Master Sun
51
material
465–467, 469, 470, 480
materialism
503
materialistic, -ism
466, 469
mathematic
474, 482
mathematicae mixtae
349, 355
mathematicae purae
349, 355
mathematical
461, 462, 464–467, 469, 472, 476,
478–480, 482–484
mathematical concepts
452
mathematical entities, existence of
260
mathematical objects
137, 140
mathematical principle
477
mathematical theology
343, 346
mathematician
461, 469, 472, 478, 501–503,
505, 508
mathematics
47, 52, 137, 465, 467, 477–481
mathematics and divine service
489
mathematics as a divine science
494
mathematics, Aristotelian conception of
260
mathematics, intellectual
286–288
mathematics, physical
287
mathematics, Platonic conception of
260
mathematics, rational
287
mathematisation of our thought
487, 488, 493,
495
mathesis universalis
622
matter
448, 451, 464, 466–472, 478
Maupertuis, Moreau de
514, 515, 519
Maupertuis, principle of
519
Mauthner, Fritz
432, 434
maxima
477
maxima and minima
416
maximum, absolute
276, 277, 282, 284
Maximus the Confessor
156
McGuire, J.E.
461, 463, 465–472, 476, 480
measure
472
mechanic
468
mechanical
466, 468, 479, 484
mechanism
469, 476, 478
mechanist
463, 464, 466–470
mechanistic
466, 468
mechanistically
469, 471
Mechev, Aleksei
606
mediate
470
mediate(im-)
465, 481
mediation
479, 480, 657, 672
mediator
468
medicine
191
medium
464, 466, 469
Meister Eckhart
251, 578
Melder, Johann
330
mercurial
468
Mersenne
374
Meschkowski, Herbert
538, 539
message
473, 481
metaphysic
56, 483
metaphysical
462, 466, 467
metaphysics
138, 465, 468, 471, 479, 539
Metaphysics VII 9
221
meteorology
191
method
389, 390, 464, 465, 474, 477–480, 482,
483

694
Subject Index
method of arguing
501
methodological
474
Metonic lunar cycle
185
Meyer, Lodewijk
432
Michelini, Famiano
357
microcosm–macrocosm correspondence
321
Middle Ages
181–199
Mikasa
57
milfoils
51, 54
millennium
194
Milton
413
mind
466, 479, 484
mind-stuff
650
Mingtang (Bright Hall)
47
minima
477
Minkowski, Hermann
526
miracle
259, 410, 419, 420
mirror
139
Mita
57
Mitsubishi
57
Mitsui
57
Mitsukoshi
57
Mittag-Lefﬂer, Gösta
539, 546
model
465, 475
Mögling, Daniel
322, 324
moment
477, 480
monad
126–129, 131, 479
monadology
513
Mondriaan, Piet
38
monotheism
471
Montaigne
409, 419
moon
184, 192, 475
moral(ity)
462, 470, 471, 480
More, H.
256, 466
Moscow Mathematical Society
599
Moscow Theological Academy
600, 601, 603,
605, 606
Moscow University
598, 599
Moses
189, 470
motion
461, 464–467, 469, 472, 475, 476, 478–
480, 483, 505
move
465–467, 472, 476, 477, 480
movement
475
multinomial numbers
337
multiplicity
474
music
191, 284, 285, 333, 334, 336, 338, 339,
343, 344, 556, 657, 667, 670
music of the spheres
667
mystery
452
mystical
473, 474
mystical arithmetic
341
mysticism
47, 54, 57, 59, 410, 419, 501
myth
471, 472, 481
Najm al-Dîn al-Misrî
171
Napier, John
308
Narsai
157
nation
470, 471, 475
natural
461–469, 471, 473–476, 479–483
natural history
191
natural selection
620
nature
128, 219–222, 461–463, 465, 468–471,
473–475, 477, 479–482
nature of the inﬁnite
228
necessarily
218
necessary
394, 396, 467, 472–474
necessity
395, 401, 467
negation
549, 554, 564–566
negative numbers
619
Negri, Antonio
431
neighbour
464, 470
neo-Confucian philosophers
49
neo-Confucian scholars
57
neo-Hegelianism
551
neo-Platonic
321
neo-Platonism
29
neo-Platonists
18, 466, 468, 481
neo-Pythagorean
321
neo-Pythagoreanism
17
neo-Thomists
34
neoplatonism
205, 468, 470
Nétsah
209
New Jerusalem
149, 151
Newman
415
Newton space
504
Newton, Isaac
29, 254, 407, 410, 461–466, 468–
481, 502–505, 511, 616
Newtonian
463, 481–483
Newtonian method
461
Newtonians
503
Nicholas of Cusa (Cusanus)
23, 533
Nicolas Malebranche
631
Nicomachean Ethics VI 3–5
221
Nicomachus
190
Nicomachus of Gerasa
17, 19, 181
Nieuwentyt, Bernard
520
nihilarians
501
Nijhoff, Martinus
439
Nikolas II, Emperor
606
nine-palaces
48
nine-palaces calculation
47
nine-palaces diagram
47
Noach
475
Noachian
470, 471
Noah
470, 480
Noah’s Ark
149
Noether, Emmy
542

Subject Index
695
nominalists
261
non-achievement
566
non-Confucian school
56
non-contradiction (avirodha)
70, 71, 73, 74
non-corporeal substances
445
non-Euclidean mathematics
665
non-mechanical
469
non-mechanistic
471, 473
notion
470, 473, 478, 482
Novalis
410
Novosyolov, M.A.
605, 606
Novosyolov, M.A., arrest
606
Numa Pompilius
472
number
126–131, 496, 531, 618, 621
number 666
294
number in metaphysics
488
number mysticism
493
number
speculations,
mystic-cabbalistic
313,
316, 318, 325
number symbolism
181–199
number theory
54, 443
number, cardinal
531, 532
number, ﬁnite ordinal
531
number, inﬁnite
538
number, natural
531, 532, 538
number, ordinal
531
number, prime
531
number, rational
531
number, real
531, 532
number, transﬁnite
538, 539
number, transﬁnite ordinal
531
numbers
125–131, 140, 365
numbers, cardinal
529
numbers, class of
529
numbers, ﬁnite
529
numbers, natural
530
numbers, transﬁnite
529, 530
numbers, transﬁnite cardinal
529
numbers, transﬁnite ordinal
530
numerical causality
365, 374
numerology
57, 181–183, 187
numerus
19
nuptial number
128
object
474, 475, 477, 478, 480
objective
480, 562
observable
465
observation
470
observe
469, 480
obviousness
390, 399
occult properties
26
occult qualities
16
Ockham
266
octad
130
omnipotence
473
omnipotent
471
omnipresence
665
omnipresent
480
One
127, 129, 136, 140, 205–207, 209
operate
476
operation
468, 478, 479
operative
469, 470
Opticks
462, 466, 468, 469, 472, 480, 483
optics
20, 21
orb
472
Oresme, Nicole
254
organization
468, 469
orientalism
63, 64, 70, 74
orientation in Cairo
175, 176
orientation in Cordoba
176
orientation in Samarqand
176
orientation of Islamic architecture and cities
175
Origenes
475
original
462, 470, 471, 475, 476
original sin
410, 411, 414, 416–418
origines
480, 482, 484
Orpheus
91
orthodox
467
orthodoxy, protestant
322, 323, 330
otherness
206, 207, 280, 281
Otric
197
Otto III
197
outwardly
218
Oxford
451, 453
Pan
472, 483
Pandera, Josephus
545
pantheism
536
Pantocrator
473, 480
Pappus
478
parables
411
parabola
506, 507
Paracelsus
321
paradoxes
543
paradoxes of set theory
491, 496
Pardies
505
part
463, 472, 474–476, 479, 480
particle
466–468
Pascal, Blaise
30, 503, 528, 539
Paschal table
184, 455
passive
466, 468, 469
passive mathematics
562
Peano arithmetic
35
Pecci, Gioacchino, cf. Leo XIII
533
Pelagianism
411
pendentives
143
pentad
128, 129

696
Subject Index
pentagram
128, 657, 659
Pentateuch
416
perceive
480
perception
480
perfect(im-)
463, 480
perfection
474
period
467, 476, 477
permutations
336–338, 341
perspectiva
21
perspective
461, 470, 480–482, 484
pervert
471
pervert code
462
Pesch, Father
534
Peter
476
Peter the Great
599
Petersburg University
598, 599
phenomena
463–467, 469, 471, 474, 480
Philo
182
Philogathos
156
Philolaus
79, 86–88, 90–92, 472
philosopher
463, 466, 467, 471, 472, 478, 482
Philosophers at war
479
philosophy
47, 188–190, 445, 446, 449, 462–
468, 471, 475, 481–483, 622
philosophy, mathematical
495
philosophy, scholastic
537
physical
464–466, 469, 475, 476, 479, 480
physico-theological
519
physics
447, 464, 465, 468, 479–481
physiology
191
Piarists
357
place
463, 465–467, 475, 483
place, circumscriptive
254, 257
place, deﬁnitive
254, 257, 258
plane
477
planet
465, 467, 472, 475, 476, 480
planetary
464, 465, 472
Plato
14, 15, 79–82, 85, 88, 89, 91, 189, 195, 409,
418, 472, 533, 622
Platonic
367, 565
Platonic bodies
665
Platonic conception
260
Platonic solids
255
Platonism
471
Platonist(neo-)
18, 466, 468, 481
Plotinus
17, 18, 24, 253
Plough
49, 52
Plutarch
103
poet
556, 558, 564
poetry
552, 556–558
Poincaré, Henri
525
point
258, 259, 464, 465, 477, 479
point, mathematical
255
points
256
polarity
555, 565, 672
polemic
479
polemics
463
political
474, 482
politique
474
Polycleitos
222
polygon
227
polygonal and pyramidal numbers
313
polygonal numbers
314, 315, 328
polygonal root
314
polytheism
471
Pope, Alexander
251
Pope, supremacy
455
popular beliefs
57
positivist
469
possibility
445, 450, 452
Pott, Constance
543, 546
power
465, 467, 471, 482
power, continuous
226
power, discrete
226
powers of the principles
216
pragmatic view of truth
622
Praisers of the Name
605, 606
precepts and rules
223, 224
precepts, in an art
223
predestination
411, 412, 416
Preface
464, 478
Presbyterianism
455
Priest
475
prime numbers
488
Principia
461–467, 469, 472–476, 478–484
Principia Mathematica
35
principle
462–466, 468–470, 473, 476, 482–484
principle of continuity
638, 639
principle of homogeneity
505, 507
Principle of Least Action
514
Principle of Mutual Conquest
49, 50
Principle of Mutual Production
50
principles and rules
224
principles of action
216
principles of being
216
principles of its art
223
prisca geometria
477
prisca sapientia
470
prisca scientia
477, 478, 480
prisca theologia
470, 471, 480
pristine
470, 471
probabilism
412, 416
probability theory
407, 414–416, 419
problem
463, 464, 467–469, 477
problem of the two tables
646
process
464, 467, 468, 471
process theology
36

Subject Index
697
Proclus
18
procreation
667–669
proper action
226
proper quality
225
property
463, 466–468, 470, 471, 483
prophecy
410, 462, 470, 473, 474, 476, 477, 481,
483
prophet
462, 470, 473, 474
prophetic
474, 475
proportion
275, 472, 478
proportional
477
proportions
276, 285
proposition
464, 468, 472
prosody
191
providence
474, 477
providential
469, 470, 473, 477
Provincial Letters
412, 415, 417, 418, 420
prudence
221
prytaneum
475
psychic monism
551
psychology
618
Ptolemy
197, 365, 366, 373
Ptolomy
15
purpose
462, 463, 476
purposive
468
putrefaction
468, 476
pyramidal numbers
314–317, 328
pyrgoidal numbers
328, 329
Pythagoras
79, 80, 91–95, 190, 418, 471–473
Pythagoras–Plato
182
Pythagorean
208, 363, 367, 374, 471, 472, 481
Pythagorean–Platonic period
6
Pythagoreanism
139, 629, 631
Pythagoreans
365, 373, 657, 659, 667
qibla
163–171, 175–177
quadrature
477
quadrature of curves
479
quadrivium
47, 189, 195–198
quaestio de certitudine mathematicarum
353
Quakerism
645
quality proper
226
quality, appropriated
225, 226
quality, extensive
225
quality, proper
225
quality—“proper” and “appropriated”
225
quantities, actual inﬁnitely small
538
quantity
467, 477–480
quantity, extended
225
quantity, intense
225
query
469, 472
quest
473, 478, 480
question
463, 465–467, 472, 477, 479, 480, 483
question Quando
226
question, quando
226
question, quantum
226
Questiones
466, 468, 469, 475
quintessence
665
Quodlibets
251
Qurân
163
Rabelais
253
Radical Enlightenment
31
Rahamin
209
Ramati
480
Ramon Lull
215
Raphson
504
Rasputin
605
ratio
467, 478
rationalism
511, 513
Ray, John
520
Ra’ya méhémna
207
reality
464, 479
reason
413, 414, 450–452, 466, 480, 481, 487,
488, 494, 496, 497, 511, 541, 543
reasoning
473, 474, 515
record
481
rectangle
479
rediscover
462
Regius, Henricus
429
regular
476, 479
regularity
476
relation
463, 466, 469, 472, 474, 475, 478, 479,
481
relativism
554, 555
relativist
549
relativity
555
religion
462, 467, 470, 471, 473–475, 515
religion, true
488
religious
461–463, 466, 470, 480
religious language
552, 554
Religious–Philosophical Society of Writers and
Symbolists
599
Rembrandt
435
Remigius of Auxerre
195
Remmelin, Johannes
316, 318, 319, 323
Renaissance
470
represent
472, 475, 480
representation
475
Republic of the United Netherlands
425
Réshit
210
restoration
471, 478
resurrection
470
revelation
450, 461, 475, 480, 481, 502, 516, 517
revelation, scriptural
409, 410
revelations
473, 476
Rhind papyrus
657

698
Subject Index
Riemann
617
ritual
7
Rius, Mònica
176
Roberval
416
rock paintings
7
Roman Catholicism
456
Romantic movement
33
Rosecrucians
28
Rosicrucian movement
321–323
Rousseau
413
Royal Society
443, 446, 454, 455
Ruan Yuan
51
Rudolff, Christoff
306
rule
464, 473, 474, 477
rule, in an art
223
Russel Paradox
532
Russell, Bertrand
79, 95, 96, 540
Ruysdael
435
Saint Irenaeus of Lyon
149
Samsung
57
San Shang
57
San Yang
57
Sanai
57
Sanwa
57
Sanyo
57
Schleiermacher, Friedrich
536
Schmidt, Karel
38
Schoenmaekers, Mathieu H.J.
37
scholasticism
451, 503
scholastics
505
Scholium generale
463, 467, 473
Schopenhauer, Arthur
573, 584
Schwarz, Hermann Amandus
526, 527
science
220, 223, 224, 462–465, 470, 471, 474,
481–483, 501, 502
science faite
562
science qui se fait
562
science religion
461
science, Aristotelian
228
science, deﬁnition of
447
sciences
504
sciences, Aristotelian
215
scientiae mathematicae
349
scientiﬁc
223
scientiﬁc community
503
Scientiﬁc Revolution
6, 28, 349, 358
scientist
461, 470, 479
Scotists
255
Scotland
456
Scripture (Holy)
471, 474, 482
Scuole Pie
357
sea
234, 242–244
search
558, 561, 562, 564–567
secondary
468, 479
secularization of the divine
32
Sefer Yetsira
208
seﬁrot
201–212
seﬁroth
21
Seidenberg’s thesis
12
self
551, 558, 563
self-discovery
139
Selzlin, David
313
semi-circle
141, 144
senses
480
sensorium
480
separation of subject and object
549, 562, 563
Sergei of Radonezh
607
series
477
Sermon on the Mount
666
set, consistent transﬁnite
532
set, inconsistent
541
set, inﬁnite
538, 541
set, notion of
542
set, power of
531
set, well-ordered
532
set theory
525, 529, 540, 542
Settimi, Clemente
357
seven
181
Sextus Empiricus
15
Shakespeare, William
544
shamanism
7, 13
Shao Yong
57
Shéfa’
209
Shekina
209, 211
Shestov
615
Shiites
172–174
Shiki
58
Shushu jiyi
47
shuxue
47
signiﬁc movement
38
signiﬁcance
476
signiﬁcation
473–475
Signiﬁcs
549, 567
signs
615
Sihai
58
simplicity
391, 392, 471, 474, 480
sin
445, 470, 519
Sinaceur, Houraya
34
singularity
665
Sirenbang
58
Sittanus, Johannes Dobricius
316
Snobelen, S.D.
461, 463, 474, 480
society
463, 464
Society of Mathematical-Materialist Dialecticians
608
Socinianism
450–452

Subject Index
699
Socrates
80, 81, 189
solar
469, 476
solar year
185
Solomon
475
Solovyev, V.S.
603
Son
467, 475
sorites
411, 417, 419
soul
136, 138, 139, 181, 254, 255, 276, 279, 517
source
465, 472
Sozzi, Mario
356
space
463, 465, 466, 477, 479, 480, 483, 503,
621, 629
spatial intuition
621
species
218–220
sphere
472
spherical triangles
143
Spinocism
504
Spinoza
363, 364, 371, 373, 374, 408–410, 425
Spinoza, Baruch
30
Spinozism
430
Spinozistic structuralism
431
spirit
468, 469, 476, 517, 518, 546
Spirit (Holy)
467
spirit, liberty of
518
spiritual
468–470, 482
spreekwiskunst
562, 563
square
141, 142, 144, 472
square root of polygonal number
314, 315, 327,
328
squaring the circle
658, 661
St. Matthias’ day, calculation of
453
Staal, Frits
7
Stalin
430
star
467, 472, 475
Star Manual
49
Stifel, Michael
28, 293, 319
stimulus conduction
470
Stoic
468, 476, 481
Stoicism
470
string
472
structures
621
study
470, 473, 475
Stumpf
618
Suarez, Franciscus
255, 256
subject
562–565, 567
subject, divine
567
subject, unobjectiﬁable
549, 562, 563
subjective
562
substance, incorporeal
253, 254
substances and accidents
219
subtle ﬂuid
467
Suﬁsm
215, 228
Sulba Sutras
9, 12
summation of inﬁnite series
416
sun
465, 467, 472, 475, 476, 480
Sunzi suanjing
51, 52
supposition theory
263
Supreme Pole
51, 56
surface
477
Swammerdam, Johan
520
Swester Katrei
251, 253
Swift, Jonathan
23, 251
syllogism
411, 412, 417, 419
symbol
276, 277, 279, 280
Symbolic Numerology
56, 57
symbolise
283
symbolism
49, 418, 629
symbolism of the tree
215
synthetic
478
system
463–465, 467, 469, 472, 475, 476, 479,
483
system, non-archimedian
539
Tabernacle
149, 150, 475
tables for ﬁnding the qibla
169–171
Tabula generalis
224
tachtigers
556
Taiji
51, 52
Tamm, I.Ye.
607
tangent
464, 477, 480
Tchokwe people
5
technicization
622
Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre
42, 409
Tekkuné Zohar
207
temple
474, 475
Temple of Solomon
149, 151
Tertullian
150, 525
Tetens, Johann Nicolaus
543
tetrad
128
Tetraktys
126, 128
Thales
473
Thales of Miletus
189
theism
555
theologian
461, 467, 482
theological
470, 481–483
theology
125, 126, 277, 280, 282, 461, 471, 474,
475, 482, 483, 495, 661, 666, 670
theology, apophatic
565
theology, mathematical
493
theology, natural
515
theology, negative
565
Theophilus of Alexandria
192
theorem
477
theory
461, 463, 465, 466, 469, 484
theory of relativity
644
theory of sets
538

700
Subject Index
think
462, 466–468, 470
thinker
471
Thomas Aquinas
57, 251, 255, 257, 259, 260
Thomas of Aquino
533, 537, 538
Thomism
538
those
481
thought
476, 477, 479–482
Three books of geometry
478
three powers
52
three-dimensional theorem of Pythagoras
329,
330
tide
464
Tif’érét
209, 211
Tikhon, Patriarch
606
Tikkunim
207
Tillich, Paul
3
time
464, 465, 467, 471, 474, 476–483
time-reckoning
181–183
tivum, -bile, and -are
217
token sent by God
319, 321, 324
topology
631
Torah
207
Torricelli, Evangelista
349, 356
trace
473
trace explain
466
tradition
453, 457, 627, 629
Tragesser
591
transcendence
204
transcendent deity
467
transcensus
227
Transﬁnitum
533, 535, 536, 542
transubstantiation
255
treatise
463, 468, 472, 483
tree
215
triad
126–129
triangle
140–142, 144
triangle, abstract general
504
trigrams
57
trinity
216, 443, 450–452, 467, 471, 483, 493,
496, 504, 665, 672
tritheism
452
Troitse-Sergieva Lavra
607, 608
Trubetskoy, S.N.
599
Truesdell, Clifford
511
truth
221, 275, 280, 450, 452, 461, 462, 465–471,
474, 478–481, 483
two intentions
225
Tycho Brahe
326
Tylor, E.B.
3
Tyranny
471
ubi
256
ubi (place)
255
ubiquity
473
Ulam, Stanislaw
525
understanding
515, 516
uniform
480
unify
471
unit
555
unitarianism
451
unity
50, 51, 57, 136, 140, 141, 144, 279–281,
289, 462, 469, 475, 477, 480–482, 491, 495
unity of a theory
621
Unity of Science movement
38
universal
468, 481, 483
Universal Possibility
628, 634, 635, 638
universal science
333, 335, 339, 341
universe
281, 284, 285, 461, 463, 467, 472, 474,
476
unlimitedness
140
unorthodox
463
unwritten doctrines (Plato)
103, 112
Urban VIII
355
Uri Ha Levi
426
vacuum
464, 472
vacuum experiments
419, 420
value
478
Van Atten
591
Van den Enden, Franciscus
428
Van der Linde, Antonius
435
Van Eeden, Frederik
38, 577
Van Scheltema, Carel Adama
574
vapour
468, 476
variability, continuous
227
Vedic ritual
7
vegetable
468
vegetation
468, 476
vegetative
468
velocity
467, 477
Verbez, David
327
Verbezius, Dr.
327
Vermeer
435
Vernadsky, V.I.
604
Victorius of Aquitaine
181, 184, 198
Viète
477
view
461, 463, 464, 466, 468–471, 473, 475, 476,
478, 480, 481, 483
Vigny
410
virtue
468
vis insita
480
vision
474
vital
467, 468
vitalist(ic)
468, 469
vitality
475
Vivanti, Guilio
539

Subject Index
701
Voetius, Gisbertus
428
Volder, Burcher de
513
volition
552, 554, 565
Voltaire
253, 408, 415
voluntarism
410, 419
voluntarist
479
voluntary
467
von Bunau, Rudolf
323
von Dunin Borkowski, S.J., Stanislaus
30, 427
von Tschirnhaus, Ehrenfried Walther
429
Vopenka, Petr
528
vortex
467, 635, 638
Wager argument
414
Wallis
477
Wallis, John
30, 504, 505
Walton
506
Waw
207
week
185
Wehe, Zimbertus
324, 325, 327
Weierstraß, Karl
526, 527, 617
weight
472
Welby, Lady Victoria
38
Wenwang
47
Westfall, R.S.
461, 462, 464, 466, 470, 480, 484
Westminster Assembly
443
Whitehead, A.N.
36
Whole
126, 128–130
will
203, 205, 206, 208, 210, 468, 470, 479, 516–
518, 553, 565
will (of God)
467
William of Ockham
261
wisdom
135, 181
Wisdom of Solomon
349
witness, Christian
418
Wittgenstein, L.
96
Wolff, Christian von
513, 536
Wolfson, Harry
432
word
481
word calculus
319
works
462, 470, 474
world
461–472, 474–476, 479–481, 483
world system
342
world, best of all possible worlds
487, 489, 490,
495
world-maps, Mecca-centered
172–174
worship
475, 480
writer
472
wuxing
49, 50, 56
Xia dynasty
47
xiangshu
56, 57
Xingjing
49
Xu Yue
47
Yang
51, 52, 56
Yang Earth
49
Yang Fire
49
Yang Hui
54
Yang Metal
49
Yang numbers
48, 49, 55
Yang Water
49, 50
Yang Wood
49
Yâqût
166
Yates, Frances
22
Yelchaninov, A.V.
597
Yesod
209
YHWH
207
Yijing
47, 50, 55
Yin
51, 52, 56
Yin Fire
49
Yin Metal
49
Yin numbers
48, 49
Yin Water
49, 50
Yin Wood
49
Yod
207
Yotsuya
58
Young, Laurence
533
Young, William
545
Yu
47
Yubu
52, 54
Zé’ir anpin
207
Zeus
127, 129, 130
Zhang Zai
56
Zhou
47
Zhu Xi
48, 56, 57
Zhukovsky, N.Ye.
599
zîj
167
Zillis
231, 233–235, 238–240, 245, 246
Zohar
201–212
Zohar Hadash
207, 211
Zöllner, Johann
526
zonghengtu
54

This page intentionally left blank

