A Drowning Incident 
As soon as the screen door slammed he rounded 
the corner of the house so as to be out of sight, then 
ran for the woodshed and put it between himself and 
the house. The baby was taking its nap. He was not 
to go far away. Standing there in the shade of the 
locust tree he looked about. Some wasps were lilting 
to and fro in the shade under the eaves. Crossing 
behind the shed and through the gate that divided the 
huge untended hedges he came through the lot to the 
old outhouse. He swung the rotted door back care­
fully; the planks were warped and soft and velveted 
with a pale green patina. One board was gone from 
the rear and a thin shaft of light leaned in. On the 
floor was still the old coat that he had carried down 
here to Suzy, after he had followed her, the first day 
she turned up looking thin and wagging her tail, her 
dugs no longer dragging to the ground. The coat was 
matted with a crosshatching of white hairs and the 
faint sourmilk odor of the pups still lingered. They 
had gone to a new home last week. He stepped in and 
peered down into the hole and as his eyes adjusted 
to the gloom below he could see faintly the two tiny 
red triangles touching at their vertices. In the corner 
at his heel there was a cricket resting in the mold, its. 
antennae swaying in random arcs. He saw it and 
reached for it, but it sprang, bumping against the 
facing of the seat and falling to the floor again. He 
stepped on it quickly, then picked it up. It was still 
kicking one leg in slow lethargic rhythm; a thick white 
liquid was oozing from it. He dropped it down the 
hole and bent to watch. He could see it swaying 
gently in the elastic web. The black widow came 
threading her way toward it, and when she reached it 
she began a weaving motion over it with her legs as 
if performing some last rite. Soon the cricket's leg 
stopped. Then he leaned forward slightly, shot from 
his tongue a huge drop of spittle; it passed the forms 
below, receding from white to gray in the graduated 
darkness. The spider froze. He corrected his aim, and 
the second ball of spittle fell true, engulfing the fig­
ures. The spider fled her victim to the dark recesses 
of the musty shaft trailing a thin string of spittle which 
hung in mucous loops among the strands of the web. 
He went out then, and carefully pushed the ruined 
door to. The sun was well up in the oaks on the far 
side of the house. Some blue jays flashed among the 
leaves. He hesitated for a moment, then turned down 
the path toward the corner of the lot. Here he crossed 
a sag in the honeysuckled fence and started off 
through the woods. Shortly he came to an old wagon 
3 
road winding dappled and serene in the morning light 
through the dripping trees. He took the road downhill, 
shuffling through the leaves, turning up their damp 
undersides. He stopped once, stripped off a handful 
of rabbit tobacco, stuffed it in his mouth and shuffled 
down the road, spitting, his thin shoulders rolling 
jauntily. 
The road angled and switchbacked down the hill 
until it came to the edge of the woods where it 
straightened briefly before losing itself in the humming 
field beyond which stretched the line of willows and 
cottonwoods that marked the course of the creek. He 
could still feel the ruts beneath his feet as he waded 
through the knee high grasses or threaded among the 
sporadic blackberry brambles. Then he was parting 
the screen of willows, Jime and golden as they turned 
in the sun with his passage. He could hear the faint 
liquid purling even then, even before he emerged from 
the willows where the bridge crosses, glimpsed through 
the green lacework the fan of water beyond where the 
sun broke and danced on the stippled surf ace like 
silver bees. 
He walked out onto the little bridge, stepping care­
fully. The curling planks were cracked and weathered, 
bleached an almost metallic grey. The whole afair 
bellied dangerously in the middle, like a well used 
mule. He sat down on the warm boards, then stretched 
out on his stomach and peered over the edge into the 
water below. The creek was shallow and clear. The 
floor of the pool was mottled brown and gold as a 
leopard's hide where the sun seeped through the leaves 
and branches overhead. Minnows drifted obliquely 
across the slow current. Through the water-glass he 
watched the tiny shadows traverse the leopard's back 
silent and undulant as a bird's flight. He found some 
small white pebbles at his elbows and dropped them 
to the minnows; they twisted and shimmered slowly 
to the bottom trailing minuscule bubbles that stood in 
brief tendrils before rising and disappearing. The 
minnows rushed to inspect. He folded his arms be­
neath his chin. The sun was warm and good on his 
back through the flannel shirt. 
Then with the gentle current drifted from beneath 
the bridge a small puppy, rolling and bumping along 
the bottom of the creek, turning weightlessly in the 
slow water. He watched uncomprehendingly. It spun 
slowly to stare at him with sightless eyes, turning its 
white belly to the softly diffused sunlight, its legs stif 
and straight in an attitude of perpetual resistance. It 
drifted on, hid momentarily in a band of shadow, 

emerged, then slid beneath the hammered silver of 
the water surface and was gone. 
He sat up quickly, shook his head and stared into 
the water. Minnows drifted in the current like sus­
pended projectiles; a water-spider skated. 
They were black and white, they were black and 
. . .  except for the one black al1 over. He crossed the 
bridge and started after it, then stopped. When he 
turned his eyes were wide and white. He came back 
and started up the creek along the path that curved 
above the low cutbanks. He studied the water as he 
went. Small riffles ran through aisles of water-cress 
awash and flowing in the stream, among rocks where 
periwinkles crowded. A crawfish shot beneath the 
looped bole of a cottonwood. In one pool an inex­
plicable shoe sat solemnly. 
At the bend in the creek just below where it passed 
beneath the pike bridge the current swirled faster and 
the following pool was deep. Because of the turn the 
creek made, the sun was now in his eyes and he could 
not see into the water. He hurried to the pike, crossed 
the small concrete bridge, and worked his way down 
the other side, through a stand of cane. When he 
reached the creek he was on a high bank; below him 
the current rocked in a swift flume, the water curling 
and fluted. 
Below this, in the amber depths of the 
pool, he ct>uld make out a dark burlap sack. He sat 
down slowly, numb and stricken. As he stared, a smal1 
head appeared through a rent in the bag. It ebbed 
softly for a moment, then, tugged by a corner of the 
current, a small black and white figure, curled fetally, 
emerged. It was like witnessing the underwater birth 
of some fantastic subaqueous organism. It swayed 
hesitantly for a moment before turning to slide from 
sight in the faster water. 
He had no tears, only a great hollow feeling which 
even as he sat there gave way to a slow mounting 
sense of outrage. He stood up then, and pulled down 
a long willow limb and worked it back and forth 
across his knee trying to worry it in two, but it was 
tough and resilient and after a while he gave it up. 
He made his way back through the canes to the road 
and to the other side where there was a fence. He 
followed it until he found a loose strand in the wire. 
This he pulled out, and with a few bendings the rusty 
latter end came free. He went back to the creek and 
with the wire hooked at the end tried to fish up the 
sack from the bottom of the creek. The wire was too 
long to control, and the current would sweep it away; 
it was nearly half an hour before he hooked the sack. 
He twisted the wire in his hand, and when he pulled 
it the sack followed, heavy and sluggish. He worked 
it to the bank and lifted it gingerly to shore. It was 
4 
rotten and foul. When he opened it there was only 
one puppy inside, the black one, curled between two 
bricks with a large crawfish tunneled half through the 
soft wet belly. He hooked his wire into the crawfish 
and pulled it out, stringing behind it a tube of putrid 
green entrails. He tried to push them back inside with 
the toe of his shoe. He went to the road again and 
scouted the ditches alongside until he found a paper 
bag. which he brought back and into which with 
squeamish fingers he deposited the tiny corpse. Then 
he pushed through the heavy brush until he came to 
the field, crossed at a diagonal, and entered the woods 
just a few yards short of the wagon road. He turned 
up the road swinging the dirty little bag alongside. His 
steps were trance-like and mechanical, his eyes barren. 
When he reached the house Suzy came trotting 
across the yard to meet him. He avoided her and went 
in by the back door, closing it carefully behind him. In 
the kitchen he stopped and listened. The house was 
silent; he could hear his heart thumping. A warmth­
less light filled the panes of glass above the sink. Then 
he heard her cought-she was always coughing-and 
listened closer. She was in the bedroom. He listened 
at the door, then quietly eased it open. The shades 
were drawn, and where the sun beat against them 
they were suffused with a pale orange glow which 
permeated the air. air infested with the faint urinous 
odor of the baby. the odor of the blankets, sensuously 
fetid and intimate. 
He stood in the doorway for an interminable min­
ute. What prompted his next action was the culmina­
tion of all the schemes half formed not only walking 
from the creek but from the moment the baby arrived. 
Countless rejected. revised. or denied thoughts moil­
ing somewhere in the inner recesses of his mind 
struggled and merged. He lifted the stinking bag and 
looked at it. It was soggy and through a feathered 
split in the bottom little black hairs protruded like 
spiderfeet. Afterward, thinking about it, it did not 
seem him that crossed the room to the crib in the 
corner, lifted back the soft blue blanket, and along­
side the sleeping figure, small and wrinkled, dumped 
the puppy and then folded the blanket over them. He 
remembered vaguely seeing the green entrails oozing 
onto the sheet as the blanket fell. 
He is waiting for him to come home now; it is al­
most dinner time. He is sitting on his bed. his mind 
a dimensionless waJI against which only a grey pat­
tern, whorled as a huge thumbprint, oscillates slowly. 
His mother went once to the room quietly, but the 
baby did not wake. He is waiting for him to come 
home. 


