
Also by Cormac McCarthy 
No Country for Old Men 
Cities of the Plain 
The Crossing 
All the Pretty Horses 
The Stonemason (a play) 
The Gardener’s Son (a screenplay) 
Blood Meridian 
Suttree 
Child of God 
Outer Dark 
The Orchard Keeper 

the road 

Cormac McCarthy 
alfred a. knopf 
new york 
2006 

this is a borzoi book 
published by alfred a. knopf 
Copyright © 2006 by M-71, Ltd. 
All rights reserved. Published in the United States by Alfred A. 
Knopf, a division of Random House, Inc., New York, and in Canada 
by Random House of Canada, Limited, Toronto. 
www.aaknopf.com 
Knopf, Borzoi Books, and the colophon are registered trademarks 
of Random House, Inc. 
This is a work of ﬁction. Any resemblance to actual persons  
living or dead, events, or locales is entirely coincidental. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
McCarthy, Cormac, [date] 
The road / by Cormac McCarthy.—1st ed. 
p. 
cm. 
eISBN: 978-0-307-26745-0 
1. Fathers and sons—Fiction. 2. Voyages and travels—United 
States—Fiction. 3. Regression (Civilization)—Fiction. 
4. Survival skills—Fiction. I. Title. 
ps3563.c337r63 2006 
813'.54—dc22 
2006023629 
v1.0 

This book is dedicated to 
john francis m cca rt h y  


the road 


hen he woke in the woods in the dark and the 
cold of the night he’d reach out to touch the child 
W sleeping beside him. Nights dark beyond dark­
ness and the days more gray each one than what had gone 
before. Like the onset of some cold glaucoma dimming 
away the world. His hand rose and fell softly with each 
precious breath. He pushed away the plastic tarpaulin and 
raised himself in the stinking robes and blankets and 
looked toward the east for any light but there was none. In 
the dream from which he’d wakened he had wandered in a 
cave where the child led him by the hand. Their light play­
ing over the wet ﬂowstone walls. Like pilgrims in a fable 
swallowed up and lost among the inward parts of some 
granitic beast. Deep stone ﬂues where the water dripped 
and sang. Tolling in the silence the minutes of the earth 
and the hours and the days of it and the years without 
cease. Until they stood in a great stone room where lay a 
black and ancient lake. And on the far shore a creature that 
raised its dripping mouth from the rimstone pool and 
stared into the light with eyes dead white and sightless as 
the eggs of spiders. It swung its head low over the water as 
if to take the scent of what it could not see. Crouching 
there pale and naked and translucent, its alabaster bones 
cast up in shadow on the rocks behind it. Its bowels, its 
beating heart. The brain that pulsed in a dull glass bell. It 

D
T H E  R O A  
swung its head from side to side and then gave out a low 
moan and turned and lurched away and loped soundlessly 
into the dark. 
With the ﬁrst gray light he rose and left the boy sleeping 
and walked out to the road and squatted and studied the 
country to the south. Barren, silent, godless. He thought 
the month was October but he wasnt sure. He hadnt kept a 
calendar for years. They were moving south. There’d be 
no surviving another winter here. 
When it was light enough to use the binoculars he glassed 
the valley below. Everything paling away into the murk. 
The soft ash blowing in loose swirls over the blacktop. He 
studied what he could see. The segments of road down 
there among the dead trees. Looking for anything of color. 
Any movement. Any trace of standing smoke. He lowered 
the glasses and pulled down the cotton mask from his face 
and wiped his nose on the back of his wrist and then 
glassed the country again. Then he just sat there holding 
the binoculars and watching the ashen daylight congeal 
over the land. He knew only that the child was his warrant. 
He said: If he is not the word of God God never spoke. 
When he got back the boy was still asleep. He pulled the 
blue plastic tarp off of him and folded it and carried it out 
to the grocery cart and packed it and came back with their 
plates and some cornmeal cakes in a plastic bag and a plas­

5 
tic bottle of syrup. He spread the small tarp they used for a 
table on the ground and laid everything out and he took 
the pistol from his belt and laid it on the cloth and then he 
just sat watching the boy sleep. He’d pulled away his mask 
in the night and it was buried somewhere in the blankets. 
He watched the boy and he looked out through the trees 
toward the road. This was not a safe place. They could be 
seen from the road now it was day. The boy turned in the 
blankets. Then he opened his eyes. Hi, Papa, he said. 
I’m right here. 
I know. 
An hour later they were on the road. He pushed the cart 
and both he and the boy carried knapsacks. In the knap­
sacks were essential things. In case they had to abandon 
the cart and make a run for it. Clamped to the handle of the 
cart was a chrome motorcycle mirror that he used to watch 
the road behind them. He shifted the pack higher on his 
shoulders and looked out over the wasted country. The 
road was empty. Below in the little valley the still gray ser­
pentine of a river. Motionless and precise. Along the shore 
a burden of dead reeds. Are you okay? he said. The boy 
nodded. Then they set out along the blacktop in the gun­
metal light, shufﬂing through the ash, each the other’s 
world entire. 
They crossed the river by an old concrete bridge and a 
few miles on they came upon a roadside gas station. They 
stood in the road and studied it. I think we should check it 

D
T H E  R O A  
out, the man said. Take a look. The weeds they forded fell 
to dust about them. They crossed the broken asphalt 
apron and found the tank for the pumps. The cap was 
gone and the man dropped to his elbows to smell the pipe 
but the odor of gas was only a rumor, faint and stale. He 
stood and looked over the building. The pumps standing 
with their hoses oddly still in place. The windows intact. 
The door to the service bay was open and he went in. A 
standing metal toolbox against one wall. He went through 
the drawers but there was nothing there that he could use. 
Good half-inch drive sockets. A ratchet. He stood looking 
around the garage. A metal barrel full of trash. He went 
into the ofﬁce. Dust and ash everywhere. The boy stood 
in the door. A metal desk, a cashregister. Some old auto­
motive manuals, swollen and sodden. The linoleum was 
stained and curling from the leaking roof. He crossed to 
the desk and stood there. Then he picked up the phone 
and dialed the number of his father’s house in that long 
ago. The boy watched him. What are you doing? he said. 
A quarter mile down the road he stopped and looked 
back. We’re not thinking, he said. We have to go back. He 
pushed the cart off the road and tilted it over where it 
could not be seen and they left their packs and went back 
to the station. In the service bay he dragged out the steel 
trashdrum and tipped it over and pawed out all the quart 
plastic oilbottles. Then they sat in the ﬂoor decanting 
them of their dregs one by one, leaving the bottles to stand 
upside down draining into a pan until at the end they had 
almost a half quart of motor oil. He screwed down the 

7 
plastic cap and wiped the bottle off with a rag and hefted it 
in his hand. Oil for their little slutlamp to light the long 
gray dusks, the long gray dawns. You can read me a story, 
the boy said. Cant you, Papa? Yes, he said. I can. 
On the far side of the river valley the road passed through 
a stark black burn. Charred and limbless trunks of trees 
stretching away on every side. Ash moving over the road 
and the sagging hands of blind wire strung from the black­
ened lightpoles whining thinly in the wind. A burned 
house in a clearing and beyond that a reach of meadow­
lands stark and gray and a raw red mudbank where a 
roadworks lay abandoned. Farther along were billboards 
advertising motels. Everything as it once had been save 
faded and weathered. At the top of the hill they stood in 
the cold and the wind, getting their breath. He looked at 
the boy. I’m all right, the boy said. The man put his hand 
on his shoulder and nodded toward the open country 
below them. He got the binoculars out of the cart and 
stood in the road and glassed the plain down there where 
the shape of a city stood in the grayness like a charcoal 
drawing sketched across the waste. Nothing to see. No 
smoke. Can I see? the boy said. Yes. Of course you can. 
The boy leaned on the cart and adjusted the wheel. What 
do you see? the man said. Nothing. He lowered the glasses. 
It’s raining. Yes, the man said. I know. 
They left the cart in a gully covered with the tarp and 
made their way up the slope through the dark poles of the 

D
T H E  R O A  
standing trees to where he’d seen a running ledge of rock 
and they sat under the rock overhang and watched the gray 
sheets of rain blow across the valley. It was very cold. 
They sat huddled together wrapped each in a blanket over 
their coats and after a while the rain stopped and there was 
just the dripping in the woods. 
When it had cleared they went down to the cart and pulled 
away the tarp and got their blankets and the things they 
would need for the night. They went back up the hill and 
made their camp in the dry dirt under the rocks and the 
man sat with his arms around the boy trying to warm him. 
Wrapped in the blankets, watching the nameless dark 
come to enshroud them. The gray shape of the city van­
ished in the night’s onset like an apparition and he lit the 
little lamp and set it back out of the wind. Then they 
walked out to the road and he took the boy’s hand and 
they went to the top of the hill where the road crested and 
where they could see out over the darkening country to the 
south, standing there in the wind, wrapped in their blan­
kets, watching for any sign of a ﬁre or a lamp. There was 
nothing. The lamp in the rocks on the side of the hill 
was little more than a mote of light and after a while they 
walked back. Everything too wet to make a ﬁre. They 
ate their poor meal cold and lay down in their bedding 
with the lamp between them. He’d brought the boy’s book 
but the boy was too tired for reading. Can we leave the 
lamp on till I’m asleep? he said. Yes. Of course we can. 
.
.
.
 

9 
He was a long time going to sleep. After a while he turned 
and looked at the man. His face in the small light streaked 
with black from the rain like some old world thespian. Can 
I ask you something? he said. 
Yes. Of course. 
Are we going to die? 
Sometime. Not now. 
And we’re still going south. 
Yes. 
So we’ll be warm. 
Yes. 
Okay. 
Okay what? 
Nothing. Just okay. 
Go to sleep. 
Okay. 
I’m going to blow out the lamp. Is that okay? 
Yes. That’s okay. 
And then later in the darkness: Can I ask you some ­
thing? 
Yes. Of course you can. 
What would you do if I died? 
If you died I would want to die too. 
So you could be with me? 
Yes. So I could be with you. 
Okay. 
He lay listening to the water drip in the woods. Bedrock, 
this. The cold and the silence. The ashes of the late world 
carried on the bleak and temporal winds to and fro in the 

D
T H E  R O A  
void. Carried forth and scattered and carried forth again. 
Everything uncoupled from its shoring. Unsupported in 
the ashen air. Sustained by a breath, trembling and brief. If 
only my heart were stone. 
He woke before dawn and watched the gray day break. 
Slow and half opaque. He rose while the boy slept and 
pulled on his shoes and wrapped in his blanket he walked 
out through the trees. He descended into a gryke in the 
stone and there he crouched coughing and he coughed for 
a long time. Then he just knelt in the ashes. He raised his 
face to the paling day. Are you there? he whispered. Will I 
see you at the last? Have you a neck by which to throttle 
you? Have you a heart? Damn you eternally have you a 
soul? Oh God, he whispered. Oh God. 
They passed through the city at noon of the day following. 
He kept the pistol to hand on the folded tarp on top of the 
cart. He kept the boy close to his side. The city was mostly 
burned. No sign of life. Cars in the street caked with ash, 
everything covered with ash and dust. Fossil tracks in the 
dried sludge. A corpse in a doorway dried to leather. Gri­
macing at the day. He pulled the boy closer. Just remember 
that the things you put into your head are there forever, he 
said. You might want to think about that. 
You forget some things, dont you? 
Yes. You forget what you want to remember and you 
remember what you want to forget. 

11 
.
.
.
 
There was a lake a mile from his uncle’s farm where he and 
his uncle used to go in the fall for ﬁrewood. He sat in the 
back of the rowboat trailing his hand in the cold wake 
while his uncle bent to the oars. The old man’s feet in their 
black kid shoes braced against the uprights. His straw hat. 
His cob pipe in his teeth and a thin drool swinging from 
the pipebowl. He turned to take a sight on the far shore, 
cradling the oarhandles, taking the pipe from his mouth to 
wipe his chin with the back of his hand. The shore was 
lined with birchtrees that stood bone pale against the dark 
of the evergreens beyond. The edge of the lake a riprap of 
twisted stumps, gray and weathered, the windfall trees of a 
hurricane years past. The trees themselves had long been 
sawed for ﬁrewood and carried away. His uncle turned the 
boat and shipped the oars and they drifted over the sandy 
shallows until the transom grated in the sand. A dead perch 
lolling belly up in the clear water. Yellow leaves. They left 
their shoes on the warm painted boards and dragged the 
boat up onto the beach and set out the anchor at the end of 
its rope. A lardcan poured with concrete with an eyebolt 
in the center. They walked along the shore while his uncle 
studied the treestumps, pufﬁng at his pipe, a manila rope 
coiled over his shoulder. He picked one out and they 
turned it over, using the roots for leverage, until they got it 
half ﬂoating in the water. Trousers rolled to the knee but 
still they got wet. They tied the rope to a cleat at the rear of 
the boat and rowed back across the lake, jerking the stump 
slowly behind them. By then it was already evening. Just 

D
T H E  R O A  
the slow periodic rack and shufﬂe of the oarlocks. The 
lake dark glass and windowlights coming on along the 
shore. A radio somewhere. Neither of them had spoken a 
word. This was the perfect day of his childhood. This the 
day to shape the days upon. 
They bore on south in the days and weeks to follow. Soli­
tary and dogged. A raw hill country. Aluminum houses. At 
times they could see stretches of the interstate highway 
below them through the bare stands of secondgrowth tim­
ber. Cold and growing colder. Just beyond the high gap in 
the mountains they stood and looked out over the great 
gulf to the south where the country as far as they could see 
was burned away, the blackened shapes of rock standing 
out of the shoals of ash and billows of ash rising up and 
blowing downcountry through the waste. The track of the 
dull sun moving unseen beyond the murk. 
They were days fording that cauterized terrain. The boy 
had found some crayons and painted his facemask with 
fangs and he trudged on uncomplaining. One of the front 
wheels of the cart had gone wonky. What to do about it? 
Nothing. Where all was burnt to ash before them no ﬁres 
were to be had and the nights were long and dark and cold 
beyond anything they’d yet encountered. Cold to crack 
the stones. To take your life. He held the boy shivering 
against him and counted each frail breath in the blackness. 
.
.
.
 

13 
He woke to the sound of distant thunder and sat up. The 
faint light all about, quivering and sourceless, refracted in 
the rain of drifting soot. He pulled the tarp about them 
and he lay awake a long time listening. If they got wet 
there’d be no ﬁres to dry by. If they got wet they would 
probably die. 
The blackness he woke to on those nights was sightless 
and impenetrable. A blackness to hurt your ears with lis­
tening. Often he had to get up. No sound but the wind in 
the bare and blackened trees. He rose and stood totter­
ing in that cold autistic dark with his arms outheld for bal­
ance while the vestibular calculations in his skull cranked 
out their reckonings. An old chronicle. To seek out the 
upright. No fall but preceded by a declination. He took 
great marching steps into the nothingness, counting them 
against his return. Eyes closed, arms oaring. Upright to 
what? Something nameless in the night, lode or matrix. To 
which he and the stars were common satellite. Like the 
great pendulum in its rotunda scribing through the long 
day movements of the universe of which you may say it 
knows nothing and yet know it must. 
It took two days to cross that ashen scabland. The road 
beyond ran along the crest of a ridge where the barren 
woodland fell away on every side. It’s snowing, the boy 
said. He looked at the sky. A single gray ﬂake sifting down. 
He caught it in his hand and watched it expire there like 
the last host of christendom. 

D
T H E  R O A  
.
.
.
 
They pushed on together with the tarp pulled over them. 
The wet gray ﬂakes twisting and falling out of nothing. 
Gray slush by the roadside. Black water running from 
under the sodden drifts of ash. No more baleﬁres on the 
distant ridges. He thought the bloodcults must have all 
consumed one another. No one traveled this road. No road-
agents, no marauders. After a while they came to a road­
side garage and they stood within the open door and 
looked out at the gray sleet gusting down out of the high 
country. 
They collected some old boxes and built a ﬁre in the ﬂoor 
and he found some tools and emptied out the cart and sat 
working on the wheel. He pulled the bolt and bored out 
the collet with a hand drill and resleeved it with a section 
of pipe he’d cut to length with a hacksaw. Then he bolted 
it all back together and stood the cart upright and wheeled 
it around the ﬂoor. It ran fairly true. The boy sat watching 
everything. 
In the morning they went on. Desolate country. A boar-
hide nailed to a barndoor. Ratty. Wisp of a tail. Inside the 
barn three bodies hanging from the rafters, dried and 
dusty among the wan slats of light. There could be some­
thing here, the boy said. There could be some corn or 
something. Let’s go, the man said. 

15 
.
.
.
 
Mostly he worried about their shoes. That and food. 
Always food. In an old batboard smokehouse they found a 
ham gambreled up in a high corner. It looked like some­
thing fetched from a tomb, so dried and drawn. He cut 
into it with his knife. Deep red and salty meat inside. Rich 
and good. They fried it that night over their ﬁre, thick 
slices of it, and put the slices to simmer with a tin of beans. 
Later he woke in the dark and he thought that he’d heard 
bulldrums beating somewhere in the low dark hills. Then 
the wind shifted and there was just the silence. 
In dreams his pale bride came to him out of a green and 
leafy canopy. Her nipples pipeclayed and her rib bones 
painted white. She wore a dress of gauze and her dark hair 
was carried up in combs of ivory, combs of shell. Her 
smile, her downturned eyes. In the morning it was snow­
ing again. Beads of small gray ice strung along the light-
wires overhead. 
He mistrusted all of that. He said the right dreams for a 
man in peril were dreams of peril and all else was the call 
of languor and of death. He slept little and he slept poorly. 
He dreamt of walking in a ﬂowering wood where birds ﬂew 
before them he and the child and the sky was aching blue 
but he was learning how to wake himself from just such 
siren worlds. Lying there in the dark with the uncanny 

D
T H E  R O A  
taste of a peach from some phantom orchard fading in his 
mouth. He thought if he lived long enough the world at 
last would all be lost. Like the dying world the newly blind 
inhabit, all of it slowly fading from memory. 
From daydreams on the road there was no waking. He 
plodded on. He could remember everything of her save 
her scent. Seated in a theatre with her beside him lean­
ing forward listening to the music. Gold scrollwork and 
sconces and the tall columnar folds of the drapes at either 
side of the stage. She held his hand in her lap and he could 
feel the tops of her stockings through the thin stuff of her 
summer dress. Freeze this frame. Now call down your 
dark and your cold and be damned. 
He fashioned sweeps from two old brooms he’d found and 
wired them to the cart to clear the limbs from the road in 
front of the wheels and he put the boy in the basket and 
stood on the rear rail like a dogmusher and they set off 
down the hills, guiding the cart on the curves with their 
bodies in the manner of bobsledders. It was the ﬁrst that 
he’d seen the boy smile in a long time. 
At the crest of the hill was a curve and a pullout in the 
road. An old trail that led off through the woods. They 
walked out and sat on a bench and looked out over the val­
ley where the land rolled away into the gritty fog. A lake 

17 
down there. Cold and gray and heavy in the scavenged 
bowl of the countryside. 
What is that, Papa? 
It’s a dam. 
What’s it for? 
It made the lake. Before they built the dam that was 
just a river down there. The dam used the water that ran 
through it to turn big fans called turbines that would gen­
erate electricity. 
To make lights. 
Yes. To make lights. 
Can we go down there and see it? 
I think it’s too far. 
Will the dam be there for a long time? 
I think so. It’s made out of concrete. It will probably be 
there for hundreds of years. Thousands, even. 
Do you think there could be ﬁsh in the lake? 
No. There’s nothing in the lake. 
In that long ago somewhere very near this place he’d 
watched a falcon fall down the long blue wall of the moun­
tain and break with the keel of its breastbone the midmost 
from a ﬂight of cranes and take it to the river below all gan­
gly and wrecked and trailing its loose and blowsy plumage 
in the still autumn air. 
The grainy air. The taste of it never left your mouth. They 
stood in the rain like farm animals. Then they went on, 

D
T H E  R O A  
holding the tarp over them in the dull drizzle. Their feet 
were wet and cold and their shoes were being ruined. 
On the hillsides old crops dead and ﬂattened. The barren 
ridgeline trees raw and black in the rain. 
And the dreams so rich in color. How else would death 
call you? Waking in the cold dawn it all turned to ash 
instantly. Like certain ancient frescoes entombed for cen­
turies suddenly exposed to the day. 
The weather lifted and the cold and they came at last into 
the broad lowland river valley, the pieced farmland still visi­
ble, everything dead to the root along the barren bottom­
lands. They trucked on along the blacktop. Tall clapboard 
houses. Machinerolled metal roofs. A log barn in a ﬁeld 
with an advertisement in faded ten-foot letters across the 
roofslope. See Rock City. 
The roadside hedges were gone to rows of black and 
twisted brambles. No sign of life. He left the boy standing 
in the road holding the pistol while he climbed an old set 
of limestone steps and walked down the porch of the farm­
house shading his eyes and peering in the windows. He 
let himself in through the kitchen. Trash in the ﬂoor, old 
newsprint. China in a breakfront, cups hanging from their 
hooks. He went down the hallway and stood in the door to 
the parlor. There was an antique pumporgan in the corner. 
A television set. Cheap stuffed furniture together with an 

19 
old handmade cherrywood chifforobe. He climbed the 
stairs and walked through the bedrooms. Everything cov­
ered with ash. A child’s room with a stuffed dog on the 
windowsill looking out at the garden. He went through the 
closets. He stripped back the beds and came away with 
two good woolen blankets and went back down the stairs. 
In the pantry were three jars of homecanned tomatoes. He 
blew the dust from the lids and studied them. Someone 
before him had not trusted them and in the end neither did 
he and he walked out with the blankets over his shoulder 
and they set off along the road again. 
On the outskirts of the city they came to a supermarket. A 
few old cars in the trashstrewn parking lot. They left the 
cart in the lot and walked the littered aisles. In the produce 
section in the bottom of the bins they found a few ancient 
runner beans and what looked to have once been apricots, 
long dried to wrinkled efﬁgies of themselves. The boy fol­
lowed behind. They pushed out through the rear door. 
In the alleyway behind the store a few shopping carts, 
all badly rusted. They went back through the store again 
looking for another cart but there were none. By the door 
were two softdrink machines that had been tilted over into 
the ﬂoor and opened with a prybar. Coins everywhere in 
the ash. He sat and ran his hand around in the works of the 
gutted machines and in the second one it closed over a 
cold metal cylinder. He withdrew his hand slowly and sat 
looking at a Coca Cola. 
What is it, Papa? 
It’s a treat. For you. 

D
T H E  R O A  
What is it? 
Here. Sit down. 
He slipped the boy’s knapsack straps loose and set the 
pack on the ﬂoor behind him and he put his thumbnail 
under the aluminum clip on the top of the can and opened 
it. He leaned his nose to the slight ﬁzz coming from the can 
and then handed it to the boy. Go ahead, he said. 
The boy took the can. It’s bubbly, he said. 
Go ahead. 
He looked at his father and then tilted the can and 
drank. He sat there thinking about it. It’s really good, he 
said. 
Yes. It is. 
You have some, Papa. 
I want you to drink it. 
You have some. 
He took the can and sipped it and handed it back. You 
drink it, he said. Let’s just sit here. 
It’s because I wont ever get to drink another one, isnt it? 
Ever’s a long time. 
Okay, the boy said. 
By dusk of the day following they were at the city. The 
long concrete sweeps of the interstate exchanges like the 
ruins of a vast funhouse against the distant murk. He car­
ried the revolver in his belt at the front and wore his parka 
unzipped. The mummied dead everywhere. The ﬂesh 
cloven along the bones, the ligaments dried to tug and taut 
as wires. Shriveled and drawn like latterday bogfolk, their 
faces of boiled sheeting, the yellowed palings of their teeth. 

21 
They were discalced to a man like pilgrims of some com­
mon order for all their shoes were long since stolen. 
They went on. He kept constant watch behind him in the 
mirror. The only thing that moved in the streets was the 
blowing ash. They crossed the high concrete bridge over 
the river. A dock below. Small pleasureboats half sunken 
in the gray water. Tall stacks downriver dim in the soot. 
The day following some few miles south of the city at a 
bend in the road and half lost in the dead brambles they 
came upon an old frame house with chimneys and gables 
and a stone wall. The man stopped. Then he pushed the 
cart up the drive. 
What is this place, Papa? 
It’s the house where I grew up. 
The boy stood looking at it. The peeling wooden clap ­
boards were largely gone from the lower walls for ﬁrewood 
leaving the studs and the insulation exposed. The rotted 
screening from the back porch lay on the concrete terrace. 
Are we going in? 
Why not? 
I’m scared. 
Dont you want to see where I used to live? 
No. 
It’ll be okay. 
There could be somebody here. 
I dont think so. 
But suppose there is? 

D
T H E  R O A  
He stood looking up at the gable to his old room. He 
looked at the boy. Do you want to wait here? 
No. You always say that. 
I’m sorry. 
I know. But you do. 
They slipped out of their backpacks and left them on the 
terrace and kicked their way through the trash on the porch 
and pushed into the kitchen. The boy held on to his hand. 
All much as he’d remembered it. The rooms empty. In the 
small room off the diningroom there was a bare iron cot, 
a metal foldingtable. The same castiron coalgrate in the 
small ﬁreplace. The pine paneling was gone from the walls 
leaving just the furring strips. He stood there. He felt with 
his thumb in the painted wood of the mantle the pinholes 
from tacks that had held stockings forty years ago. This is 
where we used to have Christmas when I was a boy. He 
turned and looked out at the waste of the yard. A tangle of 
dead lilac. The shape of a hedge. On cold winter nights 
when the electricity was out in a storm we would sit at the 
ﬁre here, me and my sisters, doing our homework. The 
boy watched him. Watched shapes claiming him he could 
not see. We should go, Papa, he said. Yes, the man said. 
But he didnt. 
They walked through the diningroom where the ﬁrebrick 
in the hearth was as yellow as the day it was laid because 
his mother could not bear to see it blackened. The ﬂoor 

23 
buckled from the rainwater. In the livingroom the bones of 
a small animal dismembered and placed in a pile. Possibly 
a cat. A glass tumbler by the door. The boy gripped his 
hand. They went up the stairs and turned and went down 
the hallway. Small cones of damp plaster standing in the 
ﬂoor. The wooden lathes of the ceiling exposed. He stood 
in the doorway to his room. A small space under the eaves. 
This is where I used to sleep. My cot was against this wall. 
In the nights in their thousands to dream the dreams of a 
child’s imaginings, worlds rich or fearful such as might 
offer themselves but never the one to be. He pushed open 
the closet door half expecting to ﬁnd his childhood things. 
Raw cold daylight fell through from the roof. Gray as his 
heart. 
We should go, Papa. Can we go? 
Yes. We can go. 
I’m scared. 
I know. I’m sorry. 
I’m really scared. 
It’s all right. We shouldnt have come. 
Three nights later in the foothills of the eastern mountains 
he woke in the darkness to hear something coming. He lay 
with his hands at either side of him. The ground was trem­
bling. It was coming toward them. 
Papa? The boy said. Papa? 
Shh. It’s okay. 
What is it, Papa? 
It neared, growing louder. Everything trembling. Then 

D
T H E  R O A  
it passed beneath them like an underground train and drew 
away into the night and was gone. The boy clung to him 
crying, his head buried against his chest. Shh. It’s all right. 
I’m so scared. 
I know. It’s all right. It’s gone. 
What was it, Papa? 
It was an earthquake. It’s gone now. We’re all right. Shh. 
In those ﬁrst years the roads were peopled with refugees 
shrouded up in their clothing. Wearing masks and gog­
gles, sitting in their rags by the side of the road like ruined 
aviators. Their barrows heaped with shoddy. Towing wag­
ons or carts. Their eyes bright in their skulls. Creedless 
shells of men tottering down the causeways like migrants 
in a feverland. The frailty of everything revealed at last. 
Old and troubling issues resolved into nothingness and 
night. The last instance of a thing takes the class with it. 
Turns out the light and is gone. Look around you. Ever is 
a long time. But the boy knew what he knew. That ever 
is no time at all. 
He sat by a gray window in the gray light in an abandoned 
house in the late afternoon and read old newspapers while 
the boy slept. The curious news. The quaint concerns. At 
eight the primrose closes. He watched the boy sleeping. 
Can you do it? When the time comes? Can you? 
.
.
.
 

25 
They squatted in the road and ate cold rice and cold beans 
that they’d cooked days ago. Already beginning to fer­
ment. No place to make a ﬁre that would not be seen. They 
slept huddled together in the rank quilts in the dark and 
the cold. He held the boy close to him. So thin. My heart, 
he said. My heart. But he knew that if he were a good 
father still it might well be as she had said. That the boy 
was all that stood between him and death. 
Late in the year. He hardly knew the month. He thought 
they had enough food to get through the mountains but 
there was no way to tell. The pass at the watershed was ﬁve 
thousand feet and it was going to be very cold. He said that 
everything depended on reaching the coast, yet waking in 
the night he knew that all of this was empty and no sub­
stance to it. There was a good chance they would die in the 
mountains and that would be that. 
They passed through the ruins of a resort town and took 
the road south. Burnt forests for miles along the slopes 
and snow sooner than he would have thought. No tracks 
in the road, nothing living anywhere. The ﬁreblackened 
boulders like the shapes of bears on the starkly wooded 
slopes. He stood on a stone bridge where the waters slur­
ried into a pool and turned slowly in a gray foam. Where 
once he’d watched trout swaying in the current, tracking 
their perfect shadows on the stones beneath. They went 
on, the boy trudging in his track. Leaning into the cart, 

D
T H E  R O A  
winding slowly upward through the switchbacks. There 
were ﬁres still burning high in the mountains and at night 
they could see the light from them deep orange in the soot-
fall. It was getting colder but they had campﬁres all night 
and left them burning behind them when they set out 
again in the morning. He’d wrapped their feet in sacking 
tied with cord and so far the snow was only a few inches 
deep but he knew that if it got much deeper they would 
have to leave the cart. Already it was hard going and he 
stopped often to rest. Slogging to the edge of the road with 
his back to the child where he stood bent with his hands 
on his knees, coughing. He raised up and stood with 
weeping eyes. On the gray snow a ﬁne mist of blood. 
They camped against a boulder and he made a shelter of 
poles with the tarp. He got a ﬁre going and they set about 
dragging up a great brushpile of wood to see them through 
the night. They’d piled a mat of dead hemlock boughs 
over the snow and they sat wrapped in their blankets watch­
ing the ﬁre and drinking the last of the cocoa scavenged 
weeks before. It was snowing again, soft ﬂakes drifting down 
out of the blackness. He dozed in the wonderful warmth. 
The boy’s shadow crossed over him. Carrying an armload 
of wood. He watched him stoke the ﬂames. God’s own 
ﬁredrake. The sparks rushed upward and died in the star­
less dark. Not all dying words are true and this blessing is 
no less real for being shorn of its ground. 
.
.
.
 

27 
He woke toward the morning with the ﬁre down to coals 
and walked out to the road. Everything was alight. As if 
the lost sun were returning at last. The snow orange and 
quivering. A forest ﬁre was making its way along the tinder­
box ridges above them, ﬂaring and shimmering against the 
overcast like the northern lights. Cold as it was he stood 
there a long time. The color of it moved something in him 
long forgotten. Make a list. Recite a litany. Remember. 
It was colder. Nothing moved in that high world. A rich 
smell of woodsmoke hung over the road. He pushed the 
cart on through the snow. A few miles each day. He’d no 
notion how far the summit might be. They ate sparely and 
they were hungry all the time. He stood looking out over 
the country. A river far below. How far had they come? 
In his dream she was sick and he cared for her. The dream 
bore the look of sacriﬁce but he thought differently. He did 
not take care of her and she died alone somewhere in the 
dark and there is no other dream nor other waking world 
and there is no other tale to tell. 
On this road there are no godspoke men. They are gone and 
I am left and they have taken with them the world. Query: 
How does the never to be differ from what never was? 
.
.
.
 

D
T H E  R O A  
Dark of the invisible moon. The nights now only slightly 
less black. By day the banished sun circles the earth like a 
grieving mother with a lamp. 
People sitting on the sidewalk in the dawn half immo­
late and smoking in their clothes. Like failed sectarian sui­
cides. Others would come to help them. Within a year 
there were ﬁres on the ridges and deranged chanting. The 
screams of the murdered. By day the dead impaled on 
spikes along the road. What had they done? He thought 
that in the history of the world it might even be that there 
was more punishment than crime but he took small com­
fort from it. 
The air grew thin and he thought the summit could not be 
far. Perhaps tomorrow. Tomorrow came and went. It didnt 
snow again but the snow in the road was six inches deep 
and pushing the cart up those grades was exhausting work. 
He thought they would have to leave it. How much could 
they carry? He stood and looked out over the barren slopes. 
The ash fell on the snow till it was all but black. 
At every curve it looked as though the pass lay just ahead 
and then one evening he stopped and looked all about and 
he recognized it. He unsnapped the throat of his parka and 
lowered the hood and stood listening. The wind in the 
dead black stands of hemlock. The empty parking lot at 
the overlook. The boy stood beside him. Where he’d stood 

29 
once with his own father in a winter long ago. What is it, 
Papa? the boy said. 
It’s the gap. This is it. 
In the morning they pressed on. It was very cold. Toward 
the afternoon it began to snow again and they made 
camp early and crouched under the leanto of the tarp and 
watched the snow fall in the ﬁre. By morning there was 
several inches of new snow on the ground but the snow 
had stopped and it was so quiet they could all but hear 
their hearts. He piled wood on the coals and fanned the 
ﬁre to life and trudged out through the drifts to dig out the 
cart. He sorted through the cans and went back and they 
sat by the ﬁre and ate the last of their crackers and a tin of 
sausage. In a pocket of his knapsack he’d found a last half 
packet of cocoa and he ﬁxed it for the boy and then poured 
his own cup with hot water and sat blowing at the rim. 
You promised not to do that, the boy said. 
What? 
You know what, Papa. 
He poured the hot water back into the pan and took the 
boy’s cup and poured some of the cocoa into his own and 
then handed it back. 
I have to watch you all the time, the boy said. 
I know. 
If you break little promises you’ll break big ones. That’s 
what you said. 
I know. But I wont. 
.
.
.
 

D
T H E  R O A  
They slogged all day down the southfacing slope of the 
watershed. In the deeper drifts the cart wouldnt push at all 
and he had to drag it behind him with one hand while he 
broke trail. Anywhere but in the mountains they might 
have found something to use for a sled. An old metal sign 
or a sheet of rooﬁngtin. The wrappings on their feet had 
soaked through and they were cold and wet all day. He 
leaned on the cart to get his breath while the boy waited. 
There was a sharp crack from somewhere on the moun­
tain. Then another. It’s just a tree falling, he said. It’s okay. 
The boy was looking at the dead roadside trees. It’s okay, 
the man said. All the trees in the world are going to fall 
sooner or later. But not on us. 
How do you know? 
I just know. 
Still they came to trees across the road where they were 
forced to unload the cart and carry everything over the 
trunks and then repack it all on the far side. The boy found 
toys he’d forgot he had. He kept out a yellow truck and 
they went on with it sitting on top of the tarp. 
They camped in a bench of land on the far side of a frozen 
roadside creek. The wind had blown the ash from the ice 
and the ice was black and the creek looked like a path 
of basalt winding through the woods. They collected ﬁre­
wood from the north side of the slope where it was not so 
wet, pushing over whole trees and dragging them into 
camp. They got the ﬁre going and spread their tarp and 

31 
hung their wet clothes on poles to steam and stink and 
they sat wrapped in the quilts naked while the man held 
the boy’s feet against his stomach to warm them. 
He woke whimpering in the night and the man held him. 
Shh, he said. Shh. It’s okay. 
I had a bad dream. 
I know. 
Should I tell you what it was? 
If you want to. 
I had this penguin that you wound up and it would wad­
dle and ﬂap its ﬂippers. And we were in that house that we 
used to live in and it came around the corner but nobody 
had wound it up and it was really scary. 
Okay. 
It was a lot scarier in the dream. 
I know. Dreams can be really scary. 
Why did I have that scary dream? 
I dont know. But it’s okay now. I’m going to put some 
wood on the ﬁre. You go to sleep. 
The boy didnt answer. Then he said: The winder wasnt 
turning. 
It took four more days to come down out of the snow 
and even then there were patches of snow in certain bends 
of the road and the road was black and wet from the up­
country runoff even beyond that. They came out along the 
rim of a deep gorge and far down in the darkness a river. 
They stood listening. 

D
T H E  R O A  
.
.
.
 
High rock bluffs on the far side of the canyon with thin 
black trees clinging to the escarpment. The sound of the 
river faded. Then it returned. A cold wind blowing up 
from the country below. They were all day reaching the 
river. 
They left the cart in a parking area and walked out through 
the woods. A low thunder coming from the river. It was 
a waterfall dropping off a high shelf of rock and falling 
eighty feet through a gray shroud of mist into the pool 
below. They could smell the water and they could feel the 
cold coming off of it. A bench of wet river gravel. He stood 
and watched the boy. Wow, the boy said. He couldnt take 
his eyes off it. 
He squatted and scooped up a handful of stones and 
smelled them and let them fall clattering. Polished round 
and smooth as marbles or lozenges of stone veined and 
striped. Black disclets and bits of polished quartz all bright 
from the mist off the river. The boy walked out and squat­
ted and laved up the dark water. 
The waterfall fell into the pool almost at its center. A gray 
curd circled. They stood side by side calling to each other 
over the din. 

33 
Is it cold? 
Yes. It’s freezing. 
Do you want to go in? 
I dont know. 
Sure you do. 
Is it okay? 
Come on. 
He unzipped his parka and let it fall to the gravel and 
the boy stood up and they undressed and walked out into 
the water. Ghostly pale and shivering. The boy so thin it 
stopped his heart. He dove headlong and came up gasping 
and turned and stood, beating his arms. 
Is it over my head? the boy called. 
No. Come on. 
He turned and swam out to the falls and let the water 
beat upon him. The boy was standing in the pool to his 
waist, holding his shoulders and hopping up and down. 
The man went back and got him. He held him and ﬂoated 
him about, the boy gasping and chopping at the water. 
You’re doing good, the man said. You’re doing good. 
They dressed shivering and then climbed the trail to the 
upper river. They walked out along the rocks to where the 
river seemed to end in space and he held the boy while 
he ventured out to the last ledge of rock. The river went 
sucking over the rim and fell straight down into the pool 
below. The entire river. He clung to the man’s arm. 
It’s really far, he said. 
It’s pretty far. 

D
T H E  R O A  
Would you die if you fell? 
You’d get hurt. It’s a long way. 
It’s really scary. 
They walked out through the woods. The light was fail­
ing. They followed the ﬂats along the upper river among 
huge dead trees. A rich southern wood that once held may­
apple and pipsissewa. Ginseng. The raw dead limbs of the 
rhododendron twisted and knotted and black. He stopped. 
Something in the mulch and ash. He stooped and cleared 
it away. A small colony of them, shrunken, dried and wrin­
kled. He picked one and held it up and sniffed it. He bit a 
piece from the edge and chewed. 
What is it, Papa? 
Morels. It’s morels. 
What’s morels? 
They’re a kind of mushroom. 
Can you eat them? 
Yes. Take a bite. 
Are they good? 
Take a bite. 
The boy smelled the mushroom and bit into it and stood 
chewing. He looked at his father. These are pretty good, 
he said. 
They pulled the morels from the ground, small alien-
looking things that he piled in the hood of the boy’s parka. 
They hiked back out to the road and down to where they’d 
left the cart and they made camp by the river pool at the 

35 
falls and washed the earth and ash from the morels and put 
them to soak in a pan of water. By the time he had the ﬁre 
going it was dark and he sliced a handful of the mush­
rooms on a log for their dinner and scooped them into the 
frying pan along with the fat pork from a can of beans and 
set them in the coals to simmer. The boy watched him. 
This is a good place Papa, he said. 
They ate the little mushrooms together with the beans and 
drank tea and had tinned pears for their desert. He banked 
the ﬁre against the seam of rock where he’d built it and he 
strung the tarp behind them to reﬂect the heat and they sat 
warm in their refuge while he told the boy stories. Old sto­
ries of courage and justice as he remembered them until the 
boy was asleep in his blankets and then he stoked the ﬁre 
and lay down warm and full and listened to the low thunder 
of the falls beyond them in that dark and threadbare wood. 
He walked out in the morning and took the river path 
downstream. The boy was right that it was a good place 
and he wanted to check for any sign of other visitors. He 
found nothing. He stood watching the river where it swung 
loping into a pool and curled and eddied. He dropped a 
white stone into the water but it vanished as suddenly as if 
it had been eaten. He’d stood at such a river once and 
watched the ﬂash of trout deep in a pool, invisible to see in 
the teacolored water except as they turned on their sides to 
feed. Reﬂecting back the sun deep in the darkness like a 
ﬂash of knives in a cave. 

D
T H E  R O A  
.
.
. 
We cant stay, he said. It’s getting colder every day. And the 
waterfall is an attraction. It was for us and it will be for oth­
ers and we dont know who they will be and we cant hear 
them coming. It’s not safe. 
We could stay one more day. 
It’s not safe. 
Well maybe we could ﬁnd some other place on the river. 
We have to keep moving. We have to keep heading south. 
Doesnt the river go south? 
No. It doesnt. 
Can I see it on the map? 
Yes. Let me get it. 
The tattered oilcompany roadmap had once been taped 
together but now it was just sorted into leaves and num­
bered with crayon in the corners for their assembly. He 
sorted through the limp pages and spread out those that 
answered to their location. 
We cross a bridge here. It looks to be about eight miles 
or so. This is the river. Going east. We follow the road 
here along the eastern slope of the mountains. These are 
our roads, the black lines on the map. The state roads. 
Why are they the state roads? 
Because they used to belong to the states. What used to 
be called the states. 
But there’s not any more states? 
No. 
What happened to them? 
I dont know exactly. That’s a good question. 
But the roads are still there. 

37 
Yes. For a while. 
How long a while? 
I dont know. Maybe quite a while. There’s nothing to 
uproot them so they should be okay for a while. 
But there wont be any cars or trucks on them. 
No. 
Okay. 
Are you ready? 
The boy nodded. He wiped his nose on his sleeve and 
shouldered up his small pack and the man folded away 
the map sections and rose and the boy followed him out 
through the gray palings of the trees to the road. 
When the bridge came in sight below them there was a 
tractor-trailer jackknifed sideways across it and wedged 
into the buckled iron railings. It was raining again and 
they stood there with the rain pattering softly on the tarp. 
Peering out from under the blue gloom beneath the plastic. 
Can we get around it? the boy said. 
I dont think so. We can probably get under it. We may 
have to unload the cart. 
The bridge spanned the river above a rapids. They could 
hear the noise of it as they came around the curve in the 
road. A wind was coming down the gorge and they pulled 
the corners of the tarp about them and pushed the cart 
out onto the bridge. They could see the river through the 
ironwork. Below the rapids was a railroad bridge laid on 
limestone piers. The stones of the piers were stained well 

D
T H E  R O A  
above the river from the high water and the bend of the 
river was choked with great windrows of black limbs and 
brush and the trunks of trees. 
The truck had been there for years, the tires ﬂat and crum­
pled under the rims. The front of the tractor was jammed 
against the railing of the bridge and the trailer had sheared 
forward off the top plate and jammed up against the back 
of the cab. The rear of the trailer had swung out and buck­
led the rail on the other side of the bridge and it hung 
several feet out over the river gorge. He pushed the cart 
up under the trailer but the handle wouldnt clear. They’d 
have to slide it under sideways. He left it sitting in the rain 
with the tarp over it and they duckwalked under the trailer 
and he left the boy crouched there in the dry while he 
climbed up on the gastank step and wiped the water from 
the glass and peered inside the cab. He stepped back down 
and reached up and opened the door and then climbed 
in and pulled the door shut behind him. He sat looking 
around. An old doghouse sleeper behind the seats. Papers 
in the ﬂoor. The glovebox was open but it was empty. He 
climbed back between the seats. There was a raw damp 
mattress on the bunk and a small refrigerator with the door 
standing open. A fold-down table. Old magazines in the 
ﬂoor. He went through the plywood lockers overhead but 
they were empty. There were drawers under the bunk and 
he pulled them out and looked through the trash. He 
climbed forward into the cab again and sat in the driver’s 
seat and looked out down the river through the slow 

39 
trickle of water on the glass. The thin drum of rain on the 
metal roof and the slow darkness falling over everything. 
They slept that night in the truck and in the morning the 
rain had stopped and they unloaded the cart and passed 
everything under the truck to the other side and reloaded 
it. Down the bridge a hundred feet or so were the black­
ened remains of tires that had been burned there. He stood 
looking at the trailer. What do you think is in there? 
he said. 
I dont know. 
We’re not the ﬁrst ones here. So probably nothing. 
There’s no way to get in. 
He put his ear to the side of the trailer and whacked 
the sheetmetal with the ﬂat of his hand. It sounds empty, 
he said. You can probably get in from the roof. Somebody 
would have cut a hole in the side of it by now. 
What would they cut it with? 
They’d ﬁnd something. 
He took off his parka and laid it across the top of the 
cart and climbed on to the fender of the tractor and on to 
the hood and clambered up over the windscreen to the 
roof of the cab. He stood and turned and looked down at 
the river. Wet metal underfoot. He looked down at the boy. 
The boy looked worried. He turned and reached and got a 
grip on the front of the trailer and slowly pulled himself 
up. It was all he could do and there was a lot less of him to 
pull. He got one leg up over the edge and hung there rest­
ing. Then he pulled himself up and rolled over and sat up. 

D
T H E  R O A  
.
.
.
 
There was a skylight about a third of the way down the 
roof and he made his way to it in a walking crouch. The 
cover was gone and the inside of the trailer smelled of wet 
plywood and that sour smell he’d come to know. He had 
a magazine in his hip pocket and he took it out and tore 
some pages from it and wadded them and got out his 
lighter and lit the papers and dropped them into the dark­
ness. A faint whooshing. He wafted away the smoke and 
looked down into the trailer. The small ﬁre burning in the 
ﬂoor seemed a long way down. He shielded the glare of 
it with his hand and when he did he could see almost 
to the rear of the box. Human bodies. Sprawled in every 
attitude. Dried and shrunken in their rotted clothes. The 
small wad of burning paper drew down to a wisp of ﬂame 
and then died out leaving a faint pattern for just a moment 
in the incandescence like the shape of a ﬂower, a molten 
rose. Then all was dark again. 
They camped that night in the woods on a ridge over­
looking the broad piedmont plain where it stretched away 
to the south. He built a cookﬁre against a rock and they ate 
the last of the morels and a can of spinach. In the night 
a storm broke in the mountains above them and came 
cannonading downcountry cracking and booming and the 
stark gray world appeared again and again out of the night 
in the shrouded ﬂare of the lightning. The boy clung to 
him. It all passed on. A brief rattle of hail and then the 
slow cold rain. 

41 
.
.
.
 
When he woke again it was still dark but the rain had 
stopped. A smoky light out there in the valley. He rose and 
walked out along the ridge. A haze of ﬁre that stretched for 
miles. He squatted and watched it. He could smell the 
smoke. He wet his ﬁnger and held it to the wind. When he 
rose and turned to go back the tarp was lit from within 
where the boy had wakened. Sited there in the darkness 
the frail blue shape of it looked like the pitch of some last 
venture at the edge of the world. Something all but unac­
countable. And so it was. 
All the day following they traveled through the drifting 
haze of woodsmoke. In the draws the smoke coming off the 
ground like mist and the thin black trees burning on the 
slopes like stands of heathen candles. Late in the day they 
came to a place where the ﬁre had crossed the road and the 
macadam was still warm and further on it began to soften 
underfoot. The hot black mastic sucking at their shoes and 
stretching in thin bands as they stepped. They stopped. 
We’ll have to wait, he said. 
They backtracked and camped in the actual road and when 
they went on in the morning the macadam had cooled. Bye 
and bye they came to a set of tracks cooked into the tar. 
They just suddenly appeared. He squatted and studied 
them. Someone had come out of the woods in the night and 
continued down the melted roadway. 

D
T H E  R O A  
Who is it? said the boy. 
I dont know. Who is anybody? 
They came upon him shufﬂing along the road before them, 
dragging one leg slightly and stopping from time to time to 
stand stooped and uncertain before setting out again. 
What should we do, Papa? 
We’re all right. Let’s just follow and watch. 
Take a look, the boy said. 
Yes. Take a look. 
They followed him a good ways but at his pace they were 
losing the day and ﬁnally he just sat in the road and did not 
get up again. The boy hung on to his father’s coat. No one 
spoke. He was as burntlooking as the country, his clothing 
scorched and black. One of his eyes was burnt shut and 
his hair was but a nitty wig of ash upon his blackened 
skull. As they passed he looked down. As if he’d done 
something wrong. His shoes were bound up with wire and 
coated with roadtar and he sat there in silence, bent over in 
his rags. The boy kept looking back. Papa? he whispered. 
What is wrong with the man? 
He’s been struck by lightning. 
Cant we help him? Papa? 
No. We cant help him. 
The boy kept pulling at his coat. Papa? he said. 
Stop it. 
Cant we help him Papa? 

43 
No. We cant help him. There’s nothing to be done 
for him. 
They went on. The boy was crying. He kept looking back. 
When they got to the bottom of the hill the man stopped 
and looked at him and looked back up the road. The 
burned man had fallen over and at that distance you 
couldnt even tell what it was. I’m sorry, he said. But we 
have nothing to give him. We have no way to help him. I’m 
sorry for what happened to him but we cant ﬁx it. You 
know that, dont you? The boy stood looking down. He 
nodded his head. Then they went on and he didnt look 
back again. 
At evening a dull sulphur light from the ﬁres. The stand­
ing water in the roadside ditches black with the runoff. 
The mountains shrouded away. They crossed a river by a 
concrete bridge where skeins of ash and slurry moved 
slowly in the current. Charred bits of wood. In the end they 
stopped and turned back and camped under the bridge. 
He’d carried his billfold about till it wore a cornershaped 
hole in his trousers. Then one day he sat by the road­
side and took it out and went through the contents. Some 
money, credit cards. His driver’s license. A picture of his 
wife. He spread everything out on the blacktop. Like gam­
ing cards. He pitched the sweatblackened piece of leather 

D
T H E  R O A  
into the woods and sat holding the photograph. Then he 
laid it down in the road also and then he stood and they 
went on. 
In the morning he lay looking up at the clay nests that 
swallows had built in the corners under the bridge. He 
looked at the boy but the boy had turned away and lay 
staring out at the river. 
There’s nothing we could have done. 
He didnt answer. 
He’s going to die. We cant share what we have or we’ll 
die too. 
I know. 
So when are you going to talk to me again? 
I’m talking now. 
Are you sure? 
Yes. 
Okay. 
Okay. 
They stood on the far shore of a river and called to him. 
Tattered gods slouching in their rags across the waste. Trek­
king the dried ﬂoor of a mineral sea where it lay cracked 
and broken like a fallen plate. Paths of feral ﬁre in the coagu­
late sands. The ﬁgures faded in the distance. He woke and 
lay in the dark. 
.
.
.
 

45 
The clocks stopped at 1:17. A long shear of light and then a 
series of low concussions. He got up and went to the win­
dow. What is it? she said. He didnt answer. He went into 
the bathroom and threw the lightswitch but the power was 
already gone. A dull rose glow in the windowglass. He 
dropped to one knee and raised the lever to stop the tub 
and then turned on both taps as far as they would go. She 
was standing in the doorway in her nightwear, clutching 
the jamb, cradling her belly in one hand. What is it? she 
said. What is happening? 
I dont know. 
Why are you taking a bath? 
I’m not. 
Once in those early years he’d wakened in a barren wood 
and lay listening to ﬂocks of migratory birds overhead in 
that bitter dark. Their half muted crankings miles above 
where they circled the earth as senselessly as insects troop­
ing the rim of a bowl. He wished them godspeed till they 
were gone. He never heard them again. 
He’d a deck of cards he found in a bureau drawer in a 
house and the cards were worn and spindled and the two 
of clubs was missing but still they played sometimes by 
ﬁrelight wrapped in their blankets. He tried to remember 
the rules of childhood games. Old Maid. Some version 
of Whist. He was sure he had them mostly wrong and 
he made up new games and gave them made up names. 

D
T H E  R O A  
Abnormal Fescue or Catbarf. Sometimes the child would 
ask him questions about the world that for him was not 
even a memory. He thought hard how to answer. There is 
no past. What would you like? But he stopped making 
things up because those things were not true either and 
the telling made him feel bad. The child had his own fan­
tasies. How things would be in the south. Other children. 
He tried to keep a rein on this but his heart was not in it. 
Whose would be? 
No lists of things to be done. The day providential to 
itself. The hour. There is no later. This is later. All things 
of grace and beauty such that one holds them to one’s 
heart have a common provenance in pain. Their birth in 
grief and ashes. So, he whispered to the sleeping boy. I 
have you. 
He thought about the picture in the road and he thought 
that he should have tried to keep her in their lives in some 
way but he didnt know how. He woke coughing and walked 
out so as not to wake the child. Following a stone wall in 
the dark, wrapped in his blanket, kneeling in the ashes like 
a penitent. He coughed till he could taste the blood and he 
said her name aloud. He thought perhaps he’d said it in 
his sleep. When he got back the boy was awake. I’m sorry, 
he said. 
It’s okay. 
Go to sleep. 
I wish I was with my mom. 

47 
He didnt answer. He sat beside the small ﬁgure wrapped 
in the quilts and blankets. After a while he said: You mean 
you wish that you were dead. 
Yes. 
You musnt say that. 
But I do. 
Dont say it. It’s a bad thing to say. 
I cant help it. 
I know. But you have to. 
How do I do it? 
I dont know. 
We’re survivors he told her across the ﬂame of the lamp. 
Survivors? she said. 
Yes. 
What in God’s name are you talking about? We’re not 
survivors. We’re the walking dead in a horror ﬁlm. 
I’m begging you. 
I dont care. I dont care if you cry. It doesnt mean any­
thing to me. 
Please. 
Stop it. 
I am begging you. I’ll do anything. 
Such as what? I should have done it a long time ago. 
When there were three bullets in the gun instead of two. I 
was stupid. We’ve been over all of this. I didnt bring myself 
to this. I was brought. And now I’m done. I thought about 
not even telling you. That would probably have been best. 
You have two bullets and then what? You cant protect us. 
You say you would die for us but what good is that? I’d 

D
T H E  R O A  
take him with me if it werent for you. You know I would. 
It’s the right thing to do. 
You’re talking crazy. 
No, I’m speaking the truth. Sooner or later they will 
catch us and they will kill us. They will rape me. They’ll 
rape him. They are going to rape us and kill us and eat us 
and you wont face it. You’d rather wait for it to happen. 
But I cant. I cant. She sat there smoking a slender length of 
dried grapevine as if it were some rare cheroot. Holding it 
with a certain elegance, her other hand across her knees 
where she’d drawn them up. She watched him across the 
small ﬂame. We used to talk about death, she said. We 
dont any more. Why is that? 
I dont know. 
It’s because it’s here. There’s nothing left to talk about. 
I wouldnt leave you. 
I dont care. It’s meaningless. You can think of me as a 
faithless slut if you like. I’ve taken a new lover. He can give 
me what you cannot. 
Death is not a lover. 
Oh yes he is. 
Please dont do this. 
I’m sorry. 
I cant do it alone. 
Then dont. I cant help you. They say that women dream 
of danger to those in their care and men of danger to them­
selves. But I dont dream at all. You say you cant? Then 
dont do it. That’s all. Because I am done with my own 
whorish heart and I have been for a long time. You talk 
about taking a stand but there is no stand to take. My heart 
was ripped out of me the night he was born so dont ask for 

49 
sorrow now. There is none. Maybe you’ll be good at this. I 
doubt it, but who knows. The one thing I can tell you is 
that you wont survive for yourself. I know because I would 
never have come this far. A person who had no one would 
be well advised to cobble together some passable ghost. 
Breathe it into being and coax it along with words of love. 
Offer it each phantom crumb and shield it from harm with 
your body. As for me my only hope is for eternal nothing­
ness and I hope it with all my heart. 
He didnt answer. 
You have no argument because there is none. 
Will you tell him goodbye? 
No. I will not. 
Just wait till morning. Please. 
I have to go. 
She had already stood up. 
For the love of God, woman. What am I to tell him? 
I cant help you. 
Where are you going to go? You cant even see. 
I dont have to. 
He stood up. I’m begging you, he said. 
No. I will not. I cannot. 
She was gone and the coldness of it was her ﬁnal gift. She 
would do it with a ﬂake of obsidian. He’d taught her him­
self. Sharper than steel. The edge an atom thick. And she 
was right. There was no argument. The hundred nights 
they’d sat up debating the pros and cons of self destruc­
tion with the earnestness of philosophers chained to a mad­
house wall. In the morning the boy said nothing at all and 

D
T H E  R O A  
when they were packed and ready to set out upon the road 
he turned and looked back at their campsite and he said: 
She’s gone isn’t she? And he said: Yes, she is. 
Always so deliberate, hardly surprised by the most out­
landish advents. A creation perfectly evolved to meet its 
own end. They sat at the window and ate in their robes by 
candlelight a midnight supper and watched distant cities 
burn. A few nights later she gave birth in their bed by the 
light of a drycell lamp. Gloves meant for dishwashing. The 
improbable appearance of the small crown of the head. 
Streaked with blood and lank black hair. The rank meco­
nium. Her cries meant nothing to him. Beyond the win­
dow just the gathering cold, the ﬁres on the horizon. He 
held aloft the scrawny red body so raw and naked and cut 
the cord with kitchen shears and wrapped his son in a 
towel. 
Did you have any friends? 
Yes. I did. 
Lots of them? 
Yes. 
Do you remember them? 
Yes. I remember them. 
What happened to them? 
They died. 
All of them? 
Yes. All of them. 

51 
Do you miss them? 
Yes. I do. 
Where are we going? 
We’re going south. 
Okay. 
They were all day on the long black road, stopping in the 
afternoon to eat sparingly from their meager supplies. 
The boy took his truck from the pack and shaped roads 
in the ash with a stick. The truck tooled along slowly. 
He made truck noises. The day seemed almost warm 
and they slept in the leaves with their packs under their 
heads. 
Something woke him. He turned on his side and lay listen­
ing. He raised his head slowly, the pistol in his hand. He 
looked down at the boy and when he looked back toward 
the road the ﬁrst of them were already coming into view. 
God, he whispered. He reached and shook the boy, keep­
ing his eyes on the road. They came shufﬂing through 
the ash casting their hooded heads from side to side. 
Some of them wearing canister masks. One in a biohazard 
suit. Stained and ﬁlthy. Slouching along with clubs in their 
hands, lengths of pipe. Coughing. Then he heard on the 
road behind them what sounded like a diesel truck. Quick, 
he whispered. Quick. He shoved the pistol in his belt and 
grabbed the boy by the hand and he dragged the cart 
through the trees and tilted it over where it would not so 

D
T H E  R O A  
easily be seen. The boy was frozen with fear. He pulled 
him to him. It’s all right, he said. We have to run. Dont 
look back. Come on. 
He slung their knapsacks over his shoulder and they tore 
through the crumbling bracken. The boy was terriﬁed. 
Run, he whispered. Run. He looked back. The truck had 
rumbled into view. Men standing in the bed looking out. 
The boy fell and he pulled him up. It’s all right, he said. 
Come on. 
He could see a break through the trees that he thought 
was a ditch or a cut and they came out through the weeds 
into an old roadway. Plates of cracked macadam showing 
through the drifts of ash. He pulled the boy down and they 
crouched under the bank listening, gasping for breath. 
They could hear the diesel engine out on the road, run­
ning on God knows what. When he raised up to look he 
could just see the top of the truck moving along the road. 
Men standing in the stakebed, some of them holding riﬂes. 
The truck passed on and the black diesel smoke coiled 
through the woods. The motor sounded ropy. Missing and 
puttering. Then it quit. 
He sank down and put his hand on top of his head. God, 
he said. They could hear the thing rattle and ﬂap to a halt. 
Then just the silence. He had the pistol in his hand, he 

53 
couldnt even remember taking it from his belt. They could 
hear the men talking. Hear them unlatch and raise the 
hood. He sat with his arm around the boy. Shh, he said. 
Shh. After a while they heard the truck begin to roll. Lum­
bering and creaking like a ship. They’d have no other 
way to start it save to push it and they couldnt get it 
fast enough to start on that slope. After a few minutes it 
coughed and bucked and stopped again. He raised his 
head to look and coming through the weeds twenty feet 
away was one of their number unbuckling his belt. They 
both froze. 
He cocked the pistol and held it on the man and the man 
stood with one hand out at his side, the dirty crumpled 
paintmask that he wore sucking in and out. 
Just keep coming. 
He looked at the road. 
Dont look back there. Look at me. If you call out you’re 
dead. 
He came forward, holding his belt by one hand. The 
holes in it marked the progress of his emaciation and the 
leather at one side had a lacquered look to it where he was 
used to stropping the blade of his knife. He stepped down 
into the roadcut and he looked at the gun and he looked at 
the boy. Eyes collared in cups of grime and deeply sunk. 
Like an animal inside a skull looking out the eyeholes. He 
wore a beard that had been cut square across the bottom 
with shears and he had a tattoo of a bird on his neck done 
by someone with an illformed notion of their appearance. 

D
T H E  R O A  
He was lean, wiry, rachitic. Dressed in a pair of ﬁlthy blue 
coveralls and a black billcap with the logo of some van­
ished enterprise embroidered across the front of it. 
Where are you going? 
I was going to take a crap. 
Where are you going with the truck. 
I dont know. 
What do you mean you dont know? Take the mask off. 
He pulled the mask off over his head and stood hold ­
ing it. 
I mean I dont know, he said. 
You dont know where you’re going? 
No. 
What’s the truck running on. 
Diesel fuel. 
How much do you have. 
There’s three ﬁfty-ﬁve gallon drums in the bed. 
Do you have ammunition for those guns? 
He looked back toward the road. 
I told you not to look back there. 
Yeah. We got ammunition. 
Where did you get it? 
Found it. 
That’s a lie. What are you eating. 
Whatever we can ﬁnd. 
Whatever you can ﬁnd. 
Yeah. He looked at the boy. You wont shoot, he said. 
That’s what you think. 
You aint got but two shells. Maybe just one. And they’ll 
hear the shot. 
Yes they will. But you wont. 

55 
How do you ﬁgure that? 
Because the bullet travels faster than sound. It will be in 
your brain before you can hear it. To hear it you will need 
a frontal lobe and things with names like colliculus and 
temporal gyrus and you wont have them anymore. They’ll 
just be soup. 
Are you a doctor? 
I’m not anything. 
We got a man hurt. It’d be worth your while. 
Do I look like an imbecile to you? 
I dont know what you look like. 
Why are you looking at him? 
I can look where I want to. 
No you cant. If you look at him again I’ll shoot you. 
The boy was sitting with both hands on top of his head 
and looking out between his forearms. 
I’ll bet that boy is hungry. Why dont you all just come 
on to the truck? Get something to eat. Aint no need to be 
such a hard-ass. 
You dont have anything to eat. Let’s go. 
Go where? 
Let’s go. 
I aint goin nowheres. 
You’re not? 
No. I aint. 
You think I wont kill you but you’re wrong. But what I’d 
rather do is take you up this road a mile or so and then 
turn you loose. That’s all the head start we need. You wont 
ﬁnd us. You wont even know which way we went. 
You know what I think? 
What do you think. 

D
T H E  R O A  
I think you’re chickenshit. 
He let go of the belt and it fell in the roadway with 
the gear hanging from it. A canteen. An old canvas army 
pouch. A leather sheath for a knife. When he looked up 
the roadrat was holding the knife in his hand. He’d only 
taken two steps but he was almost between him and the 
child. 
What do you think you’re going to do with that? 
He didnt answer. He was a big man but he was very 
quick. He dove and grabbed the boy and rolled and came 
up holding him against his chest with the knife at his 
throat. The man had already dropped to the ground and 
he swung with him and leveled the pistol and ﬁred from a 
two-handed position balanced on both knees at a distance 
of six feet. The man fell back instantly and lay with blood 
bubbling from the hole in his forehead. The boy was lying 
in his lap with no expression on his face at all. He shoved 
the pistol in his belt and slung the knapsack over his 
shoulder and picked up the boy and turned him around 
and lifted him over his head and set him on his shoulders 
and set off up the old roadway at a dead run, holding the 
boy’s knees, the boy clutching his forehead, covered with 
gore and mute as a stone. 
They came to an old iron bridge in the woods where the 
vanished road had crossed an all but vanished stream. He 
was starting to cough and he’d hardly breath to do it with. 
He dropped down out of the roadway and into the woods. 
He turned and stood gasping, trying to listen. He heard 

57 
nothing. He staggered on another half mile or so and ﬁnally 
dropped to his knees and put the boy down in the ashes 
and leaves. He wiped the blood from his face and held 
him. It’s okay, he said. It’s okay. 
In the long cold evening with the darkness dropping down 
he heard them only once. He held the boy close. There 
was a cough in his throat that never left. The boy so frail 
and thin through his coat, shivering like a dog. The foot­
steps in the leaves stopped. Then they moved on. They 
neither spoke nor called to each other, the more sinister 
for that. With the ﬁnal onset of dark the iron cold locked 
down and the boy by now was shuddering violently. No 
moon rose beyond the murk and there was nowhere to go. 
They had a single blanket in the pack and he got it out and 
covered the boy with it and he unzipped his parka and 
held the boy against him. They lay there for a long time 
but they were freezing and ﬁnally he sat up. We’ve got to 
move, he said. We cant just lie here. He looked around but 
there was nothing to see. He spoke into a blackness with­
out depth or dimension. 
He held the boy’s hand as they stumbled through the 
woods. The other hand he held out before him. He could 
see no worse with his eyes shut. The boy was wrapped in 
the blanket and he told him not to drop it because they 
would never ﬁnd it again. He wanted to be carried but the 
man told him that he had to keep moving. They stumbled 

D
T H E  R O A  
and fell through the woods the night long and long before 
dawn the boy fell and would not get up again. He wrapped 
him in his own parka and wrapped him in the blanket and 
sat holding him, rocking back and forth. A single round 
left in the revolver. You will not face the truth. You will not. 
In the grudging light that passed for day he put the boy in 
the leaves and sat studying the woods. When it was a bit 
lighter he rose and walked out and cut a perimeter about 
their siwash camp looking for sign but other than their 
own faint track through the ash he saw nothing. He went 
back and gathered the boy up. We have to go, he said. The 
boy sat slumped, his face blank. The ﬁlth dried in his hair 
and his face streaked with it. Talk to me, he said, but he 
would not. 
They moved on east through the standing dead trees. 
They passed an old frame house and crossed a dirt road. A 
cleared plot of ground perhaps once a truckgarden. Stop­
ping from time to time to listen. The unseen sun cast no 
shadow. They came upon the road unexpectedly and he 
stopped the boy with one hand and they crouched in the 
roadside ditch like lepers and listened. No wind. Dead 
silence. After a while he rose and walked out into the road. 
He looked back at the boy. Come on, he said. The boy 
came out and the man pointed out the tracks in the ash 
where the truck had gone. The boy stood wrapped in the 
blanket looking down at the road. 

59 
.
.
.
 
He’d no way to know if they’d got the truck running again. 
No way to know how long they might be willing to lie 
in ambush. He thumbed the pack down off his shoulder 
and sat and opened it. We need to eat, he said. Are you 
hungry? 
The boy shook his head. 
No. Of course not. He took out the plastic bottle of 
water and unscrewed the cap and held it out and the boy 
took it and stood drinking. He lowered the bottle and got 
his breath and he sat in the road and crossed his legs and 
drank again. Then he handed the bottle back and the 
man drank and screwed the cap back on and rummaged 
through the pack. They ate a can of white beans, passing it 
between them, and he threw the empty tin into the woods. 
Then they set out down the road again. 
The truck people had camped in the road itself. They’d 
built a ﬁre there and charred billets of wood lay stuck in 
the melted tar together with ash and bones. He squatted 
and held his hand over the tar. A faint warmth coming off 
of it. He stood and looked down the road. Then he took the 
boy with him into the woods. I want you to wait here, he 
said. I wont be far away. I’ll be able to hear you if you call. 
Take me with you, the boy said. He looked as if he was 
going to cry. 
No. I want you to wait here. 
Please, Papa. 

D
T H E  R O A  
Stop it. I want you to do what I say. Take the gun. 
I dont want the gun. 
I didnt ask you if you wanted it. Take it. 
He walked out through the woods to where they’d left the 
cart. It was still lying there but it had been plundered. The 
few things they hadnt taken scattered in the leaves. Some 
books and toys belonging to the boy. His old shoes and 
some rags of clothing. He righted the cart and put the 
boy’s things in it and wheeled it out to the road. Then he 
went back. There was nothing there. Dried blood dark in 
the leaves. The boy’s knapsack was gone. Coming back he 
found the bones and the skin piled together with rocks 
over them. A pool of guts. He pushed at the bones with the 
toe of his shoe. They looked to have been boiled. No 
pieces of clothing. Dark was coming on again and it was 
already very cold and he turned and went out to where 
he’d left the boy and knelt and put his arms around him 
and held him. 
They pushed the cart through the woods as far as the old 
road and left it there and headed south along the road hur­
rying against the dark. The boy was stumbling he was so 
tired and the man picked him up and swung him onto his 
shoulders and they went on. By the time they got to the 
bridge there was scarcely light at all. He put the boy down 
and they felt their way down the embankment. Under the 
bridge he got out his lighter and lit it and swept the ground 
with the ﬂickering light. Sand and gravel washed up from 

61 
the creek. He set down the knapsack and put away the 
lighter and took hold of the boy by the shoulders. He 
could just make him out in the darkness. I want you to wait 
here, he said. I’m going for wood. We have to have a ﬁre. 
I’m scared. 
I know. But I’ll just be a little ways and I’ll be able to 
hear you so if you get scared you call me and I’ll come 
right away. 
I’m really scared. 
The sooner I go the sooner I’ll be back and we’ll have a 
ﬁre and then you wont be scared anymore. Dont lie down. 
If you lie down you’ll fall asleep and then if I call you 
you wont answer and I wont be able to ﬁnd you. Do you 
understand? 
The boy didnt answer. He was close to losing his tem­
per with him and then he realized that he was shaking his 
head in the dark. Okay, he said. Okay. 
He scrambled up the bank and into the woods, holding his 
hands out in front of him. There was wood everywhere, 
dead limbs and branches scattered over the ground. He 
shufﬂed along kicking them into a pile and when he had an 
armful he stooped and gathered them up and called the 
boy and the boy answered and talked him back to the 
bridge. They sat in the darkness while he shaved sticks 
into a pile with his knife and broke up the small branches 
with his hands. He took the lighter from his pocket and 
struck the wheel with his thumb. He used gasoline in the 
lighter and it burned with a frail blue ﬂame and he bent 
and set the tinder alight and watched the ﬁre climb upward 

D
T H E  R O A  
through the wicker of limbs. He piled on more wood and 
bent and blew gently at the base of the little blaze and 
arranged the wood with his hands, shaping the ﬁre just so. 
He made two more trips into the woods, dragging arm­
loads of brush and limbs to the bridge and pushing them 
over the side. He could see the glow of the ﬁre from some 
distance but he didnt think it could be seen from the other 
road. Below the bridge he could make out a dark pool of 
standing water among the rocks. A rim of shelving ice. He 
stood on the bridge and shoved the last pile of wood over, 
his breath white in the glow of the ﬁrelight. 
He sat in the sand and inventoried the contents of the knap­
sack. The binoculars. A half pint bottle of gasoline almost 
full. The bottle of water. A pair of pliers. Two spoons. He 
set everything out in a row. There were ﬁve small tins of 
food and he chose a can of sausages and one of corn and he 
opened these with the little army can opener and set them 
at the edge of the ﬁre and they sat watching the labels char 
and curl. When the corn began to steam he took the cans 
from the ﬁre with the pliers and they sat bent over them 
with their spoons, eating slowly. The boy was nodding 
with sleep. 
When they’d eaten he took the boy out on the gravelbar 
below the bridge and he pushed away the thin shore ice 
with a stick and they knelt there while he washed the boy’s 

63 
face and his hair. The water was so cold the boy was cry­
ing. They moved down the gravel to ﬁnd fresh water and 
he washed his hair again as well as he could and ﬁnally 
stopped because the boy was moaning with the cold of it. 
He dried him with the blanket, kneeling there in the glow 
of the light with the shadow of the bridge’s understructure 
broken across the palisade of treetrunks beyond the creek. 
This is my child, he said. I wash a dead man’s brains out of 
his hair. That is my job. Then he wrapped him in the blan­
ket and carried him to the ﬁre. 
The boy sat tottering. The man watched him that he not 
topple into the ﬂames. He kicked holes in the sand for the 
boy’s hips and shoulders where he would sleep and he sat 
holding him while he tousled his hair before the ﬁre to dry 
it. All of this like some ancient anointing. So be it. Evoke 
the forms. Where you’ve nothing else construct ceremo­
nies out of the air and breathe upon them. 
He woke in the night with the cold and rose and broke 
up more wood for the ﬁre. The shapes of the small tree-
limbs burning incandescent orange in the coals. He blew 
the ﬂames to life and piled on the wood and sat with his 
legs crossed, leaning against the stone pier of the bridge. 
Heavy limestone blocks laid up without mortar. Overhead the 
ironwork brown with rust, the hammered rivets, the wooden 
sleepers and crossplanks. The sand where he sat was warm 
to the touch but the night beyond the ﬁre was sharp with the 
cold. He got up and dragged fresh wood in under the bridge. 

D
T H E  R O A  
He stood listening. The boy didnt stir. He sat beside him 
and stroked his pale and tangled hair. Golden chalice, good 
to house a god. Please dont tell me how the story ends. 
When he looked out again at the darkness beyond the bridge 
it was snowing. 
All the wood they had to burn was small wood and the ﬁre 
was good for no more than an hour or perhaps a bit more. 
He dragged the rest of the brush in under the bridge and 
broke it up, standing on the limbs and cracking them to 
length. He thought the noise would wake the boy but it 
didnt. The wet wood hissed in the ﬂames, the snow con­
tinued to fall. In the morning they would see if there were 
tracks in the road or not. This was the ﬁrst human being 
other than the boy that he’d spoken to in more than a year. 
My brother at last. The reptilian calculations in those 
cold and shifting eyes. The gray and rotting teeth. Claggy 
with human ﬂesh. Who has made of the world a lie every 
word. When he woke again the snow had stopped and the 
grainy dawn was shaping out the naked woodlands beyond 
the bridge, the trees black against the snow. He was lying 
curled up with his hands between his knees and he sat 
up and got the ﬁre going and he set a can of beets in the 
embers. The boy lay huddled on the ground watching him. 
The new snow lay in skifts all through the woods, along 
the limbs and cupped in the leaves, all of it already gray 
with ash. They hiked out to where they’d left the cart and 

65 
he put the knapsack in and pushed it out to the road. No 
tracks. They stood listening in the utter silence. Then 
they set out along the road through the gray slush, the boy 
at his side with his hands in his pockets. 
They trudged all day, the boy in silence. By afternoon the 
slush had melted off the road and by evening it was dry. 
They didnt stop. How many miles? Ten, twelve. They used 
to play quoits in the road with four big steel washers they’d 
found in a hardware store but these were gone with every­
thing else. That night they camped in a ravine and built a 
ﬁre against a small stone bluff and ate their last tin of food. 
He’d put it by because it was the boy’s favorite, pork and 
beans. They watched it bubble slowly in the coals and he 
retrieved the tin with the pliers and they ate in silence. He 
rinsed the empty tin with water and gave it to the child to 
drink and that was that. I should have been more careful, 
he said. 
The boy didnt answer. 
You have to talk to me. 
Okay. 
You wanted to know what the bad guys looked like. 
Now you know. It may happen again. My job is to take care 
of you. I was appointed to do that by God. I will kill any­
one who touches you. Do you understand? 
Yes. 
He sat there cowled in the blanket. After a while he 
looked up. Are we still the good guys? he said. 
Yes. We’re still the good guys. 

D
T H E  R O A  
And we always will be. 
Yes. We always will be. 
Okay. 
In the morning they came up out of the ravine and took to 
the road again. He’d carved the boy a ﬂute from a piece of 
roadside cane and he took it from his coat and gave it to 
him. The boy took it wordlessly. After a while he fell back 
and after a while the man could hear him playing. A form­
less music for the age to come. Or perhaps the last music 
on earth called up from out of the ashes of its ruin. The 
man turned and looked back at him. He was lost in con­
centration. The man thought he seemed some sad and soli­
tary changeling child announcing the arrival of a traveling 
spectacle in shire and village who does not know that 
behind him the players have all been carried off by wolves. 
He sat crosslegged in the leaves at the crest of a ridge and 
glassed the valley below them with the binoculars. The 
still poured shape of a river. The dark brick stacks of a 
mill. Slate roofs. An old wooden watertower bound with 
iron hoops. No smoke, no movement of life. He lowered 
the glasses and sat watching. 
What do you see? the boy said. 
Nothing. 
He handed the binoculars across. The boy slung the 
strap over his neck and put them to his eyes and adjusted 
the wheel. Everything about them so still. 
I see smoke, he said. 

67 
Where. 
Past those buildings. 
What buildings? 
The boy handed the glasses back and he refocused 
them. The palest wisp. Yes, he said. I see it. 
What should we do, Papa? 
I think we should take a look. We just have to be careful. 
If it’s a commune they’ll have barricades. But it may just 
be refugees. 
Like us. 
Yes. Like us. 
What if it’s the bad guys? 
We’ll have to take a risk. We need to ﬁnd something 
to eat. 
They left the cart in the woods and crossed a railroad track 
and came down a steep bank through dead black ivy. He 
carried the pistol in his hand. Stay close, he said. He did. 
They moved through the streets like sappers. One block at 
a time. A faint smell of woodsmoke on the air. They waited 
in a store and watched the street but nothing moved. They 
went through the trash and rubble. Cabinet drawers pulled 
out into the ﬂoor, paper and bloated cardboard boxes. 
They found nothing. All the stores were riﬂed years ago, 
the glass mostly gone from the windows. Inside it was all 
but too dark to see. They climbed the ribbed steel stairs 
of an escalator, the boy holding on to his hand. A few dusty 
suits hanging on a rack. They looked for shoes but there 
were none. They shufﬂed through the trash but there was 
nothing there of any use to them. When they came back he 

D
T H E  R O A  
slipped the suitcoats from their hangers and shook them 
out and folded them across his arm. Let’s go, he said. 
He thought there had to be something overlooked but 
there wasnt. They kicked through the trash in the aisles 
of a foodmarket. Old packaging and papers and the eter­
nal ash. He scoured the shelves looking for vitamins. 
He opened the door of a walk-in cooler but the sour rank 
smell of the dead washed out of the darkness and he 
quickly closed it again. They stood in the street. He looked 
at the gray sky. Faint plume of their breath. The boy was 
exhausted. He took him by the hand. We have to look 
some more, he said. We have to keep looking. 
The houses at the edge of the town offered little more. 
They climbed the back steps into a kitchen and began to 
go through the cabinets. The cabinet doors all standing 
open. A can of bakingpowder. He stood there looking at 
it. They went through the drawers of a sideboard in the 
diningroom. They walked into the livingroom. Scrolls of 
fallen wallpaper lying in the ﬂoor like ancient documents. 
He left the boy sitting on the stairs holding the coats while 
he went up. 
Everything smelled of damp and rot. In the ﬁrst bed­
room a dried corpse with the covers about its neck. Rem­
nants of rotted hair on the pillow. He took hold of the 
lower hem of the blanket and towed it off the bed and 
shook it out and folded it under his arm. He went through 
the bureaus and the closets. A summer dress on a wire 

69 
hanger. Nothing. He went back down the stairs. It was get­
ting dark. He took the boy by the hand and they went out 
the front door to the street. 
At the top of the hill he turned and studied the town. 
Darkness coming fast. Darkness and cold. He put two 
of the coats over the boy’s shoulders, swallowing him up 
parka and all. 
I’m really hungry, Papa. 
I know. 
Will we be able to ﬁnd our stuff ? 
Yes. I know where it is. 
What if somebody ﬁnds it? 
They wont ﬁnd it. 
I hope they dont. 
They wont. Come on. 
What was that? 
I didnt hear anything. 
Listen. 
I dont hear anything. 
They listened. Then in the distance he heard a dog 
bark. He turned and looked toward the darkening town. 
It’s a dog, he said. 
A dog? 
Yes. 
Where did it come from? 
I dont know. 
We’re not going to kill it, are we Papa? 
No. We’re not going to kill it. 
He looked down at the boy. Shivering in his coats. He 

D
T H E  R O A  
bent over and kissed him on his gritty brow. We wont hurt 
the dog, he said. I promise. 
They slept in a parked car beneath an overpass with the 
suitcoats and the blanket piled over them. In the darkness 
and the silence he could see bits of light that appeared ran­
dom on the night grid. The higher ﬂoors of the buildings 
were all dark. You’d have to carry up water. You could be 
smoked out. What were they eating? God knows. They sat 
wrapped in the coats looking out the window. Who are 
they, Papa? 
I dont know. 
He woke in the night and lay listening. He couldnt remem­
ber where he was. The thought made him smile. Where 
are we? he said. 
What is it, Papa? 
Nothing. We’re okay. Go to sleep. 
We’re going to be okay, arent we Papa? 
Yes. We are. 
And nothing bad is going to happen to us. 
That’s right. 
Because we’re carrying the ﬁre. 
Yes. Because we’re carrying the ﬁre. 
In the morning a cold rain was falling. It gusted over the 
car even under the overpass and it danced in the road 
beyond. They sat and watched through the water on the 

71 
glass. By the time it had slacked a good part of the day was 
gone. They left the coats and the blanket in the ﬂoor of the 
back seat and went up the road to search through more 
of the houses. Woodsmoke on the damp air. They never 
heard the dog again. 
They found some utensils and a few pieces of clothing. A 
sweatshirt. Some plastic they could use for a tarp. He was 
sure they were being watched but he saw no one. In a 
pantry they came upon part of a sack of cornmeal that 
rats had been at in the long ago. He sifted the meal through 
a section of windowscreen and collected a small handful of 
dried turds and they built a ﬁre on the concrete porch of 
the house and made cakes of the meal and cooked them 
over a piece of tin. Then they ate them slowly one by one. 
He wrapped the few remaining in a paper and put them in 
the knapsack. 
The boy was sitting on the steps when he saw something 
move at the rear of the house across the road. A face was 
looking at him. A boy, about his age, wrapped in an out­
sized wool coat with the sleeves turned back. He stood up. 
He ran across the road and up the drive. No one there. He 
looked toward the house and then he ran to the bottom 
of the yard through the dead weeds to a still black creek. 
Come back, he called. I wont hurt you. He was standing 
there crying when his father came sprinting across the road 
and seized him by the arm. 
What are you doing? he hissed. What are you doing? 

D
T H E  R O A  
There’s a little boy, Papa. There’s a little boy. 
There’s no little boy. What are you doing? 
Yes there is. I saw him. 
I told you to stay put. Didnt I tell you? Now we’ve got to 
go. Come on. 
I just wanted to see him, Papa. I just wanted to see him. 
The man took him by the arm and they went back up 
through the yard. The boy would not stop crying and 
he would not stop looking back. Come on, the man said. 
We’ve got to go. 
I want to see him, Papa. 
There’s no one to see. Do you want to die? Is that what 
you want? 
I dont care, the boy said, sobbing. I dont care. 
The man stopped. He stopped and squatted and held 
him. I’m sorry, he said. Dont say that. You musnt say that. 
They made their way back through the wet streets to the 
viaduct and collected the coats and the blanket from the 
car and went on to the railway embankment where they 
climbed up and crossed the tracks into the woods and got 
the cart and headed out to the highway. 
What if that little boy doesnt have anybody to take care 
of him? he said. What if he doesnt have a papa? 
There are people there. They were just hiding. 
He pushed the cart out into the road and stood there. 
He could see the tracks of the truck through the wet ash, 
faint and washed out, but there. He thought that he could 
smell them. The boy was pulling at his coat. Papa, he said. 
What? 

73 
I’m afraid for that little boy. 
I know. But he’ll be all right. 
We should go get him, Papa. We could get him and take 
him with us. We could take him and we could take the dog. 
The dog could catch something to eat. 
We cant. 
And I’d give that little boy half of my food. 
Stop it. We cant. 
He was crying again. What about the little boy? he 
sobbed. What about the little boy? 
At a crossroads they sat in the dusk and he spread out the 
pieces of the map in the road and studied them. He put his 
ﬁnger down. This is us, he said. Right here. The boy 
wouldnt look. He sat studying the twisted matrix of routes 
in red and black with his ﬁnger at the junction where he 
thought that they might be. As if he’d see their small selves 
crouching there. We could go back, the boy said softly. It’s 
not so far. It’s not too late. 
They made a dry camp in a woodlot not far from the road. 
They could ﬁnd no sheltered place to make a ﬁre that 
would not be seen so they made none. They ate each of 
them two of the cornmeal cakes and they slept together 
huddled on the ground in the coats and blankets. He held 
the child and after a while the child stopped shivering and 
after a while he slept. 
.
.
.
 

D
T H E  R O A  
The dog that he remembers followed us for two days. I 
tried to coax it to come but it would not. I made a noose 
of wire to catch it. There were three cartridges in the pis­
tol. None to spare. She walked away down the road. The 
boy looked after her and then he looked at me and then 
he looked at the dog and he began to cry and to beg for the 
dog’s life and I promised I would not hurt the dog. A 
trellis of a dog with the hide stretched over it. The next 
day it was gone. That is the dog he remembers. He doesnt 
remember any little boys. 
He’d put a handful of dried raisins in a cloth in his pocket 
and at noon they sat in the dead grass by the side of the 
road and ate them. The boy looked at him. That’s all there 
is, isnt it? he said. 
Yes. 
Are we going to die now? 
No. 
What are we going to do? 
We’re going to drink some water. Then we’re going to 
keep going down the road. 
Okay. 
In the evening they tramped out across a ﬁeld trying to 
ﬁnd a place where their ﬁre would not be seen. Dragging 
the cart behind them over the ground. So little of promise 
in that country. Tomorrow they would ﬁnd something to 
eat. Night overtook them on a muddy road. They crossed 
into a ﬁeld and plodded on toward a distant stand of trees 

75 
skylighted stark and black against the last of the visible 
world. By the time they got there it was dark of night. He 
held the boy’s hand and kicked up limbs and brush and 
got a ﬁre going. The wood was damp but he shaved the 
dead bark off with his knife and he stacked brush and 
sticks all about to dry in the heat. Then he spread the 
sheet of plastic on the ground and got the coats and blan­
kets from the cart and he took off their damp and muddy 
shoes and they sat there in silence with their hands out-
held to the ﬂames. He tried to think of something to say 
but he could not. He’d had this feeling before, beyond 
the numbness and the dull despair. The world shrinking 
down about a raw core of parsible entities. The names of 
things slowly following those things into oblivion. Colors. 
The names of birds. Things to eat. Finally the names of 
things one believed to be true. More fragile than he would 
have thought. How much was gone already? The sacred 
idiom shorn of its referents and so of its reality. Drawing 
down like something trying to preserve heat. In time to 
wink out forever. 
They slept through the night in their exhaustion and in 
the morning the ﬁre was dead and black on the ground. He 
pulled on his muddy shoes and went to gather wood, 
blowing on his cupped hands. So cold. It could be Novem­
ber. It could be later. He got a ﬁre going and walked out to 
the edge of the woodlot and stood looking over the country­
side. The dead ﬁelds. A barn in the distance. 
.
.
.
 

D
T H E  R O A  
They hiked out along the dirt road and along a hill where a 
house had once stood. It had burned long ago. The rusted 
shape of a furnace standing in the black water of the cellar. 
Sheets of charred metal rooﬁng crumpled in the ﬁelds 
where the wind had blown it. In the barn they scavenged a 
few handfuls of some grain he did not recognize out of the 
dusty ﬂoor of a metal hopper and stood eating it dust and 
all. Then they set out across the ﬁelds toward the road. 
They followed a stone wall past the remains of an orchard. 
The trees in their ordered rows gnarled and black and the 
fallen limbs thick on the ground. He stopped and looked 
across the ﬁelds. Wind in the east. The soft ash moving 
in the furrows. Stopping. Moving again. He’d seen it all 
before. Shapes of dried blood in the stubble grass and gray 
coils of viscera where the slain had been ﬁeld-dressed 
and hauled away. The wall beyond held a frieze of human 
heads, all faced alike, dried and caved with their taut grins 
and shrunken eyes. They wore gold rings in their leather 
ears and in the wind their sparse and ratty hair twisted 
about on their skulls. The teeth in their sockets like dental 
molds, the crude tattoos etched in some homebrewed woad 
faded in the beggared sunlight. Spiders, swords, targets. A 
dragon. Runic slogans, creeds misspelled. Old scars with 
old motifs stitched along their borders. The heads not 
truncheoned shapeless had been ﬂayed of their skins and 
the raw skulls painted and signed across the forehead in 
a scrawl and one white bone skull had the plate sutures 
etched carefully in ink like a blueprint for assembly. He 
looked back at the boy. Standing by the cart in the wind. 

77 
He looked at the dry grass where it moved and at the dark 
and twisted trees in their rows. A few shreds of clothing 
blown against the wall, everything gray in the ash. He 
walked along the wall passing the masks in a last review and 
through a stile and out to where the boy was waiting. He 
put his arm around his shoulder. Okay, he said. Let’s go. 
He’d come to see a message in each such late history, a 
message and a warning, and so this tableau of the slain and 
the devoured did prove to be. He woke in the morning and 
turned over in the blanket and looked back down the road 
through the trees the way they’d come in time to see the 
marchers appear four abreast. Dressed in clothing of every 
description, all wearing red scarves at their necks. Red or 
orange, as close to red as they could ﬁnd. He put his hand 
on the boy’s head. Shh, he said. 
What is it, Papa? 
People on the road. Keep your face down. Dont look. 
No smoke from the dead ﬁre. Nothing to be seen of the 
cart. He wallowed into the ground and lay watching across 
his forearm. An army in tennis shoes, tramping. Carrying 
three-foot lengths of pipe with leather wrappings. Lanyards 
at the wrist. Some of the pipes were threaded through with 
lengths of chain ﬁtted at their ends with every manner of 
bludgeon. They clanked past, marching with a swaying gait 
like wind-up toys. Bearded, their breath smoking through 
their masks. Shh, he said. Shh. The phalanx following car­
ried spears or lances tasseled with ribbons, the long blades 
hammered out of trucksprings in some crude forge up­
country. The boy lay with his face in his arms, terriﬁed. 

D
T H E  R O A  
They passed two hundred feet away, the ground shudder­
ing lightly. Tramping. Behind them came wagons drawn 
by slaves in harness and piled with goods of war and after 
that the women, perhaps a dozen in number, some of them 
pregnant, and lastly a supplementary consort of catamites 
illclothed against the cold and ﬁtted in dogcollars and yoked 
each to each. All passed on. They lay listening. 
Are they gone, Papa? 
Yes, they’re gone. 
Did you see them? 
Yes. 
Were they the bad guys? 
Yes, they were the bad guys. 
There’s a lot of them, those bad guys. 
Yes there are. But they’re gone. 
They stood and brushed themselves off, listening to the 
silence in the distance. 
Where are they going, Papa? 
I dont know. They’re on the move. It’s not a good sign. 
Why isnt it a good sign? 
It just isnt. We need to get the map and take a look. 
They pulled the cart from the brush with which they’d 
covered it and he raised it up and piled the blankets in and 
the coats and they pushed on out to the road and stood 
looking where the last of that ragged horde seemed to hang 
like an afterimage in the disturbed air. 
.
.
.
 

79 
In the afternoon it started to snow again. They stood 
watching the pale gray ﬂakes sift down out of the sullen 
murk. They trudged on. A frail slush forming over the 
dark surface of the road. The boy kept falling behind and 
he stopped and waited for him. Stay with me, he said. 
You walk too fast. 
I’ll go slower. 
They went on. 
You’re not talking again. 
I’m talking. 
You want to stop? 
I always want to stop. 
We have to be more careful. I have to be more careful. 
I know. 
We’ll stop. Okay? 
Okay. 
We just have to ﬁnd a place. 
Okay. 
The falling snow curtained them about. There was no way 
to see anything at either side of the road. He was coughing 
again and the boy was shivering, the two of them side by 
side under the sheet of plastic, pushing the grocery cart 
through the snow. Finally he stopped. The boy was shak­
ing uncontrollably. 
We have to stop, he said. 
It’s really cold. 
I know. 
Where are we? 

D
T H E  R O A  
Where are we? 
Yes. 
I dont know. 
If we were going to die would you tell me? 
I dont know. We’re not going to die. 
They left the cart overturned in a ﬁeld of sedge and he 
took the coats and the blankets wrapped in the plastic tarp 
and they set out. Hold on to my coat, he said. Dont let go. 
They crossed through the sedge to a fence and climbed 
through, holding down the wire for each other with their 
hands. The wire was cold and it creaked in the staples. It 
was darkening fast. They went on. What they came to was 
a cedar wood, the trees dead and black but still full enough 
to hold the snow. Beneath each one a precious circle of 
dark earth and cedar duff. 
They settled under a tree and piled the blankets and coats 
on the ground and he wrapped the boy in one of the blan­
kets and set to raking up the dead needles in a pile. He 
kicked a cleared place in the snow out where the ﬁre 
wouldnt set the tree alight and he carried wood from 
the other trees, breaking off the limbs and shaking away 
the snow. When he struck the lighter to the rich tinder the 
ﬁre crackled instantly and he knew that it would not last 
long. He looked at the boy. I’ve got to go for more wood, 
he said. I’ll be in the neighborhood. Okay? 
Where’s the neighborhood? 

81 
It just means I wont be far. 
Okay. 
The snow by now was half a foot on the ground. He ﬂoun­
dered out through the trees pulling up the fallen branches 
where they stuck out of the snow and by the time he had an 
armload and made his way back to the ﬁre it had burned 
down to a nest of quaking embers. He threw the branches 
on the ﬁre and set out again. Hard to stay ahead. The 
woods were getting dark and the ﬁrelight did not reach far. 
If he hurried he only grew faint. When he looked behind 
him the boy was trudging through snow half way to his 
knees gathering limbs and piling them in his arms. 
The snow fell nor did it cease to fall. He woke all night and 
got up and coaxed the ﬁre to life again. He’d unfolded the 
tarp and propped one end of it up beneath the tree to try 
and reﬂect back the heat from the ﬁre. He looked at the 
boy’s face sleeping in the orange light. The sunken cheeks 
streaked with black. He fought back the rage. Useless. He 
didnt think the boy could travel much more. Even if it 
stopped snowing the road would be all but impassable. 
The snow whispered down in the stillness and the sparks 
rose and dimmed and died in the eternal blackness. 
He was half asleep when he heard a crashing in the woods. 
Then another. He sat up. The ﬁre was down to scattered 

D
T H E  R O A  
ﬂames among the embers. He listened. The long dry crack 
of shearing limbs. Then another crash. He reached and 
shook the boy. Wake up, he said. We have to go. 
He rubbed the sleep from his eyes with the backs of his 
hands. What is it? he said. What is it, Papa? 
Come on. We have to move. 
What is it? 
It’s the trees. They’re falling down. 
The boy sat up and looked about wildly. 
It’s all right, the man said. Come on. We need to hurry. 
He scooped up the bedding and he folded it and wrapped 
the tarp around it. He looked up. The snow drifted into 
his eyes. The ﬁre was little more than coals and it gave no 
light and the wood was nearly gone and the trees were 
falling all about them in the blackness. The boy clung to 
him. They moved away and he tried to ﬁnd a clear space in 
the darkness but ﬁnally he put down the tarp and they just 
sat and pulled the blankets over them and he held the boy 
against him. The whump of the falling trees and the low 
boom of the loads of snow exploding on the ground set the 
woods to shuddering. He held the boy and told him it 
would be all right and that it would stop soon and after a 
while it did. The dull bedlam dying in the distance. And 
again, solitary and far away. Then nothing. There, he said. 
I think that’s it. He dug a tunnel under one of the fallen 
trees, scooping away the snow with his arms, his frozen 
hands clawed inside his sleeves. They dragged in their bed­
ding and the tarp and after a while they slept again for all 
the bitter cold. 

83 
.
.
.
 
When day broke he pushed his way out of their den, the 
tarp heavy with snow. He stood and looked about. It had 
stopped snowing and the cedar trees lay about in hillocks 
of snow and broken limbs and a few standing trunks that 
stood stripped and burntlooking in that graying land­
scape. He trudged out through the drifts leaving the boy to 
sleep under the tree like some hibernating animal. The 
snow was almost to his knees. In the ﬁeld the dead sedge 
was drifted nearly out of sight and the snow stood in razor 
kerfs atop the fencewires and the silence was breathless. 
He stood leaning on a post coughing. He’d little idea 
where the cart was and he thought that he was getting stu­
pid and that his head wasnt working right. Concentrate, he 
said. You have to think. When he turned to go back the 
boy was calling him. 
We have to go, he said. We cant stay here. 
The boy stared bleakly at the gray drifts. 
Come on. 
They made their way out to the fence. 
Where are we going? the boy said. 
We have to ﬁnd the cart. 
He just stood there, his hands in the armpits of his parka. 
Come on, the man said. You have to come on. 
He waded out across the drifted ﬁelds. The snow lay deep 
and gray. Already there was a fresh fall of ash on it. He 

D
T H E  R O A  
struggled on a few more feet and then turned and looked 
back. The boy had fallen. He dropped the armload of 
blankets and the tarp and went back and picked him up. 
He was already shivering. He picked him up and held him. 
I’m sorry, he said. I’m sorry. 
They were a long time ﬁnding the cart. He pulled it upright 
out of the drifts and dug out the knapsack and shook it out 
and opened it and stuffed in one of the blankets. He put 
the pack and the other blankets and the coats in the basket 
and picked up the boy and set him on top and unlaced his 
shoes and pulled them off. Then he got out his knife and 
set about cutting up one of the coats and wrapping the 
boy’s feet. He used the entire coat and then he cut big 
squares of plastic out of the tarp and gathered them up 
from underneath and wrapped and tied them at the boy’s 
ankles with the lining from the coatsleeves. He stood back. 
The boy looked down. Now you, Papa, he said. He wrapped 
one of the coats around the boy and then he sat on the 
tarp in the snow and wrapped his own feet. He stood and 
warmed his hands inside his parka and then packed their 
shoes into the knapsack along with the binoculars and the 
boy’s truck. He shook out the tarp and folded it and tied 
it with the other blankets on top of the pack and shoul­
dered it up and then took a last look through the basket 
but that was it. Let’s go, he said. The boy took one last 
look back at the cart and then followed him out to the 
road. 
.
.
.
 

85 
It was harder going even than he would have guessed. 
In an hour they’d made perhaps a mile. He stopped and 
looked back at the boy. The boy stopped and waited. 
You think we’re going to die, dont you? 
I dont know. 
We’re not going to die. 
Okay. 
But you dont believe me. 
I dont know. 
Why do you think we’re going to die? 
I dont know. 
Stop saying I dont know. 
Okay. 
Why do you think we’re going to die? 
We dont have anything to eat. 
We’ll ﬁnd something. 
Okay. 
How long do you think people can go without food? 
I dont know. 
But how long do you think? 
Maybe a few days. 
And then what? You fall over dead? 
Yes. 
Well you dont. It takes a long time. We have water. That’s 
the most important thing. You dont last very long without 
water. 
Okay. 
But you dont believe me. 
I dont know. 
He studied him. Standing there with his hands in the 
pockets of the outsized pinstriped suitcoat. 

D
T H E  R O A  
Do you think I lie to you? 
No. 
But you think I might lie to you about dying. 
Yes. 
Okay. I might. But we’re not dying. 
Okay. 
He studied the sky. There were days when the ashen over­
cast thinned and now the standing trees along the road 
made the faintest of shadows over the snow. They went on. 
The boy wasnt doing well. He stopped and checked his 
feet and retied the plastic. When the snow started to melt 
it was going to be hard to keep their feet dry. They stopped 
often to rest. He’d no strength to carry the child. They 
sat on the pack and ate handfuls of the dirty snow. By 
afternoon it was beginning to melt. They passed a burned 
house, just the brick chimney standing in the yard. They 
were on the road all day, such day as there was. Such few 
hours. They might have covered three miles. 
He thought the road would be so bad that no one would be 
on it but he was wrong. They camped almost in the road 
itself and built a great ﬁre, dragging dead limbs out of the 
snow and piling them on the ﬂames to hiss and steam. 
There was no help for it. The few blankets they had would 
not keep them warm. He tried to stay awake. He would 
jerk upright out of his sleep and slap about him looking for 
the pistol. The boy was so thin. He watched him while he 

87 
slept. Taut face and hollow eyes. A strange beauty. He got 
up and dragged more wood onto the ﬁre. 
They walked out to the road and stood. There were tracks 
in the snow. A wagon. Some sort of wheeled vehicle. Some­
thing with rubber tires by the narrow treadmarks. Boot-
prints between the wheels. Someone had passed in the 
dark going south. In the early dawn at latest. Running the 
road in the night. He stood thinking about that. He walked 
the tracks carefully. They’d passed within ﬁfty feet of the 
ﬁre and had not even slowed to look. He stood looking 
back up the road. The boy watched him. 
We need to get out of the road. 
Why, Papa? 
Someone’s coming. 
Is it bad guys? 
Yes. I’m afraid so. 
They could be good guys. Couldnt they? 
He didnt answer. He looked at the sky out of old habit 
but there was nothing to see. 
What are we going to do, Papa? 
Let’s go. 
Can we go back to the ﬁre? 
No. Come on. We probably dont have much time. 
I’m really hungry. 
I know. 
What are we going to do? 
We have to hole up. Get off the road. 
Will they see our tracks? 

D
T H E  R O A  
Yes. 
What can we do about it? 
I dont know. 
Will they know what we are? 
What? 
If they see our tracks. Will they know what we are? 
He looked back at their great round tracks in the snow. 
They’ll ﬁgure it out, he said. 
Then he stopped. 
We need to think about this. Let’s go back to the ﬁre. 
He’d thought to ﬁnd some place in the road where the 
snow had melted off completely but then he thought that 
since their tracks would not reappear on the far side it 
would be no help. They kicked snow over the ﬁre and went 
on through the trees and circled and came back. They hur­
ried, leaving a maze of tracks and then they set out back 
north through the woods keeping the road in view. 
The site they picked was simply the highest ground they 
came to and it gave views north along the road and over­
looked their backtrack. He spread the tarp in the wet snow 
and wrapped the boy in the blankets. You’re going to be 
cold, he said. But maybe we wont be here long. Within the 
hour two men came down the road almost at a lope. When 
they had passed he stood up to watch them. And when he 
did they stopped and one of them looked back. He froze. 
He was wrapped in one of the gray blankets and he would 
have been hard to see but not impossible. But he thought 

89 
probably they had smelled the smoke. They stood talking. 
Then they went on. He sat down. It’s okay, he said. We 
just have to wait. But I think its okay. 
They’d had no food and little sleep in ﬁve days and in this 
condition on the outskirts of a small town they came upon 
a once grand house sited on a rise above the road. The boy 
stood holding his hand. The snow was largely melted on 
the macadam and in the southfacing ﬁelds and woods. 
They stood there. The plastic bags over their feet had long 
since worn through and their feet were wet and cold. The 
house was tall and stately with white doric columns across 
the front. A port cochere at the side. A gravel drive that 
curved up through a ﬁeld of dead grass. The windows 
were oddly intact. 
What is this place, Papa? 
Shh. Let’s just stand here and listen. 
There was nothing. The wind rustling the dead road­
side bracken. A distant creaking. Door or shutter. 
I think we should take a look. 
Papa let’s not go up there. 
It’s okay. 
I dont think we should go up there. 
It’s okay. We have to take a look. 
They approached slowly up the drive. No tracks in the 
random patches of melting snow. A tall hedge of dead 
privet. An ancient birdsnest lodged in the dark wicker of 
it. They stood in the yard studying the facade. The hand­

D
T H E  R O A  
made brick of the house kilned out of the dirt it stood on. 
The peeling paint hanging in long dry sleavings down the 
columns and from the buckled sofﬁts. A lamp that hung 
from a long chain overhead. The boy clung to him as they 
climbed the steps. One of the windows was slightly open 
and a cord ran from it and across the porch to vanish in the 
grass. He held the boy’s hand and they crossed the porch. 
Chattel slaves had once trod those boards bearing food 
and drink on silver trays. They went to the window and 
looked in. 
What if there’s someone here, Papa? 
There’s no one here. 
We should go, Papa. 
We’ve got to ﬁnd something to eat. We have no choice. 
We could ﬁnd something somewhere else. 
It’s going to be all right. Come on. 
He took the pistol from his belt and tried the door. It 
swung slowly in on its great brass hinges. They stood lis­
tening. Then they stepped into a broad foyer ﬂoored in a 
domino of black and white marble tiles. A broad staircase 
ascending. Fine Morris paper on the walls, waterstained 
and sagging. The plaster ceiling was bellied in great swags 
and the yellowed dentil molding was bowed and sprung 
from the upper walls. To the left through the doorway 
stood a large walnut buffet in what must have been the 
diningroom. The doors and the drawers were gone but the 
rest of it was too large to burn. They stood in the doorway. 
Piled in a windrow in one corner of the room was a great 
heap of clothing. Clothes and shoes. Belts. Coats. Blan­

91 
kets and old sleeping bags. He would have ample time 
later to think about that. The boy hung on to his hand. He 
was terriﬁed. They crossed the foyer to the room on the far 
side and walked in and stood. A great hall of a room with 
ceilings twice the height of the doors. A ﬁreplace with raw 
brick showing where the wooden mantel and surround 
had been pried away and burned. There were mattresses 
and bedding arranged on the ﬂoor in front of the hearth. 
Papa, the boy whispered. Shh, he said. 
The ashes were cold. Some blackened pots stood about. 
He squatted on his heels and picked one up and smelled it 
and put it back. He stood and looked out the window. Gray 
trampled grass. Gray snow. The cord that came through 
the window was tied to a brass bell and the bell was ﬁxed 
in a rough wooden jig that had been nailed to the window 
molding. He held the boy’s hand and they went down a 
narrow back hallway into the kitchen. Trash piled every­
where. A ruststained sink. Smell of mold and excrement. 
They went on into the adjoining small room, perhaps a 
pantry. 
In the ﬂoor of this room was a door or hatch and it was 
locked with a large padlock made of stacked steel plates. 
He stood looking at it. 
Papa, the boy said. We should go. Papa. 
There’s a reason this is locked. 
The boy pulled at his hand. He was almost in tears. 
Papa? he said. 

D
T H E  R O A  
We’ve got to eat. 
I’m not hungry, Papa. I’m not. 
We need to ﬁnd a prybar or something. 
They pushed out through the back door, the boy hanging 
on to him. He shoved the pistol in his belt and stood look­
ing out over the yard. There was a brick walkway and the 
twisted and wiry shape of what once had been a row of 
boxwoods. In the yard was an old iron harrow propped 
up on piers of stacked brick and someone had wedged 
between the rails of it a forty gallon castiron cauldron of 
the kind once used for rendering hogs. Underneath were 
the ashes of a ﬁre and blackened billets of wood. Off to one 
side a small wagon with rubber tires. All these things he 
saw and did not see. At the far side of the yard was an old 
wooden smokehouse and a toolshed. He crossed half drag­
ging the child and went sorting through tools standing in a 
barrel under the shed roof. He came up with a longhandled 
spade and hefted it in his hand. Come on, he said. 
Back in the house he chopped at the wood around the 
haspstaple and ﬁnally jammed the blade under the staple 
and pried it up. It was bolted through the wood and the 
whole thing came up lock and all. He kicked the blade of 
the shovel under the edge of the boards and stopped and 
got his lighter out. Then he stood on the tang of the shovel 
and raised the edge of the hatch and leaned and got hold of 
it. Papa, the boy whispered. 
He stopped. Listen to me, he said. Just stop it. We’re 

93 
starving. Do you understand? Then he raised the hatch 
door and swung it over and let it down on the ﬂoor behind. 
Just wait here, he said. 
I’m going with you. 
I thought you were scared. 
I am scared. 
Okay. Just stay close behind me. 
He started down the rough wooden steps. He ducked his 
head and then ﬂicked the lighter and swung the ﬂame out 
over the darkness like an offering. Coldness and damp. An 
ungodly stench. The boy clutched at his coat. He could 
see part of a stone wall. Clay ﬂoor. An old mattress darkly 
stained. He crouched and stepped down again and held 
out the light. Huddled against the back wall were naked 
people, male and female, all trying to hide, shielding their 
faces with their hands. On the mattress lay a man with his 
legs gone to the hip and the stumps of them blackened and 
burnt. The smell was hideous. 
Jesus, he whispered. 
Then one by one they turned and blinked in the pitiful 
light. Help us, they whispered. Please help us. 
Christ, he said. Oh Christ. 
He turned and grabbed the boy. Hurry, he said. Hurry. 
He’d dropped the lighter. No time to look. He pushed 
the boy up the stairs. Help us, they called. 
Hurry. 
A bearded face appeared blinking at the foot of the 
stairs. Please, he called. Please. 
Hurry. For God’s sake hurry. 

D
T H E  R O A  
He shoved the boy through the hatch and sent him 
sprawling. He stood and got hold of the door and swung it 
over and let it slam down and he turned to grab the boy 
but the boy had gotten up and was doing his little dance of 
terror. For the love of God will you come on, he hissed. But 
the boy was pointing out the window and when he looked 
he went cold all over. Coming across the ﬁeld toward the 
house were four bearded men and two women. He grabbed 
the boy by the hand. Christ, he said. Run. Run. 
They tore through the house to the front door and down 
the steps. Half way down the drive he dragged the boy 
into the ﬁeld. He looked back. They were partly screened 
by the ruins of the privet but he knew they had minutes at 
most and maybe no minutes at all. At the bottom of the 
ﬁeld they crashed through a stand of dead cane and out 
into the road and crossed into the woods on the far side. 
He redoubled his grip on the boy’s wrist. Run, he whis­
pered. We have to run. He looked toward the house but he 
could see nothing. If they came down the drive they would 
see him running through the trees with the boy. This is the 
moment. This is the moment. He fell to the ground and 
pulled the boy to him. Shh, he said. Shh. 
Are they going to kill us? Papa? 
Shh. 
They lay in the leaves and the ash with their hearts pound­
ing. He was going to start coughing. He’d have put his 
hand over his mouth but the boy was holding on to it and 

95 
would not let go and in the other hand he was holding the 
pistol. He had to concentrate to stiﬂe the cough and at 
the same time he was trying to listen. He swung his chin 
through the leaves, trying to see. Keep your head down, he 
whispered. 
Are they coming? 
No. 
They crawled slowly through the leaves toward what 
looked like lower ground. He lay listening, holding the 
boy. He could hear them in the road talking. Voice of a 
woman. Then he heard them in the dry leaves. He took the 
boy’s hand and pushed the revolver into it. Take it, he 
whispered. Take it. The boy was terriﬁed. He put his arm 
around him and held him. His body so thin. Dont be afraid, 
he said. If they ﬁnd you you are going to have to do it. Do 
you understand? Shh. No crying. Do you hear me? You 
know how to do it. You put it in your mouth and point it 
up. Do it quick and hard. Do you understand? Stop cry­
ing. Do you understand? 
I think so. 
No. Do you understand? 
Yes. 
Say yes I do Papa. 
Yes I do Papa. 
He looked down at him. All he saw was terror. He took 
the gun from him. No you dont, he said. 
I dont know what to do, Papa. I dont know what to do. 
Where will you be? 
It’s okay. 

D
T H E  R O A  
I dont know what to do. 
Shh. I’m right here. I wont leave you. 
You promise. 
Yes. I promise. I was going to run. To try and lead them 
away. But I cant leave you. 
Papa? 
Shh. Stay down. 
I’m so scared. 
Shh. 
They lay listening. Can you do it? When the time comes? 
When the time comes there will be no time. Now is the 
time. Curse God and die. What if it doesnt ﬁre? It has to 
ﬁre. What if it doesnt ﬁre? Could you crush that beloved 
skull with a rock? Is there such a being within you of 
which you know nothing? Can there be? Hold him in your 
arms. Just so. The soul is quick. Pull him toward you. Kiss 
him. Quickly. 
He waited. The small nickelplated revolver in his hand. He 
was going to cough. He put his whole mind to holding it 
back. He tried to listen but he could hear nothing. I wont 
leave you, he whispered. I wont ever leave you. Do you 
understand? He lay in the leaves holding the trembling 
child. Clutching the revolver. All through the long dusk 
and into the dark. Cold and starless. Blessed. He began to 
believe they had a chance. We just have to wait, he whis­
pered. So cold. He tried to think but his mind swam. He 

97 
was so weak. All his talk about running. He couldnt run. 
When it was truly black about them he unfastened the 
straps on the backpack and pulled out the blankets and 
spread them over the boy and soon the boy was sleeping. 
In the night he heard hideous shrieks coming from the 
house and he tried to put his hands over the boy’s ears and 
after a while the screaming stopped. He lay listening. Com­
ing through the canebrake into the road he’d seen a box. A 
thing like a child’s playhouse. He realized it was where 
they lay watching the road. Lying in wait and ringing the 
bell in the house for their companions to come. He dozed 
and woke. What is coming? Footsteps in the leaves. No. Just 
the wind. Nothing. He sat up and looked toward the house 
but he could see only darkness. He shook the boy awake. 
Come on, he said. We have to go. The boy didnt answer 
but he knew he was awake. He pulled the blankets free and 
strapped them onto the knapsack. Come on, he whispered. 
They set out through the dark woods. There was a moon 
somewhere beyond the ashen overcast and they could just 
make out the trees. They staggered on like drunks. If they 
ﬁnd us they’ll kill us, wont they Papa. 
Shh. No more talking. 
Wont they Papa. 
Shh. Yes. Yes they will. 
.
.
.
 

D
T H E  R O A  
He’d no idea what direction they might have taken and his 
fear was that they might circle and return to the house. He 
tried to remember if he knew anything about that or if it 
were only a fable. In what direction did lost men veer? Per­
haps it changed with hemispheres. Or handedness. Finally 
he put it out of his mind. The notion that there could 
be anything to correct for. His mind was betraying him. 
Phantoms not heard from in a thousand years rousing 
slowly from their sleep. Correct for that. The boy was tot­
tering on his feet. He asked to be carried, stumbling and 
slurring his words, and the man did carry him and he fell 
asleep on his shoulder instantly. He knew he couldnt carry 
him far. 
He woke in the dark of the woods in the leaves shivering 
violently. He sat up and felt about for the boy. He held his 
hand to the thin ribs. Warmth and movement. Heartbeat. 
When he woke again it was almost light enough to see. 
He threw back the blanket and stood and almost fell. He 
steadied himself and tried to see about him in the gray 
woods. How far had they come? He walked to the top of a 
rise and crouched and watched the day accrue. The chary 
dawn, the cold illucid world. In the distance what looked 
to be a pine wood, raw and black. A colorless world of wire 
and crepe. He went back and got the boy and made him sit 
up. His head kept slumping forward. We have to go, he 
said. We have to go. 

99 
.
.
.
 
He carried him across the ﬁeld, stopping to rest each ﬁfty 
counted steps. When he got to the pines he knelt and laid 
him in the gritty duff and covered him with the blankets 
and sat watching him. He looked like something out of a 
deathcamp. Starved, exhausted, sick with fear. He leaned 
and kissed him and got up and walked out to the edge of 
the woods and then he walked the perimeter round to see 
if they were safe. 
Across the ﬁelds to the south he could see the shape of a 
house and a barn. Beyond the trees the curve of a road. A 
long drive with dead grass. Dead ivy along a stone wall and 
a mailbox and a fence along the road and the dead trees 
beyond. Cold and silent. Shrouded in the carbon fog. He 
walked back and sat beside the boy. It was desperation that 
had led him to such carelessness and he knew that he 
could not do that again. No matter what. 
The boy wouldnt wake for hours. Still if he did he’d be terri­
ﬁed. It had happened before. He thought about waking him 
but he knew that he wouldnt remember anything if he did. 
He’d trained him to lie in the woods like a fawn. For how 
long? In the end he took the pistol from his belt and laid it 
alongside him under the blankets and rose and set out. 
.
.
.
 

D
T H E  R O A  
He came upon the barn from the hill above it, stopping to 
watch and to listen. He made his way down through the 
ruins of an old apple orchard, black and gnarly stumps, 
dead grass to his knees. He stood in the door of the barn 
and listened. Pale slatted light. He walked along the dusty 
stalls. He stood in the center of the barn bay and listened 
but there was nothing. He climbed the ladder to the loft 
and he was so weak he wasnt sure he was going to make 
it to the top. He walked down to the end of the loft and 
looked out the high gable window at the country below, 
the pieced land dead and gray, the fence, the road. 
There were bales of hay in the loft ﬂoor and he squatted 
and sorted a handful of seeds from them and sat chewing. 
Coarse and dry and dusty. They had to contain some nutri­
tion. He rose and rolled two of the bales across the ﬂoor 
and let them fall into the bay below. Two dusty thumps. 
He went back to the gable and stood studying what he 
could see of the house beyond the corner of the barn. 
Then he climbed back down the ladder. 
The grass between the house and the barn looked untrod­
den. He crossed to the porch. The porch screening rotted 
and falling away. A child’s bicycle. The kitchen door stood 
open and he crossed the porch and stood in the doorway. 
Cheap plywood paneling curled with damp. Collapsing 
into the room. A red formica table. He crossed the room 
and opened the refrigerator door. Something sat on one of 
the racks in a coat of gray fur. He shut the door. Trash 

101 
everywhere. He took a broom from the corner and poked 
about with the handle. He climbed onto the counter and 
felt his way through the dust on top of the cabinets. A 
mousetrap. A packet of something. He blew away the dust. 
It was a grape ﬂavored powder to make drinks with. He 
put it in the pocket of his coat. 
He went through the house room by room. He found noth­
ing. A spoon in a bedside drawer. He put that in his 
pocket. He thought there might be some clothes in a closet 
or some bedding but there wasnt. He went back out and 
crossed to the garage. He sorted through tools. Rakes. A 
shovel. Jars of nails and bolts on a shelf. A boxcutter. He 
held it to the light and looked at the rusty blade and put it 
back. Then he picked it up again. He took a screwdriver 
from a coffee can and opened the handle. Inside were four 
new blades. He took out the old blade and laid it on the 
shelf and put in one of the new ones and screwed the han­
dle back together and retracted the blade and put the cut­
ter in his pocket. Then he picked up the screwdriver and 
put that in his pocket as well. 
He walked back out to the barn. He had a piece of cloth 
that he intended to use to collect seeds from the haybales 
but when he got to the barn he stopped and stood listening 
to the wind. A creaking of tin somewhere high in the roof 
above him. There was yet a lingering odor of cows in the 
barn and he stood there thinking about cows and he real­
ized they were extinct. Was that true? There could be a 

D
T H E  R O A  
cow somewhere being fed and cared for. Could there? Fed 
what? Saved for what? Beyond the open door the dead 
grass rasped dryly in the wind. He walked out and stood 
looking across the ﬁelds toward the pine wood where the 
boy lay sleeping. He walked up through the orchard and 
then he stopped again. He’d stepped on something. He 
took a step back and knelt and parted the grass with his 
hands. It was an apple. He picked it up and held it to the 
light. Hard and brown and shriveled. He wiped it with the 
cloth and bit into it. Dry and almost tasteless. But an 
apple. He ate it entire, seeds and all. He held the stem 
between his thumb and foreﬁnger and let it drop. Then he 
went treading softly through the grass. His feet were still 
wrapped in the remnants of the coat and the shreds of tarp 
and he sat and untied them and stuffed the wrappings in 
his pocket and went down the rows barefoot. By the time 
he got to the bottom of the orchard he had four more 
apples and he put them in his pocket and came back. He 
went row by row till he’d trod a puzzle in the grass. He’d 
more apples than he could carry. He felt out the spaces 
about the trunks and ﬁlled his pockets full and he piled 
apples in the hood of his parka behind his head and car­
ried apples stacked along his forearm against his chest. He 
dumped them in a pile at the door of the barn and sat there 
and wrapped up his numb feet. 
In the mudroom off the kitchen he’d seen an old wicker 
basket full of masonjars. He dragged the basket out into 
the ﬂoor and set the jars out of it and then tipped over the 
basket and tapped out the dirt. Then he stopped. What 

103 
had he seen? A drainpipe. A trellis. The dark serpentine 
of a dead vine running down it like the track of some enter­
prise upon a graph. He stood up and walked back through 
the kitchen and out into the yard and stood looking at the 
house. The windows giving back the gray and nameless 
day. The drainpipe ran down the corner of the porch. He 
was still holding the basket and he set it down in the grass 
and climbed the steps again. The pipe came down the cor­
ner post and into a concrete tank. He brushed away the 
trash and rotted bits of screening from the cover. He went 
back into the kitchen and got the broom and came out and 
swept the cover clean and set the broom in the corner and 
lifted the cover from the tank. Inside was a tray ﬁlled with 
a wet gray sludge from the roof mixed with a compost of 
dead leaves and twigs. He lifted out the tray and set it in 
the ﬂoor. Underneath was white gravel. He scooped back 
the gravel with his hand. The tank beneath was ﬁlled with 
charcoal, pieces burned out of whole sticks and limbs in 
carbon efﬁgies of the trees themselves. He put the tray 
back. In the ﬂoor was a green brass ringpull. He reached 
and got the broom and swept away the ash. There were 
sawlines in the boards. He swept the boards clean and 
knelt and hooked his ﬁngers in the ring and lifted the trap 
door and swung it open. Down there in the darkness was a 
cistern ﬁlled with water so sweet that he could smell it. He 
lay in the ﬂoor on his stomach and reached down. He could 
just touch the water. He scooted forward and reached again 
and laved up a handful of it and smelled and tasted it and 
then drank. He lay there a long time, lifting up the water to 
his mouth a palmful at a time. Nothing in his memory any­
where of anything so good. 

D
T H E  R O A  
.
.
.
 
He went back to the mudroom and returned with two of 
the jars and an old blue enameled pan. He wiped out the 
pan and dipped it full of water and used it to clean the jars. 
Then he reached down and sank one of the jars till it was 
full and raised it up dripping. The water was so clear. He 
held it to the light. A single bit of sediment coiling in the 
jar on some slow hydraulic axis. He tipped the jar and 
drank and he drank slowly but still he drank nearly the 
whole jar. He sat there with his stomach bloated. He could 
have drunk more but he didnt. He poured the remaining 
water into the other jar and rinsed it out and he ﬁlled both 
jars and then let down the wooden cover over the cistern 
and rose and with his pockets full of apples and carrying 
the jars of water he set out across the ﬁelds toward the pine 
wood. 
He was gone longer than he’d meant to be and he hurried 
his steps the best he could, the water swinging and gur­
gling in the shrunken swag of his gut. He stopped to rest 
and began again. When he got to the woods the boy did 
not look as if he’d even stirred and he knelt and set the jars 
carefully in the duff and picked up the pistol and put it in 
his belt and then he just sat there watching him. 
They spent the afternoon sitting wrapped in the blankets 
and eating apples. Sipping the water from the jars. He 
took the packet of grape ﬂavor from his pocket and opened 

105 
it and poured it into the jar and stirred it and gave it to the 
boy. You did good Papa, he said. He slept while the boy 
kept watch and in the evening they got out their shoes 
and put them on and went down to the farmhouse and col­
lected the rest of the apples. They ﬁlled three jars with 
water and screwed on the two-piece caps from a box of 
them he’d found on a shelf in the mudroom. Then he 
wrapped everything in one of the blankets and packed 
it into the knapsack and tied the other blankets across 
the top of the knapsack and shouldered it up. They stood 
in the door watching the light draw down over the world 
to the west. Then they went down the drive and set out 
upon the road again. 
The boy hung on to his coat and he kept to the edge of the 
road and tried to feel out the pavement under his feet in 
the dark. In the distance he could hear thunder and after a 
while there were dim shudderings of light ahead of them. 
He got out the plastic sheeting from the knapsack but 
there was hardly enough of it left to cover them and after a 
while it began to rain. They stumbled along side by side. 
There was nowhere to go. They had the hoods of their 
coats up but the coats were getting wet and heavy from the 
rain. He stopped in the road and tried to rearrange the 
tarp. The boy was shaking badly. 
You’re freezing, arent you? 
Yes. 
If we stop we’ll get really cold. 
I’m really cold now. 
What do you want to do? 

D
T H E  R O A  
Can we stop? 
Yes. Okay. We can stop. 
It was as long a night as he could remember out of a great 
plenty of such nights. They lay on the wet ground by the 
side of the road under the blankets with the rain rattling 
on the tarp and he held the boy and after a while the boy 
stopped shaking and after a while he slept. The thunder 
trundled away to the north and ceased and there was just 
the rain. He slept and woke and the rain slackened and 
after a while it stopped. He wondered if it was even mid­
night. He was coughing and it got worse and it woke the 
child. The dawn was a long time coming. He raised up 
from time to time to look to the east and after a while it 
was day. 
He wrapped their coats each in turn around the trunk of a 
small tree and twisted out the water. He had the boy take 
off his clothes and he wrapped him in one of the blankets 
and while he stood shivering he wrung the water out of his 
clothes and passed them back. The ground where they’d 
slept was dry and they sat there with the blankets draped 
over them and ate apples and drank water. Then they set 
out upon the road again, slumped and cowled and shiver­
ing in their rags like mendicant friars sent forth to ﬁnd 
their keep. 
.
.
.
 

107 
By evening they at least were dry. They studied the pieces 
of map but he’d little notion of where they were. He stood 
at a rise in the road and tried to take his bearings in the 
twilight. They left the pike and took a narrow road through 
the country and came at last upon a bridge and a dry creek 
and they crawled down the bank and huddled underneath. 
Can we have a ﬁre? the boy said. 
We dont have a lighter. 
The boy looked away. 
I’m sorry. I dropped it. I didnt want to tell you. 
That’s okay. 
I’ll ﬁnd us some ﬂint. I’ve been looking. And we’ve still 
got the little bottle of gasoline. 
Okay. 
Are you very cold? 
I’m okay. 
The boy lay with his head in the man’s lap. After a while 
he said: They’re going to kill those people, arent they? 
Yes. 
Why do they have to do that? 
I dont know. 
Are they going to eat them? 
I dont know. 
They’re going to eat them, arent they? 
Yes. 
And we couldnt help them because then they’d eat us too. 
Yes. 
And that’s why we couldnt help them. 
Yes. 
Okay. 

D
T H E  R O A  
.
.
.
 
They passed through towns that warned people away with 
messages scrawled on the billboards. The billboards had 
been whited out with thin coats of paint in order to write 
on them and through the paint could be seen a pale palimp­
sest of advertisements for goods which no longer existed. 
They sat by the side of the road and ate the last of the 
apples. 
What is it? the man said. 
Nothing. 
We’ll ﬁnd something to eat. We always do. 
The boy didnt answer. The man watched him. 
That’s not it, is it? 
It’s okay. 
Tell me. 
The boy looked away down the road. 
I want you to tell me. It’s okay. 
He shook his head. 
Look at me, the man said. 
He turned and looked. He looked like he’d been crying. 
Just tell me. 
We wouldnt ever eat anybody, would we? 
No. Of course not. 
Even if we were starving? 
We’re starving now. 
You said we werent. 
I said we werent dying. I didnt say we werent starving. 
But we wouldnt. 
No. We wouldnt. 
No matter what. 

109 
No. No matter what. 
Because we’re the good guys. 
Yes. 
And we’re carrying the ﬁre. 
And we’re carrying the ﬁre. Yes. 
Okay. 
He found pieces of ﬂint or chert in a ditch but in the end 
it was easier to rake the pliers down the side of a rock 
at the bottom of which he’d made a small pile of tinder 
soaked in gas. Two more days. Then three. They were 
starving right enough. The country was looted, ransacked, 
ravaged. Riﬂed of every crumb. The nights were blinding 
cold and casket black and the long reach of the morning 
had a terrible silence to it. Like a dawn before battle. The 
boy’s candlecolored skin was all but translucent. With his 
great staring eyes he’d the look of an alien. 
He was beginning to think that death was ﬁnally upon 
them and that they should ﬁnd some place to hide where 
they would not be found. There were times when he sat 
watching the boy sleep that he would begin to sob uncon­
trollably but it wasnt about death. He wasnt sure what it 
was about but he thought it was about beauty or about 
goodness. Things that he’d no longer any way to think 
about at all. They squatted in a bleak wood and drank 
ditchwater strained through a rag. He’d seen the boy in 
a dream laid out upon a coolingboard and woke in hor­
ror. What he could bear in the waking world he could 

D
T H E  R O A  
not by night and he sat awake for fear the dream would 
return. 
They scrabbled through the charred ruins of houses they 
would not have entered before. A corpse ﬂoating in the 
black water of a basement among the trash and rusting duct­
work. He stood in a livingroom partly burned and open 
to the sky. The waterbuckled boards sloping away into the 
yard. Soggy volumes in a bookcase. He took one down and 
opened it and then put it back. Everything damp. Rotting. 
In a drawer he found a candle. No way to light it. He put it 
in his pocket. He walked out in the gray light and stood 
and he saw for a brief moment the absolute truth of the 
world. The cold relentless circling of the intestate earth. 
Darkness implacable. The blind dogs of the sun in their 
running. The crushing black vacuum of the universe. And 
somewhere two hunted animals trembling like ground-
foxes in their cover. Borrowed time and borrowed world 
and borrowed eyes with which to sorrow it. 
At the edge of a small town they sat in the cab of a truck to 
rest, staring out a glass washed clean by the recent rains. A 
light dusting of ash. Exhausted. By the roadside stood 
another sign that warned of death, the letters faded with 
the years. He almost smiled. Can you read that? he said. 
Yes. 
Dont pay any attention. There’s no one here. 
Are they dead? 
I think so. 

111 
I wish that little boy was with us. 
Let’s go, he said. 
Rich dreams now which he was loathe to wake from. Things 
no longer known in the world. The cold drove him forth to 
mend the ﬁre. Memory of her crossing the lawn toward the 
house in the early morning in a thin rose gown that clung 
to her breasts. He thought each memory recalled must do 
some violence to its origins. As in a party game. Say the 
word and pass it on. So be sparing. What you alter in the 
remembering has yet a reality, known or not. 
They walked through the streets wrapped in the ﬁlthy 
blankets. He held the pistol at his waist and held the boy 
by the hand. At the farther edge of the town they came 
upon a solitary house in a ﬁeld and they crossed and 
entered and walked through the rooms. They came upon 
themselves in a mirror and he almost raised the pistol. It’s 
us, Papa, the boy whispered. It’s us. 
He stood in the back door and looked out at the ﬁelds and 
the road beyond and the bleak country beyond the road. 
On the patio was a barbeque pit made from a ﬁfty-ﬁve gal­
lon drum slit endways with a torch and set in a welded iron 
frame. A few dead trees in the yard. A fence. A metal tool 
shed. He shrugged off the blanket and wrapped it around 
the boy’s shoulder. 
I want you to wait here. 

D
T H E  R O A  
I want to go with you. 
I’m only going over there to take a look. Just sit here. 
You’ll be able to see me the whole time. I promise. 
He crossed the yard and pushed open the door, still hold­
ing the gun. It was a sort of garden shed. Dirt ﬂoor. Metal 
shelves with some plastic ﬂowerpots. Everything covered 
with ash. There were garden tools standing in the corner. 
A lawnmower. A wooden bench under the window and 
beside it a metal cabinet. He opened the cabinet. Old cata­
logs. Packets of seed. Begonia. Morning glory. He stuck 
them in his pocket. For what? On the top shelf were two 
cans of motor oil and he put the pistol in his belt and 
reached and got them and set them on the bench. They 
were very old, made of cardboard with metal endcaps. The 
oil had soaked through the cardboard but still they seemed 
full. He stepped back and looked out the door. The boy 
was sitting on the back steps of the house wrapped in the 
blankets watching him. When he turned he saw a gascan in 
the corner behind the door. He knew it couldnt have gas 
in it yet when he tilted it with his foot and let it fall back 
again there was a gentle slosh. He picked it up and carried 
it to the bench and tried to unscrew the cap but he could 
not. He got the pliers out of his coat pocket and extended 
the jaws and tried it. It would just ﬁt and he twisted off the 
cap and laid it on the bench and sniffed the can. Rank 
odor. Years old. But it was gasoline and it would burn. He 
screwed the cap back on and put the pliers in his pocket. 
He looked around for some smaller container but there 

113 
wasnt one. He shouldnt have thrown away the bottle. 
Check the house. 
Crossing the grass he felt half faint and he had to stop. He 
wondered if it was from smelling the gasoline. The boy 
was watching him. How many days to death? Ten? Not 
so many more than that. He couldnt think. Why had he 
stopped? He turned and looked down at the grass. He 
walked back. Testing the ground with his feet. He stopped 
and turned again. Then he went back to the shed. He 
returned with a garden spade and in the place where he’d 
stood he chucked the blade into the ground. It sank to 
half its length and stopped with a hollow wooden sound. 
He began to shovel away the dirt. 
Slow going. God he was tired. He leaned on the spade. He 
raised his head and looked at the boy. The boy sat as 
before. He bent to his work again. Before long he was rest­
ing between each shovelful. What he ﬁnally unburied was 
a piece of plywood covered with rooﬁngfelt. He shoveled 
out along the edges. It was a door perhaps three feet by 
six. At one end was a hasp with a padlock taped up in 
a plastic bag. He rested, holding on to the handle of 
the spade, his forehead in the crook of his arm. When he 
looked up again the boy was standing in the yard just a few 
feet from him. He was very scared. Dont open it, Papa, he 
whispered. 
It’s okay. 

D
T H E  R O A  
Please, Papa. Please. 
It’s okay. 
No it’s not. 
He had his ﬁsts clutched at his chest and he was bob ­
bing up and down with fear. The man dropped the shovel 
and put his arms around him. Come on, he said. Let’s just 
go sit on the porch and rest a while. 
Then can we go? 
Let’s just sit for a while. 
Okay. 
They sat wrapped in the blankets and looked out at the 
yard. They sat for a long time. He tried to explain to the 
boy that there was no one buried in the yard but the boy 
just started crying. After a while he even thought that 
maybe the child was right. 
Let’s just sit, he said. We wont even talk. 
Okay. 
They walked through the house again. He found a beer 
bottle and an old rag of a curtain and he tore an edge from 
the cloth and stuffed it down the neck of the bottle with a 
coathanger. This is our new lamp, he said. 
How can we light it? 
I found some gasoline in the shed. And some oil. I’ll 
show you. 
Okay. 
Come on, the man said. Everything’s okay. I promise. 
But when he bent to see into the boy’s face under the 
hood of the blanket he very much feared that something 
was gone that could not be put right again. 

115 
.
.
.
 
They went out and crossed the yard to the shed. He set the 
bottle on the bench and he took a screwdriver and punched 
a hole in one of the cans of oil and then punched a smaller 
one to help it drain. He pulled the wick out of the bottle 
and poured the bottle about half full, old straight weight 
oil thick and gelid with the cold and a long time pouring. 
He twisted the cap off the gascan and he made a small 
paper spill from one of the seedpackets and poured gas 
into the bottle and put his thumb over the mouth and 
shook it. Then he poured some out into a clay dish and 
took the rag and stuffed it back into the bottle with the 
screwdriver. He took a piece of ﬂint from his pocket and 
got the pair of pliers and struck the ﬂint against the ser­
rated jaw. He tried it a couple of times and then he stopped 
and poured more gasoline into the dish. This may ﬂare up, 
he said. The boy nodded. He raked sparks into the dish 
and it bloomed into ﬂame with a low whoosh. He reached 
and got the bottle and tilted it and lit the wick and blew 
out the ﬂame in the dish and handed the smoking bottle to 
the boy. Here, he said. Take it. 
What are we going to do? 
Hold your hand in front of the ﬂame. Dont let it go out. 
He rose and took the pistol from his belt. This door 
looks like the other door, he said. But it’s not. I know 
you’re scared. That’s okay. I think there may be things in 
there and we have to take a look. There’s no place else to 
go. This is it. I want you to help me. If you dont want to 
hold the lamp you’ll have to take the pistol. 
I’ll hold the lamp. 

D
T H E  R O A  
Okay. This is what the good guys do. They keep trying. 
They dont give up. 
Okay. 
He led the boy out into the yard trailing the black smoke 
from the lamp. He put the pistol in his belt and picked up 
the spade and began to chop the hasp out of the plywood. 
He wedged the corner of the blade under it and pried it up 
and then knelt and took hold of the lock and twisted the 
whole thing loose and pitched it into the grass. He pried 
the blade under the door and got his ﬁngers under it and 
then stood and raised it up. Dirt went rattling down the 
boards. He looked at the boy. Are you all right? he said. 
The boy nodded mutely, holding the lamp in front of him. 
The man swung the door over and let it fall in the grass. 
Rough stairs carpentered out of two by tens leading down 
into the darkness. He reached and took the lamp from the 
boy. He started to descend the stairs but then he turned 
and leaned and kissed the child on the forehead. 
The bunker was walled with concrete block. A poured con­
crete ﬂoor laid over with kitchen tile. There were a cou­
ple of iron cots with bare springs, one against either wall, 
the mattress pads rolled up at the foot of them in army 
fashion. He turned and looked at the boy crouched above 
him blinking in the smoke rising up from the lamp and 
then he descended to the lower steps and sat and held the 
lamp out. Oh my God, he whispered. Oh my God. 
What is it Papa? 
Come down. Oh my God. Come down. 

117 
.
.
.
 
Crate upon crate of canned goods. Tomatoes, peaches, 
beans, apricots. Canned hams. Corned beef. Hundreds of 
gallons of water in ten gallon plastic jerry jugs. Paper tow­
els, toiletpaper, paper plates. Plastic trashbags stuffed with 
blankets. He held his forehead in his hand. Oh my God, he 
said. He looked back at the boy. It’s all right, he said. 
Come down. 
Papa? 
Come down. Come down and see. 
He stood the lamp on the step and went up and took the 
boy by the hand. Come on, he said. It’s all right. 
What did you ﬁnd? 
I found everything. Everything. Wait till you see. He led 
him down the stairs and picked up the bottle and held the 
ﬂame aloft. Can you see? he said. Can you see? 
What is all this stuff, Papa? 
It’s food. Can you read it? 
Pears. That says pears. 
Yes. Yes it does. Oh yes it does. 
There was just headroom for him to stand. He ducked 
under a lantern with a green metal shade hanging from a 
hook. He held the boy by the hand and they went along 
the rows of stenciled cartons. Chile, corn, stew, soup, 
spaghetti sauce. The richness of a vanished world. Why is 
this here? the boy said. Is it real? 
Oh yes. It’s real. 

D
T H E  R O A  
He pulled one of the boxes down and clawed it open 
and held up a can of peaches. It’s here because someone 
thought it might be needed. 
But they didnt get to use it. 
No. They didnt. 
They died. 
Yes. 
Is it okay for us to take it? 
Yes. It is. They would want us to. Just like we would 
want them to. 
They were the good guys? 
Yes. They were. 
Like us. 
Like us. Yes. 
So it’s okay. 
Yes. It’s okay. 
There were knives and plastic utensils and silverware and 
kitchen tools in a plastic box. A can opener. There were 
electric torches that didnt work. He found a box of batter­
ies and drycells and went through them. Mostly corroded 
and leaking an acid goo but some of them looked okay. He 
ﬁnally got one of the lanterns to work and he set it on the 
table and blew out the smoky ﬂame of the lamp. He tore a 
ﬂap from the opened cardboard box and chased out the 
smoke with it and then he climbed up and lowered the trap 
door and turned and looked at the boy. What would you 
like for supper? he said. 
Pears. 
Good choice. Pears it is. 

119 
He took two paperware bowls from a stack of them 
wrapped in plastic and set them out on the table. He 
unrolled the mattress pads on the bunks for them to sit on 
and he opened the carton of pears and took out a can and 
set it on the table and clamped the lid with the can opener 
and began to turn the wheel. He looked at the boy. The 
boy was sitting quietly on the bunk, still wrapped in the 
blanket, watching. The man thought he had probably not 
fully committed himself to any of this. You could wake in 
the dark wet woods at any time. These will be the best 
pears you ever tasted, he said. The best. Just you wait. 
They sat side by side and ate the can of pears. Then they 
ate a can of peaches. They licked the spoons and tipped 
the bowls and drank the rich sweet syrup. They looked at 
each other. 
One more. 
I dont want you to get sick. 
I wont get sick. 
You havent eaten in a long time. 
I know. 
Okay. 
He put the boy to bed in the bunk and smoothed his ﬁlthy 
hair on the pillow and covered him with blankets. When 
he climbed up and lifted the door it was almost dark out. 
He went to the garage and got the knapsack and came back 
and took a last look around and then went down the steps 
and pulled the door shut and jammed one of the handles 

D
T H E  R O A  
of the pliers through the heavy inside hasp. The electric 
lantern was already beginning to dim and he looked through 
the stores until he found some cases of white gas in gallon 
cans. He got one of the cans out and set it on the table and 
unscrewed the cap and punched out the metal seal with a 
screwdriver. Then he took down the lamp from the hook 
overhead and ﬁlled it. He’d already found a plastic box of 
butane lighters and he lit the lamp with one of them and 
adjusted the ﬂame and hung it back up. Then he just sat 
on the bunk. 
While the boy slept he began to go methodically through 
the stores. Clothes, sweaters, socks. A stainless steel basin 
and sponges and bars of soap. Toothpaste and tooth­
brushes. In the bottom of a big plastic jar of bolts and 
screws and miscellaneous hardware he found a double 
handful of gold krugerrands in a cloth sack. He dumped 
them out and kneaded them in his hand and looked at them 
and then scooped them back into the jar along with the 
hardware and put the jar back on the shelf. 
He sorted through everything, shifting boxes and crates 
from one side of the room to the other. There was a small 
steel door that led into a second room where bottles of gas 
were stored. In the corner a chemical toilet. There were 
vent pipes in the walls covered with wire mesh and there 
were drains in the ﬂoor. It was getting warm in the bunker 
and he’d taken off his coat. He went through everything. 
He found a box of .45 ACP cartridges and three boxes of 

121 
.30-30 riﬂe shells. What he didnt ﬁnd was a gun. He took 
the battery lantern and walked over the ﬂoor and he 
checked the walls for any hidden compartment. After a 
while he just sat on the bunk eating a bar of chocolate. 
There was no gun and there wasnt going to be one. 
When he woke the gaslamp overhead was hissing softly. 
The bunker walls were there in the light and the boxes and 
crates. He didnt know where he was. He was lying with his 
coat over him. He sat up and looked at the boy asleep on the 
other bunk. He’d taken off his shoes but he didnt remember 
that either and he got them from under the bunk and pulled 
them on and climbed the stairs and pulled the pliers from 
the hasp and lifted the door and peered out. Early morn­
ing. He looked at the house and he looked out toward the 
road and he was about to lower the hatch door again when 
he stopped. The vague gray light was in the west. They’d 
slept the night through and the day that followed. He low­
ered the door and secured it again and climbed back down 
and sat on the bunk. He looked around at the supplies. 
He’d been ready to die and now he wasnt going to and he 
had to think about that. Anyone could see the hatch lying 
in the yard and they would know at once what it was. He 
had to think about what to do. This was not hiding in the 
woods. This was the last thing from that. Finally he rose 
and went to the table and hooked up the little two burner 
gas stove and lit it and got out a frying pan and a kettle and 
opened the plastic box of kitchen implements. 
.
.
.
 

D
T H E  R O A  
What woke the boy was him grinding coffee in a small 
hand grinder. He sat up and stared all around. Papa? he 
said. 
Hi. Are you hungry? 
I have to go to the bathroom. I have to pee. 
He pointed with the spatula toward the low steel door. 
He didnt know how to use the toilet but they would use it 
anyway. They werent going to be here that long and he 
wasnt going to be opening and closing the hatch any more 
than they had to. The boy went past, his hair matted with 
sweat. What is that? he said. 
Coffee. Ham. Biscuits. 
Wow, the boy said. 
He dragged a footlocker across the ﬂoor between the bunks 
and covered it with a towel and set out the plates and cups 
and plastic utensils. He set out a bowl of biscuits covered 
with a handtowel and a plate of butter and a can of con­
densed milk. Salt and pepper. He looked at the boy. The 
boy looked drugged. He brought the frying pan from the 
stove and forked a piece of browned ham onto the boy’s 
plate and scooped scrambled eggs from the other pan and 
ladled out spoonfuls of baked beans and poured coffee 
into their cups. The boy looked up at him. 
Go ahead, he said. Dont let it get cold. 
What do I eat ﬁrst? 
Whatever you like. 
Is this coffee? 
Yes. Here. You put the butter on your biscuits. Like this. 
Okay. 

123 
Are you all right? 
I dont know. 
Do you feel okay? 
Yes. 
What is it? 
Do you think we should thank the people? 
The people? 
The people who gave us all this. 
Well. Yes, I guess we could do that. 
Will you do it? 
Why dont you? 
I dont know how. 
Yes you do. You know how to say thank you. 
The boy sat staring at his plate. He seemed lost. The 
man was about to speak when he said: Dear people, thank 
you for all this food and stuff. We know that you saved it 
for yourself and if you were here we wouldnt eat it no mat­
ter how hungry we were and we’re sorry that you didnt get 
to eat it and we hope that you’re safe in heaven with God. 
He looked up. Is that okay? he said. 
Yes. I think that’s okay. 
He wouldnt stay in the bunker by himself. He followed 
the man back and forth across the lawn while he carried 
the plastic jugs of water to the bathroom at the rear of the 
house. They took the little stove with them and a couple of 
pans and he heated water and poured it into the tub and 
poured in water from the plastic jugs. It took a long time 
but he wanted it to be good and warm. When the tub was 
almost full the boy got undressed and stepped shivering 

D
T H E  R O A  
into the water and sat. Scrawny and ﬁlthy and naked. Hold­
ing his shoulders. The only light was from the ring of blue 
teeth in the burner of the stove. What do you think? the 
man said. 
Warm at last. 
Warm at last? 
Yes. 
Where did you get that? 
I dont know. 
Okay. Warm at last. 
He washed his dirty matted hair and bathed him with the 
soap and sponges. He drained away the ﬁlthy water he sat 
in and laved fresh warm water over him from the pan and 
wrapped him shivering in a towel and wrapped him again 
in a blanket. He combed his hair and looked at him. Steam 
was coming off of him like smoke. Are you okay? he said. 
My feet are cold. 
You’ll have to wait for me. 
Hurry. 
He bathed and then climbed out and poured detergent 
into the bathwater and shoved their stinking jeans down 
into the water with a toilet plunger. Are you ready? he said. 
Yes. 
He turned down the burner until it sputtered and went 
out and then he turned on the ﬂashlight and laid it in the 
ﬂoor. They sat on the edge of the tub and pulled their 
shoes on and then he handed the boy the pan and soap and 
he took the stove and the little bottle of gas and the pistol 

125 
and wrapped in their blankets they went back across the 
yard to the bunker. 
They sat on the cot with a checkerboard between them, 
wearing new sweaters and socks and swaddled in the new 
blankets. He’d hooked up a small gas heater and they drank 
Coca Cola out of plastic mugs and after a while he went 
back to the house and wrung the water out of the jeans and 
brought them back and hung them to dry. 
How long can we stay here Papa? 
Not long. 
How long is that? 
I dont know. Maybe one more day. Two. 
Because it’s dangerous. 
Yes. 
Do you think they’ll ﬁnd us? 
No. They wont ﬁnd us. 
They might ﬁnd us. 
No they wont. They wont ﬁnd us. 
Later when the boy was asleep he went to the house and 
dragged some of the furniture out onto the lawn. Then he 
dragged out a mattress and laid it over the hatch and from 
inside he pulled it up over the plywood and carefully low­
ered the door so that the mattress covered it completely. It 
wasnt much of a ruse but it was better than nothing. While 
the boy slept he sat on the bunk and by the light of the 
lantern he whittled fake bullets from a treebranch with his 

D
T H E  R O A  
knife, ﬁtting them carefully into the empty bores of the 
cylinder and then whittling again. He shaped the ends 
with the knife and sanded them smooth with salt and he 
stained them with soot until they were the color of lead. 
When he had all ﬁve of them done he ﬁtted them to the 
bores and snapped the cylinder shut and turned the gun 
and looked at it. Even this close the gun looked as if it were 
loaded and he laid it by and got up to feel the legs of the 
jeans steaming above the heater. 
He’d saved the small handful of empty cartridge casings 
for the pistol but they were gone with everything else. He 
should have kept them in his pocket. He’d even lost the 
last one. He thought he might have been able to reload 
them out of the .45 cartridges. The primers would proba­
bly ﬁt if he could get them out without ruining them. 
Shave the bullets to size with the boxcutter. He got up and 
made a last tour of the stores. Then he turned down the 
lamp until the ﬂame puttered out and he kissed the boy 
and crawled into the other bunk under the clean blankets 
and gazed one more time at this tiny paradise trembling 
in the orange light from the heater and then he fell asleep. 
The town had been abandoned years ago but they walked 
the littered streets carefully, the boy holding on to his 
hand. They passed a metal trashdump where someone had 
once tried to burn bodies. The charred meat and bones 
under the damp ash might have been anonymous save for 
the shapes of the skulls. No longer any smell. There was a 

127 
market at the end of the street and in one of the aisles piled 
with empty boxes there were three metal grocery carts. He 
looked them over and pulled one of them free and squatted 
and turned the wheels and then stood and pushed it up the 
aisle and back again. 
We could take two of them, the boy said. 
No. 
I could push one. 
You’re the scout. I need you to be our lookout. 
What are we going to do with all the stuff ? 
We’ll just have to take what we can. 
Do you think somebody is coming? 
Yes. Sometime. 
You said nobody was coming. 
I didnt mean ever. 
I wish we could live here. 
I know. 
We could be on the lookout. 
We are on the lookout. 
What if some good guys came? 
Well, I dont think we’re likely to meet any good guys on 
the road. 
We’re on the road. 
I know. 
If you’re on the lookout all the time does that mean that 
you’re scared all the time? 
Well. I suppose you have to be scared enough to be on 
the lookout in the ﬁrst place. To be cautious. Watchful. 
But the rest of the time you’re not scared? 
The rest of the time. 
Yeah. 

D
T H E  R O A  
I dont know. Maybe you should always be on the look­
out. If trouble comes when you least expect it then maybe 
the thing to do is to always expect it. 
Do you always expect it? Papa? 
I do. But sometimes I might forget to be on the lookout. 
He sat the boy on the footlocker under the gaslamp and 
with a plastic comb and a pair of scissors he set about cut­
ting his hair. He tried to do a good job and it took some 
time. When he was done he took the towel from around 
the boy’s shoulders and he scooped the golden hair from 
the ﬂoor and wiped the boy’s face and shoulders with a 
damp cloth and held a mirror for him to see. 
You did a good job, Papa. 
Good. 
I look really skinny. 
You are really skinny. 
He cut his own hair but it didnt come out so good. He 
trimmed his beard with the scissors while a pan of water 
heated and then he shaved himself with a plastic safety 
razor. The boy watched. When he was done he regarded 
himself in the mirror. He seemed to have no chin. He 
turned to the boy. How do I look? The boy cocked his 
head. I dont know, he said. Will you be cold? 
They ate a sumptuous meal by candlelight. Ham and green 
beans and mashed potatoes with biscuits and gravy. He’d 
found four quarts of bonded whiskey still in the paper 
bags in which they’d been purchased and he drank a little 

129 
of it in a glass with water. It made him dizzy before he’d 
even ﬁnished it and he drank no more. They ate peaches 
and cream over biscuits for dessert and drank coffee. The 
paper plates and plastic tableware he dumped in a trash-
bag. Then they played checkers and then he put the boy 
to bed. 
In the night he was wakened by the muted patter of rain on 
the mattress over the door above them. He thought it must 
be raining pretty hard for him to hear it. He got up with 
the ﬂashlight and climbed the stairs and raised the hatch 
and played the light across the yard. The yard was already 
ﬂooded and the rain was slashing down. He closed the 
hatch. Water had leaked in and dripped down the stairs 
but he thought the bunker itself seemed pretty watertight. 
He went to see about the boy. He was damp with sweat and 
the man pulled back one of the blankets and fanned his face 
and then turned down the heater and went back to bed. 
When he woke again he thought the rain had stopped. But 
that wasnt what woke him. He’d been visited in a dream by 
creatures of a kind he’d never seen before. They did not 
speak. He thought that they’d been crouching by the side 
of his cot as he slept and then had skulked away on his 
awakening. He turned and looked at the boy. Maybe he 
understood for the ﬁrst time that to the boy he was himself 
an alien. A being from a planet that no longer existed. The 
tales of which were suspect. He could not construct for the 
child’s pleasure the world he’d lost without constructing 

D
T H E  R O A  
the loss as well and he thought perhaps the child had 
known this better than he. He tried to remember the dream 
but he could not. All that was left was the feeling of it. He 
thought perhaps they’d come to warn him. Of what? That 
he could not enkindle in the heart of the child what was 
ashes in his own. Even now some part of him wished they’d 
never found this refuge. Some part of him always wished it 
to be over. 
He checked the valve on the tank that it was turned off and 
swung the little stove around on the footlocker and sat and 
went to work dismantling it. He unscrewed the bottom 
panel and he removed the burner assembly and discon­
nected the two burners with a small crescent wrench. He 
tipped out the plastic jar of hardware and sorted out a bolt 
to thread into the ﬁtting of the junction and then tightened 
it down. He connected the hose from the tank and held 
the little potmetal burner up in his hand, small and light­
weight. He set it on the locker and carried the sheetmetal 
over and put it in the trash and went to the stairs to check 
the weather. The mattress on top of the hatch had soaked 
up a good deal of water and the door was hard to lift. He 
stood with it resting on his shoulders and looked out at the 
day. A light drizzle falling. Impossible to tell what time of 
the day he was looking at. He looked at the house and he 
looked out over the dripping countryside and then let the 
door back down and descended the steps and set about 
making breakfast. 
.
.
.
 

131 
They spent the day eating and sleeping. He’d planned to 
leave but the rain was justiﬁcation enough to stay. The gro­
cery cart was in the shed. Not likely that anyone would 
travel the road today. They sorted through the stores and 
set out what they could take, making of it a measured cube 
in the corner of the shelter. The day was brief, hardly a day 
at all. By dark the rain had ceased and they opened the 
hatch and began to carry boxes and parcels and plastic 
bags across the wet yard to the shed and to pack the 
cart. The faintly lit hatchway lay in the dark of the yard 
like a grave yawning at judgment day in some old apoca­
lyptic painting. When the cart was loaded with all that 
it could hold he tied a plastic tarp down over it and fas­
tened the grommets to the wire with short bungee cords 
and they stood back and looked at it with the ﬂashlight. 
He thought that he should have gotten a couple of extra 
sets of wheels from the other carts in the store but it was 
too late now. He should have saved the motorcycle mirror 
off their old cart too. They ate dinner and slept till morn­
ing and then bathed again with sponges and washed their 
hair in basins of warm water. They ate breakfast and by 
ﬁrst light they were on the road, wearing fresh masks cut 
from sheeting, the boy going ahead with a broom and 
clearing the way of sticks and branches and the man bent 
over the handle of the cart watching the road fall away 
before them. 
The cart was too heavy to push into the wet woods and 
they nooned in the middle of the road and ﬁxed hot tea 
and ate the last of the canned ham with crackers and with 

D
T H E  R O A  
mustard and applesauce. Sitting back to back and watch­
ing the road. Do you know where we are Papa? the boy 
said. 
Sort of. 
How sort of ? 
Well. I think we’re about two hundred miles from the 
coast. As the crow ﬂies. 
As the crow ﬂies? 
Yes. It means going in a straight line. 
Are we going to get there soon? 
Not real soon. Pretty soon. We’re not going as the crow 
ﬂies. 
Because crows dont have to follow roads? 
Yes. 
They can go wherever they want. 
Yes. 
Do you think there might be crows somewhere? 
I dont know. 
But what do you think? 
I think it’s unlikely. 
Could they ﬂy to Mars or someplace? 
No. They couldnt. 
Because it’s too far? 
Yes. 
Even if they wanted to. 
Even if they wanted to. 
What if they tried and they just got half way or some­
thing and then they were too tired. Would they fall back 
down? 
Well. They really couldnt get half way because they’d be 
in space and there’s not any air in space so they wouldnt 

133 
be able to ﬂy and besides it would be too cold and they’d 
freeze to death. 
Oh. 
Anyway they wouldnt know where Mars was. 
Do we know where Mars is? 
Sort of. 
If we had a spaceship could we go there? 
Well. If you had a really good spaceship and you had 
people to help you I suppose you could go. 
Would there be food and stuff when you got there? 
No. There’s nothing there. 
Oh. 
They sat for a long time. They sat on their folded blan­
kets and watched the road in both directions. No wind. 
Nothing. After a while the boy said: There’s not any crows. 
Are there? 
No. 
Just in books. 
Yes. Just in books. 
I didnt think so. 
Are you ready? 
Yes. 
They rose and put away their cups and the rest of the 
crackers. The man piled the blankets on top of the cart 
and fastened the tarp down and then he stood looking at 
the boy. What? the boy said. 
I know you thought we were going to die. 
Yeah. 
But we didnt. 
No. 
Okay. 

D
T H E  R O A  
Can I ask you something? 
Sure. 
If you were a crow could you ﬂy up high enough to see 
the sun? 
Yes. You could. 
I thought so. That would be really neat. 
Yes it would. Are you ready? 
Yes. 
He stopped. What happened to your ﬂute? 
I threw it away. 
You threw it away? 
Yes. 
Okay. 
Okay. 
In the long gray dusk they crossed a river and stopped and 
looked down from the concrete balustrade at the slow dead 
water passing underneath. Sketched upon the pall of soot 
downstream the outline of a burnt city like a black paper 
scrim. They saw it again just at dark pushing the heavy cart 
up a long hill and they stopped to rest and he turned the 
cart sideways in the road against it rolling. Their masks 
were already gray at the mouth and their eyes darkly cupped. 
They sat in the ashes by the side of the road and looked 
out to the east where the shape of the city was darkening 
into the coming night. They saw no lights. 
Do you think there’s anyone there, Papa? 
I dont know. 
How soon can we stop? 

135 
We can stop now. 
On the hill? 
We can get the cart down to those rocks and cover it 
with limbs. 
Is this a good place to stop? 
Well, people dont like to stop on hills. And we dont like 
for people to stop. 
So it’s a good place for us. 
I think so. 
Because we’re smart. 
Well, let’s not get too smart. 
Okay. 
Are you ready? 
Yes. 
The boy stood up and got his broom and put it over his 
shoulder. He looked at his father. What are our long term 
goals? he said. 
What? 
Our long term goals. 
Where did you hear that? 
I dont know. 
No, where did you? 
You said it. 
When? 
A long time ago. 
What was the answer? 
I dont know. 
Well. I dont either. Come on. It’s getting dark. 
.
.
.
 

D
T H E  R O A  
Late in the day following as they rounded a bend in the 
road the boy stopped and put his hand on the carriage. 
Papa, he whispered. The man looked up. A small ﬁgure 
distant on the road, bent and shufﬂing. 
He stood leaning on the handle of the grocery cart. 
Well, he said. Who’s this? 
What should we do, Papa? 
It could be a decoy. 
What are we going to do? 
Let’s just follow. We’ll see if he turns around. 
Okay. 
The traveler was not one for looking back. They followed 
him for a while and then they overtook him. An old man, 
small and bent. He carried on his back an old army ruck­
sack with a blanket roll tied across the top of it and he 
tapped along with a peeled stick for a cane. When he saw 
them he veered to the side of the road and turned and 
stood warily. He had a ﬁlthy towel tied under his jaw as if 
he suffered from toothache and even by their new world 
standards he smelled terrible. 
I dont have anything, he said. You can look if you want. 
We’re not robbers. 
He leaned one ear forward. What? he called. 
I said we’re not robbers. 
What are you? 
They’d no way to answer the question. He wiped his 
nose with the back of his wrist and stood waiting. He had 
no shoes at all and his feet were wrapped in rags and card­
board tied with green twine and any number of layers of 

137 
vile clothing showed through the tears and holes in it. Of a 
sudden he seemed to wilt even further. He leaned on his 
cane and lowered himself into the road where he sat 
among the ashes with one hand over his head. He looked 
like a pile of rags fallen off a cart. They came forward and 
stood looking down at him. Sir? the man said. Sir? 
The boy squatted and put a hand on his shoulder. He’s 
scared, Papa. The man is scared. 
He looked up the road and down. If this is an ambush 
he goes ﬁrst, he said. 
He’s just scared, Papa. 
Tell him we wont hurt him. 
The old man shook his head from side to side, his ﬁn­
gers laced in his ﬁlthy hair. The boy looked up at his father. 
Maybe he thinks we’re not real. 
What does he think we are? 
I dont know. 
We cant stay here. We have to go. 
He’s scared, Papa. 
I dont think you should touch him. 
Maybe we could give him something to eat. 
He stood looking off down the road. Damn, he whis­
pered. He looked down at the old man. Perhaps he’d turn 
into a god and they to trees. All right, he said. 
He untied the tarp and folded it back and rummaged 
through the canned goods and came up with a tin of fruit 
cocktail and took the can opener from his pocket and 
opened the tin and folded back the lid and walked over 
and squatted and handed it to the boy. 

D
T H E  R O A  
What about a spoon? 
He’s not getting a spoon. 
The boy took the tin and handed it to the old man. Take 
it, he whispered. Here. 
The old man raised his eyes and looked at the boy. The 
boy gestured at him with the tin. He looked like some­
one trying to feed a vulture broken in the road. It’s okay, 
he said. 
The old man lowered his hand from his head. He 
blinked. Grayblue eyes half buried in the thin and sooty 
creases of his skin. 
Take it, the boy said. 
He reached with his scrawny claws and took it and held 
it to his chest. 
Eat it, the boy said. It’s good. He made tipping motions 
with his hands. The old man looked down at the tin. He 
took a fresh grip and lifted it, his nose wrinkling. His long 
and yellowed claws scrabbled at the metal. Then he tipped 
it and drank. The juice ran down his ﬁlthy beard. He low­
ered the can, chewing with difﬁculty. He jerked his head 
when he swallowed. Look, Papa, the boy whispered. 
I see, the man said. 
The boy turned and looked at him. 
I know what the question is, the man said. The answer 
is no. 
What’s the question? 
Can we keep him. We cant. 
I know. 
You know. 
Yeah. 
All right. 

139 
Can we give him something else? 
Let’s see how he does with this. 
They watched him eat. When he was done he sat hold­
ing the empty tin and looking down into it as if more might 
appear. 
What do you want to give him? 
What do you think he should have? 
I dont think he should have anything. What do you 
want to give him? 
We could cook something on the stove. He could eat 
with us. 
You’re talking about stopping. For the night. 
Yeah. 
He looked down at the old man and he looked at the 
road. All right, he said. But then tomorrow we go on. 
The boy didnt answer. 
That’s the best deal you’re going to get. 
Okay. 
Okay means okay. It doesnt mean we negotiate another 
deal tomorrow. 
What’s negotiate? 
It means talk about it some more and come up with 
some other deal. There is no other deal. This is it. 
Okay. 
Okay. 
They helped the old man to his feet and handed him his 
cane. He didnt weigh a hundred pounds. He stood look­
ing about uncertainly. The man took the tin from him and 
slung it into the woods. The old man tried to hand him 

D
T H E  R O A  
the cane but he pushed it away. When did you eat last? 
he said. 
I dont know. 
You dont remember. 
I ate just now. 
Do you want to eat with us? 
I dont know. 
You dont know? 
Eat what? 
Maybe some beef stew. With crackers. And coffee. 
What do I have to do? 
Tell us where the world went. 
What? 
You dont have to do anything. Can you walk okay? 
I can walk. 
He looked down at the boy. Are you a little boy? he said. 
The boy looked at his father. 
What does he look like? his father said. 
I dont know. I cant see good. 
Can you see me? 
I can tell someone’s there. 
Good. We need to get going. He looked at the boy. Dont 
hold his hand, he said. 
He cant see. 
Dont hold his hand. Let’s go. 
Where are we going? the old man said. 
We’re going to eat. 
He nodded and reached out with his cane and tapped 
tentatively at the road. 
How old are you? 

141 
I’m ninety. 
No you’re not. 
Okay. 
Is that what you tell people? 
What people? 
Any people. 
I guess so. 
So they wont hurt you? 
Yes. 
Does that work? 
No. 
What’s in your pack? 
Nothing. You can look. 
I know I can look. What’s in there? 
Nothing. Just some stuff. 
Nothing to eat. 
No. 
What’s your name? 
Ely. 
Ely what? 
What’s wrong with Ely? 
Nothing. Let’s go. 
They bivouacked in the woods much nearer to the road 
than he would have liked. He had to drag the cart while the 
boy steered from behind and they built a ﬁre for the old 
man to warm himself though he didnt much like that either. 
They ate and the old man sat wrapped in his solitary quilt 
and gripped his spoon like a child. They had only two 

D
T H E  R O A  
cups and he drank his coffee from the bowl he’d eaten 
from, his thumbs hooked over the rim. Sitting like a starved 
and threadbare buddha, staring into the coals. 
You cant go with us, you know, the man said. 
He nodded. 
How long have you been on the road? 
I was always on the road. You cant stay in one place. 
How do you live? 
I just keep going. I knew this was coming. 
You knew it was coming? 
Yeah. This or something like it. I always believed in it. 
Did you try to get ready for it? 
No. What would you do? 
I dont know. 
People were always getting ready for tomorrow. I didnt 
believe in that. Tomorrow wasnt getting ready for them. It 
didnt even know they were there. 
I guess not. 
Even if you knew what to do you wouldnt know what to 
do. You wouldnt know if you wanted to do it or not. Sup­
pose you were the last one left? Suppose you did that to 
yourself ? 
Do you wish you would die? 
No. But I might wish I had died. When you’re alive 
you’ve always got that ahead of you. 
Or you might wish you’d never been born. 
Well. Beggars cant be choosers. 
You think that would be asking too much. 
What’s done is done. Anyway, it’s foolish to ask for luxu­
ries in times like these. 

143 
I guess so. 
Nobody wants to be here and nobody wants to leave. He 
lifted his head and looked across the ﬁre at the boy. Then 
he looked at the man. The man could see his small eyes 
watching him in the ﬁrelight. God knows what those eyes 
saw. He got up to pile more wood on the ﬁre and he raked 
the coals back from the dead leaves. The red sparks rose 
in a shudder and died in the blackness overhead. The old 
man drank the last of his coffee and set the bowl before 
him and leaned toward the heat with his hands out. The 
man watched him. How would you know if you were the 
last man on earth? he said. 
I dont guess you would know it. You’d just be it. 
Nobody would know it. 
It wouldnt make any difference. When you die it’s the 
same as if everybody else did too. 
I guess God would know it. Is that it? 
There is no God. 
No? 
There is no God and we are his prophets. 
I dont understand how you’re still alive. How do you eat? 
I dont know. 
You dont know? 
People give you things. 
People give you things. 
Yes. 
To eat. 
To eat. Yes. 
No they dont. 
You did. 

D
T H E  R O A  
No I didnt. The boy did. 
There’s other people on the road. You’re not the only 
ones. 
Are you the only one? 
The old man peered warily. What do you mean? he said. 
Are there people with you? 
What people? 
Any people. 
There’s not any people. What are you talking about? 
I’m talking about you. About what line of work you 
might be in. 
The old man didnt answer. 
I suppose you want to go with us. 
Go with you. 
Yes. 
You wont take me with you. 
You dont want to go. 
I wouldnt have even come this far but I was hungry. 
The people that gave you food. Where are they? 
There’s not any people. I just made that up. 
What else did you make up? 
I’m just on the road the same as you. No different. 
Is your name really Ely? 
No. 
You dont want to say your name. 
I dont want to say it. 
Why? 
I couldnt trust you with it. To do something with it. I 
dont want anybody talking about me. To say where I was 
or what I said when I was there. I mean, you could talk 
about me maybe. But nobody could say that it was me. I 

145 
could be anybody. I think in times like these the less said 
the better. If something had happened and we were sur­
vivors and we met on the road then we’d have something 
to talk about. But we’re not. So we dont. 
Maybe not. 
You just dont want to say in front of the boy. 
You’re not a shill for a pack of roadagents? 
I’m not anything. I’ll leave if you want me to. I can ﬁnd 
the road. 
You dont have to leave. 
I’ve not seen a ﬁre in a long time, that’s all. I live like 
an animal. You dont want to know the things I’ve eaten. 
When I saw that boy I thought that I had died. 
You thought he was an angel? 
I didnt know what he was. I never thought to see a child 
again. I didnt know that would happen. 
What if I said that he’s a god? 
The old man shook his head. I’m past all that now. 
Have been for years. Where men cant live gods fare no 
better. You’ll see. It’s better to be alone. So I hope that’s 
not true what you said because to be on the road with the 
last god would be a terrible thing so I hope it’s not true. 
Things will be better when everybody’s gone. 
They will? 
Sure they will. 
Better for who? 
Everybody. 
Everybody. 
Sure. We’ll all be better off. We’ll all breathe easier. 
That’s good to know. 
Yes it is. When we’re all gone at last then there’ll be 

D
T H E  R O A  
nobody here but death and his days will be numbered too. 
He’ll be out in the road there with nothing to do and 
nobody to do it to. He’ll say: Where did everybody go? 
And that’s how it will be. What’s wrong with that? 
In the morning they stood in the road and he and the boy 
argued about what to give the old man. In the end he didnt 
get much. Some cans of vegetables and of fruit. Finally the 
boy just went over to the edge of the road and sat in the 
ashes. The old man ﬁtted the tins into his knapsack and 
fastened the straps. You should thank him you know, the 
man said. I wouldnt have given you anything. 
Maybe I should and maybe I shouldnt. 
Why wouldnt you? 
I wouldnt have given him mine. 
You dont care if it hurts his feelings? 
Will it hurt his feelings? 
No. That’s not why he did it. 
Why did he do it? 
He looked over at the boy and he looked at the old man. 
You wouldnt understand, he said. I’m not sure I do. 
Maybe he believes in God. 
I dont know what he believes in. 
He’ll get over it. 
No he wont. 
The old man didnt answer. He looked around at the day. 
You wont wish us luck either, will you? the man said. 
I dont know what that would mean. What luck would 
look like. Who would know such a thing? 

147 
Then all went on. When he looked back the old man had 
set out with his cane, tapping his way, dwindling slowly on 
the road behind them like some storybook peddler from 
an antique time, dark and bent and spider thin and soon to 
vanish forever. The boy never looked back at all. 
In the early afternoon they spread their tarp on the road 
and sat and ate a cold lunch. The man watched him. Are 
you talking? he said. 
Yes. 
But you’re not happy. 
I’m okay. 
When we’re out of food you’ll have more time to think 
about it. 
The boy didnt answer. They ate. He looked back up the 
road. After a while he said: I know. But I wont remember it 
the way you do. 
Probably not. 
I didnt say you were wrong. 
Even if you thought it. 
It’s okay. 
Yeah, the man said. Well. There’s not a lot of good news 
on the road. In times like these. 
You shouldnt make fun of him. 
Okay. 
He’s going to die. 
I know. 
Can we go now? 
Yeah, the man said. We can go. 

D
T H E  R O A  
.
.
.
 
In the night he woke in the cold dark coughing and he 
coughed till his chest was raw. He leaned to the ﬁre and 
blew on the coals and he put on more wood and rose and 
walked away from the camp as far as the light would carry 
him. He knelt in the dry leaves and ash with the blanket 
wrapped about his shoulders and after a while the cough­
ing began to subside. He thought about the old man out 
there somewhere. He looked back at the camp through the 
black palings of the trees. He hoped the boy had gone 
back to sleep. He knelt there wheezing softly, his hands on 
his knees. I am going to die, he said. Tell me how I am to 
do that. 
The day following they trekked on till almost dark. He 
could ﬁnd no safe place to make a ﬁre. When he lifted the 
tank from the cart he thought that it felt light. He sat and 
turned the valve but the valve was already on. He turned 
the little knob on the burner. Nothing. He leaned and lis­
tened. He tried both valves again in their combinations. 
The tank was empty. He squatted there with his hands 
folded into a ﬁst against his forehead, his eyes closed. After 
a while he raised his head and just sat there staring out at 
the cold and darkening woods. 
They ate a cold supper of cornbread and beans and franks 
from a tin. The boy asked him how the tank had gone 
empty so soon but he said that it just had. 

149 
You said it would last for weeks. 
I know. 
But it’s just been a few days. 
I was wrong. 
They ate in silence. After a while the boy said: I forgot 
to turn off the valve, didnt I? 
It’s not your fault. I should have checked. 
The boy set his plate down on the tarp. He looked away. 
It’s not your fault. You have to turn off both valves. The 
threads were supposed to be sealed with teﬂon tape or it 
would leak and I didnt do it. It’s my fault. I didnt tell you. 
There wasnt any tape though, was there? 
It’s not your fault. 
They plodded on, thin and ﬁlthy as street addicts. Cowled 
in their blankets against the cold and their breath smok­
ing, shufﬂing through the black and silky drifts. They were 
crossing the broad coastal plain where the secular winds 
drove them in howling clouds of ash to ﬁnd shelter where 
they could. Houses or barns or under the bank of a road­
side ditch with the blankets pulled over their heads and 
the noon sky black as the cellars of hell. He held the boy 
against him, cold to the bone. Dont lose heart, he said. 
We’ll be all right. 
The land was gullied and eroded and barren. The bones of 
dead creatures sprawled in the washes. Middens of anony­
mous trash. Farmhouses in the ﬁelds scoured of their paint 
and the clapboards spooned and sprung from the wall­

D
T H E  R O A  
studs. All of it shadowless and without feature. The road 
descended through a jungle of dead kudzu. A marsh where 
the dead reeds lay over the water. Beyond the edge of the 
ﬁelds the sullen haze hung over earth and sky alike. By late 
afternoon it had begun to snow and they went on with the 
tarp over them and the wet snow hissing on the plastic. 
He’d slept little in weeks. When he woke in the morning 
the boy was not there and he sat up with the pistol in his 
hand and then stood and looked for him but he was not in 
sight. He pulled on his shoes and walked out to the edge of 
the trees. Bleak dawn in the east. The alien sun commenc­
ing its cold transit. He saw the boy coming at a run across 
the ﬁelds. Papa, he called. There’s a train in the woods. 
A train? 
Yes. 
A real train? 
Yes. Come on. 
You didnt go up to it did you? 
No. Just a little. Come on. 
There’s nobody there? 
No. I dont think so. I came to get you. 
Is there an engine? 
Yes. A big diesel. 
They crossed the ﬁeld and entered the woods on the far 
side. The tracks came down out of the country on a banked 
rise and ran through the woods. The locomotive was a 

151 
diesel electric and there were eight stainless steel passen­
ger coaches behind it. He took hold of the boy’s hand. 
Let’s just sit and watch, he said. 
They sat on the embankment and waited. Nothing moved. 
He handed the pistol to the boy. You take it, Papa, the boy 
said. 
No. That’s not the deal. Take it. 
He took the pistol and sat with it in his lap and the man 
went down the right of way and stood looking at the train. 
He crossed the tracks to the other side and walked down 
the length of the cars. When he came out from behind the 
last coach he waved for the boy to come and the boy rose 
and put the pistol in his belt. 
Everything was covered in ash. The aisles littered. Suit­
cases stood open in the seats where they’d been lifted down 
from the overhead racks and riﬂed long ago. In the club 
car he found a stack of paper plates and he blew the dust 
from them and put them inside his parka and that was all. 
How did it get here, Papa? 
I dont know. I guess someone was taking it south. A 
group of people. This is probably where they ran out of 
fuel. 
Has it been here for a long time? 
Yes. I think so. A pretty long time. 
.
.
.
 

D
T H E  R O A  
They went through the last of the cars and then walked up 
the track to the locomotive and climbed up to the catwalk. 
Rust and scaling paint. They pushed into the cab and he 
blew away the ash from the engineer’s seat and put the boy 
at the controls. The controls were very simple. Little to do 
but push the throttle lever forward. He made train noises 
and diesel horn noises but he wasnt sure what these might 
mean to the boy. After a while they just looked out through 
the silted glass to where the track curved away in the waste 
of weeds. If they saw different worlds what they knew 
was the same. That the train would sit there slowly decom­
posing for all eternity and that no train would ever run 
again. 
Can we go, Papa? 
Yes. Of course we can. 
They began to come upon from time to time small cairns 
of rock by the roadside. They were signs in gypsy lan­
guage, lost patterans. The ﬁrst he’d seen in some while, 
common in the north, leading out of the looted and 
exhausted cities, hopeless messages to loved ones lost and 
dead. By then all stores of food had given out and murder 
was everywhere upon the land. The world soon to be 
largely populated by men who would eat your children in 
front of your eyes and the cities themselves held by cores 
of blackened looters who tunneled among the ruins and 
crawled from the rubble white of tooth and eye carrying 
charred and anonymous tins of food in nylon nets like 
shoppers in the commissaries of hell. The soft black talc 
blew through the streets like squid ink uncoiling along a 

153 
sea ﬂoor and the cold crept down and the dark came early 
and the scavengers passing down the steep canyons with 
their torches trod silky holes in the drifted ash that closed 
behind them silently as eyes. Out on the roads the pil­
grims sank down and fell over and died and the bleak and 
shrouded earth went trundling past the sun and returned 
again as trackless and as unremarked as the path of any 
nameless sisterworld in the ancient dark beyond. 
Long before they reached the coast their stores were all 
but gone. The country was stripped and plundered years 
ago and they found nothing in the houses and buildings by 
the roadside. He found a telephone directory in a ﬁlling 
station and he wrote the name of the town on their map 
with a pencil. They sat on the curb in front of the building 
and ate crackers and looked for the town but they couldnt 
ﬁnd it. He sorted through the sections and looked again. 
Finally he showed the boy. They were some ﬁfty miles 
west of where he’d thought. He drew stick ﬁgures on the 
map. This is us, he said. The boy traced the route to the 
sea with his ﬁnger. How long will it take us to get there? 
he said. 
Two weeks. Three. 
Is it blue? 
The sea? I dont know. It used to be. 
The boy nodded. He sat looking at the map. The man 
watched him. He thought he knew what that was about. 
He’d pored over maps as a child, keeping one ﬁnger on the 
town where he lived. Just as he would look up his family in 
the phone directory. Themselves among others, every­

D
T H E  R O A  
thing in its place. Justiﬁed in the world. Come on, he said. 
We should go. 
In the late afternoon it began to rain. They left the road 
and took a dirt drive through a ﬁeld and spent the night in 
a shed. The shed had a concrete ﬂoor and at the far end 
stood some empty steel drums. He blocked the doors with 
the drums and built a ﬁre in the ﬂoor and he made beds 
out of some ﬂattened cardboard boxes. The rain drummed 
all night on the steel roof overhead. When he woke the ﬁre 
had burned down and it was very cold. The boy was sit­
ting up wrapped in his blanket. 
What is it? 
Nothing. I had a bad dream. 
What did you dream about? 
Nothing. 
Are you okay? 
No. 
He put his arms around him and held him. It’s okay, 
he said. 
I was crying. But you didnt wake up. 
I’m sorry. I was just so tired. 
I meant in the dream. 
In the morning when he woke the rain had stopped. He 
listened to the slack drip of water. He shifted his hips on 
the hard concrete and looked out through the boards at 
the gray country. The boy was still sleeping. Water dripped 
in puddles in the ﬂoor. Small bubbles appeared and skated 

155 
and vanished again. In a town in the piedmont they’d slept 
in a place like this and listened to the rain. There was an 
oldfashioned drugstore there with a black marble counter 
and chrome stools with tattered plastic seats patched with 
electrical tape. The pharmacy was looted but the store 
itself was oddly intact. Expensive electronic equipment sat 
unmolested on the shelves. He stood looking the place 
over. Sundries. Notions. What are these? He took the boy’s 
hand and led him out but the boy had already seen it. A 
human head beneath a cakebell at the end of the counter. 
Dessicated. Wearing a ballcap. Dried eyes turned sadly 
inward. Did he dream this? He did not. He rose and knelt 
and blew at the coals and dragged up the burned board 
ends and got the ﬁre going. 
There are other good guys. You said so. 
Yes. 
So where are they? 
They’re hiding. 
Who are they hiding from? 
From each other. 
Are there lots of them? 
We dont know. 
But some. 
Some. Yes. 
Is that true? 
Yes. That’s true. 
But it might not be true. 
I think it’s true. 
Okay. 

D
T H E  R O A  
You dont believe me. 
I believe you. 
Okay. 
I always believe you. 
I dont think so. 
Yes I do. I have to. 
They hiked back down to the highway through the mud. 
Smell of earth and wet ash in the rain. Dark water in the 
roadside ditch. Sucking out of an iron culvert into a pool. 
In a yard a plastic deer. Late the day following they entered 
a small town where three men stepped from behind a truck 
and stood in the road before them. Emaciated, clothed in 
rags. Holding lengths of pipe. What have you got in the 
basket? He leveled the pistol at them. They stood. The 
boy clung to his coat. No one spoke. He set the cart for­
ward again and they moved to the side of the road. He had 
the boy take the cart and he walked backwards keeping the 
pistol on them. He tried to look like any common migra­
tory killer but his heart was hammering and he knew he 
was going to start coughing. They drifted back into the 
road and stood watching. He put the pistol in his belt and 
turned and took the cart. At the top of the rise when he 
looked back they were still standing there. He told the boy 
to push the cart and he walked out through a yard to where 
he could see back down the road but now they were gone. 
The boy was very scared. He laid the gun on top of the 
tarp and took the cart and they went on. 
.
.
.
 

157 
They lay in a ﬁeld until dark watching the road but no one 
came. It was very cold. When it was too dark to see they 
got the cart and stumbled back to the road and he got the 
blankets out and they wrapped themselves up and went 
on. Feeling out the paving under their feet. One wheel on 
the cart had developed a periodic squeak but there was 
nothing to be done about it. They struggled on for some 
hours and then ﬂoundered off through the roadside brush 
and lay shivering and exhausted on the cold ground and 
slept till day. When he woke he was sick. 
He’d come down with a fever and they lay in the woods 
like fugitives. Nowhere to build a ﬁre. Nowhere safe. The 
boy sat in the leaves watching him. His eyes brimming. 
Are you going to die, Papa? he said. Are you going to die? 
No. I’m just sick. 
I’m really scared. 
I know. It’s all right. I’m going to get better. You’ll see. 
His dreams brightened. The vanished world returned. Kin 
long dead washed up and cast fey sidewise looks upon 
him. None spoke. He thought of his life. So long ago. A 
gray day in a foreign city where he stood in a window and 
watched the street below. Behind him on a wooden table a 
small lamp burned. On the table books and papers. It had 
begun to rain and a cat at the corner turned and crossed 
the sidewalk and sat beneath the cafe awning. There was a 
woman at a table there with her head in her hands. Years 
later he’d stood in the charred ruins of a library where 

D
T H E  R O A  
blackened books lay in pools of water. Shelves tipped over. 
Some rage at the lies arranged in their thousands row on 
row. He picked up one of the books and thumbed through 
the heavy bloated pages. He’d not have thought the value 
of the smallest thing predicated on a world to come. It sur­
prised him. That the space which these things occupied 
was itself an expectation. He let the book fall and took a 
last look around and made his way out into the cold gray 
light. 
Three days. Four. He slept poorly. The racking cough woke 
him. Rasping suck of air. I’m sorry, he said to the pitiless 
dark. It’s okay said the boy. 
He got the little oillamp lit and left it sitting on a rock and 
he rose and shufﬂed out through the leaves wrapped in his 
blankets. The boy whispered for him not to go. Just a little 
ways, he said. Not far. I’ll hear you if you call. If the lamp 
should blow out he could not ﬁnd his way back. He sat in 
the leaves at the top of the hill and looked into the black­
ness. Nothing to see. No wind. In the past when he walked 
out like that and sat looking over the country lying in just 
the faintest visible shape where the lost moon tracked the 
caustic waste he’d sometimes see a light. Dim and shape­
less in the murk. Across a river or deep in the blackened 
quadrants of a burned city. In the morning sometimes he’d 
return with the binoculars and glass the countryside for any 
sign of smoke but he never saw any. 

159 
.
.
.
 
Standing at the edge of a winter ﬁeld among rough men. 
The boy’s age. A little older. Watching while they opened 
up the rocky hillside ground with pick and mattock and 
brought to light a great bolus of serpents perhaps a hun­
dred in number. Collected there for a common warmth. 
The dull tubes of them beginning to move sluggishly in 
the cold hard light. Like the bowels of some great beast 
exposed to the day. The men poured gasoline on them and 
burned them alive, having no remedy for evil but only for 
the image of it as they conceived it to be. The burning 
snakes twisted horribly and some crawled burning across 
the ﬂoor of the grotto to illuminate its darker recesses. As 
they were mute there were no screams of pain and the men 
watched them burn and writhe and blacken in just such 
silence themselves and they disbanded in silence in the win­
ter dusk each with his own thoughts to go home to their 
suppers. 
One night the boy woke from a dream and would not tell 
him what it was. 
You dont have to tell me, the man said. It’s all right. 
I’m scared. 
It’s all right. 
No it’s not. 
It’s just a dream. 
I’m really scared. 
I know. 

D
T H E  R O A  
The boy turned away. The man held him. Listen to me, 
he said. 
What. 
When your dreams are of some world that never was or 
of some world that never will be and you are happy again 
then you will have given up. Do you understand? And you 
cant give up. I wont let you. 
When they set out again he was very weak and for all his 
speeches he’d become more faint of heart than he had 
been in years. Filthy with diarrhea, leaning on the bar han­
dle of the shopping cart. He looked at the boy out of his 
sunken haggard eyes. Some new distance between them. 
He could feel it. In two day’s time they came upon a coun­
try where ﬁrestorms had passed leaving mile on mile of 
burn. A cake of ash in the roadway inches deep and hard 
going with the cart. The blacktop underneath had buckled 
in the heat and then set back again. He leaned on the han­
dle and looked down the long straight of way. The thin 
trees down. The waterways a gray sludge. A blackened 
jackstraw land. 
Beyond a crossroads in that wilderness they began to come 
upon the possessions of travelers abandoned in the road 
years ago. Boxes and bags. Everything melted and black. 
Old plastic suitcases curled shapeless in the heat. Here 
and there the imprint of things wrested out of the tar by 
scavengers. A mile on and they began to come upon the 
dead. Figures half mired in the blacktop, clutching them­

161 
selves, mouths howling. He put his hand on the boy’s 
shoulder. Take my hand, he said. I dont think you should 
see this. 
What you put in your head is there forever? 
Yes. 
It’s okay Papa. 
It’s okay? 
They’re already there. 
I dont want you to look. 
They’ll still be there. 
He stopped and leaned on the cart. He looked down the 
road and he looked at the boy. So strangely untroubled. 
Why dont we just go on, the boy said. 
Yes. Okay. 
They were trying to get away werent they Papa? 
Yes. They were. 
Why didnt they leave the road? 
They couldnt. Everything was on ﬁre. 
They picked their way among the mummied ﬁgures. The 
black skin stretched upon the bones and their faces split 
and shrunken on their skulls. Like victims of some ghastly 
envacuuming. Passing them in silence down that silent 
corridor through the drifting ash where they struggled for­
ever in the road’s cold coagulate. 
They passed through the site of a roadside hamlet burned 
to nothing. Some metal storage tanks, a few standing ﬂues 
of blackened brick. There were gray slagpools of melted 

D
T H E  R O A  
glass in the ditches and the raw lightwires lay in rusting 
skeins for miles along the edge of the roadway. He was 
coughing every step of it. He saw the boy watching him. 
He was what the boy thought about. Well should he. 
They sat in the road and ate leftover skilletbread hard as 
biscuit and their last can of tunaﬁsh. He opened a can of 
prunes and they passed it between them. The boy held the 
tin up and drained the last of the juice and then sat with 
the tin in his lap and passed his foreﬁnger around the 
inside of it and put his ﬁnger in his mouth. 
Dont cut your ﬁnger, the man said. 
You always say that. 
I know. 
He watched him lick the lid of the tin. With great care. 
Like a cat licking its reﬂection in a glass. Stop watching 
me, he said. 
Okay. 
He folded down the lid of the can and set it in the road 
before him. What? he said. What is it? 
Nothing. 
Tell me. 
I think there’s someone following us. 
That’s what I thought. 
That’s what you thought? 
Yes. That’s what I thought you were going to say. What 
do you want to do? 
I dont know. 
What do you think? 
Let’s just go. We should hide our trash. 

163 
Because they’ll think we have lots of food. 
Yes. 
And they’ll try to kill us. 
They wont kill us. 
They might try to. 
We’re okay. 
Okay. 
I think we should lay in the weeds for them. See who 
they are. 
And how many. 
And how many. Yes. 
Okay. 
If we can get across the creek we could go up on the 
bluffs there and watch the road. 
Okay. 
We’ll ﬁnd a place. 
They rose and piled their blankets in the cart. Get the 
tin, the man said. 
It was late into the long twilight before the road crossed 
the creek. They trundled over the bridge and pushed the 
cart out through the woods looking for some place to leave 
it where it would not be seen. They stood looking back at 
the road in the dusk. 
What if we put it under the bridge? the boy said. 
What if they go down there for water? 
How far back do you think they are? 
I dont know. 
It’s getting dark. 
I know. 

D
T H E  R O A  
What if they go by in the dark? 
Let’s just ﬁnd a place where we can watch. It’s not 
dark yet. 
They hid the cart and went up the slope among the rocks 
carrying their blankets and they dug themselves in where 
they could see back down the road through the trees for 
perhaps half a mile. They were sheltered from the wind 
and they wrapped themselves in their blankets and took 
turns watching but after a while the boy was asleep. He 
was almost asleep himself when he saw a ﬁgure appear at 
the top of the road and stand there. Soon two more 
appeared. Then a fourth. They stood and grouped. Then 
they came on. He could just make them out in the deep 
dusk. He thought they might stop soon and he wished 
he’d found a place further from the road. If they stopped 
at the bridge it would be a long cold night. They came 
down the road and crossed the bridge. Three men and a 
woman. The woman walked with a waddling gait and as 
she approached he could see that she was pregnant. The 
men carried packs on their backs and the woman carried a 
small cloth suitcase. All of them wretchedlooking beyond 
description. Their breath steaming softly. They crossed 
the bridge and continued on down the road and vanished 
one by one into the waiting darkness. 
It was a long night anyway. When it was light enough to 
see he pulled on his shoes and rose and wrapped one of 
the blankets around him and walked out and stood looking 

165 
at the road below. The bare ironcolored wood and the 
ﬁelds beyond. The corrugate shapes of old harrowtroughs 
still faintly visible. Cotton perhaps. The boy was sleep­
ing and he went down to the cart and got the map and 
the bottle of water and a can of fruit from their small stores 
and he came back and sat in the blankets and studied 
the map. 
You always think we’ve gone further than we have. 
He moved his ﬁnger. Here then. 
More. 
Here. 
Okay. 
He folded up the limp and rotting pages. Okay, he said. 
They sat looking out through the trees at the road. 
Do you think that your fathers are watching? That they 
weigh you in their ledgerbook? Against what? There is no 
book and your fathers are dead in the ground. 
The country went from pine to liveoak and pine. Magno­
lias. Trees as dead as any. He picked up one of the heavy 
leaves and crushed it in his hand to powder and let the 
powder sift through his ﬁngers. 
On the road early the day following. They’d not gone far 
when the boy pulled at his sleeve and they stopped and 

D
T H E  R O A  
stood. A thin stem of smoke was rising out of the woods 
ahead. They stood watching. 
What should we do, Papa? 
Maybe we should take a look. 
Let’s just keep going. 
What if they’re going the same way we are? 
So? the boy said. 
We’re going to have them behind us. I’d like to know 
who it is. 
What if it’s an army? 
It’s just a small ﬁre. 
Why dont we just wait? 
We cant wait. We’re almost out of food. We have to keep 
going. 
They left the cart in the woods and he checked the rota­
tion of the rounds in the cylinder. The wooden and the 
true. They stood listening. The smoke stood vertically in 
the still air. No sound of any kind. The leaves were soft 
from the recent rains and quiet underfoot. He turned and 
looked at the boy. The small dirty face wide with fear. 
They circled the ﬁre at a distance, the boy holding on 
to his hand. He crouched and put his arm around him 
and they listened for a long time. I think they’ve gone, he 
whispered. 
What? 
I think they’re gone. They probably had a lookout. 
It could be a trap, Papa. 
Okay. Let’s wait a while. 
They waited. They could see the smoke through the 

167 
trees. A wind had begun to trouble the top of the spire and 
the smoke shifted and they could smell it. They could smell 
something cooking. Let’s circle around, the man said. 
Can I hold your hand? 
Yes. Of course you can. 
The woods were just burned trunks. There was nothing 
to see. I think they saw us, the man said. I think they saw 
us and ran away. They saw we had a gun. 
They left their food cooking. 
Yes. 
Let’s take a look. 
It’s really scary, Papa. 
There’s no one here. It’s okay. 
They walked into the little clearing, the boy clutching his 
hand. They’d taken everything with them except whatever 
black thing was skewered over the coals. He was standing 
there checking the perimeter when the boy turned and 
buried his face against him. He looked quickly to see what 
had happened. What is it? he said. What is it? The boy 
shook his head. Oh Papa, he said. He turned and looked 
again. What the boy had seen was a charred human infant 
headless and gutted and blackening on the spit. He bent 
and picked the boy up and started for the road with him, 
holding him close. I’m sorry, he whispered. I’m sorry. 
He didnt know if he’d ever speak again. They camped at a 
river and he sat by the ﬁre listening to the water running in 
the dark. It wasnt a safe place because the sound of the 

D
T H E  R O A  
river masked any other but he thought it would cheer the 
boy up. They ate the last of their provisions and he sat 
studying the map. He measured the road with a piece of 
string and looked at it and measured again. Still a long way 
to the coast. He didnt know what they’d ﬁnd when they 
got there. He shufﬂed the sections together and put them 
back in the plastic bag and sat staring into the coals. 
The following day they crossed the river by a narrow iron 
bridge and entered an old mill town. They went through 
the wooden houses but they found nothing. A man sat on a 
porch in his coveralls dead for years. He looked a straw 
man set out to announce some holiday. They went down 
the long dark wall of the mill, the windows bricked up. 
The ﬁne black soot raced along the street before them. 
Odd things scattered by the side of the road. Electrical 
appliances, furniture. Tools. Things abandoned long ago 
by pilgrims enroute to their several and collective deaths. 
Even a year ago the boy might sometimes pick up some­
thing and carry it with him for a while but he didnt do that 
any more. They sat and rested and drank the last of their 
good water and left the plastic jerry jug standing in the 
road. The boy said: If we had that little baby it could go 
with us. 
Yes. It could. 
Where did they ﬁnd it? 
He didnt answer. 

169 
Could there be another one somewhere? 
I dont know. It’s possible. 
I’m sorry about what I said about those people. 
What people? 
Those people that got burned up. That were struck in 
the road and got burned up. 
I didnt know that you said anything bad. 
It wasnt bad. Can we go now? 
Okay. Do you want to ride in the cart? 
It’s okay. 
Why dont you ride for while? 
I dont want to. It’s okay. 
Slow water in the ﬂat country. The sloughs by the roadside 
motionless and gray. The coastal plain rivers in leaden ser­
pentine across the wasted farmland. They went on. Ahead 
in the road was a dip and a stand of cane. I think there’s a 
bridge there, he said. Probably a creek. 
Can we drink the water? 
We dont have a choice. 
It wont make us sick. 
I dont think so. It could be dry. 
Can I go ahead? 
Yes. Of course you can. 
The boy set off down the road. He’d not seen him run in 
a long time. Elbows out, ﬂapping along in his outsized ten­
nis shoes. He stopped and stood watching, biting his lip. 
.
.
.
 

D
T H E  R O A  
The water was little more than a seep. He could see it 
moving slightly where it drew down into a concrete tile 
under the roadway and he spat into the water and watched 
to see if it would move. He got a cloth from the cart and a 
plastic jar and came back and wrapped the cloth over the 
mouth of the jar and sank it in the water and watched it ﬁll. 
He raised it up dripping and held it to the light. It didnt 
look too bad. He took the cloth away and handed the jar to 
the boy. Go ahead, he said. 
The boy drank and handed it back. 
Drink some more. 
You drink some, Papa. 
Okay. 
They sat ﬁltering the ash from the water and drinking 
until they could hold no more. The boy lay back in the 
grass. 
We need to go. 
I’m really tired. 
I know. 
He sat watching him. They’d not eaten in two days. In 
two more they would begin to get weak. He climbed the 
bank through the cane to check the road. Dark and black 
and trackless where it crossed the open country. The winds 
had swept the ash and dust from the surface. Rich lands at 
one time. No sign of life anywhere. It was no country that 
he knew. The names of the towns or the rivers. Come on, 
he said. We have to go. 
They slept more and more. More than once they woke 
sprawled in the road like trafﬁc victims. The sleep of death. 

171 
He sat up reaching about for the pistol. In the leaden eve­
ning he stood leaning with his elbows on the cart handle 
and looking across the ﬁelds at a house perhaps a mile 
away. It was the boy who had seen it. Shifting in and out of 
the curtain of soot like a house in some uncertain dream. 
He leaned on the cart and looked at him. It would cost 
them some effort to get there. Take their blankets. Hide 
the cart someplace along the road. They could reach it 
before dark but they couldnt get back. 
We have to take a look. We have no choice. 
I dont want to. 
We havent eaten in days. 
I’m not hungry. 
No, you’re starving. 
I dont want to go there Papa. 
There’s no one there. I promise. 
How do you know? 
I just know. 
They could be there. 
No they’re not. It will be okay. 
They set out across the ﬁelds wrapped in their blankets, 
carrying only the pistol and a bottle of water. The ﬁeld had 
been turned a last time and there were stalks of stubble 
sticking out of the ground and the faint trace of the disc 
was still visible from east to west. It had rained recently 
and the earth was soft underfoot and he kept his eye on the 
ground and before long he stopped and picked up an 
arrowhead. He spat on it and wiped away the dirt on the 
seam of his trousers and gave it to the boy. It was white 

D
T H E  R O A  
quartz, perfect as the day it was made. There are more, he 
said. Watch the ground, you’ll see. He found two more. 
Gray ﬂint. Then he found a coin. Or a button. Deep crust 
of verdigris. He chipped at it with the nail of his thumb. It 
was a coin. He took out his knife and chiseled at it with 
care. The lettering was in spanish. He started to call to the 
boy where he trudged ahead and then he looked about at 
the gray country and the gray sky and he dropped the coin 
and hurried on to catch up. 
They stood in front of the house looking at it. There was a 
gravel drive that curved away to the south. A brick loggia. 
Double stairs that swept up to the columned portico. At 
the rear of the house a brick dependency that may once 
have been a kitchen. Beyond that a log cabin. He started 
up the stairs but the boy pulled at his sleeve. 
Can we wait a while? 
Okay. But it’s getting dark. 
I know. 
Okay. 
They sat on the steps and looked out over the country. 
There’s no one here, the man said. 
Okay. 
Are you still scared? 
Yes. 
We’re okay. 
Okay. 
.
.
.
 

173 
They went up the stairs to the broad brickﬂoored porch. 
The door was painted black and it was propped open with 
a cinderblock. Dried leaves and weeds blown behind it. 
The boy clutched his hand. Why is the door open, Papa? 
It just is. It’s probably been open for years. Maybe the 
last people propped it open to carry their things out. 
Maybe we should wait till tomorrow. 
Come on. We’ll take a quick look. Before it gets too 
dark. If we secure the area then maybe we can have a ﬁre. 
But we wont stay in the house will we? 
We dont have to stay in the house. 
Okay. 
Let’s have a drink of water. 
Okay. 
He took the bottle from the side pocket of his parka and 
screwed off the top and watched the boy drink. Then he 
took a drink himself and put the lid back on and took the 
boy’s hand and they entered the darkened hall. High ceil­
ing. An imported chandelier. At the landing on the stairs 
was a tall palladian window and the faintest shape of it 
headlong on the stairwell wall in the day’s last light. 
We dont have to go upstairs, do we? the boy whispered. 
No. Maybe tomorrow. 
After we’ve secured the area. 
Yes. 
Okay. 
They entered the drawingroom. The shape of a carpet 
beneath the silty ash. Furniture shrouded in sheeting. Pale 

D
T H E  R O A  
squares on the walls where paintings once had hung. In the 
room on the other side of the foyer stood a grand piano. 
Their own shapes sectioned in the thin and watery glass of 
the window there. They entered and stood listening. They 
wandered through the rooms like skeptical housebuyers. 
They stood looking out through the tall windows at the 
darkening land. 
In the kitchen there was cutlery and cooking pans and 
english china. A butler’s pantry where the door closed 
softly behind them. Tile ﬂoor and rows of shelves and on 
the shelves several dozen quart jars. He crossed the room 
and picked one up and blew the dust from it. Green beans. 
Slices of red pepper standing among the ordered rows. 
Tomatoes. Corn. New potatoes. Okra. The boy watched 
him. The man wiped the dust from the caps of the jars and 
pushed on the lids with his thumb. It was getting dark fast. 
He carried a pair of the jars to the window and held them 
up and turned them. He looked at the boy. These may be 
poison, he said. We’ll have to cook everything really well. 
Is that okay? 
I dont know. 
What do you want to do? 
You have to say. 
We both have to say. 
Do you think they’re okay? 
I think if we cook them really good they’ll be all right. 
Okay. Why do you think nobody has eaten them? 
I think nobody found them. You cant see the house 
from the road. 

175 
We saw it. 
You saw it. 
The boy studied the jars. 
What do you think? the man said. 
I think we’ve got no choice. 
I think you’re right. Let’s get some wood before it gets 
any darker. 
They carried armloads of dead limbs up the back stairs 
through the kitchen and into the diningroom and broke 
them to length and stuffed the ﬁreplace full. He lit the ﬁre 
and smoke curled up over the painted wooden lintel and 
rose to the ceiling and curled down again. He fanned the 
blaze with a magazine and soon the ﬂue began to draw and 
the ﬁre roared in the room lighting up the walls and the 
ceiling and the glass chandelier in its myraid facets. The 
ﬂames lit the darkening glass of the window where the boy 
stood in hooded silhouette like a troll come in from the 
night. He seemed stunned by the heat. The man pulled the 
sheets off the long Empire table in the center of the room 
and shook them out and made a nest of them in front of the 
hearth. He sat the boy down and pulled off his shoes and 
pulled off the dirty rags with which his feet were wrapped. 
Everything’s okay, he whispered. Everything’s okay. 
He found candles in a kitchen drawer and lit two of them 
and then melted wax onto the counter and stood them in 
the wax. He went outside and brought in more wood and 
piled it beside the hearth. The boy had not moved. There 

D
T H E  R O A  
were pots and pans in the kitchen and he wiped one out 
and stood it on the counter and then he tried to open one 
of the jars but he could not. He carried a jar of green beans 
and one of potatoes to the front door and by the light of a 
candle standing in a glass he knelt and placed the ﬁrst jar 
sideways in the space between the door and the jamb and 
pulled the door against it. Then he squatted in the foyer 
ﬂoor and hooked his foot over the outside edge of the 
door and pulled it against the lid and twisted the jar in his 
hands. The knurled lid turned in the wood grinding the 
paint. He took a fresh grip on the glass and pulled the 
door tighter and tried again. The lid slipped in the wood, 
then it held. He turned the jar slowly in his hands, then 
took it from the jamb and turned off the ring of the lid and 
set it in the ﬂoor. Then he opened the second jar and rose 
and carried them back into the kitchen, holding the glass 
in his other hand with the candle rolling about and sput­
tering. He tried to push the lids up off the jars with his 
thumbs but they were on too tight. He thought that was a 
good sign. He set the edge of the lid on the counter and 
punched the top of the jar with his ﬁst and the lid snapped 
off and fell in the ﬂoor and he raised the jar and sniffed at 
it. It smelled delicious. He poured the potatoes and the 
beans into a pot and carried the pot into the diningroom 
and set it in the ﬁre. 
They ate slowly out of bone china bowls, sitting at oppo­
site sides of the table with a single candle burning between 
them. The pistol lying to hand like another dining imple­
ment. The warming house creaked and groaned. Like a 

177 
thing being called out of long hibernation. The boy nod­
ded over his bowl and his spoon clattered to the ﬂoor. The 
man rose and came around and carried him to the hearth 
and put him down in the sheets and covered him with the 
blankets. He must have gone back to the table because he 
woke in the night lying there with his face in his crossed 
arms. It was cold in the room and outside the wind was 
blowing. The windows rattled softly in their frames. The 
candle had burned out and the ﬁre was down to coals. He 
rose and built back the ﬁre and sat beside the boy and 
pulled the blankets over him and brushed back his ﬁlthy 
hair. I think maybe they are watching, he said. They are 
watching for a thing that even death cannot undo and if 
they do not see it they will turn away from us and they will 
not come back. 
The boy didnt want him to go upstairs. He tried to reason 
with him. There could be blankets up there, he said. We 
need to take a look. 
I dont want you to go up there. 
There’s no one here. 
There could be. 
There’s no one here. Dont you think they’d have come 
down by now? 
Maybe they’re scared. 
I’ll tell them we wont hurt them. 
Maybe they’re dead. 
Then they wont mind if we take a few things. Look, 
whatever is up there it’s better to know about it than to not 
know. 

D
T H E  R O A  
Why? 
Why. Well, because we dont like surprises. Surprises 
are scary. And we dont like to be scared. And there could 
be things up there that we need. We have to take a look. 
Okay. 
Okay? Just like that? 
Well. You’re not going to listen to me. 
I have been listening to you. 
Not very hard. 
There’s no one here. There has been no one here for 
years. There are no tracks in the ash. Nothing disturbed. 
No furniture burned in the ﬁreplace. There’s food here. 
Tracks dont stay in the ash. You said so yourself. The 
wind blows them away. 
I’m going up. 
They stayed at the house for four days eating and sleeping. 
He’d found more blankets upstairs and they dragged in 
great piles of wood and stacked the wood in the corner of 
the room to dry. He found an antique bucksaw of wood 
and wire that he used to saw the dead trees to length. The 
teeth were rusty and dull and he sat in front of the ﬁre with 
a rattail ﬁle and tried to sharpen them but to little purpose. 
There was a creek some hundred yards from the house 
and he hauled endless pails of water across the stubble 
ﬁelds and the mud and they heated water and bathed in a 
tub off the back bedroom on the lower ﬂoor and he cut 
their hair and shaved his beard. They had clothes and 
blankets and pillows from the upstairs rooms and they ﬁt­

179 
ted themselves out in new attire, the boy’s trousers cut to 
length with his knife. He made a nesting place in front of 
the hearth, turning over a tallboy chest to use as a head­
board for their bed and to hold the heat. All the while it 
continued to rain. He set pails under the downspouts at 
the housecorners to catch fresh water off the old standing-
seam metal roof and at night he could hear the rain drum­
ming in the upper rooms and dripping through the house. 
They rummaged through the outbuildings for anything of 
use. He found a wheelbarrow and pulled it out and tipped 
it over and turned the wheel slowly, examining the tire. 
The rubber was glazed and cracked but he thought it 
might hold air and he looked through old boxes and jum­
bles of tools and found a bicycle pump and screwed the 
end of the hose to the valvestem of the tire and began to 
pump. The air leaked out around the rim but he turned 
the wheel and had the boy hold down the tire until it 
caught and he got it pumped up. He unscrewed the hose 
and turned the wheelbarrow over and trundled it across 
the ﬂoor and back. Then he pushed it outside for the rain 
to clean. When they left two days later the weather had 
cleared and they set out down the muddy road pushing the 
wheelbarrow with their new blankets and the jars of canned 
goods wrapped in their extra clothes. He’d found a pair of 
workshoes and the boy was wearing blue tennis shoes with 
rags stuffed into the toes and they had fresh sheeting for 
face masks. When they got to the blacktop they had to turn 
back along the road to fetch the cart but it was less than a 

D
T H E  R O A  
mile. The boy walked alongside with one hand on the 
wheelbarrow. We did good, didnt we Papa? he said. Yes 
we did. 
They ate well but they were still a long way from the coast. 
He knew that he was placing hopes where he’d no reason 
to. He hoped it would be brighter where for all he knew 
the world grew darker daily. He’d once found a lightmeter 
in a camera store that he thought he might use to average 
out readings for a few months and he carried it around 
with him for a long time thinking he might ﬁnd some bat­
teries for it but he never did. At night when he woke cough­
ing he’d sit up with his hand pushed over his head against 
the blackness. Like a man waking in a grave. Like those 
disinterred dead from his childhood that had been relo­
cated to accommodate a highway. Many had died in a chol­
era epidemic and they’d been buried in haste in wooden 
boxes and the boxes were rotting and falling open. The 
dead came to light lying on their sides with their legs drawn 
up and some lay on their stomachs. The dull green antique 
coppers spilled from out the tills of their eyesockets onto 
the stained and rotted cofﬁn ﬂoors. 
They stood in a grocery store in a small town where a 
mounted deerhead hung from the wall. The boy stood look­
ing at it a long time. There was broken glass in the ﬂoor 
and the man made him wait at the door while he kicked 
through the trash in his workshoes but he found nothing. 
There were two gas pumps outside and they sat on the 

181 
concrete apron and lowered a small tin can on a string into 
the underground tank and hauled it up and poured the 
cupful of gasoline it held into a plastic jug and lowered it 
again. They’d tied a small length of pipe to the can to sink 
it and they crouched over the tank like apes ﬁshing with 
sticks in an anthill for the better part of an hour until the 
jug was full. Then they screwed on the cap and set the jug 
in the bottom rack of the cart and went on. 
Long days. Open country with the ash blowing over the 
road. The boy sat by the ﬁre at night with the pieces of the 
map across his knees. He had the names of towns and 
rivers by heart and he measured their progress daily. 
They ate more sparingly. They’d almost nothing left. The 
boy stood in the road holding the map. They listened but 
they could hear nothing. Still he could see open country to 
the east and the air was different. Then they came upon it 
from a turn in the road and they stopped and stood with 
the salt wind blowing in their hair where they’d lowered the 
hoods of their coats to listen. Out there was the gray beach 
with the slow combers rolling dull and leaden and the 
distant sound of it. Like the desolation of some alien sea 
breaking on the shores of a world unheard of. Out on the 
tidal ﬂats lay a tanker half careened. Beyond that the ocean 
vast and cold and shifting heavily like a slowly heaving vat 
of slag and then the gray squall line of ash. He looked at 
the boy. He could see the disappointment in his face. I’m 
sorry it’s not blue, he said. That’s okay, said the boy. 

D
T H E  R O A  
.
.
.
 
An hour later they were sitting on the beach and staring 
out at the wall of smog across the horizon. They sat with 
their heels dug into the sand and watched the bleak sea 
wash up at their feet. Cold. Desolate. Birdless. He’d left 
the cart in the bracken beyond the dunes and they’d taken 
blankets with them and sat wrapped in them in the wind-
shade of a great driftwood log. They sat there for a long 
time. Along the shore of the cove below them windrows of 
small bones in the wrack. Further down the saltbleached 
ribcages of what may have been cattle. Gray salt rime on 
the rocks. The wind blew and dry seedpods scampered 
down the sands and stopped and then went on again. 
Do you think there could be ships out there? 
I dont think so. 
They wouldnt be able to see very far. 
No. They wouldnt. 
What’s on the other side? 
Nothing. 
There must be something. 
Maybe there’s a father and his little boy and they’re sit ­
ting on the beach. 
That would be okay. 
Yes. That would be okay. 
And they could be carrying the ﬁre too? 
They could be. Yes. 
But we dont know. 

183 
We dont know. 
So we have to be vigilant. 
We have to be vigilant. Yes. 
How long can we stay here? 
I dont know. We dont have much to eat. 
I know. 
You like it. 
Yeah. 
Me too. 
Can I go swimming? 
Swimming? 
Yes. 
You’ll freeze your tokus off. 
I know. 
It will be really cold. Worse than you think. 
That’s okay. 
I dont want to have to come in after you. 
You dont think I should go. 
You can go. 
But you dont think I should. 
No. I think you should. 
Really? 
Yes. Really. 
Okay. 
He rose and let the blanket fall to the sand and then 
stripped out of his coat and out of his shoes and clothes. 
He stood naked, clutching himself and dancing. Then he 
went running down the beach. So white. Knobby spine­

D
T H E  R O A  
bones. The razorous shoulder blades sawing under the 
pale skin. Running naked and leaping and screaming into 
the slow roll of the surf. 
By the time he came out he was blue with cold and his 
teeth were chattering. He walked down to meet him and 
wrapped him shuddering in the blanket and held him until 
he stopped gasping. But when he looked the boy was cry­
ing. What is it? he said. Nothing. No, tell me. Nothing. It’s 
nothing. 
With dark they built a ﬁre against the log and ate plates of 
okra and beans and the last of the canned potatoes. The 
fruit was long gone. They drank tea and sat by the ﬁre and 
they slept in the sand and listened to the roll of the surf in 
the bay. The long shudder and fall of it. He got up in the 
night and walked out and stood on the beach wrapped in 
his blankets. Too black to see. Taste of salt on his lips. 
Waiting. Waiting. Then the slow boom falling downshore. 
The seething hiss of it washing over the beach and draw­
ing away again. He thought there could be deathships out 
there yet, drifting with their lolling rags of sail. Or life 
in the deep. Great squid propelling themselves over the 
ﬂoor of the sea in the cold darkness. Shuttling past like 
trains, eyes the size of saucers. And perhaps beyond those 
shrouded swells another man did walk with another child 
on the dead gray sands. Slept but a sea apart on another 
beach among the bitter ashes of the world or stood in their 
rags lost to the same indifferent sun. 

185 
.
.
.
 
He remembered waking once on such a night to the clatter 
of crabs in the pan where he’d left steakbones from the 
night before. Faint deep coals of the driftwood ﬁre pulsing 
in the onshore wind. Lying under such a myriad of stars. 
The sea’s black horizon. He rose and walked out and stood 
barefoot in the sand and watched the pale surf appear all 
down the shore and roll and crash and darken again. When 
he went back to the ﬁre he knelt and smoothed her hair as 
she slept and he said if he were God he would have made 
the world just so and no different. 
When he got back the boy was awake and he was scared. 
He’d been calling out but not loud enough that he could 
hear him. The man put his arms around him. I couldnt hear 
you, he said. I couldnt hear you for the surf. He put wood 
on the ﬁre and fanned it to life and they lay in their blankets 
watching the ﬂames twist in the wind and then they slept. 
In the morning he rekindled the ﬁre and they ate and 
watched the shore. The cold and rainy look of it not so 
different from seascapes in the northern world. No gulls 
or shorebirds. Charred and senseless artifacts strewn 
down the shoreline or rolling in the surf. They gathered 
driftwood and stacked it and covered it with the tarp and 
then set off down the beach. We’re beachcombers, he 
said. 
What is that? 

D
T H E  R O A  
It’s people who walk along the beach looking for things 
of value that might have washed up. 
What kind of things? 
Any kind of things. Anything that you might be able 
to use. 
Do you think we’ll ﬁnd anything? 
I dont know. We’ll take a look. 
Take a look, the boy said. 
They stood on the rock jetty and looked out to the south. 
A gray salt spittle lagging and curling in the rock pool. 
Long curve of beach beyond. Gray as lava sand. The wind 
coming off the water smelled faintly of iodine. That was 
all. There was no sea smell to it. On the rocks the rem­
nants of some dark seamoss. They crossed and went on. 
At the end of the strand their way was blocked by a head­
land and they left the beach and took an old path up through 
the dunes and through the dead seaoats until they came 
out upon a low promontory. Below them a hook of land 
shrouded in the dark scud blowing down the shore and 
beyond that lying half over and awash the shape of a sail-
boat’s hull. They crouched in the dry tufts of grass and 
watched. What should we do? the boy said. 
Let’s just watch for a while. 
I’m cold. 
I know. Let’s move down a little ways. Out of the wind. 
He sat holding the boy in front of him. The dead grass 
thrashed softly. Out there a gray desolation. The endless 
seacrawl. How long do we have to sit here? the boy said. 
Not long. 

187 
Do you think there are people on the boat, Papa? 
I dont think so. 
They’d be all tilted over. 
Yes they would. Can you see any tracks out there? 
No. 
Let’s just wait a while. 
I’m cold. 
They trekked out along the crescent sweep of beach, keep­
ing to the ﬁrmer sand below the tidewrack. They stood, 
their clothes ﬂapping softly. Glass ﬂoats covered with a 
gray crust. The bones of seabirds. At the tide line a woven 
mat of weeds and the ribs of ﬁshes in their millions stretch­
ing along the shore as far as eye could see like an isocline 
of death. One vast salt sepulchre. Senseless. Senseless. 
From the end of the spit to the boat there was perhaps a 
hundred feet of open water. They stood looking at the 
boat. Some sixty feet long, stripped to the deck, keeled 
over in ten or twelve feet of water. It had been a twin-
masted rig of some sort but the masts were broken off close 
to the deck and the only thing remaining topside were 
some brass cleats and a few of the rail stanchions along the 
edge of the deck. That and the steel hoop of the wheel 
sticking up out of the cockpit aft. He turned and studied 
the beach and the dunes beyond. Then he handed the boy 
the pistol and sat in the sand and began to unlace the cords 
of his shoes. 
What are you going to do, Papa? 

D
T H E  R O A  
Take a look. 
Can I go with you? 
No. I want you to stay here. 
I want to go with you. 
You have to stand guard. And besides the water’s deep. 
Will I be able to see you? 
Yes. I’ll keep checking on you. To make sure everything’s 
okay. 
I want to go with you. 
He stopped. You cant, he said. Our clothes would blow 
away. Somebody has to take care of things. 
He folded everything into a pile. God it was cold. He 
bent and kissed the boy on his forehead. Stop worrying, 
he said. Just keep a lookout. He waded naked into the 
water and stood and laved himself wet. Then he trudged 
out splashing and dove headlong. 
He swam the length of the steel hull and turned, treading 
water, gasping with the cold. Amidships the sheer-rail was 
just awash. He pulled himself along to the transom. The 
steel was gray and saltscoured but he could make out the 
worn gilt lettering. Pájaro de Esperanza. Tenerife. An 
empty pair of lifeboat davits. He got hold of the rail and 
pulled himself aboard and turned and crouched on the 
slant of the wood deck shivering. A few lengths of braided 
cable snapped off at the turnbuckles. Shredded holes in 
the wood where hardware had been ripped out. Some ter­
rible force to sweep the decks of everything. He waved at 
the boy but he didnt wave back. 

189 
.
.
.
 
The cabin was low with a vaulted roof and portholes along 
the side. He crouched and wiped away the gray salt and 
looked in but he could see nothing. He tried the low teak 
door but it was locked. He gave it a shove with his bony 
shoulder. He looked around for something to pry with. He 
was shivering uncontrollably and his teeth were chatter­
ing. He thought about kicking the door with the ﬂat of his 
foot but then he thought that was not a good idea. He held 
his elbow in his hand and banged into the door again. He 
felt it give. Very slightly. He kept at it. The jamb was split­
ting on the inside and it ﬁnally gave way and he pushed it 
open and stepped down the companionway into the cabin. 
A stagnant bilge along the lower bulkhead ﬁlled with wet 
papers and trash. A sour smell over everything. Damp and 
clammy. He thought the boat had been ransacked but it 
was the sea that had done it. There was a mahogany table 
in the middle of the saloon with hinged ﬁddles. The locker 
doors hanging open into the room and all the brasswork a 
dull green. He went through to the forward cabins. Past 
the galley. Flour and coffee in the ﬂoor and canned goods 
half crushed and rusting. A head with a stainless steel toi­
let and sink. The weak sea light fell through the clerestory 
portholes. Gear scattered everywhere. A mae west ﬂoating 
in the seepage. 
.
.
.
 

D
T H E  R O A  
He was half expecting some horror but there was none. 
The mattress pads in the cabins had been slung into the 
ﬂoor and bedding and clothing were piled against the wall. 
Everything wet. A door stood open to the locker in the 
bow but it was too dark to see inside. He ducked his head 
and stepped in and felt about. Deep bins with hinged 
wooden covers. Sea gear piled in the ﬂoor. He began to 
drag everything out and pile it on the tilted bed. Blankets, 
foulweather gear. He came up with a damp sweater and 
pulled it over his head. He found a pair of yellow rubber 
seaboots and he found a nylon jacket and he zipped him­
self into that and pulled on the stiff yellow breeches from 
the souwester gear and thumbed the suspenders up over 
his shoulders and pulled on the boots. Then he went back 
up on the deck. The boy was sitting as he’d left him, 
watching the ship. He stood up in alarm and the man real­
ized that in his new clothes he made an uncertain ﬁgure. 
It’s me, he called, but the boy only stood there and he 
waved to him and went below again. 
In the second stateroom there were drawers under the 
berth that were still in place and he lifted them free and 
slid them out. Manuals and papers in spanish. Bars of 
soap. A black leather valise covered in mold with papers 
inside. He put the soap in the pocket of his coat and stood. 
There were books in spanish strewn across the berth, 
swollen and shapeless. A single volume wedged in the rack 
against the forward bulkhead. 
.
.
.
 

191 
He found a rubberized canvas seabag and he prowled the 
rest of the ship in his boots, pushing himself off the bulk­
heads against the tilt, the yellow slicker pants rattling in 
the cold. He ﬁlled the bag with odds and ends of clothing. 
A pair of women’s sneakers he thought would ﬁt the boy. A 
foldingknife with a wooden handle. A pair of sunglasses. 
Still there was something perverse in his searching. Like 
exhausting the least likely places ﬁrst when looking for 
something lost. Finally he went into the galley. He turned 
on the stove and turned it off again. 
He unlatched and raised the hatch to the engine compart­
ment. Half ﬂooded and pitch dark. No smell of gas or oil. 
He closed it again. There were lockers built into the 
benches in the cockpit that held cushions, sailcanvas, ﬁsh­
ing gear. In a locker behind the wheel pedestal he found 
coils of nylon rope and steel bottles of gas and a toolbox 
made of ﬁberglass. He sat in the ﬂoor of the cockpit and 
sorted through the tools. Rusty but serviceable. Pliers, 
screwdrivers, wrenches. He latched the toolbox shut and 
stood and looked for the boy. He was huddled in the sand 
asleep with his head on the pile of clothes. 
He carried the toolbox and one of the bottles of gas into 
the galley and went forward and made a last tour of the 
staterooms. Then he set about going through the lockers 
in the saloon, looking through folders and papers in plas­
tic boxes, trying to ﬁnd the ship’s log. He found a set of 
china packed away unused in a wooden crate ﬁlled with 

D
T H E  R O A  
excelsior. Most of it broken. Service for eight, carrying the 
name of the ship. A gift, he thought. He lifted out a teacup 
and turned it in his palm and put it back. The last thing 
he found was a square oak box with dovetailed corners 
and a brass plate let into the lid. He thought it might be 
a humidor but it was the wrong shape and when he picked 
it up and felt the weight of it he knew what it was. He 
unsnapped the corroding latches and opened it. Inside 
was a brass sextant, possibly a hundred years old. He lifted 
it from the ﬁtted case and held it in his hand. Struck by the 
beauty of it. The brass was dull and there were patches of 
green on it that took the form of another hand that once 
had held it but otherwise it was perfect. He wiped the 
verdigris from the plate at the base. Hezzaninth, London. 
He held it to his eye and turned the wheel. It was the ﬁrst 
thing he’d seen in a long time that stirred him. He held it in 
his hand and then he ﬁtted it back into the blue baize lin­
ing of the case and closed the lid and snapped the latches 
shut and set it back in the locker and closed the door. 
When he went back up on deck again to look for the boy 
the boy was not there. A moment of panic before he saw 
him walking along the bench downshore with the pistol 
hanging in his hand, his head down. Standing there he felt 
the hull of the ship lift and slide. Just slightly. Tide coming 
in. Slapping along the rocks of the jetty down there. He 
turned and went back down into the cabin. 
.
.
.
 

193 
He’d brought the two coils of rope from the locker and he 
measured the diameter of them with the span of his hand 
and that by three and then counted the number of coils. 
Fifty foot ropes. He hung them over a cleat on the gray 
teakwood deck and went back down into the cabin. He 
collected everything and stacked it against the table. There 
were some plastic jugs of water in the locker off the galley 
but all were empty save one. He picked up one of the emp­
ties and saw that the plastic had cracked and the water 
leaked out and he guessed they had frozen somewhere on 
the ship’s aimless voyagings. Probably several times. He 
took the half full jug and set it on the table and unscrewed 
the cap and sniffed the water and then raised the jug in 
both hands and drank. Then he drank again. 
The cans in the galley ﬂoor did not look in any way salv­
able and even in the locker there were some that were badly 
rusted and some that wore an ominous bulbed look. 
They’d all been stripped of their labels and the contents 
written on the metal in black marker pen in spanish. Not 
all of which he knew. He sorted through them, shaking 
them, squeezing them in his hand. He stacked them on the 
counter above the small galley refrigerator. He thought 
there must be crates of foodstuffs packed somewhere in 
the hold but he didnt think any of it would be edible. In 
any case there was a limit to what they could take in the 
cart. It occurred to him that he took this windfall in a 
fashion dangerously close to matter of fact but still he said 
what he had said before. That good luck might be no such 

D
T H E  R O A  
thing. There were few nights lying in the dark that he did 
not envy the dead. 
He found a can of olive oil and some cans of milk. Tea in a 
rusted metal caddy. A plastic container of some sort of 
meal that he did not recognize. A half empty can of coffee. 
He went methodically through the shelves in the locker, 
sorting what to take from what to leave. When he had 
carried everything into the saloon and stacked it against 
the companionway he went back into the galley and opened 
the toolbox and set about removing one of the burners 
from the little gimballed stove. He disconnected the braided 
ﬂexline and removed the aluminum spiders from the burn­
ers and put one of them in the pocket of his coat. He unfas­
tened the brass ﬁttings with a wrench and took the burners 
loose. Then he uncoupled them and fastened the hose to 
the coupling pipe and fitted the other end of the hose to 
the gasbottle and carried it out to the saloon. Lastly he 
made a bindle in a plastic tarp of some cans of juice and 
cans of fruit and of vegetables and tied it with a cord 
and then he stripped out of his clothes and piled them 
among the goods he’d collected and went up onto the 
deck naked and slid down to the railing with the tarp and 
swung over the side and dropped into the gray and freez­
ing sea. 
He waded ashore in the last of the light and swung the tarp 
down and palmed the water off his arms and chest and 
went to get his clothes. The boy followed him. He kept 

195 
asking him about his shoulder, blue and discolored from 
where he’d slammed it against the hatch door. It’s all right, 
the man said. It doesnt hurt. We got lots of stuff. Wait till 
you see. 
They hurried down the beach against the light. What if the 
boat washes away? the boy said. 
It wont wash away. 
It could. 
No it wont. Come on. Are you hungry? 
Yes. 
We’re going to eat well tonight. But we need to get a 
move on. 
I’m hurrying, Papa. 
And it may rain. 
How can you tell? 
I can smell it. 
What does it smell like? 
Wet ashes. Come on. 
Then he stopped. Where’s the pistol? he said. 
The boy froze. He looked terriﬁed. 
Christ, the man said. He looked back up the beach. 
They were already out of sight of the boat. He looked at 
the boy. The boy had put his hands on top of this head and 
he was about to cry. I’m sorry, he said. I’m really sorry. 
He set down the tarp with the canned goods. We have to 
go back. 
I’m sorry, Papa. 
It’s okay. It will still be there. 
The boy stood with his shoulders slumped. He was 

D
T H E  R O A  
beginning to sob. The man knelt and put his arms around 
him. It’s all right, he said. I’m the one who’s supposed to 
make sure we have the pistol and I didnt do it. I forgot. 
I’m sorry, Papa. 
Come on. We’re okay. Everything’s okay. 
The pistol was where he’d left it in the sand. The man 
picked it up and shook it and he sat and pulled the cylin­
der pin and handed it to the boy. Hold this, he said. 
Is it okay, Papa? 
Of course it’s okay. 
He rolled the cylinder out into his hand and blew the 
sand from it and handed it to the boy and he blew through 
the barrel and he blew the sand out of the frame and then 
took the parts from the boy and reﬁtted everything and 
cocked the pistol and lowered the hammer and cocked it 
again. He aligned the cylinder for the true cartridge to 
come up and he let the hammer down and put the pistol in 
his parka and stood up. We’re okay, he said. Come on. 
Is the dark going to catch us? 
I dont know. 
It is, isnt it? 
Come on. We’ll hurry. 
The dark did catch them. By the time they reached the 
headland path it was too dark to see anything. They stood 
in the wind from off the sea with the grass hissing all about 
them, the boy holding on to his hand. We just have to keep 
going, the man said. Come on. 

197 
I cant see. 
I know. We’ll just take it one step at a time. 
Okay. 
Dont let go. 
Okay. 
No matter what. 
No matter what. 
They went on in the perfect blackness, sightless as the 
blind. He held out one hand before him although there 
was nothing on that salt heath to collide with. The surf 
sounded more distant but he took his bearings by the wind 
as well and after tottering on for the better part of an hour 
they emerged from the grass and seaoats and stood again 
on the dry sand of the upper beach. The wind was colder. 
He’d brought the boy around on the lee side of him when 
suddenly the beach before them appeared shuddering out 
of the blackness and vanished again. 
What was that, Papa? 
It’s okay. It’s lightning. Come on. 
He slung the tarp of goods up over his shoulder and 
took the boy’s hand and they went on, tramping in the 
sand like parade horses against tripping over some piece of 
driftwood or seawrack. The weird gray light broke over 
the beach again. Far away a faint rumble of thunder muf­
ﬂed in the murk. I think I saw our tracks, he said. 
So we’re going the right way. 
Yes. The right way. 
I’m really cold, Papa. 
I know. Pray for lightning. 

D
T H E  R O A  
.
.
.
 
They went on. When the light broke over the beach again 
he saw that the boy was bent over and was whispering to 
himself. He looked for their tracks going up the beach but he 
could not see them. The wind had picked up even more and 
he was waiting for the ﬁrst spits of rain. If they got caught 
out on the beach in a rainstorm in the night they would be in 
trouble. They turned their faces away from the wind, hold­
ing on to the hoods of their parkas. The sand rattling against 
their legs and racing away in the dark and the thunder 
cracking just offshore. The rain came in off the sea hard and 
slant and stung their faces and he pulled the boy against him. 
They stood in the downpour. How far had they come? He 
waited for the lightning but it was tailing off and when the 
next one came and then the next he knew that the storm 
had taken out their tracks. They trudged on through the 
sand at the upper edge of the beach, hoping to see the 
shape of the log where they’d camped. Soon the lightning 
was all but gone. Then in a shift in the wind he heard a dis­
tant faint patter. He stopped. Listen, he said. 
What is it? 
Listen. 
I dont hear anything. 
Come on. 
What is it, Papa? 
It’s the tarp. It’s the rain falling on the tarp. 
.
.
.
 

199 
They went on, stumbling through the sand and the trash 
along the tideline. They came upon the tarp almost at once 
and he knelt and dropped the bindle and groped about for 
the rocks he’d weighed the plastic with and pushed them 
beneath it. He raised up the tarp and pulled it over them 
and then used the rocks to hold down the edges inside. He 
got the boy out of his wet coat and pulled the blankets 
over them, the rain pelting them through the plastic. He 
shucked off his own coat and held the boy close and soon 
they were asleep. 
In the night the rain ceased and he woke and lay listening. 
The heavy wash and thud of the surf after the wind had 
died. In the ﬁrst dull light he rose and walked down the 
beach. The storm had littered the shore and he walked 
the tideline looking for anything of use. In the shallows 
beyond the breakwater an ancient corpse rising and falling 
among the driftwood. He wished he could hide it from the 
boy but the boy was right. What was there to hide? When 
he got back he was awake sitting in the sand watching him. 
He was wrapped in the blankets and he’d spread their wet 
coats over the dead weeds to dry. He walked up and eased 
himself down beside him and they sat watching the leaden 
sea lift and fall beyond the breakers. 
They were most of the morning ofﬂoading the ship. He 
kept a ﬁre going and he’d wade ashore naked and shivering 
and drop the towrope and stand in the warmth of the blaze 
while the boy towed in the seabag through the slack swells 

D
T H E  R O A  
and dragged it onto the beach. They emptied out the bag 
and spread blankets and clothing out on the warm sand to 
dry before the ﬁre. There was more on the boat than they 
could carry and he thought they might stay a few days on 
the beach and eat as much as they could but it was danger­
ous. They slept that night in the sand with the ﬁre stand­
ing off the cold and their goods scattered all about them. 
He woke coughing and rose and took a drink of water and 
dragged more wood onto the ﬁre, whole logs of it that sent 
up a great cascade of sparks. The salt wood burned orange 
and blue in the ﬁre’s heart and he sat watching it a long 
time. Later he walked up the beach, his long shadow reach­
ing over the sands before him, sawing about with the wind 
in the ﬁre. Coughing. Coughing. He bent over, holding his 
knees. Taste of blood. The slow surf crawled and seethed 
in the dark and he thought about his life but there was no 
life to think about and after a while he walked back. He got 
a can of peaches from the bag and opened it and sat before 
the ﬁre and ate the peaches slowly with his spoon while 
the boy slept. The ﬁre ﬂared in the wind and sparks raced 
away down the sand. He set the empty tin between his feet. 
Every day is a lie, he said. But you are dying. That is not 
a lie. 
They carried their new stores bundled in tarps or blankets 
down the beach and packed everything into the cart. The 
boy tried to carry too much and when they stopped to rest 
he’d take part of his load and put it with his own. The boat 
had shifted slightly in the storm. He stood looking at 

201 
it. The boy watched him. Are you going back out there? 
he said. 
I think so. One last look around. 
I’m kind of scared. 
We’re okay. Just keep watch. 
We’ve got more than we can carry now. 
I know. I just want to take a look. 
Okay. 
He went over the ship from bow to stern again. Stop. 
Think. He sat in the ﬂoor of the saloon with his feet in the 
rubber boots propped against the pedestal of the table. It 
was already getting dark. He tried to remember what he 
knew about boats. He got up and went out on deck again. 
The boy was sitting by the ﬁre. He stepped down into the 
cockpit and sat on the bench with his back against the 
bulkhead, his feet on the deck almost at eye level. He had 
on nothing but the sweater and the souwester outﬁt over 
that but there was little warmth to it and he could not stop 
shivering. He was about to get up again when he realized 
that he’d been looking at the fasteners in the bulkhead on 
the far side of the cockpit. There were four of them. Stain­
less steel. At one time the benches had been covered with 
cushions and he could see the ties at the corner where 
they’d ripped away. At the bottom center of the bulkhead 
just above the seat there was a nylon strap sticking out, the 
end of it doubled and cross-stitched. He looked at the fas­
teners again. They were rotary latches with wings for your 
thumb. He got up and knelt at the bench and turned each 

D
T H E  R O A  
one all the way to the left. They were springloaded and 
when he had them undone he took hold of the strap at the 
bottom of the board and pulled it and the board slid down 
and came free. Inside under the deck was a space that held 
some rolled sails and what looked to be a two man rubber 
raft rolled and tied with bungee cords. A pair of small plas­
tic oars. A box of ﬂares. And behind that was a composite 
toolbox, the opening of the lid sealed with black electrical 
tape. He pulled it free and found the end of the tape and 
peeled it off all the way around and unlatched the chrome 
snaps and opened the box. Inside was a yellow plastic 
ﬂashlight, an electric strobebeacon powered by a drycell, 
a ﬁrst-aid kit. A yellow plastic EPIRB. And a black plas­
tic case about the size of a book. He lifted it out and 
unsnapped the latches and opened it. Inside was ﬁtted an 
old 37 millimeter bronze ﬂarepistol. He lifted it from the 
case in both hands and turned it and looked at it. He 
depressed the lever and broke it open. The chamber was 
empty but there were eight rounds of ﬂares ﬁtted in a 
plastic container, short and squat and newlooking. He 
ﬁtted the pistol back in the case and closed and latched 
the lid. 
He waded ashore shivering and coughing and wrapped 
himself in a blanket and sat in the warm sand in front of the 
ﬁre with the boxes beside him. The boy crouched and 
tried to put his arms around him which at least brought a 
smile. What did you ﬁnd, Papa? he said. 
I found a ﬁrst-aid kit. And I found a ﬂarepistol. 
What’s that? 

203 
I’ll show you. It’s to signal with. 
Is that what you went to look for? 
Yes. 
How did you know it was there? 
Well, I was hoping it was there. It was mostly luck. 
He opened the case and turned it for the boy to see. 
It’s a gun. 
A ﬂaregun. It shoots a thing up in the air and it makes a 
big light. 
Can I look at it? 
Sure you can. 
The boy lifted the gun from the case and held it. Can 
you shoot somebody with it? he said. 
You could. 
Would it kill them? 
No. But it might set them on ﬁre. 
Is that why you got it? 
Yes. 
Because there’s nobody to signal to. Is there? 
No. 
I’d like to see it. 
You mean shoot it? 
Yes. 
We can shoot it. 
For real? 
Sure. 
In the dark? 
Yes. In the dark. 
It could be like a celebration. 
Like a celebration. Yes. 
Can we shoot it tonight? 

D
T H E  R O A  
Why not? 
Is it loaded? 
No. But we can load it. 
The boy stood holding the gun. He pointed it toward 
the sea. Wow, he said. 
He got dressed and they set out down the beach carrying 
the last of their plunder. Where do you think the people 
went, Papa? 
That were on the ship? 
Yes. 
I dont know. 
Do you think they died? 
I dont know. 
But the odds are not in their favor. 
The man smiled. The odds are not in their favor? 
No. Are they? 
No. Probably not. 
I think they died. 
Maybe they did. 
I think that’s what happened to them. 
They could be alive somewhere, the man said. It’s possi ­
ble. The boy didnt answer. They went on. They’d wrapped 
their feet in sailcloth and bound them up in blue plastic 
pampooties cut from a tarp and they left strange tracks in 
their comings and going. He thought about the boy and 
his concerns and after a while he said: You’re probably 
right. I think they’re probably dead. 
Because if they were alive we’d be taking their stuff. 
And we’re not taking their stuff. 

205 
I know. 
Okay. 
So how many people do you think are alive? 
In the world? 
In the world. Yes. 
I dont know. Let’s stop and rest. 
Okay. 
You’re wearing me out. 
Okay. 
They sat among their bundles. 
How long can we stay here, Papa? 
You asked me that. 
I know. 
We’ll see. 
That means not very long. 
Probably. 
The boy poked holes in the sand with his ﬁngers until 
he had a circle of them. The man watched him. I dont know 
how many people there are, he said. I dont think there are 
very many. 
I know. He pulled his blanket about his shoulders and 
looked out down the gray and barren beach. 
What is it? the man said. 
Nothing. 
No. Tell me. 
There could be people alive someplace else. 
Whereplace else? 
I dont know. Anywhere. 
You mean besides on earth? 
Yes. 
I dont think so. They couldnt live anyplace else. 

D
T H E  R O A  
Not even if they could get there? 
No. 
The boy looked away. 
What? the man said. 
He shook his head. I dont know what we’re doing, he 
said. 
The man started to answer. But he didnt. After a while 
he said: There are people. There are people and we’ll ﬁnd 
them. You’ll see. 
He ﬁxed dinner while the boy played in the sand. He had a 
spatula made from a ﬂattened foodtin and with it he built a 
small village. He dredged a grid of streets. The man walked 
down and squatted and looked at it. The boy looked up. 
The ocean’s going to get it, isnt it? he said. 
Yes. 
That’s okay. 
Can you write the alphabet? 
I can write it. 
We dont work on your lessons any more. 
I know. 
Can you write something in the sand? 
Maybe we could write a letter to the good guys. So if 
they came along they’d know we were here. We could write 
it up there where it wouldnt get washed away. 
What if the bad guys saw it? 
Yeah. 
I shouldnt have said that. We could write them a letter. 
The boy shook his head. That’s okay, he said. 

207 
.
.
.
 
He loaded the ﬂarepistol and as soon as it was dark they 
walked out down the beach away from the ﬁre and he 
asked the boy if he wanted to shoot it. 
You shoot it, Papa. You know how to do it. 
Okay. 
He cocked the gun and aimed it out over the bay and 
pulled the trigger. The ﬂare arced up into the murk with a 
long whoosh and broke somewhere out over the water in a 
clouded light and hung there. The hot tendrils of magne­
sium drifted slowly down the dark and the pale foreshore 
tide started in the glare and slowly faded. He looked down 
at the boy’s upturned face. 
They couldnt see it very far, could they, Papa? 
Who? 
Anybody. 
No. Not far. 
If you wanted to show where you were. 
You mean like to the good guys? 
Yes. Or anybody that you wanted them to know where 
you were. 
Like who? 
I dont know. 
Like God? 
Yeah. Maybe somebody like that. 
In the morning he built a ﬁre and walked out on the beach 
while the boy slept. He was not gone long but he felt a 

D
T H E  R O A  
strange unease and when he got back the boy was standing 
on the beach wrapped in his blankets waiting for him. He 
hurried his steps. By the time he got to him he was sitting 
down. 
What is it? he said. What is it? 
I dont feel good, Papa. 
He cupped the boy’s forehead in his hand. He was 
burning. He picked him up and carried him to the ﬁre. It’s 
okay, he said. You’re going to be okay. 
I think I’m going to be sick. 
It’s okay. 
He sat with him in the sand and held his forehead while he 
bent and vomited. He wiped the boy’s mouth with his hand. 
I’m sorry, the boy said. Shh. You didnt do anything wrong. 
He carried him up to the camp and covered him with blan­
kets. He tried to get him to drink some water. He put more 
wood on the ﬁre and knelt with his hand on his forehead. 
You’ll be all right he said. He was terriﬁed. 
Dont go away, the boy said. 
Of course I wont go away. 
Even for just a little while. 
No. I’m right here. 
Okay. Okay, Papa. 
He held him all night, dozing off and waking in terror, feel­
ing for the boy’s heart. In the morning he was no better. 
He tried to get him to drink some juice but he would not. 
He pressed his hand to his forehead, conjuring up a cool­

209 
ness that would not come. He wiped his white mouth while 
he slept. I will do what I promised, he whispered. No mat­
ter what. I will not send you into the darkness alone. 
He went through the ﬁrst-aid kit from the boat but there 
was nothing much there of use. Aspirin. Bandages and dis­
infectant. Some antibiotics but they had a short shelﬂife. 
Still that was all he had and he helped the boy drink and 
put one of the capsules on his tongue. He was soaked in 
sweat. He’d already stripped him out of the blankets and 
now he unzipped him out of his coat and then out of his 
clothes and moved him away from the ﬁre. The boy looked 
up at him. I’m so cold, he said. 
I know. But you have a really high temperature and we 
have to get you cooled off. 
Can I have another blanket? 
Yes. Of course. 
You wont go away. 
No. I wont go away. 
He carried the boy’s ﬁlthy clothes into the surf and washed 
them, standing shivering in the cold salt water naked from 
the waist down and sloshing them up and down and wring­
ing them out. He spread them by the ﬁre on sticks angled 
into the sand and piled on more wood and went and sat by 
the boy again, smoothing his matted hair. In the evening 
he opened a can of soup and set it in the coals and he ate 
and watched the darkness come up. When he woke he was 
lying shivering in the sand and the ﬁre had died almost to 

D
T H E  R O A  
ash and it was black night. He sat up wildly and reached 
for the boy. Yes, he whispered. Yes. 
He rekindled the ﬁre and he got a cloth and wet it and put 
it over the boy’s forehead. The wintry dawn was com­
ing and when it was light enough to see he went into the 
woods beyond the dunes and came back dragging a great 
travois of dead limbs and branches and set about break­
ing them up and stacking them near the ﬁre. He crushed 
aspirins in a cup and dissolved them in water and put in 
some sugar and sat and lifted the boy’s head and held the 
cup while he drank. 
He walked the beach, slumped and coughing. He stood 
looking out at the dark swells. He was staggering with 
fatigue. He went back and sat by the boy and refolded the 
cloth and wiped his face and then spread the cloth over his 
forehead. You have to stay near, he said.You have to be 
quick. So you can be with him. Hold him close. Last day 
of the earth. 
The boy slept all day. He kept waking him up to drink the 
sugarwater, the boy’s dry throat jerking and chugging. You 
have to drink he said. Okay, wheezed the boy. He twisted 
the cup into the sand beside him and cushioned the folded 
blanket under his sweaty head and covered him. Are you 
cold? he said. But the boy was already asleep. 

211 
.
.
.
 
He tried to stay awake all night but he could not. He woke 
endlessly and sat and slapped himself or rose to put wood 
on the ﬁre. He held the boy and bent to hear the labored 
suck of air. His hand on the thin and laddered ribs. He 
walked out on the beach to the edge of the light and stood 
with his clenched ﬁsts on top of his skull and fell to his 
knees sobbing in rage. 
It rained brieﬂy in the night, a light patter on the tarp. He 
pulled it over them and turned and lay holding the child, 
watching the blue ﬂames through the plastic. He fell into a 
dreamless sleep. 
When he woke again he hardly knew where he was. The 
ﬁre had died, the rain had ceased. He threw back the tarp 
and pushed himself up on his elbows. Gray daylight. The 
boy was watching him. Papa, he said. 
Yes. I’m right here. 
Can I have a drink of water? 
Yes. Yes, of course you can. How are you feeling? 
I feel kind of weird. 
Are you hungry? 
I’m just really thirsty. 
Let me get the water. 
He pushed back the blankets and rose and walked out 
past the dead ﬁre and got the boy’s cup and ﬁlled it out of 

D
T H E  R O A  
the plastic water jug and came back and knelt and held the 
cup for him. You’re going to be okay, he said. The boy 
drank. He nodded and looked at his father. Then he drank 
the rest of the water. More, he said. 
He built a ﬁre and propped the boy’s wet clothes up and 
brought him a can of apple juice. Do you remember any­
thing? he said. 
About what? 
About being sick. 
I remember shooting the ﬂaregun. 
Do you remember getting the stuff from the boat? 
He sat sipping the juice. He looked up. I’m not a retard, 
he said. 
I know. 
I had some weird dreams. 
What about? 
I dont want to tell you. 
That’s okay. I want you to brush your teeth. 
With real toothpaste. 
Yes. 
Okay. 
He checked all the foodtins but he could ﬁnd nothing sus­
pect. He threw out a few that looked pretty rusty. They 
sat that evening by the ﬁre and the boy drank hot soup and 
the man turned his steaming clothes on the sticks and sat 
watching him until the boy became embarrassed. Stop 
watching me, Papa, he said. 

213 
Okay. 
But he didnt. 
In two day’s time they were walking the beach as far as the 
headland and back, trudging along in their plastic bootees. 
They ate huge meals and he put up a sailcloth leanto with 
ropes and poles against the wind. They pruned down their 
stores to a manageable load for the cart and he thought 
they might leave in two more days. Then coming back to 
the camp late in the day he saw bootprints in the sand. He 
stopped and stood looking down the beach. Oh Christ, he 
said. Oh Christ. 
What is it, Papa? 
He pulled the pistol from his belt. Come on he said. 
Hurry. 
The tarp was gone. Their blankets. The waterbottle and 
their campsite store of food. The sailcloth was blown up 
into the dunes. Their shoes were gone. He ran up through 
the swale of seaoats where he’d left the cart but the 
cart was gone. Everything. You stupid ass, he said. You 
stupid ass. 
The boy was standing there wide-eyed. What hap­
pened, Papa? 
They took everything. Come on. 
The boy looked up. He was beginning to cry. 
Stay with me, the man said. Stay right with me. 
.
.
.
 

D
T H E  R O A  
He could see the tracks of the cart where they sloughed 
up through the loose sand. Bootprints. How many? He 
lost the track on the better ground beyond the bracken and 
then picked it up again. When they got to the road he 
stopped the boy with his hand. The road was exposed to 
the wind from the sea and it was blown free of ash save for 
patches here and there. Dont step in the road, he said. 
And stop crying. We need to get all the sand off of our feet. 
Here. Sit down. 
He untied the wrappings and shook them out and tied 
them back again. I want you to help, he said. We’re looking 
for sand. Sand in the road. Even just a little bit. To see 
which way they went. Okay? 
Okay. 
They set off down the blacktop in opposite directions. 
He’d not gone far before the boy called out. Here it is, 
Papa. They went this way. When he got there the boy 
was crouched in the road. Right here, he said. It was a 
half teaspoon of beachsand tilted from somewhere in the 
understructure of the grocery cart. The man stood and 
looked out down the road. Good work, he said. Let’s go. 
They set off at a jogtrot. A pace he thought he’d be able to 
keep up but he couldnt. He had to stop, leaning over and 
coughing. He looked up at the boy, wheezing. We’ll have 
to walk, he said. If they hear us they’ll hide by the side of 
the road. Come on. 
How many are there, Papa? 

215 
I dont know. Maybe just one. 
Are we going to kill them? 
I dont know. 
They went on. It was already late in the day and it was 
another hour and deep into the long dusk before they 
overtook the thief, bent over the loaded cart, trundling 
down the road before them. When he looked back and saw 
them he tried to run with the cart but it was useless and 
ﬁnally he stopped and stood behind the cart holding a 
butcher knife. When he saw the pistol he stepped back but 
he didnt drop the knife. 
Get away from the cart, the man said. 
He looked at them. He looked at the boy. He was an out­
cast from one of the communes and the ﬁngers of his right 
hand had been cut away. He tried to hide it behind him. A 
sort of ﬂeshy spatula. The cart was piled high. He’d taken 
everything. 
Get away from the cart and put down the knife. 
He looked around. As if there might be help somewhere. 
Scrawny, sullen, bearded, ﬁlthy. His old plastic coat held 
together with tape. The pistol was a double action but the 
man cocked it anyway. Two loud clicks. Otherwise only 
their breathing in the silence of the salt moorland. They 
could smell him in his stinking rags. If you dont put down 
the knife and get away from the cart, the man said, I’m 
going to blow your brains out. The thief looked at the 
child and what he saw was very sobering to him. He laid 
the knife on top of the blankets and backed away and 
stood. 

D
T H E  R O A  
Back. More. 
He stepped back again. 
Papa? the boy said. 
Be quiet. 
He kept his eyes on the thief. Goddamn you, he said. 
Papa please dont kill the man. 
The thief ’s eyes swung wildly. The boy was crying. 
Come on, man. I done what you said. Listen to the boy. 
Take your clothes off. 
What? 
Take them off. Every goddamned stitch. 
Come on. Dont do this. 
I’ll kill you where you stand. 
Dont do this, man. 
I wont tell you again. 
All right. All right. Just take it easy. 
He stripped slowly and piled his vile rags in the road. 
The shoes. 
Come on, man. 
The shoes. 
The thief looked at the boy. The boy had turned away 
and put his hands over his ears. Okay, he said. Okay. He 
sat naked in the road and began to unlace the rotting 
pieces of leather laced to his feet. Then he stood up, hold­
ing them in one hand. 
Put them in the cart. 
He stepped forward and placed the shoes on top of the 
blankets and stepped back. Standing there raw and naked, 
ﬁlthy, starving. Covering himself with his hand. He was 
already shivering. 

217 
Put the clothes in. 
He bent and scooped up the rags in his arms and piled 
them on top of the shoes. He stood there holding himself. 
Dont do this, man. 
You didnt mind doing it to us. 
I’m begging you. 
Papa, the boy said. 
Come on. Listen to the kid. 
You tried to kill us. 
I’m starving, man. You’d have done the same. 
You took everything. 
Come on, man. I’ll die. 
I’m going to leave you the way you left us. 
Come on. I’m begging you. 
He pulled the cart back and swung it around and put 
the pistol on top and looked at the boy. Let’s go, he said. 
And they set out along the road south with the boy crying 
and looking back at the nude and slatlike creature standing 
there in the road shivering and hugging himself. Oh Papa, 
he sobbed. 
Stop it. 
I cant stop it. 
What do you think would have happened to us if we 
hadnt caught him? Just stop it. 
I’m trying. 
When they got to the curve in the road the man was still 
standing there. There was no place for him to go. The boy 
kept looking back and when he could no longer see him 

D
T H E  R O A  
he stopped and then he just sat down in the road sobbing. 
The man pulled up and stood looking at him. He dug their 
shoes out of the cart and sat down and began to take the 
wrappings off the boy’s feet. You have to stop crying, he 
said. 
I cant. 
He put on their shoes and then stood and walked back 
up the road but he couldnt see the thief. He came back and 
stood over the boy. He’s gone, he said. Come on. 
He’s not gone, the boy said. He looked up. His face 
streaked with soot. He’s not. 
What do you want to do? 
Just help him, Papa. Just help him. 
The man looked back up the road. 
He was just hungry, Papa. He’s going to die. 
He’s going to die anyway. 
He’s so scared, Papa. 
The man squatted and looked at him. I’m scared, he 
said. Do you understand? I’m scared. 
The boy didnt answer. He just sat there with his head 
bowed, sobbing. 
You’re not the one who has to worry about everything. 
The boy said something but he couldnt understand 
him. What? he said. 
He looked up, his wet and grimy face. Yes I am, he said. 
I am the one. 
They wheeled the tottering cart back up the road and 
stood there in the cold and the gathering dark and called 
but no one came. 

219 
He’s afraid to answer, Papa. 
Is this where we stopped? 
I dont know. I think so. 
They went up the road calling out in the empty dusk, 
their voices lost over the darkening shorelands. They 
stopped and stood with their hands cupped to their 
mouths, hallooing mindlessly into the waste. Finally he 
piled the man’s shoes and clothes in the road. He put a 
rock on top of them. We have to go, he said. We have to go. 
They made a dry camp with no ﬁre. He sorted out cans 
for their supper and warmed them over the gas burner and 
they ate and the boy said nothing. The man tried to see his 
face in the blue light from the burner. I wasnt going to kill 
him, he said. But the boy didnt answer. They rolled them­
selves in the blankets and lay there in the dark. He thought 
he could hear the sea but perhaps it was just the wind. He 
could tell by his breathing that the boy was awake and after 
a while the boy said: But we did kill him. 
In the morning they ate and set out. The cart was so loaded 
it was hard to push and one of the wheels was giving out. 
The road bent its way along the coast, dead sheaves of 
saltgrass overhanging the pavement. The leadcolored sea 
shifting in the distance. The silence. He woke that night 
with the dull carbon light of the crossing moon beyond the 
murk making the shapes of the trees almost visible and 
he turned away coughing. Smell of rain out there. The boy 
was awake. You have to talk to me, he said. 

D
T H E  R O A  
I’m trying. 
I’m sorry I woke you. 
It’s okay. 
He got up and walked out to the road. The black shape 
of it running from dark to dark. Then a distant low rum­
ble. Not thunder. You could feel it under your feet. A sound 
without cognate and so without description. Something 
imponderable shifting out there in the dark. The earth 
itself contracting with the cold. It did not come again. 
What time of year? What age the child? He walked out 
into the road and stood. The silence. The salitter drying 
from the earth. The mudstained shapes of ﬂooded cities 
burned to the waterline. At a crossroads a ground set with 
dolmen stones where the spoken bones of oracles lay mol­
dering. No sound but the wind. What will you say? A liv­
ing man spoke these lines? He sharpened a quill with his 
small pen knife to scribe these things in sloe or lampblack? 
At some reckonable and entabled moment? He is coming 
to steal my eyes. To seal my mouth with dirt. 
He went through the cans again one by one, holding them 
in his hand and squeezing them like a man checking for 
ripeness at a fruitstand. He sorted out two he thought 
questionable and packed away the rest and packed the cart 
and they set out upon the road again. In three days they 
came to a small port town and they hid the cart in a garage 
behind a house and piled old boxes over it and then sat in 
the house to see if anyone would come. No one did. He 
looked through the cabinets but there was nothing there. 
He needed vitamin D for the boy or he was going to get 

221 
rickets. He stood at the sink and looked out down the 
driveway. Light the color of washwater congealing in the 
dirty panes of glass. The boy sat slumped at the table with 
his head in his arms. 
They walked through the town and down to the docks. 
They saw no one. He had the pistol in the pocket of his 
coat and he carried the ﬂaregun in his hand. They walked 
out on the pier, the rough boards dark with tar and fas­
tened down with spikes to the timbers underneath. Wooden 
bollards. Faint smell of salt and creosote coming in off the 
bay. On the far shore a row of warehouses and the shape of 
a tanker red with rust. A tall gantry crane against the sullen 
sky. There’s no one here, he said. The boy didnt answer. 
They wheeled the cart through the back streets and across 
the railroad tracks and came into the main road again 
at the far edge of the town. As they passed the last of the 
sad wooden buildings something whistled past his head 
and clattered off the street and broke up against the wall of 
the block building on the other side. He grabbed the boy 
and fell on top of him and grabbed the cart to pull it to 
them. It tipped and fell over spilling the tarp and blankets 
into the street. In an upper window of the house he could 
see a man drawing a bow on them and he pushed the boy’s 
head down and tried to cover him with his body. He heard 
the dull thwang of the bowstring and felt a sharp hot pain 
in his leg. Oh you bastard, he said. You bastard. He clawed 
the blankets to one side and lunged and grabbed the ﬂare­

D
T H E  R O A  
gun and raised up and cocked it and rested his arm on 
the side of the cart. The boy was clinging to him. When 
the man stepped back into the frame of the window to 
draw the bow again he ﬁred. The ﬂare went rocketing up 
toward the window in a long white arc and then they could 
hear the man screaming. He grabbed the boy and pushed 
him down and dragged the blankets over the top of him. 
Dont move, he said. Dont move and dont look. He pulled 
the blankets out into the street looking for the case for the 
ﬂarepistol. It ﬁnally slid out of the cart and he snatched it 
up and opened it and took out the shells and reloaded the 
pistol and breeched it shut and put the rest of the loads in 
his pocket. Stay just like you are, he whispered. He patted 
the boy through the blankets and rose and ran limping 
across the street. 
He entered the house through the back door with the ﬂare-
gun leveled at his waist. The house was stripped out to the 
wall studs. He stepped through into the livingroom and 
stood at the stair landing. He listened for movement in 
the upper rooms. He looked out the front window to 
where the cart lay in the street and then he went up the 
stairs. 
A woman was sitting in the corner holding the man. She’d 
taken off her coat to cover him. As soon as she saw him she 
began to curse him. The ﬂare had burned out in the ﬂoor 
leaving a patch of white ash and there was a faint smell 
of burnt wood in the room. He crossed the room and 

223 
looked out the window. The woman’s eyes followed him. 
Scrawny, lank gray hair. 
Who else is up here? 
She didnt answer. He stepped past her and went through 
the rooms. His leg was bleeding badly. He could feel his 
trousers sticking to the skin. He went back into the front 
room. Where’s the bow? he said. 
I dont have it. 
Where is it? 
I dont know. 
They left you here, didnt they? 
I left myself here. 
He turned and went limping down the stairs and opened 
the front door and went out into the street backward watch­
ing the house. When he got to the cart he pulled it upright 
and piled their things back in. Stay close, he whispered. 
Stay close. 
They put up in a store building at the end of the town. He 
wheeled the cart through and into a room at the rear and 
shut the door and pushed the cart against it sideways. He 
dug out the burner and the tank of gas and lit the burner 
and set it in the ﬂoor and then he unbuckled his belt and 
took off the bloodstained trousers. The boy watched. The 
arrow had cut a gash just above his knee about three 
inches long. It was still bleeding and his whole upper leg 
was discolored and he could see that the cut was deep. 
Some homemade broadhead beaten out of strapiron, an 
old spoon, God knows what. He looked at the boy. See if 
you can ﬁnd the ﬁrst-aid kit, he said. 

D
T H E  R O A  
The boy didnt move. 
Get the ﬁrst-aid kit, damn it. Dont just sit there. 
He jumped up and went to the door and began digging 
under the tarp and the blankets piled in the cart. He came 
back with the kit and gave it to the man and the man took it 
without comment and set it in the concrete ﬂoor in front 
of him and unsnapped the catches and opened it. He 
reached and turned up the burner for the light. Bring me 
the water bottle, he said. The boy brought the bottle and 
the man unscrewed the lid and poured water over the 
wound and held it shut between his ﬁngers while he wiped 
away the blood. He swabbed the wound with disinfectant 
and opened a plastic envelope with his teeth and took out 
a small hooked suture needle and a coil of silk thread 
and sat holding the silk to the light while he threaded it 
through the needle’s eye. He took a clamp from the kit 
and caught the needle in the jaws and locked them and 
set about suturing the wound. He worked quickly and he 
took no great pains about it. The boy was crouching in the 
ﬂoor. He looked at him and he bent to the sutures again. 
You dont have to watch, he said. 
Is it okay? 
Yeah. It’s okay. 
Does it hurt? 
Yes. It hurts. 
He ran the knot down the thread and pulled it taut and 
cut off the silk with the scissors from the kit and looked at 
the boy. The boy was looking at what he’d done. 
I’m sorry I yelled at you. 
He looked up. That’s okay, Papa. 

225 
Let’s start over. 
Okay. 
In the morning it was raining and a hard wind was rattling 
the glass at the rear of the building. He stood looking out. 
A steel dock half collapsed and submerged in the bay. The 
wheelhouses of sunken ﬁshingboats standing out of the 
gray chop. Nothing moving out there. Anything that could 
move had long been blown away. His leg was throbbing and 
he pulled away the dressing and disinfected the wound 
and looked at it. The ﬂesh swollen and discolored in the 
truss of the black stitching. He dressed it and pulled his 
bloodstiffened trousers on. 
They spent the day there, sitting among the boxes and 
crates. You have to talk to me, he said. 
I’m talking. 
Are you sure? 
I’m talking now. 
Do you want me to tell you a story? 
No. 
Why not? 
The boy looked at him and looked away. 
Why not? 
Those stories are not true. 
They dont have to be true. They’re stories. 
Yes. But in the stories we’re always helping people and 
we dont help people. 

D
T H E  R O A  
Why dont you tell me a story? 
I dont want to. 
Okay. 
I dont have any stories to tell. 
You could tell me a story about yourself. 
You already know all the stories about me. You were 
there. 
You have stories inside that I dont know about. 
You mean like dreams? 
Like dreams. Or just things that you think about. 
Yeah, but stories are supposed to be happy. 
They dont have to be. 
You always tell happy stories. 
You dont have any happy ones? 
They’re more like real life. 
But my stories are not. 
Your stories are not. No. 
The man watched him. Real life is pretty bad? 
What do you think? 
Well, I think we’re still here. A lot of bad things have 
happened but we’re still here. 
Yeah. 
You dont think that’s so great. 
It’s okay. 
They’d pulled a worktable up to the windows and spread 
out their blankets and the boy was lying there on his stom­
ach looking out across the bay. The man sat with his leg 
stretched out. On the blanket between them were the two 
pistols and the box of ﬂares. After a while the man said: I 

227 
think it’s pretty good. It’s a pretty good story. It counts for 
something. 
It’s okay, Papa. I just want to have a little quiet time. 
What about dreams? You used to tell me dreams 
sometimes. 
I dont want to talk about anything. 
Okay. 
I dont have good dreams anyway. They’re always about 
something bad happening. You said that was okay because 
good dreams are not a good sign. 
Maybe. I dont know. 
When you wake up coughing you walk out along the 
road or somewhere but I can still hear you coughing. 
I’m sorry. 
One time I heard you crying. 
I know. 
So if I shouldnt cry you shouldnt cry either. 
Okay. 
Is your leg going to get better? 
Yes. 
You’re not just saying that. 
No. 
Because it looks really hurt. 
It’s not that bad. 
The man was trying to kill us. Wasnt he. 
Yes. He was. 
Did you kill him? 
No. 
Is that the truth? 
Yes. 
Okay. 

D
T H E  R O A  
Is that all right? 
Yes. 
I thought you didnt want to talk? 
I dont. 
They left two days later, the man limping along behind 
the cart and the boy keeping close to his side until they 
cleared the outskirts of the town. The road ran along the 
ﬂat gray coast and there were drifts of sand in the road that 
the winds had left there. It made for heavy going and they 
had to shovel their way in places with a plank they carried 
in the lower rack of the cart. They walked out down the 
beach and sat in the lee of the dunes and studied the map. 
They’d brought the burner with them and they heated 
water and made tea and sat wrapped in their blankets 
against the wind. Downshore the weathered timbers of 
an ancient ship. Gray and sandscrubbed beams, old hand-
turned scarpbolts. The pitted iron hardware deep lilac in 
color, smeltered in some bloomery in Cadiz or Bristol and 
beaten out on a blackened anvil, good to last three hun­
dred years against the sea. The following day they passed 
through the boarded ruins of a seaside resort and took 
the road inland through a pine wood, the long straight 
blacktop drifted in pineneedles, the wind in the dark 
trees. 
He sat in the road at noon in the best light there would be 
and snipped the sutures with the scissors and put the scis­
sors back in the kit and took out the clamp. Then he set 

229 
about pulling the small black threads from his skin, press­
ing down with the ﬂat of his thumb. The boy sat in the 
road watching. The man fastened the clamp over the ends 
of the threads and pulled them out one by one. Small pin-
lets of blood. When he was done he put away the clamp 
and taped gauze over the wound and then stood and pulled 
his trousers up and handed the kit to the boy to put away. 
That hurt, didnt it? the boy said. 
Yes. It did. 
Are you real brave? 
Just medium. 
What’s the bravest thing you ever did? 
He spat into the road a bloody phlegm. Getting up this 
morning, he said. 
Really? 
No. Dont listen to me. Come on, let’s go. 
In the evening the murky shape of another coastal city, the 
cluster of tall buildings vaguely askew. He thought the iron 
armatures had softened in the heat and then reset again to 
leave the buildings standing out of true. The melted win­
dow glass hung frozen down the walls like icing on a cake. 
They went on. In the nights sometimes now he’d wake in 
the black and freezing waste out of softly colored worlds of 
human love, the songs of birds, the sun. 
He leaned his forehead on his arms crossed upon the bar 
handle of the cart and coughed. He spat a bloody drool. 
More and more he had to stop and rest. The boy watched 

D
T H E  R O A  
him. In some other world the child would already have 
begun to vacate him from his life. But he had no life other. 
He knew the boy lay awake in the night and listened to 
hear if he were breathing. 
The days sloughed past uncounted and uncalendared. 
Along the interstate in the distance long lines of charred 
and rusting cars. The raw rims of the wheels sitting in a 
stiff gray sludge of melted rubber, in blackened rings of 
wire. The incinerate corpses shrunk to the size of a child 
and propped on the bare springs of the seats. Ten thou­
sand dreams ensepulchred within their crozzled hearts. 
They went on. Treading the dead world under like rats on 
a wheel. The nights dead still and deader black. So cold. 
They talked hardly at all. He coughed all the time and the 
boy watched him spitting blood. Slumping along. Filthy, 
ragged, hopeless. He’d stop and lean on the cart and the 
boy would go on and then stop and look back and he 
would raise his weeping eyes and see him standing there 
in the road looking back at him from some unimaginable 
future, glowing in that waste like a tabernacle. 
The road crossed a dried slough where pipes of ice stood 
out of the frozen mud like formations in a cave. The remains 
of an old ﬁre by the side of the road. Beyond that a long 
concrete causeway. A dead swamp. Dead trees standing 
out of the gray water trailing gray and relic hagmoss. The 
silky spills of ash against the curbing. He stood leaning 
on the gritty concrete rail. Perhaps in the world’s destruc­

231 
tion it would be possible at last to see how it was made. 
Oceans, mountains. The ponderous counterspectacle of 
things ceasing to be. The sweeping waste, hydroptic and 
coldly secular. The silence. 
They’d begun to come upon dead windfalls of pinetrees, 
great swaths of ruin cut through the countryside. The 
wreckage of buildings strewn over the landscape and skeins 
of wire from the roadside poles garbled like knitting. The 
road was littered with debris and it was work to get the cart 
through. Finally they just sat by the side of the road and 
stared at what was before them. Roofs of houses, the trunks 
of trees. A boat. The open sky beyond where in the dis­
tance the sullen sea lagged and shifted. 
They sorted through the wreckage strewn along the road 
and in the end he came up with a canvas bag that he could 
tote over his shoulder and a small suitcase for the boy. 
They packed their blankets and the tarp and what was left 
of the canned goods and set out again with their knap­
sacks and their bags leaving the cart behind. Clambering 
through the ruins. Slow going. He had to stop and rest. He 
sat in a roadside sofa, the cushions bloated in the damp. 
Bent over, coughing. He pulled the bloodstained mask 
from his face and got up and rinsed it in the ditch and 
wrung it out and then just stood there in the road. His 
breath pluming white. Winter was already upon them. He 
turned and looked at the boy. Standing with his suitcase 
like an orphan waiting for a bus. 

D
T H E  R O A  
.
.
.
 
In two day’s time they came to a broad tidal river where 
the bridge lay collapsed in the slow moving water. They 
sat on the broken abutment of the road and watched the 
river backing upon itself and coiling over the iron trellis­
work. He looked across the water to the country beyond. 
What are we going to do Papa? he said. 
Well what are we, said the boy. 
They walked out the long spit of tidal mud where a small 
boat lay half buried and stood there looking at it. It was 
altogether derelict. There was rain in the wind. They 
trudged up the beach with their baggage looking for shel­
ter but they found none. He scufﬂed together a pile of the 
bonecolored wood that lay along the shore and got a ﬁre 
going and they sat in the dunes with the tarp over them 
and watched the cold rain coming in from the north. It fell 
harder, dimpling the sand. The ﬁre steamed and the smoke 
swung in slow coils and the boy curled up under the pat­
tering tarp and soon he was asleep. The man pulled the 
plastic over himself in a hood and watched the gray sea 
shrouded away out there in the rain and watched the surf 
break along the shore and draw away again over the dark 
and stippled sand. 
The next day they headed inland. A vast low swale where 
ferns and hydrangeas and wild orchids lived on in ashen 
efﬁgies which the wind had not yet reached. Their progress 

233 
was a torture. In two days when they came out upon a 
road he set the bag down and sat bent over with his arms 
crossed at his chest and coughed till he could cough no 
more. Two more days and they may have traveled ten 
miles. They crossed the river and a short ways on they 
came to a crossroads. Downcountry a storm had passed 
over the isthmus and leveled the dead black trees from 
east to west like weeds in the ﬂoor of a stream. Here they 
camped and when he lay down he knew that he could 
go no further and that this was the place where he would 
die. The boy sat watching him, his eyes welling. Oh Papa, 
he said. 
He watched him come through the grass and kneel with 
the cup of water he’d fetched. There was light all about 
him. He took the cup and drank and lay back. They had 
for food a single tin of peaches but he made the boy eat it 
and he would not take any. I cant, he said. It’s all right. 
I’ll save your half. 
Okay. You save it until tomorrow. 
He took the cup and moved away and when he moved 
the light moved with him. He’d wanted to try and make a 
tent out of the tarp but the man would not let him. He said 
that he didnt want anything covering him. He lay watching 
the boy at the ﬁre. He wanted to be able to see. Look 
around you, he said. There is no prophet in the earth’s 
long chronicle who’s not honored here today. Whatever 
form you spoke of you were right. 
.
.
.
 

D
T H E  R O A  
The boy thought he smelled wet ash on the wind. He went 
up the road and come dragging back a piece of plywood 
from the roadside trash and he drove sticks into the ground 
with a rock and made of the plywood a rickety leanto but 
in the end it didnt rain. He left the ﬂarepistol and took the 
revolver with him and he scoured the countryside for any­
thing to eat but he came back emptyhanded. The man took 
his hand, wheezing. You need to go on, he said. I cant go 
with you. You need to keep going. You dont know what 
might be down the road. We were always lucky. You’ll be 
lucky again. You’ll see. Just go. It’s all right. 
I cant. 
It’s all right. This has been a long time coming. Now it’s 
here. Keep going south. Do everything the way we did it. 
You’re going to be okay, Papa. You have to. 
No I’m not. Keep the gun with you at all times. You 
need to ﬁnd the good guys but you cant take any chances. 
No chances. Do you hear? 
I want to be with you. 
You cant. 
Please. 
You cant. You have to carry the ﬁre. 
I dont know how to. 
Yes you do. 
Is it real? The ﬁre? 
Yes it is. 
Where is it? I dont know where it is. 
Yes you do. It’s inside you. It was always there. I can 
see it. 
Just take me with you. Please. 
I cant. 

235 
Please, Papa. 
I cant. I cant hold my son dead in my arms. I thought I 
could but I cant. 
You said you wouldnt ever leave me. 
I know. I’m sorry. You have my whole heart. You always 
did. You’re the best guy. You always were. If I’m not here 
you can still talk to me. You can talk to me and I’ll talk to 
you. You’ll see. 
Will I hear you? 
Yes. You will. You have to make it like talk that you 
imagine. And you’ll hear me. You have to practice. Just 
dont give up. Okay? 
Okay. 
Okay. 
I’m really scared Papa. 
I know. But you’ll be okay. You’re going to be lucky. I 
know you are. I’ve got to stop talking. I’m going to start 
coughing again. 
It’s okay, Papa. You dont have to talk. It’s okay. 
He went down the road as far as he dared and then he 
came back. His father was asleep. He sat with him under 
the plywood and watched him. He closed his eyes and 
talked to him and he kept his eyes closed and listened. 
Then he tried again. 
He woke in the darkness, coughing softly. He lay listening. 
The boy sat by the ﬁre wrapped in a blanket watching him. 
Drip of water. A fading light. Old dreams encroached 

D
T H E  R O A  
upon the waking world. The dripping was in the cave. 
The light was a candle which the boy bore in a ringstick of 
beaten copper. The wax spattered on the stones. Tracks 
of unknown creatures in the mortiﬁed loess. In that cold 
corridor they had reached the point of no return which 
was measured from the ﬁrst solely by the light they carried 
with them. 
Do you remember that little boy, Papa? 
Yes. I remember him. 
Do you think that he’s all right that little boy? 
Oh yes. I think he’s all right. 
Do you think he was lost? 
No. I dont think he was lost. 
I’m scared that he was lost. 
I think he’s all right. 
But who will ﬁnd him if he’s lost? Who will ﬁnd the lit ­
tle boy? 
Goodness will ﬁnd the little boy. It always has. It will 
again. 
He slept close to his father that night and held him but 
when he woke in the morning his father was cold and stiff. 
He sat there a long time weeping and then he got up and 
walked out through the woods to the road. When he came 
back he knelt beside his father and held his cold hand and 
said his name over and over again. 
.
.
.
 

237 
He stayed three days and then he walked out to the road 
and he looked down the road and he looked back the way 
they had come. Someone was coming. He started to turn 
and go back into the woods but he didnt. He just stood in 
the road and waited, the pistol in his hand. He’d piled all 
the blankets on his father and he was cold and he was hun­
gry. The man that hove into view and stood there looking 
at him was dressed in a gray and yellow ski parka. He car­
ried a shotgun upside down over his shoulder on a braided 
leather lanyard and he wore a nylon bandolier ﬁlled with 
shells for the gun. A veteran of old skirmishes, bearded, 
scarred across his cheek and the bone stoven and the one 
eye wandering. When he spoke his mouth worked imper­
fectly, and when he smiled. 
Where’s the man you were with? 
He died. 
Was that your father? 
Yes. He was my papa. 
I’m sorry. 
I dont know what to do. 
I think you should come with me. 
Are you one of the good guys? 
The man pulled back the hood from his face. His hair 
was long and matted. He looked at the sky. As if there were 
anything there to be seen. He looked at the boy. Yeah, he 
said. I’m one of the good guys. Why dont you put the pis­
tol away? 
I’m not supposed to let anyone take the pistol. No mat­
ter what. 
I dont want your pistol. I just dont want you pointing it 
at me. 

D
T H E  R O A  
Okay. 
Where’s your stuff ? 
We dont have much stuff. 
Have you got a sleeping bag? 
No. 
What have you got? Some blankets? 
My papa’s wrapped in them. 
Show me. 
The boy didnt move. The man watched him. He squat ­
ted on one knee and swung the shotgun up from under 
his arm and stood it in the road and leaned on the fore-
stock. The shotgun shells in the loops of the bandolier 
were handloaded and the ends sealed with candlewax. He 
smelled of woodsmoke. Look, he said. You got two choices 
here. There was some discussion about whether to even 
come after you at all. You can stay here with your papa and 
die or you can go with me. If you stay you need to keep out 
of the road. I dont know how you made it this far. But you 
should go with me. You’ll be all right. 
How do I know you’re one of the good guys? 
You dont. You’ll have to take a shot. 
Are you carrying the ﬁre? 
Am I what? 
Carrying the ﬁre. 
You’re kind of weirded out, arent you? 
No. 
Just a little. 
Yeah. 
That’s okay. 
So are you? 
What, carrying the ﬁre? 

239 
Yes. 
Yeah. We are. 
Do you have any kids? 
We do. 
Do you have a little boy? 
We have a little boy and we have a little girl. 
How old is he? 
He’s about your age. Maybe a little older. 
And you didnt eat them. 
No. 
You dont eat people. 
No. We dont eat people. 
And I can go with you? 
Yes. You can. 
Okay then. 
Okay. 
They went into the woods and the man squatted and 
looked at the gray and wasted ﬁgure under the tilted sheet 
of plywood. Are these all the blankets you have? 
Yes. 
Is that your suitcase? 
Yes. 
He stood. He looked at the boy. Why dont you go back 
out to the road and wait for me. I’ll bring the blankets and 
everything. 
What about my papa? 
What about him. 
We cant just leave him here. 
Yes we can. 

D
T H E  R O A  
I dont want people to see him. 
There’s no one to see him. 
Can I cover him with leaves? 
The wind will blow them away. 
Could we cover him with one of the blankets? 
I’ll do it. Go on now. 
Okay. 
He waited in the road and when the man came out of the 
woods he was carrying the suitcase and he had the blan­
kets over his shoulder. He sorted through them and handed 
one to the boy. Here, he said. Wrap this around you. 
You’re cold. The boy tried to hand him the pistol but he 
wouldnt take it. You hold onto that, he said. 
Okay. 
Do you know how to shoot it? 
Yes. 
Okay. 
What about my papa? 
There’s nothing else to be done. 
I think I want to say goodbye to him. 
Will you be all right? 
Yes. 
Go ahead. I’ll wait for you. 
He walked back into the woods and knelt beside his 
father. He was wrapped in a blanket as the man had prom­
ised and the boy didnt uncover him but he sat beside 
him and he was crying and he couldnt stop. He cried for a 
long time. I’ll talk to you every day, he whispered. And I 

241 
wont forget. No matter what. Then he rose and turned and 
walked back out to the road. 
The woman when she saw him put her arms around him 
and held him. Oh, she said, I am so glad to see you. She 
would talk to him sometimes about God. He tried to talk 
to God but the best thing was to talk to his father and he 
did talk to him and he didnt forget. The woman said that 
was all right. She said that the breath of God was his 
breath yet though it pass from man to man through all 
of time. 
Once there were brook trout in the streams in the moun­
tains. You could see them standing in the amber current 
where the white edges of their ﬁns wimpled softly in the 
ﬂow. They smelled of moss in your hand. Polished and 
muscular and torsional. On their backs were vermiculate 
patterns that were maps of the world in its becoming. 
Maps and mazes. Of a thing which could not be put back. 
Not be made right again. In the deep glens where they 
lived all things were older than man and they hummed of 
mystery. 


a note on the type 
This book was set in a typeface called Bulmer. This distinguished let­
ter is a replica of a type long famous in the history of English printing 
which was designed and cut by William Martin about 1790 for William 
Bulmer of the Shakespeare Press. In design, it is all but a modern face, 
with vertical stress, sharp differentiation between the thick and thin 
strokes, and nearly ﬂat serifs. The decorative italic shows the inﬂuence 
of Baskerville, as Martin was a pupil of John Baskerville’s. 
Composed by Creative Graphics, Allentown, Pennsylvania 
Designed by Peter A. Andersen 

