THE DARK WATERS 
BY CORMAC McCARTHY 
H
ER first high yelp was thin and clear as the air itself, its 
tenuous and diminishing echoes sounding out the coves 
and hollows, trebling to a high ring like the last fading 
note of a chime glass. He could hear the boy breathing in the 
darkness at his elbow, trying to breathe quietly, listening too hard. 
She sounded again, and he stood and touched the boy's shoulder 
lightly. Let's go, he said. 
The strung-out ringing yelps came like riflefire. 
The boy 
was on his feet. Has she treed yet? he asked. 
No. 
She's jest hit it now. 
Then he added: 
She's close 
though, hot. 
He started down the steep hummock on which 
they had been resting, through a maze of small pines whose 
polished needles thick on the ground made the descent a series of 
precarious slides from trunk to trunk, until they got to the gully 
at the bottom, a black slash in the earth beyond which he could 
see nothing although he knew there was a field there, pitched 
sharply down to the creek some hundred yards further on. He 
dropped into the gully, heard the beaded rush of sliding dirt as 
the boy followed, came up the other side, and started out through 
the field at a jog-trot, the heavy weeds popping and his corduroys 
setting up a rhythmic zip-zip as he ran. 
The cottonwoods at the creek loomed up stark and pale out of 
the darkness; he crossed a low wreck of barbed wire, heard again 
the resonant creak of the rusty staples in the checked and split 
cedar post as the boy crossed behind him. 
They were in the 
woods above the creek then, rattling through the stiff frosted 
leaves. 
Lady's sharp trail-call still broke excitedly off to their right. 
They moved out under the dark trees, through a stand of young 
cedars gathered in a clearing, vespertine figures, rotund and 

CORMAC 
MCCARTHY 
211 
druidical in their black solemnity. When the man reached the 
far side, the woods again, he stopped, and the boy caught up 
with him. 
Which way is she going? He was trying not to sound winded. 
The man paused for just a moment more. Then he said, Same 
way he is-motioning loosely with his hand. 
His back melted 
into the darkness again. The boy moved after him, keeping his 
feet high, following the sound of the brittle leaves. Their path 
angled down toward the creek, and he could hear at intervals 
the rush of water, high now after the rain, like the rumble of a 
distant freight passing. 
Watch a log, the man called back to him. 
He jumped just 
in time, half stumbled over the windfall trunk, lost his balance, 
ricocheted off a sapling, went on, holding his head low, straining 
to see. Trees appeared, slid past with slow gravity before folding 
again into the murk beyond. They were climbing now, a long 
rise, and when he came over the crest he caught a glimpse of the 
figure ahead of him, framed darkly for an instant against the 
glaucous drop of sky. Below him he could make out the course of 
the creek. They dipped into a low saddle in the ridge, rose again, 
and the man was no longer there. 
He stopped and listened. 
Lady's clear voice was joined by another, lower and less insistent. 
She was much closer now, quartering down, coming closer. He 
could follow her progress, listening between the explosions of his 
breath. Then she stopped. 
There was a moment of silence; then the other dog yapped 
once. Sounds of brush crashing. Two wild yelps just off to his 
right and then a concussion of water. A low voice at his side said: 
He's got her in the creek, come on. The man started down the 
side of the hill, the boy behind him, and out onto a small flat 
set in the final slope to the creek and dominated by a thick beech 
tree. Something was coming down from the ridge above them, 
and they halted. 
A long shadow swept past in a skitter of leaves 
and on toward the creek bank. 
There was one short chopped 

212 
THE 
DARK 
WATERS 
bark and then a splash. They followed, sidling down the slope 
and out along the bank where the water gathered a thin mem­
branous light by which they could see, directed by frantic surging 
sounds and low intermittent growls, some suggestion of figures 
struggling there, and the new dog striking out in the water now 
to join them. The fight moved down, out in deep water and 
under the shadow of the far bank. The snarls stopped, and there 
was only the desperate rending of water. 
A light blinked through the trees to their right, went out, 
appeared again, bobbing, unattached and eerie in the blackness. 
They could hear the dry frosted crack of sticks and brush, muted 
voices. The light darted out, peered again suddenly down upon 
them, sweeping an arc along the edge of the creek. 
Howdy, a voice said. 
Cas? 
Yeah . . .  that you, Marionț 
Bring that light; they're in the creek. 
They came down the slope, four dismembered legs hobbling 
in the swatch of light as they descended. 
Throw your light, Sylder said. 
They came alongside, dispensing an aura of pipe-smoke and 
dog-hair. The shorter one was working the beam slowly over the 
creek. Whereabouts? he said. 
Down some. Howdy, Bill. 
Howdy, the other said. In the glare emanating from the flash­
light their breath was smoke-white, curling, clinging about their 
heads in a vaporous canopy. The oval of the flashbeam scudded 
down the glides against the far bank, passed, backed, came to rest 
on the combatants clinching in the icy water, the coon's eyes glow­
ing red, pin points, his fur wetly bedraggled and his tail swaying 
in crestfallen buoyancy on the current. The big dog was circling 
him warily, trudging the water with wearying paws and failing 
enthusiasm. They could see Lady's ear sticking out from under 
the coon's front leg, and then her hindquarters bobbed up, surg-

CORMAC 
MCCARTHY 
213 
ing through the face of the creek with a wild flash of tail and 
sinking back in a soundless swirl. 
Cas swung the beam to shore, scrabbled up a handful of rock 
and handed the light to the other man. Hold it on him, he said. 
He scaled a rock at the coon. It cut a slow arc in the beam and 
pitched from sight with a muffled slurp. The big hound started 
for shore, and Lady's tail had made another desperate appearance 
when the second rock, a :flitting shadow, curving, :fl.ashed water 
under the coon's face. 
He turned loose and struck out downstream, stroking with the 
current. The big dog, on the other bank now, had set up a pitiful 
moaning sound, pacing, the man with the light calling to him in 
a hoarse and urgent voice, Hunt im up, boy, hunt im up. He 
turned to the men. He's skeered of rocks, he explained. 
Hush a minute, Sylder said, taking the light from him. Lady 
was already some thirty yards below them. When the light hit 
her, she turned her head back, and her eyes came pale orange, 
ears fanned out and :floating, treading the water down before her 
with a tired and grim determination. She had her mouth turned 
up at the corners in a macabre and ludicrous grin as if to keep out 
the water. 
Ho, gal, Sylder called. 
Ho, gal. They were moving down the 
creek too, raking through the brush. She's fixin to drownd her­
self, someone said. 
Ho, gal, Ho .. .. 
He never even felt the water. 
He couldn't hear them any 
more, hadn't heard them call since he left them somewhere back 
up the creek, when he hit the bull briers full tilt, not feeling them 
either, aware only of them pulling at his coat and legs like small 
hands trying to hold him. Then he was over the bank, feet reach­
ing for something and finally skewing on the slick: mud, catapult­
ing him in a stifflegged parabola down and out into the water, 
arms :fl.ailing, but not falling yet, not until he had already stopped, 

214 
THE 
DARK 
WATERS 
teetering thigh-deep, and took a first step out into the current, 
where he collapsed forward like a shot heron. 
But he didn't even feel it. When he came up again, he was in 
water past his waist, the soft creek floor squirming away beneath 
his feet as if he were walking the bodies of a colony of underwater 
creatures clustered there. He could see a little better now. There 
was no light on the bank, and he thought: 
I come down too far. 
And no voices, only the sounds of the creek chattering and rocking 
past all around him. Then he went in again, over his head this 
time, and came up treading water and with something heavy 
pushing against his chest. He got his arms under it and lifted. 
Lady's head came up, and her eyes rolled at him dumbly. He 
reached and got hold of her collar, the creek bottom coming up 
and sliding off under his feet, falling backwards now with the dog 
rolling over him and beginning to struggle, until his leg hit a 
rock, and he reached for it and steadied himself and rose again 
and began to flounder shoreward with the dog in tow. 
They came with the light and Sylder looked at him huddled 
in the willows, still holding the dog. He didn't say anything, 
just disappeared into the woods, returning in a few minutes with 
a pile of brush and dead limbs. 
One of the men was kneeling with him and stroking the dog, 
examining her. She looks all right, he said, don't she, son? 
He couldn't get his mouth open, so he just nodded. He was 
beyond cold now, paralyzed. 
The other man said: Son, you goin to take your death. 
We 
better get you home fore you freeze settin right there. 
He nodded again. He wanted to get up, but he couldn't bear 
the rub of his clothes where he moved. 
Sylder had the fire going by then, a great crackling sound as 
the dry brush took, orange light leaping among the trees. 
He 
could see him in silhouette moving about, feeding the blaze. 
Then he came back. 
He gathered the quivering hound up in 
one arm and motioned for the boy to follow. 
You come over 
here, he said. And get them clothes off. 

CORMAC 
MCCARTHY 
215 
He got up then and labored stiffiy after them. 
Sylder put the hound by the fire and turned to the boy. Lemme 
have that coat, he said. 
The boy peeled off the leaden mackinaw and handed it over to 
him. He passed it around the trunk of a sapling, gathered the 
ends up in his hands, and twisted what looked to be a gallon of 
water out of the loose wool. Then he hung it over a bush. When 
he looked back the boy was still standing there. 
Get em off, he said. 
He started pulling his clothes off, the man taking from him in 
turn shirt and trousers, socks and drawers, wringing them out 
and hanging them over a pole propped on forks before the fire. 
When he was finished, he stood naked, white as a slug in the cup 
of firelight. Sylder took off his coat and threw it to him. 
Put it on, he said. And get your ass over here in front of the 
fire. 
The two men were behind him in the woods; he could hear 
them crashing about, see the wink of their light. One of them 
came back toting a huge log and dropped it on the fire. A flurry 
of sparks ascended, flared, lost in the smoke pulling at the bare 
limbs overhead, returned, tracing their slow fall redly through 
the dark trees downwind. 
He sat in a trampled matting of vines, the long coat just cover­
ing his buttocks. Sylder made a final adjustment to the pole and 
came over. He lit a cigarette and stood regarding him. 
Kind of cool, ain't it? he said. 
The boy looked up at him. Cool enough, he said. 
The clothes had begun to steam, looking like some esoteric 
game quartered and smoking on the spit. 
Then he said, What'd you do with the coon? 
Coon? 
Yeah. The coon. 
Goddamn, the boy said, I never saw the coon. 
Oh, Sylder said. But his voice was giving him away. Hell, I 
figured you'd of got the coon too. 

216 
THE 
DARK 
WATERS 
Shoo, the boy said. Over his teeth the firelight rippled and 
danced. 
The two men were warming their hands at the fire, the shorter 
one grinning good-naturedly at the boy. The other hound had 
appeared, hovering suddenly at the rim of light and snuffling at 
the steaming wool and then slouching past them with nervous 
indifference, the slack hound grace, to where Lady lay quietly, 
peering across her paws into the fire. He nosed at her, and she 
raised her head to look: at him with her sad red eyes. He stood 
so for a minute, looking past her, then stepped neatly over her 
and melted silently into the black wickerwork of the brush. The 
other man moved over to her and reached down to pat her head. 
One ear was mangled and crusting with blood. 
Coon's hard on a Walker, he said. 
Walker's got too much 
heart. Old Redbone like that-he motioned toward the blackness 
that encircled them-he'll quit if it gets too rough. Little old 
Walker though-he addressed the dog now-she jest got too 
much heart, ain't she? 
When Sylder let him out of the car, his clothes were still wet. 
You better scoot in there fast, he told him. Your maw raise hell 
with you? 
Naw, he said, she'll be asleep. 
Well, Sy Ider said. We'll go again. 
You got to stay out of 
the creek, though. Here, I got to get on. 
My old lady'll be 
standin straight up. 
All right, we'll see ye. He let the door fall. 
Night, Sylder said. The car pulled away, trailing ropy plumes 
of smoke, the one red taillight bobbing. He turned toward the 
house, lightless and archaic among the crumbling oaks, crossed the 
frosted yard. 
His shadow swept upward to the lean-to roof, 
dangled from a limb, upward again, laced with branches, stood 
suddenly upon the roof. He slid downward over the eaves and 
disappeared in the black square of the gable window. 


