free ebooks ==>  
www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
9TH
E D I T I O N
Media Programming
S T R A T E G I E S A N D P R A C T I C E S
Susan Tyler Eastman
Indiana University
Douglas A. Ferguson
College of Charleston
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
       This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions,
some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed 
content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right 
to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For
valuable information on pricing, previous editions, changes to current editions, and alternate 
formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for 
materials in your areas of interest.
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Printed in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 16 15 14 13 12
Media Programming: Strategies and
Practices, 9th Edition
Susan Tyler Eastman & Douglas
A. Ferguson
Editor in Chief: Lyn Uhl
Publisher: Michael Rosenberg
Assistant Editor: Erin Bosco
Editorial Assistant: Rebecca Donahue
Media Editor: Jessica Badiner
Marketing Program Manager: Gurpreet
S. Saran
Art and Cover Direction, Production
Management, and Composition:
PreMediaGlobal
Manufacturing Planner: Doug Bertke
Rights Acquisition Specialist: Mandy
Groszko
Cover Image: TV screen pixels close-up
[©oriontrail/Shutterstock]
Graphics contained in this title are
© 2013 Cengage Learning
© 2013, 2009, 2006 Wadsworth, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright
herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by
any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to
photocopying, recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution,
information networks, or information storage and retrieval systems, except
as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright
Act, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product,
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com
Library of Congress Control Number: 2012930783
ISBN-13: 978-1-111-34447-4
ISBN-10: 1-111-34447-7
Wadsworth
20 Channel Center Street
Boston, MA 02210
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions with
office locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United Kingdom,
Australia, Mexico, Brazil and Japan. Locate your local office at
international.cengage.com/region
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by
Nelson Education, Ltd.
For your course and learning solutions, visit www.cengage.com
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our preferred
online store www.cengagebrain.com
Instructors: Please visit login.cengage.com and log in to access
instructor-specific resources.

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Brief Contents
Detailed Contents iv
Preface ix
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming 1
1
A Scaffold for Programmers 3
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming 43
2
Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies 45
3
Multichannel Television Strategies 91
4
Online Television Strategies 128
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes 155
5
Program and Audience Research and Ratings 157
6
Syndication for Stations, Cable, and Online 206
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices 243
7
Non-Prime-Time Network Programming 245
8
Television Station Programming Strategies 271
9
Basic and Premium Subscription Programming 303
10
Public Television Programming 340
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices 375
11
Music Radio Programming 377
12
Information Radio Programming 429
Annotated Bibliography 460
Internet Media Sites 466
About the Contributing Authors 468
Index to Program Titles 472
General Index 476
iii
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Detailed Contents
Preface ix
P A R T O N E
Introduction to Programming 1
CHAPTER 1
■A Scaffold for Programmers 3
by Susan Tyler Eastman and Douglas A. Ferguson
What Is Programming? 4
The Process of Programming 8
The Lure of Lore 12
Structural Considerations 14
The Elements of Programming 18
A Model of Programming 23
External Influences on Programmers 27
The Pressures and Pulls 41
Notes 42
P A R T T W O
Frameworks for Media Programming 43
CHAPTER 2
■Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies 45
by William J. Adams and Susan Tyler Eastman
Blurring the Boundaries 46
Vertical Integration 48
Audience Targeting 55
Prime-Time Ratings 64
Prime-Time Scheduling Practices 67
iv

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Program Renewal 70
New Program Selection 75
Promotion’s Role 79
Changing Format Emphases 80
Network Decision Making 87
The Risks and Rewards Ahead 88
Notes 90
CHAPTER 3
■Multichannel Television Strategies 91
by Susan Tyler Eastman and Michael O. Wirth
Multichannel Video Programming Distributors 92
The Big Gamers 93
Selection Strategies 97
Scheduling Strategies 114
Evaluation Strategies 117
Promotion Strategies 118
Local Origination on Cable 119
Community Access on Cable 124
What’s Sneaking Up 126
Notes 127
CHAPTER 4
■Online Television Strategies 128
by Douglas A. Ferguson
The New Programs 129
Web Program Providers 132
Enhanced Viewing 138
Video Games and Virtual Worlds 140
A Conceptual Framework 143
Strategic Considerations 146
Specific Approaches 148
Online Measurement 151
What’s Coming Fast 152
Notes 153
P A R T T H R E E
Understanding Key Processes 155
CHAPTER 5
■Program and Audience Research and Ratings 157
by Douglas A. Ferguson, Timothy P. Meyer, and Susan Tyler Eastman
Decision-Making for Programmers 158
Detailed Contents
v
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Program Testing 161
Qualitative Audience Research 163
Ratings Services 166
Ratings Terminology and Measurement Computations 174
Television Market Reports and Other Programming Aids 180
Radio Reports 185
Cable Ratings 189
Online Research Services 192
Ratings Limitations 195
Future Challenges 202
Notes 205
CHAPTER 6
■Syndication for Stations, Cable, and Online 206
by John von Soosten and Douglas A. Ferguson
The Syndication Chain 207
Program Acquisition 213
Ratings Consultation 217
The Decision Process 223
Revenue Potentials 226
Payment 230
Cable and Syndication 233
Online Syndication 234
The International Marketplace 236
What Lies Ahead for Syndication 239
Notes 241
P A R T F O U R
Television Programming Practices 243
CHAPTER 7
■Non-Prime-Time Network Programming 245
by Robert V. Bellamy and James R. Walker
Non-Prime-Time Dayparts 246
Scheduling Strategies 248
Sports 250
Soap Operas and Game Shows 253
Weekday News, Information, and Talk 256
Weekend News and Information 262
Children’s Programming 263
Late-Night Weekend Entertainment 268
The Effects of Consolidation and Cable 269
Note 270
vi
Detailed Contents

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
CHAPTER 8
■Television Station Programming Strategies 271
by Robert B. Affe
The Regulatory Wave 272
The Digital Wave 273
Sources of Television Programs 273
Network Programming for Affiliates 275
The Network–Affiliate Agreement 279
Preemptions 280
News and Local Programming 281
Syndicated Programming 284
Station Dayparts 287
Station Promotion 298
What Lies Ahead for Stations 300
Notes 302
CHAPTER 9
■Basic and Premium Subscription Programming 303
by Susan Tyler Eastman and Douglas A. Ferguson
Competing Content Networks 304
The Proliferating Nonbroadcast World 305
Selecting Strategies 312
Scheduling Strategies 322
Evaluating Apples and Bananas 327
The Many Channels 328
Hyping Subscription Networks 337
Audio Services on Cable 337
Twisting Paths for the Future 338
Notes 339
CHAPTER 10
■Public Television Programming 340
by Glenda R. Balas
A Special Kind of Television 341
Program Philosophy 343
The Network Model 344
Multicasting 348
Multiple Platforms 348
PBS Responsibilities 349
Types of Station Licensees 353
Program Production 357
Syndicated and Local Programming 362
Scheduling Strategies 365
National Promotion 368
Audience Ratings 369
Detailed Contents
vii
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Developments Ahead 371
Notes 373
P A R T F I V E
Audio Programming Practices 375
CHAPTER 11
■Music Radio Programming 377
by Gregory D. Newton and Matthew T. Kaiser
The Shifting Ground 378
A Little History 379
Choosing a Format 391
Step-by-Step Selection Process 398
Implementation 402
The Station Sound 405
Marketing and Promotion 417
News and Other Nonentertainment Programming 421
Network and Syndicated Programming 423
What’s Coming for Radio? 427
Notes 428
CHAPTER 12
■Information Radio Programming 429
by Matthew S. Pierce and Robert F. Potter
Information Versus Entertainment Radio 430
The Rise of Information Radio 435
Information Programming Formats 441
All-News Formats 443
Talk Formats 445
The Content Infrastructure 450
On-Air Talk Techniques 452
Information Formats on Public Radio 454
What Lies Ahead 457
Notes 459
Annotated Bibliography 460
Internet Media Sites 466
About the Contributing Authors 468
Index to Program Titles 472
General Index 476
viii
Detailed Contents

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Preface
T
his book about media programming deals
with both the structured and unstructured
media. By structured we mean the traditional mass
communication media of broadcast television and
radio and the cable networks. These services have
long sent prepackaged programs to viewers and listen-
ers in linear series organized by time and day. We
focus on ABC, CBS, Fox, NBC and PBS, and include
CW, MyNetworkTV, Telemundo, TeleFutura and
Univision and affiliated stations, the major cable net-
works, such as CNN, MTV, TNT, USA, HBO and so
on, the satellite TV and telephone TV services, such as
DirecTV and AT&T, and the radio and audio net-
works. Although these channels’ programs can be
recorded and replayed, on a structured service, each
program was originally selected to fit in a single chan-
nel to create an image and set of expectations about
that channel. Of considerable importance is the fact
that many programs get replayed on co-owned chan-
nels or are later sold in syndication. Of even more
importance is that this structured industry is moving
toward on-demand programming, thus becoming
more like the unstructured industry.
By unstructured we mean the parts of the huge
online world that carry old and new television pro-
grams and radio shows, talk and music that come
via the web to your laptop or tablet or cell phone—
or perhaps your TV set. While we focus primarily
on the unstructured services that provide television
programs and movies, such as Netflix, Google
and Hulu.com, we include the personal media of
YouTube, Facebook and MySpace, as well as online
gaming such as Farmville, Carville and Cityville, plus
X-Box, Nintendo and their kin. We incorporate these
in the unstructured group because they consist of giant
masses of content from which users select however
they prefer. Online media is inherently VOD (video
on demand). Nonetheless, much of the online world
is filled with non-programming and falls outside the
purview of this book. But we do refer to blogs and
podcasts, insofar as they are carriers of content that
relates to the structured and unstructured program-
ming media.
The primary reason for including both structured
media content and rivaling unstructured content is
that they share an economic and marketing universe.
They compete for the attention of the same viewers,
listeners and users, and they compete for the same
dollars, although the revenue streams operate in dif-
ferent ways. And they are coming closer together.
Indeed, over the next decades, broadcasting and
cable will fade as broadband distribution rises, but
for now, all must coexist and share the audience’s
attention.
Change continues to be the media’s most endur-
ing characteristic, and the contents of this book have
most value when they not only describe and inter-
pret the present but also predict the patterns of the
future. The next media revolution is well begun, and
the once-rigid barriers between methods of deliver-
ing programming are dissolving, as are barriers
between domestic and foreign programming. The
authors make educated assessments of likely changes
in the near future, while science fiction imaginings
ix
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
edge closer and closer. 3D television without glasses
is certainly coming but hasn’t reached most living
rooms yet.
The Changes
Six major shifts in the industry guided the revision
for this edition. They can be summarized as conclu-
sions or operating principles:
■Multiplatform strategies inform media decisions
today. The conventional TV networks reacted to
the newest media by trying limited multiplatform
marketing, but changing economics and audience
behaviors now make cable and the internet par-
allel to broadcasting, and if not yet equivalent,
they are the future in programming and profits.
Where once the broadcast networks viewed cable
and the internet merely as vehicles for marketing
their content, broadband and cable are now either
full partners or full competitors to the broadcast
media. Now every kind of receiver (computers,
phones, tablets and TV sets) must be considered in
every decision to buy, make or schedule
programming.
■Cross-media have become enmeshed media.
Diverse media outlets have been assimilated
within giant media corporations. Broadcast net-
work and stations, cable networks and systems
and online video services now operate within sin-
gle commercial conglomerates. This has led to
conflicting goals within corporations in which
programming decisions sometimes advantage
some owned segments and disadvantage others to
maximize overall profits. The full ramifications of
Comcast’s purchase of NBCUniversal, for exam-
ple, will not emerge for a decade. While cross-
fertilization and reuse of broadcast programs on
both cable and online is old news, the three kinds
of media are now more deeply embedded—to the
point where some distinctions have been erased.
Television companies no longer act without full
consideration of online impacts. And now radio is
becoming audio and no longer separate from
online, iPods or the telephone.
■New media only partly subsume old media. Tele-
vision has gone from black-and-white to color to
digital to HD and is going to 3D (although most
screens lag behind and don’t display HD signals,
let alone 3D), while television is simultaneously
going online. And only about three quarters of
U.S. household have broadband access, not all of
that high speed. LP records quite thoroughly
replaced 78 RPM, but then CDs replaced records,
and now online downloads to iPods and cell
phones are replacing CDs. Radio has in part gone
from analog to digital and from broadcast to sat-
ellite and to online, but HD radio has not yet been
widely adopted in home, although it has become
standard for new cars. In each big change, the
strength and speed of the takeover has varied and
in many cases, the old medium persists alongside
the new.
■Analog is dead, and digital is becoming HD. The
makers and distributors of media content now
largely ignore the millions of analog receivers in
homes (and cars) and presume they will inevitably
join the digital age. Although cable, satellite and
telephone distributors offer hundreds of channels
as digital signals, the media companies expect to
drop most plain digital in favor of high definition
in the not-distant future. Households today may
contain a mix of analog and digital media, but
over-the-air television and radio consumers are
getting left behind. While only about a third of
digital subscribers now take high-definition ser-
vice, the industry expects full conversion in a few
years. While only half of households have high-
speed internet access now, more than 90 percent
will have it in a few years. Although the digital
gap is shrinking, it persists between older and
younger people and urban and rural households,
despite sporadic regulatory efforts.
■Reducing, reusing and recycling are now the
driving strategies behind programming decisions.
While the traditional networks broadcast the
classically defined the main program genres, new
types of programs are emerging in spite of old
terminology. Game shows and reality programs
have merged and exploded across television.
x
Preface

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Meanwhile, YouTube mushrooms with new pro-
gram ideas, and Facebook illustrates the audi-
ence’s need for interaction. While program types
are expanding, schedules everywhere fill with
reused tried-and-true favorites. Because the net-
works strive to reduce the total number of
expensive programs they need to fill their sche-
dules, an essential part of current strategy has
become replaying of episodes more often and
recycling shows on co-owned cable channels and
online.
■Wirelessness and pay are the directions of the
future. Although the traditional wired media of
cable, satellite and telephone remain strong media
businesses for now, wireless ways to receive tele-
vision and audio are becoming commonplace. It is
likely that virtually all entertainment media will
become wireless (perhaps delivered via light rather
than in the presently used parts of the spectrum!)
and almost all media will require some sort of pay
in your lifetime.
Chapter Organization
The organization of this edition of Media Program-
ming has been altered to catch up with changes in
ownership patterns and technology distribution, as
well as to give greater prominence to the unstruc-
tured media because of their current interest to
readers.
■Part One introduces the strategies and principles
guiding the structured and unstructured media
and tells what programmers need to know.
■Part Two looks at programming from the per-
spectives of prime-time broadcast—the gorilla on
the block—as well as multichannel cable/satellite
and online networks.
■Part Three builds understanding of the processes
and problems of ratings and syndication, and if
you don’t understand them, you don’t understand
anything.
■Part Four focuses on the practices of specific kinds
of programming situations.
■Part Five addresses the rapidly morphing audio
media of music and information.
Although so much is changing right under our
noses, this book largely preserves the classic media
subdivisions as a convenience for chapters and
because the process of amalgamation and reemer-
gence remains ongoing … ongoing. Someday, as in
science fiction, all kinds of media will merge into
mega-conglomerate media businesses serving all the
different kinds of receivers. TV sets, laptops, tablets
and smart phones—and who knows what—will be
just different sizes and shapes of wireless computers.
But we aren’t there yet, not by a long shot.
Two indexes appear at the book’s end, along
with a brief bibliography and a long list of internet
media sites. The authors also maintain a website at
www.media-programming.com where updates and
links are posted. The site can also be searched from
www.wadsworth.com. Also at the book’s close
you’ll find brief bios of the editors and authors.
The word television now encompasses much
more than it did a handful of years ago. The impacts
of digitalization, internet penetration and media
consolidation continue to work their ways into
viewers’ homes and will remain the dominant forces
operating to change programming strategies and
practices in the coming decade. At the same time,
the slow growth in the number of U.S. viewers and
listeners is giving greater emphasis to serving the
fast-growing Hispanic and Latino audiences and
greater importance to providing programming for
other countries. Concurrently, competition from
foreign-made programs is attracting more U.S. view-
ers while rising local media industries in other coun-
tries are creating stiffer competition abroad for U.S.
media companies. These will continue to be major
pulls and pressures on overall programming strategy
for the coming decade.
Our Thanks and Appreciation
We
celebrate
and
appreciate
our
contributing
authors and thank them warmly: William J. Adams
of Kansas State University; Robert B. Affe of Indiana
Preface
xi
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
University; Glenda Balas of the University of New
Mexico; Robert V. Bellamy of Duquesne University;
Matthew T. Kaiser of the University of North
Carolina; Timothy P. Meyer of the University of
Wisconsin-Green Bay; Gregory D. Newton of Ohio
University; Matthew S. Pierce of Indiana University;
Robert F. Potter of Indiana University; John von
Soosten of SiriusXM; James R. Walker of Saint
Xavier University; and Michael O. Wirth of the Uni-
versity of Tennessee. Working under someone else’s
deadlines and requirements isn’t easy, but these con-
tributors were gracious and responsive, and have
our gratitude. We also give special thanks to those
who contributed to past editions of this book. Much
of what they had to say remains part of the present
book.
We also thank those who wrote the boxed
additions—the delightful blogs that spice up this
book: James Angelini of the University of Delaware;
Timothy B. Bedwell of Media Quarry, LLC; Andrew
Billings of Clemson University; Mike Bloxham of
Treadline Interactive; Dom Caristi of Ball State Uni-
versity; Frank J. Chorba of Washburn University;
Edward Fink of California State University at
Fullerton; Deborah Goh of Nanyang Technological
University; Simon Licen of the University of Ljub-
jana; Patrick Parsons of Pennsylvania State Univer-
sity; Elizabeth Perse of the University of Delaware;
Nancy C. Schwartz, The Academic Edge, Inc.; the
late Daan van Vuuren of SABC; and David Weiss
of Montana State University.
And most of all, we thank Rebecca Donahue of
Cengage/Wadsworth, who has been the best editor
we could have had, and whose gentle and thoughtful
online presence much resembles the style of her pre-
decessor at Wadsworth, Rebecca Hayden. The first
of these two wonderful women made this book pos-
sible; the second helped us keep our sanity and sense
of humor during this edition.
We dedicate this edition to the two Rebeccas, as
well as to Lewis Klein and the memory of Sydney
Head, who together had the original idea for this
book so many decades ago.
Susan Tyler Eastman
Douglas A. Ferguson
xii
Preface

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
P A R T1
Introduction to
Programming
Part One Outline
Chapter 1
A Scaffold for Programmers 3
1
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
This page intentionally left blank 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A P T E R1
A Scaffold for Programmers
Susan Tyler Eastman and Douglas A. Ferguson
Chapter Outline
What Is Programming?
The Big Changes
The Themes
The Process of Programming
How Programming Is Unique
What Does the Audience Want?
The Lure of Lore
Structural Considerations
Sources of Programs
The Uniqueness of Scheduling
The Need for Promotion
The Elements of Programming
Compatibility
Habit Formation
Control of Audience Flow
Conservation of Program
Resources
Breadth of Appeal
A Model of Programming
Selection
Scheduling
Promotion
Evaluation
External Influences on
Programmers
Technological Influences
Economic Influences
Ownership Influences
Regulatory Influences
Ethical Influences
The Pressures and Pulls
Notes
3
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I
t’s a wake-up call the first time someone says to
you, “Wait. I’m watching a movie on my iPod.”
Or maybe it was an iPhone. Or an iPad. Americans
use electronic screens of one sort or another for an
average of at least eight hours a day. This book
focuses on decisions affecting the content of those
screens. The chapters look at the strategies of all
kinds of television (broadcast, cable, online) and
audio (radio, satellite, internet), as well as the daily
practices of the electronic media industry. Although
new technologies often capture our immediate atten-
tion, in the media world “content is king,” and we’ll
show you why. This chapter introduces the kind of
programming specific to the electronic media—not
what computer programmers normally do—and out-
lines the complex media industry.
What Is Programming?
Programming can refer to an outcome or a process.
It can describe either a group of programs on a radio
station, a television network, or cell phone, as in
“I really enjoy the programming on that new cable
channel”—or the act of choosing and scheduling
programs on a broadcast TV station, subscription
channel, or online service, as in “My job is program-
ming; I pick most of the shows my channel carries.”
Like the programmer who handles many cable chan-
nels, the online programmer also has the job of
choosing but for a video library rather than a single
channel.
The processes of selecting, scheduling, promoting
and evaluating programs define the work of a pro-
grammer, and they are the subject of this book,
whether the programmer is a paid employee or you,
the viewer! The word programs refers to units of con-
tent—some as short as tweets and YouTube videos,
others as long as TV series and Hollywood movies.
As you choose which online sources to watch, load
up your iPod, or subscribe to Netflix or Spotify, you
are programming for yourself, but someone else
placed that content where you could get at it.
At a radio station or small cable channel, the
person paid to handle the programming tasks
might be called a program director or general man-
ager (or “hey, you”); at a television station or net-
work, the decisions are made the very highest
corporate levels (the people called “sir”) because so
many tens of thousands of dollars, even millions, are
involved in each decision. Regardless of the person’s
position title, the job will be to choose content that
targets the desired audience, design a schedule, make
sure the content is effectively marketed, and monitor
the outcome—a job description that applies to
both the established media and the newest media.
Of course, it’s highly likely that being talented at
the job leads to more successes.
If a channel has weakly pulling shows, it needs
new programming, in the most tangible sense,
because owners usually seek large audiences for
their advertisers. Always remember: The main func-
tion of commercial media is to deliver an audience to
advertisers. Even Facebook and YouTube are sup-
ported by advertising. The new shows a program-
mer chooses must appeal to more viewers (or
listeners in the case of radio, users in the case of
the web) than did the old shows. Somebody orga-
nizes the hour to hour display of new videos on
YouTube, just as somebody chooses the hourly
sequence of television channels. But day to day,
once the big decisions are instituted and the shows
running, evaluation of some kind of audience ratings
takes the front seat for programmers.
The Big Changes
The media world doesn’t hold still, which keeps it
interesting. In case you failed to notice, three
changes in society and the industry have dramati-
cally affected programming and continue to do so:
digitization, internet access and media competition.
Digital Media
Digitization has displaced analog television broad-
casting and changed the equipment that consumers
use to receive television. Anything can be a “televi-
sion” now, or so it seems. Box 1.1 asks whether you
are really at the cutting edge. Digitizing television
4
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
gave rise to DVRs (digital video recorders), which in
turn enormously increased time-shifting of tradi-
tional television programs, as described in 1.2.
Having people watch a show on different days at
different times and via different media has had a
powerful and often confusing impact on ratings
and program scheduling. Consumers’ desire for
time-shifting led to such innovations as on-demand
television, which in turn changed the meaning of a
TV channel. Video-on-demand (VOD) is more like a
library than a set of channels. Moreover, viewers
now want HD (high definition) or even 3D reception
on large screens in their homes as well as public
places, leading to new production criteria for pro-
grams and much affecting what Hollywood does.
Nonetheless, nearly 8 percent in the United
States, mostly in big cities where signals are strong,
still get along without cable or satellite television (or
the telcos’ UVerse or FiOS) in their homes. (They
have to go to bars to get the good stuff!) And only
newer cars have HD radio. Smart phones and tablets
now show some TV shows and other kinds of pro-
gramming, another byproduct of digitization of tele-
vision and the telephone. At the same time, smart
TV sets let users switch between television and the
internet. The new media only partly replace the old
media, but they have generated new ways for audi-
ences to use media.
Internet Access
That the internet has given rise to enormous changes
almost goes without saying. Although everyday use
of the internet has been widespread for more than
two decades, it has become faster (although not
fast enough for most people), wireless, and easier
to use (except for the 25 percent of Americans still
lacking high-speed internet access in their homes).
For media programmers, the internet provides four
things:
■replay of major movies and network television
series and specials;
■original programs made for the web by amateurs
or professionals (user-generated content and web
series);
■websites that carry updates and background about
television stars, program plots, and schedules
(enhancements); and
■a gazillion places for program promotion and
advertising.
Both program promotion and program replay
matter: They influence the all-important ratings.
Internet usage measures provide another kind of
“rating.”
As the whole world seems to know, the spread
of the internet via wireless signals led to social media
1.1
Are You Really Watching HDTV?
A
lot of people think they are watching HD when they’re
not. It takes three things to have an HD picture:
1. A digital HD screen for your TV or computer set, duh.
2. A program shot by an HD camera: Older cameras were
not in HD format, and even today, many local events,
including regional sports, are commonly produced using
older non-HD cameras—even if the screen looks like the
right spread-out aspect ratio. So if you watch a lot of old
movies, you probably aren’t getting them in real HD,
even if they’ve been remastered.
3. A contract for HD service from your local cable, phone
or satellite service. If you aren’t paying for HD service,
you’re getting only a digital signal but not an HD signal.
You have to pay extra for HD.
Look at detail in the close-ups: Can you see the whiskers
grow?
Look for detail in the distant background: Can you see
the faces and clothes of individual fans at
a game?
Look for figure/ground separation: Do the foreground
figures stand well apart from the background?
Get used to real HD because 3D is coming! And
holography of some sort after that.
CHAPTER 1 A Scaffold for Programmers
5
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
communication. Once upon at time, AT&T and
other phone companies were the social media. You
called people on the telephone. Facebook, Twitter
and the like have taken over as the vital parts of
interpersonal communication, affecting daily per-
sonal life and even underpinning national uprisings
in the Middle East and elsewhere. But time spent on
social media takes away from time for consuming
traditional broadcast and cable programs.
Competition with the internet for precious audi-
ence time has forced drastic changes in television pro-
gramming.
For
example,
competition
drove
the
explosion
of
such
cheap-to-produce
quasi-reality
shows as Survivor and American Idol; it upped the
number of reruns during prime time; and it changed
audience measurement practices. To compete, the inter-
net found success with elaborate online games such as
Farmville, a guzzler of user time. (Have you tried puppy
watching? It’s another time devourer.) Competition for
audiences has motivated the adoption of “green” strat-
egies (of a sort) for the big as well as small television
corporations: Programs must now be reduced, reused
and recycled (and whatever other R-words you can
think of) more than ever before.
1.2
The DVR Factor
D
igital video recorders (DVRs) change viewing habits.
Those who own them grow very fond of (and
dependent upon) them. Those who have original or
updated TiVos are often fiercely loyal to them—more so
even than the owners of unbranded models from cable and
satellite operators. Those who do not own them cannot
understand all the fuss. They’ll find out, eventually. Some
forecasters predict that DVRs will be in 80 percent of tele-
vision homes by about 2015.
To the uninitiated, DVRs appear to be glorified VCRs or
recording DVDs, with video stored on a random-access
hard drive. But DVRs can pause and instantly replay live
TV, allowing more viewer control. DVRs play back while
recording, allowing the viewer to time-shift more easily
than ever before. The internal menu systems driven by
daily downloaded program information make recording
so very easy. DVRs beat VCRs hands down: no codes, no
stop-start times, no clocks to set; just choose a program
from the menu of upcoming options (or during a live
promo or during the actual show) and hit record. Record a
show once or every time it is shown, regardless of what
time or day. There is no need to know what night a show
is on because the DVR does all the thinking. It even can be
told to ignore any show reruns during daily or weekly
recordings. Viewers simply visit their DVR program menu
and find what they want, when they want it. Dayparts are
irrelevant. Channels are irrelevant. And commercials are
meant to be skipped.
Even more important to conventional viewing patterns is
that DVRs usually come bundled alongside enormous
packages of digital services, including VOD. Because the
TV services commonly have informational bands that
appear for a few seconds across the bottom of screens,
they do two things: Besides distracting the viewer from
immediate involvement in the upcoming program, they cer-
tainly make using the up/down channel changing buttons
(old-style surfing) quite unappealing. Digital cable rapidly
becomes menu-driven television, not channel-driven.
Satellite services also come bundled with DVRs to make
pay-per-view possible, and cable operators supply DVRs to
digital, HD and 3D subscribers for a fee, with the goal of
encouraging pay-per-view sales. Indeed, manufacturers of
television receivers promise to build the DVR functions into
the sets themselves. Many viewers don’t want an additional
box connected to their TV sets.
So what happens to programming strategies? Are the
traditional practices of hammocking, tentpoling, bridging
and leading-in (see Chapter 2) relevant in a DVR-enabled
home? Some say not, but some say not so fast. Will the
added expense keep most people away or will bundling of
services make the price for adding a DVR insignificant?
Guide listings are not universally popular. DVRs vastly
improve them. How will widespread use of DVRs become?
One for every TV in the house? A few viewers may remain
content with the way things were before DVRs, but not
many. Stay tuned in the coming years and find out.
6
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Media Competition
Finally, Comcast bought NBC Universal (creating
NBCUniversal, for some odd reason). This giant step
reflected consolidation not just within an industry seg-
ment but across competitive boundaries. And it was a
“buy up” rather than lateral or down: A cable operator
bought a major broadcast network, along with its
ownership in a dozen cable networks. A newcomer
bought an old-old-timer. Since the 1980s, broadcast-
ing and cable have been primary rivals, battling head
to head for viewers, but it normally takes a large group
of cable networks to match the ratings of a single
broadcast network in prime time. So for several
reasons, this merger shocked many industry insiders.
Cross-media has now become enmeshed media.
The number of cable networks exceeds 500,
though many are co-owned by other networks or
very small splinter services. The top 25 get by far
the most viewing and have the most subscribers.
No one can say how many program services there
are online, but about a half-dozen are best known
for providing web series, while YouTube, iTunes
and their cohort supply virtually infinite and chang-
ing quantities of videos. In contrast, the number of
broadcast networks seems to have stabilized at ten
(or nine depending on who you count): The Big Four
of ABC, CBS, FOX and NBC; plus CW, MyNet-
workTV and PBS; plus Univision, Telemundo and
TeleFutura, the three Spanish-language networks.
(PBS often gets left out, leaving nine commercial
networks.) But, around the edges, Google seeks to
make YouTube into a broadcast network, and Net-
flix would like to join this exclusive group, so the
number of networks could change.
One significant point is the growth in audiences
for Spanish-language networks: Univision is the fifth
largest network, far bigger than CW or MNTV or
any single cable network. A major point is that
Comcast’s purchase of NBCUniversal from General
Electric, as well as AT&T’s, Google’s and Netflix’s
aspirations, signal a major shift in the relationships
among the controlling media entities, and these
moves are the likely forerunners of more consolida-
tion. And new relationships between the social
media and the commercial media are in the wind.
Ownership powerfully affects programming. In
addition to political slant, such as with Fox cable
and MSNBC, the financial clout of an owner and
the size of its total audience influence the purchase
price of programs: Money matters. And the number
of co-owned outlets directly affects a program’s
distribution: Audience size matters. The larger the
financial risk, the more conservative big owners
become. Consolidation leads to more reduce, reuse
and recycle rather than to innovation.
The Themes
The pressures arising from these three big changes
are themes throughout this book. All chapters in
this book examine how programs (units of content)
are selected (or not selected), how content is
arranged in schedules or menus of various kinds
(or all over some screen), how the content is pro-
moted to audiences or users and advertisers, and
how content and audiences are evaluated (at least
by the industry, even if that’s not how you see
things). We are especially concerned with the limits
arising from technology, financing, regulations, pol-
icies and marketing needs, and you should be too.
■One central premise is that how content is paid for
determines much of its structure and availability,
and the long-term trend is to pay for use (whether
you like it or not).
■Another thrust is how the mass orientation and
traditionally rigidly linear structuring of the
broadcast media is adapting to emergence of per-
sonal and mobile media. (How much difference do
you see?)
■We focus on the methods and processes of con-
sumption of digital video and audio media, which
are dissolving fixed ideas about “channels” and
“dayparts.”
■Still other recurring themes arise from the ways
the once-clear distinctions between networks,
syndicators and cable companies are fading, and
while some former competitors are becoming
enmeshed through partnerships and mergers, cer-
tain pressures keep other competitors well apart.
CHAPTER 1 A Scaffold for Programmers
7
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
■Another recurring topic is how programmers
struggle frantically on a daily basis for bigger
shares of the overall American audience and spe-
cific sub-audiences.
■We are always concerned with how the big media
conglomerates are co-opting and commercializing
online, mobile, social and noncommercial pro-
gram content.
■At the same time, the persistent patterns of daily
work and living continue to influence the avail-
ability and arrangement of most media entertain-
ment content (and you don’t even notice).
■Finally, the realities of economics always over-
shadow all aspects of media programming.
Look for examples of how these themes emerge in the
following chapters about specific media situations.
The Process of Programming
Programming is both a skill and an art. The primary
goal in programming advertiser-supported media is
to maximize the size of an audience targeted by
advertisers. The only way to accomplish this goal is
to satisfy the needs and wants of that audience, what-
ever they are today and tomorrow and tomorrow.
Present-day technology permits viewers them-
selves to choose programs from dozens of sources
(such as broadcast stations, cable/satellite channels,
SiriusXM, Netflix, YouTube), giving consumers
more-or-less instant access to hundreds—even thou-
sands—of programs. But oddly enough, most people
prefer to let someone else do the programming
chore. Viewers tend to choose channels and web-
sites, but expect someone else to have filled those
channels/sites in an expert way. Even YouTube
viewers may choose a topic or known video to
start with, but then they typically click on whatever
follows (despite the commercials).
In the case of mass-appeal channels, such as the
major television networks and larger cable networks
and internet services, programmers go after as many
viewers as possible. Most advertisers assume that the
demographic groups they want to reach will be well
represented in the total audience, if it’s large.
To cover all bases, most big media companies
have expanded their brands into groups of channels,
such as the 5 channels of ESPN, the 11 channels of
HBO/Cinemax HD, or the dozen or so channels
owned all in or part by NBCUniversal and its
owner Comcast. In the case of specialty cable and
internet channels (called niche networks) such as the
Military History Channel, Black Entertainment Tele-
vision, Comedy Central and the Tennis Channel (or
still smaller networks focusing on pets or cooking or
cars or houses or shopping), the programmer may be
more interested in pleasing a particular audience sub-
group than in reaching an audience outside the tar-
geted group. Of course, the larger the size of that
target audience, the easier it is to make money.
Very narrowly targeted channels cannot survive
long, even on the internet, unless they carry adver-
tising (but if audiences are small, few advertisers will
buy) and/or charge subscription fees—if enough
people are willing to pay to get the service. But audi-
ences tend to expect most programs to come for free,
so other means of generating money are essential.
All programmers must deal with certain limita-
tions, most of them economic. Program resources
are scarce. Good shows cost a lot of money. Unfor-
tunately, bad shows are also expensive (except on
YouTube). Good or bad, the four largest broadcast
networks combined (ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC) spend
more than $10 billion annually on programs and
rights to major events. Their collective share of the
total audience shrank for several years but has cur-
rently flattened at about one-third of viewers at any
given time. Audiences are available to consume media
for only so many hours per day, and less of that view-
ing went to the Big Four networks as cable networks
and then games and social media captured more of
the audience. At the same time, Univision’s TV audi-
ences are swelling in size. In the case of television
programming for which viewers pay a fee, there is a
limit to how much they will spend before they start
complaining to Congress about subscription fees.
One byproduct of smaller network audiences in
the United States has been greater efforts to market
U.S. program content in other countries. CNN is a
worldwide service; Disney runs Spanish-language
channels in South America and other parts of the
8
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
world. Although ABC, CBS, FOX and NBC are
quintessentially American channels, and their U.S.
popularity depends on them staying so, their parent
corporations can be increasingly involved with cable
and broadcast channels in other countries. Just as
U.S. car makers pushed for years to get into the
gigantic Chinese car market, media program produ-
cers yearn to follow in their footsteps.
The following figure (see 1.3) illustrates the not-
always-happy relationship between U.S. television
viewers and television program services as a tug of
war. The cartoon suggests that as audiences adopt
new technologies, programmers must respond with
new strategies for enticing and holding those audi-
ences. Similarly, changing economic, regulatory, and
social conditions usually result in acrimonious ten-
sions between the sources of programs and their
viewers, listeners and users.
How Programming Is Unique
If Irving Berlin was correct when he wrote that
there’s no business like show business, then what
makes a programming product unique? How are
programs different from other products that cor-
porations make for the public?
Certainly, ease of delivery is key for broadcast-
ing. What other product can be simultaneously
delivered to nearly every consumer? Who else can
attract the biggest audiences? The very biggest sports
and entertainment events still go to the broadcast
networks, for now.
In theory, anyonecan conceiveanidea and sell itto
a cable channel or a broadcast network or put it online,
but the big distributors (cable and broadcast networks
through their systems and stations) continue to exert a
large measure of control over which programs run.
Barriers to entry still limit budding suppliers.
Nonetheless, it is possible for some program-
mers to start small and build national audiences.
Oprah Winfrey started at a small station doing a
local talk show before achieving national television
prominence and creating her own production com-
pany and then more recently her own cable televi-
sion channel (see 8.9 for more on Oprah). Facebook
was only begun in 2004 and now reaches more than
three quarters of U.S. homes and represents maybe
(at least at unsettled times) half of all internet use
worldwide. Beginning with a website is the likely
path for many future entrepreneurs.
Reaching a national audience is becoming less
difficult. Internet cafes and Wi-Fi are proliferating,
and a growing number of program suppliers are
looking for nontraditional program providers. Net-
flix, Hulu and other online video rentals and sales
services offer another potential avenue for program
suppliers, and the internet’s ability to stream audio
and video programming—looking and sounding
both the same and different from traditional pro-
grams—improves continuously. On the other hand,
to remain competitive, the broadcasters have long
been first adopters of content production for new
screen technologies—first color, then HD, and now
3D programs.
Broadcast
programming
remains
unique
because there is no apparent direct cost to consu-
mers for the most popular shows. Although cable
and online programmers siphon away some desi-
rable programs, the big broadcast networks are
able to provide very popular drama, reality and
comedy programs, along with top sporting events
and live news coverage, seemingly absolutely free
to the audience. Despite all the new media, television
remains the most used medium (close to 6 hours
daily), and advertisers know it. They pay for the
programs in exchange for having their commercials
presented to the audience.
Although the high cost of advertising is passed
along to consumers, the advertiser’s ability to mar-
ket products to huge audiences actually decreases
the per-item cost of many products because of econ-
omies of scale. It usually costs more for producers to
market products to a small number of people.
Why should radio or television programmers
care how “free” the programs are to the receivers?
In the case of broadcast programming, the low cost
to viewers generates audiences large enough to sell
to advertisers. Contrary to popular belief, broadcas-
ters are not in the business of creating programs; they
are in the business of creating audiences that adverti-
sers want to reach. Even in the case of cable/satellite
channels and online sites, advertiser support is critical
CHAPTER 1 A Scaffold for Programmers
9
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
to programmers because costs are seldom borne
entirely by subscriber or user fees.
Programming is a unique product in that it is
used to lure the attention of consumers so that
advertisers can show those consumers commercial
messages that help sell other products. Programmers
work only indirectly for the audience; the primary
customer is the advertiser, without whom there
would be few programs to see or hear. Prime-time
television might look like YouTube.
What Does the Audience Want?
The most important part of programming is under-
standing the audience. What appeals to viewers or
listeners or online users? Quite simply, on the sur-
face audiences want to be entertained, and they want
to be informed. Speaking very generally, these two
elements comprise the whole of programming con-
tent (see 1.4 and 1.5). But the devil is in the details,
of course.
1.3
Tug of War
Reprinted by permission of Milton Hamburger.
Google
AT&T
News
Corp
Fox
Viacom
Program
strategies
Promotional
strategies
Gamers
Web
DVR
Availability
YouTube
Facebook
Twitter
Cable TV
CBS
Verizon
Audience
Industry
Basic
Cable
Advertisers
Preference/Needs
ABC
Disney
NBC
Pay
Cable
Uni-
vision
Time
Warner
Comcast
PBS
Apple
Viewing
10
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The demand for entertainment encompasses a
mixture of comedy and drama. Narrative stories
represent the norm, and these stories have a begin-
ning, a middle and an end occurring within each
episode.1 Characters have goals resulting from a
desire. Along the way, they encounter some form
of conflict. In a comedy program, the conflict is a
humorous situation resolved in a way that causes
the audience to laugh. Sitcoms usually appear in
half-hour episodes. In a drama, the conflict results
from a counterforce, often “the bad guys.” Most
dramas last an hour, occasionally longer. Nonnarra-
tive
reality
programs
are
more
like
situation
comedies with game show elements: they consist of
a situation in which “people” compete to win. But
the most successful of these shows also embody a
narrative
about
participants
carried
over
from
week to week.
By the turn of this century, the former reality
format (Survivor and Fear Factor) had resurfaced on
a wave of game shows (Who Wants to Be a Million-
aire?), which was soon overtaken by other types of
blockbuster reality programs (Dancing with the
Stars and American Idol) and two hit game shows
(Deal or No Deal and Jeopardy). Many of these real-
ity shows are competitions that generate a sense of
1.4
Recipe for Successful Production
A
step-by-step procedure for the process of program-
ming would go something like this. First, choose pro-
grams that seem to meet the needs and wants of an
audience. Second, organize those programs into a coher-
ent schedule that flows from one program into the next.
Third, market the programs to the appropriate audience.
Finally, evaluate the results and make necessary adjust-
ments. This is the basic recipe for cooking the perfect pro-
gram schedule.
1. Target a demographically desirable audience.
2. Choose appropriate programs for that audience.
3. Evaluate reasonable costs for program types and time
slots.
4. Evaluate the competition to determine a scheduling
strategy.
5. Make sure a program fits in with neighboring
programs.
6. Employ talented performers whom the public likes.
7. Hire producers/directors/writers with a record of
success.
8. Deal with currently popular subject matter.
9. Emulate comparable high-rated programs.
1.5
What Is Quality?
W
henever the word quality is attached to program-
ming, viewers think they know what that means. Do
they? Quality often connotes strong production values (lav-
ish sets, famous performers, riveting scriptwriting, technical
achievement) and critical acclaim. Those who fight to save
quality programs often see some substantial social value in
such shows.
So why is quality lacking in most television shows? Is it
money, or could it be that the masses want circuses instead
of high culture? Perhaps quality signifies only that a group
of viewers finds some subjective value that is independent
of objective criteria. If we cannot agree on what constitutes
quality, does it really exist? Maybe those who use the
phrase “quality television” really mean to say “programs
that we really like.”
Programmers are well advised to be careful with the
word quality as long as so little consensus exists about what
it is. It might be better to strive toward shows that are pop-
ular (or critically acclaimed) by external standards, rather
than programs that have intrinsic quality.
CHAPTER 1 A Scaffold for Programmers
11
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
urgency, like sporting events do, making them seem
more important to watch than dramas or comedies.
Comedies, which had real staying power for
decades, were consistently taking a beating in the
ratings in the first decades of the 2000s, leading
some critics to wonder whether viewers find serial
dramas and series reality shows especially addict-
ing. By mid-decade, the biggest draws were Fox’s
American Idol and such crime shows as NCIS: Los
Angeles, CSI and The Mentalist. As has always
been the case, however, such sporting events as
the NFL games swamp all other shows in audience
size.
Comedies and dramas are composed of various
ingredients that appeal to most audiences: engaging
dialogue, attractive characters, romantic themes,
nostalgia, suspense and high emotion, to name a
few. The audiences for all entertainment genres are
also interested in seeing or hearing something novel,
even if it is an old idea with a new twist (see 1.6).
Reality shows, on the other hand, create a “human
spectacle” that is every bit as scripted, primarily
through postproduction editing, as programs with
a preproduction script.
Information programming is also driven by nov-
elty and entertainment value. Viewers want fresh
stories that promise something new. Critics can com-
plain about the trivialization of information, but net-
work
and
syndicated
news
and
information
programming with an entertainment approach (info-
tainment)
attracts
big
audiences.
Consider,
for
example, the long-time success of 60 Minutes,
20/20 and The Today Show. These programs mix
popular topics with more serious information.
In their newscasts, local stations also necessarily
pay close attention to the lighter side of community
events, partly because there are fewer opportunities
for hard news than on the national level and partly
because “positive” stories appeal strongly to view-
ers. The trend has reached the point that younger
audiences get much of their news from shows that
actually mock the news, such as The Daily Show
with Jon Stewart.
Looking at the types of programs demanded by
audiences is one way to learn what people want,
although it is not a perfect method. Some people
say they want just comedy, for example, but some
sitcoms have “serious” episodes that address social
1.6
Uncovering the Mystery
M
erely asking television audiences what they want is
difficult. Many times viewers do not know what they
want until they see it, and a short while later they tire of it
and crave something new. Programmers must become
accustomed to dealing with fickle audiences. The only ref-
uge is to uncover the mystery of how the audience makes
choices about what to watch.
The process whereby audience members make choices
is seldom clear, but researchers use three basic approaches
to predict those choices. One way looks at the uses and
gratifications of media consumption. This approach fre-
quently substitutes the self-reported attitudes of viewers for
more concrete information on their actual behaviors. A
second way uses additional predictors of choice, such as
market size, program length, awareness, cable/DVD/sat-
ellite penetration, and audience availability. Research find-
ings in this area are equally unsatisfying or unusable
because really strong predictors, such as when the audi-
ence is available, are not usually controlled by the pro-
grammers (or the viewers).
The most promising way to predict choice seems to be
to study the actual content of programs, but the industry
has sponsored very little generalizable research. What
element in a television or radio program is most important?
Some say it is the likeability of the main characters. Others
point to the compelling nature of the story or the format.
Little research has been done in this area, perhaps
because using structural predictors is easier than using
content variables. In any case, studying programming as
a serious topic is not easy. The networks and other pro-
gram suppliers focus on the ratings and on testing ideas
and pilots (see Chapter 2), but programming seems to
remain one big gamble where instinct is more important
than science.
12
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
issues, while some dramas venture into comedy.
Adding to the general misinformation about pro-
gramming is the fact that viewers and listeners
believe
they
are
programming
experts
merely
because they watch or listen. Most people who
tune to a broadcast program feel that they could
do a better job of choosing the shows and selecting
the time slots. If that were really true, of course,
there would be no need for a book on how to be a
programmer. Programming skills can be learned, but
the art is a bit more difficult than it seems to many
people.
The Lure of Lore
Everyone watches television, so nearly everyone pro-
fesses to understand what programs ought to be like.
Yet merely having preferences does not qualify a
viewer—or a programmer—to make accurate deci-
sions or judgments about program strategy. Because
television viewing is so easy, the audience feels con-
fident that putting shows on is really simple: Just
make good programs and schedule them when they
do not conflict with other good shows! Never make
any bad shows. What could be easier?
Because it’s too hard to explain, the profes-
sionals who work at the major broadcast and cable
networks, along with their counterparts at the indi-
vidual stations in each city, sometimes take a simi-
larly simplistic stand. Always do this. Never do that.
Give the people what they want (see 1.7). Or as Dick
Block of the National Association of Television
Program Executives (NATPE) preached, “Find out
what works, what doesn’t work.”
Out of this no-brainer philosophy has grown a
garden of “rules” that the wisdom of experience has
nurtured. Call it folklore or just lore; many pro-
grammers believe that achieving success in television
programming is a matter of avoiding common mis-
takes. Unfortunately, programming is much more
complicated. But it is useful to examine some of
the lore that has grown up around programming.
Certainly some of it may be good advice. Like
most lore, however, the student of programming
should be suspicious of universal truths.
First, there is the matter of dead genres. A genre
is a type of program, such as a western or a sitcom.
At various times in the history of programming,
common wisdom has declared each genre dead.
Family sitcoms were dead in 1982, they said—until
Cosby went on the air. Game shows were dead, they
said—until Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? came
along. Reality shows such as America’s Funniest
Home Videos were very popular in the early
1990s, and then they were dead—until they came
back a decade later in the form of Survivor.
Second, program lore holds that there is a for-
mula approach to building a successful show. For
example, take a grizzled veteran in an action profes-
sion and pair that character with a young person to
create dual appeal—something for both older and
younger viewers. Or hire a big-name star from the
world of movies, music or sports. The problem with
such recipes is that they lead to bland television.
Moreover, fans can name plenty of programs fitting
these formulas that got quickly canceled—far more
than shows that lasted on network television.
Third, program lore preaches that certain for-
mats always fail. Anything with chimps. Science-
1.7
A Programming Myth
T
he late Sydney W. Head was a frequent contributor
to earlier editions of this textbook, and he had this to
say about programming:
A popular fallacy holds that innumerable workable new
program ideas and countless usable new scripts by embry-
onic writers await discovery and that only the perversity or
shortsightedness of program executives keeps this treasure
trove of new material off the air. But television executives
hesitate to risk huge production costs on untried talents and
untested ideas. Even when willing, the results rarely differ
much because mass entertainment remains the goal. A
national talent pool, even in a country the size of the United
States (and even for superficial, imitative programming), is
not infinitely large. It takes a certain unusual gift to create
programs capable of holding the attention of millions of
people hour by hour, day by day, week after week.
Sydney W. Head
CHAPTER 1 A Scaffold for Programmers
13
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
fiction drama has never spawned a major network
hit, not even Star Trek (although X-Files came
close). Never bank on satire. The list goes on…
The internet has become the home for thousands of
experiments in program content—most of these
amateur, short-lived and attracting few repeat view-
ers in many cases, but attracting millions to the big
successes. A few commercial websites, such as those
produced by Comedy Central and some other pro-
fessional producers, generate huge audiences for a
time, but not for the many daily hours that charac-
terize conventional television viewing. So far, only a
handful of experimental online programs have given
rise to new types of television programs for large
audiences, but more may lie ahead. The same pro-
blems face radio broadcasters who want to compete
with the big guys.
This chapter—indeed, the rest of this book—
outlines what practitioners and scholars generally
agree are the real fundamentals of programming.
These are the building blocks that programmers con-
struct with, whatever the medium, and they go well
beyond the lore described above. It takes a gift to
create programs capable of holding the attention of
millions of people hour by hour, day by day, week
after week. Competence in the field comes from
understanding the sources of programs, the factors
impacting audience size, and the influences of tech-
nology, economics, ownership and regulation on
programming strategies and practices. Beyond them
lies artistry—or magic.
Structural Considerations
Programming can be seen as largely a matter of
choosing materials and building a schedule. These
two processes—followed by promotion and evalua-
tion—are the essence of what a programmer does on
a day-to-day basis. Choosing programs depends on
circumstances that are closely linked to the source of
the programming, and depends even more on pre-
dicting what ratings each show will achieve. Simi-
larly, scheduling is greatly influenced by whether
the type of channel that will carry it is broadcast,
cable, cell, tablet or online.
Sources of Programs
Four basic program sources exist for television and
radio: Network programs, syndicated programs,
local programs and online programs. These compart-
ments, however, are by no means watertight. Pro-
duced shows sometimes develop into hybrid blends
of local production and syndication, with an online
counterpart. Network entertainment programs “go
into syndication” to cable channels or broadcast sta-
tions after their initial plays on the national network;
then they may be stockpiled online for On Demand
replay and aired on tablets. Networks also produce
special short segments of programs suited to tablets
or smart phone reception.
Network Programs
The national, full-service, interconnected network is
broadcasting’s way of pooling resources to generate
information programming. Newspapers shared news
and features by means of news agencies and syndicates
long before broadcasting began, but broadcasting
introduced the elements of instantaneous national
distribution and simultaneous programming. There
are nine national commercial television networks:
ABC, CBS, CW, FOX, MyNetworkTV (MNTV),
NBC, and the three commercial Spanish-language
networks (Telemundo—TEL, TeleFutura—TFA, and
Univision—UNI), plus one public noncommercial tele-
vision network (PBS). These ten supply broadcast pro-
grams by making or purchasing them.
Aside from news, talk and news-related public-
affairs materials which they produce themselves, the
six English-language broadcast networks buy most
of their programs from the big Hollywood studios
(all but one of which are owned by the parent cor-
poration of one of the broadcast networks). Occa-
sionally they buy from the very few remaining
independent production firms. The tortuous route
from program idea to finished, on-the-air network
series is variously described in Chapters 2 and 7.
Network programmers for public broadcasting
face still another situation. Originally designed as an
alternative to the commercial system, much PBS pro-
gramming comes ready-made from the larger mem-
ber stations specializing in production for the
14
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
network and from small independent producers, but
it still buys programs, notably the British Broadcast-
ing Corporation (BBC), which now has its own sat-
ellite channel carried on cable in the United States.
While PBS selects, schedules and distributes its pro-
gramming, no programs are produced by the net-
work itself (although PBS now has its own satellite
channels that compete with its affiliates, but it does
not produce their content either). See Chapter 10 for
more on public television’s processes.
The Spanish-language networks draw much of
their serial programming from Mexico’s Televisa, a
producer of movies and telenovelas (popular soap-
opera-like serials with a definite ending after some
months and usually with a moral or educational
point). Some also comes from South America, par-
ticularly Brazil. Univision, the fifth-largest television
network in the country, also produces several long-
running programs, including the blockbuster of
blockbusters: Sabado Gigante. TeleFutura, owned
by Univision, attracts the second-largest prime-time
audiences among the Spanish-language services.
Unlike Galavision, a competing cable network, all
three broadcasters produce newscasts and carry
live and taped sports, especially soccer and tennis
matches originating outside the United States.
About 200 cable program networks deliver the
bulk of satellite and cable systems’ content. Cable
networks (called subscription content networks in
Chapter 9) differ in major respects from broadcast
television networks. In technical delivery, they are sim-
ilar: in both cases a central headquarters (the network)
assembles programs and distributes them nationwide,
using orbiting satellites to reach thousands of cable
systems and some affiliated stations (CNN Headline
News, for example, goes straight to some stations).
But the financial and working relationships
between broadcasting affiliates and their networks
and between cable affiliates and their networks dif-
fer fundamentally. In addition to retransmitting
broadcast stations, local cable systems supply hun-
dreds of channels of satellite-distributed program-
ming and must deal with hundreds of networks.
The traditionally symbiotic relationship between
each broadcast network and its 210 or so affiliated
stations does not exist in the cable field. Most
programmers who work for cable networks also
have far less input into the creative aspects of pro-
gramming than do their broadcast counterparts.
The great bulk of cable network programming
comes from the same sources as broadcast program-
ming—distributors of feature films and syndicated
programs—and, indeed, much of cable content has
been old network programming, although this is rap-
idly changing as cable networks spend more for
recent off-network hits and greatly increase their
own production enterprises. Each cable network
seeks for a single signature program that captures
attention and gives definition to the whole network.
At the same time, the multiplication of digital splinter
channels (such as Encore Action, Encore Drama,
Encore Love, etc., called virtual channels) has greatly
increased the difficulty of the programmer’s task of
attracting a large audience for any one channel.
The internet has more varied program sources,
drawing on both conventional television and radio
content as well as on original commercial and
amateur sources. The main sources for web series are
Hulu.com, blip.tv and revver.com, although YouTube.
com shows some web series, too. These series may have
short or relatively long lives, but only a very few ever
appear on over-the-air or cable television.
The traditional radio networks once offered by
ABC, CBS and NBC no longer qualify as full-service
networks. Those that have not been sold now resem-
ble syndicators, supplying features and program
inserts such as newscasts. Conversely, some radio
program syndicators supply stations via satellite
with complete schedules of ready-to-air music in var-
ious established formats, much like the TV networks
supply schedules of programs, except that the sta-
tions now pay the radio networks for the content.
Formerly, the radio networks paid the stations to
air the commercials (called compensation), but that
system is disintegrating.
Syndicated Programs
Local broadcast programmers come into their own
when they select syndicated programs for their indi-
vidual stations. They draw upon the following
sources:
CHAPTER 1 A Scaffold for Programmers
15
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
■Off-network series. Programs that have reverted
to their copyright owners after the network that
first aired them has used up its contractual num-
ber of plays (increasingly, the networks demand a
share of ownership rights in many of their shows).
These programs used to go directly to stations, but
nowadays such cable networks as TNT, USA and
A&E gobble up many of the best off-network
dramas while TBS and the newer broadcast net-
works—CW and MNTV—take many of the pop-
ular sitcoms to rerun.
■First-run syndicated series and specials. Programs
packaged independently by producers and marketed
directly to individual stations rather than being first
seen as network shows (for example, Entertainment
Tonight, Oprah and Wheel of Fortune).
■Feature films. Movies made originally for theatri-
cal exhibition, although this category has dimin-
ished because so many movies go to such premium
cable networks as HBO, Showtime and pay HD
channels. See 1.8.
Local Production
Local programs are those shows produced “in-
house,” usually by professionals on broadcast sta-
tions (such as the local newscasts), but sometimes
homemade by amateurs who find distribution on
public access cable and online channels. Local
newscasts play an important role in television and
radio station strategies (but even newscasts, though
locally produced, often contain a great deal of syn-
dicated material as inserts). Aside from news, how-
ever, locally produced material plays only a minor
role as a program source. It is true that all-news,
all-talk, and all-sports radio stations depend almost
entirely on local production, but those formats cost
so much to run and have such a specialized appeal
that they remain relatively few in number, exist
only in the larger markets, and do not have televi-
sion counterparts. Stations simply find syndicated
material cheaper to obtain and easier to sell to
advertisers. Localism is more worshipped than
practiced.
The Uniqueness of Scheduling
Of all the programmer’s basic skills, perhaps sched-
uling comes closest to qualifying as a unique radio
and television specialty. Scheduling a station, cable
system, or network is a singularly difficult process,
and little that is comparable occurs online as yet.
Even with hundreds of competing channels, the
availability of the web, and the proliferation of
remote controls and digital video recorders, the
audience for one show normally influences adjacent
programs. The influence can be to build up adjacent
program audiences or to drag them down. Effective
scheduling requires understanding one’s own and
one’s competitors’ coverage patterns, market and
audience demographics. Most broadcast stations in
a market compete directly for viewers and advertis-
ing dollars, but some viewers are more desirable
than others, and programmers at stations without
a network affiliation or with only a poor affiliation
are disadvantaged compared with those program-
mers
who
deliver
the
most
popular
network
programs.
1.8
Movies, Movies, Movies
O
f all the program types, the feature film is the most
in demand because of its popularity on so many
different delivery systems. The term window—borrowed
from the world of space flight where it refers to the lim-
ited time-space openings when conditions are just right
for launching rockets—has been applied to the release
sequence by which feature films reach their various
markets. First, of course, comes the traditional window of
theatrical release—films are either simultaneously
released in several thousand theaters throughout the
country or put out in stages of “limited release.” Next in
the usual order of priority come releases through the
windows of DVD and pay-per-view cable, then regular
pay cable, then broadcast networks, and finally general
broadcast and cable syndication. Prices for licenses
(and rentals) decrease at each stage of release as pro-
ducts age and lose their timeliness. However, studios
sporadically experiment with different release cycles for
specialized movies to see what makes more profit.
16
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Cable system programmers have different pro-
blems. They have to weigh the claims of competing
services for specific channel locations. Being reposi-
tioned (moved to a higher channel number) used to
be a very contentious issue between stations and
cable until the FCC mandated that broadcasters get
the same digital and analog cable channel numbers
that they used for their over-the-air channels.
This FCC decision, combined with widespread
adoption of digital cable, has pretty much made
channel positions a nonissue. Nonetheless, if posi-
tions are vacant, cable operators prefer to give the
choicest positions—the lowest in a group because
they are easiest to remember—to the most popular
(or most lucrative) services, whether they are broad-
cast or cable-only. Cable operators especially favor
the cable channels owned all or in part by their par-
ent corporations.
The Need for Promotion
The broadcast and cable networks forgo billions of
dollars in advertising revenue in order to promote
their programs on their own air, interrupting pro-
grams with clusters of promos and cluttering the
bottom of the screen with animated program remin-
ders. Such on-air marketing is essential for interest-
ing viewers in new programs and new episodes of
continuing series, and for retaining audiences by
making them feel satisfied with the program array.
In addition, millions are spent on paid program
advertising appearing in other media, and on mar-
keting endeavors in cooperation with such retailers
as Kmart or McDonald’s. Stations also cosponsor
concerts and sporting events to attract audiences to
local television and radio programs.
At the same time, having a presence in the
online world has become a necessity for all ten
broadcast networks. First PBS and then the five big-
gest commercial networks—ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC
and UNI—developed huge multimedia sites on the
web, and the major studios and most cable networks
followed suit. Television and radio enthusiasts can
now point-and-click their way through myriad
home pages designed by the networks, their affili-
ates, the studios, the major cable channels, the
programs, the fan clubs and even the program stars
themselves. Unlike most blog and podcast sites,
these are sophisticated promotional sites created to
capture attention, generate buzz and feed the fans’
yearning for closer contact with programs and their
stars. Commercial interests sponsor most of these
sites. Not to be outdone, this textbook itself has a
section within www.wadsworth.com!
Fred Silverman, a giant in network program-
ming history, understood that how programs were
promoted was as important as how they were sched-
uled. The allocation of immensely valuable airtime
to program promotion each year on every network
and station is clear evidence that the industry is con-
vinced of the truism that the best program without
promotion has no audience. If the audience doesn’t
know what day, what time and what channel a pro-
gram is on, the old viewers who miss the show will
have a profound impact on the ratings; if new view-
ers don’t see many exciting promos that convince
them to watch a network’s shows, their absence
will certainly also have a profound impact on
ratings.
It is crucial to understand that just a ratings
point or two stands between the number one and
number three broadcast network in most years
(and maybe just a point more to number four). Pro-
motion on and off the air is vital to maintaining and
increasing standing in that elite group. The same
situation occurs among cable networks and at the
local level. Cable networks vie to be among the
top 10 (or top 25), but most differ by only fractions
of a ratings point. The slight advantage given by
effective promotion can be the difference between
making that top list and falling to some lower
grouping, and advertisers typically buy by grouping.
Local stations often vary only minutely in popular-
ity, too, and a great deal of promotion of a newscast
or radio format can boost one station above its
competitors.
Promotion of online programs takes a different
form
nowadays.
It
largely
consists
of
gaining
favored placement in Google lists and other created
listings of favorites or types of sites. Virtually all top
placement is purchased on Google, at least under
generic terms. This revenue contributes to a large
CHAPTER 1 A Scaffold for Programmers
17
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
part of a search engine’s income. Placement is no
longer luck of the draw or someone’s idiosyncratic
whim except perhaps on individuals’ sites.
Networks, stations, systems and sites are also
concerned with their overall images. Increasingly,
fostering positive images around the world has
value in building audiences for exported programs
and associated products (this is called branding).
Google and Apple have world recognition as brand
names at least as widely known as those of Disney,
CBS, Fox, NBC and the biggest movie studios, and
they allot enormous budgets to increasing and main-
taining those brand names. Promotion, then, is one
path through the labyrinth leading to high visibility,
high ratings and thus high revenue.
The Elements of Programming
The various strategies for selecting, scheduling,
promoting and evaluating programs are derived
from a set of assumptions about audience behavior.
These broad assumptions, which are here organized
into five groups, become the basis for strategies cap-
italizing on them, even in the changing media
environment:
■Compatibility
■Habit formation
■Control of audience flow
■Conservation of program resources
■Breadth of appeal
Compatibility
Scheduling strategies take advantage of the fact that
programs can be timed to coincide with what people
do throughout the daily cycle of their lives. The con-
tinuously unfolding nature of radio and television
allows programmers to schedule different kinds of
program material, or similar program materials in
different ways, into various dayparts. Programmers
strive to make their programming compatible with
the day’s round of what most people do—getting
up in the morning and preparing for the day; driving
to work; doing the morning household chores;
breaking for lunch; enjoying an afternoon lull;
engaging with children after they return from
school; accelerating the tempo of home activities as
the day draws to a close; relaxing during early prime
time; and indulging in the more exclusively adult
interests of later prime time, the late fringe hours
and the small hours of the morning. And, of course,
compatibility calls for adapting to the changed activ-
ity schedules of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
Programmers speak of these strategies in terms of
dayparting—scheduling different types of programs
to match parts of the day known by such terms as
early fringe, prime time and in the case of radio,
drivetime.
Cable television’s approach to compatibility has
historically differed from broadcasting’s approach.
Each broadcast station or network has traditionally
had only a single channel at its disposal (even if it
shows up on two or three places in the electronic
guide with different numbers). In consequence,
broadcast programmers must plan compatibility
strategies for what they judge to be the “typical”
lifestyles of audiences. Most cable networks target
more narrowly. Like the internet, an entire cable or
satellite system accommodates so many channels
that it can devote some to every type of audience
at all hours, ignoring dayparts. They can cater to the
night-shift worker with sports at 6
A.M., to the
single-person household with movies at 6 P.M., to
the teenager with round-the-clock videos—by using
a different channel to serve each interest.
The daily share of viewing of the Big Four broad-
cast television networks (ABC, CBS, Fox, NBC) fell
below the combined viewing of cable channels several
years ago. Broadcasters’ economics—and thus clout—
have diminished dramatically because in such large
metropolitan areas as New York City cable/satellite
penetration has reached 91 percent.
Even so, many cable channels effectively shut
down their program services during low-viewing
dayparts (for example, 3 to 7 A.M.) and let infomer-
cials reign. The owners find it hard to resist the
guaranteed
advertising
income
from
program-
length commercials at a time of day when the audi-
ence size is both too small to attract mainstream
advertisers and not large enough to generate viewer
18
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
complaints that the usual shows are missing. By con-
trast, internet use climbs when television is weakest.
Habit Formation
Compatibility strategies acquire even greater power
because audience members form habits of listening
and
watching.
Scheduling
programs
for
strict
predictability (along with promotional efforts to
make people aware of both the service as a whole
and
of
individual
programs)
establishes
tuning
habits that eventually become automatic. Indeed, in
spite of having DVRs, some people will go to
extraordinary lengths to avoid missing the next epi-
sode in a favorite series the moment it is aired. Pro-
grammers discovered the basic principle in the early
days of radio when the Amos ‘n’ Andy habit became
so strong that movie theaters in the 1930s shut
down their pictures temporarily and hooked radios
into their sound systems at 7:15 P.M. when Amos ‘n’
Andy came on. At about that time the fanatic loyalty
of soap opera fans to their favorite series also
became apparent, a loyalty still cultivated by today’s
televised serial dramas.
Ideally, habit formation calls for stripping pro-
grams—scheduling them Monday through Friday at
the same time each day, just as evening news is
stripped daily on network-affiliated stations. To
strip
original
prime-time
programs,
however,
would require building up a backlog of these expen-
sive shows, which would tie up far too much capital.
Moreover, networks want maximum latitude for
strategic maneuvers in the all-important prime-time
schedule. If a broadcast network stripped its three
prime-time
hours with the same six half-hour
shows each night, it would be left with only six
pawns to move around in the scheduling chess
game instead of the two dozen or so pawns that
the weekly scheduling of programs of varying
lengths makes possible.
When weekly prime-time network shows go into
syndication, however, stations and cable networks
schedule them daily in strips (one episode daily at
the same time), a strategy requiring a large number
of episodes. A prime-time series has to have been on a
network for four years (with the prospect of one
more year) to accumulate enough episodes for a
year’s stripping in syndication (including a substantial
number of reruns). Because few weekly shows survive
five years of prime-time competition, the industry
periodically faces a nagging shortage of quality off-
network programs suitable for syndication. Syndi-
cated game shows, such as the long-running Jeopardy
and Wheel of Fortune, fill the gap. Necessarily, cable
networks also pick up shows that had short runs, but
for lower licensing prices.
Cable has adopted different patterns. Especially
when just starting out, networks such as FX and
Oxygen stripped sitcoms not only day to day but
across most of each evening until their revenues per-
mitted more variety in programs. Networks such as
A&E, USA and TNT also strip expensive hit dramas
that are freshly off-network in early evenings and
prime time.
No one knows whether audiences find them-
selves more comfortable with the structured, compat-
ible, predictable scheduling of traditional television
than
with
a
multitude
of
digital
programming
choices. Researchers investigating channel repertoire
have often observed that, when scores of options are
available to listeners and viewers, most tune in to
only eight or so of the possible sources. For example,
for many years, when Nielsen Media Research sur-
veyed homes with access to 200 or more television
channels, it used to find consistently that viewers
watched only about 15 of them for more than one
hour per week. Which 15 varies by household, of
course. (Nielsen no longer tries to measure repertoire
because the definition of “channel” has become so
slippery.) The increased variety of program choices
made possible by digital cable/satellite television and
DVRs seems to have weakened viewing habits. Only
about half of viewers (mostly women) choose in
advance the programs they watch. The other half
plays with the remote control.
Even so, some people may sometimes prefer to
have only a limited number of choices. They find it
confusing and wearying to sift through scores of
options before settling on a program. We’ve all
run across the complaint about having hundreds
of channels and nothing to watch! Broadcast
scheduling,
as
a
consequence
of
compatibility
CHAPTER 1 A Scaffold for Programmers
19
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
strategies and a tendency toward habit formation,
preselects a varied sequence of listening and view-
ing experiences skillfully adapted to the desires and
needs of a target audience. People can then choose
an entire service—an overall entertainment pattern
(or “sound” in the case of radio)—rather than indi-
vidual programs.
New technologies like DVRs have increased
time shifting but are not likely to eliminate the aver-
age viewer’s need to form patterns of behavior.
Most people are creatures of habit, and television
viewing is an activity that begs for routines. Indeed,
DVRs
may
actually
enhance
habit
formation
because they make it easier to catch all the episodes
of a favorite show, thus strengthening a habit. Graz-
ing via remote controls diminishes for those who
make use of their DVRs: Viewers can watch live
TV and fill in the gaps when “nothing good is on”
with saved favorites.
Control of Audience Flow
The assumption that audiences welcome, or at least
tolerate, preselection of their programs most of the
time accounts for strategies arising from the notion
of audience flow. Even in a multichannel environ-
ment with dozens of choices, the next program in a
sequence can capture the attention of the viewers of
the previous program. At scheduling breaks, when
one program comes to an end and another begins,
programmers visualize the audience as flowing from
one program to the next in any of three possible
directions: They try to maximize the number of
audience members that flow through to the next
program on their own channel and the number
that flow in from rival channels or home video, at
the same time minimizing the number that flow
away to competing channels or activities.
Many scheduling practices hinge on this con-
cept. Audience flow considerations have tradition-
ally dominated the strategies of the commercial
broadcast and cable networks and affiliates (see
1.9). Blocking several similar comedies in adjacent
time slots, for example, takes advantage of audience
flow. By contrast, counterprogramming (scheduling
programs with differing appeals against each other)
is crucial to the strategies of small-audience channels
that seek to direct the flow away from competing
channels to themselves.
Fortunately for programmers, when watching
television on large home screens, many audience
members
remain
afflicted
by
tuning
inertia.
Although hundreds of options often exist in a
cable, satellite, online, and tablet environment, peo-
ple tend to leave the channel selector alone unless
stimulated into action by some forceful reason for
change. Many times, viewers are engaged in simulta-
neous activities that preclude a focused attention to
what programs might be available on other chan-
nels. Moreover, programmers believe that children
can be used as a kind of stalking horse: Adults will
tend to leave the set tuned to whatever channel the
children chose for an earlier program.
The greater number of program options pro-
vided by cable/satellite/telco and online services and
the convenience of remote controls and DVRs have
certainly lessened—but not eliminated—the effect of
tuning inertia. Researchers recognize several ways the
audience
uses
the
remote
control
keypad
to
1.9
Television Versus Books,
Newspapers, and Movies
C
ontrolling audience flow becomes problematic
because listeners and viewers have freedom of
choice. Unlike a consumer faced with the limited deci-
sion of whether to buy a book, subscribe to a newspa-
per, or attend a movie, electronic media consumers can
choose instantaneously and repeatedly by switching
back and forth among programs at will. Hence, pro-
grammers cannot count on even the slight self-restraint
that keeps a book buyer reading a book or a ticket buyer
watching a movie so as not to waste the immediate
investment. And, obviously, the polite social restraint that
keeps a bored lecture audience seated does not inhibit
radio and television audiences. Programmers have the
job of holding the attention of a very tenuously commit-
ted audience. Its members take flight at the smallest
provocation. Boredom or unintelligibility act like a sud-
den shot into a flock of birds.
20
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
manipulate programming: grazing, hunting up and
down the channels until one’s attention is captured;
flipping, changing back and forth between two chan-
nels; zapping, changing the channel to avoid a com-
mercial interruption; and zipping, fast-forwarding a
recording to avoid commercials or to reach a more
interesting point. While grazing has fallen off, jump-
ing between two programs (such as two games) and
zipping through recorded commercials are common-
place. Moreover, the home playback unit has under-
mined Saturday evening ratings for both broadcast
and cable programmers: Huge numbers of viewers
regularly rent DVDs on Saturday nights from Netflix.
Thus, tuning inertia continues as only a modest factor
to consider in broadcast programming strategies.
Program flow is nearly irrelevant for some for-
mats such as all-news radio, all-weather cable chan-
nels, and specialized subscription channels, which
actually invite audience flow in and out. Some for-
mats aim not at keeping audiences continuously
tuned in but at getting them to constantly return. As
a widely used all-news radio slogan goes, “Give us
22 minutes, and we’ll give you the world.” One
cable news service used to promote itself in variations
of “All the news in 30 minutes.” The Weather Chan-
nel doesn’t expect even weather buffs to watch for
hours, just to return periodically.
In any case, the overall strategic lesson taught by
the freedom-of-choice factor is that programs must
always please, entertain and be easily understood.
Much elitist criticism of program quality arises simply
because of the democratic nature of the medium.
Critics point out that programs must descend to the
lowest common denominator of the audience they
strive to attract. This fact need not mean the absence
of program quality. After all, some programs aim at
elite audiences among whom the lowest common
denominator can be very high indeed.
Conservation of Program Resources
Radio and television notoriously burn up program
materials at a high rate. This is an inevitable conse-
quence of the continuousness attribute. That fact
makes program conservation an essential strategy.
See 1.10.
A high percentage of the programming on cable
networks and online consists of repeats of the same
items. The broadcast networks also schedule plenty of
reruns and now reuse their shows—repurposing—on
their other owned broadcast and cable networks and
online, as wellasreformatting them for cells and tablets.
Material related to the popular programs shows up in
magazine articles, blogs and talk shows. The internet
has stimulated production of new programs and pro-
gram types, but on the whole, online and cable heighten
program scarcity rather than alleviating it.
One further complicating factor, at least for hit
series, is their easy availability on DVD. If someone
really loves a show, they can buy a whole season or
entire multiyear runs as a boxed set and need not
search for it in reruns.
Frugality must be practiced at every level and in
every aspect of programming. Consider how often
audiences see or hear “the best of so-and-so,” a com-
pilation of bits and pieces from previous programs;
flashback sequences within programs (especially in
soap operas); news actualities broken into many seg-
ments and parceled out over a period of several hours
1.10
Reruns
A
nyone who doubts the difficulty of appealing to
mass audiences need only consider the experience
of the older media. Of 25,000 to 28,000 new books
printed in any one year, only less than 1 percent sell
100,000 or more copies; of 12,000 or so records
copyrighted, fewer than 200 music recordings go gold;
of 200 feature film releases, only 5 percent gross the
amount of money reckoned as the minimum for breaking
even. And yet audiences for these media are small com-
pared with the nightly prime-time television audience.
Sometimes audience demands and conservation
happily coincide, as when the appetite for a new hit song
demands endless replays and innumerable arrange-
ments. Eventually, however, obsolescence sets in, and
the song becomes old hat. Radio and television are
perhaps the most obvious examples of our throwaway
society. Even the most massively popular and brilliantly
successful program series eventually loses its freshness
and goes into the limbo of the umpteenth rerun circuit.
CHAPTER 1 A Scaffold for Programmers
21
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
or days; the annual return of past years’ special-
occasion programs; sports shows patched together
out of stock footage; the weather report broken
down into separate little packets labeled marine
forecasts, shuttle-city weather, long-term forecast,
weather update, aviation weather and so on.
The enormous increase in demand for program
materials created by the growth of cable television
and the internet would be impossible to satisfy
were it not that the multichannel media lend them-
selves to repeating programs much more liberally
than does single-channel broadcasting. A pay-cable
channel operates full time by scheduling fewer than
50 or so programs a month—mostly movies—and
runs each film four to six times. Furthermore,
movies first scheduled one month turn up again in
the following months in still more reruns, which
pay-cable programmers euphemistically call encores.
Even the basic cable channels rotate the showing of
their movies and series, based on the idea that the
audience at 8 P.M. will be different from the audience
at 1 A.M. For example, A&E double-runs (plays the
same episode of) many of its prime-time series, and
the internet makes available archives of thousands
(even millions) of old programs—all of which
makes frugality in sharing and repeating programs
even more crucial.
Beginning in the mid-2000s, several of the broad-
cast television networks began offering regularly
scheduled repeats as part of their prime-time line-
ups. Borrowing a strategy from cable, the broadcast
networks recognized that viewers were accustomed to
having multiple opportunities to see first-run shows
within the same week. “This is inevitable,” said Pre-
ston Beckman, the executive vice president of FOX
Entertainment. “No network can program 22 hours
any more, or in our case 15 hours.”2 Not surpris-
ingly, the networks chose low-viewing nights for the
repeats, conserving the cost of filler programming.
Programmers can also make creative use of low-
quality shows. The SyFy Channel features packages
of old monster and ghost movies, and SOAPnet
replays old daytime soap operas for new generations
of fans, just as Nickelodeon reruns old cartoons over
and over. Another reuse strategy is evident in pro-
grams such as Soap Opera Digest.
A major aspect of the programmer’s job consists
of devising ingenious ways to get the maximum mile-
age out of each program item. One strategy is to
develop formats that require as little new material
as possible for the next episode or program in the
series; another is to invent clever excuses for repeating
old programs over and over; a third, the newest, is to
adopt multiplatform strategies for each program as it
is conceived. For the best programs, viewers seek
more and more experience with each show, its char-
acters, its plot twists, even merchandise. Programmers
respond to the viewers’ desire for more interactions
by using extensions that may include websites and
blogs, podcasts and other feedback. Nowadays,
extensions spin off all hit programs. They show up
in magazine articles and books while spreading across
television in the form of program guests, guest hosts,
and guest contestants. In the view of a programmer,
there’s no end to a good idea.
Before it ever airs, programmers plan versions
of
a
show
for
broadcast
television,
for
pay-
per-view, for various internet locations, for tablets,
for cell phones, for magazines, and so on, although
such multiplatform approaches are usually only
implemented when a show actually becomes a hit.
The losers—without dedicated cult followings—just
fade away. The point is that any beginner can design
a winning schedule for a single week on a single
channel; a professional has to plan simultaneously
for all media as well as for the attrition that inevita-
bly sets in as weeks stretch into the indefinite future.
See 1.11.
Breadth of Appeal
Stations and cable systems recoup their high capi-
tal investment and operating costs only by appeal-
ing to a wide range of audience interests. This
statement might seem self-evident, yet for many
years, some public broadcasters made a virtue out
of ignoring “the numbers game,” leaving the race
for ratings to commercial broadcasters. But this
fundamentally
unrealistic
viewpoint
has
given
way to the strategy of aiming for a high cumulative
number of viewers rather than for high ratings for
each individual program. This strategy coincides
22
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
with the goal of cable/satellite operators, whose
many channels enable them to program to small
audiences on some channels, counting on the
cumulative reach of all channels to bring in suffi-
cient subscriptions to make a profit. The internet
inherently has this broad reach, although not the
big profits—as yet.
The national television broadcasting networks
continue to “cast” their programs across the land
from coast to coast with the aim of filling the entire
landscape. Of course, no network expects to capture
all the available viewers. A top-rated prime-time
program draws between 10 and 15 percent of
the
available
audience,
although
extraordinary
programs get nearly double that proportion of
viewers.
Nevertheless, by any standard, audiences for
prime-time broadcast television networks are enor-
mous. Although the audience shares of the Big Four
broadcast networks had dropped from 90 percent of
viewers to less than 40 percent by 2012, a single
program can still draw an audience so large it
could fill a Broadway theater every night for a cen-
tury. It is important to understand that a rating of
10 still means more than 10 million households are
watching a program, and since households average
2.6 people, that means that 26 million people
watched a show. Such size can be achieved only by
cutting across demographic lines and appealing to
many different social groups. Network television
can surmount differences of age, sex, education
and lifestyle that would ordinarily segregate people
into many separate subaudiences.
A Model of Programming
As pointed out earlier, the process of actually doing the
job of programming divides into four major parts.
First, programmers must select programs to go into a
program lineup—and separate lineups may be needed
for large home screens, for tablets, or for online ser-
vices. Then they must schedule the programs in an
arrangement that maximizes the likelihood of their
being viewed by the desired audience. Next, they must
promote them to attract attention to new shows and
new episodes of series and tell viewers where to find
the shows. Finally, they must continually evaluate the
outcome of their decisions. These complex decision-
making processes of selection, scheduling, and promo-
tion, modified by feedback from evaluation, ultimately
determine the size and composition of the audience and
suggest a series of pictorial models.
The model in 1.12 shows each of the major
components exerting a proportional influence on
the resulting audience. The model shows that the
1.11
Ripple Effect TV©
T
ruly successful TV programs are so compelling that
they draw an audience that is not content to merely
watch. The audience is hungry to go beyond the passive
and to commune with others in chat rooms and virtual
environments—to post videos, download additional con-
tent, buy the T-shirt, get updates on tablets and phones,
and so on. If a program creates a deep enough sense of
involvement (which is the currency of all interaction), then a
creative extension backed up by a rewarding user experi-
ence will respond to that desire for further interaction with
the program.
The programming for which program extensions work
best can be thought of as Ripple Effect TV©. These are the
programs that people talk about—the ones that show up
most often in the blogosphere. With the ripple effect, the
first broadcast is like a stone dropping in water. The big-
gest splash occurs at the point of impact, but thereafter the
ring of concentric circles fans out to ripple across a range of
platforms, bringing with it further opportunities to profitably
harness the audience’s sense of involvement—to allow that
audience to develop itself into a community and to satisfy its
desires—before coming back (i.e., to the original TV
show’s next episode) for more.
Michael Bloxham, Ph.D.,
Vice President, Trendline Interactive
CHAPTER 1 A Scaffold for Programmers
23
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
selection component contributes roughly 50 percent
to ratings; the scheduling component contributes
about 30 percent; and the promotion component
contributes about 20 percent. These proportions,
however, vary widely for particular media, for par-
ticular programs, for different times of day, and even
at different times in media history.
Selection, for instance, was probably much
more important and promotion much less important
in the 1950s when CBS and NBC dominated televi-
sion viewing. Increasing competition in television
came first from ABC and later from FOX, then
from cable, then from even more broadcast net-
works (UPN and the WB which later merged into
CW). Then PAX morphed into Ion, UNI grew up
and added TeleFutura, Telemundo added viewers,
and FOX invented MNTV. Now the internet, tablets
and smart phones compete directly with broadcast
television, altering the relative importance of each
component in the television programming process.
Moreover, scheduling has to be understood as oper-
ating now across the various media. Overall, compe-
tition has boosted the importance of promotion and
diminished the salience of scheduling, especially for
new programs and new services.
In contrast to television, for popular all-music
radio stations promotion is sometimes the most sig-
nificant component in the determination of radio
audience size and composition. On-air contests and
games have a great deal to do with music station
popularity. For all-news and talk radio and televi-
sion, scheduling surfaces as the arena of competition
and ongoing dynamism. For emerging web series
channels, selection remains the key component.
If the model in 1.12 appears mechanistic, that is
quite misleading. Even after more than a half cen-
tury
of
concentrated
attention,
programming
remains as much an art as a science. And nowhere
is that more evident than in the enormous wealth of
online programming. As the subsequent chapters
will reveal, at all stages the processes and outcomes
of programming are affected by the sparkle of
insight, imagination and inspiration.
Selection
The figure shown in 1.13 illustrates some of the
many components affecting the selection stage for
electronic media that are spelled out in the following
chapters. For the broadcast networks, these compo-
nents include the scarcity of top-notch writers, the
high financial risk of trying markedly different pro-
gram ideas, and the escalating costs per episode for
the onscreen and off-screen talent. For cable net-
works, the same factors are important for choosing
programs, as is the need, usually, to target an under-
served audience group. As significant as individual
1.13
Selection Factors
Reprinted by permission of Milton Hamburger.
Selection
Audience habits
Novelty
Cost
Compatibility
Talent availability
Differentiation
Trendiness
1.12
Basic Four-Part Programming
Model
Reprinted by permission of Milton Hamburger.
Selection
50%
Scheduling
30%
Promotion
20%
Audience
Size
Evaluation
24
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
programs are, even more important is the overall
composite that creates a “format” for the cable or
radio channel or internet site.
Additional factors that affect the selection of
programs for cable and satellite networks include
the need for differentiation from competing chan-
nels, costs relative to other program types, and the
ability to capture space on local cable or satellite
systems to reach an audience. On the internet, imag-
inative designs and antiauthority appeals to teen and
young adults are key elements.
In radio and online music programming, enor-
mous efforts go into choosing the songs that appeal
to a particular demographic and psychographic
group. Whether they are called music directors or
programmers, the crucial task of the people making
these efforts is to find and keep current the songs
that the audience will tune in to hear.
Scheduling
It has been long understood that the size of
the prime-time television audience is affected by
the amount and type of competing programs, the
amount of viewing inherited from preceding pro-
grams, and the compatibility between adjacent
programs (see 1.14). The most studied of these
elements, the amount of inherited viewing between
adjacent programs, has been consistently shown to
hover around 50 percent in prime time. This means
that half of the viewers watching Program B on a
channel had already watched Program A on that
channel.3 Program B’s other viewers come from
other channels or are newly tuned in for the evening.
Inheritance, however, is known to be much lower
between incompatible programs and between nonad-
jacent programs. Few of the viewers of a romantic
drama, for example, would choose to stay tuned for
a violent action movie.
Moreover, inheritance is dramatically lower
outside of prime time. One big exception is between
two adjacent soap operas, when inherited viewing
usually goes up. By contrast, only 10 percent of tele-
vision viewers are likely to flow from program to
program in the morning daypart because of the
other activities and obligations of their daily lives—
going to work, for example.
In radio, careful attention to each nuance of
song rotation and news story rotation leads to ongo-
ing scheduling adjustments. Similar attention to
detail is required of online music and video, but as
Chapter 4 explains, most of early focus was on the
technology, and scheduling strategies have only
recently gotten attention and continue to alter as
they seem successful or unsuccessful. Most websites
schedule by topic, genre or alphabetical name.
YouTube and its many imitators let viewers know
which clips and shows are “most recent” or “most
popular” so that users can go directly to that
programming.
Ordering by title or recency also applies to sites
that replay actual television shows (Netflix, Hulu and
Hulu Plus, Crackle, TV-4-PC.com, your-free-satellite.
com, free-internet-tv.com, the-free-tv.com, and vari-
ous iPad apps). Counts of hits reveal movements,
and measures of time-spent-watching a show tell the
presumed length of viewing (only presumed because
computer users are often doing more than one thing
simultaneously), but content on many sites that might
be called “programs” doesn’t divide into tidy half-
hour-long and hour-long parcels. To date, systems
haven’t been refined for counting what’s watched
on smart phones, for example.
1.14
Scheduling Factors
Reprinted by permission of Milton Hamburger.
Scheduling
Hammocking
Blocking
Compatibility
Ranking
Competition
Inherited viewing
CHAPTER 1 A Scaffold for Programmers
25
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Promotion
The figure shown in 1.15 names some characteristics
that impact the effectiveness of promotional spots on
the air—such as the location of spots within a pro-
gram, the position of those spots within breaks, the
distance between the promotion and the promoted
program (Next? Later tonight? Next week? Next
month?), and the familiarity of the program to view-
ers or listeners. Such considerations as the physical
environment of a message, the number of people
reached, and the frequency of seeing or hearing the
message also affect the efficacy of both on-air and
print promotion. Program promotion is constantly
manipulated in the struggle to gain and hold ratings.
Evaluation
Programmers must constantly appraise programs
using ratings, hits or other measures, interpreted by
the honed instincts and experience of the programmer.
Here, evaluation refers to the ongoing interpretation
of quantitative information and qualitative judgments
that results in revisions of show selections, changes in
the scheduling of already selected programs, and mod-
ifications in their promotion. One important result of
increased competition from cable and new broadcast
networks, as well as from the internet, has been to
drive the process of programming into constant flux.
At local stations and at national and global networks,
a static program lineup tends to lose ground, while
ongoing refinements help to maintain and even
increase audience size. This shifting of program
times much irritates habitual viewers!
In 1.16, evaluation has a wide range of consti-
tuents, some directly related to program audiences
and others of larger social scope. For example, the
success of the competing programs affects a pro-
grammer’s interpretation of ratings. A show with
low ratings scheduled against a megahit on another
channel might well be considered reasonably suc-
cessful, whereas the same show in a less challenging
location would be expected to perform much better
in the ratings. Consider, for example, the inherent
difficulty of trying to target men viewers (on net-
works other than the one with Monday Night Foot-
ball) on Monday nights during football season.
In addition, the programmers’ specific assump-
tions about an audience’s behavior and viewing or
listening
motivations
affect
how
programs
are
selected, scheduled and promoted. In one town, for
example, workers start and end their jobs early,
making afternoons a good time to program to
them, whereas in another town, companies have var-
1.15
Promotion Factors
Reprinted by permission of Milton Hamburger.
Promotion
Clutter
Location
Frequency
Construction
Familiarity
Distance
1.16
Evaluation Factors
Reprinted by permission of Milton Hamburger.
Evaluation
Tolerance levels
Technology
Stock value
Audience share
Genre trends
Design styles
26
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
ied schedules, lessening impact on the number of
available afternoon viewers. Consider how complex
programming would be in a country where the peo-
ple speak not just one or two but 11 different lan-
guages (see 1.17 for a description of television in
South Africa today).
Programmers’ understanding of the impact and
use of the newest technologies is also vital. Smart
phones and tablets, as well as DVRs, have much
affected the processes of program selection and
scheduling, and the growth of online music listening
has altered the strategies of traditional broadcast
radio stations. Other factors that programmers must
constantly scope out are the trends in popularity of
particular program genres, fads in star performers,
styles in design and sound effects, and so on. The pro-
grammer’s nearly unconscious awareness of what is
going to become popular and his or her ability to cap-
ture it in programming decisions comprise much of
what is meant by the creative side of programming.
Although some critics have decried the constant
changes in television program lineups in the last dec-
ades, industry experience suggests that ongoing
change is essential. Programmers tend to assume
that
audiences—especially
the
highly
desirable
young
adults—are
fickle,
have
short
attention
spans, become easily bored, follow fads, and find
other forms of entertainment. It may be that many
program ideas (and songs) wear out and become
stale more rapidly than in the past, partly resulting
from clones, reruns, repeat plays of music, or web
chat about a series or song. It may be that perfor-
mers peak for a shorter time than in the past as a
result of constant media attention. It may also be
that programmers perceive their careers to depend
on identifying and eliminating tiny flaws in program
lineups and formats. Whatever the reason, ongoing
feedback from the evaluation process is a critical
component of the programming process.
In sum, the basic model of selection, scheduling,
promotion, and evaluation guides the approaches to
specific programming situations that appear in sub-
sequent chapters of this book. Collectively, the main
model and its parts (1.12 to 1.16) illustrate some
major components of the programming process
that vary in the strategies for specific situations.
These strategies, as well as the commonplace prac-
tices of programming—and the magical creative ele-
ment—are the topics of this book.
External Influences on
Programmers
Beyond learning the nuts-and-bolts programming
framework, the novice programmer must deal with
strong external pressures that powerfully—at times—
affect decision making, for good or ill. Five sets of
1.17
Television in Many Languages
W
ith a population of just 46 million people, South
Africa has only five national television channels
and no regional channels. Of these five, the South African
Broadcasting Corporation (SABC), similar to the BBC in
Britain and the CBC in Canada, programs and distributes
three channels nationwide. These channels have to serve
a population that speaks 11 different languages, and
although much of the audience is bi- or multilingual, a
large proportion does not understand English.
Most of SABC’s programs are nonetheless in English,
including such American daytime and prime-time shows
as Oprah, The District, and The Bold and the Beautiful.
South African–made “soapies” and mini-dramas are also
very popular. Within these shows, programmers mix
languages and also use English subtitling to overcome
the language problem. To serve educational and politi-
cal needs, national and international news is broadcast
in 7 of the 11 languages at various times and on differ-
ent channels. As you might imagine, scheduling
becomes an enormous challenge!
The two competing (non-SABC) channels in South
Africa broadcast only in English, although one of them,
e-tv, presently attracts the second-largest audience in the
country. The other is a subscription (pay) movie channel.
All five of South Africa’s television channels carry
advertisements.
Reprinted by kind permission of Linda van Vuuren.
Daan van Vuuren
Former Director of Audience Research SABC, South Africa
CHAPTER 1 A Scaffold for Programmers
27
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
influences are outlined briefly in the following sections.
Because the distribution system influences the kinds of
programming chosen, technological issues are consid-
ered first. Without money (economic influences), of
course, there can be no widespread development of
new technologies. From economics flows some kind
of structure, creating ownership influences. Whenever
corporations and economies get in the way of individ-
ual rights, governments create regulatory influences.
Finally, this chapter discusses what is morally right
about the work of a programmer (ethical influences).
For example, does the end (ratings success) justify the
means (pandering to fickle viewers)?
Technological Influences
The long-term effect of media digitization has been to
lessen station dependence on traditional national
networks for television and radio programming,
both as sources of original material and of off-
network syndicated material; indeed, it tends also to
reduce the number of local stations (see Chapter 8).
The development of HD dramatically affected view-
ers’ choice of channels, and 3D is next. Although 3D
is attracting top-notch production talent, relatively
little makes it all the way to home television receivers
as yet. The newest portables can display entire televi-
sion broadcasts, and some run on solar power. The
broadcast networks may be the biggest guys on the
block, but they find themselves less able to invest in
high-cost series programming because of the audi-
ence’s shift to watching cable networks, playing
back rented and purchased DVDs and downloads,
and playing games on the internet for long hours.
Contributing to this audience erosion is the
increased difficulty of persuading affiliates to clear all
requested time for network schedules. At one time the
networks had considerable leverage over affiliates
because the networks leased the coaxial-microwave
relays that were the sole real-time program distribution
system. Clearances of network programs were virtually
automatic then. Now, however, satellites give affiliates
many alternate sources of instantaneous delivery at rea-
sonable cost. All this encourages the emergence of new
program providers. Nonnetwork group owners play a
prominent role among them.
Another huge technological influence is the
inevitable creeping convergence of computers, tele-
phones and television. There is little doubt that the
various media have begun to come together in and
out of the home. For example, the merging of per-
sonal communication assistants (Palm Pilots, Black-
Berrys, Treos and their clones, best known by the
older name of PDAs) with cell phones and tablets
and Wi-Fi internet access signaled the arrival of por-
table web/television (see Chapter 4). Surprisingly,
convergence came to handheld devices before it
fully arrived in living rooms!
Economic Influences
There is a saying in business: “Good, fast, cheap—
choose two.” The idea that quality, speed and price
cannot all occur at the same time is also true for pro-
gramming. If most programming is like cheap fast
food, then we should not be surprised that the quality
is not high. The cost of extremely well-executed pro-
gramming is high, and only two or three new TV
series survive through a second season or longer (see
Chapter 2). Each year, program development costs
hundreds of millions of dollars. In other businesses
it is known as Research and Development. In televi-
sion it is called failure, or futility, or a wasteland.
The high failure rate of television programs
attracts constant attention in newspapers and maga-
zines and in TV news and talk shows like Entertain-
ment
Tonight,
but
when
television
shows
are
compared to other sources of entertainment, such
as movies, books and Broadway plays, the TV fail-
ure rate does not seem so serious. The kinds of pro-
grams prevalent at any given time can be directly
linked to economics. Some programs can be pro-
duced cheaply: soaps, game shows, talk shows, real-
ity formats and tabloid news. In each case, there is
little expense involved because there is no need for
top-name
stars
or
sophisticated
writing.
These
shows may not win many awards, but they create
audience demand without incurring huge costs.
Economic pressures also include the cost of wait-
ing for a show to “grow” into its time slot. Consider-
able lore has evolved about several programs that had
early low ratings and might never have become
28
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
successful but that were, for various reasons, allowed
to stay on the networks’ schedules despite their rat-
ings. Some shows seem to need incubation time to
“find an audience.” Amazing Grace was such a
series, almost getting cancelled several times before
rising in the ratings in the fifth year. Some program
producers feel that the audience never gets a chance
to discover some shows because cancellations come
too quickly because so many millions of dollars are at
stake.
In addition, a situation can arise where a show
is canceled even when it finishes among the top
shows for the week. Anyone who remembers The
Single Guy or Jesse will realize that some successful
shows owe most of their success to the preceding
program. If the lead-in show has a huge audience,
even a precipitous falloff can leave a strong audience
share for the weaker following program, but pro-
grammers want shows that maintain or build the
audience shares from the preceding shows. As Chap-
ter 2 explains, programs that “drop share” are can-
celed, regardless of seemingly high rankings.
Ownership Influences
To function in media programming, it is necessary to
know who the major players are. The six media
giants in 1.18 are the companies that have enormous
interests throughout broadcasting, cable and the
internet. The major commercial television studios
and producers appear in 1.19. As these charts show,
these big companies own powerful media interests
and combine production, distribution and exhibition
of programs—the condition called vertical integ-
ration. The expansion of these mega-corporations
into all aspects of media was an outcome of the repeal
of the financial interest and network syndication rules
(Fin-Syn).
Because much of media content is produced by
network-run or network-owned studios, program-
mers must make difficult choices among competing
company interests when acquiring shows. Enhancing
the parent corporation’s stock market value usually
outweighs the importance of higher ratings on a par-
ticular channel, and executives at the highest levels
are generally focused on maximizing revenue to the
parent corporation. As Chapter 2 explains, to boost
profits, when networks have a strong show, they give
it their best time slot. When they have a strong show
in a weak time slot, they often sell it to others (as
Warner Brothers did with Friends to NBC). If a
time slot is strong but the owned show is weak, the
network normally tries to buy better programs from
others. If both the show and the time slot are weak,
then the network should recycle its own library (old
movies) or buy cheap reality shows.
Ownership also directly affects programmers
at the lower levels of the hierarchy. Nowadays,
nearly all broadcast stations and cable systems
belong to companies that own far more than one
station or system. The profitability of broadcast
and cable investments attracts corporate buyers,
who gain important economies of scale from mul-
tiple ownership. Because they can buy centrally in
large quantities, they can get reduced prices for
many kinds of purchases, including programs. Cur-
rent Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
and Justice Department policies encourage the for-
mation of multimedia companies and very large,
diversified conglomerates, making group owner-
ship the pattern of the industry. Although the failed
merger between AOL and Time Warner was the
first signal of the web’s to major-player stakes,
now Google and Facebook loom over the entire
industry. And although AT&T owns only cable
systems and phone lines, its executives ponder con-
tent ownership, for sure.
In broadcasting, the owner of two or more sta-
tions within a given type (AM, FM, TV) is called a
group owner, while in cable television the owner of
three or more cable systems is called a multiple sys-
tem operator (MSO). To group MSOs with satellite
and telephone companies that deliver television, the
broader term multichannel video programming dis-
tributor (MVPD) applies. About three-quarters of
the nearly 1,300 commercial American television
stations are under group control (one-third are con-
trolled by the top 25 groups), and big groups control
about three-quarters of the 12,000 U.S. radio sta-
tions. In cable, the percentage of systems is even
higher, with more than 90 percent owned by an
MVPD.
CHAPTER 1 A Scaffold for Programmers
29
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
1.18
The Players
30
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Group ownership of the right stations in the
right markets can be remarkably profitable. ABC,
CBS, FOX and NBC’s owned-and-operated stations
(O&Os) constitute the most prominent group-
owned constellations. The O&Os of just ABC,
CBS, FOX or NBC in the top three markets—
WABC, WCBS, WNYW and WNBC in New York;
KABC, KCBS, KTTV and KNBC in Los Angeles;
WLS, WBBM, WFLD and WMAQ in Chicago—
gross more revenue than any other groups. FOX,
currently with the largest potential television reach,
is owned by Rupert Murdoch, the international
media magnate (see 1.20).
Each of the Big Four television networks and
CW (jointly owned by CBS and Time Warner) now
has about 200 affiliates and owned stations. MyNet-
workTV (MNTV) has about 165 affiliates, and Tel-
emundo (owned by NBC) has about 145, while ION
(formerly Pax) had somewhat less reach at about
100 affiliates and soon became a syndicator rather
than a network.
Perhaps surprisingly, although it is the fifth
strongest network overall in ratings, Univision has
just about 50 affiliates, as does its owned co-
network, TeleFutura (see Chapters 2 and 7). In
those 50 markets, Univision’s ratings often exceed
1.19
The Producers
T
he veteran movie and television producers were tradi-
tionally the Big Seven studios of the Hollywood enter-
tainment motion picture industry until Sony bought MGM-
UA in 2004 (reducing the seven to six). Currently, the
Big Six studios are Sony (Columbia TriStar, MGM), Walt
Disney Studios (Buena Vista, Miramax, Touchstone), Para-
mount (CBS), 20th Century Fox (News Corp.), NBCUni-
versal, and Warner Brothers (CW)—though many would
focus on the main four: Columbia TriStar, NBCUniversal,
20th Century Fox, and Paramount.
In addition, the independent production houses make
Hollywood their base of operations. Among independent
producers, Wolf Films, Carsey-Werner-Mandabach,
WorldWide Pants, David E. Kelley and Steven Bochco
used to be regular and prolific producers for the networks
and the syndication market. But independents are increas-
ingly being acquired by large studios, as when New World
bought Stephen Cannell Productions, Viacom purchased
DreamWorks, King World Productions went to CBS after its
split-up from Viacom, and Witt/Thomas Productions was
taken over by Warner Brothers. Not much is left.
Consider the prime-time lineup in 2003–04. According
to the Coalition for Program Diversity, that season CBS
owned 98 percent of its programming. FOX owned 80
percent, ABC owned over 70 percent, and NBCUniversal
owned nearly 60 percent of prime-time programming. The
Coalition for Program Diversity unsuccessfully lobbied the
Federal Communications Commission in 2003 to require
that the broadcast networks buy 25 percent of their content
from independent producers. Instead, now the networks
have some kind of ownership in 100 percent of what they
air, at least in prime time. Moreover, the five major
networks now require company ownership in all that their
O&Os buy in the syndication marketplace. This may be full
or partial participation, but as you can imagine, the eco-
nomics of independent production are no longer
“independent.”
This pie-splitting situation has driven buyouts and mer-
gers and will soon kill off some production companies…if it
hasn’t already. As examples, consider the independent
producers listed above. As of 2010, Wolf Films’ television
arm was officially “associated” with NBCUniversal, as was
WorldWide Pants. David E. Kelley now does not do pro-
duction on his own, instead working mainly for FOX or
ABC. Steven Bochco, while still listed as an independent
producer, no longer has any dealings with broadcasting.
Witt/Thomas, a company that can trace its history back to
the beginnings of television in the 1950s, has been taken
over by Warner Brothers. Like Steven Bochco, Carsey-
Werner-Mandabach refused to sell and found its television
market dried up. It no longer exists.
William J. Adams, Ph.D.
Kansas State University
CHAPTER 1 A Scaffold for Programmers
31
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
those of all other networks. Of course, how big each
station’s market is determines how many people can
see the broadcasts, although cable channels spread
reach even further. Some of the advantages and dis-
advantages of group ownership are spelled out in
1.21.
Because broadcast stations have a legal obliga-
tion to serve their specific communities of license,
group owners must necessarily give their outlets a
certain amount of latitude in programming deci-
sions, especially decisions that affect obligations to
serve
local
community
interests.
Beyond
that,
broadcast group owners generally employ a head-
quarters executive to oversee and coordinate pro-
gramming functions at owned stations with varying
degrees of decentralization.
As for cable, the days of adding and swapping
bunches of new systems has largely passed. The
largest MSOs focus instead on competing with
phone companies such as AT&T and Verison (its
FiOS service supplies video; see Chapter 3). Systems
tend to create geographically close groupings, thus
generating savings in management. Some MSOs
have given slightly more autonomy to their local
1.20
Rupert Murdoch and News Corp.*
N
ews Corp. (which might easily be called the FOX
Empire) is a giant among giants. Its annual revenue is
nearly $35 billion, making News Corp. the third largest
entertainment media conglomerate in America, barely
behind only the Walt Disney Company (approximately
$40 billion) and Comcast NBCUniversal (estimated
$65 billion combined in January 2011, and yes,
NBCUniversal is now one word).
News Corporation’s holdings are vast. The annual
report shows divisions in countries around the world for
filmed entertainment, television, cable network program-
ming, direct broadcast satellite television, newspapers and
information services, integrated marketing services, book
publishing and more. A sampling of media properties illus-
trates how vast the Fox Empire is.
■
It owns all things 20th Century Fox, including film and
television studios and distribution, music recording
and publishing, product licensing and merchandising,
Fox Searchlight Pictures and more.
■
It operates all things FOX, including broadcast and
cable networks, which cover the Fox Broadcasting
Company—one of the “Big Four” networks along with
ABC, CBS and NBC in America—plus MyNetworkTV,
FoxSports, 27 owned-and-operated TV stations, many
other Fox channels around the world, Fox News, FX,
Fox Movie Channel, Speed, Fuel TV, FSN, a number
of sports programs and networks globally, the STAR
channels in Asia, Sky Italia in Europe, 39 percent of
British Sky Broadcasting, various percentages of the
National Geographic channels globally and more.
■
Newspaper and information holdings include The
Wall Street Journal (in America and Asia), the Dow
Jones Newswires, The Times and The Sun in Europe,
and almost 150 titles in Australia.
■
The company owns HarperCollins Publishers in the
western English-speaking world (U.S., Canada,
Europe, New Zealand, Australia), and 40 percent of
HarperCollins India.
■
Digital media holdings include MySpace.com and the
websites for all Fox shows (e.g., AmericanIdol.com,
TheSimpsons.com).
■
News Corp. even owns 32 percent of Hulu and
50 percent of the National Rugby League in Australia
and New Zealand. (It once owned the Los Angeles
Dodgers, too.)
The “fox” who controls this vast media empire is Rupert
Murdoch (born Keith Rupert Murdoch on March 11, 1931),
an Australian turned naturalized American (in 1985) who
began his media career with one newspaper in Adelaide.
Like all hugely successful moguls, Murdoch receives frequent
criticism. A large scandal rocked his empire in the summer of
2011 when one of his British publications, News of the
World, was implicated for illegally obtaining information
and invading privacy, including bribing and phone hacking.
The allegation that tipped the scale was hacking into the
voice mail of murdered teenager Milly Dowler, possibly
deleting messages and leading her parents to think she was
still alive. The tabloid closed its doors, publishing its last
issue on July 10, 2011. Soon after, News Corp. dropped
32
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
managers as they try to trim headquarters’ budgets
to reduce overhead. Nevertheless, cable group own-
ers tend to centralize programming more than
broadcasting groups do because cable has no special
local responsibilities under federal law (as does
broadcasting). Programming in the case of cable sys-
tems refers to what networks they carry, although
many of the largest MSOs also own several cable
program networks, so they also produce programs
and have a vested interest in distributing them to
all the markets they reach, irrespective of local
preferences.
Executives concerned with programming, like
those in every other aspect of broadcasting, cable,
and new media, constantly need to update their
knowledge of the rapidly evolving field and the rap-
idly increasing competition. The electronic trade press
provides constant updates, but even more important
are the many trade and professional associations that
provide personal meetings, demonstrations, exhibits,
seminars, and publications. Dozens of such associa-
tions bring practitioners together at conferences on
every conceivable aspect of the media, all of which
touch on programming in one way or another—
its $12 billion bid to acquire the remaining shares of
British Sky Broadcasting. Rupert and his son, James, were
called to testify before a British Parliamentary Committee
regarding the allegations. Murdoch denied responsibility
for what happened, arguing that the decisions were made
by those he trusted. However, he did say he was
“shocked, appalled, and shamed” at what had happened,
apologizing in an advertisement “for the serious wrongdoing
that occurred.” At the company’s annual shareholders’
meeting in Los Angeles on October 21, 2011, some
called for his ouster, but Rupert and his sons James and
Lachlan survived the vote, retaining control of the media
empire.
The scandal caused many in America to question, once
again, the rightness of behemoth media conglomerates.
Can Fox news reporters and journalists from News Corp.’s
many other print and electronic media be objective in
reporting on the man who has the power to fire them? How
can reporters be removed far enough from managers to
operate independently, or can they? What do you think
about media consolidation in light of the News Corp.
scandal?
In addition to the phone hacking charges, other criticism
is aimed at Murdoch, too. For example, while some of the
programs on FOX television are applauded for their wit and
innovation, such as The Simpsons and House, others are
derided for their debauchery and meanness, such as Family
Guy and Hell’s Kitchen. No one can argue, though, that
FOX network has spawned some megahits, such as Amer-
ican Idol and Glee. Murdoch has often claimed that he is
“a catalyst for change” in media. One implication is that,
while a few people always condemn new ideas, the suc-
cess of his enterprises demonstrates that hundreds of mil-
lions want to buy his programs, services and publications.
Another implication is that his successes have forced others
in the media business to change, too… and perhaps not
always for the better.
Photo of Rupert Murdoch at the World Economic Forum, January
26, 2007, used by permission under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Share Alike 2.0 Generic license, courtesy of the World
Economic Forum. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Rupert_
Murdoch_-_WEF_Davos_2007.jpg.
Edward J. Fink, Ph.D.
California State University, Fullerton
*Columbia Journalism Review (www.cjr.org/resources/).
CHAPTER 1 A Scaffold for Programmers
33
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
conferences on advertising, copyright, education,
engineering, digital media, finance, law, management,
marketing, music, news, production, programs, pro-
motion, research, satellites and telephone, to name
just some.
Licensing groups provide the legal and eco-
nomic environment that ensures that artists get
paid royalties for their works. The best-known of
these associations, organizations and groups are
listed in 1.22, with more about the most important
of all associations to programmers—the National
Association
of
Television
Program
Executives
(NATPE)—in 1.23.
Regulatory Influences
The hottest topic in media regulation is net neutral-
ity, the idea that FCC should develop rules prevent-
ing
broadband
companies
from
favoring
their
owned content and from charging fees for giving
priority to certain signals on the internet. This dis-
agreement pits giant broadband companies as Com-
cast, Google, Verison, AT&T and Time Warner
against those who favor treating the internet like
telephone lines, where all comers get free and equal
treatment. The pivotal issue might be called “pay to
play,” meaning that distributors are likely to give
favored treatment to companies that pay the most
(see Chapter 4).
Broadcast radio and television, more than most
other kinds of businesses, must live within con-
straints imposed by national, state and local statutes
and administrative boards. Moreover, public opin-
ion imposes its own limitations, even in the absence
of government regulation. The trend to “let the mar-
ketplace decide” led to enormous media conglomer-
ates and limited government involvement. Only a
1.21
Group Ownership
T
he main programming advantages of group owner-
ship are the cost savings in program purchases,
equipment buys (such as computers, servers, and cameras),
and service charges (such as by reps and consultants) that
accrue from buying at wholesale, so to speak. Insofar as
groups produce their own programs, they also save
because production costs can be divided among the sev-
eral stations in the group—a kind of built-in syndication
factor. Moreover, group-produced programs increasingly
are offered for sale to other stations in the general syndi-
cation market, constituting an added source of income for
the group owners.
Group buys often give the member stations first crack
at newly released syndicated programming as well as a
lower cost-per-station. Distributors of syndicated pro-
grams can afford such discounts because it costs them
less in overhead to make a sale to a single headquarters
than to deal individually with many stations (see Chapter
6 on Syndication). A large group can deliver millions of
households in a single sale. Large group owners can
also afford a type of negative competition called ware-
housing. This refers to the practice of snapping up
desirable syndicated program offerings for which the
group has no immediate need but which it would like to
keep out of the hands of the competition by holding
them on the shelf until useful later. Also, group execu-
tives have bird’s-eye views of the national market that
sometimes give them advance information, enabling
them to bid on new programs before the competition
even knows of their availability. For their part, producers
often minimize the risk of investing in new series by
delaying the start of production until at least one major
group owner has made an advance commitment to buy
a series. Many promising program proposals for first-run
access time languish on the drawing boards for lack of
an advance commitment to purchase.
The stations in the top four markets that are owned and
operated by the national television networks exercise
extraordinary power by virtue of their group-owned status.
Each such O&O group reaches about two-fifths of the entire
U.S. population of television households, making their col-
lective decisions to buy syndicated programs crucial to the
success of such programs. Thus, these few group-owned
stations influence national programming trends for the entire
syndicated program market. So important to the success of
programs is their exposure in the top markets that some
34
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
few rules remain that programmers must know to
avoid possible violations within their jurisdictions.
Fairness and Equal Opportunity
Both broadcast stations and local cable-originated
programming must observe the rules governing
both the appearances of candidates for political
office
(equal
time)
and
station
editorials.
The
equal-time rule for political candidates demands
that broadcasters and cable access channels (not
cable or satellite operators) provide equal opportu-
nities for federal candidates, effectively preventing
entertainers and news personnel from running for
office while still remaining on their programs.
Although the FCC has formally abandoned its
specific Fairness Doctrine concerning discussion of
controversial
issues
of
local
importance,
many
managers continue to adhere to the basic fairness
concepts as a matter of station policy. Day-to-day
enforcement of such rules and policies devolves
largely on the production staff in the course of opera-
tions, but programmers often articulate station poli-
cies regarding balance and stipulate compliance
routines. Fairness looms large in talk radio and talk
television because the talk so often deals with contro-
versial topics.
Monopoly
Traditionally, various rules have limited concentra-
tions of media ownership, all of them aimed at
ensuring diversity of information sources—in keep-
ing with implicit First Amendment goals—although
the recent trend has been to loosen the rules. None-
theless, group owners of broadcast stations are
syndication companies offer special inducements to get
their wares on the prestigious prime access slots on network
O&O stations. These inducements can take the form of
attractively structured barter syndication deals or cash pay-
ments to ensure carriage. The latter type of deal, known as
a compensation incentive, occurs primarily in New York,
the country’s premier market.
Although O&O stations remain legally responsible for
serving their individual local markets, they naturally also
reflect the common goals and interests of their networks. As
an example of a rather subtle network influence, consider
the choice of the prime access program that serves as a
lead-off to the network’s evening schedule. An ordinary
affiliate (that is, one bound to its network only by contract
rather than by the ties of ownership; see Chapter 8) can
feel free to choose a program that serves its own best
interests as a station. An O&O station, however, must
choose a lead-in advantageous to the network program
that follows, irrespective of its advantage to the station.
O&O stations also must take great care in choosing and
producing programs to protect the group image, especially
in New York, where they live next door to company
headquarters.
The big cable and telephone system owners (MVPDs)
have many of the same advantages as broadcast groups,
however. Cable systems normally obtain licenses to carry
entire channels of cable programming rather than individ-
ual programs or program series (see Chapters 3 and 9).
Thus, major MVPDs, negotiating on behalf of hundreds of
local cable or phone systems and tens of thousands of
subscribers, gain enormous leverage over program suppli-
ers. Indeed, a cable network’s very survival depends upon
signing up one or more of the largest MVPDs.
Group headquarters programmers and their sometimes
extensive staffs impose an additional layer of bureaucracy
that tends to slow local decision making. Local program
executives know their local markets best and can adapt
programming strategies to specific needs and conditions. A
group-acquired TV program may be well suited to a large
market but will not necessarily meet the needs of a small-
market member of the group. When a huge MVPD such as
Comcast makes a purchase for hundreds of different sys-
tems, not every system will find the choice adapted ideally
to its needs. Group ownership imposes some inflexibility as
the price of its economies of scale.
CHAPTER 1 A Scaffold for Programmers
35
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
particularly sensitive to regulatory compliance in
this area because they have a high financial stake
in compliance and, of course, are conspicuous tar-
gets susceptible to monopoly charges.
For many years, cable franchises were regarded
as “natural monopolies,” because it seemed uneco-
nomic to duplicate cable installations (overbuilds).
Telephone companies, however, have stepped into
this breach. Upgrading existing telephone lines to
fiber permitted digital broadband delivery (called
DSL), starting the trend for phone companies to
compete for cable consumers by offering packages
of
telephone,
internet
connection
and
satellite
television channels in some communities. Now
Comcast’s XFinity, AT&T’s U-Verse and Verizon’s
FiOS battle head to head for subscribers in many
large markets.
Localism
The FCC traditionally nudged broadcasters toward
a modicum of localism in their program mixes, and
expected licensees to find out about local problems
1.22
The Associations
H
ere is a list of important organizations, along with
the home page listings (when available) for the
World Wide Web.
Major Industry Trade Associations
National Association of Broadcasters (NAB): www.nab.org
National Cable & Telecommunications Association
(NCTA): www.ncta.com
Radio-Television News Directors Association (RTNDA):
www.rtnda.org
Writers Guild of America—West & East (WGAW &
WGAE): http://wga.org & www.wgaeast.org
Independent Film Association (IFTA): www.ifta-online.org
Programming Organizations
National Association of Television Program Executives
(NATPE): www.natpe.org
MIPTV: www.miptv.com
National Federation of Community Broadcasters (NFCB):
www.nfcb.org
Alliance for Community Media (ACM): www.alliancecm.
org
Media Communications Association International (MCAI),
formerly the Independent Television Association:
www.mca-i.org
Association of Independent Commercial Producers (AICP):
www.aicp.com
Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers
(AMPTP): www.amptp.org
Music Licensing Groups
American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers
(ASCAP): www.ascap.com
Broadcast Music, Inc. (BMI): www.bmi.com
SESAC: www.sesac.com
Technical Societies
Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers
(SMPTE): www.smpte.org
Society of Broadcast Engineers: www.sbe.org
International Radio & Television Society (IRTS): www.irts.
org
Visual Effects Society (represents special effects artists):
www.visualeffectssociety.com
International Association for Radio, Telecommunications
and Electromagnetics (NARTE): www.narte.org
Marketing and Sales Organizations
Television Bureau of Advertising (TVB): www.tvb.org
Radio Advertising Bureau (RAB): www.rab.com
Syndicated Network Television Association (SNTA):
www.snta.org
Cabletelevision Advertising Bureau (CAB): www.
onetvworld.org
Cable & Telecommunications Association for Marketing
(CTAM): www.ctam.com
Promax: www.promax.tv
36
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
in a station’s service area and to offer programs
dealing with those problems. In licensing and license
renewals, the FCC gives preferential points for local
ownership, owner participation in management and
program plans tailored to local needs. However,
localism seems to be getting less and less emphasis.
Moreover, cable operators are not licensed by the
FCC and so have no such federal public-interest
mandate, and as a result, cable programmers differ
fundamentally in their programming outlook from
traditional broadcast programmers.
Nonetheless, increased competition for audi-
ences now drives local broadcasters and cable opera-
tors toward increased localism. In many cases,
localism has boosted the financial return for those
stations with a long, honorable history of commu-
nity orientation. It is good business to serve the com-
munity, not merely a requirement. On the other
1.23
National Association of Television Program Executives (NATPE)
W
hen television programmers formed their own pro-
fessional organization in 1962, they called them-
selves the National Association of Television Program
Executives (NATPE)—tacitly acknowledging that member-
ship would be dominated by general managers and other
executives who play more important programming roles
than those specifically designated as programmers.
Although programmers may track the performance of pro-
grams and come up with the ideas for new purchases, the
executives are the ones who authorize the money—and
make no mistake, programs are enormously expensive,
running into the tens and hundreds of millions in large
markets just to rerun off-network hits.
The broadcast station programming team usually con-
sists of the general manager, sales manager and program
manager. In cable organizations, the executive in charge
of marketing plays a key management role and may have
the most influence on programming decisions. In recent
years, the role of program manager at many network affili-
ates has diminished as higher-level staff members frequently
make programming decisions.
Syndicators put programs on display nationally and
internationally at a number of annual meetings and trade
shows. For showcases, they rely especially on the annual
conventions of NATPE and the National Cable Television
Association (NCTA) held each spring. Starting in 2003,
NATPE faced some competition from the Syndicated Net-
work Television Association (SNTA), which meets in New
York in conjunction with the Association of National
Advertisers (ANA) that every year holds its well-regarded
Television Advertising Forum.
At the annual NATPE conventions, hundreds of syndi-
cators fight for the attention of television programming
executives, offering a huge array of feature films (singly and
in packages), made-for-TV movies, off-network series, first-
run series, specials, miniseries, documentaries, docudra-
mas, news services, game shows, cartoons, variety shows,
soap operas, sports shows, concerts, talk shows and so on.
Trade publications carry lists of exhibitors and their offerings
at the time of the conventions. (Chapter 6 gives a
selection of syndicators along with examples of their
offerings.) At the same time, the largest portion of sessions
at recent NATPE conferences has been dedicated to the
new media, but the attendees were largely new-media
companies and content producers seeking ideas about
how to gain distribution.
One industry source estimated that 90 percent of
NATPE attendees continued to be focused on the traditional
buying and selling of programs, while 10 percent were
focused on the new media. Europe has a similar annual
program trade fair, MIPTV. Formerly at that fair, the flow of
commercial syndicated programming between the United
States and other countries ran almost exclusively from the
United States.
Public broadcasting first whetted American viewers’
appetites for foreign programs. And with such specialized
cable services as the Discovery Channel, featuring foreign
documentaries, and Bravo, with foreign dramatic offerings,
as well as AZN Television’s Asian programs, and Univi-
sion’s Mexican and Spanish programs, the international
flow has become somewhat more reciprocal, although the
United States is still much more often an exporter than an
importer. Just as at the NATPE conventions, there is great
interest at the MIPTV trade fair in innovation and new digi-
tal media.
CHAPTER 1 A Scaffold for Programmers
37
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
hand, economic forces lead to giant corporations for
whom localism gets more lip service than action.
Copyright
With the exceptions of news, public-affairs and local
productions, all owned programs entail the payment
of royalties to copyright owners—whether broad-
cast, carried by cable, or distributed over the inter-
net. (Of course, user-supplied content such as on
YouTube only necessitates royalty payments when
replayed on
commercial services.)
Programmers
should understand how the copyright royalty system
works, how users of copyrighted material negotiate
licenses from distributors to use such material, and
what limitations on program use the copyright law
entails.
Broadcast stations and networks usually obtain
blanket licenses for music from copyright licensing
organizations, which give licensees the right to unlim-
ited plays of all the music in their catalogs (in pro-
grams, promos or song play). For the rights to
individual programs and films, users usually obtain
licenses authorizing a limited number of performances
(plays) over a stipulated time period. One of the pro-
grammer’s arts is to schedule the repeat plays at stra-
tegic intervals to get the best mileage possible out of
the product.
Stations and networks obtain licenses for the
materials they broadcast, with fees calculated on
the basis of their over-the-air coverage, but cable
television systems have introduced a new and
exceedingly controversial element into copyright
licensing.
Importation
of
distant
signals
have
stretched the original single-market program license
to include hundreds of unrelated markets all across
the country—to the obvious detriment of copyright
owners (the producers), the ones who stand to make
money from the reuse of their programs. The Copy-
right Law of 1976 took at stab at solving this prob-
lem by introducing the compulsory licensing of cable
companies that retransmit television station signals.
It provided retransmission compensation to the
copyright owners in the form of a percentage of
cable companies’ revenues that went directly to the
Copyright Royalty Tribunal for distribution (mostly
to sports rights holders).
The Cable Act of 1992 went further and insisted
that cable systems receive retransmission consent
from broadcast stations for their signals, which led
some to believe that cable operators would finally
pay
broadcasters
for
retransmission.
The
issue
seemed largely resolved when most affiliates of
major television networks made deals with cable
operators for a second local cable channel in lieu
of cash payment.
In 2007, however, several small cable operators
agreed to pay the CBS network a per-subscriber fee
(cable compensation) for the right to carry its pro-
gramming,
a
break-through
for
broadcasters.
Although the initial amount was small (about $.50
per subscriber), the deal set a new precedent in
cable/broadcast relations that gave broadcasters
leverage in eventually gaining a second revenue
stream (in addition to advertising), something long
desired by broadcasters and, until then, adamantly
refused by cable operators (more on this topic in
Chapter
3).
Nowadays,
periodic
battles
erupt
between broadcasters and cable MVPDs, threaten-
ing the loss of favorite programs or, horrors, a foot-
ball game in one or another market until negotiated
settlements are is reached. Chapter 2 deals more
with this hot topic. The hungrier broadcasters get,
the more they become anxious to share the sub-
scriber dollars going to MVPDs.
A related copyright matter, the syndicated
exclusivity rule, often called syndex, gives television
stations local protection from the competition of
signals from distant stations (notably superstations)
imported by cable systems. The rule is based on the
long-held principle that a station licensed to broad-
cast a given syndicated program has normally paid
for exclusive rights to broadcast that program
within its established market area. Satellite retrans-
mission of certain stations (the half-dozen supersta-
tions) undermines this market-specific definition of
licensing and divides audiences. The rule requires
cable systems to black out imported programs
that duplicate the same programs broadcast locally.
Most syndicators avoid selling
their shows to
38
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
superstations
in
order
to
make
the
shows
“syndex-proof.”
Lotteries, Fraud, Obscenity, Indecency
Federal laws generally forbid lotteries, fraud and
obscenity, and laws regarding them apply to locally
originated cable as well as to broadcast programs.
Conducting gaming and cheating audiences are defi-
nitely forbidden activities, and the fines are prohibi-
tive. Shows that feature state-run lotteries, however,
are an exception to the rule. If a state says stations
can air the state lottery, the FCC doesn’t care, but
stations cannot run their own lotteries to make
money. Programmers also need to be aware of
special Communications Act provisions regarding
fraudulent contests, plugola and payola (see Chap-
ters 11 and 12).
Indecency,
a
specialized
interpretation
of
obscenity laws, appears to apply only to broadcast-
ing. The 1984 Cable Act sets specific penalties for
transmitting “any matter which is obscene or other-
wise not protected by the Constitution” (Section
639), but subsequent Supreme Court decisions
affirmed that cable operators qualify for First
Amendment protection of their speech freedom, as
does the internet. This puts on those alleging obscen-
ity the heavy burden of proving the unconstitution-
ality of material to which they object; in fact, several
court
decisions
have
overthrown
too-inclusive
obscenity provisions in municipal franchises. In
practice, MVPDs have greater freedom to offend
the sensibilities of their more straitlaced viewers
than do broadcasters, whose wider reach and depen-
dence on the “public airwaves” (electromagnetic
spectrum) make them more vulnerable to public
pressure. For some years, Congress has shown
signs of tightening the restrictions on cable, includ-
ing restrictions on nudity.
In a 1987 ruling, the FCC broadened the previ-
ous definition of prohibited words in broadcasting
to cover indecency. That definition had been based
on a 1973 case involving the notorious “seven dirty
words” used by comedian George Carlin in a
recorded comedy routine broadcast by WBAI-FM
in New York. Responding to complaints about
raunchy talk-radio hosts (shock jocks), the FCC
has repeatedly advised broadcasters that censorable
indecent
language
could
include
anything
that
“depicts or describes, in terms patently offensive as
measured by contemporary community standards
for the broadcast medium, sexual and excretory
activities or organs.” Raunchy radio content from
Howard Stern led the FCC to levy a $1.7 million
fine on his syndicator (see Chapter 12), eventually
driving Stern to unregulated satellite radio. The
increase in number and size of indecency fines that
started in 2004 hastened the migration of most adult
radio programming to Sirius XM. By the late 2000s,
pressure on stations to excise certain indecent words
from programming seemed ironic—given that the
U.S. president and other elected officials had pub-
licly used some of them.
Moreover, the FCC has designated late night as
a safe harbor on television and radio for adult mate-
rial. It is noteworthy that in this designation the
commission used the words for the broadcast
medium, implying that broadcasting should be trea-
ted differently from other media, a concept out of
keeping with much FCC-sponsored deregulation.
Thus, cable networks feel free to schedule dramas
at 7 or 8 P.M. that most broadcasters would only
air at 10 P.M.
Libel
News, public-affairs programs, and radio talk shows
in particular run the risk of inviting libel suits.
Because of their watchdog role and the protection
afforded them by the First Amendment, the media
enjoy immunity from punishment for libel resulting
from honest errors in reporting and commentary on
public figures. Unlike on the internet, broadcasters
must take due care, however, to avoid giving rise
to charges of malice or “reckless disregard for the
truth.”
Though the media traditionally had won most
libel cases brought against them, by the early 1990s
this trend had been reversed, and juries awarded
huge fines. Moreover, win or lose, it costs megadol-
lars to defend cases in court. Managers responsible
for news departments and radio talk shows need to
CHAPTER 1 A Scaffold for Programmers
39
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
be aware of libel pitfalls and to institute defensive
routines. These defenses include issuing clear-cut
guidelines, ensuring suitable review of editing, and
excising libelous matter from promotional and
other incidental material. To assist local program-
mers, the National Association of Broadcasters
(NAB) has issued a video that illustrates some of
the common ways news programs inadvertently
open themselves to libel suits.
Digital Must-Carry
Since the late 1990s, the FCC has pushed for con-
version of all U.S. television households to digital
reception both to foster efficiency and to release
the traditional over-the-air (analog) channels for
reassignment to Wi-Fi, mobile telephony, and other
uses. A 2006 Geneva agreement set 2015 as the
world switch-off date, after which no country need
protect the analog signals in adjacent countries, and
most countries have moved swiftly to convert. As of
2012 about 92 percent of U.S. households had con-
verted, and the process went even more swiftly in
Europe where the EU mandated switch-off at the
end of 2012. The rise of 4G smartphones and tablets
puts even more pressure on the system to free up
spectrum.
The
FCC’s
fundamental
must-carry
rules
require cable companies to carry all locally-licensed
television stations, and the HD regulations require
carriage in the station’s originating format (HD in
most cases), while also providing a non-HD digital
signal for subscribers without HD equipment. These
rules explain the very long repetitive lists of channels
each cable operator provides. What will happen,
and how fast, with 3D is an open question, but
when 3D becomes commonplace for stations, the
must-carry rules are likely to apply.
However, splinter signals from a station do not
have must-carry protection. Moreover, broadcast
networks cannot charge cable companies license
fees unless retransmission consent agreements have
been reached instead of must-carry. As already men-
tioned, such negotiations have led big cable opera-
tors to hold specific signals hostage temporarily
(such as cutting football games or a network’s entire
signal) until fee agreements are reached.
Ethical Influences
Programmers continually wrestle with standards.
They are not necessarily questions of media freedom
but of taste. What is good taste? Like anything else,
the definition depends on a consensus of the people
who have to live with the definition.
Over a period of time, the erosion of public
taste standards has mirrored the erosion of other
aspects of public life (such as manners). Viewers
might be more offended if television were the only
culprit, but it is increasingly impractical to expect to
be able to take a walk in the mall or go for a drive
on the highway without being assaulted by some-
one’s “free speech” in the form of a lewd T-shirt
or scatological bumper sticker. In the process, the
public consensus about “what is shocking” impinges
on “what is good taste.” Some viewers will defend a
program with violent or sexual content by saying,
“You think Show A is bad. It’s not nearly as bad
as Show B.” Show A becomes the standard, and
Show B is the exception, until Show C comes
along. Then Show B becomes the new standard,
and Show C the new exception.
The ever-widening spiral may not be rapid, but
there seems to be a steady broadening of what is
acceptable. Programmers are caught between the
expectations of one audience that wants “in your
face”
entertainment
and
the
complaints
from
another audience that struggles to hold onto civility.
A minority of producers (and their networks) go for
shock value and try to lower the standards one small
notch at a time. Like the drops of limestone slowly
accumulating on the floor of a cavern until a stalag-
mite forms, the amount of impolite language and
situations has grown into high peaks in some pro-
grams on evening television, especially late-night
shows. The exposed right breast of Janet Jackson
in Super Bowl 2004’s halftime show apparently
was the final straw for the FCC, which immediately
began to reassert its regulations against indecent
programming, as it does periodically.
40
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Not everyone agrees there is a problem with
program standards. Here is a look at the arguments
currently in vogue when the topic of ethical stan-
dards is discussed.
“It’s just entertainment.” The public derives its
values from such institutions as family, schools,
churches and the mass media, but as the authority
of families, schools and churches declines, the con-
tent of radio and television programs takes on a
larger role in the socialization of young people.
“If you don’t like it, turn it off.” True, but I can
turn off only my own television set. My neighbors’ kids
will still be intoxicated by the violence in afternoon chil-
dren’s programs. They will also learn from prime-time
television and soap operas that it’s all right to be pro-
miscuous. The cultural values of a nation are not wired
to my individual ability to shut off my set. If someone
poisoned all the drinking water in my area, you might
say, “If you don’t like it, don’t drink it.” I guess I could
buy bottled water, but I have to live in the same society
that my neighbors’ children inhabit.
“Parents have the responsibility to monitor
programming.” This argument rarely comes from a
parent, unless it’s a parent who works as an execu-
tive at one of the broadcast networks. Anyone who
thinks this will work is overly wishful. Children will
see what they want to see if it is readily available at a
friend’s house, their daycare center, the mall or other
group viewing locations. One person who has some
control over the ready availability of seamy pro-
gramming is the programmer.
“Censorship, even voluntary censorship, vio-
lates First Amendment rights.” The Bill of Rights
has 10 amendments, but somehow the first gets all
the attention, perhaps because the media readily
control what gets our attention. A lot of other free-
doms are equally precious to the well-being of citi-
zens, such as the right to a fair trial. The community
standards of the present age would easily shock the
framers of the Constitution.
A drinking water analogy is apt. If a very slow
poison is released into the water supply and results
in amoral, uninformed residents, then the culprits
are those who work for the treatment plant. Like-
wise, those who choose and schedule programs for
radio and television have the means to maintain
some level of decency in the mass media.
How did things get so out of whack? When
there were only three networks, the Standards and
Practices departments held a pretty tight rein, but
when pay movies and MTV came along, the compe-
tition for audiences heated up. Certainly, the most
egregious examples of sex and violence come from
movies and music videos, yet some viewers want still
more adult content. The slow erosion of civil public
behavior also affects media limits, but the amounts
of sexual and violent content are merely surface
issues. What matters are deeper concerns about
how people in society learn to solve problems and
get along in spite of differences.
The Pressures and Pulls
Well into this new millennium, the landscape of tele-
vision continues to undergo a sea change, and you
have to ride on it or with it. Currently, the industry
pressures consumers to switch from digital to high
definition. While broadcasting remains the largest
and most powerful advertising medium, the new
media check its growth.
The Federal Communications Commission has
indicated that over the coming decades, broadcasting
will be replaced by broadband. Eventually, media
entertainment may go entirely wireless, replacing
both broadcasting and cable (including most satellite
transmissions). And some new technology will even-
tually replace the Wi-Fi of today, perhaps internet
signals carried by light fixtures that fluctuate below
our visibility. Magic, huh? Certainly more upheaval
in the communications business world lies ahead.
Instead of a wealth of free programming, all
entertainment content may eventually require some
form of pay. We are evolving toward paying once
for access to a movie or television program on any
and all media devices. But there’s a long way to go.
At this time, the strategy for the traditional media
seems to be “if you can’t beat them, buy them.” In
essence, a single company must program at least two
versions of itself—one in broadcast (or cable) and one
CHAPTER 1 A Scaffold for Programmers
41
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
in broadband. In addition to online services, programs
with ads now appear on cell phones and tablets, and
Americans own nearly as many cell phones as televi-
sion sets (and the Japanese seem to own more tablets
than laptops). Indeed, worldwide, there are far more
cell phones than television sets. Because the spread of
advertising to multiple media threatens the traditional
financial model of broadcasting, the big companies
have bought, merged and developed their way into
all aspects of media, becoming media giants with fin-
gers in a wide range of media pies.
Influences work both ways: Although viewers
quickly noticed that broadcast television adopted
many features of computer screen displays, particu-
larly in newscasts and sports, ironically, the current
online world is growing to look more like the
broadcast world. A cluttered screen doesn’t work
well on a cell phone.
Notes
1. Several narrative series have had another characteristic:
Not only do individual episodes have ends, the entire serial
concludes after some years, such as Lost and 24 and for
telenovelas. This limited format has moved to cable chan-
nels such as Syfy, with series such as Stargate Universe and
Andromeda that run to a conclusion.
2. Bill Carter, “MEDIA; TV’s Loneliest Night of the Week
Is Starting to Look Very Familiar.” New York Times, June
21, 2004. www.NYTimes.com/
3. J. G. Webster, P. F. Phalen and L. W. Lichty. Ratings
analysis: The theory and practice of audience research,
3rd ed. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2006.
42
PART ONE
Introduction to Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
P A R T2
Frameworks for
Media Programming
Part Two Outline
Chapter 2
Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies 45
Chapter 3
Multichannel Television Strategies 91
Chapter 4
Online Television Strategies 128
43
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
This page intentionally left blank 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A P T E R2
Prime-Time Network
Programming Strategies
William J. Adams and Susan Tyler Eastman
Chapter Outline
Blurring the Boundaries
Prime Hours
The Scandals
Vertical Integration
Diminishing Audiences
The Prime-Time Advertising
Game
Audience Targeting
Ideal Demographics and Flow
Classic Scheduling Strategies
Appointment Viewing
Prime-Time Ratings
Sweeps and Overnights
Pocketpieces and MNA Reports
Prime-Time Scheduling
Practices
Shifting Network Seasons
Limited Series
Summer Schedules
Premieres
Program Renewal
Program Lifespan
Pivotal Numbers
Program Costs
New Program Selection
Program Concepts and Scripts
Advances and Pilots
Schedule Churn
Promotion’s Role
Changing Format Emphases
Network Decision Making
The Risks and Rewards
Ahead
Notes
45
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
A
chapter on prime-time network programming
in this day and age! To many of you it must
seem like a manual for the proverbial rearrangement
of deck chairs aboard the Titanic—after it hit the ice-
berg and has sunk up to its deck. In the last half-
decade,
the
broadcast
networks
(Six
English-
language now according to Nielsen) lost over half
the audience they had and now have prime-time rat-
ings that are the equivalent of those of the better cable
networks. In 2009 both Broadcasting & Cable and
Variety stopped publishing weekly ratings, probably
because they were so embarrassing to the networks.
Nonetheless, despite the shrinking size of network
audiences, prime time still matters a great deal to a
lot of people.
The ABC, CBS, FOX and NBC television net-
works are the most recognizable parts of their parent
corporations although not the most profitable seg-
ments. They haven’t been that for a long time. But
even today they serve three key functions. First, the
networks often act as loss leaders drawing attention
to the programs and stars, despite being outdone in
profits by owned stations (O&Os), cable networks,
theme parks, publishing and other commercial inter-
ests. Second, they are systems for cross-promoting
these
other
less
visible
corporate
counterparts.
Third, it can be argued that until recently the
major
networks’
advertising
and
entertainment
roles were most useful because they deflected criti-
cism from other aspects of the company business.
The TV networks act as magnets for people who
want something to complain about—and noise
about actors and TV shows limits potentially nega-
tive stories related to other corporate interests.
All roles have weakened, however, in the last
few years. ABC, CBS and NBC’s ability to generate
and control news related to their corporate busi-
nesses diminished very fast once FOX’s cable news,
the internet and talk radio broke their collective
voice monopoly (of course, a bad smell surrounds
FOX’s
parent
company
for
the
goings-on
in
London). Nowadays, there is plenty of chatter
about every success and every blunder made by
any of the networks, sometimes with political and
economic ramifications.
On the positive side, the networks represent
brand names that are known around the world.
The CW and MyTVNetwork, the newer English-
language networks, strive to catch up with the estab-
lished entities, just as the Spanish-language networks
Telemundo and TeleFutura strive to catch up with
front-runner Univision. Moreover, because network
audience sizes have plunged in recent years, major
changes in how the traditional networks select,
schedule and evaluate programs have occurred, the
focus of this chapter.
Blurring the Boundaries
During the last few years the separation between the
five top media companies has begun to blur. This
started when CBS and Time Warner partnered, turn-
ing the WB and UPN into the CW, thus also giving
CBS access to Warner Brothers productions. Viacom
owns Paramount and once owned CBS, and while
officially Viacom and CBS are separate companies,
they still share the same chairman and several other
board
members.
Disney
and
ABC
are
wholly
enmeshed, and Comcast, with its dozens of cable
networks, now controls NBC.
At
the
same
time,
several
networks
have
launched such joint online ventures as Hulu (see
Chapter 4). It is owned by Disney, News Corp and
Comcast/NBCUniversal. In 2011, Warner Brothers
purchased Flixster and Rotten Tomatoes, thus giv-
ing it an outlet equal to Hulu. Warner Brothers
plans to introduce a system that will allow videos
downloaded on Flixster to be saved so that they,
like DVDs, can be viewed at any time. How much
they’ll charge for this service and whether CBS will
be a favored participant is unknown, but just the
suggestion was enough to send Disney and Apple
into fits. The takeover of Rotten Tomatoes seems
odd as this site does not offer videos. It reviews
films, and people were openly wondering just how
valuable those reviews would now be when one of
the producers of those films owned the site.
Regardless of what one may think about all this
merging, it will continue. Even as you read this, the
46
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Big Five are negotiating still other joint agreements
in the areas of production and distribution. Broad-
casting’s survival in the face of Netflix and other
internet innovations, while still facing the threat of
rising cable audiences, necessitates new relationships
among competitors.
Prime Hours
Of the more than 50,000 hours the nine broadcast
networks program yearly, about one-quarter is sin-
gled out for special critical attention—the nearly 170
hours of commercial prime-time programming each
week. That figure, multiplied by 52 weeks, equals
more than 8,800 hours of prime-time network pro-
grams a year provided collectively by ABC, CBS,
NBC, FOX, UNI, CW, MNTV, TEL (Telemundo)
and TEF (TeleFutura).
Audience ratings throughout the day are impor-
tant, of course, but prime-time ratings are the ones
everyone takes note of, especially those of the Big
Five (ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC and Univision). The 22
prime-time hours—from 8 to 11 P.M. (EST) six days
each week and from 7 to 11 P.M. on Sundays—
constitute the center ring for the traditional networks,
the arena in which their mettle is tested. FOX
programs 15 hours on seven nights of the week,
competing head-to-head with the older networks.
CW programs 13 hours (avoiding Saturdays), and
MNTV programs 10 hours, dodging both Saturdays
and Sundays. Univision fills 28 hours weekly, starting
at 7 and running until 11 P.M.; some of this program-
ming is duplicated on TeleFutura. Telemundo pro-
grams all of prime time but not necessarily with
original content. (Filled with a mix of original pro-
duction and syndicated Mexican and South American
programs, Univision nonetheless beats all competition
in some markets.)
Prime-time programs are the traditional source
of virtually all off-network, online and much foreign
syndication plus DVD, tablet and smart phone sales,
and in consequence, remain the centers of long-term
profit potential. Also, while the rating difference
between prime-time and non-prime-time periods
may not be as large as it once was, prime time is
still the most heavily promoted and most talked
about part of any schedule. It remains the focus of
critical and regulatory concern. The prime hours
make or break a network’s reputation and continue
to be the most visible part of an entertainment cor-
poration’s businesses (see 2.1).
The Scandals
When we talk about broadcast television, we are
really talking about one small part of five giant
entertainment monopolies that use their airwaves
to endlessly cross-promote the various parts of
their
businesses,
to
influence
government
and,
when possible, to swallow or defeat competitive
threats. The network morning shows have become
thinly disguised vehicles for promoting the parent
company’s prime-time and cable interests. The mag-
azine business is obsessed with promoting the latest
stars, newest series, and happenings on the com-
pany’s cable and broadcast networks. Even the ven-
erable 60 Minutes finds it an absolute necessity to
interview the latest author from Simon & Schuster,
owned by CBS. (To this day, few people realize the
publisher and CBS are actually part of the same
2.1
Original Programming’s Role
T
he major difference between the broadcast net-
works and cable networks has long been the
amount of original programming used. The top five
broadcast networks (ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, UNI) have it
throughout their schedules. While the cable networks
generally have original shows in only a portion of their
schedules, there are so many cable networks that the
amount of original programming available for off-network
syndication coming from cable now almost equals that
coming from the broadcast networks. Moreover, cable is
moving toward more original syndicatable production
(see Chapter 9) even as broadcasting moves away from
it. As a result they are now challenging broadcasting for
off-network syndication dollars. More importantly, as
broadcasting has moved more and more into programs
with no afterlife, and as they have continued to push half
hour sitcoms for the syndication market, cable has begun
to take over the international market.
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
47
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
company, just as few of you students realize many of
your expensive textbooks (but not this one) and 60
Minutes come from the same company.)
They all do it. Fox News runs the latest results from
American Idol, a FOX reality show, as if they were the
news equivalents of another war, and virtually every
FOX news personality just happens to have a book,
which he or she mentions constantly, and which just
happens to be published by HarperCollins, a News
Corp-owned publishing house. NBC hypes government
proposals as if they came from Heaven itself—as long
as there’s a contract in it for GE. ABC news shows end-
lessly hype the goings-on at Disney, and CBS loves to
work stars, who just happen to be in the latest Para-
mount picture, into their top programs.
In 2006, this cross-promotion resulted in a disas-
ter for FOX when the public responded with outrage
over O. J. Simpson’s book on “here’s how I would
have committed the murder if I had done it.” The reac-
tion grew so loud it forced the cancellation of the book
deal, a primetime “news” special interview, and
resulted in the firing of a well-known editor at Harper-
Collins (owned by News Corp). CBS executives
breathed a sigh of relief as people forgot about their
2004 Super Bowl costume malfunction, about which
the official line still remains “we knew nothing.”1
In 2010 NBC got embroiled in the Leno/O’Brien
late-night debacle (see Chapter 7), and in 2011 they
were caught censoring the words under God from
the Pledge of Allegiance at the start of the Davis
Cup. In each case, there is little doubt that both
the industry and Hollywood were truly shocked by
the public’s reactions. Why did uproar happen over
these network programming disasters? The answer
is they affected the few truly legendary shows still
left on the networks. These bad decisions caught
the population’s interest and forced them to come
face-to-face with what mainstream television had
become. They didn’t like it.
Vertical Integration
During the 1980s and 1990s, broadcast ratings fell.
Stockholders panicked, and the networks were sold
to other companies, which themselves were then
taken over by giant international entertainment
corporations. Although the giants became more
and more powerful, they could not stop the ratings
slide (see 2.2).
Faced with eroding audience shares, declining
revenues and increased competition for viewers
(often from other parts of their own companies), in
the late-1990s the broadcast networks turned to the
Federal Communications Commission. In response,
in the 1996 Telecommunications Act the FCC
relaxed many of the rules governing broadcasters.
The most dramatic changes in regulations affected
ownership, eventually permitting the networks to
own stations reaching 35 percent of the population.
Further FCC relaxation on ownership or the grant-
ing of exemptions has continued since that time
allowing more cross ownership (owning radio sta-
tions, other TV stations, print interest and so on).
With this enormously increased potential clearance
for
each
network’s
programs
(unlike
affiliates,
owned-stations can’t decline any network programs,
no matter how poorly some are doing), combined
with the power of affiliation and very deep corpo-
rate pockets, the Big Four quickly took over the best
stations in the top markets.
Moreover, the FCC also removed program
ownership limits (the so-called financial interest
rules), thus permitting the networks to actually
own the programs they broadcast. The networks
then used their clout to put an end to most indepen-
dent production houses, eliminating competition
and becoming, as never before in the history of elec-
tronic media, the true producers of their programs.
Thus, most of the programming process, from pro-
duction of programs (by owned studios) to distribu-
tion via the broadcast or cable network through
owned stations and cable systems or through the
web-through owned web sites, to publicity from
the TV and online units that promote everything, is
largely controlled by a few enormous companies.
Being vertically-owned limits what program-
mers can do. For example, each network increas-
ingly feels pressure to program with series owned
by its parent company even if those programs
don’t work. By 2004, no programs were aired that
the networks did not at least partially own. Indeed,
48
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
in an ironic turn of events, the production arms of
the Big Five companies (particularly that of Time
Warner, which was strong in production but much
weaker in distribution) were complaining that other
members of the Big Five wouldn’t even look at their
proposals for new shows until they had been given a
share of ownership. One outcome was that Time/
Warner partnered with CBS to create the CW to
gain access to the CBS network.
Problems arise when business decisions made by
the parent corporation fail to adequately consider
their impact on the television network (see 2.3). In
recent years, FOX and ABC have been in several
clearance fights with large cable or satellite systems
over
rights
payments
and
over
which
other
company-owned networks would have to be carried.
These battles actually resulted in one or both of
these two major broadcast networks being pulled
off the air for a short time in some areas, with dev-
astating results for short-term ratings and advertis-
ing revenues, as well as for long-term audience sizes.
Then, over the New Year’s holiday in 2010, News
Corp went to the mat with Time/Warner cable over
retransmission fees paid to run Fox O&O stations in
nine major markets, even going off the air for a time.
Time/Warner soon agreed to significantly higher
2.2
Graph of Network Ratings
40.0
30.0
20.0
10.0
50.0
Year
Total Rating for Broadcasting
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
This graph shows the total ratings for all broadcast networks from 1989–90 to 2010–11. FOX was added in 1990–91. UPN and WB
were added in 1994–95 and the Spanish language networks were added in 2006–07. For ratings by network see table 2.4.
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
49
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
fees. Suddenly there was a new standard and the
other major companies wanted in. The allure of an
extra one to two billion dollars in “found” money
was just too great, even though it may mean even
further erosions to their audience.2
Even worse, the entire industry seems bent on
self destruction. In the face of massive declines in
the audience, both unions and stars continue to
demand ever-increasing salaries. A look at the net-
work ratings in 2.3 indicates that the networks did
not recover from the writers’ strike that affected the
2008–2009 season. (One axiom of programming is
that loyal viewers who are forced to change their
viewing habits rarely change back.)
But the unions aren’t the only problem. Back in
2003 it was huge news when NBC agreed to pay
each cast member for Friends a million dollars an
episode just to keep them for one more year. At
the time, original episodes of Friends had rating of
about 15. More recent problems with Charlie Sheen
of Two and a Half Men revealed that he was being
paid $2 million an episode, plus his share of syndi-
cation revenue and whatever other perks he con-
tracted, but Two and a Half Men was only getting
about a 4 rating, and that’s less than half what the
show was getting only a few years earlier. While it
may have been the number one sitcom in the country
just then, that is more a sad comment on situation
comedies ratings than praise of the show.
As far as the major broadcast networks are con-
cerned, production costs have just gone too high,
which is one reason the cable networks are moving
in fast on original production (see Chapter 9). They
can do the same show for a fraction of the cost
because salaries are lower (cable networks are
exempt from many union rules) and they seldom
produce their shows in Los Angeles.
Diminishing Audiences
As 2.3 shows, American broadcast network ratings
have been falling over the last two decades. Indeed,
the average primetime rating in 2011 was 2.9 for the
broadcast networks (FOX highest at 3.8 and NBC
lowest at 2). Indeed, by mid-decade, cable’s collective
ratings in prime time had passed those of the combined
broadcast networks. By 2011, individual cable pro-
grams carried in prime time—like Jersey Shore, Bill
O’Reilly, True Blood, Deadliest Catch and others—
were beating competing network broadcast shows in
the ratings, as were such Spanish language programs
as Sabado Gigante, Univision’s highly rated variety
series, and Soy Tu Duena (Women of Steel) its top
rated novella. Removing such megahit shows as CSI
and American Idol from the analysis would drop the
average ratings even further. It’s easy to understand
why problems with just one show, such as Two and a
Half Men at CBS or the end of Smallville on CW, can
throw an entire network into panic.
The Prime-Time Advertising Game
Traditionally, prime time has been the financial
jewel in the media crown, pulling in billions of dol-
lars each year for the networks. Until recently, the
drop in audience size has been compensated for by
higher advertising rates, by adding more spots
within programs (many prime-time shows now air
20 minutes of ads per hour), and by producing
fewer episodes. Increases in advertising rates, as
high as 15 percent per year, have not been uncom-
mon, and complaints from advertisers have been
shrugged off. Where else can they go?
Most prime-time advertising spots are sold in
late May and early June during the up-front sales
period. Advertisers guarantee themselves access to
top programs or desired time slots by locking them
in at least three months in advance. Of course,
because the programs have not aired, there are no
ratings with which to set prices. Therefore, the prices
for ads are based on estimated ratings provided by
advertising agencies and guarantees provided by the
networks. If a network does not make the guaran-
teed rating, it will have to run spots for free until the
number of missed points is made up. If a program
does much better than predicted, the advertisers get
a bargain. The system appears to favor the adverti-
sers, but that is seldom the case.
50
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2.3
Average Prime-Time Network Rating from September to May, 1980 to 2011
Year
ABC
CBS
NBC
FOX
WB/UPN/CW
UNI/TEL
1980–81
18.0
19.0
17.2
1981–82
17.7
18.5
15.2
1982–83
16.6
17.7
14.5
1983–84
16.2
16.8
14.5
1984–85
15.0
16.5
15.8
1985–86
14.3
16.0
17.1
1986–87
13.6
15.4
17.1
1987–88
12.7
13.4
15.4
1988–89
12.6
12.3
15.4
1989–90
12.9
12.1
14.5
1990–91
12.0
11.7
12.5
6.1
1991–92
12.2
13.8
12.3
8.0
1992–93
12.1
12.9
12.0
8.1
1993–94
12.1
11.7
10.3
7.1
1994–95
11.7
10.8
11.5
7.1
1.9/4.1
1995–96
10.5
9.6
11.6
7.3
2.4/3.1
1996–97
9.2
9.6
10.5
7.7
2.6/3.2
1997–98
8.4
9.7
10.2
7.1
3.1/2.8
1998–99
8.1
9.0
8.9
7.0
3.2/2.0
1999–00
9.3
8.6
8.5
5.9
2.6/2.7
2000–01
8.4
8.6
8.0
6.1
2.5/2.4
2001–02
6.3
8.1
8.8
5.7
2.5/2.7
2002–03
6.0
7.9
7.4
5.8
2.5/2.2
2003–04
5.9
8.5
7.3
6.0
2.5/2.3
2004–05
6.4
8.4
6.6
5.3
2.4/2.3
2005–06
6.0
7.3
5.8
5.5
1.9/1.5
2006–07*
6.2
7.8
5.7
6.2
2.0
2.0/0.5
2007–08
5.7
6.4
5.1
6.4
1.6
1.8/.6
2008–09y
2.9
3.1
2.8
3.6
.9
2.0/.7
2009–10
2.4
3.6
2.5
2.9
**
1.1/**
2010–11
2.3
3.6
2.0
3.8
**
1.2/**
Note: The chart combines ratings for ABC, CBS, NBC, FOX, CW, UNI and TEL in the September to May season years when they were
operating with a rating above 1. The FOX network started broadcasting before 1990, but for the first few years its ratings were not reported
in the trade press. Similarly, Univision and Telemundo were not included until 2007. At present, CW, Telemundo and MNTV get ratings of
less than 1 (as small as .4 or .3) and shares of just 1, so they fall within Nielsen’s margin of error and are not reported.
*WB and UPN were combined, for the most part, into CW in 2006.
yThis season involved a writers’ strike that affected the numbers
**Ratings dropped below 1 and were not reported.
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
51
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
In actual numbers, although the ratings look
small, each point represents a percentage of the 116
million television households in America (as esti-
mated by Nielsen in 2012). Thus, a 2.4 rating stands
for about 2 million households, each with an average
of 2.6 people viewing. Even a rating as small as 2.4
means the program is attracting 6 to 7 million people
at one time. Such ratings are sufficient for many
advertisers and still better than average cable pro-
grams earn, but the biggest advertisers are getting
nervous as they also have to pay a lot more for
broadcast programs than for cable programs.
The ability to predict ratings is weak at best, and
the networks tend to be very conservative in their
guarantees. For the last few years, the networks
have further protected themselves by refusing to sell
the top-rated shows except as part of package deals.
In other words, if sponsors want to buy time in a
program like The Mentalist or The Good Wife, they
also have to buy time in much weaker shows. In this
way the networks assure the sale of time slots that
might otherwise be left open. Of course, this means
the sponsors have to take programs they don’t really
want and spend more than they would if they just
bought the strongest shows. Although sponsors
object, they continue to buy just as they always
have. After all, where else are they going to go?
Until recently, that “where else?” question ended
all discussion. It has always been easier for the adver-
tising industry just to do what has always been done.
For 20 years the compensation rates for the agencies
placing advertisements declined steadily (from around
15 percent in the 1980s to the low single digits), giv-
ing them no incentive to make extra efforts.
As audience size continued to decline and net-
work ad rates skyrocketed, however, the corporate
sponsors themselves began to get back into the act.
During the 2004–05 season, many of the biggest
sponsors refused to go along with network attempts
to make double-digit increases in advertising rates,
forcing the broadcast networks to drop increases
back to 6 to 8 percent. For the first time in that
season, almost half of all prime-time slots had not
been sold by the end of the up-front sales period,
2.4
Owners and Audits
A
recent event illustrated how corporate profits can
dominate the business decisions of subsidiaries.
According to trade reports, Peter Jackson, internationally
recognized for his Lord of the Rings movies, broke off
relations with New Line Cinema, a Time Warner com-
pany, and would not participate in a New Line Hobbit
prequel because Time Warner refused to permit an inde-
pendent audit of the reported $4 billion income from the
Lord of the Rings trilogy. This ended production until New
Lines’ options on the Hobbit ran out because, without the
New Zealand production facilities, it was too expensive for
New Line to do.
It is widely believed that New Line was only allowing
companies that its parent owned to bid on such things as
foreign distribution, broadcast and cable rights, DVDs,
merchandising and so on. For the parent company, such
arrangements provide a great advantage: All profits come
to it, and money can be moved around so that taxes are
lessened. The difficulty is that for independent producers
such as Peter Jackson, this closed bidding practice costs
tens of millions of dollars. In short, rather than allow the
audit, New Line was willing to forgo a potential hit movie
worth billions.
More recently, the producers of Smallville have been
locked in legal battles with the CW. They claim the CW is
giving Warner Brothers-owned stations and other Warner
Brothers affiliated entities special deals for very low prices
on Smallville, thus cheating the producers out of millions in
profit sharing. However, insiders say this is just how things
are done these days. In an ever-narrowing market, both in
terms of product and competition, pressures come from all
sides. No one part of the company is allowed to threaten
the overall bottom line, even if that means massive losses in
revenues for individual parts of the company or squeezing
other people involved with the project even when the
company must work with them in the future.
William J. Adams, Ph.D.,
Kansas State University
52
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
and cable and the internet reaped the benefits. The
networks haven’t forgotten this scare.3
In 2008 top advertisers refused to pay ABC,
CBS and NBC a so-called integration fee of $125
million on top of whatever prices they had negoti-
ated during the upfront sales period. Advertisers
pointed out this fee made sense when someone had
to physically insert ads into programs, a practice
that no longer existed (and a fee that FOX, the
CW and cable networks did not charge4). Adverti-
sers also continue to object to the practice of calcu-
lating the ratings by totaling “live plus three days,” a
practice that drives up their costs (see Chapter 5).
Both FOX and the CW are moving toward more
integrated ads, in other words, product placement
deals, and ABC and CBS are beginning to test the
waters.5
Moreover, cable networks and the internet are
no longer the only real competitors for advertising
dollars or for content. Much of the challenge for
advertising revenues seems to be coming from
cash-plus-barter
syndication
deals
(discussed
in
Chapter 6). Some syndicated programs outdraw
most network shows, and the prices they can
demand from the spot ad market reflect that
power. By mid-decade, the syndicated Friends, Sein-
feld, and Two and a Half Men pulled more than
$200,000 per 30-second spot, and several others
drew at least half that amount (see 2.4).
Advertisers must also deal with the new non-
traditional ways of obtaining programming. For
years broadcasters took comfort in the fact that
they were free while all alternatives cost a lot. As
the alternatives begin offering more choices and ser-
vices than broadcasting, the industry quickly learned
that many people were willing to pay for what they
wanted (see 2.5).
In short, networks are no longer the economic
powerhouses they once were, but the profits for
their parent companies keep growing because they
own most of the alternatives. Nonetheless, concern
about program production is mounting. So far, the
broadcast networks are still expected to produce the
original programs that then feed the rest of the system.
But as networks rely more and more on cheap reality
programs, the pool of programs with an afterlife dries
up. Many reality shows can’t be syndicated, can’t be
rerun on the air, can’t be sold overseas or online, and
have no value as DVDs. Once viewers know who
won, they don’t want to see the shows again.
FOX, however, figured out how to make extra
money from the reality show American Idol and
used the process to justify the cost of producing
Glee. This new method is separate from traditional
advertising or syndication revenues. American Idol
gives massive promotion to singers (often several
people going into the finals—not just the winner)
who are then signed by Columbia Records, with
whom FOX has a profit-sharing deal. These singers
then go on tours using FOX-owned promoters with
audience tickets sold through FOX-owned outlets.
Much the same is true for Glee, which by all previ-
ous standards should be too expensive to be
2.5
Cutting the Cord
W
ired Magazine compared the cost of the internet
television with traditional TV (by which they
meant signals delivered via cable or satellite). To equal
the cost of cable or satellite, they calculated that the
average person dropping cable or satellite would
need a digital antenna to get broadcast stations ($50),
Hulu ($119.88 per year), Joost, YouTube, TV.com,
network Web sites (free), Netflix instant ($107.88 per
year plus a Roku box at $79.99), and Apple TV or
Amazon Video on demand ($229 for the Apple box,
$1.99 per-show for average definition programs; for
hi def, the authors figured $517.40 per year for one
show per week night). The savings to move from
cable/satellite TV to internet TV was $360 to $540
(depending on whether one was replacing satellite or
a cable premium package) during the first year and
$720 to $900 per year thereafter. Cutting the cord
sounds like a good deal for savvy viewers, but what do
advertisers and broadcast networks do then?*
William J. Adams, Ph.D.
Kansas State University
*Wired Magazine, Sept. 2010, “Wired’s guide to picking your
perfect tv setup.” Wired.com/magazine/2010/08/ff_howto_
watchtv/
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
53
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
produced for television. But, not only does it pro-
duce top numbers (relatively speaking) with 18 to
33 year olds, it’s also a hit in DVD sales, sales of
recordings by the cast, tickets to cast tours, in inter-
net sales of the production numbers (which can be
downloaded after each show for a nominal price),
and online sales of re-viewings of the episodes.
While these moneys don’t go directly to the
FOX network, they do go to News Corp thus mak-
ing both shows worthwhile investments. As an
added bonus, the other networks can’t rush into
production with Glee knock-offs as there are very
few people in Hollywood who know how to do
musicals anymore. After all, it was assumed to be a
dead format. This practice of creative aftermarket
selling of a program and its participants suggests
one profitable direction for broadcasting’s future.
In addition, too many spots in breaks and high
ad rates have caused a rethinking among advertisers,
and the result has been an enormous increase in
product placement within programs on FOX and
the CW. Product placement was standard practice
in the early days of television, and it has been a big
moneymaker in movies ever since ET followed that
trail of Reese’s Pieces. Cable networks have aggres-
sively sought out companies to place their logos or
products in prominent positions on original cable
shows. But until recently, the broadcast networks
were reluctant to follow the trend, calling it demean-
ing, and claiming it cheapened the value of the tra-
ditional spot advertisement and could possibly raise
legal issues.
The smaller networks, however, with less to lose
given their lower ratings, were willing to try. Soon,
the cast of Buffy the Vampire Slayer was not only
drinking but also mentioning Coke products, and a
yellow VW was prominently featured in Smallville.
As the money began to roll in, the traditional net-
works wanted a piece of that action, and soon
brand-name products were appearing everywhere
except in ABC, CBS and NBC’s prime-time shows.
Product placement became so common that Nielsen
Media Research launched a new service in 2004
called Product Placement Measurement to allow
subscribers to track their products and those of
their competitors through various TV shows.
Also, product placement began to affect pro-
gram content. Sears, while not the actual producer
of Extreme Makeover: Home Edition, did make a
huge investment, in return for which the reality
show prominently featured Sears products in their
makeovers. As a result, in the 2011 sweeps, Extreme
Makeover ranked number 5 for product placement
with 45 occurrences—still minimal compared with
American Idol’s 102 occurrences (it was number 1
in product placement according to Nielsen).
Perhaps the most interesting development, how-
ever, was illustrated by a deal TNT made to insert
products into reruns of Law & Order. Generic pro-
ducts were digitally replaced with brand names that
paid for the privilege. Sometimes described as virtual
advertising, this is the next logical step in computer-
generated content. Already widely used in sporting
events, virtual ads do not require the actual place-
ment of a physical product. The advertisement exists
only in the computer.
With virtual ads, advertisers can aim their mes-
sages to specific markets. For example, Coca-Cola
now pays to have the judges on American Idol
drink their product. But through the use of virtual
ads, in New York those judges could be drinking
Vanilla Coke, while in California they sip Caffeine
Free Diet Coke, and in the South it might be Classic
Coke filling those glasses. The same process can be
used to replace the generic products shown in older
TV shows with high-paying brand names. Of more
concern to advertisers is the fact that the same pro-
cess can be used to replace an existing brand name
with a higher-paying competitor. In the past, prod-
uct placement was forever. No more. If Coke won’t
kick in more money, the stars may be drinking Pepsi
in the reruns and Dr. Pepper on the DVD. The
maker of M&M’S could finally correct its earlier
marketing mistake and have ET follow their little
chocolate product instead.
The
multiplatform
strategy
was
the
next
response to declining advertising revenues. The net-
works began distributing their most valuable prop-
erties across many media, packing the additional ad
time—at high rates—with broadcast. Advertisers
who wanted mass network exposure were then
forced to develop plans for internet, cable, tablets
54
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
and even iPod media. Beginning in 2008, CBS and
NBC also began demanding that out-of-home view-
ing be counted and began placing dedicated screens
in unusual places. By 2011, NBC had partnered with
IdeaCast which has TV screens in over 900 health
clubs and with the University Network which is on
181 college campuses. Similarly, CBS purchased
SignStory outright, which operates screens in 1,400
grocery stores and partnered with Ripple which has
1,500 screens in specialty retail locations like Jack in
the Box, and aligned with Automotive Broadcasting
which provides screens in car dealerships.6
In 2010 ABC, CBS and NBC joined FOX and
CW in moving production of their non-sitcom pilots
out of California. Film L.A., which tracks produc-
tion, noted a 42 percent drop in pilot production
between 2005 and 2009. That didn’t mean fewer
pilots were being made; they just were not being
made in California. By 2011, Los Angeles and the
state had declared “runaway” productions a crisis,
while Las Vegas was announcing plans to build a
studio. This represents a loss of $100 million dollars
to the Los Angeles region alone. The reason the pro-
duction is moving out is simple: Costs drop dramat-
ically. Not only do productions get out from under
strict union rules, but they also get a 10 percent to
25 percent reduction in taxes.7
While ABC, CBS and NBC have only moved
pilot production away, FOX, CW, Univision and
Telemundo also moved actual series production
out. While California is suffering a financial crisis,
production in areas like Hawaii, Florida, Colorado
and Chicago is booming. Canadian and Mexican
studios are running at capacity. Univision and Tele-
mundo have massive production in Miami and in
Mexico; most of it is original programming, which
they now syndicate to Spanish-speaking countries
instead of just buying programs from them.
Audience Targeting
In 2003, James Poniewozik, writing for Time maga-
zine (owned by Time Warner), noted the falling
numbers for broadcast television and asked, “Does
the mainstream still exist?”8 He might better have
asked whether the networks would know the main-
stream if they were drowning in it (see 2.6). For the
last 30 years, the broadcast networks have relent-
lessly pursued one segment of the audience to the
exclusion of other television viewers. Programs
have been targeted toward the younger, more
urban audience in the major population centers—
matching the coverage area of the network owned-
and-operated (O&O) stations—and away from the
more thinly populated rural markets where the net-
works have no direct ownership interests.
Ideal Demographics and Flow
When NBC programming head Paul Klein first pro-
posed the concept of ideal demographics back in the
early 1970s, he believed the networks could go after
his
so-called
ideal
demographic
group
without
losing the rest of the audience because at the time
it was widely agreed that people watch television,
2.6
The Aging Audience
I
ronically, network audiences are aging, far beyond
what most can imagine. As of 2010 (the latest pub-
lished numbers), these were the median ages of network
viewers:9
CW
34
FOX
44
ABC
51
NBC
49
CBS
55
Univision
34
Such aging scares network executives because the
trend potentially affects advertising revenue and the via-
bility of many kinds of programs. One response has been
to focus on the ratings for certain desirable segments of
the audience. The few youth-oriented programs being
offered, such as Glee, get lots of hype. Even supposedly
“young shows” often aren’t: The median for Two and
One Half Men is 50 and Dancing with the Stars is 60.
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
55
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
not shows. In a three-network era, Klein reasonably
assumed that viewers were forced to stay with one of
the networks, so why not go after the most desirable
audience? To Klein, that meant urban women 18 to
34 years of age. He believed they were the most sus-
ceptible to advertising and controlled the economy.
They were also, it was claimed, the largest segment
among the many demographic divisions.
When faced with critics who pointed out that the
over-50 crowd had more money and that the poten-
tial television audience consisted of as many men as
women, Klein simply dismissed the older audience as
too set in its ways (to respond to advertising) and
dismissed men as non-shoppers. Almost at once,
there were signs he might be wrong. The year CBS
and NBC introduced ideal demographics to the
schedule, their ratings plunged, and ABC found itself
in the unaccustomed position of being Number One.
Klein thought that just proved his point. The audi-
ence hadn’t left; they had just changed channels.10
By the mid-1970s there were clear signs of audi-
ence erosion. The networks denied it, claiming meth-
odology errors in the ratings. By the mid-1980s there
were no more denials. What had been a trickle was
now a flood. Broadcasting was hemorrhaging view-
ers, largely to cable. As the audience got smaller, the
ideal changed slightly and shifted to consist of urban
women 25 to 49 years (all races). By 2004 “women”
had been dropped from official statements, but many
argued that it was still understood. When network
ratings showed a massive loss of male viewers during
the 2003–04 season (a combined broadcast network
loss of almost two million men a night), advertisers
weren’t surprised. To paraphrase what they told the
reporter, “What are the networks offering that men
would want to watch?”11 Indeed, targeting Klein’s
ideal audience had produced a programming “gender
gap” between male and female viewers.
More recently the press has complained about a
liberal versus conservative political gap in network
programming.12 Moreover, the assumption that
younger women control shopping could now be
challenged by a trip to any supermarket.
An obsession with 18- to 49-year-olds, called
“the most desirable audience” or “the audience
most demanded by advertisers,” applies to cable
and syndication as well as to broadcasting. A pro-
grammer for E!, for example, when commenting on
its generally low numbers said, “I could create a stunt
pretty easily that would pop a household rating, but I
would bring in people my parents’ age.”13
Many syndicators seek the younger 18 to 34
audience, particularly for their daytime program-
ming, even though this demographic group is practi-
cally nonexistent during daytime hours and not what
many sponsors want. When ABC announced the can-
cellation of their soap operas in 2011 and replaced
them with talk programs, sponsors pulled out en
masse, pointing out if they wanted talk audiences,
they’d have bought talk shows in the first place.
When asked about the popularity of reality
shows, Betsy Frank, executive vice president of
research and planning for MTV and one of the
most quoted professionals in the business, pointed
to the appeal to young audiences. She went on to
argue that the ideal MTV viewer should be under
25. She pointed out that this group represents
70 million people, only 7 million fewer than the
baby boomers.14 It is ironic to note that MTV itself
pulls ratings of only about 1 in this group, implying
that only about 1 million of those 70 million poten-
tial viewers actually watch MTV.
At the broadcast network level, the program-
mers argue they know that targeting the ideal demo-
graphic group creates problems, but they have little
choice because most advertisers demand this audi-
ence. ABC and NBC claim that two-thirds of all
prime-time advertising money is spent on this
group. Of course, this argument is a little like
ESPN looking at its advertising and claiming adver-
tisers only want sports. Realistically, what else could
they buy on prime-time broadcast networks?
To be fair, CBS argues the ideal should be
higher, 25 to 54 years to be exact (which happens
to be closer to their audience demos), and FOX
argues that 18 to 34 year old urban men should be
included (a group they just happen to appeal to), but
advertisers argue that the question itself is wrong. It
may be that any demographic approach is outdated
because so many companies now use psychograph-
ics, or lifestyle data, to target ads—not just age, sex
and ethnicity.
56
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Aside from a program’s demographics, the net-
works look for audience flow from program to pro-
gram. Each network hopes to capture and hold the
largest possible adult audience, especially from
8
P.M. until 11
P.M. or midnight, with a recent
emphasis on late-night offerings (a time period
which draws a much larger percentage of young
people). Network strategies are usually directed
at achieving flow-through from program to pro-
gram within prime time—that is, encouraging the
audience to continue to watch from show to show,
although this tendency grows weaker as the num-
ber of program options increase and as the hour
gets later. Networks continue to try to produce
flow by careful scheduling, such as placing pro-
grams with similar story lines one right after
another, although remote controls, digital guides,
too many options and DVRs make flow-through
difficult to achieve. Nonetheless, virtually all tradi-
tional scheduling strategies have been designed to
maintain this flow.
Classic Scheduling Strategies
Programmers believe that surrounding a newcomer
with strong existing shows ensures the best possi-
ble opportunity for the newcomer to rate as high
as the established hits. Several strategies have
long been used to achieve protection for new and
underperforming series. About a dozen strategies
now dominate prime-time scheduling: anchoring,
leading-in, hammocking, blocking, doubling, linch-
pinning, bridging, counterprogramming, blunting,
stunting, supersizing, seamlessness, rotating and
sampling.
Several of these protect new programs, others
build flow or challenge competitors. While many
years of practice have shown the usefulness of
these strategies, they are becoming much less practi-
cal as they depend on a reservoir of strong, estab-
lished series, and broadcasting now has very few of
these available.
1.
Anchoring Strategy. All schedulers use the
strategy of beginning an evening with an especially
strong program, the anchor show. Also known as
the lead-off, this first prime-time show sets the
tone for the network’s entire evening. It is believed
that this maneuver can win or lose a whole night
and thus affect the ratings performance of a full
week. Programmers have traditionally believed
that the network winning the ratings for the first
hour of prime time also usually wins the entire
night.
A strong lead-off used to be considered so
important that the major networks routinely
moved a popular established series into the 8P.M.
(EST) position on every weeknight, even if it meant
raiding, and thus weakening, strong nights to get
proven shows for lead-offs. A classic example
occurred in 2003 when the WB moved Smallville
to the first spot on Wednesday and on Sunday to
shore up those nights, while FOX in 2010 put
Glee as the lead-off to Tuesday, moved House
back to the lead-off position on Monday and used
American Idol as the lead-off on several days of
the week.
As ratings continued to slide, fewer successes
remain to move around, making this strategy fade
in importance on most networks, even though
their programmers continued to express faith in it.
By 2007, NBC was scheduling cheaper scripted or
reality shows to lead-off prime time; inherently,
such shows are low-rated, at least to start, and
thus would provide no lead-off power. At the same
time, however, FOX led off Mondays with its hit
Prison Break, and CW led off Thursdays with the
strong Smallville, using these as evening anchors.
CBS uses its many versions of the CSI franchise in
a similar way.
2.
Lead-in Strategy. Closely related to the lead-off
or anchor show, the lead-in strategy places a
strong series before a weaker (or any new) series
to give it a jump start. Theoretically, the strong
lead-in carries part of its audience over to the next
program. A new series following a strong lead-in
has a modestly better chance of survival as com-
pared with a new series with no lead-in or a weak
lead-in. To get a strong lead-in, the networks often
shift strong series to new nights or times. No show
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
57
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
is safe in any schedule position, as King of Queens
and Becker found out when they were moved from
their strong Monday slot to act as lead-ins for the
short-lived The Brotherhood of Poland, N.H., and
subsequently sagged in their ratings.
3.
Hammock Strategy. Although scheduling
strategies can help bolster weak programs, it is
obviously easier to build a strong schedule from a
strong foundation than from a weak one. Moving
one of a pair of established series to the next later
half hour and inserting a promising new program
in the middle time slot can take advantage of
audience flow from the lead-in program to the
rescheduled familiar program, automatically pro-
viding viewers for the intervening series. This
strategy is known as hammocking the new series—
in other words, a possible audience sag in the
middle will be offset by the solid support fore and
aft (also called a sandwich, with the new show as
the filling).
The 2003–04 season provided a classic ham-
mock example with The Apprentice shoved
between Friends and ER. Hammocking is one
strategy that continues to be effective, but it can
provide misleading information on the strength of
the center show. For example, much was made at
the time of the relatively high ratings for The
Apprentice, but in truth, even in its protected spot,
it lost almost 4 points compared with the Friends
lead-in and 2 points compared with ER. More-
over, when moved to the unprotected Wednesday
night slot, it dropped into the bottom third of the
ratings. Hammocking guarantees a new series will
get sampled, however, which automatically gives
the new show a better chance. The Apprentice,
slightly revised into The Celebrity Apprentice, and
protected initially in a hammock, became one of
NBC’s few successful shows. This strategy, how-
ever, presumes a network has enough strong
shows to create hammocks, an assumption that is
increasingly rare.
4.
Blocking Strategy. By 2011, this was the most
used, albeit least effective, of all programming
strategies. Block programming or placing a new
program within a set of similar dramas or sitcoms
filling an entire evening (or at least 2 hours of one
type) is a venerable and respected practice.
The theory of blocking is that an audience tun-
ing in for one situation comedy will stay for a sec-
ond, a third and a fourth—if the sitcoms are of the
same general type. The first show in a group usually
aims at young viewers or the general family audi-
ence. Each ensuing series then targets a slightly older
audience, thus taking advantage of the fact that as
children go to bed and teenagers go out or do
homework, the average age of the audience goes up.
Blocking works best during the first two hours of
prime time but typically loses effectiveness later in
the evening.
Traditionally, the only risk was believed to be
that a new comedy might lack the staying power of
its “protectors” and damage the program that fol-
lows. Today we know there are other risks such as
burn out: So many programs of the same type that
people get sick of the whole genre. We also now
know that when broadcasters place too much reli-
ance on just a few types of programs, the cost of
those shows goes up dramatically. When Paul Klein
declared no real need for variety back in the ’70s,
and that the networks could just concentrate on sit-
coms and crime dramas, then the cheapest programs
to produce that could still pull large audiences, he
believed that the cost of production would go down.
But costs went up. By the 1980s, half-hour sitcoms
cost more than either westerns or science fiction
hours. We now know that any time the networks
rely heavily on any one genre, its cost skyrockets,
making this a dangerous strategy in more ways
than one.
Examples of blocking (also called stacking) are
easy to find in prime-time schedules every year on all
the networks. During the 2006–07 season, FOX
formed a successful animated/family sitcom block on
Sundays of The Simpsons, American Dad, Family
Guy and War at Home, which is still mostly in
place five years later. Recently, the networks have
blocked hour-long dramas, games and reality for
whole evenings—for example, CBS’s NCIS to
58
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
NCIS: Los Angeles to unforgettable on Tuesdays or
FOX’s Prison Break to House, two cult hits one after
another for a time.
5.
Doubling Strategy. One hot trend, now that
networks have fewer hit shows to work with, is
creating blocks using the same show, running epi-
sodes of the same sitcom one right after the other.
Called doubling, it started with FOX, which ran
Cops, followed by Cops—and then finished the
block with America’s Most Wanted. In 2005–06,
ABC doubled Lost on Wednesdays, while FOX
doubled That 70’s Show and NBC doubled Scrubs.
By the next season, the CW was doubling Reba all
across the schedule.
Since networks don’t increase the number of
episodes produced, the negative byproduct is that a
much-doubled show must go into reruns even
sooner—which can easily trigger burn out. ABC
found this out when it overused Who Wants To Be
A Millionaire, and it was also the case with Deal Or
No Deal, Are You Smarter Than A Fifth Grader and
the Law and Order franchise. Even at this writing,
the powerhouse CSI variations are dropping in the
ratings for the entire franchise.
One variation is to run an old episode followed
by a new episode. By mid-decade, hit comedies,
reality series and even a few hour-long dramas were
being doubled and even tripled as with Terra Nova.
Another variation involves stripping episodes on
different nights like a miniseries. This has become a
common practice with short-run series like Ameri-
can Idol, Dancing With The Stars, Survivor and
The Bachelor. Shows such as According to Jim,
Extreme Makeover, Deal or No Deal and Arrested
Development have appeared night after night, but
usually for just a few weeks at a time. Copying
cable networks like USA, TNT and A&E, the
broadcast networks occasionally turned an entire
evening over to one show, as ABC did sporadically
with Desperate Housewives and CBS did with the
original CSI.
6.
Linchpin Strategy. Most scheduling strategies
rely on having enough strong programs around
which to build a schedule for new series. However,
with fewer and fewer real hits, the networks have
had to find ways to use the few strong shows still left
to them. This is one of those ways. Also known as
tentpoling, the network focuses on a central, strong
show on weak evenings, the linchpin, hoping to use
that show to hold or brace the ones before and after
it. This strategy was the basis for NBC’s move of
Law & Order: SVU to Saturday nights and CBS’s
move of Cold Case Files to 9:00 on Sundays. These
moves also formed blocks, an added bonus, and
demonstrate that scheduling strategies are often
combined. NBC’s shift of focus to its 9:00 shows—
away from 8:00 anchors—exemplifies the use of
linchpins.
7.
Bridging Strategy. The bridging strategy is not
as common in commercial broadcasting as the
other strategies, but it has been useful to public
broadcasting and such cable networks as TBS and
HBO. Bridging has three variations. The best-
known one is the regular use of long-form pro-
grams (one-and-a-half hours or more) that start
during the access hour and continue into prime
time, thus running past the broadcast networks’
lead-offs and negating their strategies (for viewers
who might have changed channels). HBO, for
example, often schedules a hit movie starting at 7
or even 7:30 P.M. (EST) to bridge the start of net-
work prime time.
The second variation of bridging involves
starting and ending programs at odd times, thus
causing them to run past the starting and stopping
points for shows on other networks. This creates a
bridge over the competing programs, which keeps
viewers from switching to other channels because
they have missed the beginnings of the other
shows. For example, TBS regularly starts its pro-
grams at 5 minutes after the hour. As a result, TBS
viewers are forced either to watch the next TBS
show or tune into another program already in
progress.
CBS has used the bridging strategy successfully
in its Sunday night lineup. The network regularly
runs Sunday football games (or other sports)
beyond the hour point, thus throwing the rest of
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
59
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the night off by about 10 minutes. This means that
the audience that watches 60 Minutes is stuck with
CBS for the night. NBC and FOX have copied this
practice with their Sunday afternoon sports broad-
casts. The alternatives for viewers are to leave a
show before it is over or to tune in to the compe-
tition late.
A third variation on this strategy involves
scheduling half-hour shows against hour-long
shows on the competing networks. FOX, by plac-
ing a strong show like King of the Hill first, forced
the audience to watch the weaker Oliver Beene or
tune into the middle of hour-long programs on the
other networks. The risk is that viewers may go to
cable or turn to the DVR. Modern viewing habits,
split screens and digital guides have further weak-
ened this strategy as many people now watch more
than one show at a time, just switching back and
forth when something exciting seems to be
happening.
8.
Countering Strategy. The networks also sched-
ule programs to pull viewers away from their com-
petitors by offering something of completely
different appeal than the other shows, a strategy
called counterprogramming. For many years, for
example, ABC successfully countered the strong,
women-oriented series offered by CBS and NBC on
Monday nights with Monday Night Football—until
2006 when the games went to ESPN. To counter
Desperate Housewives and Cold Case Files, NBC
introduced Sunday Night Football. ABC clearly
counterprogrammed CBS’s Survivor with Ugly
Betty.
Traditionally, counterprogramming challenged
the ideal demographics approach because it relied
on finding a large, ignored group of viewers and
scheduling a program for them. In the late-2000s,
the CW was countering the older networks by
programming for teenage women, while FOX pro-
grammed for young urban men. Univision coun-
terprograms the English-language networks by
stripping three shows, Heridas de Amor, La Fea
Mas Bella and Mundo de Fieras, across the week
from 7 to 10, Monday through Friday, then vary-
ing its 10 P.M. and weekend shows. Of course, the
mere fact they broadcast in Spanish is a counter
to other broadcasters, and puts them in an entirely
separate competition group in some markets,
although Univision’s own data shows many of
its shows are watched by sizable non-Spanish-
speaking audiences.
9.
Blunting Strategy. Networks that choose to
match the competition by scheduling a show with
identical appeal are blunting the competition. For
example, in the 2006–07 season, CBS and NBC ran
CSI: New York and Medium against each other on
Wednesdays, and ABC and NBC ran Grey’s Anat-
omy and ER against each other on Thursdays, in
each case effectively splitting the legal-show fans and
medical-show fans. Such blunting attempts often
don’t last long as one show usually proves more
popular than the other.
If two networks are already blunting each other,
a third network that counterprograms often gets
higher ratings than either of the other two networks.
In other words, the two networks running similar
programs split part of the audience, while the
counterprogrammer, in theory, gets everyone who
likes its program plus all those who dislike the genre
being blunted on the other two channels. One recent
example occurred when ABC ran the magazine
show Primetime against CSI and Medium; another
occurred when CBS ran Shark against Grey’s Anat-
omy and ER.
10. Stunting Strategy. The art of scheduling also
includes maneuvers called stunting, a term taken
from the defensive plays used in professional foot-
ball. Stunting includes scheduling specials, adding
guest stars, having unusual series promotion and
otherwise altering the regular program schedule at
the last minute. Beginning in the late 1970s, the
networks adopted the practice of deliberately
making last-minute changes in their schedules to
catch rival networks off guard. These moves—cal-
culated and planned well ahead of time but kept
secret until the last possible moment—were
intended to blunt the effects of competitors’ pro-
grams. Generally such maneuvers are one-
time-only because their high cost cannot be sus-
tained over a long period.
60
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Scheduling hit films, using big-name stars for
their publicity value, and altering a series’ format
for a single evening are common attention-getting
stunts. Glee has provided a number of classic
examples: Top musical personalities “drop in” on
rehearsals. Such stunts have high promotional
value and can attract much larger-than-usual
audiences if well promoted. Of course, the fol-
lowing week, the schedule goes back to normal,
so these efforts get people to sample shows but
rarely create long-term improvements in series
ratings.
CBS used another form of stunting when it
paid more than $4 billion for rights to sporting
events (including Major League Baseball) during
the 1990s. This proved to be a financial disaster.
Although the network expected to lose money
most years, it hoped that the rewards from pro-
moting CBS shows during the World Series and
championship games would be worth the cost.
Those hopes proved fruitless, and CBS lost tens of
millions of dollars with no ratings improvements
to show for it.
Investing in popular but unprofitable specials
to promote other shows on a network remains a
popular form of stunting, however. The Olympics
are a perfect example. NBC acknowledged that
the money paid for the 2004, 2008 and 2012
Summer Games would be more than it could get
back, but it planned to use the games to promote
and then lead directly into the new fall season,
thus justifying the cost. It liked this arrangement
so much it paid $4.38 billion for the next four
Olympics (2014 to 2020).
Strangely enough, ABC, which first discovered
the real value of sports, has pulled out of most
megasports bidding, arguing that the big sporting
events have become too expensive to be worth
their price tags (although co-owned ESPN put in a
losing bid on the 2014–2020 rights). ABC may
well have been right because so far NBC’s plans
don’t seem to be working when viewed from
outside the network. On the other hand, perhaps
NBC’s image and ratings would be worse without
the Olympics rights!
11. Supersizing Strategy. In recent years, the net-
works have developed a form of stunting used
mainly for the sweeps months. This method, called
supersizing, allows them to pull questionable series
off the air without having to find another show to
fill their time slots. To fill the time, the network adds
length to their biggest hits and advertises them as
specials. Supersizing is now common for hit sitcoms
and reality series, although rare so far for hour-long
dramas. Doubling can be considered a similar strat-
egy with the same goal. Networks often schedule the
supersized climax of their reality shows to coincide
with sweeps weeks.
12. Seamless Strategy. In the 1990s the networks
turned to still another strategy intended to accel-
erate the flow between programs. First NBC, fol-
lowed by the other networks, eliminated the breaks
between key programs (Seinfeld to Frasier, for
example). Viewers normally make most use of their
remote controls in the two minutes or so that has
traditionally occurred between programs, thus
running the end of one program right up against
the start of the next avoids the opportunity for
remote use. This is called a seamless transition, and
its goal is to keep viewers watching whatever net-
work they began with.
In another twist, ABC (soon copied by the
other networks) instructed producers to cut out
all long title and credit sequences and to begin
every program with an up-tempo, attention-
getting sequence. Titles then appear later in a
program, some times as much as 10 minutes into
the program after viewers have, presumably, been
hooked. At the ends of programs, all networks
have experimented with split screens and
squeezed credits. Originally, some program action
(or “bloopers”) filled part of the screen to hold
viewers’ attention right into the next program (or
very close to it). However, this space now usually
contains ads or promos for the upcoming series.
Another variation on this strategy involves run-
ning a “next” icon or a promotional crawl for
the upcoming series over the last segment of the
preceding show. Many viewers find this
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
61
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
incredibly annoying, and the networks (and
advertisers) know it, as witnessed by the fact that
they never do it during the ads. But promotional
crawls on programs have the added advantage of
making home recordings off-the-air less desirable,
and thus, the networks believe, a spur to DVD
sales.
13. Rotating Strategy. This is a very old strategy
being reintroduced because of a shortage of original
episodes and the need to have original programming
during sweeps periods. In the early days of network
television, the very popular Jack Benny Show ran
every other week, regularly alternating with another
program. By 1960, this practice had disappeared,
but then some cable networks reintroduced it in a
slightly different variation. As they moved toward
more original production, but usually ordered
merely 10 to 13 episodes, cable programmers were
faced with the problem of what to do when original
episodes ran out.
They solved the problem by scheduling more
than a single series for the same time slot. For
example, Syfy Channel runs 10 to 13 weeks of
Warehouse 13, followed by 6 to 8 episodes of
Eureka followed by 7 episodes of Merlin. This
allows Syfy’s programmers to maximize the value of
the original episodes while spreading out production
costs, having a total of 26 episodes, which with
reruns, fills a whole season. By 2011, the networks
were beginning to do the same thing with reality
series. For example, FOX and CBS each scheduled a
hit, American Idol and Survivor, to run during
sweeps and then filled the time between sweeps with
other, far less popular programs. Until now, sched-
uling multiple series for a single time slot has been
largely limited to reality shows on the broadcast
networks, but the practice (and the need) is
spreading.
14. Strip Sampling Strategy. In the last five years, a
technique to get new programs sampled appeared:
new series aired on several different nights across
their premier weeks—horizontal stripping. The
theory is that wide exposure will allow as many
people as possible to see the show and thus will
follow it to its normal night. In a variation in
2010, Cape aired its premier episode on both net-
work and cable channels during the first
week—cross-media scheduling. To be effective, like
many other strategies, such practices have to be
combined with heavy promotion campaigns during
the initial showing advertising the show’s normal
day and time.
Although these scheduling practices can readily
be identified in prime-time network lineups, there is
little reason to believe any has an overwhelming
impact on viewing. Most were developed at a time
when few people had remote controls or DVRs, and
digital cable’s wealth of channels and the internet
didn’t exist. On-demand options and recording via
DVRs also encourage viewers to do their own sched-
uling. Today, the audience has little reluctance to
change channels, and there is no shortage of places
to go
The web carries rebroadcasts of highly rated or
much-talked-about shows, further undermining net-
work efforts to manipulate audience flow on televi-
sion during prime time. Nonetheless, most experts
believe that well-defined and executed application
of these programming strategies helps a broadcast
network hold onto significant portions of the view-
ership. They continue to believe this even in spite of
falling numbers for network programs. On the other
hand, the ratings might be worse … or so networks
like to think.
Appointment Viewing
For decades, scholars have argued about how people
watch television. For most of the last 50 years, prac-
titioners assumed people passively watched the set—
not programs (the least objectionable program the-
ory). In short, when they had time (availability),
viewers tuned in and then looked for something to
watch.
About a decade ago, some researchers began con-
tending that people actively planned their viewing
around specific programs that would continue their
current mood or change a bad mood. This view proved
62
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
to be a hard sell in an industry that had long dismissed
the idea of program loyalty in all but a few cases. For
example, everyone recognizes that many soap opera
viewers plan their activities so they can watch their
favorite afternoon programs—that is, appointment
viewing. But, experts argued, this happened rarely in
prime time, perhaps only with such megahits as Amer-
ican Idol, live sporting events, or occasionally with
highly-touted miniseries (mostly the domain of public
broadcasting and cable these days).
Some shows, like Glee and NCIS, generate loy-
alty and exhibit appointment viewing; their fans are
willing to pay extra fees for on-demand viewing
and DVD sets. When researchers looked closely at
program
preference,
they
found
that
viewers
develop strong mental images about when their
favorite programs are on and tune in with those
programs in mind. This presented a very different
view of habitual viewing, which had always been
assumed to be a factor in channel or network loy-
alty. This understanding of the power of viewers’
mental images of network schedules led to intensifi-
cation of the amount and type of on-air, print and
online promotion in order to create and manipulate
such
mental
images.
Simultaneously
it
led
to
renewed interest in creating programs that spur
viewing by appointment—that is, shows that are
so special or events so unique that viewers plan
their time around them. On the other hand, the
continual shuffling of the schedule is a practice
that
breaks
down
habitual
viewing
and
thus
increases viewer frustration.
It must be understood that despite program loy-
alty and appointment viewing, people do not tune in
every week. Most viewers do not change other plans
to watch even their favorite television programs.
They find comfort in knowing the series will still
be there next week and that they can watch missed
episodes in rerun or on DVR.
DVRs have also profoundly changed people’s
views of when they have to watch. The time-
shifting of favorite programs is now a common prac-
tice because DVRs make it easy; this has become so
important that several days after a program first airs
are now included in the ratings. Many programmers
were surprised to find that people were willing to
buy DVD sets of complete seasons of their favorite
television series. While ABC, CBS and NBC long
resisted offering their shows in DVD sets, FOX and
the CW made a sizable portion of their profits from
these sets and even program for them.
Changing concepts of ordinary viewing beha-
viors makes the successful selection and scheduling
of mass-audience programs increasingly difficult for
programmers. The truth is, as far as the major net-
works are concerned, programming is bait. It is a
lure to get viewers to watch commercials and a com-
modity that can be resold to stations, mainly their
own O&Os, as syndicated bait to get viewers for
their ads. The discovery that series could be resold
as DVD packages forced programmers to begin to
consider the actual value of the program itself
(see 2.7). For programmers, however, appointment
2.7
The Value Question
T
o further complicate matters, the industry can’t figure
out which shows have resale value. FOX, for
example, planned The Simple Life, its “Paris Hilton meets
Green Acres” reality series, for fast DVD release. The
network applauded as the series’ ratings climbed, got
the DVD set to the stores only one week after the series
finished its run on the air, and then watched as sales
went nowhere.
Meanwhile, Firefly, which FOX had dumped without
even using all of the ordered episodes, went straight to
the top of the DVD sales lists and stayed there. It was
subsequently rushed into production again as a theatrical
movie. At the same time, the success of Family Guy on
DVD, another of FOX’s cancelled series, was so great
FOX un-cancelled it. Its performance on the network,
however, was and still is only mediocre (ratings of about
2), revealing that loyalty and a willingness to buy a
series on DVD are not necessarily related to broadcast
audience size. The CW has known this for years as DVD
sales make up a huge part of the profits for two of its
series, Smallville and Supernatural.
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
63
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
viewing may not only refer to the planning of activi-
ties to allow the viewing of a series; it may also be a
measure of how much a viewer enjoys a particular
series and how much money and time he or she is
willing to invest in it.
Prime-Time Ratings
Regardless of whether an advertiser wants sheer ton-
nage or a specific audience segment, currently, com-
mercial spot costs depend mainly on the absolute
ratings plus 3 days (= total estimated audience) of
the programs in which the commercials occur. Niel-
sen is developing ratings for commercials from its
minute-by-minute people-meter data, but those are
not yet in common usage. A television advertiser,
in contrast to an advertiser on a formatted radio
station, must pay for all viewers, whether or not
they fall within the desired target audience. Esti-
mated program ratings are the major determinant
of the cost of a commercial spot.
Ratings, however, lack precision. As pointed
out in Chapter 5, network ratings estimate the view-
ing of 116 million television households using data
collected from 12,000 cooperating families, and it is
very unlikely that these estimates are exactly right.
In fact, statisticians sometimes claim that no sub-
stantial difference exists between the 10th-rated and
50th-rated shows in prime time; the differences in
their ratings could result from nothing more than
inevitable sampling errors.
Because advertisers (and ad agencies) have agreed
to base the price of a commercial spot on the absolute
number, however, they ignore this inability to measure
small differences. A top program such as The Office
that has a rating of about 4 and an advertising price
of $450,000 per 30-second spot will generate millions
of dollars more in revenue than a program such as
Cougar Town with a rating of about 3 and a spot
price of $200,000, even though the difference in rat-
ings between the two is statistically meaningless at the
levels normally set by statisticians. The treatment of
ratings as absolute numbers by both advertisers and
networks has led to fights over unmeasurable fractions
of a rating point and demands for more measurements,
produced more often. These demands have led to
ratings being reported continuously and in a number
of different ways, many of which are outlined in
Chapters 5 and 6. As a quick heads up, for prime-
time network programming, the most common of
these are the sweeps, overnights, pocketpieces and
multinetwork reports.
Sweeps and Overnights
Four times each year a highly controversial rating
event occurs—the sweeps. In November, February,
May and July, Nielsen Media Research uses people
meters in the larger markets and diaries in the smal-
ler markets to gather audience viewing behavior that
is converted into ratings, shares and demographic
information for local television stations and a grow-
ing number of cable networks. The sweep results,
particularly the November and February periods
when audience viewing levels are at their highest,
directly affect the rates these cable networks and
local
stations
(including
network-affiliates
and
O&Os) charge for advertising time.
Traditionally, the summer sweeps were of less
importance. One summer the ratings dropped so
badly that affiliates began to balk at clearing net-
work summer shows, but in recent years some of
the biggest hits have actually started during the sum-
mer. This has led the networks to claim they have
moved to a full 52-week season.
The stations demand that the networks display
their highest-quality merchandise during the sweeps
periods to attract the largest possible audiences and
maximize ad revenues. This practice makes the four
sweeps periods, especially November and February,
highly competitive and, at the same time, not always
the most valid indicators of a network’s or station’s
real strength.
National ratings take several different forms.
Aside from the sweeps, the overnights are the most
avidly monitored ratings data. They are gathered
through people meters which sample 25,000 people
(5,000 for national ratings and 20,000 for local
ratings) in 56 major markets. The overnight ratings
are used to monitor overall urban audience reaction
to such “program doctoring” as changes in casts,
64
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
character emphases and plot lines, and to compare
the viewing of major sporting events on broadcast
and big cable networks. The overnights also indicate
immediately whether a new program has “taken
off” and captured a sizable audience in the urban
markets. Advertising agencies also use the overnight
numbers to make predictions about specific shows
that then become the basis of ratings expectations
(and sales rates).
For example, when Smallville first started, it
was predicted to get a share of 3 but actually got a
7, thus making it a hit, even though its subsequent
ratings were at the bottom for all series. Since that
time, its DVD sales have made its rating almost irrel-
evant, as it has run for 10 years, never getting more
than a 4. Indeed, CW was almost in a panic as it
finally announced the series would end in 2011.
Missing the predicted number (getting one much
lower than expected) in the overnights during the
first few weeks of a newly introduced program’s
run spells cancellation unless the ratings show a
hint of growth—or unless the program is expected
to have stronger appeal to a specific audience. JAG
was canceled by NBC but picked up and run suc-
cessfully by CBS, which argued that it had a strong
rural and male appeal not represented in the city-
based overnight ratings. CBS was subsequently
proven right. Recently, when Friday Night Lights
was dropped by broadcasting, it was picked up by
cable and run successfully.
Sometimes international appeal is a factor in let-
ting a show build an audience. For example, Prison
Break was only a moderate rating success for FOX,
but it showed strong international potential and
offered a racially diversified cast during a year with
little other racial diversity in prime time. Thus,
Prison Break was renewed while higher-rated series
were canceled. In 2010, Hawaii 5-0 found itself in
much the same situation. It was not high in the rat-
ings, but its international syndication potential
seems to be very high so it was proclaimed a hit.
Still other shows that are cheap to produce but
have no aftermarket potential may be held because
the shows’ concepts are so valuable. For example,
Big Brother has always had ratings of about 2 or 3
for CBS, hardly great numbers. But the show is
inexpensive to make, and the concept has been
sold to producers in other countries, who use the
same program idea and title but staff the house
with people from their own countries. In Brazil, for
instance, Big Brother is one of the highest-rated pro-
grams, and the contestants are considered major
stars. While most game, reality and talent shows
have no life after their first run, either as DVDs,
off-network syndication or network reruns, the con-
cept may have value and be syndicatable. Programs
like Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?, Deal Or No
Deal, Dancing With The Stars, The Bachelor or
Survivor had no value to the international market
as programs, but had great value as ideas. When
syndicated, the other country actually produces it.
While the money may not come directly to the net-
work, it still comes to the parent company. Of
course the money for traditional off-network syndi-
cation never came directly to the network either.
And the process reverses: NBC bought the idea for
Voice from non-U.S. sources. (Simply stealing the
show, as Norman Lear did with All In The Family,
is no longer an option.)
Other series, such as The West Wing and Bones,
were only moderate rating performers but generated
strong critical and special-interest appeal and thus
remained on the schedule, giving them time to grow
into true rating success stories, which led to big sales
as DVD sets (and long runs on cable for Bones). Still
other programs, such as Heroes, were designed to run
on both a broadcast network and a cable network at
the same time, requiring advertisers to predict com-
bined ratings/shares. Some programs like Monk were
not designed for running on both cable and broad-
casting but have because parent companies try to
double the value of an unexpected success.
Even though the ability to accurately predict the
numbers, especially for new series, is very low, adver-
tising agency predictions still have tremendous power.
For example, during the 1999–00 season, advertisers
predicted Secret Agent Man would get barely a 2
share. As a result, the series was canceled without air-
ing even one episode. Who knows? Given a chance,
the audience might have turned to it as they did to the
summer surprise hits Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?
and Survivor (the first one), both of which were
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
65
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
predicted to generate ratings so low they didn’t even
get a regular season start. On the other hand, the
same agency experts predicted that Coupling would
be one of the highest-rated new series in 2003–04. It
certainly did not live up to that prediction.
Pocketpieces and MNA Reports
The ratings report traditionally of greatest interest to
the creative community, and the one most familiar to
the public, is published every other week in a small
booklet known as The Nielsen Pocketpiece (see 2.8).
It comes from the 12,000 national people-meter
households selected to match census demographic
guidelines for the entire country. Though this infor-
mation is published only every other week, these data
are available to Nielsen subscribers via computer the
next day. A data bank provides, upon request, data
not only for the nine major broadcast networks but
also for selected cable networks.
As 2.8 shows, more than 11 million people
watched CBS’s Cold Case that Sunday from 8:15
to 9:15, and the program’s average rating for the
hour was 10.5 with a share of 15. At the same
2.8
Sample Pocketpiece Page
66
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
time, more than 10 million people watched FOX’s
Major League Baseball game, getting a rating of 9.5
and a share of 17 or so for that 8:15 to 9:15 P.M.
hour of the game. ABC also did well with Extreme
Makeover: Households, watched by nearly 9 million
people; that show got a rating of 8.8 and a share of
13. NBC did less well in the competition, attracting
just under 5 million people to American Dreams that
week. The show got a rating of 4.3 and a share of 7.
Just over 3 million people watched WB’s Charmed,
and it got a rating of 3.0 and a share of 5 (quite
satisfactory for WB, now called the CW). The rating
for the series Doc on PAX (now called ION) aver-
aged about a 1.0, with about a 1 share.
At present, Nielsen is handling almost 1,300
computer requests for pocket-piece data monthly,
suggesting that its people-meter data may eventually
replace or diminish the importance of the over-
nights. Unlike the urban nature of the overnights,
the pocketpiece provides estimates for the entire
nation,
including
ratings/shares
and
the
all-
important demographics for both prime time and
daytime, plus general information such as average
ratings by program type, number of sets in use by
days and by dayparts, comparison of television
usage between the current season and the one pre-
ceding, and other details.
Network
programmers
also
find
Nielsen’s
Multi-Network Area Report (MNA) very useful.
The statistics in this report cover the 70 leading pop-
ulation centers in the country, represent about two-
thirds of total television homes nationally, and break
out the O&O markets. The networks use MNA
reports to compare the performance of the major
networks without the distortion caused by the one-
and two-affiliate markets included in the national
Nielsen reports (although few now exist). MNA
reports include the so-essential demographic break-
outs and give the networks figures related to their
owned stations without distortion from smaller mar-
kets where they have no ownership interests.
As network ratings have fallen, the way the net-
works report them has also changed. Very few press
releases or promotional materials actually refer to
the ratings or shares anymore. Rather, they report
the millions of people who viewed something (the
rating times 2.6). They point to the percentage
increase over last year, a show’s first-place position
in a time slot, the percentage of the ideal audience it
captures, and so on—anything but the actual rating
numbers, which are usually dismal. A decade ago
programmers joked that the ratings books were
designed to be complicated so that any programmer
could find something that he or she was doing right.
Now they keep the ratings a secret. Nielsen permits
the ratings for only the top 25 programs to be
reported in the press.
Prime-Time Scheduling Practices
The entire process of prime-time programming
breaks down into three major phases: deciding to
keep or cancel already scheduled series, developing
and choosing new programs from the ideas pro-
posed for the coming season, and scheduling the
entire group. To understand program evaluation,
selection and scheduling, the changing concept of a
season needs to be spelled out.
Shifting Network Seasons
From the 1950s to the present, the main viewing
year has periodically expanded or contracted until
it settled on 40 weeks, usually running from late
September to the end of May. The remaining 12
weeks (off-season) occur in summer. Production
cost increases combined with a high mortality rate
decreased the size of episode orders for renewed
series to 20 or 22 episodes by the 1990s, filling in
the season with specials and reruns.
Nowadays, ABC, CBS and NBC tend to order
just 6 to 10 episodes at a time, although occasional
22-episode guaranties are given to capture a high-
profile producer or star. And network contracts
now say “cancelable any time” (although Charlie
Sheen sued claiming they had no right to cancel
Two and a Half Men, or rather to cancel him, as
CBS continued with the series). Even having 22 epi-
sodes fails to cover the May sweeps; but these sweeps
are important to affiliated stations while being too
expensive for the networks to fill with specials.
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
67
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Because the network license fee gives the right
to two showings of each episode for the one pay-
ment, and because the networks need to get their
money’s worth out of every episode, for the last
decade reruns have begun early and often. They
are usually scheduled at the end of the fall season
in December (no ratings then) and between the Feb-
ruary and May sweeps. Traditionally, weaker epi-
sodes used to be rerun in summers, but the need to
fill 40 weeks has resulted in reruns of nearly all epi-
sodes during the main viewing year, with episodes of
quickly canceled series, new pilots and original real-
ity series saved for summers.
Specials, sports and limited-run tryouts fill the
remaining weeks of the regular season. However,
the definition of a “special” has become extremely
loose. During a recent season, specials included
rejected pilots, such fluff shows as ABC’s 21 Hottest
Stars Under 21, and so-called news specials that
were indistinguishable from the regular news maga-
zines and reality shows.
It used to be that placing a program on hiatus (a
rest or break) meant that it was awaiting cancella-
tion. Over the decades, a few series came back from
a hiatus with a new actor or plot line, and stayed on
the schedule, but most just disappeared. Nowadays,
if a series has 22 episodes to air, original episodes
end before Christmas and then return in February
or March to run without interruptions to the season
finales in May sweeps.
Another option for filling gaps in the schedule is
stripping, which refers to scheduling episodes of a
program, usually a magazine series like NBC Date-
line, on several different days across the week. This
practice has not seemed to harm the numbers for
news format shows, but it killed Who Wants to Be
a Millionaire? as a network show. However, after a
hiatus of a year Millionaire returned as a syndicated
series, and later went back on ABC as a special. In
more limited form, stripping has been employed
with such situation comedies as Till Death, Scrubs,
Reba and That 70’s Show, and with such reality
shows as Next Top Model, Survivor and Nanny
911, which often run two and sometimes three
times a week. FOX dose this regularly with Ameri-
can Idol and Dancing With The Stars.
Limited Series
Starting back in the 1990s, the networks began
interrupting the regular season with tryouts of new
series in strong prime-time slots. March, April and
the summer months became tryout months for lim-
ited series (generally four to six episodes). This off-
and-on method of scheduling allows the networks to
test a new program under the best possible condi-
tions while preserving original episodes of the most
popular series for the May sweeps.
Whether inserting a new series into the ongoing
prime-time schedule is an effective strategy is debat-
able. New shows usually get highly inflated ratings
while in a popular show’s time slot, but such ratings
seldom hold up when new show moves into their
much weaker permanent slots. At the same time,
constantly interrupting a popular show tends to
cause its ratings to go down. Series tried out during
the summer months suffer from the opposite effect.
Because summer ratings are so low, even if a pro-
gram significantly improves ratings for the slot, the
absolute quantity of viewers seldom looks good, and
the usual result is quick cancellation.
Many reality series, including American Idol
and Dancing with the Stars, however, were planned
as limited-run series scheduled during sweeps weeks.
Having only a few episodes reduces production costs
and allows the producers to stage much publicized
tryouts around the country (that people pay to
watch and participate in) between actual runs of
the program. Survivor now follows the same year-
round tryout scheme, but was originally a limited
summer series.
In truth, the majority of new series are aired
first in limited-run experiments, not pilots. The
majority of new programs tried by ABC, CBS,
NBC and FOX run for fewer than eight weeks. In
contrast, UNI, TEL and the CW tend to leave new
series on for a full season, but some programmers
argue that this stems not from a different philosophy
but from a lack of the money required to constantly
develop
replacements.
(MNTV
and
TEF
carry
mostly rerun entertainment series.)
Programmers argue that limited-run series in all
seasons are the wave of the future. They point to the
68
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
success of such cable programs as Monk and The
Sopranos, which ran 8 to 12 weeks, went off, and
then came back later for another 8 to 12 weeks. This
allowed cable programmers to stretch the run of the
popular original series into the summer months,
when they often wiped out the networks in the
ratings.
However, as with most things concerning the
networks, the situation is not quite that simple. In
broadcasting, the combination game/reality formula
used in Celebrity Apprentice, Survivor, The Amaz-
ing Race and American Idol forces programmers
into a scattered scheduling approach. A new game
has to start and run its course as one person is
thrown off the show each week, and then end the
game. It then takes several weeks to get the next
episode of the game ready for broadcast. Something
has to fill the weeks between the main reality series,
so why not use another cheap reality game and then
alternate them back and forth in the schedule? In
cable, programmers used the broken-run strategy
largely because they could not afford a full 22 epi-
sodes. They needed the money from the first run to
produce the second run. This scattered approach to
scheduling helped disguise the fact that there weren’t
very many original episodes being produced.
Network-planned limited runs of such high-cost
series as Lost serve much the same purpose. Limiting
the number of episodes produced each season keeps
production costs down and produces revenue to sup-
port more production. Theoretically, this type of
scheduling also builds anticipation in the audience,
allowing a network to promote an upcoming series
almost like a special event that hypes the ratings dur-
ing sweeps weeks. ABC shocked many fans in 2007
by announcing Lost’s end date of 2010, after a six-
season
run.
The
producers
claimed
that
fans
deserved the security of knowing that all the
show’s convoluted storylines would play out fully as
intended.
Summer Schedules
In the late 1980s, the networks began using March
and April, as well as summer, for testing new pro-
gram ideas in short runs and airing rejected pilots
that did not make the fall schedule. (Previously,
these pilots would never have been seen by anyone
outside the network programming department.) By
the 1990s, not only were network ratings down
but the costs for program development were so
high that the networks could no longer absorb the
expense of the development stages for new shows
that never reached the air.
Summer became the arena for reruns of weak
series episodes or episodes of quickly canceled series
that were paid for but never used, and for episodes
of never-scheduled shows or reruns of canceled
series. Running pilots as made-for-TV movies, sum-
mer specials, and short-run tests of series became
three ways to recoup much of a network’s invest-
ment. By 2007, the networks had begun to repeat
their top shows on Saturday nights, further exhaust-
ing their rerun potential for summers.
However, the practices of doubling, tripling and
stripping episodes during the regular season, com-
bined with airing many unscripted series, which can-
not be successfully rerun, began leaving little that was
fresh for the summer months. Indeed, the neglect of
the summers by ABC, CBS and NBC made them a
gold mine for the cable networks, which began killing
the broadcast networks in the summer ratings. In
addition, the affiliated stations worried about the
extreme ratings drops during July sweeps.
FOX further complicated the picture when it dis-
covered that summer was a good time to get people
to sample series they did not normally watch. This
network was able to build an audience for several
of its regular series by continuing original episodes
into summer, which were supported by active promo-
tional campaigns. To take advantage of the potential
for discovering its shows, FOX began heavily pro-
moting its reruns as a “second chance to see what
you have been missing.” FOX’s success was later cop-
ied by NBC in its “New to you” promotion that
emphasized the fact that “if you haven’t seen it, the
program is new to you.” By the early 2000s, this
strategy was sufficiently successful to force the other
networks to pay more attention to their summer sche-
dules. Most networks now schedule at least one or
two new series during the summer, although none
seems intended to continue during the main season.
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
69
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Even when a summer series generated a lot of talk or
higher-than-expected ratings, as was the case with the
short-run FOX series Roar, the show was dropped
the minute September rolled around.
Until the breakthrough by extremely cheap
unscripted (this doesn’t mean no writers, it just
means no union writers) series like Survivor, even
when a summer series outperformed expectations,
it was seldom picked up. Programmers generally
wrote these offerings off before they ever went on
the air. As a result, a show must break all records
to get attention from
programmers who have
already moved on to next season’s planning.
The original Survivor on CBS, which ran only
during the summer of 2000, was such a surprise
megahit.
It
spawned
several
clones
(look-alike
shows) for the subsequent season (Temptation Island,
The Mole and Big Brother), and then American Idol,
a summer copy of a British series, did the same thing
for FOX. Suddenly summer was seen as the time to
try reality series. With the advent of original summer
schedules and the promotion of reruns as original
programming for people who normally watched the
competition, the July ratings books took on more
importance as a measure of network and pay-cable
pull, as a limited vehicle for pre-fall testing, and inci-
dentally, as a way to satisfy affiliates.
Premieres
Traditionally, the networks premiered their new
series during a much-publicized week in late Septem-
ber. However, in 2004, because of the late summer
Olympics, the networks declared the end of fall pre-
mieres as such. The reality is that series have debu-
ted in scattershot fashion for the last decade, usually
throughout September and October (and occasion-
ally as early as August or as late as November).
Theoretically, spreading out the premieres keeps
new programs from getting lost in the rush, gives
viewers maximum opportunity to sample each new
network show, and accommodates interruptions
caused by baseball playoffs, the World Series and
other major events such as the Olympics. In fact,
spreading out “premiere week” has diminished the
excitement
associated
with
a
new
season
and
actually reduced the sampling of new shows. For
example, viewers who find an appealing show at a
certain hour in early September are unlikely to check
out new shows when they debut some weeks later at
the same hour. Viewers also won’t stay around (or
come back) when a new show they like vanishes for
several weeks while the network stunts. As a rule,
fans of comedy will find another comedy at that
hour and stick with it; fans of drama will become
loyal to another drama.
In addition, a large number of new network pro-
grams, particularly replacement shows, begin their
runs in January or February, thus creating a second
season on the networks. By late fall each year, the fate
of most prime-time programs already on the air has
become clear. Holiday specials usually preempt those
destined for cancellation or restructuring, while more
popular series go into reruns and special holiday
episodes, which are often cut together pieces of ear-
lier episodes with a loose plot—such as characters are
trying to remember something—to tie them together.
By January or February the networks are ready
to launch their second seasons—with almost the
same amount of promotion and ballyhoo as are
accorded the new season premieres in September or
October. Nonetheless, they then promptly preempt
the new schedule to promote and run special pro-
gramming for the February sweeps, and then they
introduce more new series in March. As a result, it
is hard to argue that there are clear seasons any lon-
ger. Rather, network programming has become a
round of constant changes. As a strategy, this is
called the continuous season approach. Indeed,
back in 2009, NBC said there were no more seasons,
and the others have adopted the same practices.
Schedule changes are occurring every week.
Program Renewal
Evaluation of on-air shows goes on all year. The
critical times for new programs starting are before
the sweeps in November, February, May and July;
those doing badly during sweeps are then quickly
replaced before the next sweeps occur. The final
decision on whether to return an iffy program to
70
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the schedule the following fall is usually made
between March and May because the networks
showcase their fall lineups at their annual affiliates
meetings during those months and up-front sales
begin. Last-minute changes, however, occur right
up to the opening guns in the fall.
Program Lifespan
The average lifespan of popular prime-time series
has declined steadily over time. In the 1950s and
1960s, such shows as The Ed Sullivan Show, Guns-
moke, What’s My Line? and The Wonderful World
of Disney endured for more than 20 years. These
records for longevity will probably never be matched
again in prime time—with the exceptions of news
magazines and cartoons like The Simpsons. By
1980, a program lifespan of 10 years was regarded
as a phenomenon. By the 1990s, 5 years was an out-
standing run for a successful series.
A decade later, because the networks became
the producers, they gained a vested interest in the
longevity of their programs. Series such as Small-
ville, Supernatural, NCIS, 7th Heaven and Law and
Order are now moving back toward 10-year life-
spans. The networks have become very reluctant to
cancel anything that succeeds, even modestly, if they
can make a profit from it.
Several factors accounted for this shortened
lifespan:
1.
Above all, the high cost of renewing writers,
directors and actors after an initial contract
expires
2.
The increased sophistication or, some argue, the
shortened attention span of the viewing audience
3.
The constant media coverage of television
shows and stars (as in Entertainment Tonight,
People and Us magazines, the morning talk
shows and so on), which wears out each series
idea quickly
4.
The practice of syndicating a series while it
continues its network run, of releasing DVD
sets, and of doubling and tripling (or other
overusing while on the network), which leads to
burnout
5.
The scarcity of outstanding program forms and
fresh, top-rated production and writing talent,
as well as a network propensity for formulaic
series, which leads to a great deal of copying
and very low levels of originality
6.
The loss of key actors because they become
bored or move on to other projects
7.
The move toward the cloning of prime-time
hits, which results in a sameness that causes
even the best ideas to wear out faster
The shortened lifespan of prime-time series
reflects the complexity of program license contracts
that generally ran for five to seven years. Each new
episode of a program is assigned a license fee,
whether the show is produced by the same company
that owns the network intending to carry the pro-
gram or another entity. The license fee size varies
with cost factors such as costumes, special effects,
sets, stunt work, the amount of location versus stu-
dio shooting, cast size, the producers’ and stars’
reputations, the program’s track record, the demand
for series in the same genre and so on. Traditionally,
this cost represented about three-quarters of the
actual cost of production and told the executive pro-
ducers how much they were going to have to kick in
to actually make the program.
When a series first makes it to the air, the net-
work controls the contractual situation and usually
requires several concessions from everyone involved.
At this time, the producer commonly has to sign
over such rights as creative control, spin-off rights,
limitations on syndication and scheduling control.
Everyone also agrees to a specific licensing fee for
the run of the five-year contract, regardless of the
program’s success (after all, most shows fail). Typi-
cally, this licensing fee makes no concession for shar-
ing the profits should the program become a hit.
However, when the producer and the network now
work for the same corporation, the leverage lies with
the parent company (see 2.9).
Pivotal Numbers
Choosing which programs already on the air will
continue and which will be pulled (renewals and
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
71
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
cancellations) is perhaps the easiest decision network
programmers have. The decisions are based squarely
on the network’s profit margin—in essence, sub-
tracting the cost per episode from advertising reve-
nue. Normally, revenue has been directly related to
ratings. Until the 1980s, a weeknight rating below
20 (or an audience share of less than 30) almost
always resulted in a program’s cancellation on any
network. But because of steady network audience
erosion, by the mid-2000s, the Big Four’s numbers
had plummeted to a minimum weekday prime-time
rating of 4 and a share of 9.
If the profit margin is high enough, such as with
CBS’s series Big Brother, a show will be retained
with even lower numbers. Thus, profitability is the
source of the power of reality programs. A few, such
as American Idol, have high ratings numbers, but
most do far worse than hour-long dramas. But typi-
cally, unscripted shows are incredibly cheap to pro-
duce, making the profit margins enormous.
Entertainment series stalling in the bottom third
of the Nielsens are usually canceled as soon as
possible, while programs in the top third are usually
renewed. The most difficult decisions for network pro-
grammers involve programs in the middle third—the
borderline cases—or programs that
1.
are weakening but are nearing their fifth year.
2.
are only just beginning to slide in the ratings.
3.
are highly rated but draw the wrong
demographics.
4.
produce low ratings but draw a high percentage
within a desirable demographic group.
5.
have low ratings but high profit margins.
6.
produce strong critical approval but marginal
ratings.
Occasionally, the personal preferences of a top
network executive, the reaction from critics, letter-
writing campaigns or an advertiser’s support may
influence a decision, but the prevailing view is that
cancellations had far better come too soon and too
often than too late. Indeed, network programmers
insist that advertisers and corporate headquarters
2.9
License Contracts
T
raditionally, producers practice deficit financing (pay-
ing more to produce a series than the network pays in
license fees) because the potential profit from off-network
syndication can run into the hundreds of millions of dollars.
If a show is a hit, the producers can make up any losses.
Producers typically agree to licensing contracts lower than
actual production costs in order to get their shows onto the
networks so they have chances to be hits.
For those few shows that really succeeded, in the old
days, at the end of the first contractual period (normally five
years), the tables were turned: Now the producers and
stars enjoyed the advantage because the series had a track
record. In short, if the network wanted to keep making the
series, concessions would have to be granted, usually in
the form of much higher salaries or bigger shares in profits
for the producers. Friends illustrated this dilemma when the
stars each demanded $1 million an episode in 2003–04
even before any other salaries or production costs were
figured.
Under such renewal conditions, a network could some-
times profit by dropping a popular show. But because
finding hits has been so difficult, the networks generally
decide it’s better to give in rather than have another huge
hole open up in their schedules. For example, NBC did bite
the bullet with the moderate hit ER, paying $13 million per
episode for one year just to keep this centerpiece for its
Thursday night schedule.
The repeal of the financial interest rule, however, meant that
the networks could (and do) now own the programs. Because
the network is itself the producer, tables don’t turn so completely
(oh, actors can still get pushy, and the unions can cause trou-
ble, as they did during the 2008 season), but all costs and
profits belong to the same corporation, giving it enormous
leverage over salaries and profit sharing. Although deficit
financing is still practiced for tax purposes, it occurs between
arms of the same company. One outcome of the new power
relationship is that the networks seem to hold the few big hits
longer even as cancellations for new series come quicker.
72
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
will not tolerate a program that doesn’t offer instant
success.
Replacement series, however, rarely do signifi-
cantly better than the original programs in the ratings
(see 2.10), and they push development prices even
higher. Therefore, large group owners occasionally
pressure their networks to hold on to problematic
shows. Group owners can affect cancellation deci-
sions, as can direct participation from key sponsors,
but this happens only rarely. For example, in 2003
Procter and Gamble pulled its advertisements (pur-
chased during the up-front buying) from Family
Law, saying the content was not what the company
had been promised. As a result, CBS was forced to
pull the offending episodes from the rerun schedule.
In addition, the O&Os can affect a decision because
they report to the same parent corporation. Such pres-
sure can be positive (to hold) or negative (to kill).
More than the other networks, FOX and CW
seem less traditional and readier to look for poten-
tial profits outside those generated by advertising.
They are more likely to keep shows with strong
off-network syndication or DVD sales potential,
and seek shows with potential for non-direct sales
from tours or music sales and on-demand or internet
revenues.
Program Costs
In addition to ratings, profits left after subtracting
licensing costs from advertising revenues influence
program cancellations. Two prime-time programs
of the same length, on the same network, with iden-
tical ratings will, ideally, produce identical amounts
of revenue for that network. If, however, one of
them has slightly higher per-episode licensing costs,
say as little as $100,000 an episode, over the length
of a season that difference would equal just over
$2 million more in costs. It is clear that the program
with the higher licensing cost will be canceled before
the lower-cost series. In recent years, the networks
have scheduled more program genres with low pro-
duction costs—witness the proliferation of news
magazines and reality shows in prime time.
Nonetheless, unexpected megahits like Survivor
and American Idol have led programmers to promote
“the new reality revolution” because of the genre’s low
cost, in spite of disastrous rerun numbers and no syndi-
cation potential. Currently, a new reality show costs at
least $1,500,000 per episode. Even such megahits as
Survivor cost only about $3 million per episode,
whereas the price tag for an episode of Two and a
Half Men is close to $20 million. (Original cable series
cost much less than the broadcast equivalent because
they
are
done
in
non-union
shops
outside
of
California.)
Because the company controlling the network
now usually owns the production, it has to cover
all costs, so the fee itself is largely irrelevant except
to the accountants at tax time. For accounting pur-
poses, the license fee is still used to allocate the
actual cost of production to various departments,
and it tells the network how much it has to earn
during first run and then during rerun to break
even. How networks allocate these costs varies enor-
mously and largely depends on what will generate
the lowest tax bill at the end of the year. At present,
one of the biggest cost factors is how a program is
produced from a technical standpoint (see 2.11).
Because there are only a limited number of top
producers and writers for any given genre, especially
high demand for a particular type of show forces
costs up. By 2012, the fee for a successful reality
series had gone up almost 400 percent but was still
far below the cost for any other type of program-
ming (with the exception of news magazines like
20/20).
A show’s potential for profits in syndication
also affects how high its license fee can go. Action
hours have traditionally been expensive to produce
but have been highly syndicatable in both the
domestic and international markets. They are also
highly desirable for the parent companies’ own
cable networks. However, following the takeover
of most independent production houses, the number
of original action series dried up. In 2004–05 there
were only three action hours available in syndica-
tion, Andromeda, Stargate SG1 and Mutant X. By
2007, no original action hours were on the market.
In 2008, only one new series, Legend of the Seeker,
was offered. It was produced in New Zealand, but
distributed through Disney (ABC). For the broadcast
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
73
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2.11
Production Methods
A
ccording to data from NATPE, as of 2005, physi-
cally producing a program on film (not including the
cost of talent) ran about $1,000 per minute. Tape was less
expensive but still around half that cost. Producing the pro-
gram digitally—using a digital camera and a computer for
editing, special effects, and so on—ran about $7,000
for 45 minutes of high-definition product (less than $100
for minute). This enormous cost differential—about one-fifth
the cost of film—drove the high-definition revolution in
Hollywood.
2.10
Time Slot Ratings
T
he history of ratings for the time slot a program fills
may be the strongest measure of how that program
will perform. After all, a “history” takes into account such
factors as the competition, the leads in and out on all
channels, the network’s myths and policies, and the pub-
lic’s viewing habits and expectations. The reality is that
more than 80 percent of the series scheduled in new time
slots (new or moved shows) do not alter either the ratings or
the ranking for their slots significantly. This means that a
series placed in a top-rated time slot probably will be a top-
rated series, and conversely, a series placed in a weak
position will be weak.
The majority of the remaining shows get lower ratings
than their time slot averaged in the previous season. This
means that when a series does change the historical pat-
tern, the change is usually for the worse. Chances are less
than 5 percent that a program will significantly improve the
ratings for the time slot even at the generally accepted 68
percent level (one standard deviation rather than the two
normally used in research).
Low-rated shows are subject to a widely accepted con-
dition called double jeopardy. According to this idea, low-
rated shows have both low exposure and little chance of
getting more exposure. This is because popular programs
are chosen by more people, and those viewers are more
committed to the shows. Thus, unpopular programs suffer
from increasingly fewer and less-committed viewers.
Obviously the best scheduling ploy would be to place
every series in an already strong position, an impossibility
in programming. The slots open to programmers are usually
ones where previous programs failed. In the last 20 or so
years, more than half of all new shows have been sched-
uled in prime-time slots that already ranked in the bottom
third of the ratings, and most were also in slots ranked third
compared to the competition. Clearly, the strength of a time
slot should be considered when the decision is made to
hold or cancel a series.
This, however, has not usually been the case at the
networks: In practice, a program’s rank and absolute rating
overrule expectations for a time slot. As a result, a series
with a 9 rating would usually be held, while a series with a
4 would be cancelled, even if that 9 represented a loss of
several points (by comparison with the lead-in program or
the previous program in that slot) and the 4 represented a
gain. Because there is only a small chance that a series will
significantly improve the ratings for a time slot, considering
ranking an absolute rating appears to be self-defeating in
the long run.
Because the majority of available slots are going to be
weak in any case, wisdom suggests holding onto series that
improve the numbers and slowly rebuilding holes in the
schedule would be sound practices. Because a short
replacement series is very unlikely to do any better and is
expensive to develop, common sense would also seem to
advocate holding onto new programs longer to give them
time to build audiences. After all, Seinfeld generated ratings
of only 11 and 12 during its first year (which now seems
incredibly high, but stunk back then), losing badly to Home
Improvement. Nonetheless, the pattern of the three major
networks has been “decide quickly” and “cancel fast.”
74
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
networks, this meant a lucrative part of the syndica-
tion market had evaporated in less than five years.
This part of the market has been taken over by cable
which is now relied on for almost all hour-long syn-
dicated product.
Crime dramas then surfaced as a means to fill
network schedules at a somewhat lower cost than
action hours, resulting in schedules full of Law &
Order and CSI look-alikes. Although the network
studios were cranking out afternoon talk shows
and judges banging various gavels, they were gener-
ating few dramas outside of crime and lawyer
shows. (The main exception was The Mentalist, the
success of which gave rise to a handful of “psych”
shows.) At the same time, the networks were having
no luck producing new hit sitcoms, resulting in a
certain amount of panic in the syndication market.
New Program Selection
Phase two in planning a new fall season—selection
and development of new program ideas—poses
more difficult problems than ongoing program eval-
uation. The four networks consider as many as
6,000 new submissions every year. These submis-
sions vary from single-page outlines to completed
scripts that come from writers or producers. Deci-
sion makers favor ideas resembling previously or
presently successful shows. They even quietly agree
that almost all so-called original successes are in fact
patterned after long-forgotten programs. American
Idol, for example is just the Original Amateur
Hour with a snotty Ted Mack. Glee merges the
musical with a dramatic series, a modestly innova-
tive idea, copying a Disney cable movie and 7 Brides
for 7 Brothers, the last broadcast effort.
One year, NBC promoted its move toward new
and daring ideas with Titans, described as a “quirky
yarn about a big city lawyer returning to his home-
town in Ohio,” despite this being the same plot as
Providence, Judging Amy and Ed. But then, none of
the other networks have been any more original.
The newest way of generating additional net-
work programs is franchise programming—cloning
an hour-long series into several more programs with
only minor changes. Originality has never been a big
selling point for broadcasters, but franchising pro-
grams creates extreme sameness because a fran-
chised
show
merely
has
a
different
cast
and
perhaps location. By the mid-2000s, CSI had been
cloned to three different cities (Las Vegas, Miami
and New York) and blended with JAG to form
NCIS. Law & Order had added a Special Victims
Unit and Criminal Intent, and followed them with
even more analysis in Criminal Minds. People were
only half joking when they suggested that next we
would have Law & Order: SUV where the charac-
ters would investigate crimes from large sponsor-
placed vehicles.
Over at FOX, they were working on turning
American Idol into a franchise by changing music
styles or featuring contestants of different ages. For
network programmers, franchising has three enor-
mous advantages:
1.
Generating hour-long programs for foreign
syndication or whose premise can be syndicated
internationally
2.
Reducing decision making for new series ideas
3.
Creating signature programs to be identified
with a network, thus helping to set it apart from
other program suppliers
Viewers have generally had to look to cable for
fresh ideas in such programs as Six Feet Under, Nip/
Tuck, Burn Notice, Warehouse 13 and so on. But
the most popular cable shows are sometimes reused
on sister broadcast networks, as was the case with
Monk and Queer Eye for the Straight Guy. This
double scheduling of the same show is called repur-
posing and goes both ways. For example, NBC ran
all three versions of Law & Order on its co-owned
USA and later syndicated the original series to TNT.
It also ran Heroes on the co-owned Syfy Channel. In
fact, the entire SOAPnet channel seemed to be a way
for ABC to rerun its afternoon soap operas at night
for women who work during the day. One has to
wonder what will happen to it now that ABC is
down to one soap opera. But Heroes proved so pop-
ular with younger viewers that NBC broke the
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
75
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
“avoid sci-fi” rule in 2008 and experimented with
Journeyman, Bionic Woman and (unbelievably) the
weird Chuck.
Program Concepts and Scripts
Many program concepts are dismissed out of hand;
others are read and reread, only to be shelved
temporarily—or even permanently when a network
is worried that the idea might possibly be a hit but
won’t take the chance and doesn’t want anyone else
to chance it. A few, usually variations on present hits
or linked to top stars or producers, get a favorable
nod with dispatch. Such big-name directors as Barry
Levinson,
Oprah
Winfrey
or
Rob
Reiner
are
courted and given contracts to develop anything
they want, but without promises to actually run
the shows. The networks fight desperately to find
that immediate hit that will pull in a young
audience.
Of the thousands of submissions that land on
the networks’ desks, roughly 600 are chosen for fur-
ther development. At this point, all parties sign a
step deal, a contract providing development funds
in stages to the producer. In the past, a step deal
also set compensation rates if the show were success-
ful and gave the network creative control, which are
still important when a show is not wholly owned by
one network.
As a rule, step deals authorize scripts or, in
some cases, expanded treatments. The approved
concepts often take first form as special programs,
made-for-TV movies or, increasingly, test characters
in established shows. For example, the characters
Green Arrow and Aquaman were introduced in
Smallville, both of which became strong contenders
for their own series. In the end, the CW decided to
keep them part of Smallville, but that may now
change as that show has ended its run. If a concept
was submitted initially in script form, a rewrite may
be
ordered
with
specific
recommendations
for
changes in concept, plot or cast (and even new wri-
ters and in some cases, producers).
Until recently,
ABC traditionally supported
many more program ideas at this stage than CBS,
NBC or FOX, but ratings shifts have led first CBS
and then NBC to allot more money to develop new
program ideas. The network that has recently
dropped the most in the prime-time ratings is always
the hungriest for fresh ideas and the most willing to
risk trying them.
Before authorizing any production, the program
executive will first order one or more full scripts and
a bible. Nowadays, a network typically pays about
$50,000 for a half-hour comedy script and $70,000
for a one-hour drama script. Exceptional (read suc-
cessful) writers demand much higher prices. The
bible outlines characters and their relationships, sug-
gests sets that will be needed, and summarizes future
script ideas or the way the program can develop
during its proposed run. At this stage, the producer
also looks for production locations—at least for the
pilot—outside of California.
Advances and Pilots
A pilot is a sample or prototype production of a
series under consideration. Pilots afford program-
mers an opportunity to preview audience reaction
to a property. Each of the Big Four networks orders
between 30 and 45 pilots to fill expected gaps in its
new season lineup (fewer for CW and Spanish-
language networks). Once a network decides to
film or tape a pilot, it draws up a budget and
advances start-up money to the producer. The bud-
get and advance may be regarded as the third major
step in the program development process.
Half-hour pilots cost from $1.5 million to
$3 million, depending on things like sets, costumes,
special effects, star power and so on, with one-hour
drama pilots costing more than twice that amount.
Traditionally, pilot production costs were generally
higher than costs for regular season shows because
new sets had to be built, crews assembled and start-
up costs paid. (However, the ongoing costs for the
few megahits have recently risen far higher than the
costs of their pilots.)
FOX and many producers have denounced the
pilot system because of its incredible expense and
abysmal success rate. FOX demands 5- to 10-minute
presentation films in place of full-blown pilots for
many shows, but this radical idea has met strong
76
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
resistance from the other major broadcasters. Now-
adays, of the approximately 130 pilots produced
annually,
many
are
formatted
as
made-for-TV
movies. These can be played on regular movie
nights and sold internationally as parts of movie
packages, thus recouping the investment even if
the series idea is not picked up. Series failing to
make the final selection list for the fall season are
held in reserve in anticipation of the inevitable can-
cellations. After seeing the pilots, the networks also
“short order” some backup series, authorizing pro-
duction of four to six episodes and additional
scripts in case a backup show used as filler is unex-
pectedly successful. For a visualization of the devel-
opment process, see 2.12.
The decisions to select series for airing based on
their pilots usually take into consideration the
following:
1. Current viewer preferences as indicated by rat-
ings or profit margins
2. Costs
3. Resemblance between the proposed program
and concepts that worked well in the past
4. Projected series’ ability to deliver the targeted
demographics for that network and its adverti-
sers and its O&Os
5. Types of programs the competing networks air
on nights when the new series might be scheduled
2.12
The Program Development Process
Process begins with the review of new ideas submitted in the form of pitch sessions,
requested submissions, open submissions, or company-developed proposals.
Step 1: Possibilities
Reject
Basic contract turning
over creative control and
setting basic pay schedule
for 5 to 7 years
Step 2: Possibilities
Shelve
Assign to
another producer
Reject
Provide money for
script development
Reject
Shelve
Set aside for possible
mid-season replacement
Provide a limited 
episode order
Step 4: Possibilities
Assign to
another producer
Step 3: Possibilities
Shelve
Assign to
another producer
Reject
Provide money for
pilot
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
77
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The following are of secondary weight but also
relevant to a judgment:
6. The reputation of the producer and writers
7. The appeal of the series’ performers (the talent)
8. The availability of an appropriate time period
9. The compatibility of the program with return-
ing shows
10. The longevity of the concept (for example, in a
program centered around children, the pro-
ducer must remember children grow up)
Finally, increasingly relevant are these factors:
11. The number and type of countries that might
buy the show or idea in syndication
12. The ability to reuse the show in another co-
owned venture (another broadcast or cable
network) or platform (internet or mobile media)
13. The size of the potential DVD sales market
14. The viability of inviting other companies to
share the initial expenses
15. The possibility for advertiser tie-ins or cross
promotion.
Of equal importance is whether the parent corpo-
ration can control the entire process from production
to multiplatform distribution. The chief programmer
juggles all of these considerations and perhaps others.
Schedule Churn
Stunting has resulted in a continual shifting of
prime-time
schedules,
called
scheduling
churn.
(Here the term churn refers to the continual shifting
of programs within the network schedule and should
not be confused with the term subscriber churn as it
is used in the cable and pay-television industries.)
Moving programs in the schedule, using short
runs and cancelling quickly are not the only causes
of churn. These actions don’t take into account net-
work preemptions of their own shows, which have
become distressingly commonplace. Indeed, over
the last four years, each of the four major networks
has averaged about a 40 percent preemption rate.
In most cases, these preemptions were caused by
running extra episodes of an already existing series
(for example, running hordes of back-to-back epi-
sodes of Reba)—or by reversing the existing shows
(for example, so cleverly flipping Grey’s Anatomy
and Desperate Housewives) for just one week, or
by blocking the network’s franchise shows for a cou-
ple of weeks (such as running all the CSIs on the
same night or all the Law & Orders, or just one
version three times, or…or…). Such preemptions
hurt the long-term ratings of the bumped shows:
Lost audiences don’t come back. Very few examples
of churn were the result of airing specials.
In short, regularly-scheduled series were missing
from their scheduled slots almost two out of every
four weeks between September and May. The wri-
ters’ strike can account for some of this during the
2008–2009 season, but nothing accounts for it dur-
ing the other years. And the churn rate was even
worse during the summer.
Changes now occur weekly and it’s virtually
impossible to tell when the network is trying a
stunt, fixing a move that didn’t work, or dumping
a show quickly. It is hard not to agree with Brooks
(see 2.13) that this constant motion represents panic.
A program that a network wants to get rid of can
be canceled outright or manipulated (time-shifted or
churned) until its ratings fall. Manipulation some-
times makes good public relations sense when a
show is critically successful or widely popular—but
not quite popular enough among the desired demo-
graphic groups. Some critics have suggested that this
was the problem with Touched by an Angel. Analysis
of program churn over the long haul leads to two
conclusions:
1.
An individual program’s ratings almost always
fall when it is moved two out of three weeks
(especially when moved in the second season).
2.
A new series—one that had improved upon the
time slot it was originally given—always fails
when moved.
Prime candidates for purposive schedule manip-
ulation include programs with higher-than-average
production
costs
that
would
cause
managerial
78
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
problems if abruptly canceled (because they are sup-
ported by a highly-placed executive or advertiser).
The 1995 shift of Murder, She Wrote on CBS from
Sundays to Thursdays may have been an example of
this type of move. Two notable shifts, The West
Wing from Wednesday to Sunday in 2005–06 and
King of Queens in 2006–07 from Monday to
Wednesday, are probably examples of purposive
schedule shifts. Once low ratings or even a down-
ward trend is achieved, network programmers can
point to the numbers to justify cancellation (on the
few occasions when some justification seems useful).
During panics, however, programs seem to be
moved for no apparent reason: Merely showing the
parent company that something is being done seems
to be the real programming strategy at such times.
Promotion’s Role
All broadcast networks use frequent on-air promo-
tion and online promotion, as well as paid advertis-
ing,
to
introduce
new
and
moved
programs.
Beginning as early as mid-July and continuing
through November, networks intensify promotion
of both their programs and their overall images on
their broadcast and owned cable channels. For some
big-budget or especially promising shows, paid
advertising in program guides and magazines also
helps draw audience attention, often through cross
promotion deals with advertisers.
Concurrently,
the
networks
open
elaborate
websites for each new program containing character
bios and pictures, the backstory of the series and the
current plot line, merchandise to buy, interactive
chat groups, feedback options, recent episodes or
previews of upcoming episodes and other elements.
On-air promotional announcements are believed to
play a pivotal role in the ratings success of a pro-
gram. Particularly essential are the on-screen tune-
in messages, now taking up a significant portion of
airtime. Websites have a different function: They are
thought to build loyalty to the program and involve-
ment with specific characters, both contributing to
satisfaction with a series and to frequent viewing.
In the fall, on-air promos plug every program
scheduled to appear in a season lineup. Weak or
doubtful offerings needing extra stimulus get extra
exposure on all platforms, at least until the network
surrenders. Not until a program is safely past the
rocks and shoals of its first several airings (or until
the network decides it can’t risk more early trials)
2.13
Explaining Network Churn
I
ndustry expert Tim Brooks, author of The Complete
Directory of Prime Time Network and Cable TV Shows,
blamed much of network churn on “panic.” He pointed out
that ratings had been declining since the mid-1970s but
that the decline was not steady. Rather, ratings would first
drop and then stabilize for a few years. When this hap-
pened, programmers would proclaim success, claiming
they now had control of the problem (and then they would
continue doing exactly what they had been doing).
These periods of stability were related to specific pro-
grams that, for a time, according to Brooks, brought in big
audiences. During the 1980s, it was Cosby; then in the
mid-1990s it was Roseanne and Home Improvement. Later
the numbers again stabilized when ER and Seinfeld
became hits, then Survivor further solidified them for a time.
When one of these shows eventually slid downward,
though, the overall ratings for that network went into a free
fall. When this happens, as it inevitably does, program-
mers panic.
Instead of changing the practices that seem to be driv-
ing the audiences away, they do more of them. For exam-
ple, when ratings began another free fall in 1997,
programmers went into another schedule-shuffling frenzy.
By 2004, the heavy reliance on reality series had multi-
plied the problem because such series almost always
decline significantly in audience size in their second sea-
sons and have no afterlife in either syndication or as DVD
sets. Those based on a gimmick, like The Simple Life, often
fall apart completely. Franchise shows seem to hold up
better in syndication, but never match the original in ratings.
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
79
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
does promotion let up. At least minimal on-air pro-
motion continues as long as a show is on the sched-
ule, but websites fade away (from lack of updates)
when a show seems destined for cancellation. At this
point fan sites take over (see 2.14).
In addition, networks use print promotion, espe-
cially magazines and newspaper listings, to catalog
offerings for particular evenings. For a long time,
TV Guide magazine was so important to network
television
that
programmers
sometimes
delayed
schedule changes so that the alterations could make
TV Guide’s deadline for affiliate program listings.
The promotional value of TV Guide was enormous
until its format became unwieldy after the digital
channel explosion. Cable systems now provide elec-
tronic guides, essential because of the huge numbers
and types of channels (digital, HD, 3D), with several
ways of sorting and classifying program titles.
Magazines like People and Us have become
major outlets for printed promotional materials,
often run as features and not identified as promo-
tional material. Cross-promotion using morning
shows and cable outlets carrying popular behind-
the-scenes specials is also critical for capturing atten-
tion. Some networks also join with major businesses,
such as Kmart, Sears or McDonald’s, to jointly pro-
mote the new season or a specific program.
Promotions in print, on the air and on the web
are the primary ways networks invite viewers to try
out programs. They are also the means by which the
networks convince viewers to associate a program
with a particular network (franchising or branding).
At the same time, parent corporations are demand-
ing heavy cross-promotion of a company’s many
subsidiaries—such as the CW using its TV shows
to promote music from Atlantic, Elektra, Reprise,
Rhino and Warner Bros. Records—which uses up
air time that would previously have been used to
promote episodes of individual programs. And it
leaves less and less program time.
Changing Format Emphases
To minimize risk, networks continue to rely on the
traditional winners in prime time—situation come-
dies, dramas and movies—and somewhat reluctantly
added unscripted programs (in shorthand, reality) to
this exclusive list. Another change has been the
increased use of specials, a term encompassing one-
time entertainment programs, major sporting events,
and more infrequently, news documentaries or inter-
views. Nonetheless, the proportions as well as kinds
of formats dominating evening schedules have altered
over time (see 2.15).
Situation comedies and crime dramas have a
long history in network television, stretching back
to such shows as The Life of Riley and Dragnet in
the early 1950s all the way through The Big Band
Theory and CSI in the late 2000s. In one recent sea-
son, the broadcast networks offered over 75 sitcoms
and 30 crime dramas; in a subsequent season, the
distribution had flipped to 17 sitcoms and 38 dramas
plus 26 unscripted shows (and another 22 dramas on
Univision). The concentration of shows into sitcoms
and dramas occurred because they:
■attracted sizable audiences in the young female
demographics.
2.14
Fan Sites
V
irtually every program has fan sites on the internet,
and these remain long after the networks have for-
gotten a series. Indeed, one key function of fan sites is
the more or less illegal sharing of taped episodes among
fans. (According to Variety, studies have shown most
people would use official downloads if they were
available and at low prices; most people only pirate
what the networks don’t offer.) In addition, there are
people who collect copies of virtually everything TV
does, even if the networks don’t think the offerings have
any value. Somewhere out there are people who think
My Mother the Car was a great show. Truth is, most
people don’t think of it as pirating when they find a show
“in the trash” that the networks threw away. The net-
works, or at least their parent companies, might strongly
disagree with that. At present, the networks are not
keeping up with technology in their programming, their
promotion, or their archiving.
80
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
■syndicate well off-network.
Unscripted shows supplanted some of this con-
centrated group because they:
■are comparatively inexpensive to produce.
Because of demand the cost of sitcoms and
crime shows produced in the United States has esca-
lated beyond that of most other formats. (Univision
buys its soap-like dramas—telenovelas—less expen-
sively from Mexico or produces them in Miami.) As
a result, the crime drama has moved to the franchise
route, and situation comedies have begun to all look
alike. Although examples of top-rated shows in both
of these types can be found, their overall success rate
has declined steadily. Most years, the networks do
not produce even one truly successful new sitcom (or
drama).
Situation comedies fall into two main types:
family-based comedies like Two and a Half Men,
George Lopez and How I Met Your Mother—and
occupational comedies like Becker, The Office and
Scrubs. Together, these two types account for more
than three-quarters of all situation comedies offered
over the last 20 years. More unusual sitcom formats
such as 10 Things I Hate About You or That ’70s
Show occasionally turn up, but only in limited num-
bers. Crime dramas have slowly changed—from pri-
vate citizen do-gooders like Magnum P.I. to gritty
police dramas like NYPD Blue to investigations of
somewhat revolting body parts like CSI and Bones.
The mid-1990s also saw the return of court-
room dramas, often in connection with a police
show (as was the case with Law & Order and
Law & Order: SVU), or on their own (as in The
Practice, Judging Amy and Without a Trace). Small-
ville, an unusual comic book format, is most likely
to become the franchise for the CW using the Justice
League characters now part of Smallville.
Of the approximately 700 specials each year,
more than 500 have been entertainment specials
for young adults, such as the Justin Timberlake
specials, the Charlie Brown Christmas specials and
Univision’s long-running Sabado Gigante, often con-
sidered a special even though it is part of the regular
schedule. That’s because of the type of program it is.
A fast-paced variety, talk, and game show, Sabado
Gigante airs every Saturday evening and attracts
huge Spanish-speaking audiences inside the United
States and throughout South and Central America.
About 100 specials each year on U.S. television are
sports specials, including the annual Super Bowl and
World Series games. The remaining 100 divide
among dramatic specials and news specials, includ-
ing interviews such as those by Barbara Walters, and
occasional documentaries.
Entertainment specials often attract superstars
(such as Robin Williams or Bob Newhart) whose reg-
ular motion picture work, performance schedules or
health prevents them from participating in series pro-
grams. Star-studded specials can invigorate a sched-
ule,
encourage
major
advertiser
participation,
provide unusual promotional opportunities, and gen-
erate high ratings and critical approval. However,
they cost a lot of money and are consequently rare.
Programs such as Glee or Saturday Night Live now
bring in these superstars as guests. In some cases,
stars may actually beg, or rather have their agents
beg, to get on the program. A flood of award
shows, clones of the Academy Awards and Grammy
Awards, are now promoted as “Star-Studded Spe-
cials,” but few are as big a draw as the annual Acad-
emy Awards. Indeed, many so-called entertainment
specials are merely long forms of regular series or
regular episodes with big-name guest stars.
For example, the record-breaking final episode
of M*A*S*H (amassing an extraordinary 77 share)
was an extended episode of the existing series, as
was the final episode of Seinfeld. Friends did several
long-form shows leading up to their final episode, all
of them called specials. Network programmers are
awake to the possibility that too many specials dif-
fering sharply from the regular programming might
interrupt carefully nurtured viewing habits beyond
repair—hence, the trend toward long-form episodes
of regularly scheduled series. Such shows also have
the advantage of being relatively inexpensive to pro-
duce and promote, and they exploit existing audi-
ences, thus reducing risk.
Nowadays, network prime-time sports consist
of playoffs and championships in the major sports,
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
81
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
as well as special events such as the Olympics
(see 2.16 about Roone Arledge’s extraordinary
influence). FOX and NBC, in particular, often use
sports to fill the first two months of the new
prime-time season, introducing regular series as late
as November. Although the networks carry a great
deal of football, basketball, baseball, tennis, and
golf, and Univision has soccer, most of these shows
are relegated to the weekends (see Chapter 7). Most
soccer, wrestling, Nascar, and other sports com-
mand prime time only on cable, not on the broad-
cast networks.
Cable has become the true home of sports. Even
ABC responded to pressure for the network to do
something to attract more “ideal women,” even at the
expense of its traditional audience for the long-running
2.15
Is There a Doctor in The House?
A
lways a runner-up. That might be that way to describe
medical dramas on the broadcast networks. Never
the dominant format, but always there, usually in the top
10. However, over the years, they changed.
Back in 1948, medical programs were serious science.
Starting on the old Dumont Network (and then moving to
CBS), The Johns Hopkins Science Review was one of those
shows critics loved and very few people watched. It offered
the latest breakthroughs in medicine and other areas of
science (a topic that has moved to evening newscasts). In
the early 1950s, long before Googling, the program was
where people went to get the latest word on the polio epi-
demics and the treatments. It was also where they went to
see the latest information about rockets. When it went off
the air in 1954, it was replaced with two shows: Medical
Horizons on ABC—a series, like Johns Hopkins, which
presented the latest breakthroughs, but only in medicine—
and Medic on NBC, which dramatized case files from the
Los Angeles Medical Association. Medic was more suc-
cessful, but both typified the ways the medical profession
was dealt with during the 1950s. Medicine was serious
stuff, and even when stories were dramatized, they came
“theoretically” just from the facts.
That all changed in 1961 when two groundbreaking
shows hit in the same year. Dr. Kildare (taken from the
movie of the same name) and Ben Casey both featured a
brilliant, but nonconformist young doctor and his wise,
older mentor. These doctors did more than cure sickness—
with almost God-like success: They also solved an endless
array of other people’s personal problems. For the next 20
years, right up until Trapper John, they set the formula for
successful medical dramas. But in 1972, a slight change
began to creep in with the premiere of Emergency.
It’s hard to think of Emergency as groundbreaking—but
for the first time, a medical show had an ensemble cast, not
just two major characters. What was meant to form a bridge
between action-adventure and medical drama also formed a
bridge between the existing formula and its next incarnation,
which occurred in 1982 with St. Elsewhere. Set in a big-city
teaching hospital, St. Elsewhere was a complete break from
the programs with the God-like doctors that preceded it.
Here doctors were all too human, with some driven by
money, others by a yearning for fame. Instead of solving
everyone else’s problems, doctors started worrying about
their own. The whole show was somehow less antiseptic,
grittier, more inner-city, and the topics they dealt with ranged
from breast and testicular cancer to AIDS to rape and gang
violence and so on. This was the show that made it okay for
men to appear nude, at least from behind. Doctors on tele-
vision would never climb back up on the pedestals they had
previously occupied. Even when the doctor is a certified
genius, such as in FOX’s House, he’s still an arrogant jerk.
St. Elsewhere’s most enduring legacy, however, was the
ensemble cast. From that time, right through Gray’s Anatomy,
no one or two stars carried a medical drama. From the point
of view of producers this has the huge benefit of allowing
stars to leave and new ones be brought in without damaging
the show. As a result, ensemble programs can run forever, so
long as there’s a sickness to tackle. Notably, not a single
character who appeared in the early episodes of NBC’s ER
was still there when it finally finished its 15-year run in 2009,
and yet the show continued to be a top-10 contender. By
evolving over time, the medical drama has not only kept itself
healthy but has been longer-lived than most formats.
William J. Adams, Ph.D.
Kansas State University
82
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Monday Night Football, and shifted the show to ESPN.
(Also, ESPN makes more money for Disney than ABC
does, which probably affected the move.) Big sporting
events do bring prestige to the network, are popular
with affiliates, and fill out advertising packages by
delivering male viewers of all ages, but the costs paid
by broadcast networks for the biggest events no longer
match returns.
Unscripted programming is the overall term
used by the industry to cover reality programs,
news magazines and game shows. It refers to the
types of programs that do not require the expensive
writing and controlled production used for other
series. While such shows have writers providing
ad-libs for hosts and outlining situations, the writing
costs as well as talent costs are minimal compared
with other genres. These three types of programs are
certainly not new. The magazine format goes back
decades, game shows ruled the airwaves during the
1950s, and artificial situation shows can be traced
2.16
Roone Arledge: The Man Who Brought Sports into Prime Time
W
hen Roone Arledge was first hired by ABC in 1960
as a lowly assistant producer, the television net-
works considered sports to be second-rate entertainment.
Even professional team owners at the time believed that
televised sports existed to sell tickets for the ballparks.
Roone Arledge could not have disagreed more. He was
convinced that sports programming could entertain the fans
at home, and under his leadership, the sports broadcasting
industry was completely recreated.
Arledge came up with a revolutionary approach to
producing sports: He borrowed the production techniques
of entertainment and used them to duplicate the experience
of actually attending a game at the stadium. He used many
more cameras, microphones and graphics in his sports tel-
ecasts than his competitors had ever used, and he experi-
mented constantly with new technologies. Arledge and his
team of talented engineers pioneered or refined the use of
underwater cameras, handheld cameras, isolation cam-
eras, field microphones, split screens, instant replay, slow
motion and freeze frames. Their efforts resulted in new
production techniques that heightened the drama of sport-
ing events. Arledge also began the practice of focusing on
the personalities and stories of the athletes. He invented
what was called “up close and personal” coverage—air-
ing pretaped biographical features of athletes right before
their events—to involve viewers emotionally with the
players and the outcomes.
During the 1960s, the television networks aired sports
only on weekend afternoons. But ABC’s successful prime-
time broadcasts of the 1968 Olympic Games convinced
Arledge, by then the president of ABC Sports, that sports
programming could compete with sitcoms and dramas in
prime time. Monday Night Football, an Arledge creation,
premiered in 1970 and quickly became a phenomenal
success in the ratings. (It is worth noting that CBS and NBC
had both rejected the NFL’s proposal for the show.)
During the 1970s, one sport after another moved into
prime time, and fees for broadcast rights for sports sky-
rocketed because of soaring revenues from prime-time
advertising.
In the following decades, sports programming expanded
further into network schedules, and limited choices have
given way to lineups containing dozens of channels devoted
to exclusively to sports. In addition, many professional lea-
gues, college conferences, and even some individual teams
have started their own television networks (though they are
more like syndicators than real networks). Also, some profes-
sional leagues have partnered with cable and satellite provi-
ders to offer premium access to all regular and postseason
games. Sports has continued to dominate much of broadcast
schedules, with league playoffs and championships consis-
tently among the highest-rated programs year after year.
Despite starting with very limited resources, Arledge
transformed ABC Sports into the preeminent sports network
of the day and initiated a phenomenon that lasts to today.
Although Arledge died in 2002, his immense influence will
continue to be seen for decades to come. He forever
changed ABC, and beyond that network, programming
strategies and schedules for all television, the economics of
professional and college sports, and the way that viewers
watch sports on television.
Timothy B. Bedwell
Produce, Media Quarry, LLC.
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
83
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
back at least as far as Candid Camera. What is new
is the power they command.
Like the sitcom, there have been some immense
hits in the reality genre. American Idol, Survivor and
Dancing with the Stars have had staying power, but
others, such as Joe Millionaire, did well once but fell
apart once the gimmick was known. To date, nearly
all reality series have dropped substantially in the
ratings during their second outings. Even the most
popular series in this format (with the two notable
exceptions of American Idol and Survivor: Vanuatu)
don’t match on a regular basis the ratings of a CSI,
Gray’s Anatomy, The Mentalist, The Office or other
top scripted series.
The power of reality is that it is incredibly cheap
to produce: less than one-tenth the cost of scripted
programs. The networks have also been able to stan-
dardize reality shows by fitting them into a rigid for-
mula: A group of people you hope you never meet in
real life backstab and cut each other’s throats on the
way to a big prize; during each show, one partici-
pant is thrown off after the group performs some
outlandish stunt; the outcast then hits the morning
talk shows and news circuit to hype the ongoing
program. The only thing that changes is the situa-
tion. One variation that makes critics groan is the
dumbed-down quiz show, epitomized by Are you
Smarter
Than
a
Fifth-Grader?.
Because
reality
shows are so cheap to produce, they also provide a
way to create original summer programming, thus
helping the move toward a full 52-week schedule.
But the flurry of creativity that characterized
some of the early entries has now settled into as for-
mulaic a pattern as most sitcoms. One problem with
reality series is that many of the concepts were bor-
rowed from popular shows in Japan and Europe,
and thus our versions are very hard to sell back.
The other major problem is that each show needs a
gimmick, and to maintain the shock value (and thus
generate hype), the situations have been pushed
closer and closer to outright pornography or life
risking situations. We may yet get our first on-air
tragedy.
Magazine series like 60 Minutes, 20/20, Prime-
time, Dateline and so on are almost as numerous as
reality series in prime time. The shows are produced
directly by a network’s news division and have
earned consistent though middle-of-the-pack ratings
for years. Like the other unscripted formats, maga-
zine series are, comparatively, very cheap to pro-
duce, and unlike reality series, several have been
able to run forever with little decline from their ini-
tial ratings. They also serve as prestige programs for
the networks (see 2.17). But like reality series, mag-
azine shows have no afterlife. Neither type works
well in rerun, and they have no life as a DVD set
and no syndication potential, although in some
rare cases their ideas may be franchised to other
countries.
Game shows enjoyed a brief resurgence in the
late 1990s, were badly overused, and then appeared
to vanish. Actually, they merged with reality series,
most of which are now games, but in its purer form,
the game show had been relegated to syndicated
access time (for instance, Jeopardy and Wheel of
Fortune).
Although increased costs have led to fewer
movie nights over the last few years, three types of
productions regarded as movies still fill some of
prime time on the broadcast television networks:
(1) theatrical feature films, those made originally
for release in theaters; (2) made-for-TV movies, sim-
ilar to feature films but made specifically for net-
work
television
airing
in
a
two-hour
format
containing commercial breaks; and (3) miniseries,
multipart films made especially for broadcast airing
in installments. All three types share these major
advantages for the networks:
■They fill large amounts of time with material that
usually generates respectable ratings.
■They make it possible to air topical or controver-
sial material that may be deemed inappropriate
for regularly scheduled network series or can be
taken directly from the headlines.
■They permit showcasing actors and actresses who
would otherwise never be seen on television.
■They allow the network to reward stars from their
popular series by giving them a movie.
The three kinds of movies also share one major
disadvantage—extraordinarily
high
cost
for
the
84
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2.17
T
ick tick tick tick. A ticking watch quickly became
synonymous with CBS’s groundbreaking, hour-long,
investigative news magazine, 60 Minutes, when it
launched on September 24, 1968 (the stopwatch
appeared after few episodes). Legendary news producer
Don Hewitt (1922–2009), who directed venerable CBS
newsman Edward R. Murrow for the first few years of See
It Now (1951–1958), directed the first televised presi-
dential debates in 1960 (Kennedy v. Nixon) and pro-
duced the CBS Evening News with Walter Cronkite for
years, created this prime-time Sunday staple, serving as its
executive producer until 2004. It is the longest-running,
regularly-scheduled, prime-time broadcast program in
American television. It has garnered 78 Emmys and five
Peabody Awards. It was the top-ranked show for five
years and among the top-10* Nielsen-rated programs for
23 seasons (1977–2000). It continues to be among the
top-20 shows each week and the most-watched news
magazine. TV Guide ranks it number six among its “50
Greatest TV Shows of All Time,” and the only news pro-
gram in its top 10.
Today’s investigative techniques of hidden cameras,
“gotcha” guerilla tactics, and re-edited interviews can be
traced to 60 Minutes. Originally hosted by Harry Reasoner
and Mike Wallace, other journalists and commentators
have come and gone in the 40-plus years of this storied
program. Morley Safer, Lesley Stahl, Andy Rooney and
others became household names and celebrity reporters
thanks to this high-profile “magazine for television” (as
Reasoner introduced it in the first episode). Part-time corre-
spondents include a laundry list of legendary news person-
alities, including Ed Bradley, Connie Chung, Anderson
Cooper, Walter Cronkite, Katie Couric, Bryant Gumbel,
Lara Logan, Dan Rather, Diane Sawyer and Eric Sevareid.
Through the years, 60 Minutes has been embroiled in
controversy for some of its reporting. In 1982, a package
asserted that General William Westmoreland withheld
information about the Vietnam War from key people in
Washington. Westmoreland denounced the story, and
60 Minutes issued a statement that it did not believe the
general was unpatriotic, while standing by the accuracy of
the report. In 2000, the program landed an exclusive
interview with Timothy McVeigh, the Oklahoma City
Bomber who had been found guilty and sentenced to
death. McVeigh ranted against the U.S. government, and
subsequently face-to-face interviews with death-row inmates
were made illegal. In 1995, 60 Minutes did not run a
story, for which it was criticized. The producers had infor-
mation that Brown & Williamson, a tobacco company, had
disregarded information about the health risks of its cigar-
ettes and had tampered with the tobacco to enhance the
effect of nicotine. Don Hewitt hesitated to run such a
scathing expose, and instead The Wall Street Journal broke
the story. Eventually, 60 Minutes aired an altered version,
minus some of the most incriminating evidence. The Oscar-
nominated film, The Insider (1999), dramatizes this inci-
dent. When all is said and done, though, it is expected that
hard-hitting journalism, as championed by 60 Minutes, will
run into criticism sometimes; otherwise, it can be argued
that the reporters are not doing their jobs.
Doing their jobs is a hallmark of the 60 Minutes
investigative team. Whether reporting on Vietnam and
Watergate in the early years or the current presidential
administration, this original and time-honored news mag-
azine, which its creator, Don Hewitt, said married “show
biz” and “news biz,” is considered to be the preeminent
investigative program on American television. It paved the
way for many that followed, including ABC’s 20/20
(1978), PBS’s Frontline (1983), NBC’s Dateline (1992),
and others. It has been franchised in other countries,
including Australia, New Zealand and Peru. Audio
broadcasts of the show are distributed by CBS Radio,
and commercial-free audio podcasts are available from
iTunes. The TV broadcasts stream on CBSNews.com
and CNETTV.com. The show has its own website at
CBSNews.com and its own YouTube channel, http://
www.youtube.com/user/60minutes?ob=5. It has
spawned a few other series, such as the short-lived
60 Minutes II, and it has a relatively new web
series, 60 Minutes Overtime (http://www.cbsnews.com/
60minutesovertime), with internet-exclusive content beyond
the TV program. A pretty good run for a show that just keeps
on ticking….
Edward J. Fink
California State University, Fullerton
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
85
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
networks. Miniseries are typically the most expen-
sive, and theatrical movies the second-most costly.
Both are more risky in ratings than made-for-TV
movies, but all three remain popular because they
fill big chunks of time and can be used to temporar-
ily plug holes in the schedule until programmers can
figure out something to schedule.
Theatrical movies have declined in popularity
because of exceptionally high costs and generally
low ratings when run on the Big Three networks.
The truth is that by the time a theatrical movie
makes it to broadcast TV, it is already very late in
its life cycle. It has played the theaters, run on pay-
per-view, and is probably available on VOD. It may
have been released for rental, run on cable movie
channels and sold as a DVD. Consequently, ratings
on the networks are almost always disappointing,
even for the biggest blockbusters. Made-for-TV
movies just perform better. Miniseries not only per-
form better but also have a strong afterlife in foreign
syndication and as DVDs.
Many viewers and critics bewail the disappear-
ance of the dramatic anthology format: a set of
single-episode
television
plays
presented
in
an
unconnected series. What actually happened was
that the anthology format went through a style
change and returned as the made-for-TV movie.
During the 1955–56 season, the very peak of the
anthology
era,
dramatic
anthologies
made
up
about 526 hours of prime time. In the 1989–90 sea-
son, a peak year, 624 made-for-TV movies aired in
prime time (not including those made for cable).
The best of these movies compare favorably with
the best of the dramatic anthologies of the earlier era.
Such movies also allow the networks to respond
quickly to major news events. The Scott Peterson case
was a movie even before it went to trial. The Elizabeth
Smart and Jessica Lynch stories became competing
films on more than one network, and the big guys
fought about who was going to be first to do the
Anna Nicole Smith story almost as much as the law-
yers fought about who was going to get to bury her.
Hot topics like drugs, sex and teenage problems can be
dealt with in movies in ways a prime-time series just
doesn’t allow (see 2.18). TV movies shown on co-
owned cable channels are another method of testing
new characters and plot ideas—especially for material
that might be too risqué for broadcast networks!
The made-for-TV movie has replaced the pilot
as the major method for testing new series ideas.
Programs such as Glee, succeeded as television—or
in this case cable movies (High School Musical)—
before becoming series. Made-for-TV movies as
pilots have four distinct advantages:
1.
They can be profitable.
2.
They can target a desired demographic group.
3.
Audiences and affiliates like them.
4.
They have international syndication potential as
theatrical movies.
TV movie pilots now average $5 million to
make (some as high as $10 million), but they pay
their way whether or not the concept ever becomes
a series. Even when they fail, the networks usually
have made a healthy profit on the TV movie’s initial
run, its foreign syndication and the DVD sale. More-
over, the made-for-TV movie has the advantage of
being made-to-order to fit within a network’s exist-
ing schedule. It can target a specific audience to
maintain a night’s flow and avoid the disruptions
that specials often cause.
The success of limited series on PBS’s Masterpiece
Theatre led the commercial networks into the produc-
tion of multipart series presented in two to six episodes
on successive nights or in successive weeks. Called
miniseries, they could run for as long as 10 or more
hours, typically beginning and ending on Sunday
nights—the night of maximum viewing. Shorter mini-
series tend to be scheduled on sequential nights, while
longer series stretch over two weeks, skipping the eve-
nings on which the network has its most popular pro-
grams. These extreme long forms, however, have
become very rare because of their exceedingly high
cost. Despite the advantages of blockbuster ratings,
prestige, critical acclaim and series potential, the broad-
cast networks switched from long-form to short-form
miniseries (four to six hours).
Such high-level fantasy concepts as Merlin,
Alice in Wonderland and Leprechauns, the Romeo-
and-Juliet takeoff, earned high ratings on the networks
but also sold well internationally and as DVD sets
86
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
marketed on the air during the original network show-
ing. NBC adopted the practice of putting delayed
repeats on its cable networks about one week after ini-
tial broadcast airings, thus producing another round of
advertising revenues. Widespread adoption of this
multistep profit system, similar to the one used for
Hollywood motion pictures, made the miniseries
more popular than ever by the turn of the century.
But a decade later, such event programming has
become rare for broadcasting, budgets going instead
to original production for cable.
Network Decision Making
Few program decisions precipitate as much contro-
versy as the cancellation of programs. Because com-
mercial television is first of all a business—with
tens of thousands of stockholders and billions of
dollars committed for advertising—the networks’
overriding aim is to attract the largest possible
audience in the ideal demographic range at all
times, or at least to appear to be trying to do that.
Networks always aim at the number-one position.
Traditionally, ratings have been considered the
most influential prime-time programming variable,
and the networks make many controversial deci-
sions each year based on these numbers. This
often results in (1) canceling programs favored by
millions of viewers, (2) countering strong shows by
scheduling competing strong shows, (3) preempting
popular series to insert special programs, and
(4) falling back on reruns late in the season when
the outdoors beckons and audience levels begin to
drop off.
However, the type of program, the ranking as
compared with the competition, the size of produc-
tion fees, and the target demographic group may be
as important as the ratings in cancellation decisions.
New situation comedies, strongly desired by the net-
works’ O&Os, and reality-based series are much
more likely to be held than other kinds of series pro-
ducing equivalent ratings. Also, series with low pro-
duction fees are more likely to be held than more
expensive programs, and finally, series that appeal
to
the
network’s
concept
of
“proper
demo-
graphics”—and some would now argue “political
correctness”—may be held even when ratings are
low. And occasionally, like once in a decade or so,
audience outcry restores a favorite for a while, as in
the case of cancelled and then revived Jericho on
CBS or Friday Night Lights, which got new life on
cable. Critical approval and the extraordinary pro-
motional opportunity that public acclaim provides
also figure in decisions to cancel or hold low-rated
new programs (see 2.19 and 2.20).
2.18
The Movie Mistakes
O
ccasionally, made-for-TV movies can show how badly
out of touch with their audiences the networks can be.
CBS was truly shocked by public reaction to its docudrama
on President Reagan. It seems to have never occurred to
CBS’s higher-ups that much of the public would take
offense at its portrayal of Mrs. Reagan as a shrew and the
former President as a bumbling but affable storyteller. The
public’s reaction to the tendency to make things up for
dramatic effect seems also to have stunned the Hollywood
community. When the press picked up on the public outcry,
Viacom quickly pulled the show from CBS and moved it to
Showtime, which immediately declared it a hit and never
showed it again. ABC reacted to the success of Mel Gib-
son’s The Passion of the Christ (in spite of negative Holly-
wood and mainstream press) by rushing its alternative
version of the Passion out for the 2004 Easter season, but
the network seems genuinely surprised that Judas bombed.
After all, the made-for-TV movie had a religious theme; why
didn’t it work? Recently a network announced plans for an
animated series on Jesus Christ as a teenager having pro-
blems with his overbearing father. Will they ever learn?
William J. Adams, Ph.D.
Kansas State University
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
87
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The Risks and Rewards Ahead
Supposedly, the major networks prowl for the
breakthrough idea—the program that will be differ-
ent but not so different as to turn away audiences.
The Cosby Show was one such show in 1984–85, as
was ALF in 1986. Married ... with Children aston-
ished viewers in 1987, Roseanne made a splash in
1988, Friends reintroduced the buddy sitcom in
1995, and Malcolm in the Middle suggested an
entirely new idea for the family sitcom in 1999.
The biggest change was the rebirth of the prime-
time game show with Who Wants to Be a Million-
aire? in 2000—after an absence of nearly 40 years—
and its combination with reality in the form of Survi-
vor. Next came graphic special effects and mystery
that produced the success of CSI beginning in 2002,
and then the blatant sex in Desperate Housewives. Its
success relaxed standards all through the broadcast
networks. Then CBS came up with The Mentalist,
which spawned a half-dozen medium and psychic
shows. Most recently, FOX reinvented the musical
with Glee, though few have attempted to copy it.
In recent years, all four major networks have
had entire seasons without a single new hit. In
truth, network programmers can only guess what
the next hit will be and why it succeeds. A program
failure is easier to analyze. It can result from the
wrong time period, the wrong concept, the wrong
writing, the wrong casting, poor execution of a
good idea, poor execution of a bad idea, overwhelm-
ing competition, the wrong night of the week, and a
dozen other factors. Conversely, success is very hard
to analyze or copy, even though that has become the
driving goal of the broadcast networks.
Although the actual cost of production has gone
down dramatically through the use of digital tech-
nology and computer-produced effects, other factors
have canceled out the savings and caused the full
cost of production to continue to skyrocket. Some
of those factors are directly related to programming
decisions and seem to be the opposite of what many
would naturally assume would happen. For exam-
ple, the inability of programmers to produce success-
ful
shows
has
actually
caused
the
price
of
production to go up. With so few true hits, program-
mers seem willing to pay almost anything to keep a
successful program, as demonstrated by the incredi-
ble amounts paid to renew such series as ER and
Two and a Half Men.
The networks are also locked in bidding wars for
top specials and sporting events, again causing the
prices to go through the ceiling. In a strange type of
domino effect, however, as the top price levels have
gone up, directors, writers, actors and people in all
other branches of production have also demanded
2.19
The Critics
A
cclaim usually has some effect only in the absence of
other rating successes. The kudos for Hill Street Blues,
for example, bolstered NBC’s image at a time when it was
sorely in need of prestige, persuading programmers to stick
with the show even in the face of low ratings. The same
connection between critical acclaim and patience even in
the face of low ratings can be seen for the moderately
rated The West Wing on NBC or Bones on FOX. Some-
times the networks decide to go along with the critics, at
least until something with better numbers comes along.
On the other hand, critical shock also seems to be
desirable as far as the networks are concerned. The WB
openly admitted that it added a love affair between a high
school student and a teacher to Dawson’s Creek to gener-
ate negative press. ABC did the same thing with NYPD
Blue. The nude scenes were there to stir up controversy.
After the press furor generated by the Madonna/Britney
Spears kiss, CBS was probably trying to trigger similar
press attention with its 2004 halftime show at the Super
Bowl. It just didn’t count on how negative the public reac-
tion would be. Many argue that the atomic bomb detona-
tions on 24 and Jericho, the grittier aspects of Prison Break
and the graphic details in CSI and Bones have also been
designed to generate such shock. Instead of being bowled
over, however, the critics have raved about the new
realism.
88
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
more. As a result, costs at all levels have gone up even
as ratings have gone down. The network takeover of
production not only didn’t slow this process, how-
ever; it actually increased the rate of its rise.
At the same time, the incredible failure rates have
resulted in an insatiable demand for replacement
series. It is not at all uncommon for half of new
prime-time series to fail by network standards within
their first six weeks. These shows have to be replaced,
and because development is the most expensive phase
of production, the constant demand for new series
has sent development costs out of sight. As these
new programs rarely do better than the preceding
series in those time slots on the same channels, one
would presume, just considering the economics, that
programmers would leave most new series alone for
at least a year to see if they could build audiences.
The continual hope for that one elusive program
that will break the trend, however, produces a type
of feeding frenzy in which no programmers are will-
ing to deviate from the present destructive cycle.
Predicting the future of any medium is a risky
undertaking at best. As ratings and compensation con-
tinue to fall, eventually the largest non-network group
owners may decide they can do better on their own.
It would be natural for such group owners to either
increase their participation in original syndication
production for their own systems or join with disgrun-
tled old executive producers as to form new produc-
tion houses, thus in essence becoming networks
2.20
The Censors
T
he broadcast Standards and Practices Department, a
behind-the-scenes group, theoretically used to exercise
total authority over all network programming. Cynically
and often angrily called “censors,” the department once
acted as policeman and judge for all questions concerning
acceptability of material for broadcast. It often found itself
walking a thin line between offending viewers or adverti-
sers and offending the creative community. It had to decide
between the imaginative and the objectionable.
Members of the department typically read submitted scripts;
attended rehearsals, filmings, or tapings; and often previewed
the final products before they aired. They were everywhere. If,
in the department’s lordly judgment, a program failed to con-
form to network standards in matters of language or taste, it
could insist on changes. Only a decree by the chairman or
president of the company could overturn its decisions.
However, Standards and Practices was one of the first
areas cut back when budgets grew tight in the 1990s, and
as a result, this department has little day-to-day impact
today (although its existence is loudly touted during election
years when an increase in media criticism usually occurs).
Moreover, even when it had considerable power, over the
years the department’s criteria for acceptability were forced
to change. In the early 1920s, one of the hottest issues was
whether such a personal and perhaps obscene product as
toothpaste should be allowed to advertise over the radio
airwaves. By 1983 the hottest question was whether
NBC’s censors would permit a new series, Bay City Blues,
to air a locker-room scene that included nude men photo-
graphed, as the producer put it, “tastefully from the back.”
By the mid-1980s, child abuse, abortion, and homosexu-
ality were the problematic topics, while the 1990s brought
the thorny questions of AIDS, condoms, obscene language,
and, as always, how explicitly sex could be shown.
By the mid-2000s, concern focused on violence, nudity,
drinking, and smoking, and one of the hottest issues was
whether some reality shows were rigged. This question
surfaced with the discovery that certain exciting scenes in
Survivor were staged and that ABC network executives had
overruled the judges in their American Idol clone, Last
Comic Standing—a show in which the audience suppos-
edly selected the next top comedian—apparently to pro-
duce a more demographically-friendly result. At the same
time, gay groups and other liberal organizations were
demanding more positive portrayals of gays in program-
ming, and some producers wanted even more graphic and
controversial depictions of sex in prime time.
The present situation has led to some very strange
reactions, especially noticeable on cable. The Syfy Chan-
nel, for example, owned by NBC Universal, bleeps out
bad words on some shows but ran Tripping the Rift for
years, which is little more than animated porn. Now the
network censors seem focused on political correctness and
on gaining points with minorities, not on offending special
interest groups like gays. As long as programs don’t cross
the lines set by the FCC, pretty much anything goes.
CHAPTER 2 Prime-Time Network Programming Strategies
89
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
themselves. For ten of its owned stations, FOX created
MyNetworkTV to replace the prime-time shows that
UPN formerly supplied.
Such scenarios suggest that the future American
broadcasting system could more closely resemble the
system that presently exists in such countries as
Japan, rather than what is now familiar. In short,
there would be more networks but fewer affiliates
(and maybe way fewer stations, as Chapter 4 sug-
gests). That is to say, the networks would be doing
their own productions, which would then be distrib-
uted through whatever stations they own as part of a
much larger entertainment wing of a corporation.
Companies like Hallmark have been doing pro-
duction for years (nowadays Hallmark has its own
cable network). Is it possible that they could join with
other large companies to make their own shows?
Many, like Sears and Procter and Gamble, seem to be
threatening that now, arguing that they couldn’t possi-
bly do worse than the present broadcast system. Only
time will tell how the present situation will work itself
out. Only six things seem to be sure bets right now:
1.
Television is not going to go away: Might
change a bit, but it’ll live.
2.
The power of the big broadcast networks to
control information and entertainment will
continue to decline, forcing the networks to
change into new entities.
3.
The division between broadcasting and cable
will continue to blur as the companies buy into
one another and begin to mirror each other and
make greater use of the internet.
4.
Aftermarket selling of reality and other shows
will become the centers of creative effort.
5.
Virtual advertising and product placement will
expand into regular programming as revenues
from traditional advertising decline.
6.
Multiplatform strategies will become part of every
program proposal and central to all productions.
Indeed, the mixed broadcast/cable/online model
now used by ION and Univision is the likely future of
the business. In any case, one thing is clear: The next 50
years will bear little resemblance to the last 50 years.
Notes
1. Eggerton, J. (Feb. 9, 2004). Sexy halftime stunt has
affiliates fuming. Broadcasting & Cable, pp. 6, 37.
2. Littleton, C. (Feb. 22–28, 2010). Free tv’s found
money. Nets and their affils revel in new coin from cable.
Variety, pp. 1–37.
3. Becker, A. (March 3, 2008). Buyers give lowdown on
upfronts. Broadcasting & Cable, pp. 3–26.
4. Eggerton, J. (Feb. 18, 2008). Advertisers rankled by
network fees. Broadcasting & Cable, pp. 3–26.
5. Ives, N. (March 16, 2011). American idol returns to
dominance in product placement. Advertising Age. adage.
com/article/mediaworks/American-idol-returns-domi-
nance-product-placement/1494191
6. Guthrie, M. (Jan. 21, 2008). Out-of-home tv: Now it’s
everywhere. Broadcasting & Cable, pp. 4–21.
7. Schneider, M. (April 12-18, 2010). Pilots depart from
coasts: L.A., gotham deemed too expensive for nets. Vari-
ety, pp. 1–20.
8. Poniewozik, J. (December 29, 2003). Has the main-
stream run dry? Time.
9. Bauer, D. (April 17, 2011). Broadcast tv audience aging
faster than us population. Huffington Post. www.huffing-
tonpost.com/2010/08/16/broadcast-tv-audience-agi_n_
683009.html
10. Klein, P. (1979). Programming. In S. Morgebstern
(ed.), Inside the TV Business. New York: Sterling.
11. Amdur, M. (Nov.2, 2003). Case of the disappearing
eyeballs: Big bucks at risk as nets suffer separation anxiety.
Variety. variety.com/article/VR1117894931?refcatid=
1275&printerfriendly=true
12. Gilbert, C. (April 21, 2011). How Democrats and
Republicans use the media (very differently). Journal Sen-
tinel. www.jsonline.mobi/more/news/120368144.htm
13. Romano, A. (July 22, 2002). At E!, Youth will be
served. Broadcasting & Cable, p. 22.
14. Frank, B. (July 7, 2003), Check out why young view-
ers like reality programming. Broadcasting & Cable.
90
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A P T E R3
Multichannel Television
Strategies
Susan Tyler Eastman and Michael O. Wirth
Chapter Outline
Multichannel Video Pro-
gramming Distributors
The Big Gamers
Cable Systems
Satellite Systems
Telephone Systems
Selection Strategies
Technical Considerations
Legal Considerations
Economic Considerations
Marketing Considerations
Scheduling Strategies
Evaluation Strategies
Audience Size
Repetition and Ratings
Promotion Strategies
Local Origination on Cable
Entertainment Channels
Local-Origination News
Programming
Community Access on Cable
Changing Usage
Nonlocal Programming
What’s Sneaking Up
Notes
91
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D
o you get a lot of tweets and postcards from
the company that supplies your television
service? Or from the companies that don’t? How
many ads try to persuade you to add a zillion chan-
nels and upgrade to HD? Change to DirecTV? Switch
to U-verse? Upgrade to Xfinity? Or add FiOS to your
cell service? Competition among the wired and video
service companies is fierce. The battle for subscribers
and revenue has now moved to the mobile media, and
soon will expand to potential adopters of 3D.
Multichannel Video
Programming Distributors
New communications technologies and looser fed-
eral regulations created a whirlwind in the market-
place for multichannel service providers. Cable,
satellite and telephone companies began blanketing
homes and offices with combos of digital television,
DVRs, on-demand video, voice telephony and fast
(and superfast) internet connections. Cellular com-
panies got into the game by offering 3G/4G and
Wi-Fi internet connections and wireless video pro-
gramming. Despite active competition, consumers’
monthly bills grow steadily larger, easily to $100,
$200 and, in some cases, even higher.
Cable, satellite and telephone companies are the
major broadband carriers: They use telecommu-
nications signals of far higher capacity than earlier
in the twentieth century, thus “broader bands.”
Companies
that
provide
broadband
signals
to
deliver video programming are collectively called
Multichannel
Video
Programming
Distributors
(MVPDs)—or sometimes “multivideo program dis-
tributors” because the full definition is too big a
mouthful. (In some jokes, they are the “most valu-
able program distributors.”) Most MVPDs offer a
mix of voice, internet and video services, so calling
AT&T, for example, a “telephone company” or
Comcast a “cable company” describes their history
rather than their current broadband business. On
the other hand, DirecTV is primarily a satellite
video
distribution
company.
For
all
types
of
MVPDs, it’s video that accounts for the largest
part of the revenue stream, but the distinction
between video (or television) and internet has
become largely one of hardware rather than content,
and that hardware is slowly merging. By 2015, it is
expected that more than 90 percent of the country’s
households will subscribe to some kind of multi-
channel programming distributor, some for a single
service, such as internet or cable connection, but
many for a large expensive “trifecta” of services.
Only 1 percent of those subscribers will be dial-up
households, the rest broadband. At the same time,
online video distribution or “over the top video”
will continue to grow with an increasing number
of consumers choosing to “cut the cord” to get
their TV over the internet. Current MVPD penetra-
tion is about 92 percent (see 3.1), and it should grow
to over 95 percent within the next ten years thanks
to a significant expansion in online video distribu-
tion. Most consumers will take a mix of services.
All three distributors, cable, satellite and tele-
phone companies, provide wide ranges and changing
lineups of digital video and audio programming. Cable
and telephone companies also offer high speed internet
and both wired and wireless voice services as they
3.1
MVPD Subscribership 2012
Subscribers
% /116 m. USTV HH
%/107m. MVPD HH
CABLE
70 million
60%
66%
SATELLITE
32 million
26%
30%
TELEPHONY
5 million
5%
5%
Non-MVPD
9 million
8%
8%
92
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
compete for customers, more or less. It’s that “more or
less” that makes the differences…and maybe the win-
ners. As one Bell Atlantic (now Verizon) executive pre-
dicted, “The people who will win this game are the
folks who provide depth and breadth in programming
and knock-the-socks-off customer service.”1 Thus,
major players that offer the best service along with
the most kinds of services—nearly all of which contain
programming content of one kind or another—have
the long haul advantage. The broadband technologies
that deliver multichannel media certainly give viewers
more options and more flexibility, but at a high cost.
And the huge expense of the complex technologies has
forced many smaller companies to merge (or leave the
game).
Irrespective of the kind of owner—cableop,
satco, or telco (the short-hand terms for cable oper-
ator, satellite company, and telephone company)—
the job of multichannel programmers is normally to
select, schedule, evaluate and promote channels of
television and audio programming out of the hun-
dreds of content networks (described in Chapter 9)
and to provide wired and wireless phone and inter-
net services. However, the meaning of “select” is far
different than in broadcasting as described in Chap-
ter 2. Rather than select individual programs,
MVPD programmers must choose whole channels
for their lineups, depending as much or more on
financial negotiations than type of content. Indeed,
the biggest current battle is to determine how much
money video distributors will pay the program pro-
ducers and how various middlemen (banks, credit
card companies, mobile phone carriers, software
and hardware companies) will get their share of
cell and video revenues. Moreover, the spread of
HD followed by VOD and 3D has made the com-
petitive marketplace even more complex and confus-
ing for the programmer, the distributor and the
consumer.
Video programming is predominantly a nation-
wide business. Nonetheless, a few local cable pro-
grammers remain that serve a city or limited
region. These programmers’ jobs focus on producing
and then scheduling programs for one or more chan-
nels of local or regional cable or, more likely, web
offerings, and they are discussed at the end of this
chapter because they do matter to the communities
they serve. But they aren’t in the big game.
The Big Gamers
Three types of program retransmitters dominate the
MVPD business: terrestrial wired cable, direct satel-
lite broadcasters, and terrestrial wired and wireless
telephone phone systems, although increasingly, the
big cable companies offer both wired and wireless
services. Collectively, the nine biggest MVPDs served
more than 75 percent of the 116þ million U.S. tele-
vision households in 2012, and since about 8 percent
of households have no MVPD service, that leaves
way less than 20 percent for all the smaller operators.
In addition, foreign-managed companies of these
types reach millions more subscribers around the
world. (Is there any urbanite in the world under age
30 who doesn’t have a cell phone?) Not surprisingly,
the more than a thousand U.S. operators of these var-
ious distribution systems face common problems.
Cable Systems
The term cable system refers to geographically
bounded and franchised wired companies using fiber
optic and coaxial cable to deliver from dozens to hun-
dreds of video and audio program channels to sub-
scribers. Nearly all also offer broadband (high-speed)
internet and wired telephone services, and the biggest
cable systems also offer wireless (4G/3G/Wi-Fi) voice
and video. Typically, local cable operators pick up sig-
nals from several orbiting satellites and terrestrial
broadcast antennas and then redistribute them via
cable wires to homes and other buildings. Subscribers
pay from $40 to $150 or more per month for cable
services; the total depends on the number of services
taken by the consumer, how many set-top boxes
(STBs) are being rented, whether they opt for digital
video recorders (DVRs), and how many VOD movies
were rented in a particular month. The most basic
cable service—retransmission of local off-air local
station signals and a few cable networks—may be
available for as little as $30 or $40, but most house-
holds want (many would say “need”) far more than
CHAPTER 3 Multichannel Television Strategies
93
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
that, adding high-definition, premium, or 3D channels;
DVR and STB fees; internet service; and/or both land-
line and cell phone service.
As the chart in 3.2 shows, Comcast (which also
owns 51 percent of NBCUniversal) is the dominant
force in cable television and home internet service
and is third largest (after AT&T and Verizon)
among providers of telephone service. Comcast,
together with the other four largest multiple system
operators (MSOs, the term for the companies that
install the wires and manage local service in multiple
franchise areas)—Time Warner Cable, Cox, Charter
and Cablevision—serve about three-quarters of all
cable subscribers. Comcast itself consists of hun-
dreds of separate geographic franchises in 39 states
welded into one huge operating company.
Satellite Systems
The term DBS is used only in the United States; in
the rest of the world, DTH (direct-to-home) means
all kinds of home satellite delivery services. As you
probably know from frequent advertising messages,
the two biggest companies providing domestic DBS
service are DirecTV and DISH Network. Jointly,
they have about 33 million subscribers (28 percent
of multichannel households).
As 3.3 shows, by 2012 about 19 million house-
holds subscribed to DirecTV, and about 14 million
subscribed to DISH, although such startups as
VOOM and the Christian Sky Angel were trying
hard to bite off a tiny share of the business. The two
main satcos provide service packages of between 60
and 400 channels and charge between $35 and $115
per month for their packages, while the newcomers
offer only a few dozen channels, albeit at far lower
monthly cost to subscribers.
If long-term success in the competition among
MVPD services depends on their ability to provide
consumers with all communications services—a
“triple play” of video channels plus broadband
internet access and telephone service—satcos are
out of luck. Both big satcos supply plenty of HD
(but not 3D so far), and DISH offers somewhat
more channels while DirecTV offers exclusive
sports packages. But neither has the ability to com-
petitively supply high-speed internet connections or
any kind of phone service unless they join forces
with a terrestrial phone or cable company, which
eats into profits (and is sometimes hard to explain
to potential consumers). The third generation of
just-launched communications satellites has far
larger capacity than previous satellites Nonetheless,
satcos are not likely to cost effectively compete with
cableops and telcos (see 3.4), making satellite com-
panies poor contenders for high speed internet cus-
tomers except in rural places with no other options.
The particular advantage of satcos is that they can
bring service to the millions of households outside
metropolitan areas.
Telephone Systems
The term telephony refers to service for both stan-
dard wired phones and wireless or cell phones. By
2012, analog voice telephone service had largely
given way to a digital meld of voice and data in
3.2
Top Five Cable Operators, 2012
Cable
(millions)
Internet
(millions)
Phone
(millions)
Comcast
22.8
17,6
9.0
Time Warner
Cable
12.4
10.0
4.5
Cox
4.9
3.9
2.5
Charter
4.5
3.3
1.8
Cablevision
3.1
2.7
2.2
3.3
U.S. Satellite DBS Services, 2012
N of sub
(millions)
% of
TVHHs
Video
Channels
DirecTV
19.3
17
370
DISH Network
14.1
12
400
94
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the larger markets, and mobile service (meaning
tablets or cell phones). Public and in-home Wi-Fi
are other services that cableops and telcos can
offer, and they have become an increasingly desired
component of both television and computer access.
Counting who delivers how much of what is
complicated by the two kinds of telephone service—
wired and wireless. AT&T, Verizon, Qwest/Century-
Tel, Comcast and thousands of small local phone
companies provide wire line telephones, but the hot
business is cellular service—where Verizon remains
dominant because AT&T’s threatened purchase of
T-Mobile did not suceed.
Table 3.5 shows the percentage of subscribers
with the two major kinds of service in the domestic
market. AT&T and Verizon are clearly the national
mega-giants, with Sprint much smaller and third in
line with respect to cell phone service but Qwest/
CenturyTel has 10% of landline subscribers. In
most urban areas, your local phone company has
digital lines and is linked with a cellular company
so that together they can provide any or all wire
line phone, cell phone, and internet service (at least
through DSL [digital subscriber line]). The largest
phone companies also typically offer some type of
multichannel video service. But the smaller compa-
nies lack the nationwide array of cell towers that
AT&T and Verizon have; in spite of roaming
contracts, calls just die in a lot of places outside
the home area.
Verizon (FiOS) and
AT&T (U-verse)
have
invested billions of dollars installing fiber and digital
to upgrade a significant portion of their urban and
business landline networks so they can offer broad-
band services capable of competing with those
offered by cable companies. However, most rural
areas continue to be served by twisted copper pairs
that are inadequate for offering video or high-speed
3.4
Getting to Today’s Satellite TV
S
atellite systems traditionally referred to three signal
distribution methods:
(1) low-power C-band home satellite dishes (HSDs);
(2) medium-power Ku-band direct-to-home (DTH) satellite
systems, such as Asia’s STAR TV; and
(3) high-power Ku-band direct broadcast satellite (DBS)
systems, such as DirecTV and DISH in the United States and
SKY in Europe.
The oldest form of satellite program delivery, TVRO
before the 1980s, required huge backyard dishes (often
two or three yards in diameter) that were often banned by
horrified neighborhood associations—but the business was
really killed off by the scrambling of satellite signals and the
FCC’s requirement that home dishes be licensed (no more
free out of market NFL games). Now consumers must pay
for service through a cable or satellite company, and the
large dishes have almost totally disappeared from urban
and suburban backyards. (Only a few remain in the west
and up in Alaska where signals are hard to get.)
The medium-power Ku-band DTH services lasted only a
short while in America, selling off to DBS largely resulting from
their smaller channel capacity and getting squeezed out of
the most desirable geosynchronous satellite slots because of
aggressive bidding by DirecTV and EchoStar (DISH). The
modern, high-power Ku-band satellites allow subscribers to use
dish antennas of one to two feet in diameter. (The Japanese
broadcast video and data using an even higher frequency
band, Ka, to antennas the size of American half dollars.)
Between 2011 and 2012, a new generation of satel-
lites was launched with ten times the capacity of earlier
communications satellites. WildBlue and HughesNet,
among others, offer satellite internet service with download
speeds of 1.5 to 2.0 Mbps and upload speeds of
256 Kbps for a cost of around $80 per month for their
fastest service offering. This is 30+ times faster than dial up,
but considerably slower and more expensive than the high
speed internet service offered by cableops and telcos
(via FiOS and U-verse). In addition, it takes a measurable
amount of time for signals to go up 22,000 miles and
come back down again, which leads to noticeable delays
and sluggish performance for internet users who participate
in internet gaming or who watch streaming video feeds. As
a result, such services are primarily aimed at rural markets
that are not served by cableops and telcos.
CHAPTER 3 Multichannel Television Strategies
95
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
internet connections. FiOS service is available to
16 million households in Verizon’s wire line service
area (i.e., it is available to about 60 percent of Ver-
izon’s potential wire line subscribers); U-verse is
available to 27 million households in AT&T’s wire-
line service area. FiOS and U-verse are only available
to households actually passed by the upgraded net-
works. So cable companies continue to have the
superior broadband network in most U.S. geo-
graphic areas.
FiOS is the only broadband network that takes
fiber all the way to the home. Although this means
that it can offer the fastest broadband internet ser-
vice, it also means that it is the most expensive to
build. U-verse is an IPTV (Internet Protocol TV) ser-
vice that uses VDSL (very high bit rate digital sub-
scriber line) to distribute signals via a significantly
upgraded but less expensive network (compared to
FiOS). FiOS and U-verse provide high quality, wire
line competition for cable companies. However, they
3.5
Comparative Telephone Subscribership
Landline Subs (% share)
Cell Subs (% share)
Sprint Nextel
0 (0%)
53 million (18%)
AT&T
39 million (45%)
101 million (34%)
Verizon
25 million (29%)
108 million (37%)
T-Mobile
0 (0%)
34 million (18%)
Qwest/CenturyTel
9 million (10%)
0.9 million (0.3%)
3.6
Wireless Cable
T
here is another small player in the MVPD game.
Operating alongside cable companies are a few
microwave distributors of video called multichannel multi-
point distribution service (MMDS) operators, more com-
monly called (rather ironically) wireless cable. Wireless
cable operators broadcast channels of local television and
cable networks using microwave frequencies from an
antenna located on a tower, tall building, or mountain.
Homes, apartments, and hotels receive the signals by using
a small microwave dish, typically about 16 to 20 inches in
size. A set top converter, identical in function to a cable TV
set top box (STB), has to be located near each TV receiver.
MMDS most successfully served portions of large cities
where tall buildings are not too numerous to block the line-
of-sight microwave signal, but their inability to simulta-
neously provide high speed internet connection and a large
enough menu of video, coupled with signal security issues,
killed them off except within apartment complexes where
landlords want to provide a multichannel television service.
The number of wireless cable subscribers has dropped
below 100,000, which represents less than 0.1 percent of
the multichannel video distribution marketplace.
Implementing another vision for using the MMDS spec-
trum in the late 1990s, MCI WorldCom and Sprint each
purchased a significant number of MMDS operators (alto-
gether, about 60 percent of the total MMDS licenses) with
the intention of using this spectrum as the “last-mile” con-
nection to homes for the provision of high-speed data and
voice services. When sending video to cell phones and
other wireless devices captured consumers’ interest, the
spectrum was re-deployed for wireless video and popularly
named Wi-Fi.
Although still and moving video pictures are rapidly
appearing on cell phones, pagers, and personal commu-
nication assistants (PCAs, formerly PDAs, such as Black-
Berrys) using this MMDS spectrum, most of the material
comes as short form video because of the small size of the
screens. 4G smart phones (iPhones, Androids) with broad-
band capability have had a dramatic impact on mobile
delivery of email, high speed internet, and data service.
96
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
rarely compete with each other (because there is lit-
tle overlap between the markets in which Verizon
and AT&T offer wire line telephone service). FiOS
has almost 4 million video/cable subscribers and
about 4.5 million high speed internet subscribers.
U-Verse has over 3.5 million subscribers to its
video/cable and high speed internet services.
Selection Strategies
A strategy is a plan to achieve a goal, such as to win
by defeating competitors. For MVPDs, the ultimate
goal is to make money, of course, and generally,
MVPDs make money two ways: by signing up sub-
scribers for their various services and by selling
advertising. They do best if they capture more
subscribers—and hang onto them—than others in
the same business. Each newer technology becomes
a platform for potential profit, so corporations
encompass many layers of strategies. Each small
part of a system has its own goals and plans that
normally have to be made to mesh with what the
higher-ups want.
In the case of the highest corporate media levels,
an overall strategy includes such segments as lobby-
ing for regulatory advantages, minimizing tax rami-
fications, supporting research and development of
new technologies, planning for growth, consolida-
tion and mergers and so on. These strategic elements
reach beyond the programming concerns of this
book but may affect them. The meshing of various
goals and strategies becomes more complex when
many broadcast and cable networks operate under
a single corporate owner, as is the situation with
Comcast, Disney, Time Warner, Viacom and News
Corp, who must strategize to effectively program for
many of the fixed and mobile media. Who owns a
content producer and what else that corporation
owns (and its overall financial condition) affects
what its individual parts can do and not do.
From the perspective of a single program net-
work, the goal is to make money for the parent cor-
poration
by
selecting
programs
that
attract
audiences that advertisers want to reach (usually
the 18–49 age group). On the other hand, if
one channel is going after men 18–49, then other
co-owned channels normally need to target other
demographic groups—younger, older, women, or
teens or kids, or people with a particular hobby or
lifestyle interest (in cars, in cooking, in fashion or in
specific sports). However, not all networks stick to a
single audience all the time. The broadcast networks
cast a very wide demographic net most of the time,
but when the Olympics rolls around, all networks
owned by whoever has the rights (for the last couple
of decades, NBCUniversal) must share the huge
mountain of programming and perhaps target some-
what different groups than their usual programs do.
And then there is Syfy Channel, owned by
NBCUniversal. You’d think it would be full of science
fiction movies and series, and it regularly carries Star
Gate Atlantis, Star Gate Universe, or Eureka (mostly
in summers) and disaster and monster films, but it
also carries WWE Smackdown. And one night a
week Syfy schedules people tiptoeing around old
buildings with flashlights pretending that they see
ghosts! The authors don’t know who watches that.
The point is that selection of programs is as
complex for cable networks as it is for broadcasters,
but they are working across many channels instead
of largely within a single channel (or one broadcast
channel plus an online version, at any rate). At the
same time, all program-related strategies have to
take account of shifting seasons, program contracts
and life spans, as well as the development and pro-
motion of signature programs. Nonetheless, those
content networks owned by an MVPD have even
more considerations to weigh, some of which may
narrow a network’s choices to targeting audiences
not served (at a particular day and time) by the
rest of the media corporation. And they may narrow
selection tactics to programs that work as well for
smart phones and tablets as for larger screens.
Because some MVPDs (satcos and telcos) do not
own program content networks, and thus must con-
centrate on passing through programming owned by
others, their selection strategies focus completely on
negotiating pay for replay rights.
Some experts predict complete conversion to a
totally on-demand video distribution system by mid-
decade. Other experts predict a complete move to
CHAPTER 3 Multichannel Television Strategies
97
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
wireless distribution of television at some point in
the future. However, several roadblocks will slow
any transition. These include overlapping technical,
legal, economic and marketing circumstances affect-
ing cable, satellite and telephone delivery and recep-
tion and thus programming selection strategy. Not
all factors inhibit innovation and change, however;
some encourage them. Successful programmers jug-
gle all the variables of physical and legal limits,
licensing and marketing costs, along with revenue
potential, to select the best options for their coverage
areas, and thus the mix of services necessarily varies
somewhat from town to town and from one com-
pany’s footprint to another.
Many selection considerations relate to technol-
ogy and law because the former is changing so rap-
idly, while legal applications and interpretations are
trying to catch up. We look first at seven hot topics
in media technology.
Technical Considerations
Just as one aspect of new tech becomes clear, some
other development seems to undermine that under-
standing! But here are some tried and true elements
of media technology.
1. Location and Income
Technology is not the same throughout an MVPD’s
territories, let alone throughout the country. Distri-
bution and reception technology in urban areas is
far advanced over rural areas, where great geo-
graphic distances and low household density make
both wired and terrestrial wireless signals expensive,
even impractical. The huge footprints of satellite sig-
nals better serve large rural areas.
Those who can afford to subscribe to the maxi-
mum of what’s available have far more advanced
and faster services. The less a household spends on
tech, the slower it is likely to be. A related matter is
tech dependency: Part B needs Part A in order to
make Part B work. Households cannot access video
on demand (VOD) without paying for an operator-
supplied digital set-top box (STB). (TiVo won’t
work for Comcast’s on-demand, for instance).
Technology is not the same from company to
company. VOD comes under different names and
with different characteristics. Comcast calls its ser-
vice “On Demand,” and if you have a Comcast dig-
ital STB, programs and movies (many free and some
for a fee) are instantly available via an On Demand
channel, and you can watch the same episodes and
movies as often as you like. Some other cable com-
panies, with less advanced tech, offer only Pay Per
View (PPV) and charge per viewing of a rotating set
of movies and specials. (Decoding and billing num-
bers can be supplied online or by telephone.) Satcos
require subscription to their DVR service to get a
much more limited form of VOD (compared to
cable,
FiOS
and
U-verse).
Besides
being
slow
(remember all those miles up and down the signals
have to travel), while the files gets loaded onto your
DVR’s hard drive, the programs are only available
for a limited time and then will be erased. If you
want to watch a downloaded movie again, you
need to pay again.
2. Capacity
Capacity is currently less of a problem for most
MVPDs.
Construction
of
optical
fiber
Hybrid
Fiber/Coax (HFC) systems throughout the country
in the 1990s combined with digital compression of
video signals (so that more channels can be trans-
mitted through the same amount of bandwidth)
enormously increased cable’s broadband carrying
capacity. The end of over-the-air analog television
in 2011, widespread consensus on distribution stan-
dards, and continued advances with respect to digi-
tal signal compression means wire line multichannel
distributors have greatly expanded their technical
capacity. Telcos can only bring competitive multi-
channel video services to communities where they
have fiber wiring fully installed (see 3.7). However,
rapid expansion of 4G/3G/Wi-Fi capacity for cell
phones is occurring in high-usage urban areas, mak-
ing video via smart cell phones (e.g., iPhones) and
tablets (e.g., iPads) a reality.
It also takes time for companies to roll out the
newest distribution technologies, and not all compa-
nies operate on the same schedule. One part of a city
98
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
may have technologies available that other parts
don’t, causing negative consumer reaction (compa-
nies have to field lots of calls and say “sorry, not
available in your area”) and consequent political
fallout.
The fundamental element in capacity is opera-
tional bandwidth, the width of the frequencies that
signals can use. Years ago, plain-old-telephones used
a mere 5 kHz of bandwidth, so high and low sounds
were cut off. Cable began with MHz wires but
today, the 1 GHz fiber platform is widely installed
throughout urban areas. MVPDs view fiber and
amplifier technology in terms of platforms, or levels
of potential capability, and the 1-GHz platform has
tremendous capacity. With appropriate design archi-
tecture, it can be utilized for mixes of digital signals
(video, audio, voice, data), and the number of func-
tions it performs (and thus services it delivers) can be
gradually increased over time…all the way to virtual
projects and 3D. On the other hand, as new band-
width intensive services are developed, such as
holography if and when it ever becomes practical
for television, the demand for spectrum will continue
to expand.
3. Digitization
For cable, the high cost of upgrading systems to all-
digital transmission and providing advanced set-top
boxes has led the industry to utilize a phased rollout
strategy. Cable operators seek to retain as many of
their subscribers and advertisers as possible while
3.7
The Role of Fiber Optics
A
nother element in the conversion to digital systems is
fiber optics. Cable systems and telephone companies
are evolving toward all-fiber communication networks
because of their much higher capacity (as much as 1,000
times a comparable thickness of coaxial cable), better
picture quality (because fewer and different types of
amplifiers are required), and greater reliability (through
redundancy because systems typically use only a portion of
capacity and thus have plenty left over for backup
channels).
In most systems, however, fiber installation ends at
nodes that serve something between a neighborhood and
a block or so of homes (fiber-to-the-node—FTTN)—because
installing fiber all the way to individual homes (fiber-
to-the-home—FTTH) will not be cost-effective for the fore-
seeable future. The cable industry believes that most ser-
vices, including high-speed internet connection and VOD,
can be adequately provided with FTTN, and that they can
continue to increase system capacity as needed by moving
the nodes closer to the “neighborhood” (i.e., having each
node serve a smaller number of homes).
Users of up-to-date office campuses that are equipped
with fiber all the way, however, commonly notice (and
complain about) a significant lessening of speed and reli-
ability at home—compared with their all-fiber offices,
dorms and classrooms—when part of the signal travels via
ordinary telephone or cable lines. At present, FiOS offers
the only complete fiber to the home (FTTH) service. If Veri-
zon is able to identify a set of highly valued consumer ser-
vices that require the additional speed achieved by taking
fiber all the way to the home, it could gain it a significant
advantage relative to its competitors. Failure to identify such
a service will result in lower profitability relative to its com-
petitors due to the higher costs associated with FTTH.
Although enough miles of optical fiber have been strung
to reach to the sun (and probably back again), and fiber
delivers data at the rate of one billion bits per second (a
gigabit), fiber has been used primarily as a long-haul
medium. Away from big cities, a shortage of high-speed,
local-access connections between consumer residences and
MVPD operators persists. As the quantity of high-speed
internet connections increases, however, the number of spe-
cial paid services via wire will dramatically increase, and the
cost of these services may decline. Whether cable operators
or telephone companies will ultimately dominate—or split—
the delivery of high-speed internet service to U.S. homes has
been a big question for the communications industry. At
present, cable is winning with an almost 60 percent share of
U.S. high speed internet subscribers compared to about
40 percent for telcos (see 3.1).
CHAPTER 3 Multichannel Television Strategies
99
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
moving step-by-step into digitization as the eco-
nomic payback becomes visible. An overnight shift
was impossible because it would have required all
cable subscribers to have a digital set-top box for
every television set in the home.
Although
all
broadcast
stations
supposedly
ended analog transmission in 2011, most homes
still have some analog TV receivers (with a digital
conversion box). Additionally, the capital expendi-
ture connected with the transition to digital was
quite high, so MVPDs vie for high-end customers
and look for services that will attract additional rev-
enue. As the internet becomes a bigger part of the
television system—and vice versa—subscriber choice
will expand dramatically.
For satellite companies, digitization was never
an issue. DirecTV and DISH Network launched
their operations as fully digital systems, often tout-
ing the quality of their picture and sound in their
marketing efforts to consumers. Although each of
these DBS systems uses a different digital video com-
pression system, both are able to deliver on their
marketing promises. Satellite companies are, how-
ever, restricted by the number of transmission chan-
nels currently licensed to them by the FCC: 46þ for
DirecTV and 107þ for DISH. Using present-day dig-
ital compression standards of 12 to 1, DirecTV can
transmit more than 600 channels, and DISH can
send around 1,300 to subscribers—far more than
most cable systems offer. The extra bandwidth is
used in a variety of ways including: distributing
local TV signals back into local markets (i.e., local
into local), for their slow internet and for delivering
limited VOD services.
From the consumer’s perspective, digitization
necessitates the eventual replacement of all existing
television sets and usually devoting a higher propor-
tion of discretionary income to subscriber fees. HD
and 3D are further add-ons. Because most people
have several sets and won’t throw out old ones that
work, the industry has been forced to recognize that
not all TV sets will be digital even in digital house-
holds and, moreover, that some of the remaining
8 percent of non-MVPD U.S. households will con-
tinue to depend on inexpensive down-conversion
boxes for each TV set.
On the home recording front, the public’s rapid
adoption of digital music and DVD players killed off
VCRs and videocassettes (except for the preschool
children’s market). About 86 percent of all house-
holds have DVD players. Although Blu-Ray won
the DVD standards battle in home playback, victory
came a bit late. Access to many of the same pro-
grams over the internet has slowed Blu-Ray’s pene-
tration, and creating libraries of DVDs is a practice
that is likely to fade away. Consumers can load
movies and TV shows at high speed on flash drives
if they want portability, so the DVD becomes unnec-
essary. Meanwhile, Hollywood is rushing to play
catch-up by digitizing its enormous libraries of old
movies and television series to make them available
online…once a bullet-proof digital rights manage-
ment (DRM) system is fully in place.
4. High-Definition Television
Virtually all prime-time television programs and
major sporting events on ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC
and PBS appear in HD. Over 100 cable networks,
including ESPN, CNN, TNT, A&E, USA, TLC,
Comedy Central, several Discovery channels, the
pay networks and most regional sports networks,
as well as the largest television stations, offer much
of their evening programming in HD.
Although more than 60 percent of homes have
HD screens, nonetheless, three-quarters of viewing
still occurs in standard definition for two main rea-
sons. First, many consumers haven’t hooked their
sets up to HD signals—requiring a special HD set-
top box from an MVPD for a monthly fee. Second,
much TV viewing takes place on non-HD TV sets
away from the main set, though such sets are slowly
being replaced with HD-capable screens in homes.
Moreover, older television reruns will continue to
look like standard definition on any screen because
of the way they were produced (the kind of cameras
they were shot with).
DirecTV dishes and receivers can handle the stan-
dard compressed digital standard-definition signals
(non-HD signals) and HDTV signals from satellites
in both progressive format (scans like computers in
720p HD) and interlace format (scans like television
100
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
in 1080i ATSC). The differences between systems are
described in 3.8. Indeed, a single satellite receiver can
function simultaneously as a digital television receiver
for over-the-air signals and for high definition of
both kinds and provide seamless switching among all
channels, accompanied by Dolby Digital surround
sound.
Of course, 3D is also beginning to penetrate the
marketplace, with and without glasses. 3D will be a
big draw for sports bars and other public places
now, but 3D works best on the small hand-held or
game screen at present. Without glasses, the viewer
must look squarely at the screen to get the 3D effect
(as on a smart phone or home game machine). In
crowded informal settings such as bars, glasses are
a considerable annoyance. (It is possible that the
jump to holography will occur before any kind of
3D gets widely adopted.) However, as with HD, a
large enough quantity of 3D games, programs and
movies will have to be produced and distributed
before consumers will become interested in investing
in expensive 3D television sets. Creating such con-
tent will take a considerable amount of time and
financial investment by the content creation and dis-
tribution industry. Additionally, the current lack of
a de facto technical standard for 3D TV is also a
deterrent to marketplace penetration of 3D televi-
sion sets.
5. On-Demand Television and Audio
In spite of the significant cost of doing so (cableops,
satcos and telcos pay bigger rights fees for programs
and movies stored in an on-demand library), cable
operators have been rapidly rolling out various on-
demand services because they have the potential for
great profitability. Competing technologies exist, but
Comcast’s strong market power tends to set the
standard for other cableops, as well as for telcos.
In one system, content gets streamed in real-time
though a set-top box or DVR; in another, content
is downloaded to a computer, DVR or—for audio
only—a portable media player. Internet television is
a form of downloaded VOD, as is the format some
airlines have adopted, called AVOD.
If the rights holders and distributors can agree on
a mutually profitable fee structure, a complete shift to
this form of interactive transmission by cable and telco
operators is likely. In the decades ahead, many experts
predict that very few live broadcasts will occur. Even-
tually, only a few networks will deliver real-time sports
and breaking news; the rest of television will be
3.8
The Competing Scanning and Recording Systems
H
igh-definition television (HDTV) contrasts with
standard-definition television (SDTV) and lower-
definition TV systems used in other countries. SDTV (480i)
has 480 lines of resolution and uses interlace scanning.
The HDTV system called 1080i has 1,080 lines of resolu-
tion and displays images using a form of interlaced scan-
ning that first transmits all the odd lines on the TV screen
and then the even lines. This system of HDTV is supported
by CBS, NBC and the CW. The competing HDTV system,
called 720p, offers 720 lines of resolution and displays
images using progressive scanning, which means it trans-
mits each line from top to bottom. This system provides
image quality close to that of 1080i. Moreover, when
transmitted at 24 frames per second instead of the usual
60 frames per second, cable operators can squeeze more
HDTV channels into their channel lineups. This system is,
not surprisingly, supported by cable operators, as well as
by ABC and FOX. One additional option is 480p, with
480 lines of resolution scanned one after another progres-
sively on the screen. It allows for transmission of either
multiple programs in the space of one channel or data
services such as internet access. It is, quite logically, sup-
ported by Microsoft and various computer companies who
use progressive scanning, and 480p is considered to be
enhanced-definition television (EDTV) not HDTV. Finally, the
SDTV standard in the United States is not the same as the
standard in Europe and other places, just to keep things
interesting. So don’t buy a DVD somewhere else and
expect to play it at home in the States.
CHAPTER 3 Multichannel Television Strategies
101
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
on-demand programming, operating much the same
whether the consumer seeks entertainment or informa-
tion, and looking the same to the consumer whether
the original source was once called a broadcast,
cable, satellite, telephone, wireless or online network
and whether the programs are watched on television,
computer, smart phone or tablet screens—or no
screens at all.
To imagine the near future of television, con-
sider radio and its shift to MP3s and then internet
downloads. Ultimately, on-demand services will
mean the realization of a greatly expanded channel
universe by combining the vast resources of the
internet with most preproduced and recorded video
and audio programs and, less happily, with a large
supply of commercial messages targeted to individ-
ual consumers. The speed of this huge change, which
is now in progress, depends on several things. These
include the deployment of smart set-top boxes (with
complex software) and the spread of greater stan-
dardization among technologies via open or flexible
architectures (infrastructures that can transform any
kind of signal into something the viewer can see and
hear whenever they want to view it and on whatever
screen on which they want to view; see 3.10 about
MPEG-21). At the other end, the speed of transfor-
mation also depends on consumer willingness (that
is, desire) to purchase video “by the program” in
their homes.
6. Standardizing Standards
To take advantage of complex information flows
and to seamlessly mix signals coming from many
sources—from computer data, broadcast television,
cable
television,
telephone,
banking
signals,
shopping credit records, fax and so on—requires
common standards—from sophisticated switching
centers down to the basics of jacks and plugs—
across the entire communications industry. Wide-
spread adoption of the MPEG-2 transmission and
storage formats for video and audio and MPEG-4
(the chip language for digital video compression)
have been steps on the way to industry-wide stan-
dardization that apply to broadcasting, cable, satel-
lites, telephone and the internet. Their utilization
allows program distributors—whether cable, satel-
lite or broadcaster—to reconstitute programs and
movies in viewable form on home equipment.
New
and
complex
technical
solutions
are
required to manage the delivery of these different
content types in an integrated and harmonized way
that has to be entirely transparent to the consumer
of the multimedia services. Such solutions are com-
ing but both technical and financial impediments
slow the process.
Set-top converters, for example, have some
downsides for subscribers. Most converters defeat
the utility of the television’s original remote control
and interact poorly with purchased DVRs (such as
TiVo), frustrating subscribers and generating com-
plaints. Moreover, subscribers must pay monthly
for each converter box, raising monthly bills in
homes with many television sets. (The national aver-
age is three, and it is common to have as many as
five or six TV sets and a mix of accompanying DVD
players and DVR units.) Now that smart digital
boxes have replaced analog boxes, cable program-
mers face difficult decisions about how to provide
sophisticated capabilities without disrupting service
to households with only elementary capability.
For a long time to come, there will be house-
holds (or secondary TV sets) that will need simple
down-converters to take digital signals back to ana-
log signals ($30 at the supermarket). DVRs incorpo-
rate hard drives and fancy computing functions,
giving them replay, record, search and other capabil-
ities, and they become increasingly sophisticated
with each generation. Cable operators are in a tran-
sition
period,
moving
inexorably
from
limited
addressability toward a totally addressable digital
infrastructure that should eventually eliminate one
of DBS’s current advantages over cable.
The newest intelligent boxes include a cable
modem, advanced graphics, greater speed and a
“triple-tuner” architecture that allow customers to
simultaneously watch television, access blogs and
vlogs on the internet, record several channels talk
on the telephone and use their tablets to wirelessly
interface with the set-top box. Rollout proceeds in
fits and starts because of the increased capital invest-
ment required to deploy such smart boxes and
102
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
because of the continuing development of new set-
top box capabilities. Instead, set-top converters
evolve and mutate, gaining abilities until they reach
the full-service, intelligent two-way platform.
Once
standardization
of
the
technology
is
achieved—at some date in the future—such million-
circuit converters (and DVRs) will probably move
inside television sets, but adoption of such advanced
technology will require replacement of all home elec-
tronic equipment, and thus widespread adoption will
be slow in arriving. In the meantime, incorporation of
high-definition signals and connections to other digi-
tal services must be worked out among industry com-
petitors, further slowing implementation of new
services. All the user interface hurdles will delay
implementation of these and many additional techno-
logical advances.
7. Interactivity
It was once thought that program guides, home
shopping and games would push the cable industry
toward implementation of secure interactivity (two-
way communication between users and cableops).
Instead, advertising has been the driving force in
meshing the internet with television in home living
rooms. Advertisers want minute-by-minute access to
usage patterns, and most want consumers to have
the ability to click to access additional information
about products that interest them, the kind of thing
easy to do on a computer. Coming first to cell
phones and tablets, as broadband gets to more
homes, spillover into programming will occur. All
kinds of programs—from education to cooking to
comedies—may eventually avail themselves of the
ability to ask viewers to respond in real time.
Interactivity via the internet has already revolu-
tionized information gathering about audiences and
methods of calculating audience size, and its spread
to television is altering both the revenues available to
cable, satellite and telephone companies and pro-
gram content. For example, with some advanced
interactive setups, viewers can tune in to a live sport-
ing event, then choose their own camera angles,
select the most recent statistics or purchase their
favorite players’ jerseys—all by clicking a remote.
Imagine watching a television show, then instantly
ordering the soundtrack or a particular star’s dress
or sweatshirt, without even having to dig out a
credit card. The charge for the item will simply
appear on the monthly service bill. Viewers could
also play along with a popular game show or do
banking and pay bills without getting up from their
living-room or office chairs—all by clicking a remote
or, more likely, through use of their tablet. Although
some of these functions can be done at present on a
computer, all require more than merely clicking a
button.
Some interactive options are already available
from a number of cable and satellite operations:
DISH in the United States; SKY Broadcasting
in the United Kingdom; TPS and Cable Lyonnaise
in France; PrimaCom in Germany; Via Digital in
Spain; and Galaxy Latin America, the exclusive pro-
vider of DirecTV in Latin America. Such companies
as Canoe Ventures, OpenTV, ICTV Inc. and Visible
World have been working with MVPDs and pro-
grammers to expand viable business models for
interactive television in the United States.
Legal Considerations
Selection strategies have a legal side, too, and we
look at eight concerns here. Like all businesses,
MVPDs must adhere to federal law, state law and
municipal agreements, and several long-established
policies promulgated by Congress, enforced by the
FCC and upheld by the courts particularly affect
programmers.
1. Universal Access
One congressional media policy is the goal of equal-
ity for rural and urban users. This goal has more
than a century of tradition in government regula-
tions encouraging and then demanding access to
utility and telephone services for all citizens, and it
drives many policy decisions regarding television
and the internet. Above all, communication technol-
ogies are viewed as essential to the proper operation
of a democracy—for both their informational and
their educational capacities. Thus, access for all the
CHAPTER 3 Multichannel Television Strategies
103
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
public, irrespective of household income or geo-
graphic location, is a policy goal.
For several decades, the main method of imple-
menting this goal was a federal mandate requiring
the delivery of terrestrial radio and television broad-
cast signals to all homes. Historically, Congress
viewed cable and satellite services as secondary to
broadcast service, though the courts tended to equal-
ize their value. Since 1996, access for all to the inter-
net has been a goal, but implementation lags behind
policy, largely because imposing regulations on the
internet early in its development was widely seen as
inhibiting innovation and speedy growth. Although
dial-up access is now widespread in rural areas,
regulators’ attention has shifted to ways of encour-
aging affordable availability of broadband and wire-
less services.
An important part of that access is to AT&T’s
and Verizon’s data networks. Although existing
voice roaming rules allow local competitors to con-
nect to other networks for out-of-area telephone
calls (voice), it took a 2011 FCC decision to force
the big guys to permit access for data—meaning
sending pictures, doing email, searching Google
and watching online video. Smart media require
large amounts of bandwidth to accommodate all
the things consumers want to do, and their expecta-
tions are the same whether they live in urban or
rural areas. Providing consumers who live in rural
areas with “adequate” access to broadband will
require governmental subsidization through the gen-
eration of universal access fees along with the pay-
ment of higher monthly fees by these customers.
2. Must Carry
One of the most contentious regulatory issues of the
1990s—carrying well into the twenty-first century—
is the required carriage of signals. The issue of must
carry divides the program providers (networks) from
the distributors (local cable systems, telcos and
DBS companies) and even more vociferously divides
local broadcasters from other multichannel video
distributors.
Initially, the must-carry question was whether
cable operators should be required to carry all
local broadcast television signals. Without a legal
requirement forcing cable systems to carry all local
broadcast
stations,
cable
operators
could
have
excluded some stations from easy access to cable
viewers because the installation of cable connections
usually means over-the-air antennas are discon-
nected. Cable operators could be expected to want
to carry highly watched network affiliates of the
major networks—but to have less desire to carry
small-audience religious, foreign-language, educa-
tional, public and quasi-independent stations and
shopping affiliates. Shopping channels, for example,
compete for viewers with channels owned by the
cable MSO or shopping channels with which the
operator has a favorable financial arrangement.
Any
broadcaster
excluded
from
cable
systems
would be greatly threatened financially because of
decreased audience reach. Congress (eventually sup-
ported by the courts) decided cable “must carry all.”
Next, the question shifted to whether satellite
services, which wanted to carry the most highly val-
ued local TV stations in each market, had to carry
all local broadcast signals. Would DBS have to pro-
vide retransmission of all local stations (called local-
into-local service), eating up considerable bandwidth
and necessitating high scrambling costs because their
footprints overlapped many markets? On the one
hand, DBS providers had long sought the lifting of
prohibitions against carrying any local terrestrial
broadcast television stations; on the other hand,
they said that being required to carry all local sta-
tions in order to carry some local stations, irrespec-
tive of content, would be difficult, very costly, and
not in the public interest. Even with sufficient capac-
ity, hypothetically satellite operators offering merely
the affiliates of all nine broadcast networks plus a
PBS station to all 210 markets would require the
operators to catch more than 2,110 signals, scram-
ble them, and then selectively unscramble 10 signals
for each market.
It was decided that although DBS companies
have the option of providing local-into-local service,
they would not be required to do so. However, if
they carry one local market TV station they are obli-
gated to carry all the stations in that market. Today,
DISH offers local into local service in all 210
104
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Designated Market Areas (DMAs) and DirecTV’s
local-into-local service reaches more than 94 percent
of U.S. television households. DBS subscribers typi-
cally pay a monthly fee to receive their local chan-
nels via DBS unless they purchase a program
package that includes local channels as part of the
cost of the package.
After the turn of the century, the contentious
issue shifted to digital must carry. Although federal
law required broadcast stations to shift from analog
to digital signals, as long as a significant portion of
the public could receive only analog signals, broad-
casters had to (for economic as well as political rea-
sons) distribute both kinds of signals. Most cable
operators however, claimed that they lacked the
channel capacity to provide two signals for every
broadcast station (along with a wide range of both
analog and digital cable networks) and that most
households could only receive analog signals. At
the same time, broadcasters argued that their enor-
mous financial investment in digitization would
be squandered unless local cable operators were
required to carry both their analog and digital sig-
nals during the transition from analog to digital. The
FCC declared that cable operators were required to
carry either the analog or the digital signal, not both.
Once the conversion to all digital was accom-
plished, the battle shifted to multicarriage, or carriage
of multiple digital (but non-HD) signals from one sta-
tion as opposed to only carrying that station’s high-
definition signal. Congress’s announced intention is
to shift the country to high-definition television.
Complicating the issue, the larger stations now
argue that the most viable business model for many
stations might be to divide a digital channel into a
hybrid HD service (less than true hi-def) along with
several other SDTV (standard-definition television)
multicast program services, rather than fill it with
only one channel of true HDTV. In essence, many
broadcasters wanted to copy cable networks by
becoming multichannel program suppliers and deliv-
ering multiple channels of programming (perhaps all
news or local sports, all old movies or non-English
programs—some hybrid HDTV and some not).
However, to date, the FCC has ruled that a sta-
tion is entitled to carriage of only one primary video
programming stream under the current must-carry
rules. At the moment, carriage of secondary digital
television programming depends on successful nego-
tiations between local TV stations and MVPDs
(cableops, telcos and satcos) through the retransmis-
sion consent process. At the same time, Congress
has made it very clear that it expects local TV sta-
tions to broadcast some form of HDTV, not just
multiplexed SDTV.
3. Net Neutrality
Then the whole topic of must carry rotated sideways
to become a concern about the internet carrying (or
not carrying) all content in the pipeline without
favoritism or overage fees. Dubbed net neutrality,
the fear is that internet service providers (cable com-
panies
especially)
might
install
equipment
that
blocks competitors’ programming, or even more
likely, inhibit high-bandwidth usage by creating tier-
ing systems or instituting overage charges. The ques-
tion to be decided is whether carriers should be
prohibited
from
exercising
data
discrimination.
Some online games, for example, require huge
amounts of bandwidth.
Another high-bandwidth usage group of ser-
vices
is
peer-to-peer
communications
(P2P).
Although it originally referred to file sharing systems
such as BitTorrent and Napster, the concept has
been broadened to social communication among
peers as in YouTube, Facebook, and social games.
P2P ties up large amounts of bandwidth with ser-
vices that typically don’t make money for the carrier
(or its parent corporation). In addition to concerns
with usage based data discrimination, public interest
advocates are concerned that broadband providers
(cableops and telcos primarily) might favor their
own content and applications (or of third parties
who pay for priority) over other content and appli-
cations. Cable companies, for example, might rather
consumers consumed its cable television networks
than played elaborate games such as Farmville or
chatted on Facebook.
The FCC established Net Neutrality Rules in
late 2010. These rules: (1) require all broadband
providers
to
publicly
disclose
their
network
CHAPTER 3 Multichannel Television Strategies
105
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
management practices (transparency), (2) restrict
broadband providers from blocking internet content
and applications (no blocking), and (3) bar fixed
(not mobile) broadband providers from engaging in
unreasonable discrimination in transmitting lawful
network traffic-including favoring their own con-
tent/applications or that of third parties who pay
for priority over other content/applications (no
unreasonable discrimination). No one is very happy.
4. Retransmission Consent
In 1992 Congress allowed local television stations to
choose between being carried free of charge by cable
systems or negotiating with the operators for some
compensation for carrying their signals (retransmis-
sion consent). After some years in the courts, the law
was upheld, and stations have the choice of opting
for inclusion under the must-carry rules or giving
permission for carriage, with the majority of stations
picking the latter. In order to deliver local-into-local
service, the Satellite Home Viewer Improvement Act
of 1999 also required DBS companies to seek
retransmission consent agreements with those televi-
sion stations that chose this option over must carry,
thus essentially treating all multichannel distributors
alike, including telephone companies.
When the rules first went into effect, most cable
MSOs refused to pay direct cash for any broadcast
signal. Consequently, the broadcast networks (and
other major group broadcasters) initially exchanged
their owned-and-operated stations’ retransmission
rights for cable carriage of cable channels owned
by their parent corporations, such as FX, MSNBC,
Food Network and ESPN2. This worked for a while.
By the turn of the century, however, Disney and
FOX (along with others) were aggressively seeking
leverage against such major cable operators as Cox
and Time Warner. Their tactics included requesting
more favorable channel placement (lower or “good”
digital numbers—the easy-to-remember ones) on
systems for all Disney or FOX-owned cable net-
works;
asking
MVPDs
to
pay
relatively
high
monthly per-subscriber fees for carrying new cable
networks owned by Disney or FOX; entering into an
ad barter arrangements with cableops to get them to
“pay” indirectly for carriage of their local stations;
and licensing some local news to cableops for local
video-on-demand. By contrast to the cableops,
DISH, Verizon and AT&T decided in 2007 to pay
direct cash for the rights to retransmit local TV sta-
tions, which rang loud warning bells of change in
the industry.
With the rise of strong competition in the
MVPD marketplace among cableops, satcos and tel-
cos, “must have” local television stations (ABC,
CBS, NBC and FOX network affiliates) now have
the leverage to negotiate direct cash payments from
cableops (and other MVPDs) for carriage of their
signals. In fact, retransmission consent fees are the
fastest revenue growth area for big four network-
affiliated television stations accounting for 12 per-
cent or more of a many station’s cash flow.
Recently, some spectacular battles over retransmis-
sion consent between content owners and redistribu-
tors have flared. ABC, for example, cut its signal to
Cablevision
systems
the
day
of
the
Academy
Awards, which led to a settlement just as the Oscars
aired; and Time Warner Cable and FOX settled a
heated retransmission consent dispute the day before
the Sugar Bowl.
Then tablets become the hot issue—and by
extension other mobile media like smart phones.
Viacom (owner of MTV and Comedy Central) and
Scripps (owner of HGTV and the Food Network),
supported by other content owners, demanded that
distributors (Time Warner Cable and Cablevision)
pay a premium for streaming television channels to
new media like iPads. The cable operators in turn
insisted that the right to distribute to other media
was already covered by previous retransmission con-
tracts for cable carriage.
There are two main concerns here: One is who
supplies the app for content channels: Will consu-
mers use apps arranged by their cableops, apps pro-
vided by content channels, or downloads through
paid services like Netflix? Or all of the above? Hav-
ing iTunes, for example, provide the app has advan-
tages because it can log fees to an existing account,
and its apps can be made to work only within the
consumer’s home, not as a mobile service (without
extra fees). Every company in the middle of the
106
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
distribution process wants some revenue from the
stream, and iTunes and Netflix naturally want
healthy cuts (see 3.9).
The second main concern is how to count audi-
ences. The more television viewed by consumers on
iPads and other tablets, the greater the importance of
counting every viewing of every program in order to
sell advertising effectively. Chapter 5 outlines the mea-
surement problems. How this will all work out and
what it will cost consumers are unknowns (see 3.10).
5. Corporate Policies
In addition to legal carriage requirements enforced
by the FCC, the policies of the parent corporation
may impose restrictions on what a local system can
and cannot carry. Some MVPDs, for example, have
policies against carriage of adult programming.
Moreover, parent cableops often sign agreements
with program suppliers that have the net effect of
compelling carriage of a particular cable network
on all their systems irrespective of whether it
might be the best choice for each market. A cable
network naturally wants the largest possible audi-
ence and can offer discounts to a cableop to
encourage wide carriage. Channels with a lot of
violence and sexual material have been the biggest
problems. With giant cable operators having thou-
sands of local systems scattered across the country,
standardized channel selection is unlikely to be an
ideal fit for every location but it is economical for
the MVPD.
3.10
MPEG-21 and the Future
O
ne hopeful sign is the current tentative agreement on
MPEG-21, a comprehensive new technical standard
for multimedia on the near horizon. It speaks to the pro-
cesses of exchanging, accessing and manipulating
video and audio across all media—from the internet to
broadcasting to wired and wireless transmissions of all
kinds. It potentially divides the monetary pie for the
participants in any exchange, and one of its great
appeals is that it can readily exclude unpaid file shar-
ing. Because different parties have intellectual property
rights associated with multimedia content and under-
standably seek to acquire income from those who make
use of their content, MPEG-21’s appeal is that it inte-
grates two critical technologies: one that allows consu-
mers to search for and obtain content—either personally
or through the use of intelligent agents—and another
that presents content for consumption that preserves the
usage rights (through payment of royalties) associated
with the content. However, MPEG-21 is more a hope
than a reality at present.
3.9
Mobile Wallets
C
ell phones with embedded chips are set to replace
credit cards and bank cards: A simple swipe, and a
bill is charged or money falls from the ATM. But the same
battle for pieces of fees charged for tablet apps is being
fought over the cell phone among somewhat different
players. The banks and big payment networks (Visa,
MasterCard) want to continue to collect fees from mer-
chants; Google and PayPal want a new system that gives
them cuts as servicers like banks; and Apple and mobile
carriers want to collect fees for every use of their phones.
Consumer protection groups fear that any new system
will cost consumers more, in part because fancy new
equipment would have to be installed everywhere.
Nonetheless, after a decade of debate, agreement is
slowing inching forward. Isis, a joint venture by AT&T,
Verizon and Discover, is experimenting with a system of
mobile payment, as is Barclaycard in Britain and the
United States.
CHAPTER 3 Multichannel Television Strategies
107
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6. Franchises
Historically, every cable system has had to win a fran-
chise (a contract) from a local municipal government
in order to operate in the local geographic area. Once
cable operators receive a franchise, most are required
to pay a percentage of their revenues into local gov-
ernment coffers. This is called the franchise fee, and
cable subscribers see it listed on their monthly bills.
Local government justifies charging operators a fee
because they are making commercial use of local
infrastructure (streets, trees, public rights of way)
that belong to the whole community. Cable operators
then list the franchise fee on the bill (typically about 5
percent of the subscriber’s monthly statement) to
inform cable subscribers about this so-called tax.
In addition, local franchise agreements often spec-
ify that cable operators must provide a specific num-
ber of public, educational and government (PEG)
access channels. DBS companies also have public
interest obligations amounting to 4 percent of their
channel
capacity. DirecTV,
for
example,
carries
C-SPAN, NASA TV, Link TV and others. The advent
of Verizon’s and AT&T’s entrance into the multichan-
nel television business led many states to replace local
franchising with state franchising requirements for
telcos in order to speed up their competitive entry
into the multichannel video distribution business.
Periodic refranchising of local cable operators
used to be a hurdle for each cable operator and
local government every 10 years or so. Since 1992,
local communities have been forbidden to grant
exclusive or monopoly franchises, so telcos cannot
be excluded. At the same time, local communities
must legally prove that an incumbent franchisee has
provided inadequate service—a difficult thing to dem-
onstrate to a court’s satisfaction—in order to refuse
to renew an existing cable provider’s franchise. When
coupled with the ever-changing multichannel compet-
itive landscape, cable operators appear to have a
strong renewal expectancy with respect to refranchis-
ing, which, in theory, makes it more difficult for local
authorities to negotiate for improvements. In sum,
federal regulations have generally freed MVPDs to
program as they wish, with the exception of the
must-carry and retransmission consent rules. But a
couple more sets of rules are relevant in some
situations.
7. Syndicated Exclusivity
Another area of federal concern has to do with exclu-
sive rights to show syndicated programs. Federal reg-
ulations now enforce the syndicated exclusivity rule
(often called syndex), which requires cable operators
(and now satellite and telephone program carriers
too) to black out syndicated programs on imported
signals (distant stations or satellite-delivered cable
networks) in an area when any local station possesses
exclusive rights to the syndicated program. For exam-
ple, if both WGN, the Chicago superstation, and a
local station in Indianapolis (or Kansas City, Fresno,
Atlanta or wherever) happen to carry rerun episodes
of Frasier, and IF the local station has stipulated
exclusivity in its contract with the syndicator (usually
for a stiff price), the superstation must be blacked out
or covered up with another show in the franchise
area when Frasier is on the local station.
Most importantly, the syndex rule also applies to
sporting events carried by satellite. Because most local
cable systems lack the insertion equipment to cover up
one program with another, such superstations as
KTLA, WPIX and WGN have tried to make them-
selves as “syndex proof” as possible by scheduling
only original programming or paying for exclusive
national rights to syndicated shows as WGN did with
American Idol Rewind and 24. Another example is
TBS’s having exclusive national rights to The Andy
Griffith Show for many years but losing them to Via-
com’s TV Land when its term of license ended in the
mid-1990s. DBS and telcos are also required to provide
syndicated exclusivity to local TV stations. But the
most valued syndicated programs are sporting events
because they involve live original programming, huge
audiences and big advertising revenue; in consequence,
the cost for exclusive national cable or satellite rights
for sports programs is usually very high.
8. Antennas
Another bone of contention has to do with regulations
about antennas. The FCC’s Over-the-Air Reception
108
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Devices Rule removes the ability of local governments,
property owners and covenant-controlled communi-
ties to restrict individual home-owners’ ability to
install outside antennas (dish or aerial) in order to
receive video programming signals from television sta-
tions, wireless cable providers and satellite/telephone
systems. The rule prohibits most restrictions that (a)
unreasonably delay or prevent installation, (b) unrea-
sonably increase the cost of installation, or (c) preclude
reception of a signal of acceptable quality. The rule
applies to subscribers who place video antennas on
property they own, including condominiums and
cooperatives that have an area for the subscriber’s
exclusive use (such as a balcony or patio) in which to
install the antenna. The rule also applies to townhomes
and manufactured homes, as well as to single-family
homes, and in essence greatly increases the number of
potential customers for wireless cable and DBS service.
Economic Considerations
By the second decade of the century, just over eleven
hundred (1,162) separate cable companies operated
in the United States, down slightly from a decade
ago (1,191 in 2000). To reduce operating costs and
increase
operating
efficiencies,
cable
companies
bought, merged or swapped systems to create large
clusters of geographically adjacent or nearby cable
systems. Operating all (or most) of the systems in a
local area under a single manager saves significantly
in overhead and marketing costs. It has also allowed
the cable industry to achieve the size required to gen-
erate the billions of dollars of cash flow required to
upgrade the cable system plant in order to offer
broadband, telephone service and video on demand
services. Clustering is clearly more efficient than
operating a patchwork of scattered systems in differ-
ent counties and different states. Studies also show
that above the 5-million-subscriber mark, significant
economies of scale emerge. Because most U.S. homes
can subscribe to cable if they want to, but only
about half do, growth for cable companies can be
achieved in only two ways: sell more varied domes-
tic services (high speed internet service, telephone
service, etc.) to existing subscribers and do a better
job of acquisition marketing (taking subscribers
away from satcos and telcos and getting non-
MVPD
subscribers
to
subscribe).
Nearly
every
aspect of the cable and satellite business involves
cost expenditure as well as potential income. In
deciding whether to carry a new channel, operators
have to calculate whether the benefits (revenues) will
outweigh the expenses. On the benefit side, revenues
come mostly from monthly subscriber fees and
advertising time purchases; on the outgo side,
expenses include the cost of carrying and installing
the program services, paying for copyrights, and
paying for churn. Understanding the basic econom-
ics of MVPD program delivery involves knowing
who pays whom.
In general, MVPDs pay to carry content. Most
established cable networks require each local cable,
satellite, or telephone operator to pay a monthly fee
for each program service supplied, calculated as a dol-
lar amount per subscriber per month, and ranging
from a few cents per sub to more than $6 per sub for
ESPN. A number of the more than 600 cable networks
come without charge to redistributors (especially
highly specialized services), and a very few actually
pay the MVPDs for carriage (mostly retail or brand-
new services offering short-term arrangements). In the
past, Univision paid some cable operators a small
amount per Spanish-surname subscriber (rates varied
with the quarter of the year), but its great popularity
ended the need for such payments. FOX paid cable
operators for one year to add Fox Sports to their sys-
tems. Cableops now pay Univision and FOX a per-
subscriber-per-month fee to distribute these networks
to their subscribers.
Shopping services are a notable exception; they
usually pay local cable operators a small percentage
of sales as a carriage incentive and may operate as a
barter network on an exchange-for-time basis, similar
to the barter programs discussed in Chapter 6. A dis-
tributor such as Home Shopping Network presells
most advertising spots, although a few local availabil-
ities (avails) may be included as an enticement for the
cable service to carry the channel. Nonetheless, most
MVPDs pay out hundreds of thousands of dollars
each month for the cable networks they carry.
Premium movie networks (HBO, Showtime,
Starz, Cinemax and others) have a different licensing
CHAPTER 3 Multichannel Television Strategies
109
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
pattern: The local MVPD gets between 40 and 50
percent of the monthly fee paid by subscribers, and
the remainder goes to the program network. This fee-
splitting arrangement explains why MVPDs offer so
many premium channels and are so anxious for their
subscribers to upgrade.
One successful method of gaining shelf space for
a new program service is to offer equity holdings
(partnership) to MVPDs. Systems are more moti-
vated to place an owned service advantageously on
the system because they benefit from its success.
On-demand services threaten to change the
game. If, eventually, all or most existing programs
are constantly available, then what selection strategy
can a corporation or a channel adopt? One part of
current strategy is certainly for content producers to
hang onto specific program rights as long as possible
to force viewers to seek the most desirable shows via
just one channel. Or alternatively, in the future, a
corporation might create a large shared pool of
VOD
programs
accessible
from
any
co-owned
channel—convenient for audiences but making mea-
surement of individual program audiences very diffi-
cult. If all older programs are available constantly,
then the strategy for selection clearly devolves on
choosing new programs to produce, and airing
them repeatedly to capture maximal viewership
before releasing them into any VOD pool. At pres-
ent, program rights for streaming videos (what VOD
uses) are negotiated along with the right to air an
entire channel of series or movies on an MVPD.
Still another expense comes from the rising cost of
utility pole attachments. Utility pole attachment rates
are regulated by the FCC for both cable and telecom
services (including wired and wireless services), which
pay a pole rental fee of $7 per foot per year. Cities and
utilities that own the telephone poles that both cable
and telecos attach to are hungry for revenue and thus
are raising the rates for such attachments. This is one
more pressure toward wirelessness.
1. Revenues
In general, MVPDs have two revenue streams: sub-
scriptions and advertising. Cable ops and telcos
make money by selling both subscriptions and
national and local advertising, whereas satellite
television companies have subscription revenues
plus only national advertising.
Subscribing
The number of new subscribers in the
United States to MVPDs has been slowly increasing for
more than a decade. Consumers who want to sign up
for cable or a competitor can do so as virtually all homes
are “passed” by the wires or a satellite signal. Thus, the
focus of the big MVPDs has been on upgrading current
subs to higher levels of service. Fees for minimum service
on cable have been kept low by federal mandate (that
is, rates have been regulated), and basic service (the
minimum level) usually includes only the local broad-
cast stations and local-access channels. But few people
settle for just basic television service; they want broad-
band internet and more digital channels. So customer
bills rise rapidly, keeping MVPDs profitable.
Typically, beyond the local stations’ signals, addi-
tional channels are divided into tiers of programming,
such as an expanded basic or “classic” tier, other dig-
ital service tiers including foreign language tiers, mul-
tiple premium movie and sports tiers, and several HD
tiers and maybe 3D tiers. Acquiring HD in the home
requires subscribers to rent one HD set-top box per
television set, and it requires a subscriber to pay a
monthly fee for HD service. Currently, major cable
operators average $50 to $60 in monthly revenue
from each subscribing household, and a customer’s
bill may easily exceed $150. MVPDs usually bundle
television content with phone and internet services in
“deals” with varying time limits so comparing across
companies becomes tricky.
Altogether, cable holds flat at about two-thirds
of multichannel households, and DBS serves almost
one-third, and telco just less than a tenth. But
MVPDs that provide superfast internet service are
less concerned about cord-cutters than DBS because
most cord cutters will be their internet subscribers
anyway, and because content services on the internet
are fast becoming pay services. As a result, cablecos
and telcos will get their dollar share either way.
New enhanced services linked to the web are
expected to be the “killer applications” of the next
decade. Just as Google offers overlay of maps with
other displays, so Autonomy and its competitors
offer video insertion over real-life scenes. The first
“wower” was a demonstration of moving images in
110
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
a newspaper as one turns pages (as seen in Harry
Potter movies!). Soon, a cell phone passed across
store windows in a mall will overlay images of special
sales or other information for prospective shoppers.
Advertising
On the positive side for cable opera-
tors, high programming costs can be offset in the case
of the most popular cable networks because the local
operator can sell up to two minutes of spot time per
hour (local avails) on the most popular channels.
(This advertising is in addition to the national advertis-
ing the cable content network sells.) Local advertising
became a more viable source of revenue as an outcome
of increased clustering of cable systems. In addition,
cable systems owned by different companies can join
to create large virtual geographic regions for the distri-
bution of advertising messages. As with broadcasting,
there is greater interest in purchasing ads on the most
highly-rated (USA, TNT, Discovery) and tightly tar-
geted (ESPN, MTV) cable networks. In contrast, satel-
lite operators presently lack the ability to sell local
advertising, but as spot beaming capabilities and
other required technologies improve, the potential for
DBS carriage of regional advertising increases.
Offering spots for local sale is a major bargaining
point for cable content networks when renegotiating
carriage contracts with local cable systems. For the
most part, these spots are deducted from program
time rather than network advertising time, so they
cost the content network little. There is, of course, a
practical limit to how much a program can be short-
ened to allow for advertising. Moreover, advertising
spots that cannot be sold (such as spots in less popu-
lar programs or in lightly viewed time periods) offer
little advantage to a local cable system.
2. Expenses
Carriage Fees
Cost is directly affected by whether
the cable content network is advertiser-supported
(most cable networks) or subscriber-supported (pre-
mium channels), whether the MVPD owns at least
part of the network, and which additional incentives
the network offers the operator. The cable industry
has consolidated very rapidly, partly because getting
larger gives definite advantages in negotiation for
lower per-subscriber prices for program networks. If
an MVPD controls a subscriber base of 10 million or
more homes—whether terrestrial or satellite—it has
considerable leverage with program suppliers in nego-
tiating monthly fees. As the largest operator of all,
Comcast has enormous clout.
Estimates are that MVPDs collectively spend more
than $35 billion on programming license fees each year,
with approximately 75 percent of these payments going
to advertising-supported cable networks. The fees per
cable network vary from nothing to as little as a nickel
per subscriber per month to about $6 per subscriber per
month (see 8.11). ESPN, the most popular and most
profitable of all channels, costs an average of nearly
$6 per subscriber per month and requires operators to
also carry ESPN2, ESPN Classic and ESPNEWS. For
MVPDs, ESPN is an absolute must-have. In contrast,
such smaller audience services as truTV (formerly
called Court TV) charge in the neighborhood of $.35
per sub per month (which is still $35,000 a month in a
midsized market with 100,000 subs). The fees paid to
cable networks become a sizable monthly outlay for a
system that carries 50 or more advertiser-supported
networks to 10,000 or 20,000 subscribers, as the fol-
lowing equation shows:
$:10  50 services  10;000 subs ¼ $50;000
Thus $50,000 is the whopping monthly cost for just
50 networks in a tiny franchise area.
Just imagine what Comcast must pay each
month for 300 content channels for 24 million subs!
Even AT&T’s U-verse has over 100 channels to pay
for, times its subscriber list of almost 3.5 million.
Moreover, network/distributor contracts sometimes
specify even larger per-subscriber fees if the network
is placed on an upper tier—under the assumption that
fewer people will subscribe to an upper tier or pack-
age of channels. Inclusion on both regular digital and
HD tiers is advantageous to content networks (and
broadcast stations), so normally, MVPDs don’t pay
any extra fees for duplicating the same content. The
fees are for any carriage at all (see 3.11). Such over-
head costs underlie the battle over retransmission
rights that is currently being fought between the own-
ers of over-the-air television stations and MVPDs.
Compulsory Copyright
In addition to network
fees, all cable and satellite systems pay copyright
royalty fees to the Licensing Division of the U.S.
CHAPTER 3 Multichannel Television Strategies
111
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Copyright Office based on the number of distant sig-
nal over-the-air television stations they carry. DBS
providers pay approximately 30 cents per subscriber
per month per station to carry distant signals. (But
remember that not all DBS subscribers necessarily
choose to receive the distant signals being carried).
The formula for cableops and telcos is very
involved. The basic approach to this requires cable-
ops to pay 1.064 percent of each system’s gross
receipts for the first distant signal carried. For the
second, third, and fourth distant signal they pay
0.701 percent of gross receipts and for the fifth and
beyond, they pay 0.330 percent of gross receipts. On
annual basis, the U.S. Copyright Office collects
compulsory copyright fees in excess of $100 million
from DBS distributors and of more than $200 million
from cable companies. Payment of these fees allows
cable systems and DBS to carry such superstations as
WGN, KTLA, WPIX, WWOR and others.
These funds are returned, proportionately in
theory, to copyright holders such as the holders of
rights for sporting events, music, movies, domestic
and foreign television programs and so on, though
there is some debate about whether sports rights
holders get enough or too much from the royalty
pool. From the operator’s perspective, they are an
additional expense. Copyright holders would like
to eliminate the compulsory license for carriage of
3.11
Retrans Battles
P
rogrammers and cable system operators have always
had a symbiotic but tense relationship. Each needs the
other, but negotiations between the two over the price paid
by (cable) distributors to program content suppliers has
bred interesting and sometimes even headline-inducing
clashes. In the 1980s, the flash-point involved popular
basic channels. Cable operators beat back a proposed
price hike for MTV in 1984 by launching a short-lived
competitor, the Cable Music Channel. TCI, the nation’s
leading cable company in the 1980s, used a similar ploy
to dampen a planned rate increase by ESPN. While fights
over cable programming services, especially the expensive
ESPN family of channels, continued into the 2000s, the
focus has largely shifted to payment for local broadcast
signals.
Broadcasters and the broadcasting networks historically
have sought compensation for cable’s use of their over-
the-air programming. The Copyright Act of 1976 required
cable distributors to pay a royalty for the use of distant
broadcast signals (but not for local signals), and this pro-
vided some broadcasters and program producers, for the
first time, with a modest income stream from cable. It wasn’t
until the Cable Act of 1992, however, that broadcasters
were given the legal power to withhold their local signals if
cable didn’t pay. The traditionally pugnacious cable
operators refused direct compensation in the first round of
negotiations following the ’92 Act. Cable executives
effectively declared that if people wanted local TV signals,
they could buy antennas.
Ultimately, the two sides settled on a model that gave
broadcasters extra channel capacity, in lieu of cash, to start
new services, a reward that eventually turned out to be
nearly valueless in the digital era. As those retransmission
consent contracts came up for their regular three-year
renewals in the late-1990s and into the 2000s, however,
broadcasters became increasingly bold in their demands
for payment. In what may have been a watershed show-
down in late 2004, a smaller broadcasting chain, Nexstar
Broadcasting Group, pulled its stations off of cable systems
in four markets. Nexstar wanted direct cash payment for its
channels. The cable operators said no. The blackout lasted
10 months and cost Nexstar millions. Two of the larger
cable operators involved in the dispute, Cox and Cable
One, eventually settled, not for cash but for guaranteed
advertising purchases on the Nexstar stations. Some smal-
ler cable operators, according to Nexstar, did finally agree
to pay a modest retransmission fee.
Perhaps emboldened by Nexstar’s move, in 2006 CBS
president and CEO Leslie Moonves predicted his network
would begin hammering out carriage fee agreements with
cable operators over the coming years. Hearing this threat,
in 2007 Time Warner Cable and the parent of ABC’s
stations (Disney Corp.) negotiated a high-profile distribu-
tor/supplier settlement. It provided a compensation
112
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
distant TV signals. However, so far, Congress has
agreed with the MVPD industry that continuation
of the compulsory licensing system is in the public
interest.
Audience Churn:
Another big problem is audi-
ence churn, or turnover. Subscribers who disconnect,
even if they are replaced, cost the system in hookup
time, administrative record changes, equipment loss
and duplicated marketing effort. Annual churn rates
are typically around 30 to 36 percent for basic cable
and 50 to 80 percent for premium services and digital
cable. For DBS providers, typical overall annual ser-
vice churn is around 18 percent. The churn rate for
any local system or DBS service can be calculated for
a year, or for any length of time, by dividing the num-
ber of annual disconnections by the average annual
number of total subscribers; all systems keep careful
track of their churn rates.
Disconnects in
a time period
Average number of total
subscribers in that period
 100 ¼ % chum
Not all cancellations can be prevented, of course,
because people move, children grow up and leave
home, and local economic recessions cause unem-
ployment and cutbacks on services. College towns
package that covered Disney’s ABC-owned stations and its
must-have cable channels (ESPN, ESPN 2 and the Disney
Channel). The contract also guaranteed Time Warner’s
subsequent carriage of HD versions of the popular Disney
properties. While details of such agreements are typically
confidential, the package’s terms were such that Time
Warner could maintain it had not paid direct fees to carry
the ABC stations.
That fiction eroded swiftly, however. Cable operators
were, quietly, beginning to pay broadcasters for their local
signals. In 2010, retransmission talks between Disney and
Cablevision focused specifically on carriage fees for Dis-
ney’s ABC stations. When discussions bogged down, Dis-
ney pulled WABC-TV off of Cablevision’s New York area
systems early on the day of ABC’s scheduled coverage of
the Academy Awards. It was a short-lived blackout, with
carriage reinstated about 14 minutes into the awards
show. Arbitration led to settlement, with trade press reports
suggesting that Disney received between 25 and 50 cents
per subscriber per month.
Later in 2010, Cablevision engaged News Corp. in a
similar, but much more acrimonious, dispute. In October, the
two companies came to loggerheads over carriage of a
suite of channels that included the Fox Business channel, Nat
Geo Wild, and the FOX broadcasting stations. Cablevision
balked at the price asked by News Corp, and FOX pulled its
signals from the Cablevision systems. The blackout
generated significant news media interest because it meant
that Cablevision’s New York area subscribers were
deprived of FOX coverage of the start of the 2010 World
Series. (Horrors!) The timing of the dispute was no coinci-
dence, of course. The standoff lasted 14 days before mil-
lions of angry baseball fans forced a resolution just in time for
Game 3 of the series. Terms, again, were not disclosed, but
their nature could be divined from a Cablevision statement
that declared, “Cablevision has agreed to pay Fox an unfair
price for multiple channels of its programming including
many in which our customers have little or no interest.”
The price war between cable and the broadcast industry
is likely to continue and perhaps escalate. In contrast to the
1980s, cable operators now feel like the underdogs in the
battle and have asked the government to intervene. The
FCC, in 2011–2012, was reviewing the rules. Meanwhile
some cable operators took their cases directly to customers,
informing them of the prices they now pay for off-air signals.
Charter Communications and Suddenlink Communications
reportedly include the new broadcast retransmission cost on
subscribers’ itemized bills. Charter lists the cost under “taxes
and fees” as a “broadcast TV surcharge.” (Of course, this is
like the way cable operators tell subscribers how much of
their bills get paid to their municipalities.)
Patrick Parsons, Ph.D.
The Pennsylvania State University
CHAPTER 3 Multichannel Television Strategies
113
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
normally have lots of cable cancellations at the end
of spring semester and lots of new connections in
the fall, but minimizing avoidable audience churn
is one of the primary responsibilities that a ser-
vice’s
programming
and
marketing
executives
share.
Turnover on premium channels occurs more
frequently than with the basic service. Instituting
hefty charges for disconnecting single channels has
reduced the practice of substitution, in which sub-
scribers casually drop one premium channel to try
another. Nonetheless, several premium channels
such as American Movie Classics, Galavisión and
Disney were forced to move from premium to basic
services, and the challenges faced by other premium
services have led to mergers and even occasional
combined marketing efforts by such direct competi-
tors as HBO and Showtime.
Given the easy availability of movies online and
the increased ability of copyright holders to market
movies directly to consumers, premium cable ser-
vices will need to continuously reinvent themselves
to remain economically viable in the future. HBO
Go, which allows existing HBO subscribers to access
and watch HBO content on mobile video devices
(smart phones and tablets), represents one such
attempt at reinvention. Nonetheless, unfavorable
economics may eventually end stand-alone pay
channels.
But
powerful
companies
survive
by
morphing into new entities.
Marketing Considerations
After technical, legal and economic considerations
have been evaluated, the multichannel programmer
still has to weigh several marketing factors in
deciding whether to carry a particular network
and
how
to
position
and
promote
it.
Cable
and telco programmers seek to attract and hold
both the local audience and the local advertiser;
satellite programmers must seek both national
advertisers and audiences. To achieve these goals,
both must maximize new subscriptions and mini-
mize disconnections.
The nature of the local audience determines
what has particular appeal. National research has
established that nowadays the multichannel audi-
ence differs not at all from the over-the-air-only
audience or even the online audience, but in particu-
lar markets, subscribers to a system may differ dra-
matically from national norms. One cable system,
for example, may have more middle-aged, upscale,
urban subscribers with higher-than-average incomes
and deep broadband penetration, while another may
have many more large families of mixed-age mem-
bers, and fewer broadband subscribers. The upscale
households might want documentaries, sporting
events and HD, while the large families might want
G-
and
PG-rated
movies
and
kids
programs.
Foreign-language channels are highly desired in
major cities, but less so in most small towns outside
the Southwest.
Program services have to be chosen so that
every subscriber has several channels that are espe-
cially appealing (see 3.12). In a big change from the
past, the method today is to bring hundreds of tiered
digital and HD channels to homes at 10 or 12 dif-
ferent price levels, accompanied by premium movies
and pricey sports packages at the very high end (and
3D where available).
Scheduling Strategies
Up to this point, this chapter has been concerned
with the technical, legal, economic and marketing
factors that impact the selection strategies of cable
and satellite programmers—in other words, how
and why cable and satellite operators pick some ser-
vices to carry rather than others. In addition, opera-
tors have scheduling, evaluation and promotional
concerns.
Currently, cableops, satcos and telcos negotiate
with a program supplier, such as a cable network or
a television station, to carry its programs on a sepa-
rate channel. For many years, much negotiation
involved which channel number a station would
get, but the 1992 Cable Act required that over-
the-air stations have numbers corresponding to their
over-the-air channel numbers (called channel match-
ing) or be placed on a mutually agreed-upon chan-
nel. The law never applied to DBS and never applied
114
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
to cable networks because they have no legally
assigned numbers.
Moreover, the law never envisioned HD’s rapid
proliferation, so some strange temporary placements
of stations occurred, but because it’s sensible (and to
avoid court cases or new Congressional action),
over-the-air stations are getting channel matched as
HD expands. For example, Comcast used 1000s as
HD channel numbers, so the local broadcast Chan-
nel 6 (an ABC affiliate) on Channel 6 in basic service
(which happened to be placed on 908 for a few
years) now appears on 1006. Similarly, Channel 8
(a CBS affiliate) appears as 8 at the basic level (inex-
plicably at 912 in early HD) is now 1008 in HD. It
seems likely that the 900 numbers will fade away as
HD becomes widespread.
Cable systems continue to experiment with con-
tent clustering schemes—placing cable networks on
virtual tiers according to their content or appeals (see
3.13). For example, channels can be grouped accord-
ing to whether they are (1) all narrowly alike in
content—such as sports channels, movie channels,
or audio channels; (2) all alike in their appeal to a
particular target demographic group—such as for
children or Spanish-speaking viewers; or (3) typed
broadly by content as in all entertainment or all
news. For a time, most MVPDs tossed uniformity
and moved to mixed entertainment and information
tiers with something for most people and situations in
each of several gradually expanding tiers (for higher
and higher prices), until a subscriber got everything.
However, as part of the shift to higher and
higher channel capacities (the great increase in the
number of channels), Comcast has introduced a logi-
cal numbering structure in many of its systems,
within its mixed tiers, that varies between content
grouping and appeal groups. For example, broad-
cast stations hold the 1000s; news and weather
channels appear in the 1100s; channels aimed at
women are numbered in the 1300s; those for chil-
dren in the 1500s; sports in the 1600s; movies in
the 1800s; and the 1200s are “all others,” meaning
entertainment. This system means that adjacent
channels will have similar content appeals, probably
because children, news, and sports viewers tend to
persist as users of the up/down arrows on remotes.
Interestingly, 3D channels are merely assigned
content-related numbers like other HD, although
premium HD movies (1900s), pay-per-view (1700s),
non-HD sports packages (500s) continue to stand
apart and can usually be added separately if a sub-
scriber wants them. Clearly, Comcast shares the
view that all subscribers will eventually become HD
subs.
3.12
The Phenomenon of Lift
S
ome services of particular appeal are considered to
have lift in that they will attract subscriptions to higher
tiers or premium services. The major sports channels create
lift on virtually all MVPD systems, and HD regional sports
channels draw fans to an even higher tier. Game channels
have this impact for households with children aged 10 to
15 years. Lift generally diminishes as systems add more
and more services, however, which has led to discounting
and bundling of services that mix high and lesser appeal
channels in upper-tier packages. Cultural channels are
often marketed more for their balancing effect than for any
lift they create, and similarly, public-affairs channels, clas-
sified advertising listings, and community access services
are carried because they create a positive image for the
MVPD even though they very rarely generate any increase
in subscribers.
With the goal of gaining lift, one year HBO intensely
promoted its hit series The Sopranos but found that its
expensive marketing effort only temporarily doubled its
subscribers, and that after a month, most new subs had
canceled the service. A further strategy, adopted by the
entire industry, has been to locate adult programming only
on premium or pay-per-view tiers, which makes good eco-
nomic and political sense because people who are willing
to pay extra for adult fare can get it, while households that
don’t want adult programming to be visible need not be
aware of it. Having adult fare, however, definitely provides
lift.
CHAPTER 3 Multichannel Television Strategies
115
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
U-verse consists of about 100 channels, all HD,
and they are grouped much like Comcast’s, into all
children’s, all news and information, all premium
(movies), all sports, and the catchall of “variety.”
Other cablecos, satcos and telcos utilize similar
schemes to assign networks to their systems.
Wired and wireless systems have long employed
three kinds of virtual lineups in their interactive
electronic guides: Listings by day and time, the
alphabetic listing of service names, and thematic
clustering. Time listing is useful for finding what’s
on now or soon; alphabetic listing makes the search
for a particular channel or program quick; clustering
suits channel-by-channel selection within the group-
ing. None especially suits grazing. There are just too
many channels.
One strategy that facilitates jumping is incorpo-
ration of social media into the program selection
process. For example, a brief on-screen message
might say “Others who selected this program also
watched…” Alternatively, the names of the channels
or programs that “friends” are watching might be
highlighted (via interconnection with Facebook,
Twitter, and the like).
At some point in the all-high-definition future,
operators are expected to transition totally to menu-
or topic-driven systems. Menu systems make chan-
nel numbers (and therefore lineup concepts) nearly
irrelevant. Just as all channels coming through a
VCR used to be converted to Channel 3 on the TV
set, so in the future digital television sets might have
only a single “channel” and receive all input from a
converter (built into television sets), leading to the
disappearance of the very idea of channels. Nonethe-
less, it is hard to conceive of a time when all set
owners will want to subscribe to all services for all
sets. For the purposes of pricing, some subdivisions
will be needed.
Eventually, viewers are expected to have indi-
vidual web search agents capable of “knowing”
our individual likes and dislikes. The size and distri-
bution of channel arrays then become irrelevant
because search agents can jump around at lightning
speed. Clustering would remain only as an aspect of
3.13
Uniform Lineups
E
ven within a single Nielsen DMA (see Chapter 5),
having the most popular advertising-supported ser-
vices on the same channel numbers on all cable systems
makes selling advertising easier. Standardization within a
market is called a common channel lineup to distinguish it
from the ideal of consistent positions for services from mar-
ket to market across the country (called a universal chan-
nel lineup). Nationwide standardization of channel
positions has the particular advantage of making national
on-air promotion more effective.
The goal of any kind of uniform channel lineup—local
or national even for the dozen most popular services—is a
long way from realization. The Los Angeles DMA was the
first major market in which several cable operators agreed
on a common channel array (in analog), and in the late
1980s newly constructed systems (new-builds) in Philadel-
phia and New York adopted uniform analog channel
configurations. Those patterns seem to be surviving into the
digital and then HD eras. The pattern adopted in Los
Angeles, however, did not match the one adopted in
New York.
Moreover, technical considerations limit the realization of
such plans in many markets that have long-established sys-
tems. MVPDs are in varying stages of technical expansion
into virtual channels (assigned numbers for users that have
nothing to do with actual distribution frequencies). And users
differ on their needs. Those who utilize “appointment view-
ing” and want to go straight to a particular show are unlikely
to care about logical channel arrangements, and people
who use onscreen guides find channel numbers irrelevant—
although standardization among menus and search systems
is another as yet unrealized goal. Annoyingly, how it all
works differs from house to house and differs from hotel to
hotel. But for those like children who use the remote’s arrows,
content adjacency is ideal. Uniformity makes sense for some
viewers but is especially useful for effective promotion by
networks and stations and, even more important, for lower-
ing the cost of advertising.
116
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
guide listings, providing a way to scan options
onscreen, should a viewer actually care to look
with his or her own eyes.
Evaluation Strategies
Multichannel services have two evaluation concerns:
evaluation of audience size and measurement of pro-
gram popularity. These result in very different prac-
tices, and some are unique to cable because wireless
and satellite systems do not carry local advertising.
Audience Size
Evaluation of MVPD audiences has been a long-time
problem. The overriding difficulty is that the audience
shares for cable network channels cannot be exactly
compared with over-the-air audience shares. Although
nowadays multichannel distributors collectively reach
about 90 percent of the homes reached by broadcast
television, each individual channel attracts only a
portion of the people watching via cable, wireless,
telephone or DBS (and not all cable networks appear
on all or even most services).
Usually, cable network ratings range from 1 to 4
percent of total TV households in prime time rather
than the 7 to 8 percent that the top local broadcast
affiliate achieves. Looked at nationally, a top network
TV show, such as American Idol or an NCIS season
premiere might get a rating of 12 or 13, while a top
hit on cable rates in the 4s and 5s (although NFL
games often reach 8s and 9s on cable). During the
height of interest in huge news events like the Egyp-
tian and Libyan uprisings and Japan’s earthquake and
tsunami in 2011, CNN’s and Fox News’s ratings
reached very high levels (such as 12s and 14s). Spo-
radic season-opening or ending episodes of cable dra-
mas (such as The Closer) rise into the teens. The only
cable networks to do consistently better is ESPN, and
it fails to reach the level of top local affiliates most of
the time.
However, without disasters or extraordinary
events, these and other popular cable networks usu-
ally attract fewer than 2 percent of viewers individ-
ually. Nonetheless, the collective cable ratings in a
market (for all the dozens of networks) often exceed
those for the highest-rated station.
Advertisers had little interest in the small num-
bers of per-channel viewers (which are even smaller
when the DBS and telco audiences are removed)
until the cable industry came up with four strategies
for increasing the number of people reached simul-
taneously and for making them more salable to
national or regional advertisers.
The first strategy has to do with geographic cov-
erage in portions of a state. Because the geographic
area covered by an individual cable franchise is far
smaller than the coverage areas of a single broadcast
station, the cable industry now links franchises over
a wide area (like the center of a state) by microwave
or cable to create large interconnects. Advertising
interconnects are arrangements for the simultaneous
showing of commercials on selected channels. Of
course, each operator must purchase expensive
insertion equipment for each channel that will have
local advertising added. (The ads usually cover up
promotional spots sent by the networks, and how
many and which ones can be covered by local
spots are specified in cable network contracts with
local cable operators.) Interconnects generally occur
in or near large markets, however, leaving thou-
sands of cable systems with unsalable (too small
and undefined) audiences. Moreover, satellite ser-
vices cannot be part of local interconnects. Their
subscribers add to the national ratings but not to
audiences for local or regional advertising.
A related strategy is zoning, which refers to sub-
dividing an interconnect into tiny geographic areas
to deliver geographically targeted advertising, which
permits even small local businesses to purchase low-
cost ads that reach only their neighborhoods. A dry
cleaner, for example, hardly wants to pay to reach
the other side of town where the competition
operates—but might find two or three zones on its
side of town ideal for reaching potential customers.
A third strategy is roadblocking—scheduling
the same ad on all cable channels at the same time
so that the advertiser’s message blankets the time
period. This can be done nationally by buying the
same minutes of time on all major cable networks,
or handled locally in one market by inserting the
CHAPTER 3 Multichannel Television Strategies
117
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
same ad simultaneously on all channels in an inter-
connect. Then, no matter where a remote user looks
on the lineup, the same commercial spot seems to be
playing. (Some big advertisers buy all the broadcast
networks also, thus airing a single ad virtually every-
where on television in the whole country at the same
time.)
A fourth strategy has been to develop criteria
other than ratings for wooing advertisers. Sales
executives for the cable networks generally empha-
size the homogeneity of viewers of a particular chan-
nel, meaning their demographic (age, gender) and
psychographic (lifestyle, income) similarities. View-
ers of MTV, for example, are alike in age and inter-
ests; weekday viewers of Lifetime are mostly women;
viewers of the HGTV share a common interest in
homes, furniture and gardens. The clustering of sim-
ilar channels on digital services also makes it possi-
ble for an advertiser to roadblock a group of
channels with homogeneous viewers.
Repetition and Ratings
On the programming side, program repetition is
another strategy used to increase audience size.
Sales executives for cable television report how
many people saw a program in all its airings, rather
than how many saw it on, say, Tuesday night at 9
P.M., the usual way that broadcast ratings used to
be calculated (though they are wising up as their
shows are viewed on laptops and tablets). For
cable, the size of the cumulative audience is often
more salable than the audience for a single time
period. Reporting cumulative audience size makes
programs seem more popular and more visible,
thus better environments for advertising messages.
Promotion Strategies
Effective promotion of MVPD systems took a back-
seat to technical problems for several decades. Once
America was close to fully wired, cable systems
began to pay more attention to marketing their ser-
vices. Cableops used such traditional advertising
tools as flyers on doorknobs and ads in local
newspapers to attract new subscribers. However,
because money was tight as a result of huge capital
expenditures and because cableops faced no multi-
channel competition, most cable companies’ market-
ing efforts were minimal at best for more than a
decade. After the turn of the century, increased com-
petition from satcos and telcos, coupled with the
profits to be made from upgrades to internet and
voice services, drove an explosion in competitive
promotion.
Early on, competition from satellite services
raised the bar for cable, and then telcos joined
the battle for subscribers. To capture them from
conventional cable, DBS and telco services designed
clever
marketing
tools
that
carefully
targeted
specific groups of potential subscribers. No longer
was one ad good enough to reach everybody. As
thousands of its subscribers left cable for satellite
service and later for telco service, the cable industry
woke up and began spending the money to make
more effective advertising tools. Mailers and TV
and online ads touting the advantages of signing
up for FiOS or U-verse or xfinity can’t be avoided
these days.
Another way to bolster (or retain) subscriptions
is to promote exceptional program content and
unusual program channels. When MVPD program-
mers are deciding which networks to carry, they
consider how much promotional support a particu-
lar content network provides. On-air promotion as
well as print advertising and merchandising has
three advantages: It’s valuable for boosting ratings
for new programs, reducing subscriber churn, and
creating positive images in the minds of subscribers
and advertisers. National networks can supply
professional-quality consumer marketing and sales
materials, including on-air spots, information kits,
direct mailers, bill stuffers, program guides and
other materials that local systems lack the resources
to create. In other words, some fees paid to national
cable program suppliers are, in effect, returned in the
form of advertising avails, co-op advertising funds
and prepaid ads in publications such as People mag-
azine that attract audiences to cable network pro-
gramming (and thus to upgrade to more tiers of
service).
118
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Nowadays, cable, telco and DBS operators
make use of both online promotion and on-air
video insertions to get their messages across. Major
content suppliers also maintain elaborate websites
about key programs, another factor in subscriber
retention. While use of print advertising in maga-
zines and newspapers has declined, cable operators
employ interconnects to run self-promotion on a
variety of channels. They use spots that might other-
wise have been sold, foregoing that revenue, to tout
what the subscriber misses by not having HD ser-
vice, what’s available on VOD and premium HD
channels, and how much more X service offers
than Y or Z.
In the long run, having large numbers of sub-
scribers who subscribe to high levels of service can
be expected to bring in more revenue than the cost
of the promotional spots and print ads to lure them
to upgrade. Even more important is that such pro-
motional spending has become critical to maintain-
ing market share in the increasingly competitive
multichannel video marketplace.
Local Origination on Cable
At the local level, cable programming means several
very different things, with no equivalent on the part
of satcos and telecos. On one hand, local cable refers
to the programming activities of the 7,400 or so
managers of cable systems or their MSOs. They
may produce their own local/regional channels of
information or entertainment, such as an all-day
newscast or a high-school sports channel. On the
other hand, broadcasters also make use of some
cable-only channels to replay or multiplex addi-
tional
channels
of
programming.
Finally,
local
cable also refers to the programming activities of
several thousand not-for-profit community access
groups or centers. Theirs is the most local of all
cable programming and has flourished in some cities
for nearly four decades, although the internet is rap-
idly altering this kind of local cable programming.
Local cable channels consist primarily of enter-
tainment mixed with infomercials, classified adver-
tising channels, sports, and news and community
affairs. When produced and controlled by the cable
operator or a contractor, such channels are called
local-origination (LO) channels, although the news
channels tend to cover such wide areas that they are
often referred to as regional cable. When produced
and controlled by a local not-for-profit group, such
channels are called community access. Local and
regional cable-only channels have the long-term ben-
efit of differentiating cable from competing wireless
and DBS services and, in some cases, the short-term
benefit of generating advertising revenue.
Entertainment Channels
Channels with original entertainment content pro-
duced (or purchased) by cable operators themselves
are universally commercial and intended to supple-
ment
a
system’s
profits.
The
programming
is
selected, scheduled and evaluated for its suitability
for carrying advertising messages. Religious broad-
casters (really, cablecasters) operate about one-third
of local cable channels, and they typically mix syn-
dicated programs with local and nationally distrib-
uted religious programming, including gospel music,
discussions of gospels, sermons and religiously ori-
ented talk, some of which are merely slightly dis-
guised sales messages. In addition, a few foreign-
language cable channels have a full spectrum of
news, entertainment and talk in one non-English
language. Many of these channels have dropped
their over-the-air channels in favor of becoming
digital-only
splinter
networks
with
national
distribution.
The
remaining
local-origination
channels
around the country tend to operate as regional
news channels or are programmed like independent
television stations. When entertainment oriented,
they
can
carry
nationally
syndicated
series
or
movies—very old ones because the programs are
licensed cheaply as a result of the relatively small
cable audiences (compared with the audiences of
broadcast stations or even cable networks). Such
programs may be chosen and scheduled locally but,
like syndicated programs on broadcast stations, are
not very local. Toledo, Ohio, for example, has a
popular LO channel called Toledo 5 or WTO5
CHAPTER 3 Multichannel Television Strategies
119
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
that is remarkable for its off network and first run
syndicated series (see 3.14).
On other LO channels, high school and minor
league sports are especially effective for attracting
audiences of considerable appeal to local advertisers.
Local talk programs also provide an ideal environ-
ment for both local and national infomercials.
Major national companies such as Sears, Verizon,
Ford, General Motors and Procter & Gamble supply
the bulk of direct-sell infomercials to cable systems,
and these are supplemented by shorter infomercials
from nearby car dealers restaurants, pharmacies,
home builders and the like. Hyperlocal infomercials
may be produced in the cable system’s facilities (for
a fee).
Classified advertising channels, often produced
by local newspapers, have been another somewhat
successful area for local cable, especially when oper-
ated in conjunction with a daily paper. Digital inser-
tion equipment permits the quick updating of listings
and the use of photographs (and some video), mak-
ing local real estate, car, and other classified ads as
well as Yellow Pages viable as auxiliary revenue
streams for cable. Because the internet provides
much the same opportunity for reaching out to view-
ers, however, religious broadcasters, retail compa-
nies
and
newspapers
are
generally
operating
websites with the same content they put on local
cable channels and are increasingly favoring the
web over cable.
Local-Origination News Programming
News is a powerful environment for advertising
messages and thus popular with many commercial
entities that want to reach news consumers and
make money. Having hyperlocal services helps sys-
tems attract and retain subscribers and keeps them
in the good graces of local franchising authorities
that grant them their licenses.
One strategy has been to replay broadcast news-
casts on cable channels. Pittsburgh Cable News
Channel (PCNC), for example, began in 1994 as a
retransmission
consent
channel.
(Federal
law
requires local television stations to give permission
to cable systems for carriage of their signals and
allows them to negotiate a fee or other compensa-
tion from cable operators in exchange for rebroad-
casting their signal.) Many stations exacted cable
channels of their own in lieu of monetary payment.
Most of these are solely rebroadcast channels,
but a joint effort of WPXI-TV (Channel 11) and
cable
operator
Tele-Communications,
Inc.
(now
Comcast) created the Pittsburgh Cable News Channel
that now carries live WPXI newscasts at 7 A.M. and
7 P.M. and multiple repeats of WPXI’s latest newscast
3.14
Toledo’s Local-Origination Channel
B
ecause Toledo has only five local broadcast stations,
TV5 was able to become the WB affiliate (now CW)
for Toledo and to license a great deal of “good” unsold
syndication. Now called Toledo 5 or WTO5, this local-
origination channel carries off-network reruns, such as Two
and a Half Men, The New Adventures of Old Christine,
Family Guy, The Cosby Show, and Friends and first run
syndicated programs such as The Wendy Williams Show,
The Tyra Show, Tyler Perry’s Meet the Browns and George
Lopez.
Because the local newspaper (The Toledo Blade) owns
the local cable company (Buckeye Cablevision) that owns
Toledo 5/WTO5, the channel receives the enormous
benefit of a listing at the top of the newspaper’s grid, right
under the local broadcast stations, instead of burial in the
Ws where TV Guide places it (and similar channels).
The “station” has its own website (www.wt05toledo.
com) and operates with a great deal more funding than the
usual local-origination channel. The combination of having
a national affiliation, only a few local broadcast stations in
the market, supportive ownership by the local newspaper
and carriage on Buckeye, Time Warner Cable and Com-
cast cable systems in Northwest Ohio and Southeast
Michigan places Toledo 5/WTO5 in the forefront of suc-
cessful local-origination channels that compete directly with
broadcast stations.
120
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
along with local talk and information shows (www.
wpxi.com/pcnc). The pricing of ads on PCNC is com-
parable to that of local ad inserts on CNN and Head-
line News, and cable systems carrying the channel
receive two minutes of ad time per hour. All other
advertising revenue is split between WPXI and
Comcast.
Modeled on CNN and its repeating counterpart,
Headline News, a number of cable-only local and
regional cable news channels (see 3.15) have been
formed, some of which attract considerable industry
attention. Although they require significant capital
investments (in some cases, many millions of dollars)
in equipment, crew, reporters and studios to get going
and have high daily operating costs, their revenue
potential is usually much greater than for entertain-
ment channels because they attract more regular
viewing. What the services share is their focus on
smaller geographic areas from the “region” down to
the neighborhood. Traffic reports are often street by
street, weather reports describe in detail what is
important in small geographic areas, and “news”
moves down to the level of parades, store openings,
and official city activities. This kind of information
also transfers very effectively to online services
integrally connected with these cable channels.
Local and regional cable-only news services dif-
fer from ratings-driven broadcast stations. The latter
normally divide their newscasts into half-hour seg-
ments, devoting airtime to sensational crimes, fires
and accidents, and also include nonlocal stories if
they are likely to hold audience interest. On broad-
cast stations, local events get only a few minutes at
most, and events likely to be of interest to only a few
viewers are scrapped.
In contrast, hyperlocal cable-only news chan-
nels that operate live for several hours daily—
increasingly 24 hours as they become established
and profitable—can focus on neighborhood events
on the scene and at length if they might be of interest
to a few viewers. Most model themselves on CNN
rather than the broadcast network newscasts and
carry hours of live programming, although New
York 1 News has been very successful using a half-
hour news wheel (see 3.15). With the luxury of more
time to dwell on events, regional and local networks
can spend hours on breaking events and enough
time on stories about health, sports and entertain-
ment events to avoid the taint of sensationalism.
Cable news producers’ success with audiences
and owners comes from an intense focus on local
interests and, especially in times of stress, lots of
ongoing weather and traffic reports. The details
emphasizing the problems important to neighbor-
hood residents and businesses appeal to viewers
and advertisers, and the very low cost of such
reportage appeals to cable operators.
In line with keeping expenses minimal, these
regional/local channels take advantage of the newest
robotic cameras and other automation, which may
result in some odd pictures at times but reduces (com-
pared with broadcast newsrooms) the technical staff
necessary for them to function. The reporters tend to
be young and inexperienced, are often interns or
employees working for nonunion salaries, and carry
their own handheld video cameras with portable
video recorders, eliminating still other staff costs. By
using portable tripods, reporters can even tape them-
selves at the scene of events and in interviews. As one
reporter for New York 1 News put it, “I do a story
every day. I dream it up. I set it up. I produce it.
I report it, and I even edit it. I get to do everything.”2
The backpack video journalist who functions as cor-
respondent, reporter, camera operator and producer
has become the model for inexpensive news gathering.
Although financial support must initially come
from a parent corporation with deep pockets and
patience, major national advertisers have become
increasingly interested in cable-only news and its
online counterparts. Local and regional cable news
channels can attract advertising from businesses too
small to be able to pay broadcast station rates. Rates
on New England Cable News are about $500 for a
30-second spot, compared with the $3,000 or so on
a Boston network affiliate. Although such cable
channels typically average less than a 1 rating for 24
hours, local disasters drive up ratings dramatically. For
example, New York 1 News had ratings of about 6 for
its live coverage of a winter snowstorm.
Local and regional cable news channels also have
highly interactive internet sites to further enhance
their viewers’/users’ ability to selectively choose
CHAPTER 3 Multichannel Television Strategies
121
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
among news stories and to have news on demand. As
a result, the same news information appears simulta-
neously on a cable channel and online. This serves to
broaden
the
audience
and
is
a
key
factor
in
establishing a successful media convergence strategy
for local and regional cable news channels. In the
long term, regional/local cable distribution may take
over the role that local broadcast stations have
3.15
Regional Cable News Services
T
he first and best known of the regional all-news ven-
tures on cable continues to be News 12 Networks,
which includes seven regional cable news channels in the
New York area. Launched in 1986 by Cablevision as
News 12 Long Island, News 12 Networks is a division of
Rainbow Media, the programming arm of Cablevision
Systems Corp. News 12 Networks offers 24-hour local
news service in Long Island, Connecticut, New Jersey,
Westchester, the Bronx, Hudson Valley, and Brooklyn
(see www.news12.com). News 12 Networks reach
3.8 million cable households in the New York
tristate area.
Each service supplies news about the local region to
residents, beginning each morning with a radio-style mix of
news, weather and hyperlocal traffic reports (for example,
live from key points on the Long Island Expressway on
News 12 Long Island). Then the service continues at a
slower pace throughout the day with reports on local com-
munity events, live interviews, local news updates, and
reprises of national and international news. Stories include
everything from school parades to unsolved murders to
reports on issues like garbage dumping and pollution. With
a staff of 150, facilities rivaling those of nearby broadcast
stations, and an annual budget of more than $10 million,
News 12 Long Island, the flagship service, attracts enough
advertising revenue to make a profit. Interestingly, its high-
est viewing comes in prime time.
Time Warner Cable established New York 1 News
(NY1) in 1992 as a 24-hour news channel. NY1 and its 50
full-time news reporters and anchors serve New York City’s
five boroughs from an all-digital (and almost tapeless) facility.
NY1 also provides NY1 Noticias, a 24-hour Spanish-
language news channel launched in 2003, NY1 Rail and
Road, a 24-hour cable news channel focused on the vehic-
ular traffic and mass transit conditions in New York’s five
buroughs and a corresponding website, www.ny1.com, to
complete its thorough approach to news coverage. NY1’s
use of comprehensively trained journalists—who report,
videotape, and edit their own stories—and broadcasts that
are structured in half-hour programming wheels has become
a global model for inexpensive news coverage. In addition
to advertising, it attracts revenue by charging for consulting
about low-budget news.
Northwest Cable News (NWCN), now owned by
Belo Corporation, came on the scene in 1995 when KING
Broadcasting (that is, KING-TV in Seattle, KREM-TV in
Spokane, KGW-TV in Portland, and KTVB-TV in Boise) used
its retransmission consent leverage to gain shelf space on
cable systems in Washington, Oregon and Idaho to
establish a 24-hour regional cable news channel. NWCN
provides news programming, which is targeted to the
geographic area it covers. As a result, NWCN achieves
higher ratings than CNN Headline News, and it is avail-
able to a approximately 2.9 million viewers (see www.
nwcn.com).
The Texas Cable News (TXCN) was established in
1999 as Belo’s fourth regional cable news effort. Although
some regional news channels choose to cover a metro area
or even a limited part of a metro area, TXCN followed the
design of NWCN by opting for coverage of vast regions
(that is, the entire state of Texas) that include multiple metro
markets. In 2000, Texas Cable News established
TXCN.com as its online presence. TXCN has a staff of 30
(reduced from 75 in 2005) devoted to administration,
operations and sales. It has no reporters of its own. Its
newscasts depend entirely on contributions from its televi-
sion and newspaper partners, The Dallas Morning News
(owned by A.H. Belo Corp) and WFAA-TV8 in Dallas,
KHOU-TV in Houston, KENS-TV in San Antonio, KVUE-TV in
Austin, and the company’s Washington, DC, news bureau
(all owned by Belo Corp). TXCN is available to cable
subscribers on 13 Texas cable systems, 10 of which are
owned by Time Warner Cable (see www.txcn.com).
122
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
traditionally played because cable does not use scarce
airwaves (although the broadcasters are likely to step
in as owners and producers of content). Wired cable
distribution, in turn, may soon be supplanted by
wireless web services, which may be at least partially
responsible for the demise of some of the regional/
local cable news channels that have shut down over
the past decade. For example, Orange County News-
channel ended in 2002; the Florida News Channel
failed in 2003; News 24 Houston died in 2004, as
In Washington, DC, NewsChannel 8 (NC8), owned by
Allbritton Communications, was founded in 1991. NC8
is a 24-hour news channel available to approximately
1.1 million Washington, DC, metro-area cable subscribers.
It uses a fiber-optic delivery system to deliver targeted local
news (on a nightly basis with separate anchors and produ-
cers) and advertising (on a 24-hour basis) to suburban
Maryland, Northern Virginia and the District of Columbia.
NC8 operates three local news bureaus from which it origi-
nates live coverage (see www.tbd.com/tv).
The Comcast Network (formerly CN8) employs more
than 400 people, and is a 24-hour regional cable news,
talk, sports, and entertainment network owned and operated
by Comcast. The Comcast Network was launched as CN8
launched in 1996 and is available to millions of cable homes
in its Mid-Atlantic service area (Pennsylvania, New Jersey,
Washington, DC, Maryland, Virginia and Delaware). Its
programming is primarily locally produced regional news,
entertainment and sports (high school, college and profes-
sional), with 90 hours per week of original programming
including some live, interactive and on demand program-
ming (see www.csnphilly.com/pages/comcastnetwork and
www.csnwashington.com/pages/comcastnetworkshow).
NBCUniversal owns New England Cable News
(NECN) is a 24-hour regional cable news network, which
was launched in 1992 by Hearst and Comcast. NECN
provides news, weather, entertainment, and sports to
3.7 million homes in a large number of New England com-
munities. It has won many awards, including a George Foster
Peabody Award, an Alfred I. duPont/Columbia University
Broadcast Journalism Award, and a National Edward R.
Murrow Award. In addition to its standard programming,
NECN also regularly produces documentaries focused
on issues of importance to New Englanders (see www.
necn.com).
Begun in 1993, Tribune Company owned Chicago-
land Television (CLTV)is a 24-hour regional cable news
channel that serves 1.8 million Chicago area cable
households. CLTV shares content and staff with WGN-TV
and the Chicago Tribune. Both the newspaper and CLTV
are specifically oriented toward the suburban Chicago
audience. One goal of the cable channel is to promote the
value and expertise of the newspaper reporters, which
should, in turn, improve newspaper circulation (see
www.cltv.com).
Central Florida News 13 (CFN 13) is Orlando’s only
24-hour local news channel serving the central Florida
region. Started in 1997 and originally owned by Orlando
Sentinel Communications (that is, the Tribune Company)
and Time Warner Communications, Bright House Net-
works (formerly called Advance/Newhouse Communica-
tions) now owns CFN 13. CFN 13 is affiliated with CNN
and provides local and regional news, weather, traffic,
and sports programming (see www.cfn13.com).
The Dispatch Broadcast Group (which includes WBNS-
TV, WBNS-AM/FM, and The Columbus Dispatch in
Columbus, Ohio) launched Ohio News Network (ONN)
in 1996, becoming the first state-wide 24-hour cable news
channel in the country. ONN can be seen in more than
1.8 million Ohio cable households in such cities as Cleve-
land, Columbus, Cincinnati, Dayton and Toledo. ONN
specializes in providing highly localized news, weather,
and sports along with a regionalized approach to state-
wide news coverage. It utilizes partnerships with a number
of over-the-air television stations (including WBNS in
Columbus, Youngstown, WEWS in Cleveland, WHIO in
Dayton, WKRC in Cincinnaiti, WTOL in Toledo, etc. to
rebroadcast local news programs and to share ONN stor-
ies with these stations (see www.onntv.com). For further
information on local and regional cable news channels,
visit www.newschannels.org, the website of the Asso-
ciation of Regional News Channels, and http://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:24-hour_television_news_
channels_in_the_United_States.
CHAPTER 3 Multichannel Television Strategies
123
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
well as News 9 San Antonio in 2004; Southern Ari-
zona News Network ended in 2010; and Local News
on Cable or LNC5 died in 2010.
Community Access on Cable
In dramatic contrast to commercial cable, the access
channels operated by community groups are non-
commercial and driven by educational, artistic and
public service goals. They tend to operate on the
neighborhood and city level, rarely reaching outside
county boundaries. Federal law permits local and
state franchising authorities to require cable systems
to provide channel space and sometimes financial
support for community access services.
Although by law these services divide into three
kinds—public, educational and government (PEG)
channels—in practice, they usually operate out of
community access centers. Such centers are noncom-
mercial and local not just in practice but also in active
philosophy, and they provide alternative program-
ming that would never be viable on for-profit stations
or local-origination cable channels. The mainstays of
access
content
have
been
community-produced
videos, video art, municipal meetings and hearings,
and educational productions. Like commercial com-
panies, they are finding the internet increasingly effec-
tive for reaching their audiences, and they face the
same problem of having to fund the shift from analog
to digital including HD.
Traditionally, access has meant two things to
local-access centers: (1) access by community mem-
bers to the means of television production through
training classes, arrangements for loans of TV cam-
eras, and the sharing of editing equipment; and
(2) access by community members to an audience
through the cablecasting of locally produced pro-
grams. The underlying principles guiding the staffs
of access centers are the ideas of free speech for every-
one, the egalitarian use of the media, the fostering and
sharing of artistic expression, the accessibility of all
people to affordable education and instruction, and
open and participatory government decision making.
The internet is proving an even more effective
vehicle for achieving these goals than cable, however,
and, with the drop in price and increased sophistica-
tion of video equipment, fewer members of the public
are seeking the video training that access centers can
provide, and their training equipment has largely
become obsolete. Thus, the centers focus increasingly
on digitizing their facilities to aid in the convergence
of video and computer input and output.
A few access programs have moved up to wider
distribution, and the flamboyant Bobby Flay, host of
several shows on The Food Network, got his start on
access television. The best of public access television
get Philo Awards (the name comes from television
inventor Philo T. Farnsworth), and the worst are
played at the Found Footage Festival for comic effect.
In the early 1990s, the hilarious “Wayne’s World”
spoofs about access television as part of Saturday
Night Live helped raise awareness of public access
television on the national level, for better or worse!
Changing Usage
The more than 1,000 access centers in America come
in a bewildering variety of organizational setups,
and many are finding common bonds with farseeing
public libraries. As the repositories of printed books
and periodicals move into DVDs, CDs and computer
storage of ideas, their noncommercial, anticensor-
ship, free-speech and open-access goals come to
merge into those of community access television
centers.
Many access centers, including one of the oldest
in
America—Bloomington’s
Community
Access
Television Service (CATS)—have located themselves
within a community public library and receive finan-
cial support from the city, county, library (a taxing
authority in Indiana) and cable operator. This par-
ticular center operates five PEG channels: a city gov-
ernment channel, a county government one (mostly
meetings and some interviews); an educational chan-
nel called The Library Channel; a traditional public
access channel where community members supply
the content; and a SCOLA channel (news from
other countries in their native languages).
In many other communities, once-separate local
arts centers and local television centers have come
together to become community media centers and
124
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
are evolving into community communications cen-
ters. They can involve institutional networks, local
libraries, health centers and schools, connecting
them to each other, to community agencies, and to
the internet, all of which have become central to
their future survival. It is not the particular technol-
ogy (television, books or computers) that ultimately
matters but serving the mission in the community—
the mission of public access to the means of
communication.
Many of the community members who were
once clamoring to gain local-access time to televise
their home videos or local performances, however,
can now exhibit continuously on personal websites,
bypassing one of the motivators for public cable
access. One striking aspect of the internet has been
the rapid shift of art video and low-budget movies
from cable access to the web. Video artists now fill
multiple websites with original film shorts, and the
internet provides places for the videos of birthday
parties and church fairs as well as the more serious
animation and dramatic films that once character-
ized local public access cable.
Educators, another group that formerly sought
large numbers of cable access channels, have also
turned increasingly to websites to provide interaction
with students and parents. Homework instructions
can go online; email allows personal messages from
teachers to students or parents; and the cost of such
sites is far less than for effective cable production.
Religious groups that also clamored for more time on
local-access channels now, on the internet, have more
freedom to program as they wish. Nonetheless,
church groups that wish to reach older, downscale
constituents who tend to avoid computers still seek
a significant portion of time on access television, cre-
ating problems for some managers as they see other
kinds of traditional access fare fading in quantity.
In many well-wired communities, local govern-
ments are also finding websites effective for some of
the kinds of information they produce. Long lists of
community events, community service agencies and
government office phone numbers suit menu-driven
websites better than television channels. Users can
access the websites at their convenience and select
only the material of particular interest, unlike cable
channels that unfold programs over time. Live car-
riage of public meetings of municipal government,
local school districts, environmental protection com-
mittees, councils, planning approval commissions,
and live carriage of other ad hoc meetings on com-
munity issues continue to be carried on cable system
local-access channels. However, the increased pene-
tration and quality of high speed internet service has
greatly increased the amount of online video stream-
ing of public meetings of all types.
Nonlocal Programming
Although it was once thought that all access channels
would carry only locally produced programs, some
regional and national sources are now available to
supplement what can be made locally. In addition
to
public
broadcasting,
noncommercial
services
such as SCOLA provide unedited segments of broad-
cast news from other countries in their original lan-
guages. Especially popular in university towns and
cities with large foreign-born populations, SCOLA
offers, over the course of a week, news, weather
and cultural information from such varied sources
as France, Spain, Germany, Poland, Hungary, Italy,
Korea, Greece, China, Croatia, Slovenia, Lithuania,
Latvia, Macedonia, the Netherlands, Moldova, the
Ukraine, the Philippines and other countries.
The oldest distributor of access programming
has been the Deep Dish TV Network, available to
community access centers via satellite and now the
internet. (The name Deep Dish refers to parabolic
receivers as well as apple and pizza pie!) A not-
for-profit program distributor, it is supported by
donations and grants, as are Free Speech TV and
Democracy Now! Independent and community pro-
ducers create the highly diverse programs and
largely political documentaries or analyses these sat-
ellite services circulate on such topics as housing, the
environment, civil liberties, racism, sexism, AIDS,
the Middle East and Central America.
Deep Dish identifies itself as “the first national
grassroots satellite network” and quotes author
Studs Terkel: “The idea of a democracy in this coun-
try is based on an informed citizenry, an intelligent
citizenry—and you can’t be intelligent without being
CHAPTER 3 Multichannel Television Strategies
125
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
informed.”3 These services appear unscrambled on
commercial satellite transponders; the programs are
carried by 200 or so cable systems, some public tele-
vision, and radio stations (including NPR), and on
the internet, and come directly to backyard dishes
(HSD).
What’s Sneaking Up
On-demand programming coupled with delivery of
TV Everywhere represents the leading-edge of ser-
vices for MVPDs. It has long been considered the
cable
industry’s
“holy
grail.”
However,
only
recently has on-demand’s cost fallen sufficiently to
move it into commercial market rollout. Likewise,
recent advances in wireless (4G/3G/Wi-Fi, tablets
and smart phones) have made TV Everywhere both
economically and technologically possible. More
than half of MVPD subscribers have access to on-
demand video programming and the rapid increase
in wireless access devices and penetration of user
interfaces between wireless and wire line networks
is promising to make TV Everywhere a reality.
Existing challenges for VOD include: figuring
out a way to get subscribers used to purchasing on a
per-program rather than on a per-channel or per-
package basis, negotiating low enough rights fees
with Hollywood to make VOD profitable, and con-
tinuing to negotiate an earlier window for releasing
movies to increase VOD value proposition for con-
sumers (see Chapter 9). TV Everywhere challenges
include investing the capital needed to provide con-
sumers with the required technology so that subscri-
bers can consume video content when (anytime),
where (in the home or away from home), and how
(on a TV, tablet, smart phone or laptop) they want
to receive it. In addition to the technical challenges,
MVPD distributors and programmers will also need
to overcome the intellectual property rights associ-
ated with TV Everywhere.
The advertising industry’s concern about DVRs
has led to elaborate tracking of viewer patterns to
learn how common commercial skipping continues
to be and what factors minimize it. As DVRs prolif-
erate (now approaching 50 percent penetration in
U.S. homes), advertisers will need to develop new
strategies for getting their products out and mes-
sages heard. Product placement within television
programs is one such strategy, and such marketing
tricks as discounts, coupons and other kinds of fee
reductions for watching commercial messages have
also surfaced. In addition, some advertiser sup-
ported programmers have begun to require that
fast-forward DVR functionality be disabled as a
condition
for
providing
programs
on
demand.
How far this will go and how the public will adapt is
unknown.
Cable, telco and satellite distributors moved
rapidly into the HD service business and look
ahead to 3D. In the short run, as HD set penetration
continues to increase (over 60 percent of U.S. homes
have at least one HD set), upper tier HD service
offerings from MVPDs can be expected to generate
significant revenue. However, once the transition to
digital is complete, separate non-HD service tiers are
likely to fade away, and all television will be HD
(unless it’s 3D or holography or something new we
haven’t yet heard of).
Although cable was long the clear market leader
in the area of high-speed internet service, telcos are
catching up where FiOS and U-verse are available to
consumers. The question now is how much longer
Verizon and AT&T will continue to supply the
internet and wire line telephone service components
of DBS’s triple play packages. Cable telephony ser-
vice has been growing rapidly thanks to the wide
availability of VoIP (Voice of Internet Protocol) tele-
phone service offerings by cableops. Today, cable
has approximately 25 million VoIP telephone sub-
scribers. Of course, telcos have responded with
appealing packages of television, internet and voice
telephone to counteract cable’s move into telephony.
Now that AT&T and Verizon have made the major
capital investment required to build competitive
broadband networks (FiOS and U-verse) to compete
with cable in significant parts of their coverage
areas, it will be very interesting to watch as things
develop.
On the reception end, consumers await wide-
spread distribution of truly intelligent converters
incorporated into new television sets and computers,
126
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
and user interfaces that provide seamless connectivity
between wireless and wire line devices. Consumers
also await improvements in interactive program guides
and search approaches to allow them to personalize
program viewing and searching. As the number of
channels and programs proliferate, consumers need
more efficient methods of identifying content (i.e.,
entertainment
programs,
news
stories,
etc.)
they
would like to consume. Great advances are on the
immediate horizon in this area as MVPDs and other
distributors develop much simpler and more intuitive
ways for consumers to identify programs to watch.
This includes incorporating such social media as Face-
book and online connections like Amazon.com to get
like-minded consumers to “share” what they like and
don’t like as part of the search process.
Sometime further in the future, it is envisioned
that mass guides will evolve into personal search
engines that utilize virtual agents that can be pro-
grammed by the user or that can learn on their
own to make selections for individual users, from
the huge sea of available entertainment, news and
commercial content. An agent programmed for
each individual will notify him or her about specific
video content, blogs, vlogs and RSS postings based
on
previously
expressed
preferences
or
current
wants and desires. The process of reprogramming
an agent (by voice or perhaps merely by what is fre-
quently chosen or requested) will eventually become
transparent to users, and over time, increasingly
sophisticated
agent
programs
may
become
the
equivalent of the semisentient computers in science
fiction. Agents will eventually mutate into avatars
(virtual selves) with virtual bodies that can interact
with other avatars on the internet, far beyond the
cartoon representations that exist today.
As broadband speeds become faster and faster
and screens on handheld devices become bigger and
brighter and keyboards become virtual, watching
video content on tablets, smart phones and laptops
will continue to improve as will user interfaces
between wireless and wire line distribution devices.
Nonetheless, history will repeat itself: Mobile media
will supplement—not supplant—traditional media.
Consumers will still want large TV screens in their
homes (and public places) and desktop computers in
their workplaces. However, 4G and Wi-Fi will have
a dramatic impact on consumers, and the world will
be a different place when most people can access the
internet—for video, audio or text—whenever they
want to and wherever they are.
Notes
1. Kenneth Van Meter, president of Bell Atlantic Video
Services’ interactive multimedia platform division, speak-
ing before Kagan Services’ Interactive Multimedia Forum,
18 August 1994, New York.
2. Seligmann, J, Covering the neighborhood. Newsweek,
13 December 1993, p. 6.
3. From the brochure cover for Deep Dish TV Network in
New York, 2000.
CHAPTER 3 Multichannel Television Strategies
127
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A P T E R4
Online Television Strategies
Douglas A. Ferguson
Chapter Outline
The New Programs
Competition
Wi-Fi’s Role
Evolution, Not Revolution
Web Program Producers
Movies Plus
Series Plus
Upstarts (Big and Small Ones)
Original Content Suppliers
Professional Web Videos
Ubiquity
Enhanced Viewing
Social Networks
Other TV Apps
Online Program Guides
Video Games and Virtual
Worlds
A Conceptual Framework
Geography
Economics
Strategic Considerations
Daypart Compatibility
Habit Formation
Audience Flow
Conservation of Program
Resources
Breadth of Appeal
Specific Approaches
Selecting Content
Scheduling Content
Promoting Content
Online Measurement
What’s Coming Fast
Notes
128

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
W
hen you watch YouTube or Netflix, hap-
pily, you needn’t follow a pre-structured
schedule of programs, and you needn’t watch on the
largest available screen to see what’s going on. Any
handy screen will do. When you go online to watch
a clip or show you missed on TV, you’ll probably find
links on the screen to other shows and clips that you
might like. Just like in traditional television, the com-
panies that supply online content have strategies to
keep you coming back for more (and staying longer
to watch the ads or pay a subscription). Online televi-
sion
strategies
address
the
growing
number
of
unstructured program options available on various
screens viewed by the media audience. This chapter
explores those online programming strategies, for
web programs, social media and video games.
The New Programs
In a programming book, one expects to learn what
online “programs” are, but their definition con-
tinues to be fuzzy and evolving. As in all media,
entertainment and information are the major con-
tent types, but in the online world, they come in
innumerable permutations, so it’s more useful to dis-
tinguish among web programs, enhancing informa-
tion and interactive games as the key kinds of online
program content.
Just as in conventional television and radio, most
online entertainment content is storytelling, and tell-
ing stories—real or fictional, in video or in games—is
the primary task of what are collectively called web
programs. Thus, on the internet, the term includes
short and long video programs akin to television
series, specials, documentaries, theatrical and made-
for-TV movies, web-only
newscasts
and
hosted
entertainment/talk shows. Web programs fall into
two distinct categories. First are the repurposed
showings of traditional television programs, such as
reruns of The Daily Show or NCIS via Netflix or
Hulu and NBC Nightly News on MSNBC.com. The
second type consists of original content produced spe-
cifically for online distribution, such as clips on You-
Tube or Revver. By 2012, Americans were streaming
over 15 billion videos per month (see 4.1).
At the same time, promotional information
associated with regular television programs (called
enhancement) appears on websites supplied by any
and all broadcast and cable networks, every Holly-
wood studio, most stations, most music producers
and other key groups in the entertainment industry.
Everyone wants you to watch what they provided.
At the same time, those self-contained computer/
phone options called apps (for applications, in case
you’ve been trapped in a cave) provide program
guides, live chat and other interactive functions
that “enhance” the viewing experience. As you
know from experience as well as the news, social
media apps allow viewers in different locations
watch television together as if they were in the
same room, commenting on content and receiving
enhanced information.
The third principal category of online media
consists of interactive games. Certainly, its game
function is one of the internet’s unique aspects, and
people can play solitaire or puzzles by themselves or
interact with others at distant locations (sometimes
with guns!) in elaborate video games. Notably, most
video games involve entertainment and storytelling,
just like traditional television, but with this added
dimension of interactivity. You get to participate in
the action, sometimes along with friends and stran-
gers (until you get virtually killed, of course, or all
your crops die).
Although the internet certainly contains moun-
tains of “information,” much of it is either related to
retail sales and other businesses or consists of refer-
ence material (current and archived data) or per-
sonal/political content (such as individual websites
and chat on a wealth of topics), and is thus outside
the parameters of this book. This chapter focuses on
online content that is similar or at least related to
what appears on television.
Competition
Of the three types of online content, it is web pro-
grams that offer the most direct competition to tra-
ditional media (although electronic games pretty
much wiped out the board game industry, at least
for those old enough to read). But the online
CHAPTER 4 Online Television Strategies
129
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
availability of streamed TV shows and movies
certainly caused the greatest disruption to “the
way things have been done.” You can see this in
the name that the television industry gave to
streaming
videos:
over-the-top
(OTT)
services.
Pricewaterhouse-Cooper (PwC) forecasts 9 million
OTT viewers by 2015.1 PwC also forecasts that the
money consumers will pay for online video subscrip-
tions (along with what distributors will pay to air
the programs) will rise to $99 billion by mid-
decade. Moreover, and perhaps even more disrup-
tive to current economics, parts of the internet are
now being distributed directly to portable devices
(cell phones and tablets)—the so-called third screens
(TV sets and computer monitors are the first and
second screens). Viewers can go online at their
offices or fire up their tablets at the beach to watch
television, and sometimes they opt to watch conven-
tional program channels unconventionally (see 4.2).
Clearly, the typical settings for enjoying video enter-
tainment have now moved well beyond the home.
Thus, online or on tablets, if they want to, view-
ers can watch repurposed content from regular tele-
vision channels (via Netflix and Hulu Plus, for
example). They can also watch made-for-web con-
tent from program producers who don’t use tradi-
tional distribution channels (producers of YouTube
clips, for example), creating industry competition
between traditional and online television in these
two categories. However, for viewers who “cut the
cord” from cable and satellite providers, web pro-
grams are all in the same category (see 4.3).
Wi-Fi’s Role
How many toys do you have? Are they separate or
linked? In the last decade, an explosion of home net-
working has occurred in which household electron-
ics devices, such as computers, TV sets, stereos,
phones and video games, are interconnected around
the entire house without the need for wiring. Oper-
ating on the Wi-Fi standard allows users to transmit
4.1
Streaming and Capping
S
treaming is the digital distribution of audio or video in
near-real time, the closest thing to conventional over-
the-air or cable/satellite television programs. Streaming
differs from broadcasting because the viewer receives a
single transmission not intended to be seen at the same
time that other viewers watch. Just like with a television set,
anyone with a computer and a connection to the internet
can receive streamed pictures and sound, and the faster
the connection, the better those pictures are. The number of
web users who are willing to watch streamed video grows
as connection speeds increase. Competition between
cable modems and DSL to get you as a customer, like the
competition between cable and satellite, has stabilized
(but not yet driven down) the cost of broadband
connections.
The introduction of unlimited data plans for internet and
cell phone providers was a huge selling point when com-
panies were first building a base of wired and wireless
subscribers. But as more people began downloading more
and more video programming, it became clear that a few
people were hogging the bandwidth. So internet providers
quietly introduced plans to cap, or limit, the amount of
information that could be downloaded in a billing period,
usually 250 gigabytes. The situation was analogous to
banning really big eaters from the unlimited buffet line.
Because downloading was never a huge activity,
except for a few, the introduction of data caps generated
very little controversy. But streaming is a different matter.
Like downloading, streaming exhausts huge amounts of
digital bandwidth. Unlike downloading a movie late at
night, however, streaming takes place during peak hours.
While wireline providers like cable and telcos can expand
their capacity to meet the demand, wireless was hitting the
limits of peak-hour bandwidth as early as 2011. It makes
sense (to some) to either throttle back activity or erect a
monthly cap. Of course, if you have become accustomed
to an unlimited data plan on your cell phone, you would
see it differently. Suddenly the buffet line has become a
menu of a la carte items, or you can only go through the
line once, perhaps with a slightly smaller tray.
130
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
streams of data (from computer keyboards, graphic
cameras, photo printers and home video cameras)
within a small geographic radius via radio waves.
The central unit is typically a desktop computer
with immense storage capacity that acts as a server
for the rest of the home. The computer links to any
number of cable boxes, alarm systems, stereo audio
systems, video game consoles, video displays and
who knows what that hasn’t been invented yet.
Typically, Wi-Fi internet content comes to por-
table laptops anywhere in the house or yard. Also it
can bring internet video to the main (biggest)
television set, a device that has enjoyed a privileged
location in the home for the past 60 years but where
computers do not normally reside. The “smart”
home imagined decades ago by futurists is finally
beginning to emerge, and this includes new video
and online abilities for those ubiquitous cell phones.
But using Wi-Fi in homes has proved more techni-
cally problematic than envisioned because older
equipment balks, and so it has rolled out slowly in
homes.
Outside the home, connecting to the web is a
simple matter of visiting a store or restaurant with
4.2
TV Anywhere and Everywhere
T
hanks to online video, nowadays you can watch tra-
ditional TV almost anywhere. One way is to purchase
a Slingbox. Hook your home cable or satellite to the
Slingbox, and then tune in all of your channels with a
broadband connection from any remote location. Copy-
right isn’t a problem because you are already paying your
multichannel provider for the right to watch. You are merely
extending the reach of the cable coming into your home.
With a Slingbox, you can extend that reach nearly around
the world.
Cable operators’ response to Slingbox was to come up
with their own devices and “TV Everywhere” offerings.
Thanks to tablets like the iPad and apps like that for Com-
cast’s Xfinity, subscribers can watch television virtually any-
where. Over-the-top service is sometimes described by the
“four anys”: Viewers can watch anything, anywhere, any-
time, on any device. A viewer connected to the web can
watch on their second and third screens (desktop computers
and mobile devices) what they pay to watch for on their first
screen (television set).
Even without adding equipment, you can still watch
regular channels (besides clips on websites) with services
like FilmOn or ivi TV). Subscribers to these services get
access to hundreds of worldwide TV and radio channels
through their computers. Add a device such as Apple TV,
and you can even transmit the video programs to your
television set. (Does that feel like going around in a circle?)
FilmOn is a subscription service, charging $10 per month
to receive live programming, while subscribers to ivi TV only
pay $4.99 for a comparable service (but FilmOn does
offer a very brief trial service for free).
Handheld audio and video players also supplement
media content received by cell phones. Apple’s iPod Touch
and iPad are the most common of the portable media
players, and they are capable of storing (or streaming)
hours of video, which can be displayed on a small (iPod
Touch) or larger (iPad) screen. Unlike most cell phones,
these devices can connect to Wi-Fi transmitters in the home
or in some public spaces. Despite concerns that most
people would not choose to watch a small screen, media
analysts have observed that viewers seem willing to adapt
to the largest or smallest screen that suits their situation at a
particular moment. In other words, if 3.5-inch screens are
all people have when riding on subways, then they’ll use
them until they get home to their beloved 42-inch HD
display.
Of course, most viewers still prefer their video to appear
on their home television receivers, and the bigger the bet-
ter. Microsoft’s Xbox 360 was the first device to offer PC-
to-TV downloads, and other companies (Nintendo Wii and
Sony Playstation) soon followed. Even without additional
hardware, media companies have begun to anticipate the
viewers’ desire to watch online video on TV sets. Several
manufacturers now offer HDTVs that have their own wire-
less connections, thus allowing viewers to bring internet
video to their main TV sets (meaning that no computer
needs to be in the same room as the TV set). A fifth of all
new sets shipped in 2010 had such built-in connectivity.
CHAPTER 4 Online Television Strategies
131
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
a free Wi-Fi zone. Travelers expect their hotel rooms
to offer Wi-Fi networks; libraries and schools typi-
cally feature Wi-Fi capabilities. Some cities have
public Wi-Fi, and many federal legislators consider
free public access a right rather than a privilege, like
public drinking fountains and restrooms. In addi-
tion, you can buy a monthly “Wi-Fi Anywhere” ser-
vice so you aren’t limited to public connections and
can link in wherever signals reach.
Evolution, Not Revolution
A good guess is that consumer habits will evolve
slowly as younger viewers grow older and older
viewers learn new tricks. In many households, the
price difference between full-cable service and web
programs, however, may influence a cost-based
switching decision, somewhat akin to the way cell
phones convinced some households to cancel their
landline phone service (while many younger people
now never consider landlines at all). The broadcast
networks and their allied production studios will
also benefit from streaming video, because net-
works can spread their risk among additional dis-
tribution
windows
when
they
can
repurpose
programs to subscription services. The fly in the
honey is who gets the money. A merging of inter-
ests will occur IF, and it’s a big if, and when equi-
table splits of rights and royalties can be agreed to
by dozens of parties. Economics will always be the
driving force.
Web Program Providers
It won’t come as a surprise that repurposed content on
the web primarily takes the form of television shows
and movies. As of 2012, the major providers of repur-
posed shows were Netflix, Hulu Plus, Apple iTunes and
Amazon Instant Video. A second category of web con-
tent is original programming, for which YouTube and
its close competitors are best known. Recent off-
network and off-cable repurposed programs are some-
times free and thus supported by ads, as on Hulu, but
the major online providers rely heavily on paid sub-
scriptions. Original made-for-online content, on the
other hand, is almost always free and supported by
advertising. Pretty much, you get what you pay for.
Movies Plus
Netflix evolved from a distribution channel for
rented DVDs through the mail to the largest supplier
of program-length streaming videos. It streams
professionally-produced content live over the inter-
net rather than downloaded as a single file. Monthly
subscribers with a broadband connection can watch
Netflix through their computers, game consoles,
smartphones, iPad-like tablets or web-enabled televi-
sion receivers. The company still rents out movies,
but in 2011 it began competing with the major tele-
vision networks, producing original video content as
well as continuing to stream older shows and
movies.
4.3
Cord Cutters
T
he term cord cutters applies to former cable/satellite
subscribers who have “cut the cord” to save money by
getting their movies and videos from Netflix, YouTube and
Hulu Plus. Still, traditional television has a big advantage
over video streaming: It can deliver HDTV-quality pictures,
while video streaming via the internet remains compara-
tively limited in picture quality.
As you can imagine, the prospect of losing monthly
cable subscribers to streaming video has worried some
traditional suppliers and distributors of television shows. But
other programmers are counting on the relative conve-
nience of cable and satellite technology to save their busi-
nesses. Most homes are already wired to traditional
sources, and current subscribers easily understand how to
select programs from a cornucopia of options. Streaming
video sometimes requires new devices and works best with
home Wi-Fi networks. Meanwhile, major cable operators
such as Comcast maximize their "TV everywhere and any-
where" options and promote a general shift to HD to stem
the tide of competition from streaming competitors.
132
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Netflix
was
the
first
major
supplier
of
professionally-produced content. For $7.99 (plus
an additional $7.99 if you also want the option of
DVD delivery to your mailbox), you can watch an
online library of popular television shows and
Hollywood movies. Its subscriber lists had grown
to over 25 million by 2011, two-thirds of whom
used the streaming-only option (before the price
increase from $9.99 for both options to $15.98).
Netflix online apparently made a sizable dent in
the sale of DVDs, which declined a whopping
20 percent between 2010 and 2011.
Series Plus
Hulu was originally designed as a free website to
stream content produced by regular television net-
works, plus a few original series. While CBS remains
a holdout, NBC, ABC, FOX and many large produ-
cers like Viacom participate in streaming recently-
shown programs on Hulu with few commercial
interruptions. (CBS.com and CWTV.com provide
network shows for online viewing of CBS and the
CW networks, respectively.)
The catch is that each video is preceded by a
pre-roll, which is a commercial that must be played
(not on FF) before the selected clip begins to roll.
Interestingly, 1 in 6 viewers abandon viewing a
video clip during a pre-roll, but many viewers have
begun showing greater acceptance of the tactic.
After the pre-roll, viewers have the option of watch-
ing the remaining commercials sprinkled throughout
the program, as is the practice on broadcast televi-
sion, or see all the advertising at once in one very
long commercial break. Initially, the number of com-
mercials within programs was a fraction of those
carried by over-the-air stations, which attracted
many viewers to Hulu, but as advertisers got more
comfortable with online video advertising, the com-
mercial breaks became longer and longer.
As this chapter goes to press, Hulu is for sale.
Netflix was not a bidder, but other interested com-
panies include Google, Yahoo, Amazon.com, Micro-
soft and DirecTV. Hulu has no subscribers, per se,
but it reaches over 30 million unique visitors each
month.
Hulu Plus evolved as a subscription website that
provided the same content as Hulu (with fewer com-
mercials) but expanded its menu to include entire
seasons of popular programs shown on regular tele-
vision, sometimes offering multiple seasons of espe-
cially hot series. For example, Hulu Plus has all the
Saturday Night Live programs dating back to 1975,
hundreds of hours’ worth. As with Netflix, Hulu
Plus also streams theatrical movie releases from
selected studios such as Miramax Films. The cost
per month is $7.99, the same as Netflix. Hulu Plus
focuses on well-known television series, but also fea-
tures some original made-for-web content (especially
during the summer months when regular network
television is on hiatus). As of 2011, Hulu Plus had
875,000 subscribers.
Apple iTunes is another source of videos, typi-
cally downloaded rather than streamed. Although
iTunes is best known for 99-cent music downloads,
Apple sells individual video programs for $1.99, and
because of its instantly recognized name, grabbed a
steady group of customers. Customers using iCloud
as virtual (online) storage for their music can also
store videos, but the sheer size of video files may
soon require a streaming solution instead of down-
loading, especially if portable devices are tied to off-
line storage (“the cloud”). The number of users is
50 million, although many download music instead
of videos. The library of titles is estimated as 3,000
television shows and 2,500 movies.
Powerhouse
Amazon
Instant
Video
offers
movies and TV shows for $1.99, similar to Netflix
and iTunes. Its special deal is that members of Ama-
zon Prime (a subscription service offering free two-
day shipping for books and merchandise) receive
unlimited, commercial-free, instant streaming of
5,000 movies and TV shows at no additional cost.
Amazon Prime runs just $79 per year, which is less
expensive than paying $7.99 to Netflix or Hulu Plus
for 12 months. Despite its later start, experts predict
that Amazon will eventually surpass giant Netflix,
despite the latter service having become the largest
single source of internet traffic in North America by
May 2011.2 And it might not take Amazon very
long to do that, but no subscriber count is presently
available.
CHAPTER 4 Online Television Strategies
133
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Facebook, Google+ and other social media offer
videos, too, but their presence on comScore’s ratings
lists is secondary to their primary mission of getting
users to chat (and play games). Facebook is being
used by Hulu to engage viewers by letting them
post Facebook messages to friends while watching
from the Hulu website. For example, a viewer on
Hulu can make a comment during a video that
appears on Facebook noting the exact running time
within the show that the post was written. Facebook
has 600 million unique monthly visitors worldwide,
although Hulu is not available in every country.
Upstarts (Big and Small Ones)
Another mega-giant has joined the game: Wal-Mart
started its own online video service called Vudu
to compete with Netflix, but it uses the pay-
per-download
model.
Vudu
charges
$1.99
per
episode for network shows, also putting it into
competition with iTunes. Some of the series pres-
ently offered by Vudu include Glee, Modern Family,
Weeds and Bones. Vudu did 750,000 movie transac-
tions in the last quarter of 2010, well behind Apple
iTunes but even with Amazon.
On the smaller side, it’s not clear what other ser-
vices might try to capture viewers of specific genres, in
effect, stealing them from Netflix and Hulu Plus.
Crackle is an upstart provider of television shows (it
has a handful of Seinfeld episodes) and somewhat-
recent movies, and touts its free slate of programs,
but it’s too soon to know if Crackle will be able to
gain
sufficient
advertising
support
to
compete.
Crackle has about 3 million unique monthly users.
Instead of a grab bag of programs, some web
programmers choose a particular genre, such as
humor, and focus on accumulating programs in
that genre. For example, you might have tried The
CollegeHumor Network or Funnyordie, which carry
original videos made especially for online viewing.
AOL Media Network (which delivers a variety of
online videos to AOL subscribers, reaching 42 mil-
lion users each month), Vevo (which specializes in
online music videos, reaching 60 million unique
monthly users), and Megavideo (which imitates
YouTube) are other minor contenders offering
original videos, but the crop of competitors is so
young that predictions are hard to make (see 4.5).
Even YouTube (best known for free user-generated
content) now offers an online rental service for a
small number of Hollywood films.
A service that caters to cell phone users,
MobiTV, offers its ten million subscribers more
than 25 channels of streamed live television that
show up as large as the phone screen. These include
programs from the broadcast networks and such
cable nets such MSNBC, CNBC, Discovery and the
Learning Channel, along with originals from several
web-only networks. For $9.99 per month (with no
extra charge for cellular airtime), MobiTV offers its
service via all major cell carriers. Not to be outdone,
Sprint TV and Verizon Wireless’ VCAST both offer
their own mobile TV and music plans. Tablet-size
portable devices like the iPad are making mobile
viewing even more popular. What is clear is that
lots of companies can see big dollar signs in the
download and streaming video business.
Original Content Suppliers
Overshadowing most of the online world is the mar-
vel of YouTube. Now a subsidiary of Google, it has
been by far the most popular streaming site. Tens of
millions of users upload and share videos among
groups of people or openly for everyone online.
Most of its content is user-generated content (UGC)
along with some copyrighted materials uploaded by
users (see 4.4). It is usually accessed via computers,
but some material is available for television screens
and some smart phones. About 500 million unique
visitors worldwide watch YouTube each month.
YouTube soon proliferated into dozens of You-
Tube channels (similar to TV channels) and has
become web-based video-on-demand: what people
want and when they want it, in almost real time.
People upload movie clips, TV clips and music
videos, as well as amateur videos and video blogging
and watch without needing to pay for any of it or
even register (except for “mature” material so as to
show they are old enough). As of 2011, YouTube
reported that it was serving more than three billion
videos a day, a staggering amount. Interestingly,
134
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4.4
The YouTube Phenomenon
I
n 2007 Viacom started an uproar by demanding that
more than 100,000 video clips, originally produced by
MTV, Comedy Central or Nickelodeon, be removed from
the YouTube site. The same month the BBC demanded that
100,000 clips from its own shows be removed. In both
cases, YouTube leapt to comply. Meanwhile, the Japanese
Society for Rights of Authors, Composers, and Publishers
demanded that thousands of its producers’ videos be
removed, and NBC and CBS both filed complaints about
their material appearing. Amusingly, Iran banned the site
as “culturally undermining.” The U.S. government also got
in the act when it objected to rebuttals of the “public ser-
vice” announcements they were uploading. After discover-
ing fight and gang attack videos on YouTube, ITV in the UK
claimed it was encouraging violence and bullying.
Of course, these attack videos have since become
big hits on news services, which shake their collective
heads in disgust even as they run the cuts for the hun-
dredth time. Given such complaints, you might think that
the existing media would keep its distance from this web
upstart. You might also assume YouTube was on the
verge of failure. You would be entirely wrong in both
cases.
YouTube was founded in 2005 by three former PayPal
employees using $3.5 million dollars in venture funding. In
2006, YouTube was named Time magazine’s Invention of
the Year and sold to Google for $1.65 billion. World-
wide, the public, to whom the service is free, consumes
more than 2 billion videos a day. Members of the public
can upload whatever they want so long as it meets the
15-minute time limit (although there are special categories
without time constraints, but which require high-quality,
original production).
By making it free, YouTube succeeded in avoiding the
problems that had plagued Napster. While it hasn’t ruled
on the web as such, the Supreme Court has traditionally
said members of the public can do whatever they want
with materials sent into their homes or which they have
purchased, so long as no money changes hands. You-
Tube gets its revenue from super-imposed ads and from an
innovation: Commercial customers can also upload
videos, but for a price. Even as Viacom was demanding
removal, it was buying in. NBC negotiated its own
channel, and Time Warner touts YouTube as a great outlet
for its music videos. The big entertainment companies
don’t hate YouTube; they just would like to control it. This
is very lucrative action. Indeed, most of the material they
demanded be removed is back on—just with official
sanction.
YouTube is without doubt one of the great success
stories of the web. It has exhibited immense flexibility by
adding new channels, special groupings of videos, and
even special categories (such as for comedians and
amateur producers). The NHL even agreed to provide
brief highlights of hockey games to the online service. In
fact, many YouTube producers and entertainers have
developed their own followings, becoming stars in their
own right with their works featured on late-night
broadcast television shows. Although critics once
claimed that YouTube would find it impossibly expensive
to maintain the required bandwidth and storage capac-
ity, they have suddenly grown quiet. The public has
welcomed the ability to participate in this one area of
video freedom, and revenue from advertisers provides
sufficient support.
While there are certainly many competitors who would
like to see it fail, it was probably already too late after its
first two years of operation. The public embraced this new
outlet with amazing speed. Even as Brazilian model
Daniela Cicarelli was demanding YouTube be shut down
until all copies of an unauthorized video (of her having sex
with her boyfriend on a Spanish beach) be removed, the
video had already spread through hundreds of other web-
sites. While YouTube makes no provision for downloading,
the needed software can be found in a few minutes of
surfing the web.
As Sean McManus, president of CBS News and
Sports, noted: “Our inclination now is, the more exposure
we get from clips … the better it is for CBS News and the
CBS television network; so in retrospect we probably
should have embraced the exposure, and embraced the
attention it was bringing CBS, instead of being parochial
and saying ‘let’s pull it down’.”3
William J. Adams, Ph.D.
Kansas State University
CHAPTER 4 Online Television Strategies
135
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
about three-quarters of the material comes from out-
side the United States, as does much of the viewing.
But even more overwhelming is the fact that
150 million people view some of those videos every
month.
Reaching into the once-sacrosanct sports world,
to mixed horror and delight, YouTube has also
begun to free streaming of live cricket matches and
then NBA and NHL games. Currently, it is sup-
ported by advertising, but YouTube may develop a
pay-per-month subscription service as Hulu did with
Hulu Plus. Currently, YouTube lets members “sub-
scribe for free” to one another’s channels.
Dailymotion is a French-owned competitor to
YouTube, with 93 million unique monthly visitors.
It is the world’s second largest video site. Dailymo-
tion is more likely to include mature-themed videos,
but otherwise is quite similar to YouTube.
Blip.tv is also similar to YouTube, but emphasizes
web program series rather than standalone videos.
Sometimes referred to as a “Hulu for original web
series,” Blip.tv provides more tools for creating and
promoting content than YouTube, and offers a way
for small-scale providers to make money from each
viewing (sharing a portion of the revenue with
Blip.tv, of course). Blip.tv has begun to shift its focus
toward helping 32 million monthly visitors locate the
most interesting and professional-produced content
among its 50,000 video series. Some of its independent
producers invest over $1 million in the series they pro-
duce, although that figure pales in comparison to the
$1 million per episode of many broadcast series.
Vimeo is more artistic than YouTube and posi-
tions itself as a “respectful community of creative peo-
ple who are passionate about sharing the videos they
make.” Like YouTube, it is free to use, but the 3 mil-
lion people who upload their content are encouraged
to buy a premium service (Vimeo Plus) for $59.95 per
year, which entitles them to no intrusive “banner”
advertising, ten times the storage, faster uploads and
other privileges. About 20 million unique monthly
visitors view its videos. By intent, Vimeo contrasts
markedly with the sometimes tawdry or amateuristic
tendencies of many YouTube videos.
YouTube has some other minor competitors:
Justin.tv (popular with viewers age 13 to 18, Veoh
(known for long-form videos), Flickr (known for
photos but stores videos, too), Viddler (for brand-
ing), yfrog (for Twitter), to mention a few. The
resources of Google make it difficult for anyone to
compete directly with YouTube for sheer size and
dominance in the arena of original content, but the
same was said of MySpace before its popularity was
eclipsed by Facebook.
Regardless where it appears, user-generated
content is unique, and it competes for the attention
of audiences who might otherwise watch other
forms of television. At its most basic, users sit at
their keyboards and talk or perform for their web-
enabled cameras. In an effort to entertain or inform
viewers, they might also shoot digital video in other
places and later upload it to sites like YouTube. A
more elaborate effort is called a mashup, defined as
a new video edited out of other videos from multiple
(too often copyrighted) sources. To date, many
video
mashups
have
been
parodies,
sometimes
accompanied by elaborate music mashups. Occa-
sionally, as a gimmick, a network and an advertiser
will encourage ordinary users to create content for
distribution on mainstream channels, such as the
homemade Doritos commercials that appear in
each year’s Super Bowl telecast.
Professional Web Videos
Beyond user-generated video and viral communica-
tion, an explosion of professionally produced con-
tent appears daily on an equally impressive number
of broadband video channels. YouTube itself has
begun to attract professional producers after its
acquisition of Next New Networks, by launching
YouTube Next. As mentioned, blip.tv and Vimeo
also offer vast amounts of video from professional
independent
producers,
who
exist
somewhere
between the two extremes of commercial producers
and silly amateurs.
The wide availability and frequent viewing of
short online videos has led to the phrase clip cul-
ture, which refers to the presumption that viewers
have acquired shorter attention spans. If a person is
only interested in the highlights or the most impor-
tant moment, then clips on the internet easily meet
136
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
that demand. Internet technology has led to a rise
in a kind of promotion that goes beyond word-
of-mouth advertising. Viewers who forward to
other users interesting videos or segments of infor-
mation about programs or sites are indulging in a
form of active publicity called viral communication.
Viral video refers to images or programs that often
get shared this way—for example, when the latest hit
on YouTube is forwarded to thousands of “friends”.
If a video becomes sufficiently popular, websites
like mashable.com declare the clip a meme (referring
to internet-spread ideas that attract intense notori-
ety). For example, fooling someone into watching a
video that purports to be interesting but is really
1980s singer Rick Astley performing a music video
became so popular at one time that it was labeled
the “rickrolling” meme. Top-trending topics on
Twitter are also candidates for becoming internet
memes.
Local stations have also gotten into the act by
streaming live content during their newscasts. Live-
stream is a tool for anyone wanting to launch a web
television channel for free. Some broadcast stations
(e.g., WSPA in Spartanburg, SC) use Livestream dur-
ing live newscasts to show behind-the-scenes mate-
rial during breaks. Other stations use Livestream to
upload news clips.
Ubiquity
Regardless of how videos are generated by users (or
what website distributes them), they have become
ubiquitous. One reason is the ease with which they
can be shared. Videos can be uploaded to a site such
as YouTube, where an embedded code can be
inserted into a Facebook wall, a news aggregator, a
blog, a personal webpage, a Twitter tweet or even
old-fashioned email. The ease with which computer
users can click a button to play a show would have
seemed a miracle just a few years ago. For viewers
battling boredom, it is easier to find something
entertaining on the web than on regular television.
Even watching regular television is an invitation to
see YouTube videos, as the manufacturers of big-screen
receivers integrate the web into their screens. A remote
control with a YouTube jump-button is likely to attract
an audience for popular videos on almost any topic,
even clips from 50-year-old television shows. Viewers
with older receivers can still watch YouTube through a
TiVo DVR, Apple TV box or Roku box. Roku sells for
as little as $59.99 and delivers Netflix, Hulu Plus and
Amazon Instant Video to any TV set in a web-
connected household with Wi-Fi internet.
The chart in 4.5 provides a snapshot of video
online in May 2011. It lists ten online video suppliers
4.5
Reports on Online Video Use*
Source
Unique Viewers
Viewing Sessions
Minutes per Viewer
YouTube and other Google sites
147,158,000
2,173,422,000
311.2
VEVO
60,369,000
360,205,000
105.1
Yahoo! Sites
55,482,000
272,255,000
39.1
Facebook.com
48,189,000
176,076,000
19.3
Viacom Digital
46,535,000
241,026,000
74.2
Microsoft Sites
46,502,000
251,799,000
42.8
AOL, Inc.
42,271,000
246,592,000
45.7
Turner Digital
35,185,000
126,760,000
36.3
NBC Universal
30,622,000
67,251,000
21.1
Hulu
28,543,000
195,897,000
217.8
TOTAL FOR ALL SOURCES
176,337,000
5,662,369,000
951.3
*comScore Video Metrix
CHAPTER 4 Online Television Strategies
137
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
and the time viewers spend on each of them. The
chart also shows how many viewers used video in
that month, how many sessions were streamed to
them, and the average time they watched at least
for one month; this data changes fast.
Enhanced Viewing
Enhancements come in many types, and new ones
are invented almost daily. Anything that expands
or prolongs or enriches the regular television view-
ing experience is called an enhancement. First, there
are references and links to websites. In addition to
links in program webcasts, virtually all TV stations
have streaming versions of their newscasts featured
prominently on their web pages. Even the big guys
(NBC, FOX) have created synchronized interactive
links between their evening news broadcast and var-
ious websites. Moreover, nearly every sports event
has an enhanced online viewing feature, with a
logo in the screen’s corner to remind viewers that
they can access game statistics or enter contests
online. Even syndicated game shows offer play-
at-home online enhancements.
Another kind of enhancement consists of backs-
tories and side stories and interviews that expand on
what appears on regular television. This kind of
enrichment both lengthens and deepens the fans’
experience of a program and its stars, or so the
makers hope. While some of this material appears
in magazines, most of it now resides online on station
and program websites. But viewers can also use social
media to connect with other viewers without help
from stations or channels. And the clear-winner
among online enhancements formats is social net-
working via online communities in which participants
engage in computer-mediated communication.
Social Networks
Social networks provide an extraordinary kind of
program enhancement. Sometimes accompanied by
widgets (downloadable software programs that fea-
ture media content), these sites provide the opportu-
nity to interact, much like games. Not only can fans
read about and interact with their favorites, but as
you know, they can discuss and compare and inter-
act with “friends” and strangers.
Facebook is, of course, the largest such social
network, with something like 600 million active
users worldwide. It accounts for nearly 10 percent
of all referred video streams, second only to Google,
which accounts for more than half. Owned primarily
by Mark Zuckerberg, along with other partners (but
planning to go public soon), Facebook makes its
revenue largely from banner ads provided by Micro-
soft and from Facebook credits (used to purchase
items in games and other virtual applications). Like
websites, Facebook groups have been created by sta-
tions, channels and viewers to enhance viewing
experiences among friends, family and acquain-
tances, and in effect, solidify and expand fans’ rela-
tionship to specific programs (thus making them
excellent vehicles for advertising). To create or access
Facebook pages, users must be 13 years old (suppos-
edly) and register, although many younger children
just lie. More than 40 percent of Americans have
Facebook pages, and about 140 million Americans
access the social network monthly.
Experimenting in 2011, Warner Brothers joined
with Facebook to invite members to download the
movie The Dark Knight (for 30 Facebook Credits,
or $3). Mature media companies are eager to protect
their core business by following their users onto the
internet in order to stay close to their current and
potential customers. Expect many more such joint
efforts.
The
second-largest
such
social
site,
MySpace.com, encourages its users to post videos
(vlogs, which are video versions of blogs) that can be
watched for information and entertainment value.
But MySpace.com was sold in 2011 for $30 million,
a fraction of the $580 million that Rupert Murdoch’s
News Corporation paid for MySpace.com in 2006,
so the future of this social site has dimmed consider-
ably. One exception may be musicians, who prefer
MySpace over Facebook for posting videos and
audio files.
Another widely-known enhancement is Twitter,
a hip form of social media that allows users to fol-
low people (most of whom they don’t know
138
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
personally, unlike Facebook friends). To “follow” is
to agree to have someone’s tweets (posted messages)
included into your own personalized Twitter stream
(analogous to a Facebook wall), so you only see
comments you want to read, from those people
you follow. People follow tweets in attempts to
learn information, watch trends, monitor breaking
news or engage in conversations with strangers
who share an interest. Not everyone who loves Twit-
ter bothers to tweet, although many users choose to
share. If users of Twitter “overshare” details in their
messages, their followers can choose to unfollow
them. Following and unfollowing on Twitter is
much more casual and tentative than friending and
unfriending on Facebook.
Twitter has actually changed the way many
people watch television in a big way—especially dur-
ing special events like the Super Bowl or the Acad-
emy Awards. A person who is watching alone can
feel connected by reading (and sometimes contribut-
ing to) a stream of tweets (Twitter messages of 140
characters or fewer, also known as micro-blogs)
about the program. Watching “with” others alters
the viewing experience by giving it more importance
and making it more pleasant and interesting, and
salience generally affects memory (an aspect that
has not been lost on advertisers or programmers).
Using tweets, broadcast stations and national
networks are able to entice followers with informa-
tion about the normal televised content. Creating a
buzz about a live event and creating a stream of
human interest is no less riveting for some viewers
than the links social media created among rioting
Cairo citizens during the 2011 uprising against Pres-
ident Mubarak.
Many more people belong to Facebook than
Twitter, but tweeting to strangers about television
is easier when your friends don’t happen to share
your taste in programming. The focus of tweeting
is thus on the program or channel rather than friend-
ship. Bridging this divide is the introduction of social
media tools to share what you are watching with
any online community. It is too soon to know if
viewers will really want to share what they are
watching in the same way they seem to enjoy sharing
what they are doing or thinking, but several websites
and apps have begun to link viewers by letting them
create social media profiles in which they can com-
ment on television programs.
Other TV Apps
One of the simplest of these apps is called tv Chatter,
which retrieves comments about programs directly
from Twitter. A similar app is yap.TV, which uses
a program schedule grid of programs currently
showing that then leads to an unedited Twitter
stream of comments based upon the selected pro-
gram. The difference between the two apps is that
the latter lets subscribers create their own “yaps”
to compete with the “tweets” on Twitter. Yaps are
public or can be contained in a “private party”
group chat area.
NBC Live is the most elaborate app, offering
three benefits for viewers. First, it provides a way
to watch streaming versions of the most popular
shows on NBC. Second, it encourages viewers to
log in (either on the web or iPad) to interact with
additional content (trivia, polls, cast commentary
and fun facts about the show being viewed). Third,
NBC Live offers a hosted social media forum, where
viewers engage other fans of a particular program
(and occasionally insiders from that show). NBC
Live is clearly a promotional tactic to attract and
maintain viewers to NBC programs.
Miso and Tunerfish are “check in” sites, where
viewers tell what they are watching right now, simi-
lar to how they might share their present location
on geo-location sites and apps like Foursquare,
Gowalla, Facebook Places and Google Latitude.
Miso provides badges as a reward for checking-in,
an idea borrowed from Foursquare. Subscribers to
Miso can also “follow” television shows, similar to
the way Twitter users follow other people. Tunerfish
is a phone app started by Comcast (who has very
deep pockets) that is much like Twitter in the way
it provides trending topics and a stream of users
answering the question “What are you watching
now?” Users can choose either “everyone” or “my
friends” for finding out what others are watching.
Philo and Starling are phone apps similar to Miso,
but neither worked on the iPad we tested.
CHAPTER 4 Online Television Strategies
139
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
GetGlue is an app that focuses on media enter-
tainment. Its creator calls it a window into the “taste
graph” of entertainment. GetGlue organizes itself
around a user’s answer to “I am currently …” with
the choices watching a show, listening to music,
reading a book, watching a movie, playing a game,
thinking about a topic, chatting about a celebrity,
and
drinking
wine.
Users
check-in
to
various
media, receiving virtual stickers (which can be
redeemed for actual stickers). Viewers can see a
comment stream and assign ratings (of the thumb
up or down variety), with or without comments.
Does that appeal to you? Stickers, really?
IntoNow (owned by Yahoo, another elephant in
the room) is a phone app for television viewers and
provides a “popular” button for finding out what
others are watching (and commenting upon or
assigning a rating to the content). Like the Tunerfish
app, IntoNow lets users see what friends or “every-
one” is watching.
Television Without Pity (TWOP) is a website
and cell phone app that encourages viewers to com-
ment upon or create synopses of popular programs.
tvChaser is an app that functions as an alphabetical
search engine for television programs, providing
much
shorter
synopses
than
those
found
on
TWOP. Which of these will still be around by
2015 is anyone’s guess. Place your bets!
Online Program Guides
In the 1990s the venerable TV Guide magazine created
an online web service. Along with such companies as
www.zap2it.com, such guides supply detailed tracking
of half-hour by half-hour broadcast and multichannel
offerings for all the larger U.S. markets. In addition to
websites like theirs, there are dozens of apps for televi-
sion that furnish program guides. Zap2It has released
an app called What’s On that takes the place of news-
paper or the paper magazine form of TV Guide listings.
It also includes times and locations for movies in local
theaters. Not to be outdone, TV Guide came up with its
own app for the iPhone and iPad, with local listings
plus news about television.
Unlike printed program guides and their online
counterparts, which are designed by the publishers
in “one size fits all” fashion (per market), web-based
television puts the user much more in control of the
flow of information. Web-based television typically
provides on screen access to very detailed websites
like www.imdb.com, a searchable compendium of
information on television and movies. Of course,
there’s always Wikipedia, but focused apps are
usually more up-to-date on current programs and
movies.
These enhancement apps are a tool for pro-
grammers (and fans) to make viewing more enjoy-
able. The future of such specialized social media is
unclear, but the proliferation of cell phones and
Wi-Fi tablets makes apps a tempting distraction for
television viewers. Viewers are more likely to watch
programs live than on a DVR when comments to
friends or followers are concurrent with viewing.
Live viewing (and commenting) also leads to less
skipping of commercials. On the other hand, tablet
and phone apps can serve as handy time-filler when
advertising messages appear in live shows.
Video Games and Virtual Worlds
Video gaming is the third major type of online pro-
gramming. How old would you guess most video
game players are? What often comes first to mind
are teenage boys wielding joy sticks in Worlds of
War and the like or families jumping around playing
Wii. But contrary to stereotypes about video game
players, more than half the people playing online
games are aged between 30 and 59, and they play
everything from mahjong to Sudoku, word games
and solitaire. Moreover, such games appeal to men
and women almost equally, and they increasingly
play them at home on their laptops while watching
regular television.
Zynga has successfully launched such wildly-
popular Facebook games as CityVille, FarmVille
and Mafia Wars that rely on a player’s friends, fam-
ily and acquaintances to attain rewards in the games
(see 4.6). Facebook also acquired another iconic
computer game, Civ World, adding to its luster as
the center for adult gaming. Facebook estimates
nearly 300 million members play social games,
140
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
buying virtual goods like food and fuel to advance
in the game. Slightly over half of all Facebook
users
log
in
specifically
to
play
social
games
because of the real-time rules that foster addiction to
playing.
Traditional media networks have tried to pro-
mote their offline programs during online gaming
but have not met with much success thus far. What
works better is to develop a television game show
with an online game counterpart that is itself a pro-
motional tool, fostering back-and-forth promotion
of the two versions and advertising opportunities
in both media. Jeopardy, for example, exists in
daily syndicated television, online in several forms
and in a box as a board game.
Then there are the heavy game players. They log
in on ordinary web-connected computers to play
massively multiplayer online games (MMOG) with
hundreds or thousands of online friends and stran-
gers. Youngsters (no less addicted than those parents
who play CityVille) play online games like Runescape
and the wildly popular World of Warcraft (in several
4.6
Zynga
S
ince 2007, Zynga has been enormously successful at
creating lifestyle games to which a broad segment of
users (typically people not ordinarily attracted to video
games) often become addicted. Known as "the Google of
games" to some observers, Zynga has built its fame on
popular games like FarmVille, CityVille and FrontierVille.
Although each game has stand-alone browser-based ver-
sions, most players participate with their friends via Face-
book. By June 2011, Zynga had 270 million monthly
active users. CityVille has 20 million daily players.
Most of the games rely on social media friends to
assemble a community of game players who help each
other achieve ordinary goals, like harvesting crops or
feeding animals or constructing buildings. The objects in
these games are virtual goods that convert to points or vir-
tual money, with which players can purchase virtual items.
Success in these games depends on effort, but players can
also buy virtual goods from Zynga to advance further
toward game rewards or sometimes avoid penalties. For
example, virtual farmers can resurrect crops that died by
paying roughly $2 in real cash to Zynga, which sells game
"coins" (or Facebook Credits) in $10 or $20 bundles. Real-
world poker tournament players recognized this tactic as a
"re-buy" that allows a bankrupt player a second chance to
play on. It is probably no coincidence that Zynga’s very first
social media game was Zynga Poker.
Thanks to enchanting graphics and time-based partici-
pation, Zynga captures players’ attention with virtual
activities that are fun to play with their friends at no cost—
but then offers those same players additional benefits for a
price. Zynga profits not from the free games but through the
sale of virtual goods that players desire to advance in the
game. Zynga’s games follow the so-called freemium
model, a combination of free and premium playing.
The more players play, the deeper they get into the
games. Taking a day off, for example, hurts a player’s
points. It’s not unusual for ordinary people who would
never play video games to get drawn into the game,
somewhat like an addiction. So a FarmVille player might
get up early before going to work because their corn crop
must be harvested before it withers. Manual harvesting
takes longer than using a tractor, so the player feels the
need to acquire farm machinery. Then, to operate the trac-
tor, the players choose to either convert game points to buy
gasoline or pay real money online (Zynga hopes) for game
coins to purchase fuel. Playing the game is more mindful
than passively watching television, although people often
engage in both activities simultaneously.
CityVille is Zynga’s most popular game, offering players
the opportunity to build a virtual city, acquire energy points,
and advance through experience levels. Zynga claims 61
million monthly users of CityVille. Players (often friends on
Facebook) visit one another’s cities and perform work in a
reciprocal fashion. Friends can give gifts to other friends
who play, just as they did in FarmVille. Thus, social media
acquaintances who may have nothing to say to their friends
each day can still share some kind of message to help the
other in the game (e.g., "Mary has sent you a Zoning Per-
mit" or "Can you send me an I-beam?"). Beyond the indi-
vidual accomplishments rewarded in the game, players
make friendly connections with people they know. If cities
and credits can be virtual, why not build virtual friendships?
CHAPTER 4 Online Television Strategies
141
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
versions). Monthly subscriptions are required for
most of these games. Time spent playing typically dis-
places time spent viewing television, but teens some-
times do both, as do some adults.
Programmers and users classify the content of
online and console games under the following five
categories: role-playing (RP), first-person shooter
(FPS), real-time strategy (RTS), turn-based strategy
(TBS) and simulations (SIMs). Each game requires
a downloaded program through which the player
logs onto a network of users (or, in the base
browser-based games, a “thin client” program oper-
ates the game). Some examples are described briefly
in 4.7, and you can probably think of more!
Even standalone game consoles like Xbox 360
and Playstation 3 have moved from solo to multi-
player games. With built-in Wi-Fi devices, these con-
soles let players enjoy MMOGs like Call of Duty (I,
II, III, IV…), Halo, and that all-time parents’ hor-
ror, Grand Theft Auto in all its permutations. The
chief advantage of playing games on a game console
is that such devices were designed specifically for
games. Thus, the game controllers are easier to use,
the graphics are better, and connections have less
“lag time” (because dedicated chips distribute the
flow of information). Voice chat is also better imple-
mented on game consoles than on computers. Game
consoles also have advanced motion controls, such
as Kinect for the Xbox 360.
Still another online game format consists of
virtual worlds. These are computer-based simulated
environments intended for users to inhabit and inter-
act with via avatars. Defined as the web user’s repre-
sentations of his or her individual self, avatars occur
in
three
forms:
three-dimensional
models,
two-
dimensional icons or text constructs. Very shortly
after such sites first appeared, big commercial interests
latched onto the branding and profit opportunities.
For younger children, Viacom’s Neopets has been
especially successful. Nickelodeon’s Nicktropolis.com
targets children’s desire to play games, watch videos,
design personalized 3-D areas, and interact with other
kids in real time—and also targets parents’ desire for a
“safe” online environment.
4.7
MMOGs
T
he most popular MMORPGs (where RPG stands for
role-playing game) are Runescape, Final Fantasy and
Tibia. Players spend hours in a fantasy world where items
are collected and exchanged for tools or power, and bat-
tles are fought. Websites such as http://usfine.com have
also sprung up to help players move forward in the game,
for a price.
MMOFPS games (first-person shooter) require the player
to become a warrior, and the competitions are shown
through a first-person field of view. Among the most popular
games are Combat Arms, AssaultCube and CrossFire.
MMOFPS players are usually awarded points for experi-
ence. Nexon is a major supplier of these games, and it
makes money through monthly subscriptions and merchan-
dise sales.
Beyond Protocol and Battleswarm are examples of
MMORTS (real-time strategy) games, which fall into two
respective categories: sci-fi and fantasy. Players typically
get to be a king or a general in command of others. Large
numbers of players can compete in these games set in a
persistent world hosted by the company that designs the
content and charges fees.
MMOTBS (turn-based strategy) games are regulated by
the tick on an online clock. Between the ticks, hundreds of
players share the same field of conquest, where moves are
made asynchronously and then locked in every 30 seconds
or so, allowing players with slower (or intermittent) internet
connections to simulate synchronous playing. UltraCorps
and Darkwind are trendy examples.
SIMs (simulations) are a category of multiplayer games
that includes poker, sports, auto racing and alternative
worlds. Gamblers compete for play money (sometimes real,
when the law allows) at such game sites as Pokerstars and
Full Tilt Poker. Sports fans play a variety of games (one
example is Baseball Mogul Online) which are similar to
fantasy league competitions. Kart Racer is an example of
an online racing game quite similar to MMORPGs, except
that the role-playing is limited to driving very fast. Players of
games like The Sims Online create their own alternate
worlds.
142
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Middle-school children are attracted to such
semi-educational sites as Gaiaonline.com on which
they use anime-type avatars (cartoons, manga) to
interact in real time and earn rewards that “buy”
virtual toys. Such sites earn their revenue from the
purchases of clothing, hair clips, posters, stickers,
games and so on. Such virtual-world models are
moving into regular classrooms for more direct aca-
demic learning. For the adult population, the most
popular virtual world site is SecondLife.com, a
three-dimensional UGC where participants buy and
trade virtual land and virtual dollars (using more
spooky avatars). Gaiaonline and SecondLife peaked
in popularity about 2009, but both still have large
numbers of users.
A Conceptual Framework
When an innovation comes along that fundamentally
changes the way people view the world, the term dis-
continuous change is used. At first glance, the use of
online technology to distribute radio and television
programming appears merely an extension of broad-
casting—another way to receive the content—as with
cable and satellite. The key difference, however, has
been the degree of interactivity between the user and
the programmer, a factor which created a sea change
from the past. The seemingly infinite number of
choices is another important difference: By 2012,
there were more than 800 million internet hosts
(which
are
comparable
to
channels).4
Another
change is that the formerly dominant media are
now forced to compete with such unconventional
forms of electronic entertainment as digital photo
albums, visual encyclopedias, vlogs, virtual worlds
and amateur podcasts.
Other chapters in this book have been structured
around strategies for selecting, scheduling and pro-
moting programs plus evaluating audience response.
The “a la carte” nature of program offerings on the
internet, however, has transformed many of the pro-
grammer’s tasks. Instead of schedules of limited
choices, the online audience has an abundant menu of
near-limitless choices. Every listener and every viewer
can construct his or her own media landscape. In this
content-on-demand world, fewer people spend the
same time enjoying the same program that other peo-
ple are watching. Yet, many viewers continue to
expect that someone else will assemble offerings into
a schedule, or at least a highly simplified menu.
Although it is safe to define online program-
ming as media content available through a computer
screen, tablet or speaker that displaces or substan-
tially supplements the use of noncomputer media
content, it is only possible to sketch out some seg-
ments, not boundaries. Indeed, some handheld
devices allow the screen to be wirelessly shared
with a larger screen in a group setting (such as
through Apple’s AirPlay). While online content
includes live and taped shows, described previously
as streamed or video content, it can encompass vir-
tual events, including chat rooms and group event
simulations such as those just discussed (Gaia, Sec-
ondLife). Online programming particularly includes
but is not limited to web pages that promote pro-
gramming delivered over conventional channels,
but does not include, for the purposes of this book,
the archived sound bites and video clips found on
journalism sites, which we set aside.
Conceptually, online programming compares with
other programming as shown in Table 4.8. While the
list of differences is not exhaustive, it is nevertheless
helpful for framing the relative position of online distri-
bution. Although these distinctions may seem periph-
eral to how programming is strategically scheduled,
these conceptual differences are crucial for program-
mers’ understanding of why new media are fundamen-
tally unlike more traditional media.
The central uniqueness of the online world is its
interactivity.
Applications
that
are
interactive
account for an ever-growing slice of spending on
the media. In the near term, we expect that cell
phones, tablets, portable media players or some
new multichannel television platform will better
realize the full potential of new media systems.
Geography
Because they are distributed by middlemen—the
broadcast
stations
and cable
systems—ordinary
over-the-air radio and television signals are limited
CHAPTER 4 Online Television Strategies
143
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
by geography. Back in the mid-twentieth century,
networks were developed to link together stations
and cable systems to create national services. In the
1980s and 1990s, multichannel media (cable and
satellite) became collections of networks, limited by
shelf space to about 600 digitally compressed chan-
nels (see Chapter 9).
Online, in contrast, is free of inherent geogra-
phy and fixed channel capacity, but somewhat lim-
ited by the size of the pipe (bandwidth) through
which
programming
must
flow.
Bundled
fiber
cables, however, are now replacing old-style coaxial
cable and telephone lines, thereby increasing band-
width. And internet cable modems and DSL have
pushed delivery speeds to 5 megabits per second
(mbps), with speeds up to 8 mbps for additional
monthly fees. The theoretical limit of DSL remains
10 mbps, but cable is easily three times as much.
Moreover, for larger cities, Comcast developed 50
mbps speeds and achieved 100 mbps over fiber con-
nections, leaving DSL far behind. (Clearly, if you are
a gamer 100 mbps is to die for!) When internet
access comes through such connections, very high-
quality video and audio are possible. Nonetheless,
to match HD television quality, distributors must
provide many megabits per second over shared
access lines. It is a rule of science that faster speeds
produce better video and audio quality.
Economics
The very essence of programming strategy is linked
to how revenue flows from consumer to program
producer, with the distributor (qua programmer) as
middleman. All three forms of media programming
shown in Table 4.8 have offsetting benefits and
drawbacks. The key distinction between broadcast-
ing and multichannel distribution has been the num-
ber of revenue streams: Over-the-air radio and TV
stations rely almost entirely on advertising, whereas
cable/satellite services have dual income from adver-
tising and subscriptions. Although the broadcast
industry has only a single revenue stream to date
(NBC has taken the first baby steps toward a second
stream from cable operators), the “free” element of
broadcasting allows nearly complete audience pene-
tration: 98 percent of U.S. homes receive broadcast
radio and TV stations, meaning nearly all 300 mil-
lion Americans can see and hear them.
Thus, broadcast advertising is more efficient for
reaching enormous numbers of people than cable or
internet advertising, which means that broadcasters
can charge more for the time in which commercials
air. Online programming, however, has a third rev-
enue stream from merchandising because its technol-
ogy allows point-and-click purchasing of items
related to media content. Once, such products and
services could be sold only in the commercial breaks
within TV shows. Now, companies like Zynga profit
immensely by selling virtual goods (for which there
is no manufacturing cost) to people playing online
games. And Facebook and YouTube and dozens of
others look to get into the virtual goods game.
The ability to attract subscribers to internet pro-
gramming has been negatively affected by the “free”
nature of the internet because, at the start, most con-
tent was reused broadcast material or a sorry sort of
amateurism (UGC) lacking the production quality
that viewers were used to. Nowadays, those who
supply high-quality programs made-for-online must
4.8
Strengths and Weaknesses of Media Delivery Systems
System
Reach Limited by
Revenue Streams
Bandwidth
Interactivity
Broadcast
Geography
1. Advertising
High
One-way
Cable/Satellite
Channel capacity
2. Ads, plus subscriptions
High
Mostly one-way
Online
Bandwidth
3. Ads, subs, plus merchandise
Medium
Two-way
144
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
charge (like cable) and compete with those that seem
free because they are advertiser-supported (in partic-
ular, broadcasters—and the pirate services that
share their content with everyone for free). Web
users have become willing to pay because they see
the value and convenience of streaming video.
Convincing advertisers to evolve away from the
long-established system of cost-per-thousand and
gross ratings points has been a challenge for the
online world. On the positive side, unlike conven-
tional television’s delivery of spot messages to an
unknown audience, broadband video delivers a tar-
geted message to actual users. By 2010, online video
accounted for just 10 percent of all advertising dol-
lars. Yet, the number of people who consume online
video continues to grow (see 4.5), and that great size
looks appealing to many with something to sell, so
expect change there.
In
traditional
broadcasting,
programs
that
under-deliver (have fewer than the predicted and thus
paid-for number of viewers) necessitate the giving up
of precious airtime in future programs for “make-
good” commercials. In the online system, content
providers cannot so readily hedge potential audience
size. As a result, the traditional advertiser-supported
model is slowly transforming into a “pay-per-viewer”
model for advertisers. However, internet media ana-
lysts and executives correctly predicted that demand
for subscription video services would eclipse the pay-
per-use model for consumers because of greater con-
venience and predictability. By 2011, cord-cutters
had generally traded the option of $10 per premium
channel for lower cost channels hosted by Netflix or
Hulu Plus. HBO and others have begun to shift their
economic model, to avoid sharing the fate (demise) of
established media giants like Blockbuster.
By now it is abundantly clear that audiences prefer
pre-roll advertising and commercial interruptions to
paying for short clips of video. On the other hand,
the success of subscription services like Netflix and
Hulu Plus suggests that viewers will pay for video sub-
scriptions, especially in the case of movies and games.
Despite broadcast and cable’s continuing impor-
tance, there are some highly positive features to being
an online program supplier. No licenses and franchises
are required, unlike for broadcast stations and cable
systems, and very little FCC regulation applies to
online. Moreover, at present, the distinction between
distribution and content is tenuous. Because there are
very few distributors, content really is king. There are
no bricks and mortar as with stations, cables and satel-
lites. Very few barriers exist to consumption immedi-
ately after the creation step, and the size of staff
required to maintain a website is much smaller than
for broadcast stations or cable operations.
Most crucial to this book about media program-
mers, the job of the online programmer has uniquely
become the job of librarian. Mostly, a programmer
keeps track of things—the “things” being UGC
videos submissions, updates to games, subscribers
and members, players, special offers—and maybe
advertisers (unless someone else handles them). Selec-
tion and evaluation remain valid functions, but the
importance of scheduling is greatly diminished
because everything is potentially available all the
time. Daily promotion tends to be supplanted by
research to find out who to promote to. The key job
is helping users find what they want (before their
patience runs out). Whether listeners and viewers pre-
fer to create their own media landscapes or choose
among packaged ones remains to be seen, but the
online world is not a particularly friendly place to
middlemen … except for the very Big Guys.
In the online world, the focus is on content
aggregators like YouTube and Netflix. The actual
content providers—the people who produce short
videos—either opt to place their “shows” on aggre-
gator sites or to remain off-portal on independent
websites. However, website programmers must rely
on the search engines—such as Google and Bing—in
order to be located by most users. Programmers
must decide whether to offer their content via
major sites or to go it alone, hoping to be found
by the search engines. In the days of text-only search
engines, this was a difficult decision, but video
search has been integrated into all the major search
engines, making it difficult not to be found. On the
other hand, the numbers of entries turned up by
Google and others sometimes run into the hundreds
of thousands, and being buried on such long lists
brings few hits. The solution for players with deep
pockets has been to purchase placement at the start
CHAPTER 4 Online Television Strategies
145
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
of a related search as a form of advertising.
Google.com and others charge advertisers for favor-
able placement during online searches.
For those who have broadband, the choice
between free and subscription internet content par-
allels that of broadcast and cable TV. Nowadays,
the
best
content
comes
at
a
premium,
but
advertiser-supported
free
content
is
still
pretty
good. Those who decide to pay extra for content—
that is, beyond the considerable monthly expense for
high-speed access (which has other benefits such as
fast email and instant messaging)—can save money
by subscribing to a content provider aggregator that
packages several services.
But an authentication model is popping up that
provides protection for the existing MVPDs. What it
means is that real (authentic) subscribers to a cable
or satellite service will be favored online users of
television
programs.
Authentication
makes
hot
online content available to cable and satellite sub-
scribers but not (or not now) to non-subscribers.
Having a vested interest in forestalling cable discon-
nects because of all the cable networks its parent
corporation owns, FOX was the first broadcast net-
work to adopt the practice on Hulu, but others will
soon follow suit. Only real (authentic) subscribers to
a cable or satellite service will get to see FOX series
immediately on Hulu, whereas non-authentic users
will have to wait eight days to see repeats (or
maybe forever, if this protective approach takes
off—and it is expected to, although Google might
keep an open system). If the authentication model
becomes widespread, the chances of people drop-
ping their MVPD subscriptions become considerably
lessened. For the avid online user, getting to see epi-
sodes many days later isn’t as appealing as seeing
last night’s episodes today. At a minimum, authenti-
cation practices are expected to slow down cord-
cutting.
Strategic Considerations
If program strategists are middlemen, and the inter-
net has no middle, then what is the role of program
strategy? Considering the strategic themes outlined
in Chapter 1 might lead to the conclusion that select-
ing online programs is different from selecting in the
old media environment—but there are, however,
enough similarities that programmers can make the
transition from a time-bound broadcast world to an
a la carte online world.
Daypart Compatibility
The utility of dayparting as a strategic theme was
considerably weakened for broadcasters with the
advent of themed cable channels in the 1980s
and 1990s (for example, CNN, Game Show Chan-
nel, Cartoon Network). However, the true goal of
dayparting is to target sizeable groups of people,
and the use of a time segment is only one means to
the goal. Online programmers who select pro-
grams for a given website certainly can match
their content to a compatible audience. For exam-
ple, ESPN Motion and other sports sites take
advantage of knowing what fans like to see and
delivering it to them.
In the earliest days of streaming video, the dis-
tribution of materials was a novelty, so targeting
was minimal. Streaming was done because it was
possible, not because there was any market demand.
For example, downloading programs from main-
stream television took so long they would rarely
warrant most users’ effort because it was easier just
to watch TV.
But despite the fact that teens and college stu-
dents account for a big chunk of the online video
audience, the average age of U.S. viewers is an
ancient 39 or so. Over and over, data compiled by
such online research companies as Nielsen//NetRat-
ings, comScore and Quantcast show that web surfers
over 35 years old make up anywhere from half to
two-thirds of YouTube’s audience.5 Nowadays, the
typical online user is no different from the typical
television viewer. Thus, the strategies used by the
cable theme channels will find new homes online,
with the key difference being the user’s ability to
select from a list of options (online menu), as in dig-
ital cable. The programmer, as always, must con-
struct an online menu that is compatible with the
desired visitor to the website.
146
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Habit Formation
Freed from time constraints, the web can show any-
thing, anytime. Programmers must count on first-time
visitors being so impressed with their sites’ contents
they will find it rewarding and may even bookmark it
(save the site’s address). Social bookmarking sites like
Diigo, Delicious and Google Bookmarks facilitate the
sharing of bookmarks with one’s friends. Present
studies of website repertoire already note that users
have a limited number of favorite sites (so much so
that the idea of “web surfing” has become outdated
except as a way to find specialized information).
Entrance portals like YouTube and Hulu function
like networks, connecting groups of content (in con-
trast to outlets like local broadcast stations). A main
screen menu presents different categories of content
(called links) that are sorted by interest area: news,
sports, weather, travel, shopping, movies and so on.
Portals do not hold the power they once did because
people have become accustomed to searching via
Google, Yahoo!, Bing and similar search engines.
The job of habit formation becomes making a
favorable first impression and having the most user-
friendly appearance and content—to the extent that
that users think of certain sites as “the best weather
radar site” or “the best online auction site,” an evalua-
tion that may also appeal to the “programmers” of
search engines and get them top listing. Nonetheless,
paidsearchplacementisincreasinglythedecidingfactor.
With paid placement, the search engine grants preferen-
tial positioning to theclientwho pays them for the favor.
Another financial scheme is for the video aggre-
gators to share revenue with the creators of short
videos, especially when short roll-in advertisements
precede the videos. In the case of YouTube (the
aggregator), Google (the search engine) maintained
the upper hand by acquiring it (YouTube) for
$1.65 billion (which may sound like a lot of
money until one recalls that Yahoo! paid $5.7 bil-
lion for Mark Cuban’s broadcast.com website in the
late 1990s during the dot-com heyday).
Habit formation is carefully considered by the pro-
ducers of interactive games. It is not a coincidence that
one website is called www.addictinggames.com; the
best video games encourage long play and reward
daily visits. Some games, such as Farkle on Facebook,
punish players with fewer bonus awards if they miss a
single day. Employers complain that employees play
games too much on the job, but such is the addiction
to daily play when virtual animals must be virtually fed
and virtual crops wither without virtual water.
Audience Flow
When it comes to the notion of audience flow, most
online sites follow the cable television model for spe-
cialized theme channels. As stressed in Chapters 1
and 2, the main strategy is to invite audience flow
in and discourage flow out. On the other hand,
much as multichannel programmers promote other
channels, online programmers can cross-promote
content by including new offerings (other programs)
on the same screen page as those containing estab-
lished programs (or other content). For such branded
content providers as Cartoon Network and ESPN,
cross-promoting among cable channels, online video
games and pay-per-view videos is effective. The audi-
ence can be encouraged to watch the scheduled cable
content as usual but is given the option to sample
other forms of branded entertainment (or informa-
tion) without tuning away from the brand. The inter-
net and on-demand digital services strive to give loyal
users alternate ways to remain with a program brand.
Because surfing (the online world’s answer to
grazing) is less common nowadays than in the begin-
ning, new services need a developed programming
strategy, beyond promotional support, to attract an
audience. The spinoff approach and the tie-in
approaches used by broadcasters can work well for
online content providers. For example, Angry Birds
was first developed as a game for mobile phones but
later was spun off into television programs, both as
an animated show and as a live-action version.
Conservation of Program Resources
Just as broadcast and cable programmers recycle
material to optimize its value, online programmers
put as much material onto their online menus as
possible. Unlike time-bound broadcast and cable
programmers, the online content providers are not
CHAPTER 4 Online Television Strategies
147
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
forced to rotate or rerun offerings because nearly
everything
is
continuously
available.
(Some
MMOGs are exceptions because they have exact
start and stop times for all participants, but others
go on and on until all players lose interest.)
One consideration influences some providers to
limit the availability of their material: Many pro-
grammers believe that perceived scarcity makes con-
tent appear more valuable to the public. For
example, Disney carefully limits accessibility to its
old classic films on videocassette and DVD to
make them seem more special when they briefly
become available in stores. If online content becomes
too common or too readily available, the perceived
worth of the contents (as compared with premium
materials) may be diminished. One reason why cable
viewers spend so much of their time watching HBO
is because they pay extra for it, and the extra use
justifies the cost. The lessons for website program
services seeking subscription fees are to keep content
original and promote the content as “special.”
Just as with a hit TV program, a winning video
gaming franchise can be developed into new versions.
Call of Duty was an original first-person shooter
game set in WWII that recycled popular concepts
into Call of Duty 2, Call of Duty 3 and Call of
Duty: World at War. The program’s distributor Acti-
vision chose the Vietnam Conflict as the setting for
Call of Duty: Black Ops (selling $650 million in the
first five days on the market) and then the brought the
game series into present-day battles with the Modern
Warfare Series: Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare,
Modern Warfare 2 and Modern Warfare 3. Game
players can buy new games or add-ons to existing
games (such as Call of Duty: United Offensive). Acti-
vision also created games for consoles and hand-held
games under the Call of Duty brand: Finest Hour, Big
Red One, Roads to Victory, World at War: Final
Fronts, Modern Warfare: Mobilized, World at War:
Zombies 1 and 2 and The War Collection.
Breadth of Appeal
A game like CityVille has a very wide appeal (over
60 million active monthly players by 2011), attract-
ing all age groups. Other games by Zynga target the
young, such as Mafia Wars and Warstorm, but older
audiences are typically sought for wide appeal games
like FishVille and Café World.
Online content is not immune to being catego-
rized as broadcasting or narrowcasting, even though
the term webcasting encompasses both. Like cable
programmers, most online programmers have a
choice between two tactics: to narrowcast unique
content (such as sports highlights or games) or to
broadcast mainstream content (weather, news, com-
merce). Eventually, it is likely that subscriptions
models will proliferate on the web, and evolve into
some kind of “basic” and “premium” content.
Those who toil in the programming business should
take heart that, regardless of the technology and dis-
tribution, content remains the most important factor
in influencing users. Whether broad or narrow,
broadcast, cable or online, programs have to have
distinctive
appeal
that
meets
some
consumers’
needs and wants.
Specific Approaches
Experts know little about what strategies work and
do not work in this new medium, just as “experts”
were
ignorant
during
television’s
inception
or
radio’s early days. Many honestly thought radio
would be used for education! In the present day,
repurposing television and radio content has become
an automatic process for news directors and station
managers. Many television stations now offer access
to their recent news broadcasts via web page. It has
become a competitive necessity. Oddly enough, the
most-watched local news videos are produced by
newspapers, not broadcast stations. Whether the
strategy of repurposing applies equally well to all
content and all situations is an open question, but
we’ll certainly find out as new television seasons
emerge.
Selecting Content
Shelly Palmer has described a media world of linear
(scheduling in real time) and nonlinear (on demand
with viewer control) television, where the value of
148
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
content is best realized where that content is best
viewed.6 For linear viewing (plain old broadcast and
cable television), he designates emergent content,
meaning news, sports and live events. For nonlinear
viewing (internet TV), he suggests evergreen content,
meaning sitcoms, movies, dramatic hours and docu-
mentaries. The third type of content he calls dispos-
able content, meaning talk shows, service shows
(whose
subjects
have
been
rendered
irrelevant
because of technology) and infomercials. Disposable
content is suited to either linear or nonlinear viewing.
Games have the best online growth potential.
Games, contests, gambling and other kinds of online
competition have become the “next big thing” in
terms of interactive program content. Because they
are free online and the brand names are known to
parents, Disney and Toon games have gained enor-
mous popularity with children as spinoffs, and many
others are available for teens and adults. Some
efforts have been made to distribute computer
games for a fee over the internet, a successful strat-
egy for capturing the person who has tried the free
version and become hooked. The most popular
strategy to date, however, is selling virtual goods
to game players, which has made Zynga a $10 bil-
lion company. Can I sell you some virtual corn seed
or a virtual parking place or maybe a virtual lottery
ticket?
Running mini-lottery programs online has con-
siderable (but unrealized) potential for the major
media companies because the public is familiar
with reports of lottery numbers and talk about win-
ners as elements of television content, and the vari-
ous kinds of media could be tied together. However,
the FCC would almost certainly frown on close ties
between any real gambling and media businesses.
The commission has regulations in place that specify
that any contesting that is lottery-like can only be
incidental
to
the
main
programming
service.
Whether this subsidiary requirement applies to the
internet is unknown. It is clear that the unregulated
online world could run lotteries more readily than
any other medium could. In the United States, online
poker sites were shut down in early 2011, while the
same poker sites operate freely in many other coun-
tries, making future uncertain.
Scheduling Content
So, how do the most popular online sites for TV
shows list them so you can pick something to watch?
What’s interesting about the answer to this question
is that the design, once created, is automatic. The
programmer has to decide how to present the
options, but no one has to manually update the sug-
gestions. The computer is programmed to learn the
subscriber’s habits and make suggestions accord-
ingly. Each content aggregator has a different set
of strategies, so we will take a look at some
examples:
Netflix: This service uses six highly-customized cat-
egories, different for each subscriber. Similar to
the way Amazon makes book suggestions, Net-
flix offers its first category as “Top 10 [sugges-
tions] for [name of specific user].” The text
reads: “We create this list based on your recent
rental and watching history, ratings, queue
adds, and taste preference settings. We try to
present a regularly updated selection of titles
chosen specifically for you—older titles that you
may have missed and new releases.”
The second Netflix category is “TV Shows” and is
based on popular interest. The third category is
by genre, called “Custom category” [based on
recent selections], then additional genres (e.g.,
“Children & Family Movies”). The fourth cat-
egory is “New Movies to watch instantly” and
followed by the fifth category, “Rate what
you’ve seen to discover suggestions for you”
(which is not really a category, but it appears as
a fifth choice). The final category is “Local
Favorites for [your city]” which targets sub-
scribers by their location. Above these catego-
ries on the Netflix screen is a little menu bar
with the following tabs: Genres (20 choices),
New Arrivals, Starz Play, Instantly to your TV,
and Suggestions For You.
Hulu: The free version of Hulu arranges its options
in three categories—“Recent Episodes,” “Pop-
ular Clips” and “Featured Content”—arranged
in columns. Logging off or on does not affect
the options displayed. Near the bottom of
the screen, Hulu shows three additional
categories—“Popular Shows,” “Popular
Movies” and “More to Explore.” Hulu Plus
CHAPTER 4 Online Television Strategies
149
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
(the monthly subscription version of Hulu) uses
a different layout of category options, but with
the same absence of custom suggestions:
“Browse TV,” “Most Popular Alphabetical”—
with numerous screens of choices, with check-
box filters for “Currently on air,” “Captions,”
“HD” and choice of TV only, Movies only or
both—“Recently Added” and “Coming Soon.”
Does all this suggest to you that the assumption
that people freely move around and choose
whatever they like on the internet is kind of a
fiction? There seems to be a lot of guidance here
from the online services, just as there is in con-
ventional broadcast and cable television.
Other Scheduling Strategies: Cross-referencing is the
primary strategy for displaying content as a
substitute for “scheduling” it. YouTube, for
example, cross-references its clips so that the
viewer sees suggestions related to the video just
viewed. If the viewer watches a video featuring
a particular politician, then all other videos
featuring the same official will appear as
choices. Sometimes general themes (humor or
news) will trigger a menu of choices. Content
providers have control over these suggestions
and can choose to suggest videos for its paying
video clients, which is somewhat akin to a paid
search placement.
As discussed earlier, dayparting is a minor consid-
eration for online channels because the choices
for users are so plentiful, more like cable and
satellite services. Radio and television stations
normally have one channel, so it makes sense to
target the one demographic group most likely to
be watching at a particular time of the day or
day of the week—by age, gender or lifestyle.
Online programs exist in nearly limitless cyber-
space—where shelf space is endless and digital
media can be ordered without regard to time or
space. Similarly, flow is not very controllable
for online programmers; users are as likely to
travel horizontally as vertically, or even jump to
distant sites, although sites try to keep them-
selves appealing and guide flow to other spots
within the site.
At the same time, storytelling seems to be an inher-
ently linear process, unfolding over time. Efforts
to create innovative multiple paths for stories
tend to evolve either into games or educational
activities—both of which are effort-full, not
effortless entertainment. As converged media
have arrived, web programming must consider
users’ personal goals, and target those users
who want either relatively passive or active
content.
Tiering is one scheduling strategy that successfully
made the transition from the analog to digital
TV and then to the online world. It is likely that
consumers will purchase more higher-tiered
programming more often than not, just as cable
and satellite subscribers purchase premium
multichannel programming (see Chapter 9).
Indeed, much of premium programming from
HBO, Showtime and Encore has moved to
random-access schedules in homes with digital
set-top boxes and DVRs, and such program
services will move smoothly online as new home
technologies spread. HBO2Go is a web app that
delivers HBO content directly to portable
media.
Promoting Content
The practice of online program promotion is still
very young, but it is already clear that content pro-
viders need to promote their products and services
using a mix of mass marketing and an abundance of
online spot messages (the equivalent of “on- air” in
broadcasting and cable) and on-screen invitations
(comparable to print ads). The traditional media’s
interest in all things internet also provides many
opportunities for publicity (unpaid promotion).
One avenue for the promotion of videos is the
viral nature of the internet. Most online video sites
encourage viewers to “share this video with a
friend” or to “leave a comment” (which creates
more involvement and increases the chance that an
ordinary video will rise to the status of viral video).
Social media sites like Facebook and Twitter are
good tools for the web programmer.
Wikis are sometimes associated with hit televi-
sions shows (FOX’s American Idol, CBS’s Survivor).
A wiki is a website that allows internet visitors them-
selves to easily add, remove or otherwise edit and
change available content, typically without the
need for registration. In the case of FOX’s Glee,
150
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
fans can contribute their own explanations and
interpretations of the storylines; meanwhile, the epi-
sode creators get feedback and generate excitement
for future shows. Such collaborative processes allow
mainstream content providers to be more closely
connected to the eventual audience. A dedicated
website further serves to promote the program,
whether the show appears online or on the air.
Moreover, interactive media frequently generate
email lists and sophisticated demographic databases
of potential audiences for specific services. Nearly all
websites that offer such content require the user to
sign up for the service, even when it is free. That
user’s email address then becomes available (most
sites ask permission) for updates. Instead of reaching
merely potential users (as radio does with outdoor
advertising), online services reach actual users, past
and present, with their messages. Present users can
also be encouraged to provide names of others who
might be interested in the site, sometimes with a
reward for the referral. In this way, online content
providers can send messages directly to their sub-
scriber base, without postage costs (although it
may be spam to many people).
The standard online medium of banner ads
reaches small targeted groups of online users, but
getting promotional messages out to a wider audi-
ence will draw new users. After all, many people
can be persuaded to try out something new at least
once, especially if it is free. Such offers usually have
a time limit, after which fees kick in. Because com-
puters track when a given household has used up all
free plays (of a program or a game), the service can
flood the household with “time to subscribe” mes-
sages on multiple channels. In consequence, online
promotion planners should budget money for paid
advertising in other media. Although some adults
still avoid online content, the traditional media of
print, radio and television supply enormous poten-
tial audiences for online entertainment and informa-
tion.
Despite
the
greater
efficiency
of
online
advertising, the reach of older media is important
for building a base of users. It needs to be combined
with a targeted online approach.
Interactive media of several types can follow the
promotional
guidelines
for
the
cable
networks
discussed in Chapter 9. For example, motion pictures
will someday be released to video on demand imme-
diately following their theatrical runs, assuming that
video rentals become less effective in distributing
movies and that studios are willing to take risks.
Mass marketing ads that once said, “Now on VHS
and DVD,” now say, “Now available on demand.”
Other pay events carried online will require the same
kind of promotion currently used by cable operators
and DBS satellite companies. Viewers won’t care
which way a movie comes to them.
Online Measurement
As outlined in Chapter 5, Nielsen//NetRatings and
Media Metrix measure the size of online audiences
using two different methods: online panels and
server-side
audits.
Both
methods
report
mostly
cumes
(total
unduplicated
audience).
Measuring
total reach is a good tactic when a “channel” has
not yet attracted a substantial audience. As conver-
gence of the media takes place over the next dozen
years, conventional percentages of the estimated total
audience (ratings) and percentages of those actually
using any service at a time (shares) will prove useful
tools for measuring the kinds of online programming
that garner a large core of regular users.
Like the national/local ratings for broadcast,
cable and radio, internet audience measurement
has proven to be dreadfully difficult and complex
process. Companies constantly refine the process
and constantly test to find new and more accurate
ways to measure web audiences; the task is daunt-
ing. Nielsen’s Home Technology Report describes
some major complications that make accurate mea-
surement annoyingly difficult. For example, because
of the multiple interactions that can be happening on
a single PC, information collected at the website
level tells little about how content is actually being
consumed. In some cases, PC users may access a
website and then perform other totally unrelated
operations while still keeping the original website
online. Such uses may be widespread and varied
but would be considerably different from the kind
of use taking place when a visitor goes to a site,
CHAPTER 4 Online Television Strategies
151
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
looks at it and, then closes it. Thus, measurements of
“time-spent-viewing” on many web pages may be
misleading.
Who are the users of website content? There
were more than 150 million unique video streamers
in the United States in 2011. Moreover, viewing is
quite splintered; only one service (NBC.com) had as
many as 5 million unique visitors. Although less
than 15 percent of adults in the United States
watch video online at once a week, men aged 18 to
34—that elusive group that advertisers so desire—
account for nearly half of daily viewers of online
video.
According to The Media Audit, the percentage
of adults who spend at least an hour a day on the
internet is significantly greater than the percentage
of adults who spend an hour a day with the print
edition of a daily newspaper (perhaps because most
newpapers have gotten shorter!). Research has
shown that about a quarter of adults spend seven
or more hours per week on the internet—as much
as withTV—and heavy use (however defined) has
been growing faster among internet users than
among users of other media. The percentage of afflu-
ent users is also higher for the internet than for other
media. For evidence of the arrival of online media,
one need only look at the success of Netflix, which
barely registered in people’s minds in 2009 and was
a dominant force just two years later.
What’s Coming Fast
The most likely strategy for the major film studios, big
broadcasters and the other impacted “old” media, is
adaption to the new environment, probably by buying
in. An adaptive strategy has to be viewed from the
standpoint of the established media and their “old”
business models. The old way of packaging shows in
arranged
schedules
is
most
unlikely
to
vanish
completely. Many businesses adapt by changing their
business model or product, after spreading into related
areas and testing the waters (or in this case, testing the
revenues). When the telephone industry saturated its
growth potential by the 1980s, it looked to other
information entities, like cell and cable. In contrast,
when Kodak saw the impending doom of its film busi-
ness in the 1990s, it dumped film rolls and got into the
digital photography business.
In response to the question—Can streaming
video
sites
with
entertainment
actually
make
money?—the answer is yes. Revenue is beginning
to flow in many streams: advertising, sponsorships,
transactions
and
commerce.
The
pay-per-view
model works well, as long as others are no longer
giving away content. As for advertising, it may work
best when it is personalized—something called one-
to-one marketing, where share of customer is more
important than share of market. Privacy is also an
issue, and the number of potential consumers for
any given distribution platform must be large
enough to justify the extra marketing effort beyond
the usual mass media networks. Bandwidth limita-
tions of the past are being eliminated. Faster connec-
tions and better video compression have made the
online platform a practical way to distribute video
content. The Blu-Ray DVD standard delivers HDTV
movies on a single disc, but high-definition images
are finding their way to the internet at a slower rate.
On the other hand, a handheld tablet needs less res-
olution than a giant screen several feet away.
Faced with the announcement of big changes in
store for old media in a new media world, some
people wonder aloud whether people really want
to interact with their TV sets. One should consider
that the same question was asked about the personal
computer, which was originally designed for doing
such office work as spreadsheets, word processing
and databases. The answer proved to be yes. Will
people be just as enamored with interactivity from
their TV as from their computer? The answer, again,
seems to be yes.
Do people want to watch video over the web on
their computers? Yes, if the added control and con-
venience are there. People want conveniences that
make their lives easier. Way back in 2000, Gary Lie-
berman, analyst for Morgan Stanley Dean Witter,
made the following pithy predictions about the
future of online that have proven accurate.7
1. Once the tools and applications are in place, the
revenue potential is huge.
152
PART TWO
Frameworks for Media Programming

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2. Watching [home shopping channel] QVC, if
you have a “buy” button on your remote, will
be hard to resist.
3. Set-top boxes will not succeed unless they cost
$300 or less.
4. Obsolescence will become the same problem for
set-top boxes that it is now for computers.
5. Thin applications will be more successful than
fat ones.
6. DVRs are like power windows on your car:
Once you have them, you can never go back.
7. The first step will be video-on-demand.
8. The “killer application” will be a surprise, likely
dreamed up in a dorm room.
9. Interactive TV will land in the middle of the PC
and TV experience: You won’t lean back as
much as you once did, but you won’t lean for-
ward as much as you do with your computer.
10. Brand names will continue to be important.
11. Compatibility is a must.
When nearly all of America is finally online, and
most have high-speed service, then the ubiquity of
the broadcast world will no longer be so wonderful.
TV Everywhere will have arrived, if you pay to get
it. Unless you watch or read a lot of science fiction, it
might be hard to imagine that consumers might
download
their
favorite
shows
while
channel-
surfing through thousands of channels or letting a
DVR robot download programs for them while
they are away, but such changes seem likely in the
coming years. Whoever designs the kind of remote
control Americans will use will have a tough job.
Will a trackball replace the mouse? Will voice-
recognition do away with the lap keyboard? Will
my iPhone or iPad replace the remote entirely? Can
the public afford to pay individually for each show?
Will product placement within sitcoms and dramas
be enough to pay the stars’ salaries? If the economics
are wrong, the old mass audience ways will last
much longer. If the new media demassify the audi-
ence, however, there will be no turning back. You
will live in interesting times.
Notes
1. Tom, Lowry, “PwC Predicts Pay TV Boost” Variety,
June 14, 2011. www.variety.com/article/VR1118038523.
2. Mermigas, Diane, “Send in the Cloud: Amazon
Trumps Netflix, Others with Savvy Interactivity,”
25 February 2011, http://www.mediapost.com/
publications/?fa=Articles.showArticle&art_aid=145717.
3. Brian, Montopoli, “ACBS to YouTube: Who Loves
You Baby?,” July 17 2006. www.cbsnews.com/blogs/
2006/07/17/publiceye/entry1809404.shtml.
4. Internet Systems Consortium, “ISC Domain Survey:
Number of Internet Hosts,” Redwood City, CA (n.d.).
www.isc.org/index.pl?/ops/ds/host-count-history.php.
5. Louis, Hau, “Old People Like Web Video!,” Forbes,
November 14 2006. www.forbes.com/2006/ 11/14/
youtube-video-demographics-tech-media-cx_lh_1113web
video.html.
6. Shelly, Palmer. Television Disrupted. Boston: Focal
Press, 2006, pp. 77–79.
7. Ken, Kerschbaumer, “For Lieberman, It’s All About
Perspective,” Broadcasting & Cable, July 10 2000,
pp. 52–56.
CHAPTER 4 Online Television Strategies
153
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
This page intentionally left blank 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
P A R T3
Understanding
Key Processes
Part Three Outline
Chapter 5
Program and Audience Research and Ratings 157
Chapter 6
Syndication for Stations, Cable and Online 206
155
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
This page intentionally left blank 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A P T E R5
Program and Audience
Research and Ratings
Douglas A. Ferguson, Timothy P. Meyer, and Susan Tyler Eastman
Chapter Outline
Decision-Making
for Programmers
The Advent of People Meters
The Threat from DVRs
Program Testing
Concept, Pilot, and Episode Testing
Promotion Testing
Qualitative Audience Research
Focus Groups
Music Research
Television Quotient Data (TvQs)
Ratings Services
Television Services
Radio Services
Online Radio
Online Video
Video Games
Social Media
Specialized Audiences
Ratings Terminology and
Measurement Computations
Survey Areas
Ratings/Shares/HUTs
PUTs/PURs
AQH/Cume
Reach and Frequency Analysis
Television Market Reports
and Other Programming Aids
Daypart Audiences
Time Period Averages
Program Audiences
Syndicated Program Reports
Computerized Services
Radio Reports
Metro Audience Trends
Demographic Breakouts
Time-Spent-Listening
Turnover
Cable Ratings
Premium Services
Cable Penetration Measures
Online Research Services
Web Tracking Services
Online Ratings Terminology
Matching
Ratings Limitations
Future Challenges
Notes
157
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
“H
ow could those idiots cancel that show? It
was my favorite. Why do they always get
rid of the good stuff and keep all the junk?” Sound
familiar? It should. Most people have, at one time or
another, heard the news that a favorite television show
has been canceled. The reason? Usually the one given is
“low ratings,” a way of saying that not enough people
watched the program. Why are the ratings so impor-
tant? Why do so many shows fail? Can’t a network
executive tell whether a show will succeed in the rat-
ings? In this chapter we look at ratings and other forms
of audience research and explain what they are, how
they are used and misused, and why.1 We will examine
the industry’s current program research practices
and qualitative audience measurement techniques and
then, because of their special position in industry
economics, explain and interpret audience ratings.
Decision-Making
for Programmers
Media
programmers
(and
all
others
in
the
advertising-supported media) are interested in one
goal: reaching the largest possible salable audience.
Programmers define audiences differently depending
on particular circumstances, but regardless of defini-
tion, determining audience size is paramount. The
separations between program creation and presenta-
tion and reception by the audience mean that pro-
grammers must always guess who will be there and
how many there will be; then estimate how predict-
able and accurate those guesses are.
Because networks, stations and other content
providers sell commercial time at dollar rates based
on predicted audiences, it is no surprise that pro-
gram and audience research is critical for the finan-
cial health of the broadcast television, radio, cable,
mobile and online industries. Program and audience
research, usually involving ratings, guides the pro-
cess of selecting and scheduling programs to attract
the desired audience and provide feedback on pro-
gramming decisions.
The broadcast and cable industries use many
research approaches to evaluate programs and audi-
ences, most of which fall into one of three groupings
(to date, internet companies have used only the third
type):
1.
Qualitative and quantitative measures of the
programs themselves
2.
Qualitative and quantitative measures of audi-
ence preferences and reactions
3.
Quantitative measures of audience size
Qualitative research tries to explain why people
make specific program choices and what they think
about those programs. Quantitative research, in the
form of ratings and surveys, reports what programs
(and commercials, presumably) people are listening
to or watching.2
Programmers use qualitative information on
programs to select and improve programs and to
understand audiences’ reactions to program content;
qualitative audience data help explain people’s reac-
tions to programs. Quantitative audience data gen-
erally provide measures of the size and demographic
composition of sets of viewers, listeners or subscri-
bers. Of all findings, however, ratings are the major
form of program evaluation, and they have the most
influence on the other concerns of this book—pro-
gram selection and scheduling—in the United States
and, indeed, on the television industry worldwide
(see 5.1).
Newer on-demand delivery systems have taken
most of the guesswork out of estimating audience
size, although viewer reactions still require measure-
ment. Cable systems can collect viewer information
using the converter boxes that deliver the channels.
Mobile devices can track what and how much is
viewed by whom, assuming you are not watching a
program on a borrowed iPad. Broadcasters are
largely in need of audience estimates based on sur-
vey research with the aid of metered devices.
The Advent of People Meters
In the late 1980s, a sweeping change occurred in the
national television ratings—the shift by ratings com-
panies from measuring people’s viewing using dia-
ries
and
simple
passive
meters
to
measuring
viewing using people meters, a much more elabo-
rate, interactive measurement process. People meters
158
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
consist of a computer and a handheld electronic
device with which individuals signal when they are
viewing. The “black box” computer is located near
the television set, registering (from the handheld
device) each viewer’s presence and all channel selec-
tions. When first installed, background demographic
information (age and sex) on every viewer in the
household gets stored in the device’s memory to be
matched with the viewing information. As audiences
develop more mobile habits, viewer information will
be more user-specific with data stored such portable
viewing devices as iPhones and iPads.
A/P Meters
In 2005 Nielsen introduced further refinements to its
measurement devices, counting program viewing up
to seven days after the original time of showing, to
accommodate time-shifting with video recorders.
These active/passive (A/P) people meters measure
audiences with greater accuracy and less reliance
on viewer participation by reading codes embedded
into
the
programming—rather
than
by
simply
detecting the channel to which a set is tuned, as is
done by the old metering system. At first, these
meters measured only national audiences (a particu-
lar sample), but they soon moved into the larger
markets for local measurement. In 2011 Nielsen
began measuring viewing on web-enabled television
receivers.
Set-Top Box Measurement
A set-top box (STB) measures television viewing by
connecting a counter to the (hated) digital cable box
already installed in most homes. This method is
expected to become more popular, if not liked, espe-
cially with small markets where diary-based ratings
from Nielsen show wide differences from Rentrak’s
STB ratings. Even local people meters and passive
meters have been shown to produce measurements
that diverge from STB ratings, thus supporting a
future shift to STB (but the good news for consu-
mers is that set-top boxes will soon be buried in
TV sets as they are in DVRs).
TiVo uses its own DVR box to offer STB mea-
surement and sells the information on replaying
commercials to advertisers. Programmers can glean
useful information about how people pause and
rewatch television shows and advertisers can assess
the popularity of commercial messages by how often
they are skipped (or played a second or third time).
TiVo users probably don’t, however, constitute a
representative sample, but the service measures
amount
of
time
watching
broadcast,
watching
cable, either in recorded mode or live and then on
5.1
Ratings Research Is Everywhere
D
r. Wally Langschmidt was the founder of ratings
research in South Africa. He was the colleague of
such American and European luminaries of early media
research as Arthur C. Nielsen, Alfred Politz and George
Gallop. Dr. Langschmidt helped create the South African
Advertising Research Foundation (SAARF). It promotes
and monitors the use in South Africa of up-to-date stan-
dards in such audience measurement tools as people
meters, diaries, and personal interviews. Dr. Langsch-
midt’s most outstanding contribution, however, was to
pioneer the concept of a single data source for all
media—called the All Media and Products Survey
(AMPS)—used today by both media and advertisers in
South Africa. The AMPS survey gives the whole country a
common trading currency that is used by both advertisers
and broadcast program planners to evaluate the use of
all media.
One big difference from the American system is that
funding of market research in South Africa comes from a
1 percent levy on each advertisement carried on radio, TV,
print, outdoor advertising, and cinema that is paid by the
marketers. SAARF is run by a series of industry committees,
and although the actual research is presently commissioned
to Nielsen Media Research, SAARF’s importance to the reli-
ability of South Africa’s media research is widely recog-
nized, and its contract has been renewed every five years.
Daan van Vuuren, Ph.D.
Former Director of Audience Research
SABC, South Africa
Reprinted by kind permission of Linda van Vuuren.
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
159
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
broadband, streaming versus downloads, podcasts
and user generated content, so the service generates
some useful data for the industry (even if it makes
consumers wary).
Actually the term set-top box is becoming a mis-
nomer, as fewer people have television receivers that
even resemble a box. Such a device connected to flat-
screen receiver is sometimes called a digital converter
box, although the terms set-top box and STB are still
widely used.
The Threat from DVRs
An ongoing consideration in the television and adver-
tising industries centers on the adoption of DVRs, such
as TiVo and various digital converters provided by
cable and satellite operators. The DVR is a device
that functions like a personal computer in that pro-
grams are digitally stored on the machine’s hard
drive. Like computer files, programs can be kept in
storage or deleted once storage capacity is reached,
and on some DVRs, programs can be burned to
disks and saved as DVDs. Although home video
recording of various kinds has been available for
many decades, widespread use of DVRs affects two
relationships: that between producers and program
distributors and that between advertisers and program
distributors. Over 40 percent of homes had DVRs in
2012, but penetration was expected to increase to
nearly all digital households by 2015. All satellite ser-
vice subscribers get a DVR, and cable subscribers have
the option of having either simple or high-end DVRs
with high-definition service, and all of their benefits.
Traditionally, the A/P meters counted only the
number of minutes spent viewing a program within
a few seconds of transmission (now eight seconds to
allow for DVR lag), the definition of “live” viewing.
The valuable overnight ratings, for example, include
only “live” viewing. But Nielsen produces other
important data sets, such as “live plus same day,”
which measures viewing within 24 hours (to include
DVR recording and playback), and “live plus seven,”
which measures programs recorded and watched
within a week. In 2007 Nielsen introduced C3 ratings
which measures average commercial minute ratings
with three days of DVR playback. The system is a
compromise between networks (who want credit for
DVR playback) and advertisers (who only want to
pay for viewers who are watching their commercials).
Thus, producers, syndicators and advertisers negoti-
ate with broadcast and cable networks about which
set of numbers to accept as the standard.
5.2
Tracking Bloggers
N
ot all ratings services track television or radio and not
all come from Nielsen or Arbitron. Technorati, a blog
tracking service, tracks about 55 million blogs worldwide,
in several languages (English, Korean, French, German,
Italian, Chinese and others), to measure who is talking
about which companies and what they are saying. Unlike
ratings, this kind of surveying tracks both the buzz that aids
new products and the negative write-ups that often doom
new products. Such a service benefits marketers of pro-
ducts by monitoring online chatter that can supplement or
contradict traditional advertising. In the same way, Ameri-
can media marketers play close attention to bloggers who
discuss television programs, and many large companies
have their own specialists (like commentators) who create
daily blogs on a variety of topics, some of which are their
own products and services. Brandimetrics and Nielsen
BuzzMetrics track blogs about specific client products and
services in the U.S. NM Incite (a Nielsen McKinsey com-
pany) collects social media information that builds on
BuzzMetrics. NM Incite helps clients take advantage of the
power of social media.
Nowadays anyone can track topics because the Twitter
stream of microblog messages (tweets) is indexed “live” by
search engines like Google. A programmer can follow
comments made during or after a program by searching the
show title or a hashtag (e.g., #dwts for Dancing with the
Stars). In addition, Twitter publishes the most-recent “top
trending” topics on its home page. Even the walls of Face-
book are revealed through the youropenbook.org website.
Some observers believe the program ratings for a primetime
show can be estimated by the amount of background chatter
generated on social media sites (see also Chapter 4).
160
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Another concern is that DVRs may upset the
delicate balance that permits the television industry
to pay for producing and distributing programs. All
DVRs have the ability to skip over commercials
while playing back a recording. If more and more
viewers watch more and more television but skip
the commercials, the financial infrastructure of the
television industry becomes seriously threatened.
Advertisers rely on television networks and stations
to deliver audiences for the programs in which their
commercials appear, and advertising revenue pays
most of the bill. If the viewing audience for commer-
cials shrinks because of DVR use, then ad revenues
will shrink correspondingly. At some point, revenues
might be insufficient to pay for program production
and delivery. This would require a shift to an alter-
native way to pay for television programs—perhaps
a pay-per-program system—that would make televi-
sion a much less affordable commodity.
Even if DVRs eventually change the economics of
television, audience measurement will still be needed.
Recent research from Nielsen on TV commercial
viewing by DVR users has softened many advertisers’
concerns about skipping commercials, at least as long
as fewer than half of all homes have DVRs.
One response to the threat of DVRs has been to
expand
product
placement
in
programs.
Now
research firms measure the value of product place-
ments (in daytime and reality shows) and sponsor-
ships and look at the opinions of bloggers as a way
to gauge improvements in products and marketing
(see 5.2). As product placement invades television
programming, a trend that began many years ago
in motion pictures, the line between program mea-
surement and advertising measurement begins to
blur. This chapter, however, focuses on program
and audience measurement because they are crucial
to current programming processes and strategies.
Program Testing
The enormous expense of producing television pro-
grams necessitates testing them before and during
the actual production of a show. In addition, promo-
tional announcements that advertise programs are
usually tested to gauge their effectiveness and ability
to communicate a program’s most attractive features.
Concept, Pilot, and Episode Testing
Concept testing involves asking audiences whether
they like the ideas for proposed programs. Producers
generally conduct this type of test before a program
has been offered to a broadcast or cable network.
Pilot testing occurs when a network is considering
the purchase of a new series, and audiences are
asked to react to the pilot episode. This process is
described in detail in Chapter 4 (network prime-
time programming). Episode testing occurs when a
series is under way. Plot lines, the relative visibility
of minor and major characters, the appeal of the
settings and so on can be tested to gauge audience
preferences.
ASI Entertainment, based in Los Angeles, is one
of the best-known companies conducting program
tests (and tests of commercials). Traditionally, ASI
researchers invite people into a testing theater to
watch a television program, a film or a commercial,
asking them to rate it by pushing “positive” and
“negative” buttons that are attached to their seats.
Generally the participants are paid, often in prod-
ucts rather than cash, for taking part in the test.
Computers monitor individual responses, producing
a graph of the viewer’s “votes” over time. These
data are correlated with demographic and other
information (psychographics) obtained via question-
naires from each participant (see 5.3).
Theater-style testing also takes place at the
Television City research center at the MGM Grand
in Las Vegas, an ideal location for assuming a
nationally-diverse group of vacationers. Visitors are
recruited to watch pilots and participate in surveys
and focus groups. Five minutes before the screening
begins, viewers are led into one of four studios to
watch the most recent programs from CBS, MTV,
Nickelodeon
and
other
Viacom
networks
(this
television-holdings
giant
manages
the
research
center). A survey following the program lasts about
15 minutes; such incentives as T-shirts, caps, pins,
key chains and computer software are used to get
participants to fill it out.
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
161
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Concept and pilot testing stress general plot
lines and main characters, seeking to discover if
they are understood and appeal to a variety of peo-
ple. Ongoing program testing focuses on more subtle
evaluations of the voices, manners, style and interac-
tions of all characters. In fact, different actors and
plot lines are sometimes used for separate screenings
to find out which cast and plot audiences prefer.
Postproduction research can discover a poor pro-
gram opening or an audience’s difficulty in under-
standing the main theme of an episode.
Unfortunately, the theater environment can’t
reflect at-home viewing conditions and is thus a less
than ideal research method. It does, however, supply
detailed data that can be matched to screen actions,
adding fodder for programming decisions. In many
test markets where insertion equipment is available,
researchers send alternate versions of pilot programs
(and commercials) to different cable homes and
interview the viewers on their reactions. This necessi-
tates producing alternate versions of a program,
however—a huge expense not lightly undertaken.
A popular method for program testing is using
streaming video over the internet to reach test audi-
ences. Online data collection simplifies the research
process and reduces the chance for error in the data.
As more people watch video online, theater and
cable testing may eventually be replaced, although
both are still going strong.
Promotion Testing
Competition for audiences requires that most pro-
grammers continually produce effective promotional
materials. Promotional spots advertise particular
episodes of a series, special shows, movies, news-
casts or unique aspects of a station’s or service’s pro-
gramming (images and identities).3 These promos
can be tested before they are aired to find out
whether they communicated what was intended.
Much of the promotional testing being done
uses
online
audience
samples.
Strategic
Media
Research (SMR), a research and marketing company
that has specialized in radio, began testing TV pro-
mos online at the turn of the century. Clients include
MTV, VH1, Comedy Central, Country Music Tele-
vision and Spike. Some testing firms used to conduct
tests in shopping centers, intercepting people at ran-
dom to invite them to view promos in return for
cash or merchandise. Promo evaluation, especially
for radio, sometimes includes group and theater test-
ing that emphasizes such measures as memorability,
5.3
ASI Theater Testing
A
SI research has been criticized for its unrepresentative
audience samples, yet it remains a major contributor
to network and movie studio program testing in America.
ASI provides valuable data because its audiences are
consistent from one time to the next. It has established
norms from all its previous testing of programs, films and
commercials against which new findings are weighed.
Given the many programs evaluated during past decades
and the fact that few programs are really “new” in any
significant way, comparing how well a new show tests to
how others like it have tested in the past produces useful
information. The results are especially noteworthy when a
program produces a negative or low evaluation because
the average ASI participant evaluates programs positively.
Of course, not all programs that test positively turn out to be
even modestly successful when put on a network schedule
(factors independent of the show’s content have more
influence on ratings), but very few of those that test nega-
tively at ASI later succeed.
Frequently, prime-time series that have slipped in the
ratings are tested with live audiences to determine which
aspects of the program, if any, can be manipulated to
improve the popularity of the series. The testing instruments
range from simple levers and buttons, such as those used in
ASI theaters, to more controversial methods, such as skin
conductance meters measuring respiration and perspira-
tion. Programmers seek aids in understanding the weak-
nesses and strengths of a series that is performing below
expectations. Sometimes the research suggests a change of
characters or setting that revitalizes a program. (If research
results are no help, the cynical programmer usually suggests
adding a dog or a child.)
162
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
credibility and persuasibility. After demographic
data are gathered, other questions are asked and
associated with participants’ opinions. Promo-copy
testing has become a standard practice in the
industry.
As multichannel and mobile television entered
the on-demand era, promotion testing increased in
importance and became even more critical and
more widely used. Menu-driven program selection
(video-on-demand, or VOD) is more influenced by
on-air promos and guide channels than by schedule-
driven program selection, so media companies real-
ize that promos need to be effective.
Qualitative Audience Research
In addition to program testing, which applies mostly
to television programs and movies, stations use qual-
itative research to get audience reactions to program
materials, personalities, and station or system image.
Using focus groups is one such research method.
Radio stations also use call-out research to test their
programming, and network television and major-
market stations make use of television quotient data
(TvQs). Qualitative audience research is the most
common phrase used in the industry to refer to all
of these research techniques. (See 5.4 about the begin-
nings of qualitative research in the radio days.)
Focus Groups
One method of gathering information from a group
of people is to conduct small group testing. A focus
group is a set of 10 or 12 people involved in a con-
trolled discussion. A moderator leads a conversation
on a predetermined topic, such as a music format or
television newscast, and structures the discussion
with a set of questions. Predetermined criteria
guide the recruitment of individuals for participation
5.4
Herta Herzog and Qualitative Radio Research*
H
erta Herzog is perhaps best known for her pioneer-
ing “gratifications” research on 1940s radio serial
listeners: “What do we really know about daytime serial
listeners?” This study, as well as several of her earlier pro-
jects, marked Herzog as a key developer of personal
interviews as an approach to learning about radio audi-
ences. Her method was the forerunner of much of today’s
qualitative research into television and the internet.
As a graduate student in Austria, Herzog trained with
Karl Bühler, an experimental psychologist who made several
contributions to the psychology of thinking. Bühler argued
that there were three sources of knowledge about human
psychology: observation of human behavior, observation of
the products of human culture and human introspection. By
asking the proper questions, then, introspection could be
obtained from ordinary people. Herzog’s dissertation
research was an early application of these ideas. She had
six speakers, each different in sex, age, physical type and
occupation, read the same passage over the radio on sub-
sequent days of the same week. Then, Herzog distributed
questionnaires in popular stores that shoppers mailed back
to her, analyzing them to learn what kinds of social and
personal characteristics listeners derived simply from voice
and diction. Later, Herzog developed the “depth interview,”
which involved open-ended questions and probes. She used
this technique in her gratifications research about radio seri-
als and quiz shows. The day after the 1938 War of the
Worlds broadcast, she used this method to find out why so
many listeners were frightened. These early interviews were
summarized in a memo to Frank Stanton and became the
basis for the interview schedule for the larger well-known
study, “The Invasion from Mars.”
Just as television was peeking over the horizon, Herzog
left academia in 1943 to join the McCann-Erickson
advertising agency, where she applied her techniques to
motivation research. She stuck to the qualitative aspects of
radio programs and commercials and developed ideas that
others later applied to other media.
*Women in Communication: A Biographical Sourcebook, edited
by Nancy Signorielli. Copyright 1996. Reproduced with
permission of ABC-CLIO INC. via Copyright Clearance Center.
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
163
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
in focus groups. For example, station management
may want people who listen to country music or
women aged 25 to 34. Finding people who fit the
predetermined criteria (screening) can be costly,
however, and specifying more qualifications results
in a greater turndown rate, increasing the price for
screening. Assembling a typical focus group gener-
ally costs between $4,500 and $5,000, including
the fee paid to each participant ($50 is the standard
fee, although it is sometimes as high as $150 for
individuals difficult to recruit, such as physicians
and other professionals).
Focus group research is especially useful for eli-
citing reactions to visual material and gaining insight
into subtle responses to televised characters and indi-
viduals. These small group discussions can be used to
develop precise questions for later field surveys of a
large sample of people. For example, researchers
commonly use focus groups to evaluate whether a
station has enough news programming, whether
music is too soft or loud, how people react to the
newscasters, whether personalities are perceived as
interesting or friendly and so on. The particular
advantage of focus groups is that videotapes, newspa-
per ads and recordings can be evaluated in the same
session, providing immediate feedback while avoid-
ing confusion in recall after a lapse of time.
Approximately
200,000
media-related
focus
groups are conducted each year. The latest trend is
to use internet-based videoconferencing for focus
group observers to save travel costs and allow
more people to observe the groups during the ses-
sion. This technique is sometimes used to test new
promos and programs. The biggest pitfall of high-
tech focus groups is that many nonverbal behaviors
are lost in the mediated setting. Videoconferencing
technology, while continuing to improve, presents
limited information from participating individuals.
In a face-to-face focus group, cameras can record
each participant and the moderator during the entire
focus group, enabling researchers or clients to study
group member reactions while another person is
speaking. There are many important reasons why
the data and results obtained from focus groups
can’t be generalized to a larger audience. An obvious
limitation is the small size of the group. Even when a
number of different focus groups are conducted, the
sample size will not allow for valid generalizations
to thousands, let alone millions, of people.
Another major drawback is the selection process.
Focus group participants are not selected using a sta-
tistically valid random sampling process, by any
stretch of the imagination. To generalize from a sam-
ple to the larger population from which the sample
was drawn, random sampling procedures absolutely
must be used. In a random sampling process, every
person in the population has an equal chance of being
selected. A random sampling process greatly increases
the chances of the sample’s responses representing
the population from which the sample is drawn.
Even then, there is always a slim chance that the
random sample may be nonrepresentative.
In addition to not being randomly selected,
focus group participants differ from the general pub-
lic by their willingness to spend the necessary time
and to provide the types of information of interest.
Researchers can never be sure if those who partici-
pate differ in really important ways from those con-
tacted who declined participation. (Would you do it
if stopped in a mall? Usually takes a couple of hours,
and the “reward” is often store coupons.)
Other serious limitations that prevent generaliz-
ing to the larger population include participant
responses that are elicited under highly artificial con-
ditions. Normal viewing or listening behavior takes
place in the household setting or at work (or in vehi-
cles in the case of radio), not in the company of nine
or ten complete strangers whom the participant has
never seen before and will never see again. These
conditions also increase the likelihood of groupthink
or contagion of ideas. This means that one person’s
response shapes the subsequent responses of other
group members and would not likely have occurred
if
each
individual
were
interviewed
separately.
Sometimes a domineering and authoritative individ-
ual may intimidate other participants or pressure
them to go along with a given expressed view, even
if it is not what the others really think.
The specific questions asked, how they are
worded, the order in which they are asked, and how
they are presented verbally to participants also influ-
ence the quantity and quality of responses. Questions
164
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
may elicit responses that would never have occurred
spontaneously to participants outside the focus group
setting. Finally, the quality of the moderator directly
influences the focus group outcomes. Skilled modera-
tors can make all group members feel comfortable
and believe that their responses are equally valued,
especially if participants disagree with what someone
else has said.
Focus groups have enormous diagnostic value
for programmers. “Why” questions are particularly
well suited to focus groups, as well as any questions
that require explanations that go beyond basic “yes
or no” answers. And, just as group contagion can
invalidate some responses, the group setting can suc-
cessfully elicit responses that an individual may not
have recalled when required to provide answers in
traditional survey or individual interview settings;
such responses may be elicited especially when mem-
bers feel similar to other participants. Focus groups
can also provide an effective means of developing
appropriate questions to ask a larger random sample
of audience members in future research that uses
scientifically valid sampling procedures, so they’re
useful for learning what we need to learn.
Music Research
Radio programmers want to know their audiences’
opinions of different songs and different types of
music. They need to know which songs are well
liked and which ones no longer have audience
approval (which songs are “burned out”). Call-out
research has been one popular, although controver-
sial, method for discovering what listeners think
about music selection.
Programmers conduct call-out research by select-
ing 5- to 15-second “hooks” from well-established
songs and playing them for respondents over the tele-
phone. A hook is a brief segment or musical phrase
that captures the song’s essence, frequently its theme
or title. Using computers to place the calls, play the
music and record responses automatically, program-
mers are able to ask randomly selected respondents to
rate 15 or 20 song hooks on a predetermined scale.
Often a scale of 1 to 10 is used, where 1 represents
“don’t like” and 10 represents “like a lot.” Call-out
research indicates listeners’ musical tastes at a given
moment. If stations perform call-out research fre-
quently (and some use it every day), a track record
for each song develops, and based on it the music pro-
grammer can decide whether to leave the song in the
station’s rotation or drop it. When tied to the same
songs for some time, it indicates song popularity but
does not tell the programmer how often a particular
song should be played. That remains the program-
mer’s decision.
Another popular method of testing music is
auditorium research. Programmers invite 75 to 150
people to a location where they jointly listen to and
rate a variety of songs. Instead of rating just 15 or
20 hooks, as in telephone research, auditorium tests
involve 200 to 400 hooks. Like call-out research, the
method tells which songs are liked and disliked at
the moment but not how often they should be
aired (see Chapter 11 on Music Programming).
Music testing is expensive. Call-out research
requires an investment in employees to make the
selections and maybe the calls—as well as invest-
ment in computer time to analyze the results. Audi-
torium tests involve recruiting costs and “co-op”
money for participants (usually $20 to $35). Those
stations lacking facilities and personnel for music
testing can hire commercial firms specializing in
such work. See www.musictec.com/method.html.
Television Quotient Data (TvQs)
Many programmers use Marketing Evaluation, Inc.’s
proprietary television quotient data (TvQs) to supple-
ment Nielsen ratings. While Nielsen provides infor-
mation on how many people watched a program,
TvQs measure the popularity/appeal (likeability)
and familiarity of TV programs and performers
(from TV, movies, sports and other celebrity venues).
TvQ data have been collected since 1963, relying on a
panel of household members that since 1980 has
included over 50,000 total households. Eight differ-
ent services are provided: TvQ (programs), Performer
Q, Product Q, Kids Product Q, Cartoon Q, Cable Q,
Sports Q and Dead Q (performers from the past—
don’t you love it?!). Of these, TvQ and Performer Q
are the best-known measurements.
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
165
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Networks and programmers use the various
TvQ services to identify actors who have “star”
potential, given the assessment of both recognition
and
likeability
that
the
scores
provide.
Some
research companies use various Q scores to project
the eventual success (or lack thereof) of a network
series in syndication. Unlike ratings, these models
factor in how people feel or felt about a program,
not how many watched it. Like the Nielsen ratings,
Q scores are numerical, but they are labeled “quali-
tative” because they assess how much performers
and shows are liked. Nielsen ratings are objective
measures of viewing, while Q scores are subjective
measures of the appeal and familiarity of performers
and programs.
Ratings Services
Ratings exert powerful influences on programming
decisions by syndicators and station representatives
(as illustrated in Chapter 6), by commercial network
and station television programmers (as discussed in
Chapters 2, 7 and 8) and by noncommercial televi-
sion programmers (as covered in Chapter 10). Radio
programmers also use ratings information to evalu-
ate their market positions, choose formats and con-
vince advertisers to buy time (see Chapters 11 and
12). And ratings are used in cable/satellite/telco dis-
tribution and online in specialized ways (see Chap-
ters 3, 4 and 9). In fact, all programmers use ratings
in program decision making, but how to use them
isn’t self-evident. Consequently, the rest of this chap-
ter looks at the ways programmers interpret ratings
data.
Using audience ratings is not restricted to pro-
gramming applications. In fact, ratings were origi-
nally intended only to provide information for
advertisers curious about audience size, and their
value to advertisers continues to drive the ratings
industry.
Even
today,
unsponsored
programs,
including presidential addresses and political pro-
grams, are not rated by Nielsen exactly because
they do not carry advertising.
Once the statistical reliability of ratings data
became accepted, programmers began using audience
measurement to gauge the success of their decisions.
As
competition
among
networks
and
stations
increased,
ratings
became
the
most
important
decision-making data in commercial broadcasting.
Broadcast revenues, programs, stations and individ-
ual careers depend on audience ratings. In the busi-
ness of broadcasting, high ratings normally result in
profits (and continuing careers). Broadcasting also
has public service obligations and other aspirations
and commitments, but on the purely economic side,
a network or station will eliminate a program that
receives low “numbers” if other, more viable options
are available.
Cable/satellite
rating
cannot
be
compared
directly to broadcast ratings because the potential
audience viewing subscription channels is about
92 percent that of the commercial broadcast net-
works (61 percent are cable and 31 percent satel-
lite/other). Moreover, scheduling is different: Many
of cable’s programs are scheduled in rotating and
repeating patterns rather than one-time-only pat-
terns—although this is changing because broadcas-
ters now repeat their shows (you’ve noticed!), and
cable has lots more original fare (you’ve noticed all
those hours of cooking, racing, picking, digging, sell-
ing and on and on). Further, in addition to using
standard ratings numbers, cable programmers ana-
lyze ratings to determine audience reach—how
many people over a period of time viewed a repeated
program or channel—much as public television pro-
grammers use ratings.
Articulating the power of audience ratings may
sound crass to those who consider broadcasting an
art form—or passé to those who are immersed in the
internet—but in reality ratings continue to be the most
important measure of commercial success. The efforts
of most people involved in commercial broadcasting
focus on achieving the highest possible numbers. Tar-
geting more precisely defined audiences—such as
women aged 25 to 54—is an alternate approach for
television networks and stations that cannot immedi-
ately achieve a number-one position in the adults 18þ
category.
In 2011, however, Nielsen finally began to
rethink its decades-long interest in audience demo-
graphics, as broadcasters looked for a better way
166
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
to measure the effectiveness of advertising. Nielsen
Catalina, a partnership with a loyalty-marketing
firm, offered a new model for measuring TV
audiences
based
on
viewer-purchaser
behavior.
Whether this new system will eventually replace
demographics-based ratings remains to be seen. In
the meantime, it is necessary to understand that
many advertisers want demographic data so they
can match their prospective customers to their com-
mercial messages (whether those customers want to
be matched is another question).
Alternatives to standard TV ratings emerge
from time to time over the years, all proclaiming
their inherent advantages over Nielsen data. The lat-
est challenger is Optimedia US (owned by Publicis
Groupe SA), whose “Content Power Ratings” (iron-
ically abbreviated CPR) not only count TV viewers
but also add in social media mentions on Facebook,
Twitter and the like. Reporter Emily Steel provided
some interesting comparisons of Nielsen program
rankings and those from the CPR,4 showing that
South Park which is carried by Comedy Central,
for example ranks #211 in the Nielsen rankings
but is ranked #4 in the CPR. Glee (FOX) was #2
in the CPR but only #55 in Nielsen; The Office
had a #6 CPR rank and was #105 on Nielsen.
Other top programs were not nearly as far apart,
such as Grey’s Anatomy with an 11 CPR rank and
a 28 from Nielsen.
Evaluating social media’s role in stimulating
viewing of particular shows is an emerging research
phenomenon, and it obviously has some consider-
able significance for those TV programs that appeal
to viewers who are regular social network users.
Publicis Starcom Worldwide and Network Insights
now measure the “positive buzz” on sites like Face-
book and Twitter to assess its influence on new
shows. For example, based on buzz, researchers pre-
dicted before the 2011–2012 season that FOX
would have the most hits, followed by NBC, and
were they right or wrong?
Which programs deliver the ideal reach and
frequency of viewing by their target markets at the
best possible price (aka, the biggest bang for the
buck) is what advertisers want to know. Universal
McCann continues to refine its statistical models
that incorporate data that include TV viewership,
company sales and other business data to estimate
(guess) how much commercial time should be pur-
chased and at what price not only on broadcast TV
but on other media channels. Good luck with that.
Reaching the target market and staying within
the allotted budget remain paramount in the minds
of advertisers. What happens to those in the target
market if they are in fact “reached” by the adverti-
sers’ messages remains an elusive area of audience
research. Regardless, no single model, no matter
how complex, can be used for just any product or
service category or brand within the category. Differ-
ent purchase cycles demand different objectives and
tactics. New products or brands demand different
ways
of
proceeding
by
comparison
to
well-
established product/service categories or brands. No
matter how great the advertiser’s message is, it’s obvi-
ously wasted if it doesn’t find its way to target market
consumers. The enormous difficulties of accurate
audience/consumer measurement loom over many
interrelated industries. (Lots of jobs here someday.)
Like broadcasters, advertising-supported cable
networks also need ratings information to convince
advertising agencies to purchase time. Premium
cable services such as HBO use their national ratings
to convince local cable systems that their programs
are watched and important for promoting the local
system. Video game producers and online and tele-
phone services have their own versions of measuring
audiences to show that their content is viewed.
Understanding the basics of the all-powerful num-
bers is essential in all of these businesses.
High ratings, demonstrating television’s wide-
spread household penetration, also carry clout with
Congress. Legislators generally use television to get
elected and reelected, and politicians pay attention to
their local broadcasters and the five largest national
networks because they reach such enormous numbers
of people. Increasingly, the major cable operators and
most
popular
social
media
influence
politicians
because of their ability to reach certain types of audi-
ences (especially upper socioeconomic levels).
The growth of social media comes at the older
media’s expense, but primarily for time spent look-
ing at a screen. That time could just as easily be used
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
167
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
for
social
networking,
user-generated
programs
(such as YouTube) or traditional network shows
delivered directly to mobile devices. Companies like
Radian6 and others have already begun to measure
some kinds of social media (see 5.2). Measuring the
use of mobile devices in relation to social media and
traditional media adds other layers of complexity to
the following discussion of ratings.
Television Services
The most important distinction in television ratings
is between national and local (also called market)
ratings. Nielsen Media Research is presently the
sole company in the United States producing nation-
ally syndicated network audience measurements
(although some of its clients are not too thrilled
with the monopoly it has on data collection). Except
for Arbitron’s ARB-TV measurement of out-of-
home television viewing, Nielsen is also the only
company in the United States producing local station
ratings for television (also leading to some criticism
about methods and pricing).
Other research firms collect and analyze televi-
sion audience measurements of specialized types for
only a portion of the country. Nielsen covers the
entire country continuously for network ratings,
using a separate sample of 12,000 households with
people meters.
The largest broadcast networks and the top 50
cable networks contract with Nielsen for this ratings
service. Nielsen Media Research, hereafter called
“Nielsen” for the sake of simplicity, is a subsidiary
of The Nielsen Company. Nielsen Business Media
publishes SRDS, the leading advertising database,
and owns Scarborough Research and Billboard Pub-
lications. Only a third of the parent Nielsen Com-
pany’s corporate efforts are directed at measuring
what consumers watch, with the larger portion
focused on what consumers buy. The division called
Nielsen Online measures the use of social media and
newer forms of mediated communication.
Sweeps
Nielsen conducts four nationwide measurements
of audiences (the sweeps) for all local television
stations—annually in November, February, May
and July—producing the vital local television reports
(see 5.5). These market-by-market reports allow sta-
tions to compare themselves with the other stations
in their market. A separate ratings report (electronic
as well as printed in a book) is published for each of
the 210 markets in the country for each ratings
period. These data are based on local people meters
in the largest markets, a mix of diaries and local
meters in the middle-sized markets, and diaries
only in the smaller markets. The 25 metered markets
operate on a sample of 400 to 600 homes that only
partially duplicate the national people meter sample.
Today’s ratings software can track hundreds of
channels—broadcast or cable, terrestrial or satellite,
PC or TV-delivered—and scan every channel every
three seconds to report the tuning status of every TV
set in the sample households. The data can be down-
loaded by conventional telephone or cell phone,
reported the following morning as the overnights,
and later compiled into the national people-meter
database.5
A ratings period consists of four sequential
weeks of data, reported week by week and aver-
aged for the month. In addition to the four major
nationwide television sweeps, large-market stations
purchase ratings for as many as three more ratings
periods (October, January and March). Midsized
and smaller television markets perhaps purchase
one ratings book beyond the four sweeps. The sta-
tions in a market contract individually with Nielsen
for a ratings book, paying the cost of data collec-
tion, analysis, and reporting. In the very largest
markets, stations pay as much as $1.5 million a
year for ratings; in very small markets, however,
the price may be as low as $10,000 annually. It is
important to understand that stations pay for rat-
ings in their market, and the quality could be better
if stations could afford to pay more (advertisers,
agencies and reps cover little of the cost). For exam-
ple, samples could be larger and more representa-
tive,
diaries
could
be
more
carefully
double-
checked, more call-backs could be made, and data
analysis could be more reliable, but each of these
steps would substantially increase the cost of rat-
ings to the stations.
168
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5.5
Nielsen Media Research
N
ielsen gathers and interprets data on a wide range of
consumer products and services as well as on televi-
sion and the internet (but no radio). Nielsen’s network
audience estimates are reported in the Nielsen
National TV Ratings (often abbreviated NTI for the
division that collects the data), twice-a-year summary
books, and in the abbreviated weekly booklets called
The Pocketpiece Report (see Chapter 2 for a sample
pocketpiece page). Besides the network-by-network rat-
ings, pocketpieces (named for their size, designed to
fit in a vest pocket in a suit coat) include the collective
ratings for national public networks, basic cable net-
works and premium cable networks, giving network
programmers a handy tool for comparing the perfor-
mance of the networks and their competitors. DVD
viewing is now fully incorporated into these reports.
National viewing data are also reported in the other
forms described in Chapter 6, often combined with
product purchase and usage data.
Overnights: Nielsen also collects nightly ratings called
overnights in the top metered markets, publishing this infor-
mation every morning for the benefit of network executives
and purchasing stations. Overnights, because of the smal-
ler samples used and the big-city nature of the viewers, are
only indicators of what the network ratings probably will be
when the six-month NTIs are issued. But as more and more
major markets are added to the overnight sample, the
match between the overnight sample and the total sample
comes much closer. About 70 percent of U.S. TV homes
are in the overnight sample.
Local Books: Nielsen’s other widely known task is the
measurement of local market television viewing. These
measurement reports are known as the Nielsen Station
Index (NSI) and are published in Viewers in Profile for each
market. Called the “ratings books,” they are purchased by
most television stations and advertising agencies. Nielsen
household samples are drawn from the most recent national
census, and the ratings are not weighted (adjusted to fit
national or local population percentages). NSI prepares
county-by-county reports on television viewing, various
reports for commercial time buyers, several reports for cable
networks and system operators, and an online computer
service for customized analysis of reach, frequency and
audience flow.
Product Tracking: Nielsen also offers a tracking service
called the Nielsen Scantrack. This national panel consists
of about 30,000 households who use handheld bar-code
scanners to record all purchases, including prices, and
whether each item was on sale. This information is then
correlated with television viewing data derived from people
meters, as well as from magazine and newspaper data.
Each household transmits all its media data (TV and print)
weekly over phone lines to Nielsen’s center for data anal-
ysis. This service has enormous benefits for corporate brand
managers and advertising agency media buyers (though it
may be a pain to the participants).
Computers: The measurement of television audiences now
includes computer users as programs appear on the inter-
net. Nielsen//NetRatings is a service designed to provide
high-quality information about the internet in a special
pocketpiece and other formats.
Spot Tracking: Nielsen has another service called Monitor-
Plus, which uses computer recognition technology to iden-
tify all commercials airing in the top 50 major markets. The
NSI data is combined with the commercial data to provide
a minute-by-minute gross rating point measurement for each
TV spot overall; the information is also broken out by brand
category and by how it compares to competitors’ spots.
Monitor-Plus enables buyers and sellers to track advertising
activity across 15 specific categories of media, including
television, radio and print.
This Nielsen service rates television commercials, mea-
suring the viewing of commercial spots—not programs—
using its minute-by-minute ratings. The commercials are
averaged across entire programs because per-spot data is
too unreliable. This will be useful to advertisers because
industry experts have long estimated that commercial rat-
ings are about 5 to 10 percent lower than program ratings.
That percentage can now be refined over time and even-
tually refined for different kinds of commercials in different
program environments.
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
169
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Diaries themselves continue to attract contro-
versy in the 154 markets where they are still used
as an economically feasible alternative to meters. In
2010, the Media Rating Council (MRC) withdrew
its accreditation to the diary service known as Niel-
sen NSI. Officials at Nielsen expected the problem to
be resolved, but the brouhaha served as a reminder
that choosing a sample is complicated. In this case, it
was determined by the MRC that Nielsen was using
a flawed address-based system to replace an inferior
random-dialing
phone-based
system
(abandoned
because 30 percent of homes use cell phones instead
of landline phones).
Normally, station programmers purchase only
the books for their own market, but programmers
dealing with groups of stations may purchase all
210 local market reports for the entire country or a
subset of books for markets where they have sta-
tions or cable systems. They can use these books to
cross-compare the performance of programs in dif-
ferent markets, at different times of day, with differ-
ent lead-in shows and so on. Other chapters in this
book contain discussions about how ratings are used
in specific sets of circumstances and point out spe-
cific weaknesses (see 5.6).
National Ratings
Network viewing estimates come from a nation-
wide people-meter sample of 20,000 households
with and without cable. To be included in Nielsen
reports, at least 3 percent of viewer meters (or
diaries in local reports) must record viewing of a
cable service. This means that only the top 30 or
so cable networks figure in most ratings calcula-
tions. Multiple-set households are counted only
once in total television households (TVHH), thus
making the sum of the audiences to several pro-
grams telecast simultaneously often bigger than
the number of households said to be viewing at
one time (HUT) because one household may
tune to more than one program. Indeed, the aver-
age household has more sets than people. As of
2012, one ratings point represented the viewing
of
116,000,000
television
households
(usually
abbreviated 116.0
mill.),
and
each household
represented 2.6 people.6
5.6
The People-Meter Furor
M
uch questioning has long characterized attitudes
toward rating services, but until 2004, most of this
debate stayed well within the media industry. At the start of
that year, Nielsen Media Research announced plans to
introduce local people meters in New York City and Los
Angeles, replacing set-top meters and paper diaries and
providing previously unavailable demographic details
about local viewers.
But when preliminary testing showed a huge drop-off in
total viewing, especially among minority audiences, Nielsen
faced loud charges of racial and ethnic bias in the press.
Much of the criticism came from a campaign spearheaded
by Rupert Murdoch’s News Corporation and a coalition of
black and Hispanic community leaders. In addition, produ-
cers of programs targeted to minority populations became
worried that the new system would underrepresent minority
viewing. On the other hand, many experts claimed that
minorities had been oversampled for decades, which led to
an apparent drop in viewing when they were more
accurately measured. Attempts to quell suspicions were
marked with numerous delays, and congressional investiga-
tions and audits were threatened, despite the issue being
largely perceptual rather than substantive.
To improve its image and forestall legal action, The
Nielsen Company had to lobby Congress, make big
charity donations and undertake sponsorship of community
events for minorities in several cities. (Insiders chuckled to
think of Nielsen Media Research handing out pens, T-shirts
and balloons in fair booths! This company doesn’t sell
anything to the public! Its high-priced products are sold only
to other media companies.)
By the end of the year, the issue seemed resolved after
outgoing NAACP President and CEO Kweisi Mfune
announced support for Nielsen’s use of people meters in
local TV markets. But the issue could be resurrected at any
time. Ratings are less than perfect to start with, and the
services have a lousy history of accurately measuring
minority viewing.
170
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Radio Services
Only one company, Arbitron, provides quantitative
local and national radio ratings. The consolidation
of radio ownership in the late 1990s effectively
drove out the need for competing services. Nielsen
measures radio in 11 other countries, but not the
United States, where it unsuccessfully experimented
with a competing service between 2008 and 2010.
Strategic Media Research converted its old Accurat-
ings measurement (successor to Birch Ratings, if
you’ve ever heard of that) into Accutrack, one of sev-
eral similar services that qualitatively measure radio
listening, but doesn’t do quantitative measurements.
You may (or not) be surprised to learn that Arbi-
tron measures radio audience sizes using paper diaries,
supplemented by the internet for those who prefer
responding online—but most of its ratings still come
from paper scribbles. Arbitron’s Radio Market Report
tracks both in-home and out-of-home listening (in
cars, offices and other places) for local radio stations
in all of the 299 radio markets.7 The data come from
weekly diaries mailed to a sample of households in
each market. Each person 12 years or older gets a
separate diary to fill out for one week, usually running
from Thursday to Wednesday when it is to be mailed
back to Arbitron. New random samples participate
each week, and each participant sending back a usable
diary currently gets $3. The size of the sample depends
on the history of response in the market and how
much data collection the stations are willing to pay
for (larger samples cost more money).
Data collection
Arbitron collects ratings for 48 weeks each year in
the larger markets and for as few as 16 weeks in the
smaller markets. This system is called continuous
radio measurement, although it skips three weeks
around Christmas/New Year’s and one week in
late spring. Arbitron also offers county-by-county
reports of radio listening for about 42 customized
survey areas and annual ratings for internet radio.
It also provides Arbitron Information on Demand
(AID), an online computer service for radio diary
research. Recent radio ratings from Arbitron are
available at www.radioandrecords.com.
Arbitron’s Portable People Meter (PPM) is used
in the 48 largest radio markets, with daily samples
ranging from 510 (Memphis) to 3,882 (New York
City). A PPM is the size of a cell phone or pager, and
it records all daily electronic listening for several
months. (Have you ever seen one?) Monthly rating
reports for the top ten U.S. markets are the goal, but
so far the technology has had problems and more
problems. Reports for the first 33 markets were
released by 2009 and the remaining 17 by 2010.
Discouraged by the slow pace of the PPM
releases, several of the biggest radio companies jointly
funded a competing company, Media Audit, that uses
smart phones as the measurement system. By 2012,
Media Audit had measured over 80 radio markets.
Nationwide Radio
Radio’s All Dimension Audience Research (RADAR
108), owned by Arbitron, reports on the performance
of the national radio services. RADAR reports cover
the size and demographics composition of 50 radio
networks
operated
by
American
Urban
Radio
Networks, Citadel Media Networks, Crystal Media
Networks,
Dial
Global
Media,
Premiere
Radio
Networks, United Stations Radio Networks and
Westwood One Radio Networks. RADAR reports
are based on analyses of 48 weeks of continuous
measurement using 395,000 members of Arbitron’s
diary and PPM databases. Arbitron also uses Media-
guide’s broadcast monitoring technology to verify
whether the radio commercials that were scheduled
to be aired on affiliated stations of RADAR-rated net-
works were broadcast as indicated on the network
commercial clearance reports. RADAR ratings are
the only nationwide radio network ratings, and are
reported for the top 10, 25 and 50 markets.
Online Radio
Since 2004, comScore has provided broadcast-type
ratings for the online radio industry. It passively
and continuously captures the online radio behavior
across the country of nearly 250,000 U.S. listeners.
ComScore reports weekly cumes, quarter-hour rat-
ings and most demographics in the 15 standard
broadcast dayparts for AOL Radio, Clear Channel
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
171
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Online Music, ESPN Radio, Live 365 and Yahoo
Music Launch-out. Measurement is important to
these big radio webcasters because it legitimizes a
program service that reaches far beyond the usual
geographic limits for a radio station and supplies
advertisers
with
the
data
they
need
to
make
informed decisions about media buys.
Online Video
In 2010, comScore updated its measurement of
online video with the introduction of Video Metrix
2.0, which added the capability of distinguishing
between program content and the advertising within
the shows. Video Metrix provides the television
industry’s only comprehensive measurement of the
video marketplace, with the ability to track video
advertising, top television programs, viral videos
and syndicated traffic. The comScore service also
classifies video-viewing activity by TV dayparts.
The largest primetime networks showed viewing to
their respective video sites (as shown in 5.7).
Video Games
Until advertising began appearing in video games, user
measurement was not a priority, even though video
game playing was clearly replacing some traditional
media behaviors (especially among the 18 to 34 male
demographic). But by 2005, the video game industry
was raking in more billions of dollars annually than
the movie industry, a fact that made the advertising
industry take note. Looking ahead in 2004, Nielsen
expanded its definition of viewing to include “screen-
based” advertising in order to include games, cell
phones, wireless and other portable media, and began
testing ways to measure viewing by game users.
Console-based video game systems account for
15 percent of teenage males’ daily use of media dur-
ing prime time. One recently altered factor was the
move of “television prime time for young males”
into the late-night time period, leaving 8 to 11 P.M.
for games. Nielsen has developed GamePlay Metrics
as a way of mining people-meter data collected on
television and internet use, adding the passive collec-
tion of game titles, and matching all the data to
demographics and dayparts to inform the sale of
advertising. GamePlay Metrics reports tell who is
playing what game, the type of console used (applies
to Sony, Microsoft and Nintendo, so far), the genre
of the game, and what other media the players con-
sume. The weekly data comes from the same 10,000
households used to provide television ratings.
The next generation of game consoles is likely
to include special signals related to advertising in
games that Nielsen can track, and such measure-
ments will be extended to wireless (phone and
PDA) receivers as fast as the technology can be
developed. Selling advertising within games and con-
soles is part of a national media trend to place ads
everywhere and closely measure media usage. Indus-
try profits are needed to fund the enormous cost of
developing subsequent generations of consoles, and
later, wireless equipment and content.
Social Media
Social networking sites (SNSs) like Facebook and Twit-
ter attract huge masses of viewers for their screen-based
entertainment and information (in case you hadn’t
noticed!). At last count, Facebook had over 700 million
members worldwide, and Twitter had 200 million
users (but these numbers swell in the night). At this
writing, the difficult problem of measuring their audi-
ences is unsettled and evolving rapidly, but many com-
panies are tackling solutions. Such companies as
Attensity, Radian6, Statsit, Sysomos and Vocus retrieve
text-based indicators of customer satisfaction (and dis-
satisfaction), but they barely skim the surface of the
information that might be collected, and the data they
collect is in no way the equivalent of ratings.
Specialized Audiences
Programmers and advertisers constantly pressure the
rating services for more information about aspects
of the increasingly fragmented media audience. On
the television side, the larger audience shares cap-
tured by cable create demand for an even more pre-
cise understanding of audience viewing habits. Thus,
in local market reports, the ratings companies break
demographic information into smaller units (such as
172
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5.7
Sample Online Video Ratings
Reprinted by permission of ComScore.
Wipeout
Top Shows on ABC.com by Unique Video Viewers June 2010
The Bachlorette
True Beauty
Jimmy Kimmel Live
General Hospital
Lost
Supernanny
Happy Town
All My Children
Grey’s Anatomy
214
218
229
229
279
571
682
702
1,047
1,155
Unique Visitors (000)
The Young and the Restless
Late Show with David Letterman
NCIS
The Bold and the Beautiful
CSI: Miami
Big Brother
Flashpoint
How I Met Your Mother
NCIS: Los Angeles
Two and a Half Men
129
136
137
140
153
156
179
354
524
551
Top Shows on CBS.com by Unique Video Viewers June 2010
Unique Visitors (000)
America’s Got Talent
Saturday Night Live (SNL)
The Ofﬁce
Friday Night Lights
Days of Our Lives
Last Comic Standing
The Biggest Loser
Chuck
The Tonight Show With Jay Leno
Minute To Win It
63
74
84
108
120
229
240
274
463
502
Unique Visitors (000)
Top Shows on NBC.com by Unique Video Viewers June 2010
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
173
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
10-year jumps for radio) and more useful categories
for different groups of advertisers. In addition to the
classic adults 18 to 49, 25 to 54 and the like, both
women 18 to 34 and women 25 to 49 are now
included, for example, as well as similar subgroups
of men, children and teens.
In addition to local and national ratings reports,
Nielsen and Arbitron offer various customized reports
covering narrower views of the audience (for example,
males aged 18 to 34, Hispanic women aged 25 to 54
or college students) and specialized programming, such
as Nielsen’s analyses of syndicated program ratings,
which are particularly useful to stations making pro-
gram purchases. Chapters 6 and 8 make a special
point of the importance of syndicated program
reports, which are illustrated later in this chapter.
Ratings Terminology
and Measurement Computations
Nielsen
collects
television
audience
estimates
by
randomly selecting viewers from the 210 U.S. broad-
cast television markets. The number of markets varies
slightly from year to year and has grown along with
population increases. Nielsen calls the markets Desig-
nated Market Areas (DMAs). These areas are roughly
equivalent to Areas of Dominant Influence (ADIs) as
determined by Arbitron for measuring radio markets.
Many more radio markets exist, however, to account
for listening in low-population-density areas. Nielsen
collapses these very small markets with the nearest
big city television audiences.
Survey Areas
For each market, Nielsen collects ratings data from
more than just the DMA, as shown in 5.8. The smal-
lest measurement unit is the Metro Area, the next
largest is the local DMA, and the largest unit (part
shown) is the Nielsen Survey Index Area (NSI Area).
The NSI Area includes the DMA and the Metro
Area but also encompasses counties outside the
DMA where viewing can be attributed to a station
in the DMA. These three geographical areas are
described more fully in the following sections.
NSI Area
The NSI Area includes all counties measured in a rat-
ings survey, including counties outside the DMA
when substantial viewing of stations inside the DMA
occurs in them—viewership is usually the result of
carriage by cable systems. Rarely used by commercial
television programmers (because DMAs are more use-
ful), NSI Area figures show a station’s total estimated
reach or circulation. As indicated earlier, reach tells
how many people have viewed or listened to a station
in the past, and it therefore suggests how many could
view or listen in the future. In cable, reach tells how
many households subscribe to basic cable service.
Reach is an important measure for radio, public tele-
vision, cable and online websites. Another name for
reach is cumulative audience, or cume.
DMA
Each county in the United States is assigned to only
one DMA. Generally, a DMA centers on a single
city, such as Charleston, Denver or New York, but in
some cases two or even three cities are linked in
hyphenated markets, as in the Florence/Myrtle Beach
and Springfield/Decatur/Champaign markets. All sta-
tions in these multiple markets reach most viewers,
making the cities one television viewing market.
Nielsen ranks each DMA according to the estimated
number of television households within its counties.
As of 2012, the top five DMAs in rank order were
New York (with over 7 million TV households), Los
Angeles, Chicago, Philadelphia and Dallas/Ft. Worth.
Metro Areas
The third geographical area, the Metro Survey Area
(MSA) in radio and Metro Rating Area (MRA) or
simply “Metro” in television, is the smallest of the
three survey areas and is the one most frequently
used for radio programming. The Metro includes
only a small number of counties closest to the
home city of the DMA, but often consists of only a
single, gigantic county in some parts of the United
States, especially in the West.
Because competing big-city radio signals gen-
erally blanket the Metro, urban radio programmers
use it to determine the success or failure of
174
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
programming decisions. (Coverage patterns in out-
lying areas may vary too widely to compare.) The
Metro represents the majority of urban radio lis-
teners, the bulk of office and store listening and a
large part of in-car listening. Altogether, more than
280 Metro areas are measured by Arbitron for
radio listening. Radio stations on the fringe of the
Metro area are more likely to refer to Total Survey
Area (TSA), which is comparable to NSI area mea-
sures. But television programmers rarely use Metro
ratings because no demographic breakouts are
available.
To use any of these ratings services for program-
ming decisions, programmers must understand how
the estimates are produced. Using ratings without
this knowledge is like trying to play chess without
learning the rules. Pieces can be moved, but winning
the game is unlikely. Memorize the saying, “Audi-
ences count, but only in the way they are counted.”
Print it on your wall and make signs all over your
home, and figure out what it means. We try to tell
you in the following subsections which provide an
overview of the basics of audience computations, but
telling isn’t understanding. That’s up to you.
5.8
Diagram of a Television Market Survey Area
CHEROKEE
PICKENS
LAURENS
NEWBERRY
SALUDA
EDGE-
FIELD
AIKEN
LEXINGTON
BARNWELL
ALLEN-
DALE
BAMBERG
HAMPTON
JASPER
BEAUFORT
CHARLESTON
BERKELEY
GEORGE-
TOWN
WILLIAMS-
BURG
HORRY
FLORENCE
SUMTER
LEE
RICHLAND
CALHOUN
CLARENDON
DARLING-
T0N
DILLON
MARION
CHESTERFIELD
MARLBORO
LANCASTER
COLLETON
ORANGEBURG
DORCHESTER
OCONEE
ANDERSON
ABBEVILLE
McCORMICK
GREENWOOD
YORK
CHESTER
FAIRFIELD
KERSHAW
UNION
SPARTAN-
BURG
GREENVILLE
Columbia
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
175
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Ratings/Shares/HUTs
A rating is an estimate of the percentage of the total
number of people or households in a population
tuned to a specific station or network during a spe-
cific time period (daypart) such as morning drive-
time or prime access (7 to 8
P.M. eastern/Pacific
time). A share is an estimate of the percentage of
people or households that are actually using radio
or television and are tuned to a specific station or
network during a specific daypart. The sum of all
program shares equals 100 percent, but the sum of
all ratings equals the percentage of total viewers (one
must include nonviewers to get 100 percent). Rat-
ings depend on a count of all receivers; shares on a
count of all users. Shares are always bigger percen-
tages than ratings for the same program or station
because some people who could watch television (or
listen to radio) are not watching (they are sleeping or
playing games or actually working).
Ratings are always a percentage estimate of an
entire population, whether the population refers to
all households in the country or all people aged 25
to 54 or all adults 12þ or all women aged 18 to 49.
Populations can be anything you say they are.
A share is always a percentage of those households
or people in that population using the particular
medium at a specific time. To restate, shares always
appear larger than ratings because they are based on
a smaller sample of people. Fewer people use televi-
sion (or radio or cable or the internet) than could use
it if all were at home, awake and choosing television
above other activities. Both estimates are percen-
tages of an entire group, although the percent sign
is often omitted.
Sales staffs use ratings to set advertising rates.
Programmers
generally
use
shares
in
decisions
about programs because shares show how well a
program does against its competition. Shares elimi-
nate all the people who are not watching TV and
show how many of those watching TV are tuned
to a program or station. Programmers at broadcast
networks and stations as well as cable services typi-
cally refer to their shares of an actual audience, not
their percentage (ratings) of potential households,
although newspaper articles often report ratings (or
mix up the two kinds of data).
The combined ratings of all stations or net-
works during a particular daypart provide an esti-
mate of the number of households using television
(HUTs), persons using television (PUTs), or persons
using radio (PURs). HUTs, PUTs and PURs are used
to compute the shares for each station or network.
Dayparts are more meaningful for radio audiences,
which are less likely to time-shift their media
consumption.
To illustrate these concepts, let’s assume there
are only four network television options in the
United States (like in olden days) and that Nielsen’s
metered
households
(12,000
in
reality,
but
rounded to 10,000 to keep this example easy)
indicate the following hypothetical data for prime
time:
Network
Household
Viewing
ABC
1,904
CBS
1,928
NBC
1,976
FOX
1,222
None
2,970
Total
10,000
The HUT level is .703 or 70.3 percent (7,030/
10,000), calculated by adding the households watch-
ing television and dividing by the total number of
households with television (1,904 þ 1,928 þ 1,976
þ 1,222 divided by 10,000 equals .703). The answer
is changed from a decimal to a percentage by multi-
plying by 100. A HUT of 70.3 means an estimated
70 percent of all households had a television set
on at the time of the measurement. The individual
ratings and shares for the four networks can now be
calculated.
RATING ¼ Households Watching a Network
Households with Receivers
SHARE ¼ Households Watching a Network
Households Watching TV
To calculate a rating, the number of households
watching a network is divided by the total number
of households that have receivers. To calculate
shares, the number of households watching ABC,
176
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
for example, is divided by the total number of
households watching television.
Network Ratings
Share
ABC 1,904
10,000 ¼ :190 or 19%
1,904
7,030 ¼ :271 or 27:1%
CBS 1,928
10,000 ¼ :193 or 19:3%
1,928
7,030 ¼ :274 or 27:4%
NBC 1,976
10,000 ¼ :198 or 19:8%
1,976
7,030 ¼ :281 or 28:1%
FOX 1,222
10,000 ¼ :122 or 12:2%
1,222
7,030 ¼ :174 or 17:4%
The individual ratings for all the stations in a
market during a given daypart should approxi-
mately equal the HUT. Network programmers pri-
marily use rating and share estimates to compare
program audiences, but often they also are interested
in the specific number of persons in the audience.
Ratings can be used to project to any particular pop-
ulation. For example, the data for the four networks
listed produced these estimates for the entire United
States (having a total population of about 116 mil-
lion households):
Network
Rating  Population
Population
¼ HH Estimate
ABC
.190  116 million
¼ 22,040,000
CBS
.193  116 million
¼ 22,388,000
NBC
.194  116 million
¼ 22,504,000
FOX
.122  116 million
¼ 14,152,000
.699 (or 69.9%)
¼ 81,084,000
The number 22,040,000 represents the 211 million
people estimated to be watching ABC (at this specific
time). These calculations can be verified by multiplying
the HUT, 69.9, by the total number of households:
.699 112 million ¼ 78,288,000, the total for the four
networks.
Using part of a page from a Charleston (SC)
Nielsen book (see 5.9), we can see how ratings and
shares were computed for the local television sta-
tions WCBD, WCIV and WCSC. To calculate the
rating and share for WCSC, in this morning/midday
example, Nielsen first analyzed diaries from a sam-
ple of households (HH) in the Charleston DMA. It
then projected the sample returns to the DMA
household population. Approximately 8 percent of
the total diaries were tuned to WCSC from 12
noon to 3 P.M.
If we assume that 8 percent of the diaries reflects 8
percent of the total households (always an iffy call but
done constantly), the number of homes watching
WCSC can then be calculated. An estimated 266,400
television households in the Charleston DMA (this
information is supplied on another page) yields 21,312
homes for WCSC (.08 266,400 ¼ 21,312). The
share for WCSC was computed by using the HUT (see
the H/P/T totals), which was 24 (percent). Twenty-four
percent of 266,400 yields 63,936 HH, and when that
figure is divided into WCSC’s 21,312 HH, a share of
34 results. (Actually, the calculation is 33, but because
the reported ratings are rounded to the nearest whole
number, the math does not always work with whole
numbers. Either the 8 rating is actually slightly larger
than 8 and rounded down, or the HUT rating is slightly
lower than 24 and rounded up.)
Further evidence of Nielsen’s rounding can be
seen in the 12 noon to 4:00 P.M. time period on the
same page. In that time period of the Nielsen report,
you will see that WCBD and WCIV both have “2”
ratings, but each station’s share is different. We can
compute more accurate ratings by manipulating the
basic formula, usually written as
Rating
HUT  100 ¼ SHARE
The calculated value is multiplied by 100 to create
whole numbers instead of decimals for shares and
ratings. If we transpose to
RATING ¼ Share  HUT
100
we can rate more accurately:
WCBD Rating 7  30
100
¼ 2:1
WCIV Rating 8  30
100
¼ 2:4
Keep in mind that all ratings and shares are per-
centages and must include decimal points for all
calculations, although to make their reports easy to
read, ratings companies do not print the decimals
(see 5.10).
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
177
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5.9
Daypart Ratings Page
Reprinted by permisson of Nielson Media Research.
178
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
One final point concerning the 12 noon to
3 P.M. example is that the HUT/PUT/TOTAL line is
24, but if we add all the stations, the total rating is
actually 16. The uncounted rating points mean that
8 percent of the households in the DMA were view-
ing cable channels for which no one channel
received a 1 rating. Individual shares for all the sta-
tions should equal 100 percent when totaled, even if
the tiny shares for cable viewing are unreportable.
PUTs/PURs
Ratings and shares for television generally represent
households but occasionally refer to specific demo-
graphic groups such as women aged 18 to 49. Radio
ratings always represent individuals or persons, and
therefore, the term persons using radio (PUR) is
used. Persons using television (PUT) is appropriate
when calculations of individual viewers are made.
Sales staffs and time buyers tend to be more inter-
ested in these calculations than programmers are,
and one of the big advantages of people meters is
that they supply individual-person data as well as
household data for the advertising industry.
AQH/Cume
Programmers use two very important computations
in calculating ratings: average quarter-hour (AQH)
audiences and cumulative audience (cume) esti-
mates. Program audiences are typically measured in
15-minute intervals, hence “quarter-hour audience.”
Meters can, in fact, measure one-minute audiences
(or even one-second audiences in comedy research,
for example), but a person or household is counted
in a quarter hour if the television was turned on for
a minimum of five minutes during the measurement
period.
Although radio and television diaries also mea-
sure audience size in 15-minute intervals, TV pro-
grammers use these data in much larger units—by
whole program or daypart. Quarter hours are the
particular concern of those who try to count fickle
radio listeners. (Both time units may be too broad
for accurately measuring channel jumpers and gra-
zers and radio button pushers!)
Cumulative audience measures are appropriate
for small audiences that would not show up in rating/
share measures. Cume measurements indicate the num-
ber of different people tuned in during a 15-minute
(or longer) time period. Cume figures are always larger
than AQH figures, which are averaged.
The basic difference between AQH and cume is
that in the average quarter-hour calculation, persons
can be counted more than once in a total daypart.
For instance, a person could tune to a station for five
minutes, switch stations or tune out, and then tune
back in to the original station during a later quarter
hour. This viewer would be counted twice in an
AQH calculation but not in an exclusive cume cal-
culation because it counts only the number of differ-
ent persons listening. Cume is considered to be the
reach of a station because it tells you how many
different persons were in the audience during a
time period or daypart. It also reflects the growth
or decay of an audience over time.
Public television and basic cable audiences are
often too small for accurate measurement within one
5.10
A Visual Aid for Remembering
the Formula
T
he basic relationship among the three variables
(rating, share, HUT) is easy to understand but
sometimes difficult to remember. Here is a visual aid:
R
S
H
(Putting the R “on top” is easy to remember because
ratings are most important to the station or channel for
advertising purposes.) Here’s how to calculate: If you
want R (ratings), cover the R with your finger. The result is
S (share) multiplied by H (HUT). If you want share, cover
the S with your finger. The result is R divided by H. Like-
wise, cover the H to calculate HUT: The result is R
divided by S. (The number you get must be adjusted to
provide a meaningful answer: If you multiplied, then
divide the result by 100; if you divided, multiply the result
by 100.) You may not get the exact result shown by
Nielsen because the reported figures are rounded.
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
179
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
quarter hour, but cumulative ratings over a longer
period of time may reflect more substantial audi-
ences. Cumes can also be calculated for a single pro-
gram over several airings, a common pattern in
public television and cable measurements, permit-
ting programmers to estimate the total number of
people who watched a program. Commercial broad-
casting with its special interest in the number of peo-
ple watching one commercial spot generally uses
AQH ratings.
Reach and Frequency Analysis
Salespeople most often use the concepts of reach and
frequency. As we said earlier, reach refers to circula-
tion or potential exposure—or the net size of the
audience that actually gets the signal (gross would
be all the people living in the country). Frequency
refers to the number of times a person was exposed
to a particular advertising message (or program). A
high frequency means exposure to a message several
times and indicates the “holding power” of a sta-
tion, network, or program. Programmers usually
schedule several interesting programs in succession,
trying to create audience flow and achieve a high
frequency for advertisers among successive pro-
grams appealing to the same viewers.
Television Market Reports
and Other Programming Aids
Market reports (or “books”) are divided into sec-
tions to allow programmers, salespeople and adver-
tisers
to
examine
an
audience
from
many
perspectives for a particular local DMA. In televi-
sion, the major sections are: Daypart Audiences,
Time Period Averages and Program Averages.
Daypart Audiences
The Daypart Audiences section divides viewing into
37 dayparts, a highly useful format for analyzing a
station’s overall performance in specific time blocks.
For instance, Monday through Friday noon to 6 P.M.
provides a quick summary of the ratings and shares
for all stations during that daypart. The page from a
Nielsen book in 5.9, presented earlier, shows the
crucial 3 P.M. to 5 P.M. period in the Charleston mar-
ket toward the bottom.
Nielsen divides the viewers into 26 demographic
(age and sex) classifications for both the DMA and
the NSI station totals. For just one station, 754 rat-
ings cells are required in order to fill out all 26 Niel-
sen people categories and 37 daypart categories for
station totals alone. A single ratings book page con-
tains an immense amount of data. Most program-
mers use computers to analyze the data.
A look at 5.9, presented in the previous section,
shows that WCSC was the strongest television station
in the market in the afternoon daypart, with a 7 rat-
ing/30 share in the DMA and 7/32 in the Metro. It
was very strong with both W 18–49 and W 18–34
(the usual shorthand used in ratings analyses). No
doubt this station was delighted because these demo-
graphics are very easy to sell to advertisers.
Programmers normally compare the current
numbers to previous performances. Tracking a day-
part shows how the station or program is doing over
time. It is also important for selecting syndicated
programs (see Chapters 6 and 8). Rarely will pro-
gram decisions be based on only one book unless
the numbers are very low and very credible, and
no hope for improvement is in sight.
Time Period Averages
Television programmers are interested not only in
broad dayparts but in quarter-hour or half-hour seg-
ments within them. This information, found in the
Time Period Averages section of ratings books, is
useful for determining a program’s strength against
the competition for a specific quarter hour or half
hour. Managers of affiliates look here, for example,
to see how their local newscast stacks up against its
competitors. The Time Period Averages section also
has an overview of access time and early fringe com-
petition and shows lead-in and lead-out effects. Pro-
grammers use these data to analyze performance in
time segments. (Salespeople use these data to deter-
mine spot ratings.)
180
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Averages for the whole week, Monday through
Friday, are included in the Time Period Averages
section along with most prime-time network pro-
gramming because it varies from night to night.
These figures show performance during a daypart
or time period when all days are averaged together,
crucial data when a programmer is looking at
stripped programming in early fringe and prime-
time access.
Program Audiences
The last (but not least) major section of a television
ratings book, the one television programmers most
often use, is the Program Audiences section. Rather
than lumping a program into a daypart, this section
breaks each daypart and program into 30-minute
segments (and some 15-minute ones) to isolate indi-
vidual programs on different days of the sweep
weeks. The Program Audiences section is considered
the “pure programming” section because each pro-
gram is analyzed individually here. It shows the titles
of the shows and any scheduling variations from
night to night. This allows programmers to examine
ratings for their local news, say, night by night—and
to eliminate the odd night when a sporting event, for
example, cuts into the news time.
Look
at
the
Program
Audiences
data
for
Charleston at 6 P.M. in 5.11. The numbers are the
DMA rating/share and Metro rating/share for all
weekdays (AV5—average for Monday through Fri-
day). Notice that in DMA measurements, WCSC
dominates the competition with a 25 share for its
local newscast. The local news shows on WCBD
and WCIV have a 15 share and an 11 share, respec-
tively. The FOX affiliate WTAT came in fourth with
a 7 share for Judge Judy. This section permits anal-
ysis of individual programs without interference
from ratings for adjacent programs.
In summary, the sections of a television book
provide programmers with at least four different
ways to evaluate station performance. Daypart
Audience data show broad time periods without
regard to specific programs. Time Period Averages
listings
provide
programming
data
by
quarter
hours and half hours on a daily basis and are useful
in analyzing competitive performance. Finally, Pro-
gram Averages information isolates the “pure pro-
gram”
data.
Each
section
answers
different
questions, and television programmers use every sec-
tion as their questions shift.
Because mountains of plain ratings data are
nearly too much to deal with, Nielsen also issues
reports on specific demographic groups or types of
programs or station market sizes in easy-to-use for-
mats, on which stations, reps and ad agencies rely
heavily. They also depend on other companies to
reanalyze Nielsen’s ratings data and to supplement
the data with other research. Of all these additional
services, programmers find analyses of syndicated
television programs the most valuable.
Syndicated Program Reports
Affiliates and independents rely on off-network and
first-run syndicated programming to fill parts of
their broadcast days. Because syndicated programs
are expensive, however, station decision makers
want to know about a program’s past performance.
Will a program perform well in their market? Will
its ratings justify its cost? Reps and program consul-
tants especially want this information because they
advise station programmers. Projecting or estimat-
ing ratings success for a first-run product is an
involved process that finally comes down to an edu-
cated guess. The potentials of off-network programs
are somewhat easier to evaluate, but even here no
hard-and-fast rules exist. Lead-in programs, local
competition and audience fads always influence rat-
ings. Even the most successful network program
may fail in syndication or perform below its network
numbers at a given time or in a given market.
In making decisions about syndicated programs,
Nielsen’s Report on Syndicated Programs is helpful.
(The major television rep firms also provide similar
analyses in less bulky and unwieldy formats, such as
the Comtrac report example featured in Chapter 6.)
A page from the Nielsen analysis of The Simpsons is
shown in 5.12. At the top-left corner of the page,
you will find the number of markets telecasting the
program, the distributor and other data such as the
program type and the number of episodes available.
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
181
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5.11
Program Audience Ratings Page
Reprinted by permisson of Nielson Media Research.
182
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5.12
Syndicated Program Report Page on the Simpsons
Reprinted by permisson of Nielson Media Research.
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
183
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The second section provides overall ratings and
share data by market rank and by daypart. It shows
the number of stations carrying The Simpsons in
both early fringe (138 DMA markets) and in prime
access (39 DMA markets), presumably to appeal to
young viewers in the late afternoon time period. The
Simpsons averaged a 4 rating and 7 share in both
dayparts, higher than for any other daypart. This
section shows which dayparts and market sizes a
program has played most effectively in, quite useful
information for programmers. Demographic data by
daypart fill out the rest of this section.
The third section of the page shows a market
breakout of specific stations carrying The Simpsons
in syndication. The first market, alphabetically, that
carried the program was Abilene-Sweetwater, where
The Simpsons ran at 5:30
P.M. central time on
KXVA, a FOX affiliate on Channel 15, and it had
a 3 DMA rating and a 6 DMA (Monday through
Friday) share. In that market, The Simpsons got
lower ratings than the three nightly network news-
casts but was a close fourth place to the NBC
Nightly News (4/9). The Simpsons held most of its
lead-in, That 70s Show, which had a 3 rating and a
7 share. Programmers use this information to pur-
chase or renew the show and to schedule it during
a daypart with a lead-in that will make it maximally
successful.
This third section of the page also provides data
on the total number of persons viewing a program in
key demographic groups. In Albuquerque-Santa Fe,
for example, The Simpsons was viewed at 5:00 P.M.
by 11,000 women aged 18 to 49 (representing 55
viewers per 100 homes using television), a substan-
tial increase over the lead-in. Nielsen’s report does
not show the demographic breakdown for compet-
ing stations. The programmer can, however, turn to
the page for Jeopardy (not shown here) and see
fewer women aged 18 to 49. Because Jeopardy also
has many more women 18þ than The Simpsons, the
programmer
can
deduce
that
Jeopardy
skews
toward older women who may not fit the adverti-
sers’ target.
Before
purchasing
a
syndicated
program,
station programmers typically choose markets that
are similar to their own in size and regional
characteristics; they chart the performance of that
program to determine its best daypart, its strengths
and weaknesses against specific competing pro-
grams, and its demographic appeal. The Report on
Syndicated Programs enables programmers to esti-
mate the likely performance of a syndicated program
and to schedule it effectively in their lineup. If a pro-
gram proves unsuitable (demographically or in
terms of ratings projections), the analysis is helpful
in targeting another program to meet a station’s pro-
gramming needs.
The Report on Syndicated Programs is limited
to program data about syndicated programs already
on the air. Quite often stations must decide whether
to purchase a program before it is released in syndi-
cation (or even produced). This is particularly the
case with first-run syndicated programs (never on a
network) and popular off-network programs (often
purchased before any station has tried them out).
(The subject of purchasing futures on programs is
covered in Chapter 6.) In the case of off-network
programming, national and local data from a pro-
gram’s network performance can be projected to the
local market, though as you can imagine, many mar-
kets differ substantially from the national market.
Purchasing first-run syndicated programs is much
riskier, though, because they lack both network
and station track records.
Computerized Services
All operations, including programming, are rou-
tinely computerized at broadcast stations and cable
services of all sizes. Television ratings and syndi-
cated program reports come on disks or online,
and are more commonly accessed on computers
than in paper “books,” though the old name sticks.
Local station programmers use computer software
to schedule shows; print daily, weekly and annual
program logs; and keep track of competitors’ pro-
gram purchases in the same way that reps track pur-
chases for many markets.
A ratings book represents only a fraction of the
data available from Nielsen. The books exclude
county of residence, ZIP code, specific viewing and
listening
patterns
and
each
individual
diarist’s
184
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
reported age (in ratings books, age is presented only
as group data, for example, women 18 to 34). But
then there are the raw diaries. A diary also tells what
the diarist was watching at 5:45 P.M. before he or she
began watching the 6 P.M. news. Nielsen stores this
raw diary information on a secure website that sta-
tions can examine online. The information allows
programmers to analyze nonstandard dayparts, spe-
cific groups of ZIP codes, nonstandard demo-
graphics, county-by-county viewing and audience
flow patterns. In addition, sales staffs use the term-
inals to compute audience reach and frequency. If a
programmer
wants
still
more
information
on
selected programs on a market-by-market basis,
Nielsen offers its ProFile Ranking Report (part of
the
Galaxy
software),
which
provides
detailed
comparisons.
The management of any station, network or
cable service that subscribes to Nielsen (or Arbitron
for radio) can personally review the real viewer or
listener diaries, an important service for popular
music radio stations. The main reason for inspecting
the raw diaries is to search for unexpected entries
such as how listeners or viewers recorded the sta-
tion’s or service’s name or call letters (or slogan or
air personalities). Sometimes diarists name things
differently than stations expect them to. A station
can remedy incorrect attributions in subsequent rat-
ings periods by submitting a limited number of dif-
ferent “nicknames” to Arbitron (or by changing a
slogan if it is easily confused with a competitor’s).
Before computerized systems became available, first-
hand diary reviews (usually performed by specialist
companies located near the diary warehouses) were
standard procedure after each ratings book was
published (these guys and gals are now out of
work). Computer tape now permits the information
to be examined anywhere if the appropriate soft-
ware is purchased.
On the national level, television programs are
introduced, launched, bought and withdrawn con-
stantly. Keeping tabs on the daily changes in the pro-
gram market involves constant record keeping based
on information from the trade press and reports
from reps and distributors. One crucial set of jobs
for local programmers is keeping track of local
program availabilities (syndicated programs not yet
under contract in their markets) and their own sta-
tion’s program inventory, including contract details,
plays and amortization schedules. Only the largest
stations and rep programmers, however, have the
resources to track all this crucial programming
information and keep timely records. It can be a
mess at small stations.
A great deal of information about program perfor-
mance comes from third-party processors that sell
research reports on national and syndicated television
programs, using purchased Nielsen data. These services
are based on the premise that raw information is less
usable than processed information. For example, the
Nielsen overnight ratings are analyzed by WRAP, a
Windows ratings-analysis program from Audience
Analysis,
Inc. (AAI).
Third-party processors like
WRAP compete with Nielsen’s two services (ProFile
and Navigator) and with another major service, Gal-
axy, which offers additional analysis. Nielsen also offers
a software package (N-Power) that provides access to
household and individual-level viewing for television,
and TAPSCAN is a third-party processor of Arbitron
radio ratings. Station program directors can create
rankings (called rankers) of all radio stations in a mar-
ket based on daypart or demographic criteria. For
example, stations could be ranked on exclusive cume,
which is a measure of listeners who listened only to a
certain radio station and no other. Some other third-
party processors are described in 5.13.
Radio Reports
Audiences for the 14,000 radio stations in the
United States are more fragmented than broadcast
television audiences (although the spread of cable
and satellite dishes is altering that condition for tele-
vision). The largest radio markets such as Los
Angeles have more than 80 stations, dividing the
audience into tiny slivers per station. In general,
radio stations compare their share of the audience
and their cumulative audience to that of other sta-
tions with similar formats in the same market. The
most popular stations use shares, and the least pop-
ular use cumulative audiences, although formats
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
185
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
that lend themselves to tuning in and out (such as
all-news stations) use cumulative audience ratings
even when they are popular. The top 100 radio mar-
kets correspond closely to television DMAs, but
some areas in the West and South have radio but
no television, so we remind you that the total num-
ber of radio markets (299) is thus greater than the
210 television DMAs.
Ratings books for radio are organized differ-
ently from those for television. An Arbitron radio
ratings book contains Share Trends, followed by
Demographic Breakouts, Daypart Averages, Cume
Estimates, Hour-by-Hour Estimates and a few smal-
ler sections. The age and sex categories used in radio
differ from those used for television because radio
stations target their programming to more precisely
defined demographic groups. Thus, age ranges for
radio are smaller than those used in television:
typically just ten years (for example, 25–34). Most
classification groups end in “4” for radio (24, 34,
44, 54 and so on); the groups used for television
(18–49, 25–54 and so on) are broader, reflecting
the more heterogeneous nature of television audi-
ences and thus television advertising sales.
Metro Audience Trends
The Metro Audience Trends section reports a sta-
tion’s Metro shares for five ratings books—the cur-
rent survey and the previous four surveys—covering a
period of about one year. These data show a station’s
share pattern (its “trend”) over time for four separate
demographic groups: 12þ, 18–34, 25–54 and 35–64.
A hypothetical example for the demographic category
of Total Persons 12þ is shown in 5.14. A program-
mer can get a quick overview of all stations’
5.13
Third-Party Analyses of Ratings
S
carborough Research provides a syndicated research
service to newspapers, television stations, radio sta-
tions, cable systems, internet companies, advertisers and
agencies. Scarborough is a joint venture of Arbitron and
VNU Marketing Information. Scarborough provides syndi-
cated studies to print and electronic media, new media
companies, sports teams and leagues, agencies, adverti-
sers and yellow pages. Categories include consumer
shopping patterns, demographics, media usage and life-
style activities for local markets. Scarborough surveys more
than 180,000 adults 181 using a two-phase methodol-
ogy. Phase I is the telephone interview, and Phase II is a
self-administered questionnaire and television diary. A total
of 75 leading U.S. markets are measured. Every market
has two six-month field periods each product year, elimi-
nating any seasonal bias in the data and allowing users to
account for new store openings and media changes.
One of Scarborough’s premier products is called PRIME
NExT, composed of four separate reports: Profile, which
compiles lifestyles and habits of a specific audience group;
Crosstab, which classifies several audience groups at once
for comparisons; Schedule Analysis, which combines vari-
ous proposed schedules of media and cost for analysis;
and Media Analysis, which collates media reach informa-
tion into Cumulative (more than one spot or insertion minus
duplication) or Ranker (average) reports, or into graph
mode (visually combining elements from either report).
Media Audit is a near competitor to the kinds of studies
done by Scarborough, except that the former is accredited
by the Media Ratings Council. Media Audit bills itself as a
multimedia, qualitative audience survey covering about
450 target items for each rated media’s audience. These
qualitative data points cover things such as socioeconomic
characteristics, lifestyles, business decision makers, product
purchasing plans, retail shopping habits, travel history,
supermarket shopping, stores shopped, products pur-
chased, fast-food restaurants eaten in, soft drink consump-
tion, brands purchased, health insurance coverage, leisure
activities, banks used, credit cards used, and other selected
consumer characteristics important to local media and
advertisers.
Wimmer Research is also well known for its expertise in
custom-designed telephone perceptual studies. These
include music testing, interactive software, focus groups,
micro/macro-market studies, the Persuasion Process semi-
nar and optical scanning data collection services.
186
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
performance in the market from the Metro Audience
Trends section.
Consider as an example the Monday to Sunday
6 A.M. to midnight section in 5.14. It shows that from
spring 2004 to spring 2005, WCCC clearly led the
market and continued to have climbing shares and
cume ratings (cumulative audience) in the last book.
WBBB was the number-two station and had an
upwardly trending cume. WDDD was at the bottom
of the market with flat ratings. WAAA’s 12þ share
declined from 3.3 to 2.6, but the drop is less than a
full ratings point, and the station’s cumulative rating
remained at 10 percent of the market (near the bot-
tom of the hypothetical market). Up-and-down data
tell a program director that the music probably needs
some fine-tuning in the Monday to Sunday 6 A.M. to
midnight slot. WAAA’s programmer needs to exam-
ine additional pages in the book, however, before
making any major decisions.
Demographic Breakouts
Pages from Arbitron’s Specific Audience (see 5.15)
and Listening Locations (see 5.16) sections illustrate
different ways to display ratings and share data serv-
ing different purposes. Metro and TSA AQH ratings
for several 10-year age groups broken out by gender
(and Men 181 and Women 181), with Persons 12þ
and Teens 12 to 17 listed separately, are presented in
5.14. In 5.15, Metro AQH population estimates are
detailed for the three different places people hear
radio (At Home, In-Car and Other) for drivetime
and three other time periods. These data are
reported separately for Persons 12þ, Men 18þ and
Women 18þ (5.13 shows only Men 18þ). These
Specific Audience and Listening Locations data
help programmers see which dayparts draw which
audience subgroups and where listeners most use
the station. In combination with other information
provided in an Arbitron book, they suggest how
different programming (or additional promotion)
can improve audience composition (and therefore
salability).
Arbitron also reports an hour-by-hour analysis
that includes ten demographic groups by AQH for
the Metro area. A programmer can track a station’s
performance hour-by-hour from 5 A.M. to 1 A.M. to
isolate particularly strong or weak hours during the
broadcast day. Other sections of the Arbitron radio
book include Exclusive Audience and Cume Dupli-
cation, both of which help radio programmers
understand how listeners use radio.
5.14
Metro Audience Trends Page
Arbitron Ratings Co., used with permission.
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
187
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Arbitron radio data also come on diskette or
online in a format called Arbitrend, which reflects
the continuously measured markets and contains
demographics. Programmers for music radio stations
can also purchase (or write) software to accomplish
most of the tedious work involved in developing a
station’s music playlist. (See Chapter 11 on creating
music wheels.) One widely used software program on
the market accounts for 50 different characteristics of
a song when selecting its position and rotation!
Time-Spent-Listening
Programmers are rarely content with the bare facts
reported by Arbitron (or Nielsen in the case of tele-
vision), so they use all these various ratings to make
many different computations. For example, radio
5.15
Specific Audience Page
5.16
Listening Locations Page
Arbitron Ratings Co., used with permission.
Arbitron Ratings Co., used with permission.
188
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
programmers generally want to know how long
their
audience
listens
to
their
station.
Time-
spent-listening (TSL) is computed by multiplying
the number of quarter hours in a daypart times the
rating and dividing by the cumulative audience.
To illustrate, assume we have the Los Angeles
Radio Market Report and want to compute the
18þ TSL for KABC-AM. We can pull the AQH
and cume from the book to produce the TSL. The
TSL for adults 18þ for this station, Monday to Sun-
day, 6 A.M. to midnight, is calculated using the fol-
lowing formula:
TSL ¼ AQH in Time Period  AQH Audience
Cume Audience
AQH in Time Period ¼ 504
AQH Audience ¼ 872 ð00Þ
Cume Audience ¼ 9,875 ð00Þ
TSL ¼ 504  872
9,875
¼ 39:9
*There are 504 quarter hours from 6
A.M. to midnight,
Mon.–Sun.
**Zeros indicate that these numbers are in thousands,
for example, 872 means 87,200.
Therefore, the programmer concludes that the
average length of listening to KABC for an adult
18þ is 39.9 quarter hours during a given week,
6 A.M. to midnight. A high TSL indicates that people
(who listen) are listening for long periods of time,
not that a lot of listening goes on. TSL refers only
to the amount of listening by those who do listen.
Television programmers also calculate time-spent-
viewing using the same formula.
Turnover
Turnover indexes the rate at which an audience
changes, or turns over, during a time period. Turn-
over is calculated by dividing the cumulative audi-
ence by a quarter-hour rating:
Turnover ¼ Cume Households or Persons
AQH Households or Persons
A low turnover rate indicates a loyal audience,
and high turnover means a station lacks “holding
power.” Television stations expect more turnover
than radio stations and go after greater reach. Turn-
over is calculated for public broadcasting and cable
as well as for commercial radio and television.
Tracking the amount of turnover on a graph over
time provides a quick clue to changes in audience
listening or viewing patterns for an individual sta-
tion or service.
Cable Ratings
Nielsen reports cable network ratings data sepa-
rate from broadcast network data for the larger
basic and premium cable services (in addition to
cumulative totals for all basic and pay networks
within the Pocketpiece and NSI Reports). More
than 90 percent of Nielsen’s 10,000 people-meter
sample are cable or satellite subscribers, and
Nielsen issues its Cable National Audience Demo-
graphics Report covering the national audiences
for the largest services drawn from people-meter
data.
In general, the introduction of people meters
has benefited cable services far more than most
broadcast stations or their networks. In those 50
or so local markets measured with paper diaries,
viewers tend to fill in diaries at the week’s end, los-
ing track of where VCR or DVD recordings came
from and forgetting the names of the many cable
networks, so the more familiar-sounding networks
tend to get undeserved diary entries and conse-
quently high ratings. Digital service adds a hundred
or more to the usual list, only exacerbating this
problem. People meters, however, record the exact
channel viewed, the length of viewing (which is
also recorded by traditional passive meters), and
the composition of the audience. Many smaller
local markets, however, continue to be measured
with diaries or diaries plus passive meters.
On the local market level, individual cable net-
works are included in Nielsen’s Cable Activity
Report when they achieve a 3 percent share of audi-
ence (and pay the cost of data analysis and report-
ing). Nielsen measures cable service audiences along
with broadcast station audiences in the all-market
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
189
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
sweeps (using diaries or meters or both). Cable line-
ups differ from franchise to franchise within one
market, however, and accurate tracking of channel
attributions (“I watched Channel 3”) has been diffi-
cult. For example, the Washington, D.C., area has
about 30 cable franchises plus ATT’s FiOS and
DISH and DirecTV, which place the dozens of
cable networks (and some broadcast TV stations)
on widely differing channel numbers.
Moreover, digital cable lineups can locate the
same channel in two or three places (say, 24 and
316 and 1627, with no apparent numbering logic).
In consequence, ratings for the smaller services have
not been stable even within a single market, let alone
nationally (see Chapter 9 on the dream of uniform
channel lineups). Even though the Nielsen metered
markets (covering more than 60 percent of all U.S.
viewing) may eventually migrate to Active/Passive
people meters (A/P) or portable people meters
(PPM) that read codes embedded in the programs
by the producers, there will always be less reliable
diary measurements in the smaller markets.
To qualify for inclusion in the standard televi-
sion sweep reports, a cable service must reach
20 percent of net weekly circulation. In other
words, 20 percent of the market’s television house-
holds must view it for at least five minutes during
the survey week. In the first year of reporting (in
the dinosaur age of 1982), only HBO, WTBS-TV
(the former Superstation, now the TBS cable net-
work), Showtime and ESPN qualified. Two decades
later, however, nearly all of the top 20 cable net-
works qualified in most markets, including (order
varies somewhat from year to year) Discovery,
ESPN, CNN, USA Network, TNT, Lifetime, the
Weather Channel, ESPN2, Nickelodeon, Spike TV,
A&E, TBS, the Learning Channel, CNN Headline
News, MTV, Home & Garden Television (HGTV),
C-SPAN, ABC Family Channel, the History Channel
and Cartoon Network, each of which reaches over
90 million subscribers (see Chapter 9). Galavisión
qualifies where Hispanic viewers make up much of
the population, and other cable services such as
WGN and WWOR easily qualify in some regions
of the country. Cable networks appearing on only
some of a market’s systems, however, have more
difficulty meeting the minimum viewing level, even
when they are regularly watched by the cable sub-
scribers able to receive them.
Although each large cable system operator and
network purchases cable ratings from Nielsen, they
are also interested in research that identifies their
most likely customers. Now a subsidiary of Nielsen,
Claritas offers detailed demographic and behavioral
information in annual reports. Nielsen’s PRIZM
(Potential Rating in Zipped Markets) report combines
ZIP code information with Nielsen data, information
from local governments, magazine subscription lists,
automobile registrations, and other data sources.
Such geodemographic information creates groups of
population segments by lifestyle.
Arbitron competes with Nielsen on the cable
front,
using
two
techniques:
Set-Top
Solutions
(STS) and the PPM mentioned earlier. STS collects
viewer information directly from the cable converter
box or DVR. The portable meters collect informa-
tion from a pager-sized device carried by the viewer.
Arbitron also offers three services to cable operators
and networks: Scarborough, RetailDirect and Retail-
Direct Lite. These services provide qualitative media
and market consumer behavior information, but not
ratings.
Premium Services
Pay-movie services have special measurement pro-
blems, of course (change any tech and “problems”
rise up). Movies, the largest element in their pro-
gramming, appear in repeating and rotating patterns
to attract large cumulative audiences for each fea-
ture. This contrasts with the broadcast television
pattern of scheduling a movie or series episode
only once in prime time (typically) and seeking the
largest possible audience for that one showing.
In digital households, subscribers may have six
channels of HBO, six channels of Starz, eight chan-
nels of Encore, seven channels of various ESPNs,
plus additional multichannel versions of the same
networks in high definition. Even TNT appears in
three places: analog, digital and HD; thus, counting
and
matching
viewing
from
system
to
system
has nearly insurmountable difficulties. In addition,
190
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
six channels of ESPN Sports Pay-Per-View in digital
and the same six again in HD appear on one cable
system. And there are several on-demand channels
on which older programs and events can be pulled
up, for a fee. (These kinds of pay channels are mea-
sured by their buy rates, not household ratings.)
Indeed, viewers shift the times they watch pay
cable so much more than they do broadcast television
(by recording movies at home) that it becomes prob-
lematic to use the same measurement criteria. (See
Chapters 3 and 9 on program evaluation and audi-
ence measurement.) Moreover, the total number of
pay households is relatively small for all services
except HBO, although nearly half of all television
households take one or more pay services, in addition
to digital service. And the large number of basic and
pay-cable television networks subdivide the ratings
into slivers much as radio stations do in major mar-
kets. Premium-channel cable programmers use the
ratings information available to them to judge indi-
vidual program popularity and channel popularity,
but as yet pay networks rarely win specific time per-
iods in competition with broadcasters. Frequently,
however, the cumulative audiences for all showings
of a top-notch movie on HBO equal the size of a
television network’s audience. Although pay-cable
movies usually draw small audiences, original pro-
gramming like Game of Thrones attracts critical
acclaim, Emmy awards and stronger viewing levels.
Nielsen publishes a quarterly Cross-Platform
Video Report and a comprehensive Video Recorder
Usage Study, which can help pay-cable program-
mers make sense of reported viewing. The Nielsen
Homevideo Index, as contrasted with the Nielsen
Station Index, provides many additional specialized
reports for cable programmers.
Rentrak
specializes
in
measuring
video-on-
demand, which is becoming more important as
portable video devices (such as iPads and tablets)
reach greater acceptance with viewers. Mobile OnDe-
mand is Rentrak’s answer to measuring cellphone
viewing and other portable use of media. Nielsen
still struggles expanding its home-based measurement
to portable devices, but competition from Rentrak
and comScore will likely result in new products to
keep Nielsen competitive in the future.
Cable Penetration Measures
Using figures supplied by Nielsen and the industry
itself, the industry regularly updates cable statistics,
reporting how many households have access to
cable at the present time; such households are called
homes passed (HP). As of 2012, more than 99 per-
cent of U.S. households were passed by cable wires;
that is, people in virtually all homes and apartments
could subscribe to cable if they wanted to. Cable pen-
etration is the percentage of television households
actually subscribing to basic cable service (shown as
household penetration in 5.17), which has held
steady at about 61 percent. Actually, the total pene-
tration by the cable networks had neared 91 percent
by 2012, thanks to other multichannel distributors
and the conversion to all-digital television.
Another important figure to the industry is pay
as a percentage of basic cable subscribers because
those are the homes actually signing up. NCTA
no longer reports premium subscribers, but a good
estimate is three-quarters of basic cable subscribers
take one or more pay channels. It is estimated that,
in addition to 70 million subscribers to cable systems,
about 36 million households subscribe to DirecTV,
DISH or other kinds of services, such as wireless
cable, home satellite dishes in their yards or telephone
companies. Giants like AT&T’s FiOS provide the
same cable networks to private homes and offices,
but their penetration is, so far, a tiny percentage.
Like radio, cable, satellite and telephone services
are also concerned with audience turnover. In
cable, churn is the ratio of disconnecting subscribers
to newly connecting cable subscribers (the number
of disconnects divided by the number of new
5.17
2011 Cable Summary Report*
Total Subscribers
(based on 60.6% of 116 million
TV homes)
70,296,000
Homes Passed
128,500,000
Total Cable Systems
7,426
Household Penetration
60.6%
*www.ncta.com (Statistics), estimated, 2011.
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
191
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
connects). The problems associated with a high rate
of churn are described in Chapter 9.
Because
the
audiences
for
many
advertiser-
supported networks are too small (at any one time) to
show in Nielsen ratings books, a number of smaller
basic cable networks estimate their audiences on the
basis of customized research that adjusts the size of the
universeofhomestomatchcablepenetrationinthemar-
kets the cable network already reaches. Many cable net-
works reach only a portion of cable households, and of
course, the audience for any one channel at any one time
can be minute. Direct comparisons of such customized
cable ratings to ordinary ratings can lead to confusion
because nonsubscribers are not counted. Especially for
narrowly targeted cable services, advertisers want
detailed demographic breakouts, which necessitate
expensive customized cable research at the local level.
Online Research Services
Because of interrelationships among internet web-
sites and the traditional media of cable, satellite, tele-
phone and broadcasting, it is not surprising that
Nielsen rapidly developed a system for measuring
internet audiences. Nielsen//NetRatings is one of
two major competitors in this field, the other being
Media Metrix, the web’s oldest rating service. Both
use samples of home and at-work web surfers to
monitor and estimate usage patterns.
Although cable, satellite and telephone delivery
of television have certainly had a huge impact on
audience behaviors, this impact pales in comparison
to the profound and sweeping effects of the internet
on television, as well as lots of other things, and it is
still in the early stages of its development. How and
why people use the web, what they use it for, and
how these things affect other traditional or “old”
media are yet evolving, but some trends can be
gauged with fairly high accuracy (although others
remain highly speculative). The situation for web
audiences is extremely dynamic, almost volatile in
many respects. Chapter 4 discusses in detail what
online ratings show about audience behavior. One
example is the measurement of time-spent-online
(TSO), which by 2010 was 18 hours a week per
adult, on average, and creeping up toward the 31.5
hours spent watching television weekly.8 The meth-
ods and terminology used for measurement of online
computer use are quite different from those used for
broadcast and multichannel measurement.
Web Tracking Services
Nielsen//NetRatings publishes regular reports that
include five sections: Audience Summary, Audience
Profile, Daily/Hourly Traffic, Average Usage and
AOL Audience Report. Audience Summary reports
give a comprehensive profile of the entire web audi-
ence, including the unique audience (average number
of different people who visit a site on each day during
the course of the month), page views, audience demo-
graphics, frequency and time-spent information.
Audience Profile shows demographics for the total
U.S. internet population. This report shows audience
composition, number of sessions per period, average
time spent per session and average pages viewed per
session. Daily/Hourly Traffic breaks down the Audi-
ence Profile data by specific day and hour. Average
Usage includes statistics on the number of sessions,
pages viewed, pages visited per session, time spent per
session and duration of the viewing of a page. AOL
Audience Report shows average time spent and audi-
ence demographics for use within the AOL service.
The Nielsen//NetRatings audience-tracking soft-
ware has several advantages over other approaches
because of its accuracy. The software “sits in the
datastream” and provides an unobstructed log of
all web activity. This unique technique for tracking
users automatically measures the viewing and click-
ing of ad banners (bannertrack), e-commerce activity
(commercetrack), page views cached (that is, stored)
by the browser program (cachetrack) and page load-
ing times. The tracking is unobtrusive to users in
order to limit bias and requires the absolute mini-
mum in company intervention once installed. Soft-
ware updates are also wholly automatic.
Nielsen has also begun to measure web-enabled
television sets. Viewers who use such receivers to
browse websites and stream web programs will be
measured alongside their more traditional program
choices. Nielsen also adapts its STB devices to collect
192
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
viewing data for homes connected to FiOS, which is
AT&T’s answer to broadband distribution of web-
based programs.
The other leading web tracking service, com-
Score’s Media Metrix, produces a variety of reports
from the continuous monitoring of internet audience
behavior. The comScore company surveys 120,000
internet users recruited though random-digit dialing.
Media Metrix also offers in-depth tracking of online
transactions, at-work usage and activity on all web
networks. The detailed description of the Metrix
process illustrates the complexity of the problems
and the seemingly arbitrary nature of some decisions
that must be made to have a workable measurement
system for online usage (see 5.18).
Rentrak also offers measurement of web pro-
gram viewing through its Internet TV Essentials
product. This service gauges how, what, where and
why online television viewing takes place. Rentrak
attempts to measure the shelf life of video content
to help clients optimize their libraries of web pro-
grams. Two types of viewing are considered: live-
streaming and per-transaction downloads, for either
purchased content or rental showings.
5.18
The Media Metrix Method
U
sing its own patented metering methodology, Media
Metrix continuously captures actual usage data from
randomly recruited users, getting representative samples of
tens of thousands of people in homes and businesses
around the world (but excluding college labs, cyber cafes,
airports, hotel business centers, public libraries and K–12
schools where there are certainly lots of computers …). The
Metrix is a software application that works with one’s PC
operating system to passively track all user activity in real
time—click by click, page by page and minute by minute,
measuring only those users who visit the internet at least
one day per month.
The unduplicated audience (cume or reach) is calcu-
lated by adding all at-home users to all at-work users and
then subtracting all users who use both locations. Only the
base-page universal resource locator (URL), or page
address, is counted, even if other files and items are asso-
ciated with it.
By recording whatever keyboard or mouse activity is
taking place, Media Metrix keeps track of each time the
computer is turned on or off, when the machine is on, and
whether a user is actively using the machine. Sixty seconds
after keyboard or mouse activity ceases, the machine is
declared to be “idle.” Viewing time is not credited when
the machine is in the idle state, but as soon as a user moves
the mouse or presses a key, the meter resumes accumulat-
ing viewing credit to the page or application.
When the computer first boots up, the user must select
his or her name from the list of registered users and press
OK. After 30 minutes of “idle” time, the meter presents its
user identification screen again to ensure that a change in
user is captured. If at any time the user changes, it is a
simple matter of clicking the meter’s icon to recall the user
identification screen. The meter applies viewing credit to
only one application or program at a time. If, for example,
the user is using a word-processing application while his or
her browser is in the background downloading web
pages, the word-processing application receives viewing
credit—not the browser.
Whenever a page from the web is displayed in a
browser, the meter records the full URL. The Media Metrix
Meter records the name and details of each file coming into
the PC over a network connection. The meter also records
information about each graphic file, banner ad, sound file
(wav, mid, mp3), streaming media and so on. The meter
also can record additional detail on demand, such as
specific activity within applications.
Once or twice per year, a certain percentage of
respondents are asked to complete qualitative questionnaires
to more fully describe their lifestyles beyond the key demo-
graphic data. Household-level demographics are updated
annually by asking a representative from the household to
visit a website and update the profile. Additionally, twice per
year, a portion of the sample is provided with “scanning”
software, which scans the PC to record the technical con-
figuration and to log which software programs are installed.
The weakness of the Media Metrix method is that it favors
heavy web users and excludes light users (many of whom
may be fearful of viruses and worms or wary of providing
fodder for commercial advertising messages).
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
193
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
In addition to Nielsen//NetRatings, comScore
Media Metrix and Rentrak, other services “audit”
server-based
information
supplied
by
websites.
I/Pro offers its I/Audit service, and Audit Bureau of
Circulation (the same ABC that audits newspaper
and magazine circulation) provides a service called
the ABC Interactive Web Site Activity Audit Report.
All these measurement systems have strengths and
weaknesses that favor some sites and some kinds
of usage over others. You’ll be rolling in gold if
you’re the one who comes up with the technology
that advertisers like, is fairest to all users and is
most widely adopted.
Online Ratings Terminology
Page views (also known as page impressions) are
usually defined as one or more online files presented
to a viewer as a single document as a result of a
single request received by the server. Visits are
a series of interactions with a site by a visitor—
without 30 consecutive minutes of inactivity.
Companies that focus on advertising measure-
ment, such as ABC Interactive Audits, are concerned
with such variables as ad display, ad download, ad
impression, ad impressions ratio, ad request and
click/ad interaction. To date, banners have been
one of the most successful internet advertising meth-
ods, but for programmers, it is important to under-
stand that advertising banners are not separate from
the “program” content; they are somewhat like hav-
ing a changing billboard in a live sporting event.
Online, there is no flow, no break, and no need to
zip or zap, although plenty of ad messages encour-
age the user to click away. The key measurement in
e-commerce is the click-through, defined as the
result of clicking on an advertisement that links to
the advertiser’s website or another page within the
website (exclusive of nonqualifying activity and
internal users).
As you would guess, different web tracking
services use slightly different terminology. Media
Metrix estimates a site’s (1) unique visitors (the
number of different people visiting the property in a
30-day period); (2) reach (percentage of projected
individuals who visited a designated website or
category among the total number of projected indi-
viduals using the World Wide Web during a given
reporting period); (3) average usage days per user;
(4) average unique pages per user per day and
month; and (5) average minutes spent per person
per page, per day and per month. As explained in
5.18, Media Metrix’s measure of unique pages
counts the number of different URLs visited by a
person on a particular day. For example, a user
viewing a stock-price page who hits the refresh but-
ton repeatedly throughout the day will be counted as
visiting a single unique page for the day.
Nielsen//NetRatings has similar terminology,
covering three critical areas: site activity (sites vis-
ited, URLs within a site visited, duration of visits
and duration and frequency of sessions), advertising
activity (actual ad banners viewed, advertisers, sites
the ads ran on and ads clicked on), and user profile
(age, gender, marital status, education, occupation,
income and ethnicity). Of all these measures, pro-
grammers are most interested in unique visitors
and reach, because they are most like broadcasting
and cable audience measurements, and also perhaps
site activity as an assessment of content popularity.
Matching
Attempts to combine the traditional media content of
print or TV and related internet sites first occurred
when NBC collaborated with Digital-Convergence.com
to allow viewers to link their personal computers with
television programming and advertising during NBC’s
2000 Olympics, its national election coverage and its
fall 2000 network television season. Advertisers could
then track consumers interested in their products and
tailor online information accordingly. The system
enabled advertisers to communicate directly with these
potential customers and not waste resources on those
consumers for whom the brand is either irrelevant or
not the preferred one. Whether the potential customers
thought it was such a good idea is an open question.
All television networks continue to look for
ways to “involve” the television and web audiences.
TruTV argues that cost per involvement (CPI) is a
key measure of return on investment for advertisers
who fund programming. Originally, truTV (back
194
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
when it was Court TV) introduced its “lean for-
ward” campaign, noting that viewing TV while con-
nected to the internet was different than the old
“lean back” model of passive viewing. Now, the
channel uses custom analysis of Nielsen data to
assess the “stickiness” of its website for program
viewers. It did, however, stop short of measuring
the direct effects of product sales because, like
most other advertiser-supported channels, truTV
felt it could not be accountable for the creativity of
the advertising message.
More recently, the issue has become click fraud, or
concern for the accuracy of click counts. To the indus-
try’s dismay, two quite different kinds of fraud have
been detected. In one case, a group of people flood a
site with clicks in order to earn money (hosts of search
ads make money according to how many people access
the ad, and an extra-large number of clicks earns more
money—enough to pay off conspirators). In the other
case, companies with display ads normally pay to stay
up on the site only until they attract a certain number of
clicks, and then excess clicks can knock the ad off early
(an advantage to a competitor).
Beyond this purposeful deception, measurement
definition is an issue. For example, is a person two
unique visitors or one if he/she accesses the same site
from home and work on the same day? Eventually,
the Media Rating Council is expected to establish
uniform definitions for valid, invalid and fraudulent
clicks, as well as standards for auditing tracking
numbers (as soon as a million companies can agree
on them).
Ratings Limitations
Although many broadcast, cable and web program-
mers are aware of the limitations of ratings and
user
counts,
in
practice
these
limitations
are
rarely considered. This does not result from igno-
rance or carelessness so much as from the pressure
to do daily business using some yardstick. Pro-
grammers, program syndicators, sales staffs, sta-
tion reps and advertising agencies all deal with the
same numbers. In any one broadcast market, all
participants—those buying and selling programs,
those selling and buying time—refer to the same
sets of numbers (Nielsen reports in TV, Arbitron
in radio), and they have done so for decades. The
“numbers” for any single market usually show a
consistent pattern that makes sense in general to
those who know local history (such as changes in
power, formats and ownership). Although broad-
casters and the ratings companies know that the
“numbers” are imperfect, they remain the industry
standard. In practice the numbers are perceived as
“facts,” not estimates, like it or not.
Occasionally a gross error will require a ratings
company to reissue a book, but for the most part,
small statistical inequities are simply overlooked. To
eliminate as much error as possible and refine meth-
ods suited to the newer media, the major ratings
companies use advisory boards that suggest how to
improve the ratings estimates. Because a change in
ratings methodology always means additional costs
passed on to broadcasters, the rate of improvement
will continue to be conservative now that the shift to
people meters has been accomplished.
The major limitations of broadcast and cable
ratings are briefly summarized as follows. Until use
of the internet as an advertising medium grows con-
siderably, the problem of limited use overwhelms all
other methodological considerations, and adverti-
sers are the ones who pay for ratings research. But
it won’t be long. Advertising on Facebook, in partic-
ular, has had a monumental effect on advertisers’
perspectives. All those hundreds of thousands and
millions of eyeballs…Nonetheless, the following
seven practical and theoretical problems limit the
validity, reliability, significance and generalizability
of broadcast and cable ratings data.
1.
Sample Size
Although each ratings company attempts to reach a
sample that represents the population distribution
geographically (by age, sex, income and so on), a
shortfall occasionally occurs in a market. Such
shortfalls are in fact routine in radio market ratings
and also occur, although less frequently, in television
market ratings. In these instances, certain demo-
graphic groups have to be weighted to adjust for
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
195
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the lack of people in the sample (such as too few
men between 25 and 49).
Weighting by large amounts makes the estimates
less reliable. The amount of unreliability is related to
the (unknown) differences in responses between those
who did respond in the sample and those who did not
cooperate or bother to comply with all of the proce-
dures. An expected return rate of 100 diaries from
teenagers, for example, with an actual return rate of
20, should create strong skepticism about how repre-
sentative the 20 responders are. The 80 who did not
respond would undoubtedly represent this segment of
the audience better and more accurately, but because
their media usage is not known, the ratings services
use the 20 responses and compound the error by
assigning a weight of 5 to each of the 20 responses
(to calculate the number of respondents in this age
group as a proportional part of the total sample).
Although weighting is a scientifically acceptable and
perfectly valid procedure, it assumes that those
responses being weighted closely represent those
responses that are missing (see 5.19 for more on sam-
pling errors). In our hypothetical example, the
responses of too few individuals represent too many
other people/households.
Sample size is the one limitation that comes to
most people’s minds when they hear about how rat-
ings are compiled. The typical “person on the street”
5.19
Standard Error
T
he concept of standard error is not a ratings limitation
but rather part of a mathematical model whose use
reduces some of the problems associated with rating pro-
cedures. In practice, however, very few people using
audience ratings ever take standard error into consider-
ation. The “numbers” are seen as factual; sampling errors
and other errors or weaknesses in research methodology
are not considered in any way.
In essence, using the standard error model compensates
for the fact that ratings are produced from a sample of
people, not a complete count of an entire population.
Whenever researchers project sample findings into the
general population from which that sample was drawn,
some error necessarily occurs. A standard error figure
establishes the range around a given estimate within which
the actual number probably falls. The range suggests how
high or how low the actual number may be. The formula for
standard error is
SE ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
pð100  pÞ
n
r
where SE ¼ Standard error
p ¼ audience estimate expressed as a ratio
n ¼ sample size
For example, suppose that a random sample of
1,200 people produces a rating of 20. The standard
error associated with this rating is computed as
follows:
SE ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
20ð100  20Þ
1; 200
s
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
20ð80Þ
1; 200
s
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1:33
p
¼ 1:15
A rating of 20 therefore has a standard error of plus or
minus 1.15 points—meaning that the actual rating could
be anywhere from a low of 18.85 to a high of 21.15.
Another difficulty in calculating error is determining
how confident we want to be of the results. It is possible to
be very confident (with a 95 percent probability of being
right) or somewhat confident (with only a 65 percent
probability of being right). Nielsen ratings are generally
calculated to the lesser standard. Most social science
research uses the higher standard. Nielsen includes stan-
dard error formulas in all their ratings books for those
wishing to calculate error in specific ratings and shares,
but undeniably, printing the range for each rating/share
would make ratings books unusable. Nonetheless, the
range is the most accurate version of each rating or share,
given its database, which may itself introduce a great
deal more error.
196
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
response is “How can a few thousand people be used
to measure what millions of people watch or listen
to?” They are mistaken; the sample sizes used by the
ratings companies are not the major problem. The
representativeness of those selected for the sample is.
2.
Lack of Representation
The major ratings companies long refused to sample
from group living quarters such as college dormito-
ries, bars, hotels, motels, hospitals, nursing homes,
military barracks and so on. The problem with mea-
suring such viewing is that the number of individuals
who are viewing varies, sometimes greatly, making it
nearly impossible to determine how many diaries
or people-meter buttons need to be provided. The
Nielsen people-meter ratings also fail to measure
the number of people viewing in offices, workplaces,
and country clubs—or who are watching battery-
operated TV sets on beaches and at sporting events
(there are more than 10 million portable TV sets in
the United States, to say nothing of watching via
computers, tablets or iPhones).
In
the
latest
Total-TV
Audience
Monitor
(T-TAM),
a
national
survey,
Nielsen
Media
Research estimated that about 44 million adults
(and 32 percent of adults aged 18 to 49) watched
television in out-of-home locations each week. As a
result, Nielsen finally began including college stu-
dents living away from home in its ratings because
the survey showed that college apartments and resi-
dence halls were among the most common out-
of-home locations for TV viewing. Nonetheless,
only students whose families already participate in
Nielsen’s surveys can be included—so they do not
represent new, independent families—but at least
dorm, fraternity, sorority and off-campus apartment
viewing now can influence ratings.
The rest of out-of-home viewing, however, only
appears in special reports, not the weekly ratings.
Nielsen argues that such viewing accounts for only
a small percentage of total national television view-
ing and is therefore not worth pursuing (that is, is
not cost-effective for broadcasters to pay to mea-
sure). Critics argue that, given that the number of
TV households in America is 116.2 million, with
2.56 bodies per household, totally 297.2 million
people, the loss of 44 million more out-of-house
(OOH) viewers is very much affecting program rat-
ings, and that other OOH viewers need to be added.
TV programs and some radio formats that
appeal to narrow demographic segments are widely
known to go uncounted in calculating the ratings.
Estimates for Late Night with Jimmy Fallon indicate
that as much as one-fifth of the actual audience used
to go uncounted by Nielsen’s ratings largely because
of the exclusion of the types of locations where
many people watched the program (college dorms
and bars). The same was true (and may still be to
some extent) of Fallon’s predecessor, Late Night
with Conan O’Brien, and its competitor, The Late
Show with David Letterman.
Also,
cable
sports
services
such
as
ESPN,
watched in nearly every bar in the country, suffer
from the omission of group audiences. At least 59 per-
cent of ESPN’s 5.4 million adult viewers watch out-
side the home each week. The wide popularity of
sports bars in recent years (with multiple TV screens
and patrons switching among different channels of
ESPN) adds substantially to the inaccuracy of sam-
ples used to measure sports viewing. Group viewing
of soap operas is another unmeasured phenomenon.
3.
Ethnic Representation
Data for ethnic groups are among the most hotly de-
bated aspects of broadcast and cable audience esti-
mates. Ratings companies have long grappled with
the difficulty of getting randomly selected minority
households to cooperate with the ratings company
by filling out a diary or having a meter installed. Com-
panies have offered higher honoraria for participating
in order to gain a representative sample of both His-
panics/Latinos and African-Americans. Nonetheless,
many minorities understandably remain apathetic to
the needs of ratings companies, despite financial
incentives.
Critics argue that those minorities who agree to
go along with prescribed procedures are much more
like white sample participants and are atypical of the
ethnic group they are intended to represent. Thus, a
participating black family may not be like the vast
majority of black families in a given viewing area.
Ethnic populations are undoubtedly undercounted,
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
197
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
and those who are counted are often unrepresentative
of their ethnic groups. Because no standard of “truth”
exists by which to compare samples to an entire ethnic
group, ratings companies and advertising agencies
inevitably use the numbers in front of them to make
decisions.
Nielsen does identify African-American and His-
panic audiences in its local market rating reports, but
the information in some markets is limited to penetra-
tion, counting their presence in the same table as mul-
tiset, cable and DVD homes. At the national level,
however, Nielsen’s monthly reports have an added 20
African-American demographic categories. In addi-
tion, primarily to serve Univision and Telemundo,
Nielsen started its Nielsen Hispanic Television Index
(NHTI) in 1992, but more recently, Hispanic viewers
of
Spanish-language
networks
were
folded
into
national people-meter ratings just like other television
viewers. For markets with a significant Hispanic pop-
ulation, Nielsen has phased out it separate local rat-
ings report for those homes (HSI) in favor of the NSI
report.
In other countries, the enormous complexity of
the racial and economic situation goes far beyond
what U.S. ratings companies must deal with (see
5.20 on what is measured in South Africa). Every-
where, advertisers and media programmers need to
know what languages their viewers or listeners prefer
and what electronic capabilities their households
have. In many developing countries, especially rural
areas, viewing and even listening often takes place in
large groups, which alters the relationship between a
5.20
Going Beyond Race
O
nce freed from apartheid, South Africa’s volatile history of racial division and tension led its broadcasters and mar-
keters to seek out ways to avoid categorizing people primarily by race in research. A Living Standards Measure
(LSM) was developed that clustered people into ten distinctive segments on the basis of degree of urbanization, owner-
ship of cars and major appliances, languages spoken, and access to basic services (water, electricity, telephones,
media). Because LMS is a multivariate segmentation tool constructed from 29 variables, it is a far stronger differentiator
than any single demographic variable. The full list includes such variables as the following:
Electricity
Flush toilet in house or plot
Electric stove or hot plate
Microwave oven
Water in home or on plot
Hot running water
Traditional hut
Built-in kitchen sink
Washing machine
Tumble dryer
Refrigerator/freezer
Deep freezer
Dishwasher
No domestic worker
Sewing machine
Vacuum cleaner or floor polisher
TV set
VCR in household
Home telephone
No cell phone in household
Pay/satellite channels
Stereo or music center
PC in home
Fewer than two radio sets in home
One or more sedan cars
Home security service
Home in Gauteng/Western Cape
Home in nonurban area outside Gauteng/Western Cape
The LSM is widely used in both programming and advertising to define target markets. It is also used in customized for-
mats in other parts of Africa, and efforts have begun to use LSM as a global marketing tool.
Daan van Vuuren
former Director of Audience Research
SABC, South Africa
Reprinted by kind permission of Linda van Vuuren.
198
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
program and its audience from a programming per-
spective and certainly makes counting viewers or lis-
teners even more problematic.
4.
Cooperation
All ratings companies use accurate and statistically
correct sampling procedures: People/households are
selected at random to represent (within a small
margin of error) the population from which they
were drawn. For representativeness to occur in
practice, however, the people/households originally
selected must cooperate when the ratings company
invites their participation. In the past, when Nielsen
used the passive TV-set meters (before people
meters were developed), cooperation was not an
overwhelming problem. Since the late 1980s, coop-
eration rates for allowing the installation of the
more complicated people-meter technology by Niel-
sen have steadily declined to alarmingly low levels.
Studies have reported refusal rates of one-half to
two-thirds for people-meter installations among
those
contacted
in
original
random
samples.
Refusal rates were highest among ethnic minorities
and younger adult males.
The same studies also reported sharp declines
in the area of diary cooperation. Nielsen diary
response rates for the November sweeps went
from about 43 percent in the early 1990s to around
28 percent by 2000. Arbitron diary response rates
went from 40 percent in 1995 to 35 percent by
1999.
Again,
participation
differs
among
key
demographic and lifestyle groups. Ratings for chil-
dren and teens are hugely problematic. Moreover,
long-term cooperation from all viewers continues
to be a problem. Using a diary requires partici-
pants’ willingness to train themselves to fill it out
as they view or listen and to learn how to fill it out
correctly. People meters require pushing buttons
every 15 minutes as onscreen reminders interrupt
viewing. They also require the householder to
assign spare buttons to casual guests.
Nielsen’s reliance on diaries continues in non-
metered markets across the U.S. One of the authors
of this chapter was selected to participate in the
local market ratings one year ago and, again, this
past year. Upon receipt of the diary and complete
instructions, the author discovered that one of the
first tasks was to list the TV channels regularly
watched for each of the TV sets in the household.
Since the author routinely “watches” more than 50
channels on a regular basis, sampling program
offerings at various times of day or night, this
was, at the very least an arduous task. The author
felt like tearing pages out of the Time-Warner
Channel
Guide print
publication and stapling
them to the diary with the words “good luck” writ-
ten on them. Moreover, the week selected for com-
pleting the diary was a totally atypical one in terms
of outside commitments and events that would
result in a completely unfair representation of a
normal weekday/weekend viewing period. Suffice
to say, the diary was not filled out and returned
last year, despite follow-up reminders.
Not to be outdone, the Nielsen folks called
again this past April, never leaving a message.
Thinking that was the end of it, the author was
then surprised to receive a diary and instructions
for participation this year. Nothing had changed
in terms of the process becoming more user friendly
or more in line with how most people watch televi-
sion. Again the diary was not returned, despite the
usual follow-up reminders.
Based on the author’s personal experience, it
seems appropriate to ask how reliable the local mar-
ket ratings were and will be, given poor cooperation
rates to begin with and coupled with such a major
piece of work to complete what was asked. The Niel-
sen folks would of course say that these were not
usual circumstances, but coupled with other coopera-
tion problems, the limitations of such procedures in a
highly technological age seem obvious.
Another problem in gaining cooperation that has
emerged in the last five years centers on having access
to a representative sample to participate in the ratings
(national or local market level). More and more
households have no landline telephones (“cord cut-
ters”) and are not accessible through various house-
hold listing that could be used for the sample. Of
those households with landline phones, many have
caller ID and won’t answer unfamiliar calls and/or
have put their landline phones on do-not-call lists,
which would make them unavailable to Nielsen.
Another way of collecting data, the telephone
coincidental method—usually assumed to be the
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
199
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
most
reliable
method—has
its
defects,
too.
A
2004 study conducted by Ball State University indi-
cated that phone surveys are “largely useless” for
determining media behavior. The three-part study
combined phone surveys, diaries and observation
with vastly different results: On average, people
reported through phone surveys that they watched
only 121 minutes of television per day. At the same
time, diarists logged 278 minutes, and researchers
observed individuals actually watching 319 minutes.
Other results showed that phone survey responders
said they spent only 29 minutes online per day, but
diarists said they logged on for 57 minutes each day,
while observations recorded people going online for
78 minutes a day.
Whenever cooperation rates are low, for what-
ever reason, the participating sample probably differs
from those who declined. Those who cooperate typi-
cally demonstrate a highly favorable view of the
medium and generally use it more often than those
who refuse to cooperate. Refusals may indicate a
lack of interest in the medium or, at the least, too
light a use to warrant learning a fairly complicated
but infrequently applied process. It is easy to visualize
a single person or a young, childless couple who says
to the ratings company, “No thanks, I’m (we’re)
almost never home. I (we) hardly ever watch TV at
all.” Thus, those who view more or use the medium
more are probably overrepresented in the sample,
resulting in correspondingly inflated viewing esti-
mates and unrealistic measures of the total television
audience’s preferences. Of all the limitations on rat-
ings, cooperation remains one of the two most signif-
icant and persistent problems.
5.
Definition of Viewing/Listening/Visiting
And here’s a head-scratcher: No one seems to be
even remotely certain of precisely what it means to
“view” television or “listen” to radio. It sounds so
simple on the surface, but consider this: For those
using people meters to be counted as “viewers,”
household members must activate the people-
meter computer with the handheld device only
while in the room where the television set is on.
At regular intervals, viewers are reminded of the
need to “log in” by pointing their handheld
device at the TV set. In all systems, the sole crite-
rion for being a viewer is being in the room.
Viewers can very easily be reading magazines,
talking, thinking, playing a game—in short, pay-
ing little or no attention to the picture or sound—
but are still counted as viewers.
Conversely, a viewer might be in a nearby room
doing a menial task and listening intently to a pro-
gram’s sound. This person is normally not counted
as a viewer. Being there may or may not constitute
“viewing.” More crucial, watching the same content
via computer screen is not included as viewing. What
the ratings services measure, therefore, are potential
viewers—with the option of letting traditional televi-
sion (or radio) receivers occupy their attention. To
date, no commercial techniques measure viewing as
a function of the attention paid to what is on or to
the way that content is used. And viewing or listening
via the new reception media appears only in special
studies, not regular ratings.
Among radio audiences, the parallel problem is
no uniform definition (or no definition at all) of what
it means to “listen” to radio. When in someone else’s
car on the way to school or work while this person
has the radio on, should the passenger be counted as
a “listener” to station WXXX? How about offices
where a radio station plays in the background while
people work? Are they “listening”? Is the music or
information what each person would have chosen
had they been able to select the station? Moreover,
what does “listening” mean? If a person is paying
attention to other things and has the radio on for
background noise or a kind of companionship,
should that person “count” as a listener?
As for what it means to “visit” a website, the
absence of universally agreed-upon definitions poses
inherent interpretation problems when trying to
understand what the numbers mean or represent. In
this instance, the problem centers on defining what it
means to “use” a website, a parallel to what it means
to “view” television. To be counted as a site visitor,
does one merely have to access the site to be counted
or, perhaps more importantly, should that person
count the same as someone who, while at the site,
goes to other options or pages that are components
of the site? Other questions that need to be answered
200
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
include “What exactly does someone look at when at
the site?” “For how long does the user look at a par-
ticular item or the site generally?” “Why were none
of the options accessed?” “Why were one or more
options accessed?” As difficult as it is to come up
with a valid definition of what constitutes “viewing”
television, it seems easy by comparison to defining
what goes on with a user while he or she is at a web-
site. The contemplate the strange things people do
with smart phones …
Both television and radio ratings are plagued by
the industry’s unwillingness to provide a standard-
ized, widely agreed-upon definition of viewing and
listening, and now the problem is extended to the
online world. So long as the advertising industry
remained satisfied with the ratings numbers generated
for TV and radio, there was little reason for concern.
As Nielsen moved to people meters, however, and as
media choices proliferated rapidly through cable and
satellite-delivered media services to the internet and
mobile handheld media, the reported numbers for
conventional media showed progressive shrinkage.
Advertisers began to ask what was going on, and
the broadcast and cable industries began to scramble
for explanations. Broadcasting and cable have contin-
ued to point the finger of blame toward the ratings
services, questioning their methods and the validity of
the numbers they report. Lost in all the ongoing mea-
surement arguments is the crux of the problem—no
one knows what the ratings services are supposed to
be measuring in the first place. This debate has no
satisfactory means of resolution until basic definitions
are standardized.
6.
Station Tampering
A continuing problem for ratings is that sometimes
stations
attempt
to
influence
the
outcome
of
the ratings by running contests during the measure-
ment period. Arbitron and Nielsen place warnings
on the cover of their ratings books advising users of
stations’ questionable ethics. Of course, there is a
gray area: Was the promotional activity (called
hyping or hypoing) really a normal contest or one
designed to boost (hypo) the ratings?
Warning labels are especially ineffective for the
advertising industry when the agencies get their
numbers from computer tapes or online services.
There is no “book” on which a warning can
appear. The problem of hyping has grown in recent
years, with some local newscasts promoting huge
cash giveaways during sweeps. Many industry
experts predict year-round measurement for televi-
sion that abolishes sweeps periods will eventually
solve the hyping problem.
7.
Device Limitations
Not everyone has faith in the reliability of people
meters. After 30 years of depending on one ratings
system, Nielsen’s abrupt change in 1987 from
passive meters and diary-based national television
ratings to people meters created an uproar. The
shift happened all in one year, and, with so
much at stake, many in the industry felt unpre-
pared. One objection to people meters centers on
what happens when the handheld devices are not
correctly operated. When mistakes are made, as is
inevitable, viewing is invalidated and not counted
in the ratings. Given the high likelihood that peo-
ple will have occasional mechanical difficulties
and that children and teens will “fool around”
with the meter, much legitimate viewing may be
lost. Nielsen argues the necessity of omitting fig-
ures where the device was misused, claiming that
such inclusions would produce unrealistic figures.
Nielsen further claims that in a national sample of
12,000 households, occasional omissions have
only a negligible impact on ratings. Not everyone
agrees, however.
Another people-meter problem occurs with
sample composition. The difficulties previously
discussed concerning who chooses to become
part of the sample and who refuses are worsened,
not resolved, by people meters. Nielsen’s own
studies show that people-meter cooperators differ
from noncooperators in that the former are youn-
ger, more urban and have smaller families (they
may also differ in other unreported ways). Older
people and those living in rural areas are under-
represented in the people-meter sample, in part
because of many people’s reluctance to learn to
use “another new technology.” It is, however, rec-
ognized that Nielsen’s previous national sample
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
201
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
overrepresented older viewers and that the post-
1987 sample composition more accurately repre-
sents the country’s overall population.
A third limitation centers on a new form of
resistance
to
allowing
Nielsen
to
install
the
people-meter hardware. Installing the older pas-
sive meter involved little or no hassle for partici-
pants.
People
meters,
however,
require
a
substantial amount of wiring and hole drilling.
For many people, allowing workers into their
homes to do such work is an intolerable intrusion.
And, of course, if households allowing the instal-
lation do so in part because they are eager to be
part of the television sample, they do not repre-
sent the overall population and probably produce
inflated viewing estimates and distortions in pro-
gram preferences.
A fourth and final device-related limitation
occurs because people meters transform generally
passive viewers into active viewers. Every time a
participant enters the television room or leaves,
the handheld device must be activated. Such
behavior involves more conscious decisions to
view, and about what to view and when to stop
viewing, than does usual television behavior.
Research shows that most viewing gets done
with little self-awareness on the viewer’s part.
Now, viewers with people meters must actively
record their behavior, and the results are probably
atypical viewing. Nielsen maintains that people-
meter users rapidly become accustomed to them,
and “normal” viewing habits soon return, similar
to the way viewers become accustomed to using
remote controls.
Nonetheless, the many problems with sample,
hardware, and the unnatural state of “active” view-
ing resulting from using handheld controls have
prompted Nielsen to forge ahead with passive people
meters. These are electronic devices equipped with
infrared sensors that identify people present in the
room and record that information along with the
tuned program. While these passive people meters
may overcome the “activity” criticism, testing shows
that many people feel that the camera needed to
record a person’s presence in the room has spied on
them. Nielsen and Arbitron have also been testing
various kinds of portable people meters for many
years, including a pager-sized PPM. (It has to be car-
ried around or worn on the belt or wrist.) Until the
technology of such ratings devices improves and is
demonstrated as effective and appealing to audience
participants in test samples, the problems inherent
with the present system remain and pose major obsta-
cles for interpreting what audiences are actually lis-
tening to or watching.
Whether a ratings system uses people meters,
infrared sensors recording the presence of viewers in
a room, diaries, household meters, portable devices
or some yet-to-be-developed variation on these meth-
ods, ratings remain estimates of audience preferences,
always subject to a certain undetermined margin of
error (this margin may be quite small or very large;
it is not known with any certainty). Previously, the
media industry’s temporary solution was to examine
more than one set of numbers, but maturation of the
industry has resulted in fewer independent sources of
information about audiences (see 5.21, which dis-
cusses overreliance on Nielsen).
Moreover, considering numbers from multiple
sources and multiple methods is a stopgap while
awaiting a more valid measuring system. When all
the numbers from different sources agree, certainly
confidence in their accuracy rises. When there are
variations, programmers and advertisers are left in
the uncomfortable quandary of deciding which num-
bers to trust and which numbers to use. Some televi-
sion programs and radio formats will not receive a
completely fair rating regardless of which system is
used—or even if a combination of measures is used.
Children’s and very light adult viewing will probably
always remain uncertain.
Future Challenges
As
the
broadcast/cable
and
online/interactive
worlds collide, we all expect big changes in the
years to come. Traditional measurement services
will certainly have to improve in order to measure
smaller and smaller audiences with even greater
accuracy. Google is set to challenge Nielsen with a
202
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
media ratings system that links home computers
wirelessly to television sets (and those ubiquitous
boxes and DVRs). You can expect that electronic
feedback on usage will be built into television sets,
game players, smart phones, tablets and who
knows what. This feedback will give advertisers
near real-time and much more accurate measure-
ment of media activity in general and commercial
viewing in particular—whether you want it or not.
The electronics that supply this information will be
invisibly built into all your toys. So far, Nielsen is
intent on acquiring smaller companies that use new
devices that measure media activity and then fold-
ing the information into its existing, specialized
reports.
At some time in not-so-far future, this type of
real-time data collection could supplant Nielsen’s
people-meter ratings system, regardless of who
owns and sells the data. Fortunately or not, technol-
ogy to embed a “signature” into all forms of media
content has been established, so the concept is out
there. Devices that track audience behavior are
likely to solve the counting problem—if only the
issue of what is to be counted can be decided (with
sufficient agreement among the parties concerned).
If DVRs make the practice of skipping commer-
cials widespread, the future of advertising support
for programming is also in question, leaving the like-
lihood of a pay-per-use system (on demand). Audi-
ence measurement is largely for the benefit of
5.21
The Trap of Overreliance on Nielsen
O
ne serious manifestation of the broadcast and cable
companies’ continued reliance on Nielsen data as
their major if not sole source of audience viewing data
occurred in the fall of 2003 and remains a matter of con-
siderable controversy with huge consequences for adverti-
sers and media distributors alike. As the ratings numbers
came in for the first month of the fall network prime-time
season, sharp, statistically significant declines in young
adult males appeared. Among males aged 18 to 34,
Nielsen reported declines as high as 12 percent; among
males aged 18 to 24, the drop was 20 percent. For many
advertisers who specifically buy programs that the network
guarantees will have certain percentages of males in these
age groups, this drastic reduction represented potential
losses of millions of dollars in sales (and losses of millions in
anticipated advertising revenue for the guaranteeing
networks).
Network executives were quick to respond that Niel-
sen’s sample was not representative of the total population
of males aged 18 to 34 and that Nielsen’s measurement
methodology was responsible for the reported declines.
Advertisers, by contrast, argued that such declines reflected
a lack of interest on the part of young males in many net-
work programs. Others pointed to the many activity choices
that appeal more to young males than watching network
television in prime time. Such choices include playing video
games (for example, PlayStation II or Xbox) or computer
games, surfing the web, writing blogs and downloading
and listening to music, as well as passively viewing DVDs
and other prerecorded materials. Nielsen fiercely defended
its numbers and methodologies, providing detailed expla-
nations that supported four conclusions.
1. Men aged 18 to 34 watched prime-time television
with about the same frequency as in previous seasons,
but they viewed for shorter periods of time; there are
more days in which men in the key age group did not
watch television at all.
2. Newly added sample members showed less decline in
viewing than those continuing in the sample.
3. A combination of incentives and “coaching” of sample
participants was successful in overcoming the fatigue
of button-pushing.
4. Playing video games and watching DVDs did increase
for men aged 18 to 24 years, but somewhat at the
expense of DCR use.
It is clear that Nielsen numbers remain limited in their
accuracy. While once the various parties were willing to
overlook inaccuracies and agreed to accept ratings num-
bers as a common currency required for “doing business,”
the rise of competing media such as the internet and the
threat of DVRs has generated a widespread challenge to
traditional measurement practices.
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
203
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
advertisers. If the audience pays for individual pro-
grams or channels, will the ratings really matter?
Restaurants don’t live or die by the little response
cards people fill out at the end of the meal! The
price of the meals, the number of patrons and the
potential return visits measure success. In a similar
way, networks may become retailers of their wares,
just as book publishers and motion picture studios
are. In the meantime, branded products with the
name of major companies proliferate in television
programs. Everyone is looking ahead.
Social media like Facebook and Twitter have
been widely credited with energizing audiences for
films, products/services and television programs/
series. One objective is to engage viewers, turning
them from indifferent, passive viewers into active,
enthusiastic viewers who make specific programs a
must-see on a weekly basis. Social media are also
used to maintain interest in a series while it is on
hiatus and especially as a new season approaches.
Heightened anticipation is key to building interest
and carrying it over to the start of a new season.
Cable channels like TNT, USA and AMC are exam-
ples of cable nets that put a lot of effort into trying
to fuel buzz for their series. Part of engagement is to
get viewers talking (via the Internet social network
sites) among themselves, sharing their thoughts on
favorite characters, episodes, relationships, etc.
In an interview, CBS Marketing Group Presi-
dent George Schweitzer pointed out that “Technol-
ogy is an enabler. It’s enabling us to engage our
viewers in the conversation—a two-way conversa-
tion where it used to be just one way.”9 He went
on to provide examples where CBS series’ stars are
often active on Twitter with regular tweets, interact-
ing with viewers where all Twitter followers can
read the exchanges and participate themselves. He
also added that social media enable CBS TV shows
to fuel word-of-mouth that is presumed to help build
and maintain the series’ audience.
The rub comes when searching for a connection
between those programs that are successful in
exploiting social media and generating conversations
among many thousands of followers and the corre-
sponding rating. Do those series with lots of social
buzz show ratings increases over those with less
buzz? What does it cost to continue active participa-
tion by the network in social networking? Will
advertisers be willing to look beyond the cold num-
bers of ratings (overall and in key demographic
areas) and be willing to pay more for the same num-
bers for a series that has ample evidence of an appar-
ently energized and active audience? A survey in
2011 found that 40% of U.S. Internet users in the
U.S. are fans or followers on Facebook and/or Twit-
ter of at least one network TV show or network.10
But, as CBS’s Schweitzer concluded: “It’s really hard
to point to one specific thing, like Tweet Week, that
affects ratings. From the amount of tweeting that
there was, the responses we got and the thousands
of new fans, we know that it [a show] was success-
ful. But in terms of ratings, we’ll never know.”
Until there is a reliable means of measuring
social network traffic’s tie-in to the size of the audi-
ence (via ratings or other such measurement), net-
works will have to rely on persuasion to convince
advertisers to pay more for those programs that
are particularly effective in generating social net-
work buzz. The biggest social media themselves
could enhance their prominence among radio and
TV stations and TV networks by producing some
reliable indices of impact on audience size or higher
levels of proactive consumer behavior for the adver-
tised products and services. Calculating how many
consumers use social network coupons or enhanced
bar codes for specific products or services advertised
on certain programs is one likely way of adding
some more-or-less-solid numbers to the argument,
but so far, privacy concerns seem to override such
attempts.
Actual consumption, of course, speaks directly
to advertisers’ concerns. It is clear that social media
are a growing source of online communication with
incredible potential to alter the ways of doing busi-
ness, but it is equally clear that much work—
research,
testing,
public
relations—needs
to
be
accomplished by all parties with a vested interest in
profiting from these new ways.
The latest challenge to the broadcast and cable
industries comes from Nielsen’s plan to introduce
regular “commercial ratings” in addition to the
usual program ratings. When specific commercials
204
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
have numerical audience estimates attached to them,
advertisers will be able to evaluate the program con-
texts in which their commercial appear, and this
information may have major consequences for pro-
grammers. It may influence the selection as well as
scheduling of shows if the evidence is clear that some
types are better suited for gaining audience attention
to commercials, as is already believed. And how the
media operate and are to be paid for are clearly not
the only important questions relating to evolving
forms of television, radio and information consump-
tion that the public and government need to address.
Other chapters in this book raise plenty of concerns
about the media future.
Notes
1. The word ratings had a clear meaning for much of the
history of broadcasting until the introduction of content
ratings in the late 1990s. Content ratings serve as labels to
adults who supervise children’s viewing. As the motion
picture industry did in the late 1960s, the television
industry bowed to government pressure and began putting
program content ratings on shows in the late 1990s. This
chapter deals with ratings in the traditional sense of audi-
ence measurement, not content labeling.
2. Quantitative data come from audience diaries, meters
on television receivers, and occasionally from one-time
telephone measurements (called telephone coincidentals)
during or immediately following a specific program.
3. For more on this topic, see Eastman, Susan Tyler, Fer-
guson, Douglas A., and Klein, Robert A. (eds.), Media
Promotion and Marketing, 5th ed., Boston, MA: Focal
Press, 2006.
4. Emily Steel, “New Tools for Picking Hits,” The Wall St
Journal, May 23, 2011, p. B4.
5. The number of households varies annually, and the
number of people varies according to census reports.
These estimates are from Nielsen Media Research.
6. More information about Nielsen is available on You-
Tube by using “Nielsen Ratings 101” as a search term.
The short videos are produced by Nielsen to reach poten-
tial panel members and clients. Each topic has its own
video that breaks the research process into separate areas:
introduction, designing the sample, recruitment, panel
maintenance, and the future.
7. There are more radio markets (299) than television
markets (210) because in big stretches of the southern and
western United States there are places where no television
reaches. In such places radio is useful and important. And
stations and advertisers want those people counted.
8. Result comes from a meta-analysis (of multiple mea-
surements) by eMarketer. http://emarketer.com/blog/
index.php/time-spent-watching-tv-tops-internet/.
9. Interview published in the online source eMarketer
(June 13, 2011 www.emarketer.com). http://www.
emarketer.tv/Article.aspx?R=1008429.
10. Results released in the spring of 2011 from a survey
by The Wall St. Journal and Harris Poll (press release,
March 30, 2011). Wayne Friedman, “Social Media
Increases Popularity For TV Viewer Comments,” Media
Daily News, http://www.mediapost.com/publications/?
fa=Articles.showArticle&art_aid=147734.
CHAPTER 5 Program and Audience Research and Ratings
205
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A P T E R6
Syndication for Stations,
Cable, and Online
John von Soosten and Douglas A. Ferguson
Chapter Outline
The Syndication Chain
The Producer and Production
Company
The Syndicator
The National Sales Rep
Program Acquisition
Scheduling Strategies
Deal Points
Syndicator/Rep Rules
Ratings Consultation
Key Questions
Research Data
National Reports
Local Market Reports
Specialized Program Analysis
The Decision Process
Determining Need
Analyzing Selection Options
Revenue Potentials
Negotiation
Bidding
Payment
Cash and Amortization
Amortization Schedules
Barter and Cash-Plus-Barter
Cable and Syndication
Online Syndication
The International
Marketplace
The Traditional Pattern
The Emerging Pattern
What Lies Ahead for
Syndication
Notes
206

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
W
hat you see on your hometown television
stations usually comes from somewhere
else, even though the local station gets the big billing!
The programs can be network, advertiser supplied,
local or syndicated. This chapter deals with the fourth
type, syndicated programs, which are mostly reruns of
TV series, specials and movies generally sold to indi-
vidual stations or station groups for exclusive show-
ing in a single market.1 These programs come from
the distributor to the stations via satellite or Fire-
Wire.2 The local television station licenses a syndi-
cated
program
from
a
syndicator,
a
national
company that also licenses the same program to
other stations in other markets but generally not to
others in the same market, unless a second station is
owned by the same group owner.
Have you run across listings for two different
episodes of one show on different channels at differ-
ent times in your guide channel? Under the FCC’s
cross-ownership
rules,
programs
are
frequently
licensed to a group owner for airing on either of the
co-owned stations in the same market. It is not
uncommon for the same program to air on both sta-
tions, typically in different time slots, sometimes one
right after another so you can watch double epi-
sodes. Just to keep you sharp, an alternative is that
a given program may air for a period of months or
even years on one station in a market and then be
moved to the other co-owned station in that same
market…and all run again.
Nationally,
any
“used
television
program”
probably will not air simultaneously in the same
time period in all markets and maybe not necessarily
even on the same day or in the same daypart. The
show probably will not air in every one of the 210
U.S. markets, and it probably will not air solely on
affiliates of any single network. Hence, the program
is said to be syndicated.
Although many programs may be licensed to
national cable networks (which often precludes
sale to local television stations) or online services
like Netflix or Hulu, the term syndication typically
applies
to
broadcasting.
Although
this
chapter
focuses on broadcast television, most of the prin-
ciples
and
considerations
discussed
here
apply
equally to cable syndication, online syndication
and international syndication. The topic of radio
syndication is discussed in Chapters 11 and 12 and
noncommercial syndication in Chapter 10. The most
common arrangements and methods of buying and
evaluating syndicated programs are described in this
chapter, but new permutations keep appearing. It is
best to remember the old adage, “Just when you
thought you’d seen it all…”
The Syndication Chain
The syndication chain reaches from the producer
through various intermediaries to the station, and
it begins with the program itself. By “program,”
we usually mean all the episodes of a series, any-
where from a handful to a hundred or more. Pro-
grams for syndication arise in one of four ways.
1.
If the program was originally created exclu-
sively for syndication and has not previously aired
in any other venue (such as a network), it is said to
be first-run; it is a program created for first-run
syndication. Ellen, Entertainment Tonight and
Judge Judy are easily-recognized examples of syn-
dicated first-run programs. (Most new first run
efforts are flops.) Foreign programs produced for
airing in other countries and later placed into
domestic U.S. syndication are usually considered
first-run because they have not previously been seen
in this country. (The rare program made for syn-
dication that later gets sold to a cable or broadcast
network—to the great joy of the producer—is
called off-syndication.)
2.
Programs that were originally created for one
of the broadcast networks and are subsequently
sold in syndication are called off-network. Previ-
ously aired episodes of Family Guy, CSI: Miami,
Everybody Loves Raymond and The Simpsons
are examples of off-network programs you’ve
probably seen.
3.
Shows that were created for the national cable
networks were traditionally included in the off-
network category. But as the number of such pro-
grams put into syndication increased, a separate off-
cable designation developed. Generally, these are
CHAPTER 6 Syndication for Stations, Cable, and Online
207
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
shows that go from one cable network to another
(not to co-owned broadcast networks).
4.
The fourth category consists of feature films,
including theatricals (made originally for exhibition
in movie theaters) and made-for-TV, made-
for-cable or movie-of-the-week (MOW) films.
MOWs may be off-network, off-cable or first-run
in syndication.
You’ve surely noticed that while most network
shows air once a week, syndicated shows are
stripped across the week. Remember that there are
(usually) 52 weeks with 365 days in a year (you
learned this in elementary school), and television
never goes dark (you learned this in middle school).
If you (being now a grown-up station programmer
or syndicator) subtract 52 weekends, you have
261 daily slots each year to fill with various
stripped programs. Maybe there are a handful of
holidays with special programs (Christmas) and
local sporting events (Indy 500) and local political
debates (every other year), leaving you with about
250 days to fill. If you buy a syndicated sitcom
and run each episode twice, you need exactly
125 episodes to fill a half hour daily for the whole
year… and 125 of the next show, and 125 of
many others… TV eats up programs. Keeps pro-
grammers busy.
Off-network shows are sold for several of
years with a fixed number of runs per episode. It
takes a long time—at one episode per week—on a
network to build up enough episodes for syndica-
tion. For example, five years of Two and a Half
Men
generated
about 110
episodes
that
then
might be sold for three or five years for five to ten
airings of each episode. Of course, because they are
reruns of reruns, off-network shows don’t get
network-level ratings when syndicated to stations
(and if streaming rights to the same show have
been sold to NetFlix or Hulu, then its value to sta-
tions sinks a bit further).
In contrast, first-run programs are generally
sold in syndication for one or two years at a time
with a predetermined number of weeks of original
programs (most of them) and repeat programs
(fewer). For example, a 52-week deal might include
39 weeks of original programs (195 shows) and
13 weeks of repeats (65 of the original 195
shows), getting the station through every one of
the 260 weekdays for an entire year. If the pro-
gram is successful, the contract may be renewed
for a year or two, usually at a higher price. And
fresh episodes of first-run shows are produced
for each subsequent season. Look in 6.1 for exam-
ples of the four types of syndicated programs,
and in 6.2 for syndicated shows categorized by
program genre.
The person who is responsible for delivering the
program on time and on or under budget is called the
showrunner. He or she is directly accountable for con-
tacts with the production company and syndicator
who financed the program. Moreover, if a program
is not delivering satisfactory ratings, the showrunner
is responsible for “fixing” or improving it.
The syndication chain involves both direct parti-
cipants—one or more producers and financial back-
ers, a distributor and the buyer (a broadcast television
station, cable network, or foreign network)—and
indirect participants, such as the programmers at
the national station representative firms. All must
6.1
Types of Syndicated Programs
O
ff-Network: Friends, Seinfeld, Everybody Loves
Raymond, CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, The
Parkers, King of Queens. (Note that—just to confuse
viewers—off-network shows may run simultaneously
with new episodes on the broadcast network and with
reruns or multiplexed episodes on cable networks and
in off-network syndication.)
First-Run: Dr. Oz, Ellen, Dr. Phil, Rachael Ray, Jerry
Springer, Entertainment Tonight, Jeopardy!, Wheel of
Fortune, Judge Judy.
Off-Cable: Nip/Tuck (from FX to Logo), Stargate SG1.
Feature Films: Nearly any movie title once it leaves the
movie theaters except recent movies still playing on pay-
per-view, pay cable or a broadcast network before they
go into syndication.
208
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
talk in a mutually understood language. Although
several systems for classifying programs exist, syndi-
cators and programmers commonly use eight easily
recognized genre categories (see 6.2). Children’s pro-
grams used to be another major category of syndica-
tion, but no longer (see 6.3).
The Producer and
Production Company
Many people think of producers as cigar-smoking,
fast-talking, jewelry-bedecked guys “taking meet-
ings” by the pool. A few may fit this description,
6.2
Eight Common Syndicated Genres
•
Situation comedy. Most sitcoms are off-network (for
example, Friends, Family Guy, Seinfeld, Everybody
Loves Raymond, The Simpsons), although in the distant
past some were created for first-run syndication—for
example, some episodes of Mama’s Family and all
episodes of Small Wonder.
•
Drama. These may be off-network (Criminal Minds,
Monk, Ugly Betty, CSI), off-cable (Sex and the City,
Stargate SG1), or first-run (Star Trek: Voyager) and
may include action-adventure/sci-fi shows (24, Alias)
and dramatic shows (Dawson’s Creek, The X-Files).
Although these shows were nearly all one hour long,
a rare few are half-hour shows.
•
Talk. Generally these are first-run, one-hour shows.
They include Dr. Oz, Dr. Phil, Maury, The Jerry
Springer Show and others.
•
Magazine. Most commonly half-hour, first-run pro-
grams, these include Entertainment Tonight (ET),
Access Hollywood, TMZ on TV and Extra. This
category also includes the weekend editions of the
same programs: ET Weekend, for example.
•
Reality. This category is a catchall comprised mostly of
first-run half hours (although the occasional first-run hour
creeps in) and includes health shows (The Doctors, Dr.
Oz), court shows (The People’s Court, Judge Judy,
Judge Joe Brown, Divorce Court), comedy shows (Man
Up Stand Up), music shows (videos, dance music), and
comedy-based shows (America’s Dumbest Criminals).
•
Games. These half-hour, first-run shows include “pure”
game shows (Jeopardy!, Wheel of Fortune) and celebrity-
driven, humor-based shows where the entertainment value
is often more important than the game itself (Family Feud).
•
Weekly. This category includes virtually all the afore-
mentioned program types, but the shows are first-run
and designed for broadcast once or twice a week,
generally on Saturdays or Sundays (Dog the Bounty
Hunter, Man Up Stand Up). Thanks to competition from
cable networks, many stations run filler or infomercials.
6.3
Children’s Genre
F
or years, children’s programming was dominated by
syndicated programs from a variety of companies; then
production shifted to the networks. In recent years, syndi-
cation of children’s programming has virtually ceased to
exist. Kids’ CW consists mainly of sitcoms and youth dra-
mas that originally aired on CW/WB. Fox Kids has been
rebranded as 4KidsTV and is children-oriented program-
ming on Saturday mornings on FOX stations. The children’s
syndication business today is virtually nonexistent. The few
syndicated kids programs that are available come from
DIC Entertainment and independent producers (such as
Litton) and are aired by stations seeking to fulfill FCC-
mandated educational/instructional programming on
weekends, often in early-morning time periods.
Along with public television, cable networks, especially
Cartoon Network, Disney Channel and Nickelodeon, are
the major forces for reaching kid viewers nowadays.
Whether provided by the networks or acquired through
syndication, children’s programs fall into several basic cat-
egories: animation (SpongeBob SquarePants, Fairly Odd
Parents), live action (iCarly, Big Time Rush), and theatrical
cartoons (Bugs Bunny, Tom and Jerry).
CHAPTER 6 Syndication for Stations, Cable, and Online
209
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
but most would not stand out in a crowd. Actually,
the producer—or showrunner—is the person who
coordinates the diverse elements that constitute a
television program. In some production companies,
this person is called the executive producer; in others
he or she is the line producer. Showrunners (or exec-
utive producers) oversee on-air talent, directors, wri-
ters, technical crew, line producers, production
managers, production assistants and researchers.
They “run the show” as the on-the-set boss and
often come from a writer background. Showrunners
often deal with talent agents, personal managers,
union officials, the press and lawyers. They are
answerable for everything: the program concept,
the program content, the tone or mood of the pro-
gram—in other words, the overall production.
A production company finances and produces
television programs, hiring the showrunner and the
staff and possibly proposing program ideas or
financing the producers who bring in the ideas.
Based on a pilot, maybe, or merely a written presen-
tation, the production company sells programs
directly to broadcast or cable networks or, alterna-
tively, strikes a deal with a syndication company to
distribute (syndicate) its programs to individual tele-
vision stations. Often the production company is the
syndicator itself and distributes the programs it has
created.
The decision to begin production of a new pro-
gram depends on (a) whether a broadcast or cable
network is interested in the idea and advances devel-
opment funds (see Chapters 4 and 9) or (b) whether
the program is suitable for domestic and foreign syn-
dication. U.S. cable and sales to foreign television
networks are a crucial aftermarket for off-network
programs and theatrical movies.3
For many years, hour-long dramatic shows had
only modest syndication potential even after net-
work airing, but such cable channels as TNT, USA,
A&E and Spike have shifted to off-network dramas
for early evening and prime-time weeknights (for
example, Law & Order, CSI, Without a Trace),
raising the prices for long runs of such hour-long
series. Comedy has always been a gold mine,
although most programmers insist that sitcoms
must have young adult and youth appeal to succeed
in syndication. Network carriage is important for
giving a program high visibility, but syndication is
where the profits lie.
The Syndicator
Although some syndicators produce programs and
others merely handle programs produced by other
companies, all syndicators (also called distributors)
supply programming to local stations on a market-
by-market basis throughout the nation. Unlike ABC,
CBS, FOX, NBC, CW, ION, MNTV, TeleFutura,
Telemundo and Univision, syndicators do not have
a single “affiliate” in any particular market. How-
ever, just to make things complicated, the parent
companies of ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC and Univision
also operate syndication companies as separate enti-
ties and generally forge strong relationships with
affiliates of the parent corporation if possible. None-
theless, syndicators can and often do sell their pro-
gramming to any and all stations in a market.
Depending on the kind of programs offered by
the syndicator, certain stations in a market may be
more frequent customers than other stations. For
example, some affiliates build programming blocks
around game shows, others around talk shows.
Although the syndicator may have more than one
customer in a market, only one station is licensed
to carry any particular program at a time. Thus,
one station may license such first-run syndicated
programs as Dr. Oz and Dr. Phil from King World
(owned by Viacom/CBS); a second station in the
same market may license Inside Edition and Bob
Vila’s Home Again, also from King World, and a
third station in the same market may simultaneously
license syndicated reruns of Everybody Loves Ray-
mond and CSI, again from King World. And it’s
very likely that King World’s Wheel of Fortune
and Jeopardy! have been airing on one of these sta-
tions for decades.
Each station will have the exclusive right in its
local market to all episodes of the series it bought
during the term of the license. And because it means
more money, the syndicator King World may try to
upgrade the time period of one or more of these
shows from a lesser-rated to a higher-rated time slot
210
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
(even though the show may compete against another
King World program on another station in the mar-
ket). Syndicators also try to upgrade a show from a
weaker station to a stronger station. For the syndica-
tor, such upgrades usually result in more income
from higher license fees, as well as higher rates for
barter spots because of higher ratings. So station pro-
grammers must look to their own self-interest and be
a bit wary of syndicators.
The United States used to have dozens of domes-
tic syndication companies, but the number has
declined in recent years after many mergers. There
are also scores of other syndicators worldwide. All
major domestic program syndicators and their hottest
properties in the mid-2010s are listed in 6.4. Off-
network hits such as Seinfeld, Family Guy and Every-
body Loves Raymond average as high as $2 to $3
million per episode in combined syndicated revenue
(from all stations). Of the firms in 6.4, six companies
command more than three-quarters of the domestic
syndication business: CBS Television Distribution,
Disney-ABC
Domestic
Television,
NBCUniversal
Television, Sony Pictures Television, Twentieth Tele-
vision and Warner Brothers Domestic Television
Distribution. All the other very large syndicators are
divisions of the Hollywood studios.
Syndicators “sell” (license for a fee, hence
license fee) the telecast rights to a program to a
local station for a certain term and for a set number
of plays. The syndicator or the producer of the pro-
gram continues to own the rights to the show. Syn-
dicators get a commission for distribution, and they
can increase their revenues by selling national barter
time (advertising spots) within the programs they
handle. At the end of the license term, the broadcast
rights revert to the syndicator, who may now license
the program all over again to any station in the mar-
ket, including the station that ran the program in the
first cycle or any of its competitors. This occasion-
ally results in some weird station-hopping by old
shows.
The syndicator’s client is both the group owner
and the local television station or the cable network.
After the FCC relaxed limitations on ownership of
television stations in terms of both the percentage of
the U.S. population covered and the number of sta-
tions permitted under common ownership in a single
market, the dynamics of the sales process changed.
6.4
Program Syndicators
Syndicators
Programs
Carsey-Werner
That ‘70s Show, 3rd Rock from the Sun, The Cosby Show, Roseanne
CBS Television Distribution
Dr. Oz, Dr. Phil, Wheel of Fortune, Jeopardy!, Judge Judy, ET, Rachael Ray
Disney-ABC Domestic Television
My Wife and Kids, According to Jim, Alias, Scrubs, Less Than Perfect, 8 Simple
Rules, Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?, Disney movies
DLT Entertainment Ltd.
Benny Hill, Three’s Company, The Ropers
Hearst Entertainment & Syndication
The Bravest, Popular Mechanics for Kids, movies, cartoons
Litton Entertainment
Storm Stories, Jack Hanna’s Into the Wild
MGM Domestic Television
Cash Cab, Stargate Universe, Stargate Atlantis, movies
NBCUniversal Television Distribution
30 Rock, The Office, Access Hollywood, House, Law & Order, Maury, The Jerry
Springer Show
Sony Pictures Television
Seinfeld, The Nanny, Married … with Children, Who’s the Boss?, movies
Trifecta
Punk’d, The Hills, Geek Meets Girl, Last Shot with Judge Gunn
Twentieth Television
Family Guy, How I Met Your Mother, That 70’s Show, Are You Smarter than a
5th Grader?, Don’t Forget the Lyrics, Divorce Court, Judge Alex, movies
Warner Brothers Domestic Television
Distribution
Ellen, TMZ, The People’s Court, Modern Family, Big Bang Theory, Without a
Trace, movies
CHAPTER 6 Syndication for Stations, Cable, and Online
211
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Increasingly, program purchasing and scheduling
decisions moved toward corporate or group man-
agement and away from local television stations.
This is partly the result of the rapidly increasing
costs of acquiring programming (as a percentage of
a station’s operating budget and expense versus rev-
enue) and also because of the greater negotiating
clout a group programming executive has when bar-
gaining on behalf of several television stations—as
opposed to the leverage a single station has.
At the group level, there are generally one or
more programming executives. Frequently, upper
management is involved in negotiating for program-
ming on a group level, especially because of the con-
sequences for multiple stations and the huge dollar
amounts involved—often tens of millions for a single
buy. These upper-level executives may include the
CEO, president, CFO, executive and senior vice pre-
sidents and even owners. A lot of money is involved,
and a single program buy usually affects several sur-
rounding programs as well as advertising revenues.
At the station level, the people most commonly
involved are the general manager, the business man-
ager (financial person) and the program director (also
called program manager, director of programming, or
other similar titles). Many important program pur-
chasing or scheduling decisions may be made by cor-
porate management or station owners, bypassing the
local general manager and program director alto-
gether. These corporate executives, including the
group programming executive, are generally not
located in the same city as the station itself, a potential
source of friction and poor judgment. In another twist,
because of consolidation, the same program director
may program two stations in the same market that
are owned and/or operated by the same company.
While in effect these stations compete against each
other, the programmer will likely set up complemen-
tary program schedules on the two stations, hoping to
maximize viewership on both of them.
The National Sales Rep
The outside party involved in the syndication chain
is the rep programmer, who works for the national
station sales representative firm that sells national
advertising time for the station. The rep programmer
acts as an ally for and consultant to the station
about programming buys. In recent years, there has
been much consolidation in the sales representative
business, leaving just three major rep firms, each of
which has separate sales organizations/divisions
under
its
corporate
ownership.
This
structure
enables the firms to represent more than one televi-
sion station in the same market, since the “separate”
sales divisions within the same firm “compete” with
one another.
■Clear Channel-owned Katz Media Group has
Millenium (formerly Seltel and Katz Independent),
Eagle and Continental divisions.
■Cox-owned TeleRep consists of MMT, TeleRep
and HRP divisions.
■Petry Media, owned by Petry, has Petry and Blair
divisions.
These companies (and several smaller ones) are
station representatives, national sales organizations
selling commercial airtime on behalf of local televi-
sion stations. The media gorillas, ABC, CBS, FOX
and NBC O&Os, are self-repped and have their
own major rep divisions. Similarly, Univision sta-
tions and a few other large television stations are
also self-repped. The names of station reps can be
seen in trade publication articles, in advertisements,
on research materials, in directories and even on
television station letterheads.
Although the station representative is primarily
a sales organization, reps do provide additional ser-
vices to client stations including marketing support,
sales research, promotion advice and programming
consultation. Generally, the bigger the station, the
more help that’s offered, though the need is greater
at smaller stations. Through these support services,
the reps help client stations improve their perfor-
mance in terms of audience delivery, which in turn
leads to increases in advertising rates and, presum-
ably, increased profitability for the station—and the
rep, of course. (Although revenues may go up,
profitability for the station sometimes does not
because of increased programming and operating
costs and other expenses.) Usually, no additional
212
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
fee is charged for support services; they are included
in the rep’s sales commission (see 6.5). The major
rep firms have programming staffs that work with
programmers at client stations to shape and guide
the stations’ programming schedules.
Rep programmers provide ratings information
that may support or call into question information
that syndicators supply, and they advise client sta-
tions on the programs that will attract the most
viewers
in
the
demographic
groups
advertisers
most desire to reach. At the same time, rep program-
mers must consider each station’s programming phi-
losophy, the mores of the community, and the
quality of each program. (While all stations might
like to carry Jeopardy! if they could, not all want
to carry The Jerry Springer Show.)
One of the rep’s most important functions is to
regularly
disseminate
generic
national
research
information and market-specific research to client
stations. Most reps maintain close contact with all
the big networks (ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, CW and
Univision), enabling them to supply an affiliate with
competitive information regarding the other net-
works. Reps also publish ratings summaries and
analyses
of
new
programs,
and
they
provide
exhaustive ratings information after each rating
sweep period. Because of their national overview of
programming and their own experience and that of
their colleagues, rep programmers can often look at
programming decisions from a broad perspective
not available to a local station’s general manager
or program director.
Program Acquisition
Syndication is the arena in which most programmers
expend much of their energies—and with good rea-
son. For most stations, the money spent annually to
acquire syndicated television shows is their single
largest expense. The station that buys a syndicated
program that turns out to be a dud or the station
that overpays for a syndicated show may be in
financial trouble for years to come. And the station
that makes several such mistakes (not uncommon)
has serious problems.
The general manager and the program director
get recommendations from their rep on which shows
should be acquired, along with a rationale for the
acquisition and recommendations on the program’s
6.5
The National Sales Rep
R
eps sell commercial airtime on local client stations to
national spot advertisers. As the advertising agency
represents the advertiser in buying commercial time, the
station rep represents its client station in selling the national
time. Local stations sell commercial time to local merchants
and other advertisers within their markets, and all commer-
cial stations employ a local sales force for this purpose. In
most cases, it is not economically feasible for a single sta-
tion to employ a sales force to sell commercial time to
national advertisers because there are far too many
advertisers and advertising agencies in too many cities to
be covered by a station’s sales force. That’s where the rep
comes in. Rep firms employ sales people in major cities on
behalf of local stations to sell to advertisers in those cities.
(Several of the dozen or so reps have offices in more than
20 cities.) Because reps sell on behalf of many stations,
they can maintain sales forces of hundreds of people, sell-
ing on behalf of dozens of stations. The largest station
representatives have client stations in as many as 200
markets.
The rep receives a negotiable commission from its
client stations for the commercial time the rep sells. As a
rule of thumb, a 10 percent commission rate is the industry
norm, but because of the competitive nature of the rep
business, such considerations as the overall state of the
economy and market size may cause the commission rate
to vary widely. Stations in larger markets and stations
owned by large group broadcasters often pay only single-
digit commission rates to their representative. Conversely,
stations in smaller markets generally pay a higher com-
mission rate because the dollar volume is considerably
less than in large markets.
CHAPTER 6 Syndication for Stations, Cable, and Online
213
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
placement in the station’s lineup. Although reps
spend most of their time dealing with syndicated
programming and therefore work closely with syn-
dicators, agency reps do not work for the syndica-
tors. Reps work for the stations; rep firms are paid
commissions by client stations based on advertising
sales.
Both the station program director and the
rep programmer spend many hours meeting with
syndicators, listening to sales pitches, and watching
videocassettes or DVDs of sales pitches, research
information, program excerpts or actual pilots. In
the pitch, the syndicator’s salesperson tries to con-
vince the programmer of the program’s merits and
that the program, if scheduled on the station, will
improve the station’s ratings. Although the reps do
not actually purchase the program, and although the
syndicator must still pitch the station programmers
directly, a rep’s positive recommendation to the sta-
tion paves the way for the salesperson when he or
she contacts the station. Most syndicators’ agents
maintain close and frequent contact with the station
program director and the reps. They inform reps of
ratings successes, changes in sales strategy, pur-
chases of the program by leading stations or station
groups, and any other information they feel may win
support from the rep. Syndicators often try to enlist
the rep’s support for a show in a specific time period
on a specific station the rep represents.
Syndicators can be good sources of information
about competing stations in a given market because
they generally deal with all stations in a market and
have a good idea of each station’s programming
needs
and
philosophy.
Frequently,
syndicators
inform reps of programs during their developmental
stages—like trial balloons that serve as a way to
gauge the rep’s reaction prior to beginning a sales
campaign or shooting a pilot of a program.
Syndicator contacts with reps do not replace
contact between syndicator and station. Rather, syn-
dicators take a calculated risk with reps to gain sup-
port for a program. If a rep dislikes the show or does
not feel it suits a station’s needs, the rep’s advice to
the station can damage the salesperson’s efforts.4
Many stations have refused to buy syndicated
shows because their reps did not endorse them.
Scheduling Strategies
When a television station acquires a program from a
syndicator, its managers generally have a pretty good
idea of how they will use the show. Normally, they
look not only for a program that meets their needs
but also for one that fits certain scheduling and
business-deal criteria. As discussed in Chapter 2,
several scheduling strategies are widely accepted.
■Stripping. Syndicated series can be scheduled daily
or weekly, and programs that run daily in the same
time period Monday through Friday are said to be
stripped. In the case of off-network programs, 65
episodes (three network seasons) are generally
considered the absolute minimum for stripping,
allowing 13 weeks of Monday to Friday stripping
in syndication before a station repeats an episode.
As explained earlier, between 100 and 150 epi-
sodes are considered optimum for stripping,
whereas 200 or more episodes can be a financial
and scheduling burden to a station. Of course, first-
run daily programs are created specifically for
stripping. Typically, game show and comedy pro-
ducers will generally shoot 195 original episodes
(39 weeks) a year, with 65 episodes (13 weeks)
repeated. However, some first-run strip shows will
be produced fresh every day with no repeats (260
episodes over 52 weeks), as in the case of timely
magazine shows like Entertainment Tonight.
■Audience flow. As a general strategy, program-
mers try to schedule successive shows in a
sequence that maximizes the number of viewers
staying tuned to the station from one program to
the next. The shows flow from one to the next,
with each building on its predecessor. The lead-in
and lead-out shows are carefully selected to be
compatible with a program in any given time
period. Theoretically, the audience flows with the
shows. Additional audience may flow into the
program from other stations and from new view-
ers just turning on their television sets. Thus,
audience flow is a combination of (1) retention of
existing audience from lead-in, (2) channel
switching from other stations and (3) attraction of
new tune-in viewers.
214
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
■Counterprogramming. This tactic refers to sched-
uling programs that are different in type and audi-
ence appeal from those carried by the competition at
the same time. For example, within one market from
4 to 5 P.M. Monday through Friday, station WAAA
might schedule a talk show, WBBB might carry two
court shows, WCCC might carry a magazine show
and a reality show, WDDD might carry two situa-
tion comedies, and station WEEE might also sched-
ule two sitcoms. And with WDDD and WEEE both
carrying situation comedies opposite one another,
one station might schedule sitcoms with ethnic
appeal against the other station’s general-appeal
sitcoms, hoping to pick up a disproportionately
large share of minority viewers. Thus, all stations
are counterprogramming each other. In another
example, within one market during prime time at
10 P.M., while the ABC, CBS and NBC affiliates
carry network entertainment programs, the FOX,
UNI and CW affiliates might schedule news. While
the ABC, CBS and NBC affiliates air late-evening
news at 11 P.M., the other stations might counter-
program with situation comedies, reality shows and
other non-news programming. Again, one station
might schedule programs with strong appeal to
minority viewers in hopes of picking up additional
viewers in what has become a highly competitive
and increasingly fractionalized marketplace.
Deal Points
When the syndicator approaches the station or rep
programmer, he or she outlines the terms and con-
ditions of the offering. Most deals include the fol-
lowing deal points or terms:
■Title. In the case of programs entering syndication
after a network run, the syndication title may be
slightly different from the network version.
Sometimes the title of a first-run program is
changed from the time the program is marketed to
the time it starts airing, often in an attempt to
entice more people to watch the show.
■Description of the program. This includes whether
it is first-run or off-network, the story line or
premise and other pertinent information. While not
an actual deal point, the syndicator may also
indicate potential strong points for audience appeal,
including gender (for example, sitcoms having high
female appeal or sports shows with strong male
appeal), age (reality dating shows with young adult
appeal or sitcoms that have kid/teen appeal), or
ethnic (sitcoms with large minority casts).
■Cast, host, or other participants. Big-name or
emerging talent is often a draw. In some cases, an
ethnic host or cast may be a selling point. If
additional episodes of a series are planned, notice
of long-term contracts with the talent has value.
■Duration. The program may be 30, 60 or 90
minutes long, or another length entirely.
■Number of episodes. This point includes original
episodes and repeats. Sometimes a minimum and
maximum number of episodes are offered.
■Number of runs. The syndicator indicates the
maximum number of times the station may air
(run) each episode. In situations where a single
company owns two stations in the same market, a
provision might be negotiated in the contract to
allow the program to run on either station, but the
total number of runs in aggregate on the two sta-
tions will generally be the same as if only a single
station were to run the show. In large part this has
to do with the amount of money paid by the syn-
dicator or production company in residuals to
actors, talent, producers, directors and other cre-
ative personnel and the amount paid in music
licensing and other rights payments. Generally,
the greater the number of runs permitted, the
higher these payments will be, regardless of the
number of stations carrying the program. These
additional payments go right out of the syndica-
tors and/or the production company’s bottom
line, hence reducing profits. Another factor limit-
ing the number of runs in syndication might
include future sale to cable networks, which
affects both the term (length) of the contract and
the number of runs during that period.
■Start and end dates. Programs are sold for specific
lengths of time, such as six months, one year,
three-and-one-half years, five years or seven years.
They may be sold months or years in advance of
the start date (called futures).
CHAPTER 6 Syndication for Stations, Cable, and Online
215
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
■Commercial format. Each show is sold with a
fixed number of commercial spots. For example, a
typical half-hour program might be formatted for
(1) six-and-a-half internal commercial minutes (in
other words, thirteen 30-second units) in two
breaks of two minutes each and one break of two-
and-a-half minutes within the program plus (2) an
endbreak (external) following the program, typi-
cally of 92 seconds. Some of the commercial time
within the program may be retained by the syn-
dication company for sale to its own national
sponsors; this is considered barter time and is part
or all of the license fee.
■Price. The cash price may be stated as either a per-
episode fee (which is one inclusive amount for all
runs of a single episode) or as a weekly fee (a fixed
amount regardless of the number of times each
episode is ultimately shown). The price charged
for a program will generally vary by market size,
with stations in larger markets paying more for a
program than stations in smaller markets would
pay because at any given rating, there are more
viewers per rating point in larger markets than in
smaller ones. Therefore, stations in larger markets
can charge more for commercial airtime and with
those higher revenues can pay more for program-
ming than stations in smaller markets can. How-
ever, competition for a certain program in a highly
competitive market can result in a higher license
fee than in a somewhat larger market that is less
competitive. Reasons for competitive levels can
include the number of stations in a market (more
stations means more competition for a show and
fewer shows to choose from—each show has a
better chance of being sold because there are more
potential customers), more intense rivalries
between competing stations or corporate owners,
and the personalities and abilities of the pro-
grammers and the syndicators. Keep in mind that
highly successful shows like Jeopardy! and Dr.
Phil can command significantly higher license fees
than less popular programs. Often the “buzz fac-
tor” has something to do with program pricing,
like a car or movie that becomes hot because
people are talking about it and not necessarily
because it’s the best car or movie for the price.
A syndication company’s sales, research and pub-
licity people can often create or enhance a pro-
gram’s perception in the marketplace. The price
goes up for the show everybody is buzzing about,
like Oscar winners.
■Payment method. Programs are sold for cash, for
barter or for cash-plus-barter.
■Down payment. In cash or cash-plus-barter deals,
the syndicator might request a down payment
(typically 10 to 20 percent) when the contract is
signed, which is sometimes several years before
the station receives the rights to the show.
■Payout. Cash the station still owes to the syndi-
cator (after the down payment) must be paid
when the program begins to air. Typically, the
balance is paid in installments over the life of the
contract, similar to mortgage or auto loan
payments.
Syndicator/Rep Rules
The relationship between syndicators and reps is
generally friendly and mutually dependent. The syn-
dicators need the reps’ support in client markets; the
reps need to get programming information from the
syndicators. Yet the relationship must also be
guarded. Because the reps are agents of their client
stations, they must maintain their independence
from the distributors with an impartiality befitting
the trust placed in them by the stations.
Therefore, certain unwritten rules govern the
relationship between syndicator and station rep.
Reps rarely make blanket program recommenda-
tions, and they do not endorse any particular syndi-
cator. Although reps often support or oppose a
particular genre or programming trend, they are
generally quick to point out that not every station
in every market necessarily can be included in their
assessment. Few programs will appeal equally in
every market, and the stations’ competitive needs
differ greatly from market to market.
Another unwritten rule is that rep programmers
do not supply syndicators with privileged client-rep
information. As an extension of the station, the rep
programmer does not want to supply information to
syndicators that would help the syndicator negotiate
216
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
against the station. Privileged information includes
prices the station would be prepared to pay for pro-
grams, prices it already paid for other programs,
other programs the station is considering purchasing,
its future plans and strategies, contract expiration
dates and any other information that might harm
the station’s negotiating position; however, syndica-
tors frequently provide such information to the reps.
Ratings Consultation
Station general managers and program managers
talk regularly with their national reps. Rep program-
mers and station sales management are also in con-
tact, albeit less frequently (and research directors,
but most stations do not even have a research
department).
The
rep
programmer
occasionally
meets clients, either by visiting the station or when
station personnel travel to New York, where all reps
are based, to meet with rep sales management and
with advertising agencies. Most general managers/
program directors and reps endeavor to meet with
one another at the annual conventions of NATPE
(National Association of Television Program Execu-
tives) and NAB (National Association of Broadcas-
ters), as well as at network affiliate meetings.
A good working relationship between the station
and the rep programmer is important. Consultation is
not a one-way process; a rep does not presume to be
an all-knowing authority dispensing wisdom from a
skyscraper in New York. The consultation a rep pro-
grammer provides is a give-and-take exchange of
ideas. Just as the rep has a national perspective,
enabling him or her to draw upon experiences in
other markets, the station programmer generally
knows his or her market, local viewers’ attitudes
and lifestyles, and the station’s successes and failures
over the years better than almost anybody else.
Key Questions
Station management and rep programmers must
consider some key questions as they work together.
■How well is the station’s current schedule
performing?
6.6
NATPE Pitching Contests
I
f or when you get a job in programming, you are likely
to attend an annual NATPE conference. The sale of
programs to stations is so integral to how programmers do
their jobs that you might encounter a “pitch” competition,
which is centered on the strategic considerations already
presented. Syndicators attempt to sell (pitch) a program to
stations or groups of stations. In a hypothetical syndication
offering of an equally hypothetical off-network program,
the prospective buyer must consider
•
whether or not the station actually needs the program.
•
the potential danger if the show ended up on a com-
petitor (a virtual likelihood if her station passes on
purchasing it).
•
whether there is another program available that might
be a better acquisition for her station.
•
the time period when her station would schedule the
show (and a backup time period if it didn’t perform up
to expectations).
•
the actual network performance versus the show’s
projected performance in syndication.
•
all the research (from the syndicator, the station rep,
and her own).
•
the cost of the program (raising the question of
whether there is money allocated in the station’s five-
year future budget projections for a show at this price
level).
The program buyer must put aside her personal
feelings or biases for or against the show (it happens
to be one of her favorites; in fact, she usually TiVos it
to be sure she doesn’t miss an episode) and make the
decision on as much of a nonemotional business basis
as possible. However, even the most conscientious
programmers can rarely put aside all personal
feelings and overlook either positive or negative buzz
in both the television industry and their own personal
worlds.
CHAPTER 6 Syndication for Stations, Cable, and Online
217
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
■Has there been audience growth, slippage or
stagnation since the previous ratings report? Since
the same period a year ago? Two years ago?
■What audience demographics are the advertisers
and the station and rep’s sales departments seek-
ing? Is current programming adequately delivering
those demos?
■Are older shows exhibiting signs of age?
■Has the competition made schedule changes that
have hurt or helped the client station?
■Does the client own programs that can be used to
replace weak programs, or must the client con-
sider purchasing new programs for weak spots?
Generally, a station seeks audience growth over
previous ratings books. Of course, for one or two
stations to experience audience growth, other sta-
tions in the market must lose audience. And compe-
tition from cable and online also siphons viewers
away from over-the-air broadcast television. The
rep programmer seeks to help the station stem audi-
ence erosion and create growth instead.
Reps also help station programmers analyze the
most recent ratings report. Both parties look for
trouble spots. If a program is downtrending (show-
ing a loss of audience from several previous ratings
periods), the programmers may decide to move it to
a different, perhaps less competitive time period. Or
they may decide to take the show off the air entirely,
replacing it with another program. Sometimes a
once-successful but downtrending program can be
rested or “put on hiatus,” perhaps three months
minimum to a year maximum, or for a part of the
year, such as the summer. When the program
returns to the air from hiatus, it often recaptures
much of its previous strength and may run success-
fully for several more years. (If the station does take
the program off the air, it must still pay the cash
portion of the license fee to the syndicator, and it
must run the barter spots in the agreed-upon time
period where the show had run, so this is not an easy
decision.)
The programmers may also note that a certain
daypart is in trouble. A wholesale revision of that
part of the schedule may be in order. They may
need to rethink a station’s programming strategy to
decide whether current programming is still viable or
whether the station should switch to another genre.
For example, if a two-hour off-network action-drama
block is not working, should the station switch to
sitcoms or talk shows? A change of this magnitude
is often quite difficult to accomplish, for the station
usually has contractual commitments to run current
programming into the future. Also, most viable pro-
grams of other genres are almost certainly already
running on other stations in the market. It is usually
easier to rearrange the order of the existing shows to
see if a different sequence will attract a larger audi-
ence. It is also far easier to replace a single show than
an entire schedule block.
Although household ratings are an important
indicator of a program’s relative performance, pro-
grammers are primarily concerned with audience
demographics. Though there are dozens of demo-
graphic groupings, the most important demos are
women 18 to 34 years old (W18–34), women 18 to
49 (W18–49), women 25 to 54 (W25–54), men 18 to
34 (M18–34), men 18 to 49 (M18–49), men 25 to 54
(M25–54), teenagers (T12–17) and children (K2–11).
Generally, these are the demographic groups most
desired by advertisers and therefore the target audi-
ences of most programs, with W18–49 generally
regarded as the single most important demo. Ethnic
appeal can be an important consideration, especially
in markets with relatively high minority populations.
Although most programs probably don’t appeal
equally to all of these groups, programmers try to
schedule shows that reach at least several of these
demos at times of the day when those people are avail-
able to watch television. Even if a program is not num-
ber one or two in household rating and share, a strong
performance in a salable demographic may make the
program acceptable despite the household rating. For
example, the program may be number two or three in
household rating and share but may have very strong
appeal to young women, making it number one in the
market in W18–34 and W18–49. And strong ethnic
appeal to Hispanics or African-Americans may be an
important factor in many markets. These groups have
attractive demographics for many advertisers. Thus, the
program might be acceptable for the station’s needs
despite its lower household ratings performance.
218
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
In another example, the program might be the
third-rated show in its time period but may have
exhibited significant ratings growth over previous rat-
ings books. Therefore, the programmers may decide
to leave the program in place because it is uptrending
rather than downtrending. They may decide instead
to change the lead-in show to try to deliver more
audience to the target show. They may also decide
to promote the show more to build audience.
A key issue in all these decisions is that pro-
gramming is usually purchased far in advance of its
actual start date. In the autumn of any year, stations
are already planning for the following September,
even though the current season has barely begun.
Successful first-run shows are often renewed for sev-
eral years into the future. Off-network programs are
frequently sold two or three years before they
become available to stations in syndication.
Once purchased, the station is committed to
paying the agreed-upon license fee to the syndicator
regardless of the program’s subsequent network or
syndication performance. Not uncommonly, a once-
popular network program will fade in popularity in
the two or three years between its syndication sale
and its premiere in syndication. Although the station
may be stuck with a program of lesser value than
originally perceived, the syndicator does not waive
or offer to drop the license fee. A deal is a deal.
Conversely, some network shows increase in popu-
larity as they continue to run; a station that bought
early may pay a smaller license fee than it would if it
had purchased the program a year or two later when
its popularity was greater. Reps and their client sta-
tions thoroughly research, analyze and plan acquisi-
tions carefully in order to purchase wisely—and then
they place their bets and cross their fingers.
Research Data
As you can imagine, much station/rep consulting time
is spent preparing information, researching program
performance and formulating programming strategy
using
ratings
information
from
Nielsen
Media
Research. Station, syndicator and rep programmers
and salespeople regularly use the quarterly ViP rat-
ings books to make programming decisions, sell
syndicated shows and sell advertising time. The syn-
dicators and reps also have available to them addi-
tional Nielsen ratings information not generally
purchased by stations because of its cost. These Niel-
sen studies include both national and local market
reports. We repeat some reports already mentioned
in Chapters 2 and 5 because here their relevance to
local and group stations are what matters. Even
reports focused on network programs tell local and
group programmers how a possible future buy is
doing now on the nets, and everyone in this business
plans years ahead (or should).
National Reports
■NTI. Nielsen Television Index, based on people
meters, provides daily ratings performance on a
national basis for all network programs, including
household and demographic audience estimates.
The NTI ratings are also available as a weekly
pocketpiece.
■NTI Pocketpiece. The Nielsen Television Index
Pocketpiece Report weekly report provides
national household and persons audience esti-
mates for sponsored broadcast network programs.
The Pocketpiece provides demos and household
numbers for various dayparts. It is small enough
to fit into a man’s suit jacket pocket (hence the
name) or a woman’s purse, making it handy on
sales calls. The Pocketpiece is also the oldest and
best known Nielsen report.
■Galaxy Explorer. Nielsen’s overnight NTI service
provides national household ratings and shares and
HUT levels. As a Windows-based system, users can
analyze broadcast, cable and syndication audience
estimates across user-selected demographics and
user-defined dayparts for programs and time
periods on both a daily and a weekly basis.
■Galaxy Lightning. Galaxy Lightning is a quick
way to process standardized reports and to load
data onto spreadsheets, which can then be
manipulated and printed.
■NPOWER. Nielsen’s NPower is a software package
that allows individual users to analyze Nielsen data
and create custom ratings reports on desktops or
CHAPTER 6 Syndication for Stations, Cable, and Online
219
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
laptops. Subscribers can access a centralized Nielsen
database, which is continually updated by Nielsen.
The data includes audience estimates for broadcast,
cable, syndication and Hispanic viewing.
■NAD. Nielsen’s National Audience Demographics
Report provides comprehensive estimates of view-
ership across a wide range of audience demo-
graphic categories. The NTI NAD is published
monthly in two volumes and provides information
on national network program viewership. The NSS
NAD is a monthly book providing similar data for
syndicated programming. CNAD is a quarterly
report of cable network viewership. Unlike the
other NAD reports, CNAD does not provide data
on individual programs; it provides viewing esti-
mates only for time periods and dayparts.
■HTR. Nielsen’s monthly Household Tracking
Report tracks program performance by individual
network within half-hour time periods.
■PTR. Nielsen’s monthly Persons Tracking Report
tracks program performance in terms of house-
hold audiences and viewers per 1,000 viewing
households (VPVH). The PTR includes both reg-
ularly scheduled programs and “specials.”
■CPT. The Household and Persons Cost Per 1000
Report is an NTI report that gives advertising
agency media planners and buyers estimates of the
efficiency of network audience delivery.
■HUT. Nielsen’s quarterly Households Using
Television Summary Report provides HUT levels
for individual half-hour time periods for individ-
ual days and weeks.
■NTAR. Nielsen’s quarterly Television Activity
Report compares the audience levels of all broad-
cast network affiliates, independent television sta-
tions, PBS stations and individual basic and pay
cable networks.
Local Market Reports
■NSI. Since 1954, the Nielsen Station Index has
been the system used to measure viewership in
local Designated Market Areas (DMAs), including
local commercial and public broadcast stations,
and viewership of some national cable networks,
superstations and spill-in stations from adjacent
markets. NSI provides metered market overnight
ratings reports in more than 50 major markets
and diary measurement in all Nielsen DMAs.
■ViP. Nielsen’s Viewers in Profile report is the bible of
local television stations, the infamous “book” by
which stations (and sometimes careers) live and die.
Most commercial TV stations subscribe to this report
because they use it as the basis for the advertising
rates the stations charge. All advertising agencies,
syndication companies, and station reps get this
report as well. Using NSI data, the ViP books show
viewership over specific four-week periods (the
“sweeps”) in quarterly reports (November, February,
May, July) in 210 markets and in October, January
and March in selected large markets. The information
is broken down for dayparts, programs and individ-
ual quarter hours. Ratings and shares are shown for
households and key demographic groupings based on
age and gender. There is also a very useful section that
tabulates viewership as thousands of people rather
than as rating or share. The data is shown as a four-
week average and is also broken out for the four
individual weeks and the 28 days of the ratings
period. Both program averages (showing data for
only a single program as a single number for the entire
length of the show) and time period averages (which
may include two or more programs in the same time
period during the four weeks and are broken down
by quarter hours or half hours) are provided.
■NSS Pocketpiece. Nielsen’s National Syndication
Service weekly report provides national audience
estimates (in small size) for barter programs dis-
tributed by subscribing syndicators or occasional
networks, including barter specials, syndicated
sporting events and barter movie packages. (This is
not the same as the network PT pocketpiece. Pro-
grammers are expected to have lots of pockets.)
■ROSP. Nielsen’s Report on Syndicated Programs
provides a complete record of all syndicated pro-
grams. The ROSP aids in the selection, evaluation
and comparison of syndicated program performance.
■Network Programs by DMA. Nielsen’s reports
provide audience information for network pro-
grams by station within each DMA (market).
220
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
■DMA TV Trends by Season. This Nielsen report
shows viewing trends throughout the year for all
DMAs. It is produced once a year following the
July ratings period.
■TAR. Nielsen’s quarterly DMA Television Activ-
ity Report compares the audience levels of all
broadcast network affiliates, superstations, inde-
pendent television stations, PBS stations and indi-
vidual basic and pay-cable networks. This report
is similar to Nielsen’s national NTAR report,
except it is for individual local markets and
includes spill-in stations from other markets.
■NSI Report on PBS Program Audiences. This
report shows viewership of public television dur-
ing each of the major ratings sweeps periods
(November, February, May, July).
■NSI Report on Devotional Program Audiences.
This report shows viewership of religious pro-
grams during each of the major ratings sweeps
periods (November, February, May, July).
■NHSI. The Nielsen Hispanic Station Index report
evaluates Spanish-language television viewing in
16 local markets that have significant Hispanic
populations.
■Galaxy Navigator. Similar to Galaxy Explorer,
Nielsen’s Galaxy Navigator provides household
ratings and shares and HUT levels for the indi-
vidual local metered (overnight) markets. Using a
Windows-based program, Galaxy Navigator
enables the user to manipulate the reported data
to customize reports.
■Galaxy ProFile. Galaxy ProFile is a PC-based
analysis tool that the client can use to manipulate
Nielsen data for all DMAs. Users can study the
performance of individual programs across any
and all markets, including comparisons in user-
selected demos and with previous sweeps perfor-
mances. Galaxy ProFile also provides time period
analysis, genre analysis (that is, game shows, talk
shows and so on), program block analysis,
benchmark analysis and grid analysis.
In addition to this mountain of reports, which
may also be purchased by syndicators, major station
groups and large-market stations, Nielsen offers var-
ious internet (Media Metrix), sports, DVD, game-
show, local-cable, pay-cable and other studies. If
all this isn’t enough, Nielsen can prepare special
research reports exclusively for an individual station
or tailored for a group of stations such as a rep
firm’s client list. (But your station better be in deep
doo-doo to justify that expense!)
Specialized Program Analysis
Before the advent of personal computers, Nielsen
provided printed reports to stations, syndicators
and station reps, often at significant expense. Now
the station reps themselves provide much customized
research formerly available only from Nielsen. One
example of such customized ratings research is the
Katz
Comtrac
system,
which
has
become
an
industry-standard research tool because it provides
easy-to-use comprehensive overviews of station and
program performances (see 6.7). Nielsen originally
computed the Comtrac reports on its mainframe
computers and then printed them as books, but
since the late 1980s Katz has prepared the reports
in-house for its clients on its own PCs more quickly
and at significantly lower cost. Katz now distributes
the reports to its client television stations on CD-
ROMs. The stations can then analyze the data on
their own computers, printing only the individual
reports in which they are interested.
Katz’s first page for Friends (one of several
pages that cover all markets) tracks the show’s
shares in syndication in a condensed format. It
shows which stations in which markets purchased
Friends and when they scheduled it. As you can
see, it then lists the shares for the time period perfor-
mance in the three previous ratings books (May
2003, November 2003, and February 2004, as well
as May 2004 in this example), also telling what kind
of lead-in Friends had and the lead-in’s shares.
In some cases Friends was not the program in
the time period in previous ratings surveys, so the
performance of whatever previous program was in
the time period is shown. The previous program is
indicated by a small letter next to the share number,
CHAPTER 6 Syndication for Stations, Cable, and Online
221
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6.7
Comtrac Sheets for Friends
FRIENDS
Demos : HH = Homes, W1 = W18-49,  W2 = W25-54,  M3 = M25-54  
May '03
LI
SH
HH
SH
Nov '03
LI
SH
HH
SH
Feb '04
LI
SH
HH
SH
May '04
Hr  Leadin
HH
SH
May '04  Target
HH
RT
HH
SH
%CHG
May '03
W1
SH
W2
SH
M3
SH
May '04
Hr  Leadout
HH
SH
May '04
Top Competitor
LI
SH
HH
SH
W1
SH
May '04
2nd Competitor
LI
SH
HH
SH
W1
SH
 32
CINCINNATI
WXIX
F
19 20T
 7:30P M-F
 33
MILWAUKEE
WVTV
W 18 20T
 6:00P M-F
 33
MILWAUKEE
WVTV
W 18 20T 10:30P M-F
 34
COLUMBUS, OH
WTTE
F
28 20T
 6:00P M-F
 34
COLUMBUS, OH
WTTE
F
28 20T 11:00P M-F
 35
GREENVILLE-SPAR
WHNS
F
21 20T
 6:30P M-F
 35
GREENVILLE-SPAR
WHNS
F
21 20T
 7:00P M-F
 36
SALT LAKE CITY
KJZZ
I
14 20T
 5:30P M-F
 36
SALT LAKE CITY
KJZZ
I
14 20T
 6:00P M-F
 37
SAN ANTONIO
KENS
C
5 20T 10:30P M-F
 38
GRAND RAPIDS-KA
WOOD N
8 20T
 7:30P M-F
 38
GRAND RAPIDS-KA
WXSP
U
15 18T 10:00P M-F
 39
WEST PALM BEACH
WPEC
C
12 20T
 7:00P M-F
 39
WEST PALM BEACH
WTVX
U
34 20T 11:00P M-F
 40
BIRMINGHAM
WTTO+ W 21 20T
 5:30P M-F
 40
BIRMINGHAM
WTTO+ W 21 20T
 6:00P M-F
 41
NORFOLK-PORTSMT
WTVZ
W 33 20T
 7:00P M-F
 41
NORFOLK-PORTSMT
WTVZ
W 33 20T
 7:30P M-F
 42
NEW ORLEANS
WNOL
W 38 20T
 9:30P M-F
 42
NEW ORLEANS
WGNO A
26 20T 11:00P M-F
 43
MEMPHIS
WHBQ F
13 20T 10:30P M-F
 44
BUFFALO
WIVB
C
4 20T
 7:30P M-F
 44
BUFFALO
WNLO
U
23 20T 11:00P M-F
 45
OKLAHOMA CITY
KOCB
W 34 20T
 6:00P M-F
 45
OKLAHOMA CITY
KOCB
W 34 20T
 6:30P M-F
 46
GREENSBORO-H.PO
WTWB W 20 20T
 6:00P M-F
 46
GREENSBORO-H.PO
WTWB W 20 20T
 6:30P M-F
 47
HARRISBURG-LNCS
WHTM A
27 19T
 7:30P M-F
 48
PROVIDENCE-NEW 
WLNE
A
6 20T
 7:30P M-F
 48
PROVIDENCE-NEW 
WLWC U
28 20T 11:30P M-F
 49
ALBUQUERQUE-SAN
KASA
F
2 20T
 6:00P M-F
 49
ALBUQUERQUE-SAN
KASA
F
2 20T
 6:30P M-F
 50
LOUISVILLE
WDRB
F
41 20T 11:00P M-F
 50
LOUISVILLE
WDRB
F
41 20T 12:00M M-F
 51
LAS VEGAS
KVVU
F
5 19T
 6:30P M-F
 51
LAS VEGAS
KVVU
F
5 20T
 7:00P M-F
 52
JACKSONVILLE, B
WJWB W 17 20T
 6:00P M-F
 52
JACKSONVILLE, B
WJWB W 17 20T
 7:00P M-F
 53
WILKES BARRE-SC
WSWB+W 38 20T
 7:00P M-F
 53
WILKES BARRE-SC
WOLF
F
56 20T 10:30P M-F
 54
AUSTIN
KNVA
W 54 20T
 6:00P M-F
 54
AUSTIN
KNVA
W 54 20T
 6:30P M-F
 55
ALBANY-SCHENECT
WNYT
N
13 19T 12:30P M-F
 55
ALBANY-SCHENECT
WNYT
N
13 20T
 7:30P M-F
 56
LITTLE ROCK-PIN
KLRT
F
16 20T
 6:00P M-F
 56
LITTLE ROCK-PIN
KLRT
F
16 20T 10:00P M-F
 57
FRESNO-VISALIA
KMPH+ F
26 20T
 7:00P M-F
 57
FRESNO-VISALIA
KMPH+ F
26 20T 11:00P M-F
 58
RICHMOND-PETERS
WWBT N
12 20T
 7:30P M-F
 59
DAYTON
WDTN
A
2 20T
 7:00P M-F
 60
TULSA
KWBT
W 19 20T
 6:00P M-F
 60
TULSA
KWBT
W 19 20T
 6:30P M-F
 61
KNOXVILLE
WBXX
W 20 20T
 7:30P M-F
9
11
9
10
11
12
FRIENDS
7
   4.3
8
-33
17
15
14 VARIOUS
12 WKRC
ENT TONIGHT 30
17
15
20 WCPO JEOPARDY
18
14
16
4
6
4
7
4
7
KING OF QUEENS
4
   2.4
5
-29
11
11
3 EVRYBDY-RAY MF
8 WTMJ
6P REPORT
20
19
11 WISN
WISN 12 NEWS
16
15
15
5
6
6
7
6
7
EVRYBDY-RAY MF
5
   2.4
5
-29
8
8
3 KING-QUEENS B
7 WTMJ
TONITE SHW-NBC
22
19
19 WISN
ACCESS HOLLYWD
16
11
12
12
12
12
12
13
13
SIMPSONS B
10
   4.9
10
-23
22
18
15 WILL & GRACE
9 WCMH NEWSCH 4 AT 6
16
17
16 WBNS
10-EYWT NWS-6P
17
17
14
10
9
8
8
8
8
NEWSCENTER-10P
10
   4.4
8
0
16
14
6 EVRBDY-RY MF B
9 WCMH NEWSCH 4 AT 11
18
20
24 WBNS
10TV NIGHTBEAT
20
19
15
7
7
6
7
7
6
THAT 70S SHW B
8
   3.8
7
17
14
12
14 FRIENDS B
7 WYFF
NBC NITELY NWS
16
15
15 WLOS
ABC-WORLD NWS
12
13
9
7
7
7
8
6
7
FRIENDS
7
   3.8
7
0
14
13
12 SEINFELD
7 WLOS
WHEEL-FORTNE
13
15
10 WYFF
ENT TONIGHT 30
15
13
12
5
4
7
7
7
8
HOME IMPROV MF
5
   2.5
6
-25
21
9
8 FRIENDS
6 KSL
NBC NITELY NWS
11
16
13 KUTV+ 2 NEWS AT 530P
16
14
16
4
6
7
8
8
11
FRIENDS B
6
   3.0
6
-45
19
10
6 WILL & GRACE
5 KSL
EYWT NWS-6
16
17
16 KSTU+ SIMPSONS
9
13
17
21
13
20
13
18
13
EYEWIT NWS-10
20
   6.8
12
-8
12
15
10 D LETTRMAN-CBS
10 WOAI
TONITE SHW-NBC
18
16
14 KSAT
INSIDE EDITION
16
11
9
11
9
9
9
5
7
INSIDE EDITION
10
   3.4
8
14
9
10
8 VARIOUS
14 WWMT JEOPARDY
25
23
15 WXMI
EVRYBDY-RAY MF
9
10
14
2
1 a
2
2
2
1
VARIOUS
1
   0.4
1
0
1
1
1 KING OF QUEENS
1 WOOD VARIOUS
17
16
20 WWMT VARIOUS
18
16
14
11
8
11
8
10
8
CBS EVE NWS
11
   3.5
6
-25
10
8
8 ENT TONIGHT 30
7 WPTV
EXTRA
26
16
17 WPBF
WHEEL-FORTNE
8
16
9
3
3
3
3
4
3
VARIOUS
3
   1.7
3
0
5
4
2 JUST SHOOT ME
3 WPTV
NWSCHNL5 AT 11
18
19
15 WPEC
NEWS12-11.00
18
16
17
5
7
4
5
5
5 b
SIMPSONS
6
   3.8
7
40
12
9
14 FRIENDS B
8 WBRC
FOX6 NEWS-530P
17
15
14 WBMA+ ABC-WORLD NWS
18
14
12
7
8
5
8
5
8 c
FRIENDS
7
   4.8
8
0
19
14
12 EVRYBDY-RAY MF
8 WBMA+ 33/40 NEWS-6
14
16
12 WBRC
FOX 6 NWS AT 6
15
15
15
5
6
6
6
3
5
SIMPSONS B
5
   3.0
5
0
12
10
9 FRIENDS B
5 WVEC
WHEEL-FORTNE
13
14
11 WAVY
ENT TONIGHT 30
14
12
15
6
6
6
6
5
6
FRIENDS
5
   3.2
5
-17
10
9
8 VARIOUS
6 WVEC
JEOPARDY
14
14
13 WGNT
JUDGE-BROWN B
11
11
11
5
5
5
5
6
5
EVRYBDY-RAY MF
5
   3.6
5
0
6
5
3 SIMPSONS
6 WWL
VARIOUS
20
21
15 WDSU
VARIOUS
14
13
15
5
5 d
8
8 a
4
5 d
ABC-NITELINE
5
   2.2
4
-20
6
7
5 WILL & GRACE
3 WWL
D LETTRMAN-CBS
15
12
10 WDSU
TONITE SHW-NBC
10
9
7
8
10
7
10
8
11
KING OF HILL R
8
   5.6
9
-18
13
13
9 THAT 70S SHOW
11 WMC
TONITE SHW-NBC
20
13
11 WREG D LETTRMAN-CBS
18
13
10
15
9
15
9
14
10
INSIDE EDITION
14
   4.6
8
-20
12
12
11 VARIOUS
15 WKBW JEOPARDY
17
18
14 WGRZ
ENT TONIGHT 30
8
13
15
2
2
2
2
2
1
ACCESS HOLLYWD
2
   1.0
2
100
2
2
1 COPS
2 WIVB
NW4 BUFFALO 11
20
21
18 WGRZ
CH2 NWS NTSIDE
19
19
18
3
7
6
8
5
8
ON AIR-RYAN
3
   3.9
7
-12
17
11
12 FRIENDS B
7 KFOR
NWSCHANNEL 4-6
18
19
18 KWTV
NWS 9-6
13
16
13
7
8
8
9
8
8
FRIENDS
7
   4.3
7
-12
15
11
9 VARIOUS
9 KOCO
WHEEL-FORTNE
15
19
13 KFOR
NWSCH4-630
19
16
14
5
5
4
4
3
4 e
THAT 70S SHOW
5
   2.8
5
25
11
9
9 FRIENDS B
6 WFMY
WFMY NEWS 2-6
15
17
13 WGHP FOX8 NWS-6.00P
14
16
14
5
6
4
5
4
5
f
FRIENDS
5
   3.0
6
20
13
11
10 EVRBDY-RY MF B
6 WFMY
CBS EVE NWS
17
19
13 WXII
NBC NITELY NWS
15
14
15
6
4
7
5
8
6
HOLLYWD SQUARS
7
   2.3
5
-17
4
4
4 VARIOUS
6 WHP
JEOPARDY
19
19
12 WPMT
EVRYBDY-RAY MF
8
11
18
4
3
4
3
4
4 g
ENT TONIGHT 30
3
   1.8
3
-25
4
5
2 VARIOUS
4 WPRI
JEOPARDY
15
15
12 WJAR
ACCESS HOLLYWD
12
10
16
2
3
2
3
f
3
2 h
WILL & GRACE
2
   0.7
2
0
6
5
3 DREW CAREY
2 WJAR
TONITE SHW-NBC
24
19
31 WPRI
D LETTRMAN-CBS
14
11
11
3
4
3
4
5
7
DHARMA-GREG
4
   2.4
4
-43
8
8
7 FRIENDS B
4 KOAT+ ACTN 7 NWS-6
14
13
12 KOB
EYEWTNS NW-600
10
12
15
4
4
4
5
7
8
FRIENDS
4
   2.5
4
-50
8
7
8 VARIOUS
8 KRQE+ WHEEL-FORTNE
12
12
9 KOAT+ ENT TONIGHT 30
13
11
15
9
8
8
8
11
10
FOX NEWS AT 10
10
   4.5
8
-20
16
14
7 SEINFELD
10 WLKY
NEWS CH32 11PM
22
19
19 WAVE
WAVE NWS-11P
14
16
14
10
9
j
8
7
j
10
8
i
SEINFELD
10
   3.7
9
13
18
13
12 FRASIER
9 WLKY
D LETTRMAN-CBS
14
13
14 WAVE
TONITE SHW-NBC
11
10
16
9
9
8
8
8
8
THAT 70S SHW R
7
   4.4
8
0
15
10
8 FRIENDS B
9 KVBC
JEOPARDY
13
15
9 KLAS
EYEWT NWS-630
12
11
9
9
10
8
10
8
10
FRIENDS
7
   5.4
9
-10
14
11
10 EVRYBDY-RAY MF
8 KVBC
WHEEL-FORTNE
15
13
8 KLAS
ENT TONIGHT 30
11
12
10
5
5
7
5
5
5 c
HUGHLEYS B
3
   2.2
4
-20
7
7
4 JUST SHOOT ME
3 WJXT
EYEWTNS NWS@6
16
17
15 WTLV
FIRST CST NW@6
13
14
12
5
6
5
6
5
6
JUST SHOOT ME
3
   3.0
5
-17
9
8
7 WILL & GRACE
4 WTLV
WHEEL-FORTNE
15
14
14 WJXT
ENT TONIGHT 30
12
11
16
2
2
1
2
f
1
2 k
WILL & GRACE B
2
   0.9
2
0
4
3
3 SIMPSONS
2 WBRE
WHEEL-FORTNE
12
21
11 WNEP
INSIDE EDITION
36
16
15
6
4
8
4
8
4
l
FOX56 NWS-10PM
10
   2.6
5
25
8
6
6 BECKER
2 WYOU VARIOUS
15
17
15 WBRE
VARIOUS
14
15
17
6
7
7
8
8
10
WILL & GRACE
4
   2.9
6
-40
15
13
4 FRIENDS B
6 KXAN+ NEWS 36-6
13
14
8 KVUE
24 NEWS AT 6
16
13
11
7
5
f
8
7
f
10
9
f
FRIENDS
6
   3.3
6
-33
13
12
6 VARIOUS
5 KXAN+ WHEEL-FORTNE
14
14
8 KVUE
ENT TONIGHT 30
13
11
15
15
12
17
12
12
10
NWSCH13-NOON
11
   1.6
8
-20
15
16
7 DAYS-OUR LIVES
16 WRGB YOUNG&RESTLESS
29
31
32 WTEN+ JEOPARDY
16
11
3
15
10
15
11
13
10
ENT TONIGHT 30
13
   4.3
9
-10
16
16
2 VARIOUS
14 WTEN+ JEOPARDY
21
25
18 WRGB KING OF QUEENS
11
10
11
4
5
4
6
2
4
KING OF HILL
4
   2.6
5
25
10
7
5 SEINFELD
6 KATV
CH 7 NWS-6
27
28
18 KTHV
KTHV NEWS 6P
14
15
14
3
3
2
2
2
2
FOX16 NWS AT 9
3
   1.9
4
100
5
3
2 THAT 70S SHOW
4 KATV
CH7 NWS-NGHTSD
12
24
19 KTHV
KTHV NEWS 10P
19
23
24
17
13
12
11
13
14
EVRBDY-RY MF B
14
   5.5
11
-21
14
10
9 FRASIER
7 KFSN
JEOPARDY
15
15
5 KFRE
MASH
2
4
3
14
6
17
5 m
16
10 c
10 OCLK NWS
14
   2.9
12
20
19
17
10 SEINFELD
10 KSEE
KSEE 24-NWS-11
17
17
12 KFSN
ACTION NWS 11
11
16
13
19
13
18
13
18
14
ENT TONIGHT 30
18
   7.4
12
-14
17
17
14 VARIOUS
14 WRIC
JEOPARDY
12
12
9 WTVR
MILLIONAIRE
9
9
7
8
9
10
9
10
9
ABC-WORLD NWS
7
   3.4
7
-22
9
10
8 JEOPARDY
11 WHIO
WHEEL-FORTNE
25
25
20 WRGT
SIMPSONS
6
7
13
5
5
6
7
5
5
THAT 70S SHW B
5
   2.4
4
-20
14
10
4 FRIENDS B
5 KOTV
NEWS-6
23
19
21 KTUL
NWS CH 8 AT 6
15
19
19
5
4
7
6
5
6
FRIENDS
4
   2.7
5
-17
13
10
6 VARIOUS
4 KTUL
WHEEL-FORTNE
19
21
18 KOTV
ENT TONIGHT 30
19
15
20
8
9
8
9
7
8
THAT 70S SHOW
5
   3.6
6
-25
14
10
10 VARIOUS
7 WBIR
JEOPARDY
23
20
19 WATE
MILLIONAIRE
14
13
10
a:  VARIOUS
b:  HOME IMPROVMNT
c:  FRIENDS
d:  EVRYBDY-RAY MF
e:  THAT 70S SHW B
f:  WILL & GRACE
g:  ENT TONIGHT 30
h:  DREW CAREY
i:  CHEERS
j:  FRASIER
k:  THAT 70S SHOW
l:  FRIENDS B
m:  SEINFELD
n:  KING-QUEENS B
o:  KING OF HILL
COMTRAC Syndicated Program Schedules, May 2004. Used by permission.
222
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
and the title is in the footnote at the bottom of the
page. For example, in San Francisco the small letter
b indicates Cheers ran in the three previous time
periods; in Los Angeles, Friends was the February
2004 program because there is no small letter next
to the number.
Next the Comtrac report shows Friends’ current
lead-in and shares in each market, and then Friends’
own shares and ratings under the heading May ’04
Target (including some abbreviated demographics),
and its lead-out. Finally, the Katz Comtrac page
shows Friends’ two main competing programs in
each market and their audience shares.
The Decision Process
When the syndicator visits the station, he or she
makes a pitch to either the general manager or the
program manager or both. This occurs, we hope,
after the rep has consulted with the station and pro-
vided research support combined with experience
and judgment—resulting in the rep’s recommenda-
tion regarding the program the syndicator is selling.
The station and the rep then analyze (via email) the
terms of the deal and how they might use the pro-
gram, if at all.
Each programming decision is different from
any other. Each show is different; each deal is differ-
ent. Markets and competitive situations differ; cor-
porate philosophies and needs not only differ but
may also change over time. The personalities and
opinions of the syndicator, station general manager,
program director and rep programmer all enter into
the decision. Although innumerable permutations
and combinations exist, the basics of the decision-
making process involve an assessment of need and
an analysis of selection options.
Determining Need
Perhaps the most important part of making any pro-
gramming decision is establishing whether a pro-
gram
is
needed
and
determining
whether
the
program in question is the best choice to meet that
need. Sometimes this task is easy. The need may be
quite obvious. For example, a first-run program that
many stations carry may fail to attract a large
enough national audience and be canceled by its syn-
dicator. It needs to be replaced on all the stations
carrying it. In another example, despite increased
promotion and a strong lead-in, a particular pro-
gram on a given station continues to downtrend in
several successive books and from its year-ago per-
formance in the time period. It needs to be replaced.
At other times the need may be less obvious. A
show may perform reasonably well but show no
audience growth and finish second or third in the
time period. Should it be replaced? Will a replace-
ment show perform as well, better or not as well?
When a syndicator is pitching a station, he or
she tries to identify or create a need for the station
to
buy
the
particular
program
being
offered.
Although the syndicator’s assessment that an exist-
ing program should be replaced may be correct, he
or she is looking at it strictly from the perspective of
selling a program in the market. The syndicator’s
need to sell a particular show may not be the same
as the station’s degree of need (if any) to replace an
existing program. And the syndicator doesn’t have
to find money in an operating budget to pay for
the program, even if it fails to perform up to expec-
tations. (When people buy new cars or televisions or
hair dryers, they come with warranties. If they don’t
work properly, the consumers have recourse to the
manufacturer.) Television programs don’t come
with warranties; the station assumes all the risk,
even if the show fails.
The station and rep programmers approach the
determination of need by first looking at the perfor-
mance of the existing schedule and identifying trou-
ble spots, including individual programs and entire
dayparts. For example, three out of the four pro-
grams from 4 to 6 P.M. may be performing quite
well, but one may be a weak link and therefore a
candidate for replacement. In another situation, the
entire 4 to 6
P.M. schedule might be performing
poorly and need to be replaced, perhaps including
a switch from one program type to another, such
as from talk shows to reality and magazine shows.
CHAPTER 6 Syndication for Stations, Cable, and Online
223
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Analyzing Selection Options
Once a need to replace a program has been estab-
lished, a replacement must be selected. Programmers
have six basic options at this point. Think baseball,
for the alternatives are analogous in both television
and baseball.
■Do nothing at all. If a station or a baseball team is
trailing, it’s sometimes best to leave the lineup
unchanged, hoping for an improved performance
or a mistake by the competition. Sometimes
there’s no alternative because the bench strength is
either depleted or no better than the current
players, so no stronger players or programs can be
substituted.
■Change the batting (or programming) lineup.
Swap the lead-off hitter with the cleanup batter, or
swap a morning program with an afternoon show,
or reverse the order of the two access shows.
(There are many more examples.)
■Go to the bench for a pinch hitter or go to the
inventory of programs “on the shelf” (already
owned by the station but not currently on the
schedule) for a replacement show.
■Hire a new player or buy a new show.
■Send the player to the minors or switch stations,
but only if a company owns two stations in the
same market.
■Do not renew the player’s contract when it
expires, and do not renew the program contract.
This is no immediate remedy, but at least the sta-
tion is no longer on the hook when the current
contract expires.
Let’s look at each option in greater detail.
1. Do Nothing
Although a time period may be in trouble, some-
times nothing can be done to improve the situation.
The station may not own any suitable replacement
shows. Other shows already on the air might be
swapped, but the station and rep programmers
might feel that such a swap would hurt another day-
part (perhaps a more important daypart) or that the
other program might not be competitive in the target
time period. Then, too, potential replacement shows
available from syndicators may be perceived as no
improvement over existing programming, or they
might be too expensive. Often, increasing promotion
can help the show “grow.” Finally, the programmers
may decide to leave the schedule intact because it
may take time for viewers to “find” the show and
form a viewing habit. The rep may research the per-
formance of the program in other markets to see
whether the program is exhibiting growth. Some-
times the only choice is to do nothing at all.
2. Swap Shows
The second alternative is to change the batting
order. Generally, the station and rep programmers
look first at the station’s entire program schedule
to see whether the solution might be as simple as
swapping time periods for two or more shows
already on the air. Often a program originally pur-
chased for one time period can improve an entirely
different time period when moved.
In most cases, syndicators are delighted when a
station moves a show from a time period with a
lower HUT level to one with higher HUTs. A higher
HUT level means a higher rating, even if share stays
the same or drops slightly. For syndicators selling
barter time in a program, higher ratings in individ-
ual markets contribute to a higher national rating,
which translates into higher rates charged by the
syndicator to the barter advertiser.
For a station, however, such a move may also
mean paying higher license fees to the syndicator.
In the case of first-run programs, syndicators often
make tier or step deals with stations. At the time the
deal is made, stations and syndicators agree on
price levels for different dayparts, with higher
prices for dayparts that have higher HUT/PUT
levels and thus more potential viewers available.
One price is agreed upon for morning time periods,
a higher price for early fringe, and perhaps a still
higher price for access. Four-tier agreements, which
may also include late night, are not uncommon.
Moving a program from one daypart to another
triggers a change in license fee. It is to the station’s
advantage to negotiate a step deal to avoid a
224
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
potentially expensive program playing in a low-
revenue time period.
Step deals are relatively rare for off-network
programs, which generally have a single license fee
level priced by the syndicator that is based on the
revenue potential of the daypart in which it is pre-
sumed the program will play. Thus, when a station
buys an off-network sitcom or hour-long action-
adventure show for access or early fringe, the price
the station pays remains the same over the life of the
contract. If the show is a ratings failure in access or
early fringe and must be moved to a less lucrative
morning or late-night time period, the station’s
financial
obligation
to
the
syndicator
remains
unchanged. Thus, a station can find itself with a
very expensive “morning program,” a daypart of
significantly lower revenue potential than early
fringe or access (meaning that the program may
cost the station far more than the time period can
generate in advertising income).
If the station buys an expensive off-network show
that later is downgraded to a time period with lower
HUT levels, the station may experience some discom-
fort in its bottom line (low profitability or a loss), but
the consequences are generally not disastrous. If, how-
ever, the station buys several expensive shows that do
not perform and must be moved to time periods with
lower advertising rates, the economic impact can be
quite serious. Because of the relatively long license
terms of off-network shows (typically three to four
years), a station may not recover for years when sev-
eral such “mistakes” are made.
Depending on the program and how the contract
is structured regarding stripping or weekend runs, it
may be possible to move a Monday to Friday pro-
gram from a weekday schedule to the weekend. Gen-
erally this is not possible with first-run strip programs
(such as talk or court shows), which are designed for
a five-day run, but the strategy may be possible with
some off-network shows, particularly older sitcoms
that are purchased on a per-episode basis.
3. Substitute Shows
The third alternative is to go to the bench for a pinch
hitter. Programmers have a responsibility to manage
existing products and at the same time remain com-
petitive. It’s not always necessary to spend more
money to buy a new program. Sometimes the station
already owns the solution to a problem. A simple
swap of programs already on the air may not be
the best answer. A station with strong bench
strength may have enough programs “in the dug-
out” to replace a failing show in a competitive man-
ner. Corporate accountants like this sort of solution
because it does not add to a station’s expenses, and
it uses existing products that must be paid for
whether or not they air.
The station and rep programmers look at the
strengths and weaknesses of the shows on the
shelf, which generally have aired before. They must
ask some questions at this point. How well did these
shows work? Have they rested long enough to
return at their previous performance level, and if
not, is their reduced level still superior to the current
program’s performance? Are the shows dated? Will
they look “old”? Are the potential replacement
shows suitable for the time period? Are they compat-
ible with the other programs in the daypart? Are
they competitive? Are they cost-effective? Do they
appeal to the available demographic?
4. Buy New Shows
If the first three solutions have been examined and
rejected, the programmers at the station and the rep
generally consider purchasing a program. Because
an added expense is involved whenever a purchase
is made, the programmers must determine whether a
new program will be superior to an existing show,
and if so, whether it will be strong enough to offset
the additional cost.
Although expense is a consideration in any pro-
gramming decision, programmers as well as corpo-
rate and station management should always keep in
mind one very important factor: They must keep the
station competitive. Remember, their job is to
deliver the largest mass audience with the strongest
demographics. Although they must always keep an
eye on the bottom line and therefore program in a
cost-effective manner, a false economy will result
from trying to avoid expense if the result would be
CHAPTER 6 Syndication for Stations, Cable, and Online
225
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
to lose even more revenue. If ratings decline, eventu-
ally revenue will also decline.
Instead, programmers must balance expense
against returns, determining the ratings potential
and projected revenue when deciding whether a
new purchase is practical and, if so, how much the
station can afford. The rep’s research can help proj-
ect the future performance of a program, whether it
is already on a station’s schedule or will be a future
acquisition. Anticipated performance plays a large
role in determining the purchase price.
5. Switch Stations
When two stations in the same market are com-
monly owned, the contracts may have been negoti-
ated to allow some programs to run on either
station. Sometimes a program can take on a new
life and appear fresher when switched from one sta-
tion to another. Sometimes a program will become a
better fit in the “other” station’s lineup because of
other program acquisitions or changes made to
either or both stations. And sometimes it’s just pru-
dent to put a weakening program on the weaker of
the two commonly owned stations to reduce the neg-
ative impact on the stronger station’s performance.
While in baseball the team might send a struggling
player to its farm club, in television this works only
in a situation where two stations in the same market
are commonly owned, and the show can be put
into the schedule of the other, presumably weaker
station.
6. Don’t Renew
Most companies own only one station in a market,
and therefore,
when a program is performing
poorly, that station is stuck with it. Unlike baseball,
where a player can be literally traded to another
team run by a different owner, this is generally not
possible in television during the term of the program
contract. At contract renewal time, the current sta-
tion may, in effect, turn a program into a “free
agent” by not renewing it; the syndicator can then
try to sell it to another station in the market. More-
over, unless the incumbent station has a contractual
right to meet or beat any offers from competing sta-
tions, the syndicator may elect to sell the show to a
different station for its next cycle anyway, because
the other station is stronger, can offer a better time
period, is willing to pay more money, or offers to
pick up additional programming from the syndica-
tor if it takes the program in question. Sometimes,
stations will warehouse (store unused) programs to
prevent competitors from getting them.
Revenue Potentials
Based on a program’s ratings and the sales depart-
ment’s estimate of cost per point (the number of dol-
lars advertising agencies or advertisers are willing to
pay for each rating point the station delivers), pro-
grammers can determine the amount of money the
station can pay for a show. It works like this: A rating
point equals 1 percent of the television households in
a market. If there are 500,000 television households
in market A, a rating point represents 5,000 house-
holds (HH). A show that receives a 15 rating in mar-
ket A would deliver 75,000 households (5,000 HH
per rating point 
15 rating points ¼ 75,000
HH). Let’s say that market B has 250,000 house-
holds. By a similar calculation, a 15 rating in market
B would represent 37,500 households. Likewise, a 15
rating in market C with only 100,000 households
would represent just 15,000 households viewing the
program. This simple arithmetic illustrates the point
made earlier in the “Deal Points” section that pro-
grams generally are sold at a higher price in larger
markets than in smaller ones. Thus, even at the
same rating, the larger the market, the larger the
number of viewers. Conversely, the smaller the mar-
ket, the fewer the viewers. And the amount of reve-
nue a station can expect varies accordingly by market
size, as does the license fee for the program.
Advertising agencies pay a certain amount for
each thousand households, called cost per thousand
(CPM). Let’s say the agency assigns a $5 CPM. A
15 rating in market A would be valued at $375 for a
30-second commercial ($5 CPM  5,000 HH per
rating point  1,000 ¼ $25 per point, then  a 15
rating ¼ $375).
226
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Let’s say the station is considering a half-hour,
off-network sitcom cut for six local commercial min-
utes and sold with six available runs over four years.
(While the program may actually be cut for 6:30,
including a 30-second barter spot, the general man-
ager and program director at the station and the rep
are concerned only with the six minutes that are
available for sale to the station and rep.) The six
commercial minutes in each episode translate to
twelve 30-second spots per day. Revenue potential
is calculated by multiplying the projected rate per
spot at the anticipated rating by the number of com-
mercials to give a gross revenue potential. The gross
is now netted down (reduced) to allow for commis-
sions paid by the station to salespeople, reps and
advertising agencies. At a 15 percent commission
rate, the station nets 85 percent of the gross. The
net is now netted down again to a projected sellout
rate (the number of spots actually sold over the
course of a year is generally less than the number
available). Most stations use a conservative 80 per-
cent sellout rate for planning purposes; if they actu-
ally sell more than 80 percent of the available time,
that’s all to the good, and to the bottom line. This
final revenue figure is called the net net. The calcula-
tion per episode would look like this:
$
375
rate per 30-second commercial
12
30-second commercials
$4,500
gross per day
.85
net revenue level
(after 15% commission)
$3,825
net per day
.80
sellout rate
$3,060
net net per day
The $3,060 is the daily income the station can
expect to generate during the current year for each
run of the program.
To compute what the show would generate
when it goes on the air, the station and rep sales
managers inform programmers of the potential rate
for all future years the show will be available. A
typical increase in cost per point from year to year
might run from as low as 3 percent to as high as 12
percent depending on inflation and local market
economy. Using figures supplied by sales, program-
mers use this formula to project the net net revenue
potential of the program over the life of the show. In
this calculation, they also revise the rate based on
the show’s ratings delivery. A program that pro-
duces a 15 rating in its first run might be moved
by its fifth and sixth runs (because it can be expected
to weaken as it is repeated) to a time period with
lower HUT levels, such as late night, and may gen-
erate only a 5 rating. Therefore, although CPMs are
increasing, the lower rating will bring down the spot
rate, lowering the revenue potential for the program
in that run.
Let’s look at a simplified example of the com-
plete calculation. We’ll assume the program is avail-
able two years from now. There will be 130 episodes
of six runs each (780 total runs) over four years. The
station plans to trigger the episodes as soon as the
contract starts, running five episodes a week for
three years, with no hiatus, until all 780 runs are
exhausted. Coincidentally, this will take exactly
three years (5 days/week  52 weeks ¼ 260 days
per year ÷ 780 total runs ¼ 3 years).
The various calculations of the revenue poten-
tial for each individual episode are shown in 6.8.
The percentage rate increases are estimated by
sales. This year and next year are the two years
between the time the station buys the show and the
time it goes on the air. Years 1, 2 and 3 are the years
in which all runs will be taken. The years are not
necessarily calendar years; generally they begin in
September with the start of the new season or the
program’s availability date.
Now that we’ve figured the revenue potential per
run of each episode as shown in 6.8, it’s easy, based on
projected usage, to compute the total revenue poten-
tial for each episode over the life of the contract.
But we’re not quite done. Now let’s figure how
much the station can pay per episode. Stations
assign percentage ranges in three areas: program
purchase cost, operating expense and profit. Pro-
gram purchase cost may run as low as 20 to 30 per-
cent of total revenue for an affiliate, which gets most
of its programming from the network, to as high as
50 percent for an independent, which must purchase
CHAPTER 6 Syndication for Stations, Cable, and Online
227
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
or create all of its programming. Let’s use a median
figure of 40 percent for our example in 6.9.
With a total revenue projection of $13,397.08
per episode, the station using a 40 percent program
cost figure would estimate the price per episode at
$5,358.83. Because nobody figures so closely (that
is, to the exact dollar), a range of $5,000 to $5,500
per episode would be a reasonable working figure.
Multiplying these figures by 130 available episodes
would establish a total investment of $650,000 to
$715,000 for the program. The station would cer-
tainly try to negotiate a lower cost for the show
but might be willing to go higher, even considerably
higher, depending on how badly the station needed
the program or if it perceived that the show was
important to the station’s image (to viewers and
advertisers) and to its competitive position.
Unfortunately for the station, syndicators per-
form the same calculations. They generally quote a
purchase price significantly higher than the station
wishes to pay. In our example, knowing that the
station could expect to make as much as $20,000
6.8
Run 1, Year 1
$3,439.44
Run 2, Year 1
$3,439.44
Run 3, Year 2
$1,945.34
Run 4, Year 2
$1,945.34
Run 5, Year 3
$1,313.76
Run 6, Year 3
$1,313.76
Total net net revenue per episode
$13,397.08
6.9
Calculation of Revenue per Episode
$5.00 current CPM
Year 1: Runs 1 & 2 of each episode in access at 15 rating.
1.05 (5% increase estimate)
$5.25 CPM next year
1.07 (7% increase estimate)
Year 2: Runs 3 & 4 of each episode in early fringe at 8 rating.
$5.62 CPM Year 1 of show
1.06 (6% increase estimate)
Year 3: Runs 5 & 6 of each episode late night at 5 rating.
$5.96 CPM Year 2 of show
1.08 (8% increase estimate)
$6.44 CPM Year 3 of show
Year1
Year 2
Year 3
$5.62 CPM
$8.96 CPM
$6.44 CPM
5000 households
5000 households
5000 households
1000
1000
1000
$28.10 Cost per point
$29.80 Cost per point
$32.20 Cost per point
15 rating
8 rating
5 rating
$421.50 rate
$238.40 rate
$161.00 rate
12 Commercials
12 Commercials
12 Commercials
$5,058.00 Gross
$2,860.80 Gross
$1,932.00 Gross
.85 net revenue
.85 net revenue
.85 net revenue
$4,299.30 Net
$2,431.68 Net
$1,642.20 Net
.80 sellout
.80 sellout
.80 sellout
$3,439.44 Net Net per run
$1,945.34 Net Net per run
$1,313.76 Net Net per run
228
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
in the access-time period if all six runs of each epi-
sode ran in access, but not knowing that the station
might plan to take some runs in early fringe and late
night, the syndicator might ask $10,000 to $15,000
per episode. The station might want to pay $3,000
to $4,000 but expect to pay $5,000 to $6,000 per
episode and go as high as $7,500 if it really needed
the show.
Obviously, the two parties have to reach a mid-
dle ground or the show will either be sold to another
station in the market or go unsold to any station.
And now the fun begins—negotiation.
Negotiation
Syndicators sell most programs to stations through
good old-fashioned negotiation. Generally, the syn-
dication company “opens a market” by pitching the
program to all stations in the market. The pitch will
be the same to every station in the terms and condi-
tions of the deal (episodes, runs, years, availability
date, price, barter split, payment terms) but may dif-
fer subjectively depending on the stations’ perceived
needs, strengths, weaknesses and programming phi-
losophy. The syndicator will try to determine or cre-
ate a need at each station with the hope that several
will make an offer. In this ideal situation, the syndi-
cator will be able to select which station receives the
show based on the following considerations:
■Highest purchase price offered (if cash or cash-
plus-barter)
■Size of down payment
■Length of payout
■Ability to make payments
■Best time period (particularly important to the
syndicator for shows containing barter time)
■Strength of station
■Most compatible adjacent programming
Often the syndicator receives no offers initially but
may have one or two stations as possible prospects.
Negotiations may continue for weeks or even months,
with syndicator and station each making concessions.
The station may consider paying a higher price than
originally planned or may agree to also purchase
another program. The syndicator may lower the asking
price or may increase the number of runs and years (if
possible). The station may raise the down payment, and
the syndicator may allow the station to pay out over
more time. Negotiation is basic horse trading.
Bidding
Some syndicators of hit off-network programs have
sold their programs by confidential bid to the highest
bidder in the market rather than through negotiation.
Here is how bids work. The syndicator opens half a
dozen or so markets in a week. Each station receives
a complete pitch, including research data, terms and
conditions. Financial terms are omitted during the
pitch. After several days, when all stations have
been pitched, the syndicator faxes all stations simul-
taneously, revealing the syndicator’s lowest accept-
able
price
and
certain
other
financial
details.
Stations are given a few days, perhaps 72 or 96
hours, to bid on the program. Bids from each station
in the same market are due simultaneously so that no
station has a time advantage over another. The syn-
dicator analyzes the bid price, the amount of down
payment offered, and other financial terms to deter-
mine the highest bidder. The highest bidder wins the
program, pure and relatively simple.
The rep programmer usually becomes involved
in advising client stations during the bidding pro-
cess. Syndicators notify the reps of the markets com-
ing up for bid, and the reps immediately notify their
respective client stations. The reps provide their
usual research analyses of the program’s perfor-
mance, coupled with their subjective views of how
well the show will play in syndication and in the
client’s lineup. While the reps advise the stations
whether or not to bid, it is ultimately the station’s
decision (with corporate approval) whether or not to
bid and how much to offer. The reps frequently
project the rating and help clients determine the
amount of the bid if a bid is to be made.
Perhaps most important, the reps track reserve
prices (asking prices) and reported or estimated sell-
ing prices in other markets. The rep programmer
informs the client of these pricing trends to help the
station determine a bidding price based on previously
CHAPTER 6 Syndication for Stations, Cable, and Online
229
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
paid prices in similar markets. The rep also informs
the client of down-payment percentages and payout
terms in other markets, which serve as a guide to
successful bidding.
Bidding is a fairly simple, clear-cut procedure
for syndicator and station alike. There is no messy,
drawn-out negotiation. The syndicator makes only
one trip to the market, not repeat visits over many
weeks or months. The sale can be accomplished
quickly if there is a bidder at an acceptable price.
Competition between stations is established, often
turning into a frenzied escalation of prices by sta-
tions reaching ever deeper into their piggy banks to
be sure they acquire the must-have program. And
the syndicator generally achieves prices far in excess
of the amounts that might be realized through nego-
tiation. But bidding works only for the must-have
shows that are truly megahits. An atmosphere of
anticipation has to preexist, and stations must have
a strong desire to own the program.
Stations generally dislike bidding. It often forces
them to pay more than they normally would. In a
negotiation, station management usually gets a feel
for the degree of competing interest and the syndica-
tor’s minimum selling price. In a bidding war, stations
get little sense of the competition for the show. A sta-
tion may be the only bidder, in which case it bids
against itself. It may also bid substantially more than
any other bidder, a waste of money. In this situation,
each station works in the dark, which can be unset-
tling. However, stations realize that if they want to be
in the ball game for a bid show, the syndicator not
only owns the bat and ball but also makes the rules.
Payment
Payment for programming takes one of three basic
forms: cash, barter or cash-plus-barter. Payout
arrangements vary and are usually negotiated.
Cash and Amortization
Cash license fees are paid as money (rather than in
airtime, as with barter). In most cases, cash deals are
like house mortgages or auto loans. An initial down
payment is generally made at the time the contract is
signed, followed by installment payments over a set
period of time. The down payment is generally a
comparatively small portion of the total contract
amount, perhaps 10 or 15 percent. The remaining
payments are triggered when the station begins
using the program, or at a mutually agreed-upon
date, either of which may be a month or two or
several years after the contract is signed. If the con-
tract is for a relatively short amount of time or a low
purchase price, the payments will be made over a
short period of time. A one-year deal may have 12
equal monthly payments, and a six-month deal may
be paid in only two or three installments; however, a
five-year contract may be paid out over three years
in 36 equal monthly payments, beginning when the
contract is triggered. No payments would be due in
years four or five of the contract.
When stations buy programs for cash, whether
negotiated or bid, they pay out the cash to the syn-
dicator on an agreed-upon schedule, but they allo-
cate the cost of the program against their operating
budget via an amortization schedule. Amortization
is an accounting principle wherein the total cost of
the program is allocated as an operating budget
expense on a regular (monthly) basis over all or a
portion of the term of the license. Thus, stations con-
trol and apportion operating expenses to maintain a
profit margin. Amortization does not affect the syn-
dicator or the amount paid to the syndicator
(payout).
Depending on the intended method of airing the
program, amortization may be taken at regular
weekly or monthly intervals or as the runs are actu-
ally used. In the case of programs intended to be
played week in, week out without hiatus (such as
most first-run and some off-network shows), amor-
tization is taken every week or month without
exception. This allows a station to predict its ongo-
ing program costs, but it does not allow the station
to avoid those costs should it remove the program
from its schedule.
Alternatively, for most off-network shows and
feature films, the show or movie is expensed (amor-
tized) as runs are taken of the individual episodes or
titles. The amount amortized each week or month
230
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
will vary depending on the number of runs used. If a
station must reduce operating expenses, it can do so
by resting (placing on hiatus) a program or running
less expensive movie titles. Conversely, in a period of
strong revenues, a station can play off (run) more
expensive shows or movies. In this manner, a station
can control its operating costs to a degree. If, how-
ever, a station does not play off all the episodes
before the end of the contract, it may find itself
with unamortized dollars that have to be expensed.
Thus, amortization can be a double-edged sword,
and the programming executive has to be a bit of
an accountant as well as a creative programmer.
Amortization Schedules
Amortization schedules differ from station to station,
depending on corporate policy. Some stations use dif-
ferent schedules for different program types or
planned usages. The two most widely used amortiza-
tion schedules are straight-line and declining-value.
Straight-line amortization places an equal value
on each run of each episode. If a program cost a
station $10,000 per episode for five runs of each
episode, straight-line amortization would be com-
puted by dividing the five runs into the $10,000
cost per episode, yielding an amortized cost per
run of $2,000 (20 percent of the purchase price, in
this case). If the station had negotiated more runs at
the same per-episode license fee, the cost per run
would decline. For example, had the station pur-
chased eight runs for $10,000, the straight-line
amortized cost would be $1,250 per run. The
lower amortized cost would reduce the station’s
operating budget by $750 each time the show is
run. On a five-day-a-week strip over 52 weeks
(260 runs in a year), the $750-per-run savings
would total $195,000, a sizable amount. (Thus, it
is important to negotiate well to get as many runs as
possible.) The station would still pay the syndicator
the full $10,000 per episode, multiplied by the total
number of episodes.
With declining-value amortization, each run of
an episode is assigned a different value on the prem-
ise that the value of each episode diminishes each
time it airs. Thus, the first run may be expensed at
a higher percentage of total cost than is the second
run, and the second run may be expensed higher
than
the
third
run,
and
so
forth.
A
typical
declining-value amortization schedule for five runs
of a program might look like this:
First run
40 percent
Second run
30 percent
Third run
20 percent
Fourth run
10 percent
Fifth run
00 percent
If we compared the same program under straight-
line and declining-value amortization systems, oper-
ating expenses would be as follows:
Straight-line
Declining-value
First run
$2,000 (20%)
$4,000 (40%)
Second run
,,,,2,000 (20%)
,,,,3,000 (30%)
Third run
,,,,2,000 (20%)
,,,,2,000 (20%)
Fourth run
,,,,2,000 (20%)
,,,,1,000 (10%)
Fifth run
,,,,2,000 (20%)
$ 2,0000 (0%)
Total
$10,000 per
episode
$10,000 per
episode
In both schemes, the total amortized amount
over the five runs is the full per-episode cost of the
program. In the straight-line method, the station
expenses each run (or “charges” itself) equally,
even though the show’s performance may decline
as more runs are taken of each episode. An advan-
tage of this method is that the initial run or runs are
comparatively inexpensive, especially if the show
performs well. A disadvantage is that the final run
is just as expensive as the first run, even though the
show’s popularity may have faded and the ratings
declined.
Under the declining-value method, the bulk of
the amortization is taken on the initial runs, when
the ratings would presumably be at their highest.
Relatively few dollars would remain to be expensed
in the final runs. In this example, 70 percent of the
program’s cost is taken in the first two runs under
the declining-value system, but only 40 percent is
taken for the same two runs straight-lined. If the
show falls apart in the ratings after two or three
runs, the station using the declining-value method
CHAPTER 6 Syndication for Stations, Cable, and Online
231
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
has already put most of its financial obligation
behind it, but the station using straight-line amorti-
zation has the bulk of the expense still to come.
In
the
example,
using
the
declining-value
method amortizes all the expense of each episode
over the first four runs. Because stations sometimes
fail to use all the available runs of a program, the
fifth run at no charge can be quite helpful to a sta-
tion. If the run is not taken, there is no charge
against the show as there would be in the straight-
line system. (Not all declining-value amortization
schedules provide free runs; some companies place
some value even on the final run, which serves to
reduce the expense on the earlier runs, at least
slightly.)
The straight-line system is frequently used to
amortize first-run shows that are expensed on a
weekly basis and generally run no more than twice
per episode. The declining-value system is often used
for off-network programs and feature films that are
generally expensed on a per-run basis and are sold
with 5 to 10 runs per episode or film.
Finally, amortization is only an internal alloca-
tion of dollars against usage. It does not change the
payout of the license fee to the syndicator. The pro-
gram may be fully run and amortized before payout
is completed, or the station may continue taking
runs of the show for years after the payout to the
syndicator is complete, with the amortization of
the episodes allowing the expense against the oper-
ating budget to be delayed until the programs are
actually run. When all episodes are fully amortized
and all payments made to the syndicator, the final
dollars expensed in both amortization and payout
will be identical.
Barter and Cash-Plus-Barter
The second payment method is barter. Barter is a
fairly simple payment system. The station agrees to
run national commercials sold by the syndicator in
return for the right to air the program. No money
changes hands. The syndicator makes all of its
money from the sale of commercials to national
advertisers, and the station gives up some of the
commercial time it or its rep would have had to
sell. A typical straight barter deal might give half
of the advertising time within a program to the syn-
dicator, with the other half available for station sale.
For example, a half-hour program with six minutes
of available commercial time might allocate three
minutes to the syndicator and three minutes to the
station.
Cash-plus-barter means exactly what the name
suggests. Part of the license fee is paid in cash, albeit
a lower cash license fee than if the show were sold
for straight cash, and part of the license fee is given
by the station to the syndicator as commercial time,
which the syndicator sells to national advertisers. A
typical cash-plus-barter deal for a half-hour show
might be a cash license fee plus one minute of com-
mercial time (1:00 national) for the syndicator, with
the station retaining five-and-a-half minutes (5:30
local) for its own sale.
Barter can be both a blessing and a curse. On
the plus side, barter can be a way of reducing cash
expense at a station. In some cases, especially for
untried and unproven first-run shows, stations may
be more willing to give up commercial airtime than
to spend money. If a syndicator takes three minutes
of commercial time within a half-hour show and the
station receives three minutes, the syndicator has
received 50 percent of the available commercial
time, and the station retains 50 percent. As you
saw earlier, stations generally figure 30 to 50 percent
of their revenue goes to programming expense, so
barter may seem expensive. But because stations
are rarely 100 percent sold out and may average
only an 80 to 90 percent sellout over a year, the
barter time the station gives up really represents
only 30 to 40 percent of revenue potential.
Because most syndicated programs today con-
tain some barter time, barter can be problematic.
Some stations embrace barter so they don’t have to
spend real money. Others dislike it because commit-
ments to many shows with heavy barter loads mean
significantly less time for the station to sell, hence
less revenue. A typical barter deal could result in as
much as half of the commercial inventory not being
available to the station to sell. Also, the station may
not want to give its time to a third party to sell, often
at lower rates than the station itself is charging,
232
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
because the syndicator is selling many markets as a
package.
Regardless of a station’s feelings regarding bar-
ter, it has no choice about whether to pay cash or
give up barter airtime for a show. The syndicator
determines the payment terms, not the station. The
station’s only option is whether to run the program.
If it doesn’t like the terms, it doesn’t have to clear the
show.
Barter and cash-plus-barter are used primarily
for the sale of first-run programs and the first syndi-
cation cycle of off-network programs because barter
is an effective way for syndicators to maximize rev-
enues to fully cover production and distribution
costs. Producing first-run shows is generally expen-
sive, and stations are often unwilling to pay suffi-
ciently
high
license
fees
for
untried
first-run
programs. The syndicator’s other choice is to cover
production and distribution costs by bartering a pro-
gram. By combining cash payment and several bar-
ter commercials a day in the first syndication cycle
of an off-network program, the syndicator can max-
imize revenue while allowing the station to spend
less actual money than if the program were sold
for cash only. Older off-network sitcoms, action
hours and dramas are generally sold for straight
cash with no barter because production costs have
already been covered and demand for these pro-
grams is less.
Even though clearance in every market in the
country is the goal, the syndicator must sell the
show to stations in enough markets to represent at
least 70 to 80 percent of all U.S. television house-
holds. Based on this minimum figure, the syndicator
projects a national rating and, using a national cost
per point, determines a rate for each 30-second com-
mercial. The syndicator then attempts to sell all the
national time in the show to national advertisers at,
or as close as possible to, the determined rate. The
syndicator tries to clear the show in the strongest
time periods on the strongest stations to achieve
the highest rating. The ratings from all markets
clearing the show are averaged to produce a national
rating that will, it is hoped, equal or exceed the
projected rating. If the syndicator can get the 70 to
80 percent national clearance, sell all the spots at or
near the rate card price, and deliver the rating prom-
ised to advertisers, the syndicator will make money,
and the show will stay on the air. If not, the syndi-
cator will likely lose money, and the show might not
be renewed.
In an effort to increase the rating and therefore
the revenue potential, some syndicated programs are
run twice during the same week. For example, a pro-
gram that runs Monday through Friday during
prime access and averages a 5 rating may be rerun
the same night during the overnight hours (between
1:00 and 5:00 A.M.), where it might average a 1
rating. The prime-access 5 rating and the overnight
1 rating can be added together to cume a 6 rating.
This cumed (or cumulative) rating is considered
unduplicated viewing because most people would
not watch the same program twice the same day.
Thus, the program has a cumed rating of 6, which
is 20 percent higher than the 5 it achieved in prime
access. A 20 percent higher rating can translate into
20 percent more revenue, which could represent sig-
nificant money during the course of a year to the
syndicator.
Although no standardized ratio of national-
to-local commercial time exists, half-hour straight
barter shows typically range from two minutes
national/four minutes local (generally expressed as
2:00N/4:00L) to as much as 3:30N/3:30L. Hour-
long barter shows typically contain from 3:30N/
10:30L to as much as 9:00N/5:00L. A one-hour
cash-plus-barter program would typically be cut in
the ranges from 2:00N/12:00L to 3:30N/10:30L,
plus that would be the cash payment. The amount
of national barter time the syndicator can withhold
depends on the perceived demand for and strength
of the program and the ability of the syndicator’s
station sales force.5
Cable and Syndication
Broadcast syndicators have found cable networks to
be a ready and growing market for programs.
Instead of sending a large sales force to call on
three to eight stations in each of the 210 local mar-
kets to sell a program in syndication, that same
CHAPTER 6 Syndication for Stations, Cable, and Online
233
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
program is frequently sold to a national cable net-
work in a single deal. Often the cable price exceeds
what might be made in broadcast syndication. Also,
sales staff salaries and travel expenses are saved.
With more potential customers needing to fill 168
hours a week of airtime, cable syndication has
become an extremely lucrative marketplace.
More recent and vintage off-network programs,
not to mention new and continuing first-run pro-
grams, are available than can be fit into traditional
broadcast station schedules. The huge supply of pro-
grams and reduced broadcast demand have thus
forced the creation of a cable aftermarket. Some
cable networks program their schedules much as
independent broadcast television stations once did,
stripping off-network shows and movies (for exam-
ple, USA’s Law & Order: Special Victims Unit fol-
lowed by a feature film) and vintage programs.
Others buy failed network or syndicated programs
at appealingly low prices because these shows either
don’t have enough episodes for syndication or have
already failed in syndication.
A cable network can make an opportunistic
purchase and program the shows effectively for its
needs. Basic cable has become a hot competitive
marketplace for feature films after their pay-cable
and network exposure and before broadcast syndi-
cation. The same is true for off-network shows.
Broadcasters’ place in line is pushed further back,
not nearly as central to program distribution when
this chapter was first conceived. Even more disrup-
tive has been the recent growth in online syndica-
tion, discussed previously in Chapter 4 and again
later in this chapter.
To maximize revenue potential for network pro-
grams, the enduring trend has been to sell off-
network rights simultaneously to both traditional
broadcast stations and cable networks, with the latter
bidding higher for the top shows. Although the types
of deals may be limited only by the imagination and
creativity of the sellers and buyers, perhaps the most
common arrangement has become a weekly run on a
television station (one showing of each episode) fol-
lowed by a Monday through Friday strip run on a
cable network. A popular and long-running program
might also run simultaneously on different venues: (1)
on the original broadcast network with newly pro-
duced episodes for the network, (2) weekly repeats
from previous seasons on local television stations
once a week, and (3) the same weekly repeats on a
cable network as a strip.
Yet another arrangement is a simultaneous run
of brand-new episodes on both a broadcast network
and a cable network. For example, from the begin-
ning of its network run, Law & Order: Special Vic-
tims Unit ran on the NBC television network with a
repeat play several days later on the co-owned USA
cable network.
In still another arrangement, a program may be
created for a basic cable network and simultaneous
first-run syndication. For example, The Invisible
Man was created with this idea in mind, taking its
first run on the Syfy Channel followed by a first-run
syndication appearance of the same episode two
weeks later on broadcast television stations in syndi-
cation. Somewhat similarly, Monk was created for
initial runs on USA and at a later date was played
on the traditional NBC network.
Hollywood studios command steep prices when
they sell off-network shows into syndication on
cable networks. Table 6.10 shows some recent
prices.
Inevitably, the once-rigid relationships of syn-
dication, broadcast television and cable will con-
tinue to evolve and interweave, leading to new
and evermore innovative marketing schemes that
involve online distribution. Just when all partici-
pants think they understand how the business
works, someone invents a better (or at least differ-
ent) mousetrap.
Online Syndication
Online shows fall into the same categories discussed
earlier in the chapter (off-net, off-cable, first-run,
movies), but the sales process is still being formed.
Wrote one observer: “online video syndication is
still feeling its way … there are no rules for online
syndication. And while everyone agrees that syndi-
cation is the future of online video, no one knows
what the field will look like in 5 or 10 years.”6
234
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
YouTube, Vimeo and Blip.tv are planning to
develop long-form, professionally-produced, first-run
programs for online streaming, and others probably
have similar plans. Blip.tv embeds sponsors’ ads in
contributors’ videos and pays a share of the revenue
to those who produce the videos (especially program-
length series). While not everyone who has the talent
to make compelling television shows can get a broad-
cast or cable deal, online distributors are now posi-
tioned to obtain revenue for any producer’s content
that can draw an audience. Funnyordie.com, for
example, is a source of satiric programming, and it
attracts audiences and thus advertisers.
A decade ago, websites like Atom tried to mar-
ket informally-produced videos to advertisers but
failed. However, now potential audiences are much
better connected to wireless computers, phones and
iPad-type tablets, with much faster streaming speeds.
Online viewership is projected to reach over 1.3 bil-
lion people worldwide by 2016.
Off-cable shows that went to broadcast stations,
after some editing, are now sold directly to online dis-
tributors (in addition to the usual DVD sales). For
example, after a six-season run of Nip/Tuck on the
FX cable network, Warner Bros. Home Entertainment
struck a syndication deal with Netflix to stream all 100
episodes of Nip/Tuck, as well as three other Warner
Bros.-produced series, Veronica Mars, Pushing Daisies
and Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles.
DVD sales of off-cable series have been declin-
ing as more homes sign onto monthly subscriptions
of streaming services like Netflix and Hulu Plus,
which each charge $7.99 per month. By 2010, Net-
flix began offering producers $70,000 to $100,000
per off-network episode, just for streaming rights,
which
do
not
preclude
syndication
to
other
6.10
Prices for Off-Network Program Sold to Cable Networks
Hour-longs:
Show
Cable Net
$ per episode
Year
Hawaii Five-0
TNT
2,500,000
2011
Glee
Oxygen
500,000
2010
NCIS: Los Angeles
USA
2,200,000
2009
The Mentalist
TNT
2,000,000
2009
Ugly Betty
TV Guide
200,000
2009
Bones
TNT
450,000
2008
Criminal Minds
A&E
650,000
2008
Lost
Sci-Fi/G4
200,000
2008
Half-hours:
Show
Cable Net
$ per episode
Year
Modern Family
USA
1,400,000
2010
The Big Bang Theory
TBS
1,500,000
2010
The Cleveland Show
TBS/Adult Swim
500,000
2010
30 Rock
Comedy Central
800,000
2009
Curb Your Enthusiasm
TV Guide/TV Land
600,000
2009
Entourage
Spike
600,000
2009
It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia
Comedy Central
700,000
2009
Old Christine
Lifetime
350,000
2009
How I Met Your Mother
Lifetime
750,000
2008
CHAPTER 6 Syndication for Stations, Cable, and Online
235
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
networks (except Hulu Plus, of course). It remains
unclear whether Hollywood is entirely comfortable
with this arrangement. Also, other companies that
stream videos (Apple, Amazon, Google, YouTube)
are very likely to start bidding wars for hit shows.
Cable operators will likely compete with their own
streaming services (TV Everywhere or Comcast’s
Xfinity—See Chapter 4).
At present, movies hold the strongest potential
for online distribution. Netflix is the leader, stream-
ing movies to 23 million subscribers in 2011. In con-
trast, YouTube streams an enormous 3 billion
videos per day. And it has just begun to move to
long-form content like movies. Hulu Plus also car-
ries movies, and smaller competitors like Crackle
show movies in addition to reruns of Seinfeld.
Where all this is going is pretty clear; the questions
to guess at are how soon, how will it be paid for,
and who owns everything.
The International Marketplace
From the earliest days of television syndication
through the late 1990s, the international syndication
marketplace was fairly predictable and understand-
able. A program created in one country for domestic
syndication, network or cable might also be sold in
other countries, thus extending the revenue potential
for the program. The basic syndication “rules” were
pretty much the same in international syndication as
in
domestic.
Then,
as
the
twenty-first
century
approached, something entirely unforeseen happened:
A totally new and exciting arena opened up, produc-
ing vast new creative and sales potential. Although the
traditional international syndication market is still
very active and important, new programming and
marketing concepts are changing the face of the inter-
national marketplace. Let’s look first at the tradi-
tional, tried-and-true international syndication realm.
The Traditional Pattern
Just as American syndicators have found multiple pro-
gram sales opportunities in this country in network,
syndication and cable, they have also extended the
revenue potential of programs through syndication in
international markets. Although most American tele-
vision programs are produced in English, foreign
broadcasters and cable networks find American pro-
gramming very attractive. There is a worldwide appe-
tite for things American (Mickey Mouse, Coca-Cola
and McDonald’s hamburgers, to name but a few);
people in other nations also love American television
shows and movies. Thus many, but certainly not all,
American television programs find life in other coun-
tries. Often they are dubbed into another language.
They may also be aired in English, either with or with-
out subtitles, depending in part on the level of English
spoken by citizens of a particular country and on the
expense of dubbing or subtitling.
Even within the same country, some broadcas-
ters may opt to dub, while others may choose to
subtitle, and still others may air the program in its
original language. Though policies among compa-
nies may differ for various reasons, often the
expense of dubbing is the determining factor. As a
matter of course, programs for young children are
almost always dubbed: They can’t read yet!
In many ways, the syndication process in the
international marketplace is very similar to the
domestic sales effort. Syndicators have websites,
and salespeople send tempting emails and then visit
stations and cable networks in cities throughout for-
eign countries. A domestic salesperson may go on
the road for several days in the southwestern United
States, traveling from Dallas to Albuquerque to Lub-
bock. Conversely, the international syndicator may
go on a sales trip of several weeks, ranging through-
out the Pacific Rim from Hong Kong to Tokyo to
Fiji to Samoa. Although a domestic syndicator’s big-
gest cultural problems may be regional accents and
local food, the international salesperson encounters
language barriers and quite different customs. Many
certainly find this makes their jobs both more chal-
lenging and more interesting.
As in this country, programs are sold for vari-
ous combinations of cash and barter time. The
amounts of cash involved, however, are generally
substantially less. The production costs of a program
are usually recouped in the United States through
sales to broadcast networks, local television stations
236
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
and cable networks. International sales become the
icing on the cake.
In some instances, especially for first-run syndi-
cated shows, a program is created with American
and international partners cofinancing the produc-
tion and distribution costs and then splitting the rev-
enue. For example, an American company may team
with French and Australian partners. Generally,
each coproduction partner retains the rights to the
production in its own country or territory. The
American
partner
may
retain
North
American
rights, the French company the rights to France
and Europe, and the Australian producer the rights
throughout the Pacific Rim. Rights in Asia, South
America and Africa might be sold to an entirely
separate
company.
The
divvying
up
of
rights
often depends on the individual clout of the produc-
tion partners and how much they are contributing
to
the
production,
including
both
money
and
facilities.
A program may even be shot in one of the part-
ner countries such as Australia and may use talent
and production crews from one or more of the coun-
tries represented. Sometimes this is done to meet
national employment quotas or for nationalistic
pride, but more frequently the purpose is to lower
production costs. In the United States, we enjoy a
high standard of living; we also have high labor
and other production costs. Although shooting a
series in a country such as Australia may sound
exotic, it is usually done primarily with an eye on
the bottom line.
Unlike program production in the United States,
when shows are produced in other countries for air-
ing in those countries or in the international market-
place, the producers must generally conform to
various quotas. Often a country will require that cer-
tain percentages of the people employed for the pro-
duction of a program be citizens of that country.
This extends from the stars and other on-camera tal-
ent to the behind-the-scenes people, including pro-
ducers,
writers,
technicians,
wardrobe
people,
stagehands, secretaries and even drivers.
Quotas of a different sort must also be consid-
ered. Many countries regulate the percentage of a
program schedule that must originate within that
country, leaving the remaining portion of the sched-
ule that may be made up of programs produced in
other countries. For example, the European Union is
very restrictive regarding the amount of program-
ming that must contain European content. Further-
more, within a single European country, certain
percentages must be created within that nation. In
France, for example, not only must a certain per-
centage of the programs carried on the French net-
work Canal+ be European, but some must also be
produced in France. Within the EU, quotas are the
same among all European countries, but quotas may
be significantly different in other areas of the world.
In the United States, there are no restrictions
or quotas whatever regarding either national pro-
gram origination or employment. American produ-
cers are subject only to U.S. labor laws regarding
noncitizens.
When a program is produced by or taped in
several countries, quotas become even trickier. Sell-
ing foreign-produced programs to customers in
another
country
requires
consideration
of
that
nation’s employment requirements and content quo-
tas, among other things. This is one of the reasons
why fewer and fewer American prime-time series are
finding their way onto other nations’ television
screens.
For years, most programming went in one direc-
tion: from the United States to other countries. Rel-
atively little programming flowed from other nations
into the United States. American dramatic and
action shows generally sold best in other countries.
Although car crashes, whodunits and prime-time
soaps
seem
to
have
universal
appeal,
comedy
shows often didn’t fare as well. What’s a knee slap-
per or rib tickler in one part of the globe may not
seem so funny in other areas.
American movies have long been popular in
most other countries. During the 1980s and 1990s,
the Hollywood studios increasingly made output
deals in which substantial amounts of programming
from a studio were sold in advance in other coun-
tries. This helped to finance the production costs of
the shows and to give relative assurance that a pro-
gram actually would be produced. Some people have
dubbed this period the Golden Age of Export.
CHAPTER 6 Syndication for Stations, Cable, and Online
237
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The birth of new broadcast and cable networks
in the United States and throughout the world in the
1980s and 1990s created a tremendous demand for
fresh programming. The rise of the FOX network
had enormous impact not only in the United States
but also around the world. FOX programs such as
Beverly Hills 90210 and The Simpsons became so
popular in other countries that they became global
brands, much like Nike and Microsoft.
Many American
cable
networks
have
also
become global brands. MTV has cable networks in
many areas of the world programmed in the lan-
guages of the local countries. The Discovery Chan-
nel is also global, with localized programming in
Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin America and the Middle
East as well as in individual countries, including
Australia,
Brazil,
Canada,
Germany,
Italy
and
India. Fox Kids Network, E! and TNT are also
seen in many countries. And CNN is the original
worldwide network, viewed around the globe since
the 1980s.
Global branding has become commonplace in
broadcast and cable circles. Often branding goes
far beyond an individual program or character (see
6.11).
The Emerging Pattern
As the twenty-first century began, an extremely sig-
nificant change occurred in the international market-
place. With deregulation and a single monetary
standard sweeping Europe, there was a desire for
strong locally-produced programming coupled with
an ability to export such programming—to America
among other places. As a result, format program-
ming emerged as a dominant trend. (Formatting is
essentially the same as franchising.) And unfortu-
nately, we then saw the end of the Golden Age.
To understand format programming, think of
Wheel of Fortune and Who Wants to Be a Million-
aire?. Both programs were created in one country
(Wheel by producer Merv Griffin and syndicator
King
World Productions
in the United
States,
Millionaire by producer Michael Davies and the
BBC in England). In each case, the format is licensed
to broadcasters in other countries. Many of the
production elements (scripts, music, scenery design,
sound effects, questions and so on) are provided by
the program creators, but local hosts and contest-
ants are used in each country. Scripts are tailored
to local interests, habits and language (the American
word cookie would be changed to biscuit in Eng-
land, for example).
Even the name may be changed to reflect local
culture and language. (For example, the most popu-
lar syndicated show in the United States is still called
6.11
Global Branding by
Nickelodeon
N
ickelodeon has created branded blocks of pro-
gramming both for its own international services
and for sale to other companies in countries where Nick
does not have its own operations. Nickelodeon provides
not only several hours of the programs themselves but
also interstitial materials such as promos and IDs and
website content. As a further extension of branding and
its image, Nickelodeon also licenses ancillary rights and
services. Included are product licensing and merchan-
dising (toys and games), video and audio products
(CDs, videocassettes and DVDs), and publishing rights
(books and magazines). Like many other companies,
Nickelodeon believes its trademark is valuable, and it
carefully guards the environment in which its program-
ming and image are presented around the world.
As communications shrink the world, programs and
program concepts are becoming both more global and
more utilized. For example, Nickelodeon created Rugrats
as a U.S. cable program. The show has since been
aired around the world. In Great Britain alone, Rugrats
can be seen on the BBC (the British Broadcasting Cor-
poration’s terrestrial broadcast network), Nick UK (basic
cable and direct broadcast satellite) and Nick Replay
(digital TV). With an eye to the future, when Nickel-
odeon develops programs or acquires program rights,
their programmers attempt to do so for all Nickelodeon
venues (Nick US, Nick UK, Nick Australia and so on).
Such strategy is not unique to Nickelodeon; indeed,
many multinational companies employ the same
approach.
238
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Wheel of Fortune in Australia, but its name becomes
Roda a Roda in Brazil, La Ruleta de la Fortuna in
Ecuador, Glücksrad in Germany, Roda Impian in
Malaysia, Carkifelek in Turkey, and Chiêc nôn kˆy
diêu in Viet Nam. And Jeopardy! becomes Your
Own Game [in Russian].)
In some cases, actual video portions of the pro-
gram may be supplied. (For its preschool program
Blues Clues, Nickelodeon provided all the anima-
tion; the various international broadcasters then
chromakeyed their own local live actors over the
animation.) Perhaps most important, the shows are
produced in the local languages. Thus, Wheel has its
own British Pat Sajak and successors to the classic
Vanna White. Meanwhile, the British host of Mil-
lionaire was replaced by Regis Philbin in this coun-
try. Both shows air in Japan with Japanese hosts, in
France with French hosts and so forth.
Format programming has tremendously affected
international syndication. What had been pretty
much a one-way flow of programs from the United
States to other countries has been abruptly changed.
Product flow from Europe to the United States and
other countries is now the largest ever. This phe-
nomenon has resulted in vast new creative and sales
potential.
What Lies Ahead for Syndication
Syndication is a rapidly changing business. Head-
lines in trade publications frequently herald new
and innovative syndication deals. Although it is
speculative at best to imagine how the industry
might look by the end of this decade, several scenar-
ios are plausible.
1.
Innovative deal structuring. As the financial
stakes get higher and competition becomes fiercer,
syndicators and stations alike will become more
and more creative in their deal making. Broadcast
syndicators will make offers more attractive to
stations while simultaneously finding new ways to
increase revenue to their own bottom line. This
may involve barter, payout, additional daily or
weekend runs, sharing use with cable, cofinancing
with station groups, hiatus periods and ancillary
revenue sources. Deal structure will be limited only
by the ingenuity of the participants and will be
driven by the need to maximize profits for both
syndicators and stations.
2.
Cost control. Stations and syndicators are
continually striving to manage costs. The days of
heady economic growth and comfortable profits
between the 1970s and early 1990s seem only a
pleasant memory in the 2000s. In the wake of new
competition from cable and the softening of the
world economy, costs must be controlled. There-
fore, whether in deal making, station operation or
expansion of facilities or staffs, broadcasters and
syndicators alike share a common goal: the need for
efficiency, streamlining, mutually beneficial dealing
and use of all assets. With FCC regulations allow-
ing ownership of more stations by each individual
broadcasting company, and with mergers of many
syndicators, cost controls become ever more
important, even as the programming deals are
becoming bigger.
3.
Consortiums/coproduction/co-ventures. All
these terms mean much the same thing: Station
groups and syndicators are increasingly finding
new and exciting ways to work together as part-
ners. Spurred by tough economic times and the
need to control costs, station groups and syndica-
tors can share costs and risks and, perhaps, profits.
Station groups will continue to join forces with one
another in noncompeting markets to develop and
launch first-run programs to meet specific station
needs. Increasingly, syndicators will join in these
co-ventures. Because stations will hold an equity
position in some shows, these shows will probably
gain some extra promotion and perhaps be given a
longer time on the air to prove themselves. In other
words, coproduced shows will get a good shot at
succeeding (if the audience likes them!).
4.
Cable, internet and mobile media. Increasingly,
programs created for original telecast via one deliv-
ery system are finding their way to another: over-
the-air to cable and vice versa; network to either
broadcast syndication or cable; cable to syndication;
cable to foreign; foreign to domestic syndication.
CHAPTER 6 Syndication for Stations, Cable, and Online
239
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
And the internet and various mobile media will
become increasing parts of these aftermarkets. Sev-
eral crisscrossing paths already exist, and the line
between network/syndication/cable is now blurring.
In fact, the broadcast networks routinely promote
their cable programs on network shows airing on
local affiliates; talent is frequently utilized for both
network and cable telecasts. As cable has grown and
solidified its economic base, syndicators have played
to that strength. Once traditional adversaries, now
cable and broadcast have formed co-ventures that
will benefit both. Just as politics make strange bed-
fellows, so too do the economic needs of the televi-
sion industry.
The internet and mobile media have rapidly
become the next challenges for broadcasters, syndi-
cators and networks. Although the internet and
smart phones offer great opportunities for extending
program and product reach and for promoting a
program or an entire brand, they also create huge
challenges—even threats. Decisions must be made
on how to sell a program on the internet and to
mobile media, how to charge, and how to protect a
copyright. Once a program or portion of a program
is on the internet, it essentially becomes available to
any person or company in the entire world. The
owners of the program and the content copyright
need to figure out how to protect their financial and
other interests. Producers usually make programs
because of their enormous revenue potential from
domestic and international syndication, and the
syndication process involves hundreds of millions of
dollars annually across the United States. The rise of
the internet and mobile media potentially challenges
all these assumptions.
5.
Increasing role of reps. Programmers at station
representative firms will play an even greater role in
the syndication process. As costs escalate and pro-
gramming decisions become riskier, the rep pro-
grammer’s expertise becomes more valuable. To
control costs, many stations have eliminated the
program director position and are using rep pro-
grammers instead. This trend is likely to continue.
6.
Increasing role of networks. With the demise of
the FCC’s financial and syndication rules, the
networks have become actively involved with the
production of syndicated shows. Many expect the
prime-access period (7 to 8 P.M. EST) to attract more
off-network programs now that the Prime-Time
Access Rule (PTAR) is long gone. First-run game
shows and magazine formats have outlived their pro-
tected existence in the top 50 markets. Increased
competition for hit off-network programs will affect
the price for these shows.
Just as the children and teenagers of the 1950s
and 1960s grew up watching I Love Lucy, The Flint-
stones and The Brady Bunch, so too the next genera-
tion found enduring favorites in The Cosby Show,
The Simpsons and Married … with Children. Today’s
teens and adults expect police departments to conduct
advanced
crime-scene
investigation
because
they
watched so many episodes of CSI, Without a Trace,
Cold Case and their clones. This generation has taken
Ugly Betty and Grey’s Anatomy into their lives. Tele-
vision shows are valuable assets that can enjoy a long
economic lifespan. Old favorites in broadcast syndi-
cation continue to play and play and play. And the
needs of cable have extended the life of many seem-
ingly lesser programs, while the internet offers world-
wide opportunities to unknown producers.
While sitcoms are still important in syndication,
hour-long network dramas generally are not as desir-
able for television stations because it is harder to find
one-hour blocks of time on stations that will reach
large audiences (outside of prime time—it’s named
that for the obvious reason). Also, because many
hour-long shows tend to be serial in nature (Grey’s
Anatomy, 24, Lost), once the outcome is known from
the original network run, the dramatic tension and
viewer interest surrounding these programs tend to
lessen. Their network rerun ratings are generally
considerably lower than their original run rating,
foretelling potential lower ratings in syndication.
First-run series, on the other hand, draw viewers
who are more likely to watch live, thus using DVRs
less, which results in greater viewing of commercials.
Some of these hour programs may be sold in
syndication as once-a-week hours for weekend
runs, while others are sold directly to cable networks
following their over-the-air network runs. Other
240
PART THREE
Understanding Key Processes

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
hours (such as Law & Order and CSI) are sold
directly to cable networks, bypassing syndication.
For the rights holders, the lack of domestic syndica-
tion potential is often offset by sales to international
buyers for broadcast in other countries.
The Peter Allen song “Everything Old Is New
Again” at one time applied to the syndication poten-
tial of most programs going directly to television
stations.
Nowadays,
especially
with
the
rapid
growth of cable and online networks plus tablets,
program
producers
have
many
more
potential
buyers for programs when they finish their originals
runs on network television. If only enough adver-
tisers would catch up to pay for the game.
Notes
1. In the media business, a station group is made up of
television stations in two or more different markets owned
by one company, and relaxed FCC cross-ownership rules
now sometimes permit a single company to own two sta-
tions within some larger markets.
2. FireWire, also called i.Link and Lynz, is Apple’s stan-
dard for high-speed data transfer to computers (like USB).
The system is copyrighted and fees are high, so FireWire is
used by the television industry but not the general public.
Known technically as IEEE 1394, the descriptively-named
FireWire system provides high-definition audio/video con-
nections for speedy transfer of such programming as syn-
dicated series episodes and movies. As you can imagine,
“emailing” a whole movie or two dozen episodes necessi-
tates high-quality and high-speed capacity.
3. A few shows move the other direction. The game show
Remote Control went from cable to broadcast syndication,
the first of a new stream of programs for the syndication
market.
4. In cases where the rep is negative toward the program,
avoiding an in-person pitch to reps generally has the
advantage of minimizing the strength of the rep’s recom-
mendation to stations. Opinions tend to be stronger about
shows that have been evaluated firsthand. Reps eventually
see pilots or sample tapes of all shows their client stations
are interested in, but delay sometimes works to the tem-
porary advantage of the syndicator.
5. Barter splits may vary widely, even among essentially
similar programs. For example, Jerry Springer, Oprah and
Jenny Jones are all cash-plus-barter, one-hour talk-show
strips, but the national/local barter splits are quite differ-
ent, with Jenny Jones’s syndicator having considerably
more national time to sell than Jerry Springer’s distribu-
tion company: Jerry Springer, 2:30N/12:00L; Oprah,
3:00N/11:00L; Jenny Jones, 3:30N/10:30L.
6. Troy Dreier, “Syndicate of Die,” http://www.strea-
mingmedia.com/Articles/Editorial/Featured-Articles/Syndi-
cate-or-Die-65694.aspx.
CHAPTER 6 Syndication for Stations, Cable, and Online
241
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
This page intentionally left blank 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
P A R T4
Television Programming
Practices
Part Four Outline
Chapter 7
Non-Prime-Time Network Programming 245
Chapter 8
Television Station Programming Strategies 271
Chapter 9
Basic and Premium Subscription Programming 303
Chapter 10
Public Television Programming 340
243
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
This page intentionally left blank 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A P T E R7
Non-Prime-Time Network
Programming
Robert V. Bellamy and James R. Walker
Chapter Outline
Non-Prime-Time Dayparts
Scheduling Strategies
HUT Levels
The Struggle for Clearances
Advertisers and Demographics
Genres of NonPrime-Time
Programming
Sports
Sports Programming in a
Multichannel Environment
Non-Live-Event Sports
Programming
Soap Operas and Game Shows
Soap Operas
Game Shows
Weekday News, Information,
and Talk
Early-Morning Newscasts
Morning Magazines
Daytime Talk
Evening News
Late-Night News
Overnight News
Weekend News and
Information
Weekend Magazines
Sunday News Interviews
Children’s Programming
Production and Development
Processes
Late-Night Talk/Variety
Late-Night Weekend
Entertainment
The Effects of Consolidation
and Cable
Note
245
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T
he migration of television audiences away
from the big broadcast networks to the ever-
increasing number of alternative video outlets has
greatly accelerated in the last five years—a phenome-
non that won’t be a surprise to you! As Chapter 2
pointed out, even a cursory glance at prime-time sche-
dules shows that network TV has struggled in its
attempts to reach and maintain audiences with value
to advertisers. Similar pressures have come to major
segments of non-prime-time. In fact, network Mon-
day–Friday daytime programming has experienced
some of the most radical changes of all: The iconic
soap opera format now is rapidly fading away, and
more and more time slots are being returned to affili-
ates (who hardly know what to do with them). Talk
programs have become indistinguishable from syndi-
cated offerings and make up more and more of what
is left of daytime network programming.
For the popular media, prime-time television is
television. Much of national and local coverage of
television focuses on evening programs. Critical
reviews, star interviews and Nielsen ratings for the
top prime-time programs are readily available.
Because prime time is the subject of such intense
reporting, you might think the rest of the day is
insignificant. Not true. Daytime talk and late-night
comedy are frequently the most provocative and—
significantly for the U.S. broadcast networks—most
profitable
shows
on
television.
The
difference
between what a program costs to produce and the
advertising revenue it generates is its profit. Because
non-prime-time programs are generally inexpensive
to produce and carry more ads than prime time,
their ratings can be relatively modest and still supply
huge profits for the networks. In addition, non-
prime-time
audiences
are
less
demographically
diverse, making it easier for advertisers to target
their commercials to consumers most interested in
their
products.
This
means
more
compatibility
between a program and its spots (less viewer annoy-
ance) and less advertising waste (fewer commercials
directed to wrong viewers) than in prime time with
its larger but more diverse audiences.
Nonprime-time viewers are often more loyal
to their programs than prime-time viewers. Many
football fans plan their whole week around Saturday
college and Sunday professional games, and the net-
work programmer who preempts a weekday soap
opera or The View for a special program will receive
an avalanche of unpleasant tweets and emails.
Despite steadily decreasing audiences, millions of
Americans still use network evening news as a
daily information ritual, and Letterman or Leno as
a daily bedtime ritual.
Networks generating the largest advertising rev-
enues have the most non-prime-time programming.
Programmers cannot ignore the non-evening programs
because there are many more hours to program than
in prime time. More than any other type of program-
ming, the non-prime period distinguishes the oldest
broadcast networks (ABC, CBS, NBC) from their
more recent competitors. The long-established pres-
ence of the Big Three in virtually all nonprime day-
parts
provides
them
with
heaps
of
commercial
availabilities to sell to advertisers. ABC, CBS, and
NBC each sells more than three times as many com-
mercial minutes as FOX, the most active of the other
English-language networks.
The primary reason for this vast disparity in the
networks’ most basic product, advertising availabili-
ties, is that the newer networks take a different
approach to nonprime-time programming. With the
important exceptions of sports on FOX, newer net-
works have not competed successfully in nonprime
time. Instead of challenging long-running programs
in early morning, daytime, and late night, the CW
and MNTV try to capture viewers’ attention in
prime time, while ION strips older family-oriented
reality shows. Univision, by contrast, successfully fills
many of its nonprime hours with talk shows and tele-
novelas (television novels similar to soap operas, but
with a definite ending after some months or years)
and carries major international sports on weekends.
NonPrime-Time Dayparts
Nonprime time is a broad term encompassing all the
programming dayparts other than prime time. The
U.S. broadcast television networks program some or
246
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
all of the following dayparts (reflected in eastern/
Pacific times) with several types of programming.
Weekday Programming
Overnight
2:05 A.M.–6 A.M. News
Early morning
6 A.M.–9 A.M. Magazine
Daytime
10 A.M.–4 P.M. Soaps/Game
shows/Talk
Early fringe
4 P.M.–6 P.M. Children’s*
Early evening
6:30 P.M.–7 P.M. News
Late night
11:35 P.M.–2:05 A.M. Talk/news
*Daytime children’s programming has been abandoned by all
the major English-language networks in recent years. This is
another example of how niche-oriented cable networks (e.g.,
Disney Channel, Nickelodeon) have replaced one of the tradi-
tional functions of broadcast television.
Weekend Programming
Weekend mornings
8 A.M.–1 P.M. Children’s/
Magazine
Weekend afternoons
1 P.M.–7 P.M. Sports
Weekend late night
11 P.M.–1 A.M. Comedy/
Music
The size of the audiences in non-prime dayparts
is considerably smaller than in prime time, but all
nonprime-time dayparts contribute competitively
and economically to a network’s performance. Pro-
gramming executives responsible for nonprime day-
parts are as dedicated to competing for available
viewers as are their evening counterparts. In prime-
time programming, the “war” fought night after
night is measured in daily ratings gains or losses.
Although daily ratings are important to shows in
nonprime time, the key to the battle is to get viewers
into the habit of watching weekday nonprime pro-
grams every day or from week to week. With the
exception of Univision’s Sabado Gigante, all ten of
the longest-running programs on the networks are
non-prime series (see 7.1).
In prime time, ratings for the Big Four broad-
cast networks average between approximately 2.0
and 8.0 nowadays and range from about a 1.5 at
the bottom end to about 8.0 or occasionally higher
for top-rated shows in the key Adults 18 to 49
demographic. This huge variation means sharp dif-
ferences in the prime-time advertising rates and
profit ratios for the networks. For daytime, the aver-
age is between 2.5 and 3.0 with a range from 2.0 to
3.5, a quite different ball game. Although the reven-
ues generated are more modest, the risks are also
7.1
Longest-Running Network Series
Top 10 Longest-Running Programs as of 2011*
Years on the Air
1. Meet the Press, NBC (premiered 1947)
64
2. CBS Evening News (premiered 1948)
63
3. The Today Show, NBC (premiered 1952)
59
4. Face the Nation, CBS (premiered 1954)
59
5. The Tonight Show, NBC (premiered 1954)
57
6. General Hospital, ABC (premiered 1963)
48
7. The Price Is Right, NBC, ABC, CBS (1956–65, returned 1972)**
48
8. Days of Our Lives, NBC (premiered 1965)
46
9. NBC Nightly News (premiered 1970)***
41
10. The Young and the Restless, CBS (premiered 1973)
38
*Sabado Gigante has been on the air 49 years (since 1962), but the first 24 were on a local South American channel; it has been a network
show on Univision for 26 years.
**While in syndication, The Price Is Right had a concurrent prime-time run from 1956 to 1964 and two brief runs on prime time in 1986 and
1993.
***NBC, starting with The Camel News Caravan (1948–56) and then The Huntley-Brinkley Report (1956–70) to the present NBC Nightly
News (1970– ), has had an evening newscast on the air continuously for 63 years.
CHAPTER 7 Non-Prime-Time Network Programming
247
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
more modest. Nonprime programmers use a low-
risk approach when building their schedules.
Using a low-risk programming strategy, pro-
grammers concede that blockbuster ratings and
their accompanying high advertising rates are virtu-
ally impossible to attain. They take a more conser-
vative approach, which limits production costs and
uses tried-and-true formats. In addition, developing
a schedule using a different series every hour of each
weekday would be far too expensive—by a long
shot. Thus, weekday programming is stripped (the
same programs are scheduled on Monday through
Friday at the same time). Stripping allows viewers
to build ongoing loyalty to a series while lowering
the financial risks involved in program development.
To program effectively in nonprime time, the net-
works must assess the available audience in a partic-
ular part of the day. To do this, programmers
examine HUT levels, clearances, potential adverti-
sers and likely demographics of audience members.
Scheduling Strategies
Scheduling nonprime time presents a unique set of
challenges for programmers. The programmer jug-
gles two types of audience flow: flow-through from
the first program to the second one in the daypart
and flow across the weekdays from one day to the
next. Flow-through is usually accomplished by using
blocks of similar shows; flow across the weekdays is
promoted by stripping a series in the same time slot
each weekday. While we commonly see blocks of
soaps or game shows on TV, late night is blocked
too: a late-night talk show is usually followed by
another late-late talk show. For news, talk and mag-
azine programs, continuity comes from the regular
presence of a familiar anchor or host that promotes
flow from one day to the next. Also, such program
genres as soap operas have a cliff-hanger narrative
structure that connects each episode with the next
day’s episode, driving flow across days.
In contrast, weekend programming is scheduled
weekly—like prime time—with one episode per
week at the same time from week to week. Viewers
return each Saturday or Sunday to get programming
that is less available on networks during the rest of
the week, such as sports, comedy, music or extended
news interviews. Viewers of Sunday morning politi-
cal talk, for example, typically return week after
week to keep up, and fans of a particular NFL
team will religiously tune in every Sunday afternoon
to see their favorite.
HUT Levels
HUT levels reach around 60 percent in prime time,
while nonprime-time levels can be less than 10 per-
cent. Because so few homes are using their television
sets (or home computers), the potential ratings and
advertising revenue are limited. But the opportunity
to create a winning franchise for a time period
remains: Even small audiences have value to adver-
tisers. In fact, many clients cannot afford to adver-
tise in prime time, so creative programming targeted
to the “right” small audience is often very attractive
to these sponsors. Weekends are a good example.
Viewers who tune in on the weekend have a differ-
ent mindset than prime-time viewers do. They often
want more movies or sports than they have time to
watch during prime time. Longer chunks of leisure
time can offset smaller HUT levels: Weekend view-
ers wind up spending more time watching television,
despite their smaller numbers.
The Struggle for Clearances
Nonprime time and prime time especially differ in the
crucial matter of affiliate clearances. When a network
schedules a program, an affiliated station has three
options: It can clear the program (air it when sched-
uled by the network), it can decide not to clear it
(preemption), or it can ask permission to air the pro-
gram at a later time (delayed carriage). Both preemp-
tion and delayed carriage, especially by major-market
stations, hurt a network’s national ratings because
they reduce the potential audience for the program.
In order to increase clearances of network program-
ming, especially in nonprime time, the networks suc-
ceeded in getting the FCC to raise the percentage of
U.S. households they can reach with their owned-
and-operated stations. Although most affiliates clear
248
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
about 90 percent of their network’s total schedule,
the percentage in nonprime time, especially in the
daytime, Sunday morning, overnight and late-night
dayparts, is substantially lower. The O&Os naturally
clear the entire network schedule.
In a surprising move after nearly 50 years of
daytime programming, around the turn of the cen-
tury, NBC (which ranked third in daytime program-
ming
throughout
the
1980s
and
early
1990s)
decided to scale back its daytime schedule because
of low clearances. When NBC first offered The
Other Side, a daytime talk show, it received only a
61 percent clearance rate; in other words, almost 40
percent of NBC’s affiliates decided to schedule some
syndicated series instead. Besides eroding its poten-
tial audience, preemption and delayed carriage dis-
rupt the scheduling strategies used to foster audience
flow from one program to another. For example, an
ABC affiliate that carries Nightline following the
local newscast provides a stream of viewers who
are looking for information. When Nightline is
delayed to allow the affiliate to carry a sitcom,
much of the potential audience goes to bed or
switches to an all-news cable channel. The delayed
Nightline is less likely to attract a large audience
when it follows comedy rather than news.
The corporate owners of the broadcast net-
works are also hedging their nonprime-time bets by
offering programming to their own and other
network affiliates through their syndication arms.
Viacom, owner of CBS, also owns King World, the
syndicators of former daytime powerhouse Oprah
and its popular spinoffs, Dr. Phil and Dr. Oz.
When affiliates of ABC or NBC purchase these talk
programs, the shows compete with whatever CBS
affiliates offer, a situation that more than irks CBS
affiliates.
Advertisers and Demographics
A network has to determine which segment of the
available audience it will go after (target), mindful
of its competitors’ programming and influenced to
some degree by advertiser support for its program-
ming. Then the network programmer’s task is to put
together a schedule of programs that will, at the
lowest possible cost, do four big things:
■Attract the most desirable demographic groups
■Maximize audience flow-through
■Build viewer loyalty
■Capture the largest possible audience
One big difference between the major dayparts is
that audiences during nonprime-time dayparts are
more homogenous (similar in demographic compo-
sition) than prime-time audiences. Typically in non-
prime time, the three networks schedule the same
program type head-to-head (all soaps, all talk, all
games, all soft news and so on), which creates fierce
competition for single audience group. When select-
ing the shows for a particular daypart, the networks
necessarily give primary consideration to these
elements:
■Demographics of available audiences
■Competitive counterprogramming opportunities
■Economic viability
The questions are whether an audience group is
large enough to split profitably, whether there is a
chance to capture another big group, and what the
cheapest option is that will still please enough
advertisers.
Indirect influences on programming practices
also come into play. Daytime programs rely on
drug and food companies for advertising revenue.
Hence, programmers are wary of scripts or interview
programs that tackle subjects such as tampering
with painkillers or rat hairs in cereal. For three rea-
sons, daytime programming is in much closer touch
with its advertising messages than prime time. First,
daytime programs contain more commercial minutes
per hour. Second, because many programs were
once both sponsored and produced by advertisers,
there is a tradition of sensitivity to advertiser
needs.
Finally,
two
major
companies,
General
Foods and Procter & Gamble, dominate the adver-
tising time in daytime, and until very recently, the
networks could not afford to offend them. (Now
most networks are owned by even bigger guys.)
CHAPTER 7 Non-Prime-Time Network Programming
249
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Genres of NonPrime-Time
Programming
There are seven key genres of nonprime program-
ming: (1) sports, (2) daytime soap operas (including
telenovelas that also air in prime time), (3) game
shows, (4) news/magazines, (5) talk shows, (6) chil-
dren’s programs and (7) comedy/music programs.
Most of these program types are identified with par-
ticular dayparts: sports with weekend afternoons;
soaps and game shows with daytime; children’s pro-
gramming with Saturday mornings; talk/comedy
shows with weekday late night; and comedy/music
with late nights on Saturdays. Different strategies
and practices necessarily associate with each genre
of programming, as well as different levels of cost,
and the development processes for new shows vary
considerably. Not all of these categories are mutu-
ally exclusive. For example, the third and fourth
hours of Today are as much a talk program as
they are a news/magazine. The View and The Talk
are talk programs (duh) but include interviews with
newsmakers like the news/magazines. In addition,
ABC schedules the cheap-to-produce reality genre
in daytime (and prime time)-most recently, The
Chew and The Revolution.
Sports
In case you haven’t noticed, on the broadcast net-
works, weekend afternoons (1 to 7 P.M.) are domi-
nated by live sports coverage, and they are allowed
to run on into the once-sacred prime time if the
events are popular. Sports are indubitably one of
the most important forms of programming in televi-
sion. One of the chief reasons for sports’ popularity
with the network higher-ups is their consistent abil-
ity to attract an audience of young men who are
extremely difficult to attract with other types of reg-
ularly scheduled programming (duh). In addition,
sports provide a much-valued location for zap-
proof advertising and promotion. Sports telecasts
are brimming with opportunities for the insertion
of ads, promotional spots and announcements that
cannot be avoided by the viewer unless she or he
also risks missing part of the action. Sports also
are one of the programming forms that provide
excellent branding opportunities for networks, such
as “NBC—The Home of the Olympics,” FOX NFL
Sunday and so forth.
A network’s sports division is responsible for
acquiring the rights to games and events and for pro-
ducing the telecasts. It must work closely with the
programming division because of the complexities
associated with live sporting events, including over-
time pay and weather-related cancellations. The net-
works’ sports divisions negotiate with the sports
leagues to guarantee that start times occur when
the majority of viewers can watch. Those sporting
events that do not attract a prime-time-sized audi-
ence are carefully scheduled elsewhere so as not to
interfere with the all-important prime-time entertain-
ment programs.
Noninterference with prime time diminished as
a concern in recent years, however, because of the
rising popularity and enormous cost of major team
sports, particularly football. The late afternoon NFL
games and even post-game programs regularly run
into Sunday prime time and often contribute to high
prime-time ratings, bumping 60 Minutes and other
Sunday shows. NBA (National Basketball Associa-
tion), MLB (Major League Baseball), and NCAA
(National Collegiate Athletic Association) playoff
games now regularly appear in prime hours. When
Disney shifted ABC’s Monday Night Football to its
ESPN cable network because of declining ratings,
NBC promptly filled the prime-time broadcast NFL
void with Sunday Night Football while re-branding
Sunday night prime time as Football Night in Amer-
ica. Most regular season team sports coverage
remains in weekend afternoons and early evenings
(and on cable), while most major postseason con-
tests are featured in prime time.
Sports Programming in a
Multichannel Environment
Although major sports are not the low-cost pro-
gramming option they were in the early days of tele-
vision, programming costs are always relative in
250
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
television. Although CBS claimed to have lost mil-
lions of dollars on sports rights in the early and
mid-1990s, within a few years the network once
again spent enormous sums to regain a piece of the
NFL Sunday afternoon package and to renew its
NCAA Men’s Basketball Tournament coverage.
This occurred after the network’s prestige was seri-
ously damaged by its loss of the NFL to the less-
established network in 1994.
FOX used the NFL and later MLB, NASCAR
(National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing),
and, to a limited degree, the NHL (National Hockey
League) to establish itself as a legitimate member of
the Big Four to both viewers and the financial com-
munity. One result of FOX’s new leverage was its
ability to upgrade its affiliates in several markets,
mainly at the expense of CBS. The question of
cost, then, involves more than simply the profit or
loss made from the ratio of program costs to adver-
tising revenues: Losing major sports can undermine
the legitimacy and degrade the financial value of a
broadcast network.
Cable has clearly had a huge impact on televised
sports programming. Networks such as ESPN,
ESPN2, ESPNU, Versus (VS) and the regional Com-
cast Sports, Fox Sports and Root Sports Nets exist
only because of their sports coverage. Cable’s satu-
ration coverage has raised the profile and value of
sports on television, even as it drains ratings from
broadcast networks for all sports but the NFL.
Only the NFL has consistent increases in regular-
season ratings—at a time when most other broad-
cast
network
ratings
are
declining.
ESPN,
for
example,
now
pays
the
NFL
more
per
year
($ 1.1 billion) for Monday Night Football than any
of the Big Four broadcast networks pay for their
Sunday afternoon (CBS, FOX) or Sunday night
(NBC) packages. Although network sports ratings,
like the ratings for all other network programming,
have had some attrition in the wake of cable and
internet competition, the falloff is much less than
that of other program genres. In fact, ratings for
the NFL, NBA and even the NHL have recently
increased while the ratings for MLB, NASCAR and
other events have remained stable in the last few
years. An important point is that even the limited
ratings attrition for sports is offset by sports’ increased
value as one of the few programming types that
attract the male audience so valued by advertisers, in
spite of ever-proliferating entertainment options. In
addition, such high-profile events as the Super
Bowl, the Olympics and the World Series continue
to draw enormous audiences and provide substantial
promotional opportunities for the host networks at
critical times of the year (the February sweeps and
early in the new broadcast season).
The solution to the tug-of-war over sports has
been for broadcast networks to partner with cable
networks to share rights to sports programming.
The most prominent examples are Disney’s owner-
ship of both ABC and the ESPN networks, which
have shared NFL, NBA and NHL packages; the
FOX/Fox Sports Net combination, which shares
MLB; and the more recent Comcast/NBC merger,
which shares the NHL and is likely to become a
more aggressive bidder for sports to feed both the
network and Comcast’s numerous Regional Sports
Networks (RSNs). Cable networks are able to offer
most of the near-daily regular season games, leaving
broadcast networks to focus on the postseason and
key regular season contests.
There
are
also
shared
rights
arrangements
among separate companies where early rounds of
team playoffs and golf and tennis matches appear
on cable networks, with later rounds shifting to net-
works. The split of NBA between ESPN and ABC is
another example of leveraging the value of sports
television. In fact, the sports divisions of ABC and
ESPN have been merged and now operate in tandem
more often than they operate as competitors.
The sports anthology program, exemplified by
ABC’s long-running Wide World of Sports, was a
casualty of the changes in sports television.1 The
minor sports that were typically covered by anthol-
ogies have, for the most part, benefited from the
explosion in televised sports by gaining individual
contracts on broadcast or cable (NASCAR, WNBA
and Major League Soccer). There has been a redefi-
nition of what constitutes a successful program:
now there is more emphasis on the “quality”
than the quantity of ratings. This situation has ena-
bled NASCAR to gain lucrative network television
CHAPTER 7 Non-Prime-Time Network Programming
251
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
contracts (see 7.2). The “a little something for every-
body” approach of sports anthologies is less viable
as a means of keeping program audiences in the
multichannel environment because it virtually en-
courages channel changing.
The idea of multiple sports in one program lives
on in the biannual Olympic Games and the various
X Games (the “extreme” sports that have a particu-
lar appeal to young audiences). Although the Olym-
pics cannot be regularly scheduled in a conventional
sense, the 1992 decision of the International Olym-
pic Committee (IOC) to have the Summer and Win-
ter Games alternate every two years enormously
increased the value of the games to television.
NBC, in fact, gave up competing for rights to the
NFL, MLB and NBA in the mid-1990s in favor of
the lower-cost NASCAR and, even more important,
in favor of branding itself as the “Network of the
Olympics.” ABC Sports had used this same brand-
ing strategy with great success to build its ratings
and credibility in the 1960s and 1970s, and NBC
has succeeded in tying itself to all Olympics in the
public’s mind. (Some people are surprised to hear
that any other network ever carried the Olympics.)
With the Winter Games scheduled in the Febru-
ary sweeps and the Summer Games coming right
before the fall season rollout two years apart, the
various Olympic events provide hundreds of hours
of prime-time and nonprime programming and also
supply a key promotional platform for touting
NBC’s other programming. The Olympics were
also the first major experiment with multiplatform
programming, a practice that has now become stan-
dard for the Olympics and other long-season sports
while stimulating the new media by providing highly
visible and valued content.
Non-Live-Event Sports Programming
Non-live-event sports programming on the networks
today generally consists of (1) pregame and post-
game programs and (2) sports-league-produced pro-
gramming for children and young adults. Since the
success of CBS’s The NFL Today in the 1970s,
broadcast and cable networks have developed simi-
lar shows for other sports. These wraparound shows
help networks to more fully brand programming
blocks and expand the programming hours devoted
7.2
Nascar on Television
A
lmost $4.5 billion. That’s the price FOX, ABC/ESPN
and TNT paid to carry NASCAR races for the eight
years that started in 2007. The deal’s hefty tag recognized
NASCAR’s high television ratings as the second most-
watched sports programming after the National Football
League. Among its most valuable assets are the Nextel
Cup races.
Starting in the 1960s, ABC aired NASCAR races as
part of its Wide World of Sports program, and after two
decades, shifted NASCAR off broadcasting and onto
cable (ESPN), a relationship that lasted another 20 years.
ESPN is widely credited for popularizing NASCAR—so
much so, indeed, that at the turn of the century, NBC and
FOX snapped it up—but unexpectedly, the ratings slid in
mid-decade. The slide led to the creation of the “Chase for
the Nextel Cup,” an end-of-season playoff series in which
only the top ten drivers were eligible for the final ten races.
These races energized the entire season and attracted
much larger audiences, taking NASCAR to the No. 2 spot.
When NBC decided not to renew NASCAR’s contract in
2005, ABC/ESPN jumped at the opportunity to air the
races again, agreeing to pay an estimated $270 million to
air 17 Nextel Cup races (the remaining races were split
among broadcasting and cable outlets).
NASCAR is widely popular, but whether ABC/ESPN’s
investment will pay off over that long a haul remains to be
seen. Competition from the NFL is hard to beat. NASCAR
ratings have also been sagging, including double-digit
dives in the 2009 and 2010 seasons. NASCAR officials
and network executives “study the reasons” for the drop,
but many journalists blame a clash between race times and
NFL games, colorless story lines about the drivers, and the
spacing and timing of the many, many commercial breaks.
Debbie Goh, Ph.D.
Nanyang Technological University
252
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
to sports without paying additional rights fees. In
addition, powerful sports entities can demand airing
of league-produced shows. This began when the
NBA forced former broadcast partner NBC to
schedule NBA Inside Stuff, a youth-oriented feature
magazine about the league, as a condition of its con-
tract with the league. Similar programming and a
variety of promotional spots are now standard in
major sports television rights deals.
Soap Operas and Game Shows
Daytime programming (9 A.M. to 4 P.M.) has tradi-
tionally been one of the most lucrative dayparts for
television networks. Its profit margin often challenges
that of prime time because the cost per program in
daytime is substantially less. The money needed to
pay for one hour of prime-time drama will cover
the costs of a week’s worth of daytime soap operas.
Moreover, daytime profits help networks offset
extraordinary program investments in other dayparts.
Because viewer loyalties are intense and developing
successful new programs is difficult, the newer net-
works were reluctant to try to develop daytime pro-
gramming—which turned out to be smart. Cost
advantages have greatly declined in the last few
years because the audience for network daytime pro-
gramming has succumbed to the lure of popular syn-
dicated offerings on stations, cable and online.
Currently, of the major English-language net-
works, only ABC, CBS and NBC have a substantial
stake in daytime programs Monday through Friday
(see 7.4), although each of the Big Three have much
7.3
Mister Olympic Broadcasting
D
uncan “Dick” Ebersol is best known for producing
large-scale events, most notably the Olympic
Games. Long an American television executive, his career
began at ABC Sports where, mentored by Roone Arledge,
he became the first-ever television Olympic researcher. In
the mid-70s, he moved to NBC and created such enduring
successes as Saturday Night Live and Friday Night Videos,
as well as Later with Bob Costas, under his own indepen-
dent production company.
In 1989, Ebersol returned to NBC to become the pres-
ident of NBC Sports. He immediately negotiated the
acquisition of the rights to broadcast the NBA, and in the
following years brought the NFL, MLB and Nascar under
the NBC umbrella. His most influential decision, however,
was to turn NBC into “The Home of the Olympics” in the
USA. In 1993, he secured the rights to the 1996 Atlanta
Summer Olympics (the 1988 Seoul and 1992 Barcelona
Games had been acquired before his arrival at the net-
work). This was the first of several record-breaking contracts
that would bring the broadcaster every summer and winter
Olympics between 2000 and 2012.
Under Dick Ebersol’s guidance, NBC effectively became
the biggest single sponsor of the Olympic Movement (the
International Olympic Committee and the organizations it
coordinates). Broadcast rights add up to half of the entire
revenue generated by the movement, and NBC alone con-
tributed $820 million to the $1.28 billion collected from
broadcasters of the 2010 Vancouver Olympics. This mas-
sive role gives the network some influence on the scheduling
of Olympic events. For example, in the 2008 Beijing
Games, in contrast to past practice, swimming finals were
scheduled in the morning sessions to allow NBC to broad-
cast them live in prime-time, rather than in tape delay due to
the time zone offset. In addition, the network expanded its
coverage from Beijing to an unprecedented 3,600 hours,
most of them through such outlets as online channels, digital
platforms and on-demand footage. Such a flood of signifi-
cant (and popular) content contributed in a major way to the
rapid development of these new media platforms.
Ebersol unexpectedly resigned from NBC in May
2011, just weeks ahead of the negotiations for the U.S.
rights for the 2014 and 2016 Olympic Games. Despite
his departure, the network secured exclusive U.S. Olympic
TV rights through 2020 with a $4.38 billion contract that
includes four summer and winter games.
Simon Licen, Ph.D.
University of Ljubjana
CHAPTER 7 Non-Prime-Time Network Programming
253
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
reduced the amount of programming they schedule
in this daypart in the last decade. Telemundo and
Univision, however, maintain a major presence in
daytime with telenovelas that air during several
hours of their Monday through Friday schedules.
In addition to having lower programming costs
in the daytime, the networks schedule about 21 min-
utes of non-program material (commercials, pro-
mos, public service announcements and so on) per
hour compared with about 17 minutes in prime
time. Although daytime audiences are much smaller
than prime time, daytime programming fills more
hours per day, and each hour provides more com-
mercial slots. In prime time, top dramas, situation
comedies and ambitious miniseries have enormous
talent costs; sports programming has huge rights
fees, and breaking news coverage is expensive.
Those kinds of programs become loss leaders,
often costing far more than the advertising revenue
they generate.
But daytime programmers face enormous com-
petition from cable television and syndicated pro-
gramming. The collective number of viewers for
syndicated programming, for example, now regu-
larly surpasses that for daytime television on the
major networks.
Daytime television seems to have the most
potential for audience erosion. Compared with the
1950s and 1960s, the number of viewers who are
at home in the daytime has decreased. Because
many more women work, children stay at childcare
centers rather than at home. The networks have
additional worries as the numbers of younger view-
ers (aged 18 to 34 and 18 to 49) continue to decline
for each of the networks. Cable/satellite networks,
the internet, video games and home video also con-
tribute to this decline.
Soap Operas
For about 50 years, soap operas were the cash cows
for their networks. Production and talent costs are
considerably less than for prime-time programming.
Soaps are shot primarily in digital studios with mul-
tiple cameras and receive far less costly postproduc-
tion editing and sound “sweetening.” Typically, the
producers, directors, writers and actors hired for
soaps produce five hours of programming a week,
compared producing the 30 minutes of a prime-
time sitcom. Despite the seemingly lower quality,
CBS’s highly rated The Young and the Restless
does better at making a profit and delivering its tar-
get audience—women 18 to 49—than many of the
network’s prime-time offerings (see 7.5).
In addition, the soaps built loyal constituencies
that lasted for decades because viewers followed a
set of compelling characters nearly every weekday.
Networks developed this habitual viewing by strip-
ping daytime soaps in the same time slot five days a
week. Viewers become so determined to see their
favorite soaps that daily activities are planned around
making time to watch, and episodes are regularly
time-shifted when necessary. Soap operas continue to
be one of the most time-shifted programming genres.
7.4
Network Weekday Daytime Programming
Network
Hours
Programs
ABC
4
The View, General Hospital, The Chew, The Revolution
CBS
5
The Price Is Right, The Young and the Restless, The Bold and the
Beautiful, The Talk, Let’s Make a Deal
NBC*
3
Today (3rd and 4th hours), Days of Our Lives
*NBC’s Today has expanded into this daypart in the last decade, first from 9–10 A.M. ET in 2000 and from 10–11 A.M. ET in 2007. The
fourth hour of Today is an example of how the concept of brand extension has come to television. This last hour is related to the parent program
only by title as it has completely different hosts (Kathy Lee Gifford and Hoda Kotb), little if any interest in news, and much more emphasis on
entertainment, comedy, fashion and food. Because of these differences, this particular brand extension of the iconic Today brand is aired out of
pattern (usually in early afternoon) in some major markets.
254
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Despite this long and enormously successful his-
tory, the most important recent change in network
daytime programming is the decline of the soap
opera as a major genre. Since 2010, four long-
running soaps—All My Children, As the World
Turns, The Guiding Light and One Life to Live—
have been cancelled. This surprised many observers
because
soaps
survived
and
even
thrived
after
millions of women began to work outside the home
in the 1970s and 1980s; they even found new popu-
larity among college students and others who time-
shifted them for viewing at more convenient times.
Soaps fell from their perch as the prototypical day-
time program genre for four reasons:
1.
The total daytime audience has eroded greatly
since the 1990s when even the lower-rated soaps
were able to draw about five million viewers. Today,
only the highest rated of the remaining soaps (The
Young and the Restless) regularly attracts this many
viewers.
2.
The audience for soaps is ageing faster than that
of other programs. The loyalty that made soaps such
a successful genre has not transferred to younger
viewers who can watch most anything they want on
television at any time of the day via cable, time
shifting and on demand programming.
3.
Despite efforts to trim costs and with a price
structure much less costly than prime-time dramas,
soap operas still cost more to produce than talk and
other “reality” programs.
4.
Today’s seemingly never-slowing pace of life
makes it more and more difficult for viewers to
devote the time and effort required to follow a pro-
gram for five hours a week. Daytime viewing has
become “grazing” in which viewers drop in and out
of programs. This works to the advantage of rela-
tively simple non-scripted programs such as maga-
zines, reality and talk.
None of the problematic dimensions for soap operas
are likely to change; this makes the remaining four
network soaps likely to be the last of the English-
language U.S.-produced soaps. This is a sea change
from traditional television practice and another indi-
cator of the big challenges that local, regional and
national television programmers face.
Game Shows
From the 1950s until the 1990s, game shows were
the other profitable mainstay of network daytime
programming. Typically, several episodes of a game
show were taped in a single day, and these shows
used the same sets and props for years. In exchange
for on-air announcements, advertisers provided the
prizes awarded to contestants. Usually only the host
got a big salary, and production costs were very low.
Four kinds of competition have nearly driven
games daytime network lineups:
1.
The popularity of familiar first-run syndicated
game shows (including Jeopardy! and Wheel of
Fortune)
2.
The growth of cable/satellite networks dedicat-
ing some or all of their schedules to games
(GSN, formerly the Game Show Network)
3.
The draw of network big-money games (Deal or
No Deal and Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?)
in prime time
4.
The rise of syndicated talk programming
This last, syndicated talk, is much more lucrative for
most stations than network game shows. Remember
7.5
Network Soap Opera Ratings
HH Rating
W 18–49
Rating
CBS
The Young and the
Restless
3.6
1.7
CBS
The Bold and the
Beautiful
2.2
1.0
ABC
General Hospital
2.1
1.4
NBC
Days of Our Lives
2.0
1.2
ABC
One Life to Live*
1.9
1.0
NBC
All My Children*
1.9
0.9
*Cancelled in 2011.
“Ratings: Another New Low for GH in Women 18–49,” (2011, May
12), Soap Opera Network, http://www.soapoperanetwork.com/
ratings/item/4567-ratings-another-new-low-for-gh-in-women-18-49-
viewers.
CHAPTER 7 Non-Prime-Time Network Programming
255
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
that stations get only network compensation and
limited
advertising
slots
for
a
network
show,
whereas they can sell all the advertising time in syn-
dicated shows. They have particularly hurt the clear-
ance rate for game shows—which has led to their
virtual demise as a network daytime staple.
Two network daytime game shows remain,
however, both on CBS: The Price Is Right and
Let’s Make a Deal. One of television’s all-time
longest-running programs, Price was the first hour-
long game show (it was even 90 minutes for a short
time), and developed a near-cult following among
homemakers, shift workers and college students. Its
network run still seems secure as the program has
also developed a devoted following among young
people, and host Drew Carey is popular with youn-
ger viewers, as well as with more traditional daytime
audiences. The continuing success of Price led CBS
to revive Let’s Make a Deal, a game that has been on
and off network and syndication daytime and prime-
time schedules since the 1960s. The newest version,
hosted by Wayne Brady, places much more empha-
sis on the show business talents of its host than the
older versions and shows signs of becoming a day-
time staple (until the next major upheaval).
Weekday News, Information,
and Talk
In addition to their own intense competition, the
broadcast networks face increasing challenges from
strong local stations in major markets in the early
morning daypart. Local stations in large markets,
including New York, Miami, Chicago and Washing-
ton, are producing their own early newscasts and
magazine programs (see Chapter 8). Because of
their strong local emphases, these competing shows
have
garnered
strong
ratings
against
network
offerings.
If network programs are to remain strong compe-
titors in the major markets in the morning dayparts,
they must adjust to the changing environment by
doing what local competitors cannot. Because network
morning shows cannot compete for local appeal, the
key to successfully attracting mega-audiences lies in
continuing to interview the most important national
and international news and entertainment figures, and
in shipping their popular morning personalities off to
exotic locales or the sites of hot national news events.
Early-Morning Newscasts
Each of the Big Three provide early-morning news-
casts on weekdays, running from 4 or 5 A.M. to 7 A.M.
The networks hope to bolster their 7 A.M. program-
ming by getting flow-through from these earlier pro-
grams, but they also realize that many affiliates
produce their own morning news shows during part
of this time period. Therefore, they try to accommo-
date affiliates with multiple feeds of these early news-
casts. All have beginning and end points at the top
and bottom of every half hour, so an affiliate can
“dump out” or join a network morning newscast
after 30 or 60 minutes.
Morning Magazines
In the period between 7 and 9 A.M., the Big Three
networks compete head-to-head with magazine for-
mat programs. The long-running Today, Good
Morning America and a CBS challenger appearing
under
numerous
titles
(The
Early
Show
since
1999), have contested this time period for several
decades. These morning magazines provide news
headlines, weather forecasts, and interviews ranging
from soft entertainment to hard news. Because they
resemble print publications, they are called maga-
zines. Like print magazines, they contain a series of
feature articles, have a table of contents (billboard)
at the beginning to tell viewers about what will be
on that day, and are bound together with a common
cover and title.
The magazine format is especially suited to the
early-morning daypart when most viewers do not
watch for extended periods of time. As people
ready themselves for the day ahead, they catch
short glimpses of television (see Chapter 8 on day-
parting). The segmented magazine format allows
viewers to watch for short periods of time and still
see complete stories. News and weather updates
256
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
allow viewers to start their day with useful informa-
tion. All national magazines include local breaks in
which affiliates air brief local news, local weather or
traffic updates. FOX affiliates usually compete with
other affiliates by having their own long-form local
newscasts (but nothing from the network).
Morning magazines are a valuable tool for pro-
moting the network’s prime-time offerings. For
instance, when a network has scheduled a prime-
time miniseries, the hosts of the morning magazine
interview the stars or appear on the set of the mini-
series. Correspondents from prime-time news maga-
zines
(20/20,
Dateline)
frequently
make
guest
appearances on their network’s morning shows to
promote features on that night’s program. Con-
versely, prime-time programs can help boost the rat-
ings of morning magazines. For example, CBS’s The
Early Show’s ratings increased for a time when it
began to capitalize on the success of the network’s
prime-time Survivor series. Each of the morning
magazines has weekend editions that further extend
their brands.
By early 2011, NBC News’s Today was still
dominating the ratings over its rivals—as it had
done for over a decade. ABC News’s Good Morning
America was second, and CBS’s The Early Show
was a weak third and likely facing yet another revi-
sion (see 7.6 for more on the battle for morning
magazine leadership). To some extent, the relative
popularity of the leading morning shows is con-
nected to the night-before ratings (tuning inertia). If
NBC is the number-one network, the television set is
often switched off at night with the channel position
on NBC, and a disproportionate number of viewers
turn on their sets and see morning programming
from NBC. Similarly, ABC has an advantage when
its shows win the ratings the night before. Despite
presently out-rating its two traditional network riv-
als overall, CBS has never had much success in the
morning and probably does not benefit from tuning
inertia. Of course, NBC’s strong late-night lineup
helps Today much more than its presently low-
rated prime-time lineup.
Despite relatively low ratings, the competition
between the networks for early-morning viewers is
always intense because the advertising revenue is so
great. The stakes get even higher during ratings
sweeps. To make the shows more attractive, the
cast and crew often travel to exotic locations during
a sweep. Although the cost of remote productions is
higher, they often return higher ratings and create a
promotional hook to tempt audiences. During one
sweeps period, CBS scheduled an entire week of its
morning magazine inside the studios of Late Night
with David Letterman while Late Night was in Lon-
don. This provided cross-promotion for both shows.
Daytime Talk
Traditionally, the talk show was used to fill hour-
long gaps in a network’s daytime schedule and tar-
get the desirable 25 to 54 female audience. Further,
if a talk-show host connected with the audience, a
series attracted very loyal followers who watched
daily. With studios and equipment almost always
available, talk shows are one of the most easily insti-
tuted and adaptable of genres. Indeed, with out-
standing success, syndicators have stolen the genre
away from the broadcast networks with such syndi-
cated talk as Oprah, Dr. Phil, The Jerry Springer
Show and The Ellen DeGeneres Show. Back in the
1980s when Donahue, Oprah and Geraldo were
redefining the daytime talk show, the networks
stuck with their successful soap operas and game
shows in daytime, losing the programming initiative
to their syndicated competitors. In the era of corpo-
rate consolidation, some of these programs began
being syndicated by the same media conglomerates
that owned the networks.
The Big Three have recently re-entered the day-
time talk business. This is a reaction to the decline of
soap operas as a viable format and the inexpensive
cost of mounting a talk show. ABC started the new
wave of network daytime talk with The View in the
late 1990s. The late-morning show (11 A.M. cur-
rently) has a unique four-host format that includes
television icon Barbara Walters, its creator and
producer. The View’s continuing success in both rat-
ings and in its format expansion to international
markets, led NBC to expand Today to both the
9–10 A.M. and 10–11 A.M. time periods. As men-
tioned above, the third and, especially, the fourth
CHAPTER 7 Non-Prime-Time Network Programming
257
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
7.6
The Morning Magazine Shows
NBC’s Today
NBC pioneered the magazine format with the 1952 premiere
of The Today Show. Over the years viewers have become
very attached to the show’s hosts and regular guests. Popular
Today Show personalities have included Dave Garroway (its
original host), John Chancellor, Hugh Downs, Barbara Wal-
ters, Tom Brokaw, Jane Pauley, Willard Scott, Bryant Gumbel,
Katie Couric, Matt Lauer and Meredith Vieira.
Each of these hosts and regulars had a long run, bringing
stability and familiarity to the program. These are essential
ingredients for ratings success in a daypart where viewers’
behavior becomes routine, as most people start each of their
weekdays in much the same manner. The Today Show’s
sole big ratings dip, which took place in the early 1990s,
has been attributed mostly to revolving hosts following the
departure of Jane Pauley. The Today Show successfully
rebounded in the mid-1990s with a new generation of
morning stars and, renamed Today, has been the clear
leader in morning network ratings. Lauer and Ann Curry are
the present hosts/anchors for the first two hours, supported
by a roster of familiar specialists such as weatherman Al
Roker and big-name contributors from the NBC News.
ABC’s Good Morning America
Like the newer networks of today, in its first decade or so (prior
to 1975) ABC did not offer any network service until 11 A.M.
Then it challenged the well-established Today Show by intro-
ducing AM America and aiming for a younger early-morning
audience. ABC believed that its target audience, women 18
to 49, were less-habituated viewers than the over-50 age
group that had been drawn in large numbers to The Today
Show, and that these younger women would sample the new
program. By 1980 the retitled Good Morning America
(GMA) had moved into first place overall in the ratings.
Although Today had re-established its first-place position
by the mid-1990s, GMA remains securely in second
place. After unsuccessfully experimenting with younger,
supposedly “hipper” anchors in the late 1990s and early
2000s following the departure of long-time anchors/hosts
Charles Gibson and Joan Lunden, ABC returned Gibson
and added popular prime-time news personality Diane
Sawyer. When Gibson became the World News anchor
in 2006, newscaster Robin Roberts was promoted to co-
host, making Sawyer and Roberts the first all-female
morning magazine program hosting team. The network
also invested millions in a new studio, complete with
Today-like windows showing adoring fans outside.
Increasing stability has closed some of the ratings gap
between number-two-rated GMA and number-one-rated
Today. Sawyer replaced Gibson on the nightly ABC
World News evening broadcast in 2010 at which point
George Stephanopoulos joined Roberts as co-anchor.
CBS’s The Early Show
CBS has languished in third place in the morning news rat-
ings since the beginning of three-network competition in
early mornings in the 1970s. Even when ABC was out of the
picture, CBS always ran a dismal second to The Today
Show regardless of whether they were trying straight news or
“infotainment.” The failure of CBS to establish a morning
franchise is one of the enduring mysteries of network televi-
sion. The network has always trailed the competition
regardless of format, personalities or ratings for the rest of its
morning performance. A recent CBS attempt at a star-driven
Today/GMA-style program (complete with a window for
fans to gather!) was The Early Show hosted by former Today
host Bryant Gumbel. Debuting in late 1999, Gumbel (and
co-host Jane Clayson) lasted barely three years before being
replaced by four co-anchors—including Harry Smith, a vet-
eran of a previously unsuccessful CBS attempt at developing
a morning program. As of early 2011, Erica Hill and Chris
Wrigge were the two main anchors, but they had a very
brief tryout. By late in 2011, CBS had acquired former PBS
talk host Charlie Rose and OWN host Gayle King for its
morning show. These two will probably last longer than most
CBS morning predecessors if only because it would take a
good offer (and strong contract) to get them away from their
own long-lasting shows. But if history is any guide, their time
in these jobs will also be limited.
The money that successful morning programs generate
makes it unlikely that CBS will give up on its nearly 40-year
effort to create a successful morning news and infotainment
magazine. Nonetheless, the huge number of options for
viewers even at this time of the day on broadcast, cable
and the internet make for increasingly long odds that CBS
can capture enough of the audience and buzz to compete
strongly with NBC and ABC in the early-morning ratings
race.
258
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
hour of Today have minimal connection with the
parent program.
More recently, CBS has rolled out The Talk, a
program that follows the same basic pattern as The
View. In addition to the traditional Big Three, both
Telemundo and Univision rely on popular talk
shows to fill substantial parts of their daytime
schedules.
Evening News
Although ratings have and continue to decline, par-
ticularly among the young, the evening newscasts
remain the centerpieces of the ABC, CBS and NBC
television news organizations, and the same is true
of Univision. Along with daytime and late-night pro-
gramming, evening newscasts help distinguish these
full-service networks from their more recent compe-
titors (FOX, the CW, MNTV, ION), thus enhancing
their brand identification.
The advertising revenue generated by these
news programs remains substantial. Evening news-
casts also give the broadcast networks prestige as
major players in national and international politics.
In the early days, evening newscasts provided a ser-
vice to affiliates, most of which then had very lim-
ited,
if
any,
news
operations.
CBS
and
NBC
introduced the nightly 15-minute newscast to net-
work television in 1948, and by the 1960s, the news-
casts had expanded to 30 minutes. Although modest
by today’s standards, the expenses incurred by a net-
work news operation during those early years were
often far more than the income derived from adver-
tising on the newscasts.
Today, evening newscasts face difficult competi-
tion from cable news networks and internet news
services. Busy viewers don’t need to wait until 6:30
or 7 P.M. for a network newscast because 24-hour
news
channels
(CNN,
CNBC,
CNN
Headline
News, MSNBC and Fox News Channel) and hun-
dreds, maybe thousands, of news websites spon-
sored by newspapers, television and radio stations,
wire services and the networks themselves, can be
reached anytime. In addition, the newscasts on the
larger local affiliates compete with the network
newscasts for national and sometimes international
stories using satellites to bring in high-quality cover-
age with on-the-spot video.
Thus, network news may not remain a staple of
non-prime-time programming if current trends per-
sist (see 7.7). Less than a third of the adult public
now watch any of these telecasts with any degree
of regularity, down from more than half in 1990
and almost three-quarters in 1980. Also, network,
local and cable news audiences slipped precipitously
in viewers younger than 30, perhaps because youn-
ger adults are more likely to seek news from other
alternatives, such as the internet and mobile media.
This demographic trend suggests that audiences for
evening newscasts may continue to decline.
Nonetheless, network newscasts continue to
bring in sizable advertising revenue for the net-
works. Despite increased competition and lower rat-
ings, these newscasts also remain important as
promotional tools. Affiliates benefit because the net-
works promote the evening’s prime-time schedule
during commercial breaks. Just as with early-
morning magazine programs, the network’s news
division can promote other news programming
within the newscast. For example, ABC promotes
Nightline as well as its website (abc.com) within its
nightly newscast, while each of the networks gener-
ally incorporates promotion for their own news
magazines (CBS’s 60 Minutes and 48 Hours Mys-
tery; NBC’s Dateline NBC; and ABC’s 20/20 and
Prime Time Live) within their evening newscasts.
Indeed, all the networks push their websites in
every newscast and many promotional spots.
Time zone differences present a challenge to
both
programming
departments
and
the
news
departments. The solution has been a multiple-feed
schedule. The first feed of a network newscast is gen-
erally 6:30 to 7 P.M. eastern time. Because some
affiliates delay this newscast and the time would be
inappropriate for the mountain and Pacific time
zones, a second feed is scheduled for 7 to 7:30 P.M.
eastern time and a third from 6 to 6:30 P.M. Pacific
time. Breaking or updated news stories can be
inserted into the later feeds.
Because most network newscast elements (news
gathering, scheduling and technology) are about the
same across competitors, news personalities become
CHAPTER 7 Non-Prime-Time Network Programming
259
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
7.7
The Evening Newscasts
NBC Nightly News
NBC first offered a regular nightly newscast in 1948, the
Camel News Caravan with John Cameron Swayze. Swayze
was not an experienced journalist and eventually was
replaced in 1956 by Chet Huntley and David Brinkley. The
renamed newscast, The Huntley-Brinkley Report, was a ratings
hit, becoming the top-rated news program in the late 1950s
and for most of the 1960s. When Huntley retired in 1970,
NBC retitled the show the NBC Nightly News with Brinkley
and John Chancellor as the main anchors. Following NBC’s
declining news ratings in the late 1970s and early 1980s,
Tom Brokaw was moved from The Today Show to the Nightly
News anchor position in 1982. As NBC added cable net-
works (CNBC, MSNBC), the Nightly News became a source
of programming material for these newer news/talk outlets.
Nightly News’s stories are frequently the major focus of even-
ing programming on these cable networks, and archived
Nightly News reports have been repackaged to provide new
programming for its cable partners.
Brokaw stepped down as Nightly News anchor after
the 2004 presidential election and was successfully
replaced by Brian Williams, a frequent guest anchor on the
Nightly News and former anchor of a long-running CNBC
evening newscast. Heir to ABC’s Peter Jennings because of
his similar wry manner, NBC’s Williams is currently the
most popular of the network evening newscasters.
CBS Evening News
Walter Cronkite replaced Douglas Edwards as anchor of the
CBS Evening News in 1962 and remained until his retire-
ment in 1981. In times of crisis, more people tuned in to
Cronkite than to any other newscaster. During the 1970s,
polls repeatedly showed Cronkite as the most trusted source
of news. Dan Rather took over the helm of the CBS Evening
News upon Cronkite’s retirement, but Rather’s credentials as
a highly experienced journalist would have meant little had
his chemistry not matched that of his predecessor.
Even though the ratings of the CBS Evening News declined
after Cronkite’s retirement, Rather continued to dominate the
evening news ratings until the late 1980s when the reign of
ABC’s Peter Jennings began. In June 1993 CBS decided to
pair Rather with veteran reporter and weekend anchor Connie
Chung. The combination did not work out, and ratings did not
improve. Two years later, Chung was demoted from the
anchor desk, and the president of CBS News was fired. In
2005, Dan Rather stepped down following criticism of his role
in a news story that used faked documents.
Long-time CBS correspondent Bob Schieffer was interim
anchor until September 2006 when Katie Couric (former co-
host of NBC’s Today) became the sole weeknight anchor.
Although Couric and her producers attempted to shake up
the conventional formula of an evening newscast with more
interviews and guest commentators, such moves were met
with large amounts of criticism and no improvement in the
ratings. The newscast soon reverted to the standard anchor-
centered newscast that has been a television mainstay for
over 50 years. After five years of not being able to lift the
newscast out of third place, Couric left in 2011 to be
replaced by veteran CBS correspondent Scott Pelley.
ABC World News
ABC has been airing nightly newscasts since 1953, but for
three decades it failed to pose a serious news threat to CBS
and NBC. In 1977, in a bold move, ABC appointed the
head of ABC Sports, Roone Arledge, to supervise its news
division as well as its sports division. Arledge had made
ABC the number-one network sports organization with his
unconventional strategies—introducing offbeat sporting
events and building up the dramatic aspects of sports
competition. During his tenure as head of news, ABC
assembled a team of highly respected journalists, including
Peter Jennings, Sam Donaldson, Diane Sawyer, Ted Kop-
pel and David Brinkley, catapulting ABC into the lead in
the evening news ratings for some years.
Most observers credit anchorperson Peter Jennings with the
success of World News Tonight, as he actively served as
executive editor and wrote (or rewrote) many of the stories,
adding his own wry style. After the departures of Brokaw and
Rather, Jennings’ 2005 death was a shock to many viewers
and industry insiders, closing an era of network news stability,
now called the classic era. After an interim period, Elizabeth
Vargas and Bob Woodruff were named as Jennings’ succes-
sors in 2006. However, Woodruff’s grievous injuries suffered
while he was covering the Iraq war put an end to the new
anchor team after less than one month. Charles Gibson
became the anchor of the renamed ABC World News later
that year. Diane Sawyer became the second woman to solo
anchor a network evening newscast when she replaced the
retiring Gibson in 2010.
260
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
critical for winning the ratings competition. News
anchors that can connect with other members of
the news team and the audience are essential as the
centerpieces for building loyalty. All three networks
produce high-quality newscasts for which the ratings
have been nearly equal for a very long time, but they
risk losing the next generation of news viewers to
cable and the internet if younger personalities are
not developed to anchor these programs. Prime-
time newsbreaks, vacation replacements and week-
end newscasts often are the training grounds for new
anchors and reporters.
As of the end of 2010, the NBC Nightly News
was solidly in first place in the evening news ratings
with an Adults 25 to 54 rating of 2.0. ABC World
News was second with 1.7, followed by the CBS
Evening News with 1.4. The networks have tried
to distinguish the three newscasts from each other
and from cable by creating segments within the
newscasts. CBS’s “Eye on America,” NBC’s “It’s
Your Money,” and ABC’s ongoing “Person of the
Week” provide hooks for promotional announce-
ments. The networks believe that viewers will link
such segments to a particular network and get into
the habit of watching a particular network for a
favorite segment. Alternately, they may follow up
on that network’s news website. The news websites
also offer viewers a chance to view features or even
full newscasts on demand, although with reduced
picture and sound quality.
Late-Night News
In November 1979, ABC News seized on the Amer-
ican viewing audience’s fascination with the Iran
hostage crisis and began a late-night newscast to
summarize the major events of the day. The show
evolved into Nightline, an in-depth news program
hosted by Ted Koppel until 2005. Then a three-
anchor multi-topic format was developed, currently
hosted by Cynthia McFadden, Terry Moran and Bill
Weir. Critics, however, pointed to less depth than in
the single-story format and frowned on the rise in
popular culture stories.
Because it counterprograms the network and
syndicated talk shows, Nightline continues to draw
a loyal, upscale audience. Traditionally, the series’
ratings fell or rose sharply depending on national
crises, wars and other disasters. Although the pro-
gram is typically a half-hour in length, it sometimes
expands for extremely important stories. On those
evenings, Nightline can obliterate all the competing
programs.
Such major news events as the disputed 2000
presidential election, the events of 9/11, the invasion
of Iraq and later the Arab Spring triggered big
upward spikes in the size of its audience. Even
when major events are not taking place, Nightline
has become a solid ratings performer (often finishing
first in its time slot). The key to its success has been
ABC’s vigorous campaign to have the show cleared
live in most TV markets.
Overnight News
The overnight time period (2:05 to 6 A.M.) has the
lowest viewership of any daypart. Be it second-shift
workers, nursing mothers, bottle-feeding fathers or
insomniacs, however, there is some television view-
ing in the overnight period, but the network compe-
tition is not as spirited as in other dayparts. Unlike
in prime time, where HUT levels are around 60 per-
cent, overnight HUT levels are just 10 percent.
Given the relatively low number of viewers, the
potential ratings for individual overnight programs
are thus quite low. Some affiliated stations sign off
in the overnight hours, leading to lower clearance
rates that further reduce ratings. Therefore, in the
overnight time period, a 1.0 rating (meaning over
3 million people) is considered very strong (even in
a nation of over 300 million people).
Given the low ratings and the low HUT levels,
one might wonder why a network would bother to
schedule any programming overnight. Even with 16
minutes of commercial time per hour, the entire day-
part is worth only a few million dollars to each broad-
cast network. If the network can keep costs below the
advertising revenue in the daypart and promote forth-
coming shows, however, the effort is worthwhile
because the risk is low. In addition, overnight news
gives network affiliates programming at no cost to
sustain their broadcast signal for 24 hours a day.
CHAPTER 7 Non-Prime-Time Network Programming
261
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
ABC’s World News Now and CBS’s Up to the
Minute are the traditional overnight news series,
although their names have changed over the years.
Scheduled about 2
A.M., these shows compete
against syndicated news programming offered to
local stations by CNN Headline News. NBC’s
cable partners, MSNBC and CNBC, also offer infor-
mation alternatives on cable/satellite networks. Each
network does what it can to keep the costs of pro-
duction low. Up to the Minute was one of the first
network news services to provide video stories on
demand over the internet, now common practice
for television news organizations.
Following their overnight programming, net-
works offer early newscasts that lead into and pro-
vide
updates
for
their
local
affiliates’
news
programming. At 4:30 A.M., NBC enters the compe-
tition with Early Today, a joint venture with its
cable/satellite partner CNBC. At the same time,
ABC airs America This Morning and CBS carries
CBS Morning News. These early-morning news
efforts lead into the networks’ morning news maga-
zines: Today, Good Morning America and The
Early Show.
Weekend News and Information
Although weekday news and information programs
receive
the
most
attention,
weekend
programs
include some of the longest-running series in televi-
sion. In addition, weekend news and information
slots allow networks to extend successful program
brands such as Today and Good Morning America
into new hours.
Weekend Magazines
ABC, CBS and NBC each program weekend morn-
ing magazines. On both Saturdays and Sundays,
NBC airs a one-hour Today and ABC carries a
one-hour GMA. CBS offers a two-hour Saturday
version of its weekday magazine, Saturday Early
Show, and also Sunday Morning, a 90-minute pro-
gram that reviews news of the past week and surveys
the world of fine art, music, science and Americana.
Sunday Morning, first with host Charles Kuralt and
then with Charles Osgood, has been a fixture on
CBS for over 30 years and delivers a surprisingly
solid rating for the time period. These weekend
shows allow network news divisions to utilize vet-
eran news staff members while also developing and
experimenting with new talent on the air.
Sunday News Interviews
ABC, CBS and NBC have traditionally aired public-
affairs interview programs on Sunday mornings, and
FOX has joined them. The format usually consists of
a panel of journalists interviewing recent newsmakers
about current issues and events. These shows have
longevity rare in modern television: NBC’s Meet the
Press, network television’s longest-running program,
began in 1947, and CBS’s Face the Nation began in
1954. ABC inaugurated its own public-affairs show,
Issues and Answers, in 1960, which was replaced by
This Week with David Brinkley in 1981. After Brink-
ley’s retirement, the title was shortened to This Week,
and Christiane Amanpour now hosts it. FOX News
Sunday, which is allied with the Fox News cable
channel, joined the competition in the 1990s. Meet
the Press, hosted by David Gregory, presently draws
the largest audience followed closely by Face the
Nation, hosted by Bob Scheiffer. This Week is third
and News Sunday, hosted by Chris Wallace, typically
brings up the rear.
Although these news interviews do not attract
large audiences, they remain on the air for two key
reasons. First, all four of these programs have
become important news events in and of themselves.
Elected officials and top reporters appear on them to
be seen and quoted; they have a chance to express
themselves at length on important issues; and they
themselves watch these programs avidly. Their
words on Sunday morning television often become
Sunday night’s and Monday morning’s news. This is
especially important because Sunday is usually a
slow news day. Second, the programs attract desir-
able upscale audiences, and as a result, prestigious
advertisers are drawn to the shows.
Despite attractive attributes, many stations are
hesitant to clear these relatively low-rated programs
262
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
on weekends. Affiliates can make more money car-
rying infomercials or paid religious programming.
To provide affiliates with more flexibility, multiple
feeds of the programs are scheduled, giving affiliates
plenty of scheduling options. However, many affili-
ates still refuse to clear the time.
Children’s Programming
Children’s television programming best illustrates
the massive industry changes caused by the prolifer-
ation of program outlets. Because a child’s brand
loyalty is to the program and not to the network,
an upstart network such as the former WB could
leverage its Pokémon program in several time
spots, making the WB, at least for a time, the
number-one network in both the weekday kids’
and the traditional Saturday morning children’s
block.
The dominant position of basic cable network
Nickelodeon is further evidence that children are
major users of cable television services (see 7.8).
Consistently ahead of any of the Big Four broadcast
networks in children’s ratings, Nickelodeon has used
such popular series as SpongeBob SquarePants,
iCarly and Zoey 101, among others, to become the
major force in children’s television (both on cable
and at cousin company CBS) and an increasingly
powerful force in motion pictures and product
licensing.
After decades of dominating Saturday morning
children’s programming, the rise of Nickelodeon, the
Disney Channel, Cartoon Network and the once
powerful Fox Kids network drove all three of the
older broadcast networks into downplaying the
time period. Post-2000, a pattern of leasing kids’
shows from cable became the norm. The three-
hour ABC Kids, for example, is provided by parent
company Disney, which recycles its Disney Channel
and Toon Disney cable programming on the net-
work. ABC calls this “New-to-ABC Kids’ episodes.
Not surprisingly, popular Disney animated theatri-
cal films, such as Toy Story and The Lion King, pro-
vide the self-serving inspiration for many of the
programs in the block.
NBC, which abandoned most cartoon program-
ming in favor of tweens live-action programming
(Saved by the Bell) in the 1990s, formed (with
ION) the more economical Qubo Kids lineup, airing
shows on Saturday afternoons that target 4- to 8-
year-olds. The CW is programmed by 4 Kids Enter-
tainment, an offshoot of the major children’s televi-
sion syndicator Saban, presently under the Toonzai
on CW4Kids label, demonstrating the continuing
popularity of Japanese anime for young viewers.
FOX, which at one time was a dominant player in
children’s programming, had abandoned the genre
by 2011.
For some years, CBS “rented out” its Saturday
morning
block
to
Nickelodeon;
then
it
tried
education-blended-with-entertainment for older chil-
dren, for example, Wheel of Fortune 2000 and
Sports Illustrated for Kids. Still slipping in the rat-
ings, in 2007 CBS rediscovered animation, installing
a lineup of six new animated half-hour series from
Canadian producer Nelvana, under the KOL brand
name. Today, the two-hour CBS kids’ block is called
Cookie Jar TV. Despite major efforts, all the broad-
cast networks must continually struggle against the
attractions of cable and websites directed toward
children.
In addition to ratings and economics, program-
mers must also consider factors specific to children’s
programming. One factor is that federal rules man-
date minimum amounts of prosocial and educa-
tional programming (see 7.9). Although such rules
are often perceived as vague and easily satisfied, pro-
grammers in other dayparts do not face such
content-specific rules. Even Univision has had trou-
ble figuring out what would be acceptable (see 7.10)
The Children’s Television Act also required
broadcasters to air educational and informational
children’s programming (knows as E/I). At license
renewal time for stations, the FCC is required to
consider whether a television station has served the
educational and informational needs of children.
Broadcasters are now obligated to air programs
serving a child’s cognitive/intellectual or social/emo-
tional needs. These rules, of course, apply to sta-
tions, not networks, but many affiliates and all the
O&Os want help from their networks in fulfilling
CHAPTER 7 Non-Prime-Time Network Programming
263
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the children’s requirements. All of the programs
presently offered by ABC, CBS, NBC and the CW
on Saturday morning meet the E/I standard. How-
ever, the FCC does not specify the number of hours
or the actual series that would satisfy the act, so
there is always some unease.
After the act was in place, the FCC cited statis-
tics showing that educational programming on the
networks had actually fallen from 11 hours a week
in 1980 to just 5 hours by the early 1990s. The
Commission reacted to these findings by adopting
new rules in 1996 designed to strengthen the existing
7.8
“Watching” in New Ways
W
hile kids and tweens still watch a great deal of
television, not all viewing habits are equal, and
traditional television shows are finding it harder to appeal
to older children. Because entertainment programming is
now accessible through a myriad of platforms, from home
computers to cell phones and iPads, television program-
mers are increasingly employing cross-platform initiatives to
reach school-age kids. Instead of delayed rollout, Cartoon
Network’s animated series Class of 3000 launched with a
website featuring online sneak previews, streaming epi-
sodes, downloadable songs, podcasts, ringtones, wallpa-
pers and messenger icons, plus a funkbox game that lets
kids create their own music. Nickelodeon has renamed its
5–7 P.M. programming block ME:TV to reflect the prolifer-
ation of web-based activities for kids.
Interstitials between episodes of SpongeBob Square-
Pants feature short videos of kids participating in
polls and games, and the program showcases videos
submitted to Nick.com by kids. Viewers can go online
to submit questions to Nick’s hosts and celebrity guests
or visit www.Nicktropolis.com, a virtual world where
kids create their own avatars and personal rooms in
order to play games, interact with network characters
and connect with friends. Such activities may seem
secondary enhancements to adults, but for children,
they are becoming the new definitions of watching
television.
Nancy C. Schwartz, Ph.D.
The Academic Edge, Inc.
7.9
Children’s Programming Requirements
T
he FCC has long studied children’s television pro-
gramming. Members of the public, including special-
interest groups and parents, have repeatedly stated their
concerns about “kidvid.” The main concerns regarding
children’s television programming have long been the over-
commercialization of children’s programming, the blurring
of distinctions between program content and advertising
messages, and the absence of educational content.
In 1990, Congress passed the Children’s Television Act,
requiring the FCC to impose advertising limits on children’s
programming of up to 10.5 minutes on weekends and 12
minutes during the week. The act also restricted the use of
host-based commercials, ones that feature characters from
the program in the advertiser’s message. At the time, for
example, a number of commercials featured the Mighty
Morphin Power Rangers; the act eliminated those ads
featuring the Power Rangers or products with the Power
Rangers pictured on them during the airing of Mighty Mor-
phin Power Rangers or within 90 seconds before or after the
program. Had the commercials aired, then the entire pro-
gram would have been considered a program-length com-
mercial and, therefore, in excess of the maximum allowable
advertising time for one hour of children’s programming.
This was a clever stratagem to force stations to exhibit
some sensitivity to children’s vulnerabilities. The prohibition
on host-based commercials was aimed at decreasing the
confusion a young child likely has in distinguishing com-
mercials from a show’s content. Even before the Children’s
Television Act, networks (as well as syndicators and
broadcasters) usually placed interrupters or bumpers
between programs and commercials. Nonetheless,
research shows that young children remain confused.
264
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
act. Chief among these were rules that did the
following:
■Established a guideline of a minimum of three
hours per week of core programming per televi-
sion station
■Defined core programs as those that are regularly
scheduled on a weekly basis, broadcast between
7 A.M. and 10 P.M., at least 30 minutes long, and
that have as their significant purpose “serving the
educational and information needs of children”
■Adopted new public information initiatives to
benefit parents, such as requiring on-air identifi-
cation of core children’s programs and providing
this information in parents’ guides
Another factor is that children’s programming is
very much fad driven: Children’s interests are fickle
and change quickly. Chances are very good that the
current SpongeBob phenomenon will fade in a few
years and be replaced by the next big thing. Scooby
Doo,
Power
Rangers,
Pokémon
and
Teenage
Mutant Ninja Turtles have all had their days in the
ratings’ sunshine.
Still another factor is that children’s television is
often an excellent example of the synergy so her-
alded when corporations merge. The most popular
programs are used to market a dizzying array of
toys, games, clothing, fast food, snacks, videos and
motion pictures. One has only to walk through the
various children’s sections of a major store to see
how popular children’s programs become strong
franchises for marketing a vast array of products, a
phenomenon that dismays many parents.
Production and Development
Processes
The development process for animation is different
from that of prime-time or other daytime programs.
Development of an animated children’s series begins
about 12 months before telecast, with pickups of
new series exercised in February or March to allow
producers six to seven months to complete an order
for a September airing. The first stage is a concept
pitched to the network programmers. The next steps
are the outline, which describes the characters and
the setting, and the artwork, which provides the
sketches of the characters in several poses and cos-
tumes. If a project passes these stages, the next step
is to order one or more scripts, which usually go
through many drafts before final acceptance.
Pilot programs are rarely commissioned for car-
toons because of the long production time and high
costs. The usual contract for a season of animated
programs to be aired weekly specifies production of
only 13 episodes. If it airs any cartoons, the network
generally schedules each episode four times during
the first season.
The development process for live action is simi-
lar to that of animation, but it substitutes a casting
tape for the artwork. In hopes of lowering per-
episode production costs or of targeting a slightly
older target audience, the broadcast networks have
focused on live-action programs for several years.
The large number of repeats that networks can
employ offsets the high cost of children’s program-
ming to a large degree. Popular children’s programs
can have each episode broadcast dozens of times
7.10
Univision’s Expensive Mistake
I
n its most aggressive action regarding children’s pro-
gramming to date, the FCC fined Univision $24 million
in 2007. This was the biggest fine ever for an individual
company and a shock to an industry that has a history of
being rather casual about what is and is not “educational.”
In the early 1990s, for example, several stations were using
The Flintstones and The Jetsons to fulfill their educational
requirements. Univision’s fine arose from two years of
labeling one of its soap operas as “children’s” program-
ming. Complices al Rescate (“Friends to the Rescue”) follows
the lives of two identical 11-year-old girls who swap identi-
ties, lose family members and friends, and suffer injustice.
Because of the plots’ complexity and the many adult themes,
the FCC determined that the episodes had little value for
children. The telling point was that about 80 percent of the
advertising in the episodes was directed toward adults.
CHAPTER 7 Non-Prime-Time Network Programming
265
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
over a period of years (besides spending time on
cable and being syndicated to stations). Unlike
most programs, which lose substantial audience
share with reuse, both live-action and animated chil-
dren’s programs are less affected by repeats because
the audience changes frequently with a new genera-
tion of youngsters to discover every old program. In
addition, children generally enjoy the familiarity of
program reruns more than adults do.
Despite network cuts, the children’s television
market remains strong, vital and profitable to net-
works that have carved out a substantial niche inside
the genre. Even with their recent ratings problems,
most of the broadcast networks are likely to maintain
at least some Saturday morning presence through co-
ventures that allow the broadcast networks to main-
tain a reduced Saturday morning schedule, but that
target young viewers carefully and use the programs
with proven popularity on cable and/or in syndica-
tion. The advantages for the Big Four are that they
no longer have developmental responsibilities for chil-
dren’s programming and no longer need take on the
entire financial responsibility.
In addition, even in an era of continuing dereg-
ulation of television and equation of the public inter-
est
with
the
corporate
interest,
the
FCC
and
Congress would likely object to a network’s com-
plete
abandonment
of
children’s
programming.
Although always affected by economic cycles and
the fickleness of the audience, children’s program-
ming is likely to remain popular and profitable
because it can be linked to other profit centers in
entertainment, motion pictures, video games and the
internet.
Late-Night Talk/Variety
The studio-based talk/variety show is a prime exam-
ple of low-risk programming. Its minimal start-up
and ongoing production costs make it a perfect for-
mat for the low-budget realms of both daytime and
late-night television. On the other hand, it’s had its
problems (see 7.11) with changing hosts.
Although other genres have been tried, the talk
show remains the network genre with the greatest
longevity in the late-night time period. Currently,
NBC airs three consecutive talk shows (The Tonight
Show with Jay Leno, Late Night with Jimmy Fallon
and Last Call with Carson Daly) in the late-night
period; CBS airs two talk shows (Late Show with
David Letterman and The Late Late Show with
Craig Ferguson); while ABC competes with Jimmy
Kimmel Live following Nightline. FOX has failed
several times to develop competing talk/comedy pro-
grams (The Late Show Starring Joan Rivers, The
Wilton North Report, The Chevy Chase Show) and
presently does not program the daypart.
As in prime-time series development (see Chap-
ter 2), pilots are often produced for nighttime talk
shows. Producers test a variety of elements prior to a
talk show’s release in attempts to gauge a show’s
potential: Commonly examined are the sets, the
band, the sidekick, and the pacing of the show, but
of course the key is the appeal of the host. When a
network signs a major star to a talk-show contract,
the network may decide to economize by producing
rehearsal shows rather than a full-scale pilot. The
late-night talk show has some of the same benefits
of the morning talk show. The talk show can pro-
mote network offerings by booking same-network
guests. A well-known celebrity appearing in a forth-
coming made-for-TV movie can make a timely
appearance on Leno or Letterman to promote the
show’s exact airdate and airtime.
After the merry-go-around (Version 2.0), late
night gradually settled down. On NBC, Leno’s
Tonight (Version 2.0) is currently followed by Late
Night with Jimmy Fallon and then Last Call with
Carson Daly (a popular former MTV personality).
CBS’s decision to gamble on David Letterman
after he left NBC was a win. CBS had been strug-
gling in third place in late night, and its new Late
Show with David Letterman gave CBS an instant
ratings success in this time period. Following Late
Show’s success, the network lured Tom Snyder
away from his cable talk show on CNBC and gave
him his own program, The Late Late Show, follow-
ing Letterman. After Snyder retired, CBS hired Craig
Kilborn, former host of Comedy Central’s news
spoof The Daily Show. After Kilborn’s departure,
comedian/actor Craig Ferguson took over the host-
ing duties.
266
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Prior to acquiring the services of Letterman,
CBS had run original dramas (most of which were
relatively inexpensive international coproductions)
and repeats of prime-time programs. However,
CBS had long sought its own “signature” talk-
show personality to compete with Carson. First
with Merv Griffin in the 1960s and 1970s and
then Pat Sajak in the late 1980s, the Eye network
failed to make a dent. Carson’s departure and
NBC’s choice of Leno over Letterman to host The
Tonight Show allowed CBS to obtain Letterman.
Although rarely winning the time slot, Late Show
has been a highly lucrative program for CBS.
The success of Letterman led ABC to try unsuc-
cessfully
to
woo
him
away
from
CBS.
ABC,
even more than CBS, has consistently failed to estab-
lish late-night stars. From Les Crane in the early
1960s through Joey Bishop, Dick Cavett, Jack Paar
and Rick Dees over the years, ABC has found lim-
ited late-night success with repeats of prime-time
dramas and, since 1981, with ABC News’s Night-
line. Before 2003, ABC tried Politically Incorrect, a
7.11
The Late-Night Merry-Go-Round
A
lthough not the first network late-night program
(NBC’s Broadway Open House has that distinction),
NBC’s The Tonight Show, with an over 55-year run, is the
model for all television talk/comedy/variety programs and
a model of stability with only five regular hosts in five dec-
ades: Steve Allen, Jack Paar, Johnny Carson, Jay Leno,
Conan O’Brien, and Leno again. Carson, the host of The
Tonight Show for the three decades from 1962 to 1992,
was such a mammoth ratings success that the network
added a one-hour show following Tonight: The Tomorrow
Show with host Tom Snyder, which ran from 1973 to
1982.
After guest-hosting frequently for Carson, David Letter-
man was given his own daytime show on NBC in the
1980s. Because of low clearances and low ratings, his
program lasted only four months. Guessing that Letterman’s
offbeat style might better suit late-night audiences, NBC
replaced Snyder’s program with the now-legendary Late
Night with David Letterman. Letterman developed a cult
following among young viewers, particularly college stu-
dents, who made up a large portion of the show’s
audience.
Letterman’s show attracted an especially desirable tar-
get audience with little falloff toward the end of the pro-
gram, and to capitalize on the potential flow of viewership,
NBC added another half-hour to its late-night lineup in
1988. The show, Later, was originally hosted by NBC
sportscaster Bob Costas.
When Carson retired from Tonight in 1992, NBC had
to decide who would replace him. Of its two final candi-
dates, the network chose stand-up comic and frequent
guest host Jay Leno over Letterman (driving Letterman to CBS
after he lost this too-long too-public decision). Because
Tonight’s audience had aged dramatically toward the end
of Carson’s reign, Leno retained the opening monologue
that Carson had made famous but changed the show’s
style, band and routine to draw a younger audience.
Leno’s musical guests were selected with careful attention to
the younger target audience. The Tonight Show with Jay
Leno has been consistently the highest-rated of the network
late-night programs.
With big ballyhoo, Conan O’Brien moved from Late
Night to Tonight in 2009, and former SNL star/actor
Jimmy Fallon took over Late Night. O’Brien had been
promised the Tonight show back in 2004 at which time
Leno was initially supposed to retire. Instead, in 2009 Leno
was awarded a nightly prime-time program (10:00 P.M.
M–F) which turned out to be a major failure so serious that it
harmed all of NBC’s prime-time schedule—a harm that still
hadn’t been rectified years later. So O’Brien finally got the
tonight slot, but his ratings on Tonight were less than had
been expected and considerably less than what Leno had
been generating at 11:30. So Leno’s prime-time program
was cancelled early in 2010, and after O’Brien vocally
refused to give up the 11:30 time spot, he was dumped
and replaced by the return of Leno. (With renewed public-
ity, O’Brien moved to TBS and started a new talk/variety
program, Conan.) This game of musical chairs was a major
embarrassment to NBC and the most controversial and
publicized event in prime time since the Leno/Letterman
struggle to replace Carson in the early 1990s.
CHAPTER 7 Non-Prime-Time Network Programming
267
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
comedy/political discussion program, in the post-
Nightline slot, but declining ratings and, according
to many observers, the controversial post-9/11 com-
ments of host Bill Maher led to cancellation. Its
replacement, Jimmy Kimmel Live, is a Hollywood-
based talk program hosted by a cable personality
best known for his appeal to young men via Comedy
Central’s The Man Show.
FOX had three notable late-night talk-show fail-
ures prior to withdrawing from the daypart. None
of the three—The Late Show Starring Joan Rivers
(1986 to 1987), The Wilton North Report (1987
to 1988), and The Chevy Chase Show (1993)—
attracted significant audiences away from competing
talk shows. As of 2011, only the Big Three competed
against cable and syndication for late night viewers
on weeknights (see 7.12). With cable increasingly
competitive in late night with its own talk/variety
or comedy programs (Daily Show, Colbert Report,
Conan, George Lopez) there is little opening for
FOX to re-enter the fray.
Late-Night Weekend
Entertainment
Programmers of late-night (11 P.M. to 1 A.M.) week-
ends generally attempt to reach viewers aged 18 to
34, but they face competition from a variety of
sources in this daypart. First of all, on any given
Saturday night, many in the desired target audience
have other things to do than watch television. Sec-
ond, cable and syndicated movies capture substan-
tial audiences among this age group. As a result, to
reach young adults, networks have tried to grab
attention with truly unique programs on Friday
and Saturday nights, including outlandish comedy,
news and music formats. With only a handful of
exceptions, however, they have been unsuccessful,
so affiliates fill late-night weekend time with syndi-
cated fare and infomercials.
One of the rare successes in network late-night
weekend programming history is NBC’s Saturday
Night Live (SNL). Debuting on NBC in 1975, SNL
remains an often innovative 90-minute comedy/vari-
ety program airing on Saturdays at 11:30 P.M. SNL
features regular cast members and a different guest-
star host each week. Ratings sometimes reach 6.0
total and close to 3.0 in Adults 18 to 49—huge rat-
ings for a time period when HUT levels are so low.
In some weeks, SNL out rates all other Saturday
night
network
programs
including
prime
time.
Many former cast members have become famous
film
and
prime-time
television
stars,
including
Chevy Chase, Mike Myers, Bill Murray, John
Belushi, Eddie Murphy, Dana Carvey, Chris Rock,
Adam Sandler, Will Ferrell, Amy Poehler and Tina
Fey.
Because producing a fresh 90-minute sketch-
driven comedy is so demanding, NBC occasionally
7.12
Late-Night Network Ratings Season Cumulative as of May 2011
Program
Network
Number of Viewers
A 18–49 Rating
Nightline
ABC
4.0 million
1.0
Tonight (Leno)
NBC
3.9 million
1.0
Late Show (Letterman)
CBS
3.6 million
0.9
Late Night (Fallon)
NBC
1.8 million
0.6
Late, Late Show (Ferguson)
CBS
1.8 million
0.5
Jimmy Kimmel Live
ABC
1.7 million
0.5
Last Call (Daly)
NBC
1.0 million
0.4
“Gorman, Bill. (2011, May 12). Jay Leno and Jimmy Fallon Deliver #1 Finishers vs. ABC and CBS Competition for Late Night Week of
May 2-6.” TB By The Numbers. http://tvbythenumbers.zap2it.com/2011/05/12/jay-leno-and-jimmy-fallon-deliver-1-finishes-vs-abc-and-cbs-
competition-for-the-late-night-week-of-may-2-6/92379/.
268
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
gives the cast and writers a rest and has offered some
specials and a variety of packaged, thematic best-of-
SNL shows in its time slot. During the crucial
November, February and May ratings sweeps, how-
ever, first-run shows air for at least three consecutive
weeks.
As is the case with most successful series, SNL
has had its imitators over the years, the most obvi-
ous being ABC’s Fridays that lived and died in the
early 1980s. So far, SNL has had only one long-
running
network
competitor,
FOX’s
MADtv,
which ran from 1995–2009. Similar to SNL, it
uses a repertory company of young comedians per-
forming comedy sketches, including popular culture
satires and recurring character bits. The one-hour
program started at 11 P.M., a half-hour earlier than
SNL, allowing it to counterprogram the local news
on NBC affiliates and bridge the start of SNL, thus
capturing viewers interested in comedy before SNL
takes the stage. In late 2006, FOX began to program
the 12 to 12:30 A.M. post-MADtv spot with Talk-
show with Spike Feresten, and alternate this with
repeats of prime-time series. Both MADtv and Talk-
show left the air in 2009 to be replaced by The
Wanda Sykes Show that lasted only one season.
Reruns of Fringe and a reality competition program
entitled 30 Seconds to Fame were being scheduled
by FOX by 2011.
The Effects of Consolidation
and Cable
Network non-prime-time programming is in transi-
tion. There is no question that daytime, weekend
and late-night programming can be lucrative day-
parts. The combination of relatively low costs for
program production (with the exception of sports)
and loyal audiences has produced substantial prof-
its. Why then are many of the remaining network
programs losing audiences? Why have the networks
scaled back or abandoned their programming in
some of these dayparts (for example, NBC on week-
day afternoons, FOX in late night)? The answers to
these questions lie in the changing nature of the
broadcast network television industry in the early
years of the twenty-first century.
The huge profits from daytime and some other
nonprime dayparts are no longer a secret. Local sta-
tions now realize that they can generate much more
revenue from syndicated programs or even infomer-
cials than they can from the compensation (cash
and/or advertising availabilities) offered by networks
for clearing their programs (see Chapter 8). This has
reduced clearance levels for non-prime dayparts and
led to the scaling back of network offerings. Because
of low clearances, the newer broadcast networks
have not even attempted to program many of the
non-prime dayparts.
However, there is no need to worry about the
networks. Their corporate owners are increasingly
the owners not just of cable networks, but of both
the local stations and the syndicated programming
that has replaced network programming on those sta-
tions in many nonprime dayparts, and they are buy-
ing up online services (witness Hulu). The Big Four
networks constitute the largest owners of major tele-
vision stations, and their O&Os are typically much
more profitable than their networks. In addition, co-
ventures, such as seen on Saturday mornings between
cable networks, broadcast networks and syndicators,
are likely to become the norm in other time periods
and spill over into the internet and as offerings for
mobile media. The old lines of demarcation are rap-
idly dissolving in the television industry—as they did
a generation earlier in the radio industry.
Several non-prime network programs continue
to have fiercely loyal audiences. The problem for
the networks is that these audiences are aging and
not being replaced by younger viewers who are
divided among many more viewing options (and
other entertainment media) than were their parents.
In
particular,
programs
that
have
traditionally
drawn a loyal but older audience (soap operas,
news) must adapt or run the risk of becoming
unprofitable—at which point they will likely be so
altered as to be unrecognizable or simply disappear.
The most important factor to consider with
regard to both the present and future of nonprime net-
work programming is this blurring of the traditional
distinctions between network, syndicated and cable
CHAPTER 7 Non-Prime-Time Network Programming
269
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
programs. Relaxation of the financial interest and syn-
dication rules (see Chapter 1) allowed networks to
establish themselves as program suppliers to affiliates
and nonaffiliates. Increasingly, broadcast networks
are both programmers and syndicators both domesti-
cally and internationally. The continuing relaxation of
the television station ownership cap has made the cor-
porate owners of the broadcast networks more active
program buyers.
While integrated station and network owner-
ship can be used to guarantee clearance for a net-
work program, it can also be used as clout for
“sibling” syndicated programming. For example,
the revenue goals of a Viacom/CBS-owned television
station might be fulfilled by a CBS network pro-
gram. On the other hand, it might be more lucrative
for the station to acquire a syndicated program such
as Dr. Phil from King World (a syndicator owned by
Viacom) or a film from Paramount (another Viacom
Company). The parent company (in this case, Via-
com) cannot lose in any of these scenarios. More-
over,
Viacom
can
use
its
clout
to
gain
the
necessary clearance for a new syndicated offering
in exchange for the rights to a successful show. In
addition, Viacom is not tied to the needs of CBS or
its local affiliates and can auction off its syndicated
offerings to whatever local stations are willing to
pay the most. Viacom (or Disney, FOX, NBC Uni-
versal, Time Warner) cannot lose.
This is the new television. The low HUT levels
in nonprime time have allowed the big media con-
glomerates to experiment in the “new world” of
television programming. There is much more change
to come in all dayparts, as the decades-old distinc-
tions between broadcast networks, cable networks,
syndicators and program producers fade into the fog
of corporate consolidation and the rise of online and
tablet television.
Note
1. Despite the demise of regularly scheduled sports
anthologies on the networks, the Wide World of Sports
brand continues as the name of a sports entertainment
attraction at Disney World. The Walt Disney Co. is, of
course, the parent company of both ABC and ESPN.
270
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A P T E R8
Television Station
Programming Strategies
Robert B. Affe
Chapter Outline
The Regulatory Wave
The Digital Wave
Sources of Television Programs
Network Programming for
Affiliates
The Big Four
The Small Ones
The Spanish-Language Three
The Network–Affiliate
Agreement
Preemptions
News and Local Programming
The Role of Local Newscasts
Other Local Programming
Syndicated Programming
The Prime-Time Access Rule
Off-Network Syndication
Movies
Infomercials
Station Dayparts
Early Morning (6 to 9 A.M.)
Morning (9 A.M. to 12 Noon)
Afternoon (12 Noon to 4 P.M.)
Early Fringe (4 to 7 P.M. EST/PST
4 to 6 P.M. CST/MST)
Prime Access (7 to 8 P.M. EST/PST
6 to 7 P.M. CST/MST)
Prime Time (8 to 11 P.M. EST/PST
7 to 10 P.M. CST/MST)
Late Fringe (11 to 11:35 P.M. EST/
PST 10 to 10:35 P.M. CST/MST)
Late Night (11:35 P.M. to 2 A.M.
EST/PST 10:35 P.M. to 2 A.M.
CST/MST)
Overnight (2 to 6 A.M.)
Weekend Programming
Station Promotion
On-Air Promotion of Programs
Promotion in Other Media
What Lies Ahead for Stations
Digital Technology
Competing Newscasts
Channel Migration
The Mutation of Broadcasting
Notes
271
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
T
he dinosaur could not adapt to a radically
changed environment … and died out; Some-
what more recently, vacuum tube manufacturers lost
their
market
to
transistors;
film
cameras
were
replaced by digital cameras. In business, as in biology,
the key to survival is adaptation. Media companies of
the past that have ridden the peak of the wave of
technological, economic and demographic change
have prospered; those companies able to merely cope
with change have hung on to survive, if only tempo-
rarily; companies that failed to meet the demands of
change have been extinguished. The dynamics of pro-
gramming a television station have radically changed
over the last 15 years or so, buffeted by overdue reg-
ulatory reform and technological revolution in the
form of digital communications. Consider the impact
of the internet, digitized signals and personalized
mobile communications devices. Whereas most indi-
vidual
stations
were
programmed
autonomously
(“inside the building”) for most of the twentieth cen-
tury, today the television station is at the end of a
pipeline
of
business
imperatives
imposed
from
above. (The sole exception is news programming, dis-
cussed later in this chapter.)
On
many
levels—technological,
financial,
demographic, marketing and regulatory—broadcast
programming is hurtling through creative and eco-
nomic developments that are breathtaking to its
viewers and gut-wrenching to its participants. Now
that the predictability and easy profitability of past
decades have declined markedly, station owners,
programmers and industry observers warily look to
the horizon to see what lies ahead.
The Regulatory Wave
The two waves that broke over the programming
business formed far offshore during the 1990s; one
flooded the business immediately, with a long term
impact; the second wave took a longer, slower time
to crest, but had an equally formidable consequence.
The first was regulatory reform, which had several
parts. For starters, after decades of patchwork revi-
sions, in 1996 the U.S. Congress finally revamped the
enabling legislation of the electronic media business,
the (antique) 1934 Communications Act. The effect
on the programming business was profound. Numer-
ical restrictions on station ownership were lifted.
Media companies could own, theoretically, as many
stations as they wanted (and the giants wanted a lot!),
up to a cumulative population reach of 39%. Almost
immediately, television station companies were no
longer small, informal collections of media properties.
The economies of scale created by the 1996 act
imposed a discipline of managerial realities from
above, affecting production, purchase, scheduling
and promotion at television stations.
Some of the most enthusiastic station-buyers
were the networks themselves. Always at the van-
guard of the economies of scale that drive commer-
cial television, three of the four major networks
leapt to add to their portfolio of stations. By 2011,
FOX owned 17 stations, CBS owned 14 stations,
and NBC 10. Only ABC held back with a smaller
portfolio of 8 stations.
For station programmers, the most visceral
change was the fact that the relationship between
the local station affiliate and the network was
uprooted. Always precarious and wobbly at best,
the balance between the powerful national program-
mer and the local outlet was tipped unequivocally
toward the network. The days of the locally owned
and operated commercial television station were
over. The first and second generations of station
owners sold out … and moved on.
Another
regulatory
change
with
convulsive
impact was the FCC’s decision to let the networks
return to the lavishly profitable business of program
syndication. This abrogated the established financial-
syndication rules (fin-syn) and ripped program-
making away from the independent producers and
put it into the hands of big studios with which the net-
works had close “marital” relationships (Disney owns
ABC, Paramount once owned CBS, Fox owns FOX).
Once free to do so, it was an easy play for networks to
produce their own programs and then reap the profits
of selling them in the programming aftermarket. Soon
the independent producers were finished off (as
described in Chapter 2), and the Hollywood studios
made theatrical movies and television largely for the
favored network.
272
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Finally, the FCC has backed away from its tra-
ditional insistence on a local orientation for broad-
casting. The result has been an increase in the
quantity of affiliates of some network and an overall
decrease in the number of unrelated (independent)
station owners. Another by-product has been more
substitution of remote owners for local ones and a
concomitant decrease in locally produced programs.
The Digital Wave
No business operates in a vacuum, immune to outside
forces, and television programming is no exception.
Many factors affect the environment in which a sta-
tion makes decisions about program selection, sched-
uling, evaluation and promotion. In technology, the
major change has been the adoption of digital signal
transmission. As of 2009, all licensed stations (which
excludes cable) were required to broadcast a digital
signal (although some stations sought exemptions
from the FCC). This has resulted in superior-quality
signals, although they are not necessarily in high-
definition formats and do not necessarily result in
better reception for all receivers.
At the same time, stations acquired the ability to
multiplex—to send several channels of programming
on their assigned frequency—while previously they
could send only one channel. From an economic per-
spective, going digital required an enormous financial
outlay, and the station owners thought multiplexing
would provide compensating income. Moreover, as
an advertiser-supported medium, broadcast television
is hyper-responsive to the overall national economy.
When the economy expands, advertising budgets
likewise expand; in a period of economic contraction,
advertising budgets are usually among the first
budgets cut by companies.
Another pressure comes from new and intensi-
fied competition—first from cable, then from the
internet and mobile media. Networks and their
affiliates no longer capture the majority of television
viewing. Combined ratings for the top 20 cable net-
works now often equal or pass broadcast ratings.
Yet the broadcasters were slow to convert to digital
signals and continue to be slow to convert to HD.
And the demography of the audience is altering.
More affluent viewers are abandoning the networks in
droves; younger viewers are, too, finding that the flex-
ibility of the internet and mobile media better suits
their lives. The median age of television viewers is rap-
idly growing older (past 50 years of age), accelerated
by the fact that younger consumers spend increasing
amounts of time in online and gaming pursuits. In a
business that relies on young, brand-conscious consu-
mers, the graying of America signals a demographic
derailment for national advertising via broadcasting.
Sources of Television Programs
In nearly all circumstances, station decisions about
programs are evaluated for both their creative (con-
tent) and financial (business) considerations. When
home viewers enjoy—or disparage—a program on
the screen, what they see is the result of professional
programmers’ evaluations of that show’s relative
creative and financial merits.
Nearly all programs are produced by one of four
entities: the networks, the television production divi-
sions of the movie studios, the very few remaining
independent
producers
(more
common
in
radio
broadcasting than television now), or the local sta-
tions themselves. A producer needs a customer for
any program, and television programming is relayed
to homes via one of three outlets—from a network to
its affiliates, from a syndicator when purchased by the
station or its group, or from original production at the
station (called local). The chart in 8.1 illustrates how
several popular programs have come to the screen via
different producers and modes of distribution.
Not
all
networks
are
program
producers
because two are co-owned and operated as a unit
with the dominant network. ABC, CBS, FOX and
NBC are active producers, but CBS/TW-owned
CW and FOX-owned MNTV are not; they carry
mostly syndicated or “repurposed” product from
their parent companies. Both Univision (UNI) and
Telemundo (TEL, owned by NBC) produce a wide
range of Hispanic programming—and import from
Mexico as well—but TeleFutura (TEF), owned by
UNI, produces primarily sports.
CHAPTER 8 Television Station Programming Strategies
273
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
For purposes of discussing programming, here
are three classifications of stations. Most visible are
the
network
owned-and-operated
stations
(the
O&Os, pronounced “oh and ohs”), which are gen-
erally the top stations in the biggest markets. For
example, ABC-TV, Inc., (owned by Disney) in turn
owns the ABC Television Network, which in turn
owns and operates eight television stations, among
them
WABC-TV
(New
York),
KABC-TV
(Los
Angeles), WLS-TV (Chicago), WPVI-TV (Philadel-
phia) and KGO-TV (San Francisco). In the short-
hand of the television trade press, it is often
reported that a network has “made” or “lost”
money. That is a largely inaccurate way to report
the fortunes of a broadcasting company. It is impor-
tant to remember that network television is a pro-
gram service; in other words, it is an expense. The
network’s programming service is not designed to
maximize profit. The real money is made by selling
commercials in high-rated programs at the network-
owned stations. This is why the networks continue
to beef up their portfolios of owned stations and
aggressively lobby Washington to raise the limits
on station ownership still further.
As you undoubtedly know, affiliates are stations
that have agreed to run all the programs distributed
by one of the nine major commercial networks and
have signed an affiliation contract. The Washington
Post Company, for example, owns six television sta-
tions, and its Houston station (KPRC) is affiliated
with the NBC network and has the exclusive right
to run NBC’s programs in the Houston television
market. It is called a network-affiliated station.
Other stations owned by the Washington Post Com-
pany, however, are affiliates of other networks.
A true independent station has no formal rela-
tionship with a network and instead obtains its pro-
grams from a variety of sources, mostly syndicators
or rerun programs. During a brief 15-year period
(roughly from 1980 to 1995), independents sprang
up across America, corresponding to a spurt in the
economy and consequent demand for advertising
time. The economy was so good, in fact, that four
new networks—FOX, PAX, UPN and the WB—
were formed, and most of the then-independent sta-
tions chose affiliation.
Today, most of the former UPN and WB sta-
tions are affiliated with the CW or MNTV (PAX
died and eventually reemerged as ION—which
morphed quickly into a syndication service). In addi-
tion, more than 200 stations are O&Os or affiliates
of one of the Spanish-language networks (Univision,
Telemundo, TeleFutura or one of the smaller net-
works). However, the number of owned stations
and affiliates varies widely for the nine biggies
(see 8.2).
Altogether, 95 percent of all commercial broad-
cast stations today are either O&Os or affiliates of
one of the nine commercial broadcast networks. In
addition to ION, a few very small broadcast television
networks exist alongside the well-known ones, for
example, America One (formerly Channel America),
MTV2 (formerly The Box), and Trinity Broadcasting
Network (TBN) and other religious networks. They
8.1
Program Distribution
Produced by:
Network/Station
Movie Studio
Independent Producer
Distributed via:
Network
NBC Nightly News (NBCUniversal)
CSI (CBS)
America’s Got Talent (Freemantle
North America)
Syndication
Rachael Ray Show (CBS TV)
Ellen (Warner Bros)
Wendy Williams Show (Debmar)
Local station
Local newscasts (self-produced or
repeated from another local station)
—
—
274
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
tend to have secondary rather than primary affilia-
tions, largely with digital-cable or low-power or very
small market stations. If they have primary affilia-
tions, these tend to consist of less than a handful of
stations.
Network Programming
for Affiliates
In television, the station–network relationship is
modeled on the pattern established in the days of
radio. The operators of the first radio stations
quickly realized that broadcasting’s programming
demands were an all-consuming flame. As difficult
as it was to create programming for large-city sta-
tions in the early days, it was nearly impossible for
smaller-market stations to fill their program days.
The owners of WEAF, including General Electric,
fed that station’s programming to their co-owned
station in Washington, D.C., WCAP. In effect, the
cost of that program to the local station was zero.
That experiment was so successful that when sta-
tions outside the company clamored for programs,
General Electric created a relationship in which the
company
would
send
programs
through
long-
distance telephone lines to the local station. In
return, GE inserted their commercials inside the pro-
gram, and at the program’s conclusion, the local sta-
tion could air its own commercials. Thus the first
network was created.
Subsequent networks, including television and
cable, continue to be patterned after this model.
The classic network model maximizes the economies
of scale in the broadcasting business because the cost
of producing one program can be spread over hun-
dreds of affiliates. In return, with one commercial,
an advertiser can have its message sent nationwide
in the same program at the same time. In network-
distributed programs, the network keeps approxi-
mately three-quarters of the commercial time, and
the affiliate retains a quarter of the time for sale,
traditionally the source of immense profitability.
Another advantage is that the local affiliate has
exclusivity, the sole right to the network’s programs
(or at least, the right of first refusal). The full-service
networks (ABC, CBS and NBC) supply about 12
to 16 hours of programming daily to their 200þ
affiliates—nearly 100 hours per week across all time
periods—which is about one-half to two-thirds the
amount a station needs. UNI supplies even more
8.2
Network Affiliates and Owned Stations
Owned Stations
Affiliates*
U.S. Penetration
ABC
8
218
96.8%
CBS
14
204
96.9%
CW (CBS/TW)
—
195**
95%
FOX
17
180
96.1%
ION
58
95
83%
MNTV (FOX)
—
167
96%
NBC
10
207
97%
TeleFutura (Univision)
18
34
75%y
Telemundo (NBC)
13
50
93%y
Univision
19
66
97%y
*America One, for example, has 152 affiliates, but they are low-power, cable and satellite affiliates only; moreover, the network is not pro-
moted on the air, so its affiliates appear to be independents.
**CW also has 15 cable-only digital affiliates.
yThese percentages are of Spanish-speaking households, not total TV households.
CHAPTER 8 Television Station Programming Strategies
275
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
hours to its affiliates. Getting the rest is the primary
occupation of programmers at the stations (and the
other networks supply even fewer hours, making the
programmer’s job much larger).
But downsides to the network–affiliate relation-
ship exist. Some affiliates are weak stations with
poor signals, low-rated newscasts or overall inade-
quate performances, all of which disadvantage a net-
work and cause it to look for stronger affiliates.
From the affiliates’ perspectives, some networks’
programming is rated lower (the CW, MNTV, Tele-
Futura) than that of other networks—or a network’s
specific programs might not be as popular in a par-
ticular market as in the country overall. For exam-
ple,
ABC
has
traditionally
targeted
the
urban
audience, but some of its affiliates are in rural loca-
tions where urban material doesn’t always suit the
viewers. Nonetheless, both networks and affiliates
need each other to provide what they themselves
lack: The networks lack local presence, and the
affiliates lack the financial resources to program all
their broadcast days.
The Big Four
At the apex of their dominance and profitability in
the late 1970s, the Big Three—CBS, NBC, ABC—
attracted more than 90 percent of all prime-time
viewing
and
advertising
dollars.
By
the
early
2000s, their collective share of prime-time viewing
had slipped beneath 35 percent. Although alterna-
tive forms of video entertainment, in the aggregate,
have chipped away at the networks’ near-monopoly
of television, commercial network television con-
tinues to remain the best vehicle for mass advertising
in America and thus continues to be economically
viable. The newer broadcast networks, the cable net-
works and internet websites attract higher concen-
trations of narrowly targeted audiences, but they
cannot come close to contesting the networks for
delivery of mass audiences.
In 1994, FOX upended the cozy three-way bal-
ance that had operated for four decades. Initially,
FOX’s affiliates were former independent stations,
usually
the
highest-rated
independents
in
their
respective markets, but still inferior in audience
share and revenue to their competitors, the affiliates
of the long-established networks. In addition, most
of the FOX affiliates lacked newscasts. Chairman
Rupert Murdoch soon put them on notice that his
affiliates would produce local news—or lose the
FOX affiliation. FOX successfully raided many tra-
ditional affiliate rosters, especially those of CBS, and
the Big Three reluctantly became the Big Four. FOX
captured the crown jewels of the industry by acquir-
ing the broadcast rights to NFL football starting
with the 1994 season. By securing the NFL rights,
other affiliates suddenly saw the immediate threat of
losing loyal viewers, irreplaceable revenue and an
unmatched platform for promoting network pro-
gramming. The impact of the NFL deal shook the
underpinnings of the relationship between the Big
Three networks and their affiliates, particularly for
CBS, whose affiliates opened their eyes to the advan-
tages of switching their allegiance to FOX.
Before 1994, affiliation switches were rare. View-
ers, broadcasters and networks basked in the security
of
loyal,
long-term
relationships.
When
FOX
announced a series of affiliation switches in major
markets, it unleashed a flurry of activity, breaking a
logjam and causing a downstream realignment of
affiliates in nearly every large market in which the
Big Three networks did not already own stations. In
Philadelphia, Boston, Detroit, Dallas, Atlanta, Cleve-
land, Seattle, Tampa, Miami, Phoenix and many
other markets—covering nearly one-quarter of the
U.S. population—one or more long-term affiliation
relationships were broken up, and FOX substantially
upgraded its affiliate lineup. By doing so, it achieved
station parity in network television (reaching equal
numbers of households via roughly the same number
of owned-stations and affiliates).
CBS was severely wounded by the raid on its
affiliates. The network lost decades-long relation-
ships in large markets and had to spend scores of
millions of dollars in advertising, promotion and
publicity, introducing viewers in many markets to
the local channel that was the new home of CBS.
The costs were more than monetary; in many cases
they were a slap to the prestige of the “Tiffany
Network.” In Detroit, for example, CBS lost its
Channel 2 affiliate to FOX and had to decamp
276
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
way up the dial to Channel 62. (It was not exactly in
the same spectrum with police and fire calls, but it
was close, from CBS’s perspective.) In Miami, CBS
lost its traditional position on Channel 4 and moved
to Channel 6, which had a serious signal-reception
problem in the northern half of the market. In
Atlanta, CBS lost Channel 5 and moved to Channel
46. CBS was staggered by the FOX raid, and it took
years for the network—and thus its affiliates—to
recover.1 Today, CBS, NBC, ABC and FOX have
between
197
and
226
affiliated
stations
each
(including O&Os) on their rosters.
The Small Ones
In January 1995 two new networks debuted in the
same week: “The WB”, owned principally by Time
Warner, and “UPN”, originally owned by Paramount
and Chris-Craft Broadcasting, then by Viacom/CBS.
These so-called netlets did not provide the full pro-
gramming slate to their affiliates. Instead, the WB
and UPN focused on the heart of a station’s schedule,
the prime-time hours, adding young-adult-skewing
programming and children’s animation on weekdays
and weekend mornings. The new networks patterned
their rollout on the model devised by FOX in its early
years, introducing one or two nights of prime-time
programming per year.
After a decade of low ratings, CBS and Time
Warner shut down the networks, and in about the
blink of an eye, came up with the CW, cherry-
picking the old schedules for the best programs.
Since the new network could have only one affiliate
per market, it captured the best ones (sometimes
stealing from the Big Three because NBC’s program-
ming was ailing at the time). That left dozens of for-
mer UPN stations (many owned by FOX) and others
without a network, so FOX invented MyNetworkTV
(MNTV, named like FOX’s MySpace.com).
The new networks’ game plans avoid competing
for ratings with the Big Four across all dayparts.
Instead, the CW and MNTV program only when
they can be competitive, which means primarily
prime time, and primarily weeknights. Even FOX
does not program three hours of prime time every
night, unlike the Big Three. FOX programs two
hours, then expects its affiliates to air late news at
10 P.M. (9 P.M. central) to get the jump on the late
newscasts aired by affiliates of the other networks.
Affiliated broadcasters are left with large portions of
weekdays and weekends to fill.
The other English-language network, Paxson,
launched its PAX service in 1998, concentrating on
family-friendly programming, both first-run and syn-
dicated, and morphed into ION in 2007 (after a cou-
ple of other tries at a new name), but it lagged in
ratings and familiarity to audiences. In order to foster
programming without sex and violence (suitable for
family viewing), it attempted to tightly control the
programming of its affiliates using a contract that lim-
ited the carriage of syndicated series. Many affiliates
soon abandoned the contract, ignoring it and eventu-
ally jumping ship for more popular programming
from MNTV or the CW. Consequently, ION stopped
trying to be a network and shifted to a rerun service,
purchasing long sets of older off-network series, cur-
rently offering Without a Trace (over and over),
Ghost Whisperer (over and over), and lots of Criminal
Minds. Dropping its “holier than everyone else” atti-
tude, it carries Look Sexy Now. It does not produce
newscasts or live talk, instead filling time with paid
programs (mostly religion) and informercials.
One of the major benefits of the FOX, CW and
MNTV affiliations is that they give a network-quality
look to their affiliated stations, which were predomi-
nantly weak independent stations before the mid-
1990s. As much as any other factor, by their guerrilla
style of picking off younger network audiences, the
newer networks have contributed to the blurring of
identities between affiliates and the former indepen-
dents. Independents used to be characterized by a
“local” look (“local” used pejoratively in this case),
providing prime-time programming consisting of old
movies and even older syndicated products. Today, it
is virtually impossible to distinguish between the two
former classes of stations in network prime time.
The Spanish-Language Three
One of the huge success stories in broadcasting in
the last generation has been Spanish-language pro-
gramming. The Hispanic population of the United
CHAPTER 8 Television Station Programming Strategies
277
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
States is now the largest minority population, as well
as the fastest-growing minority. Furthermore, this
population is densely settled along the states border-
ing Mexico (Arizona, New Mexico, Texas), and the
Mountain states, with significant population clusters
in Florida, North Carolina and metropolitan New
York,
Chicago
and
Atlanta.
The
three
major
Spanish-language services—Univision (and its sister
network, TeleFutura), and Telemundo, owned by
NBCUniversal—overwhelm markets that have a
strong Spanish-speaking presence. Indeed, UNI typi-
cally
outdraws
English-language
competitors
in
many time periods and has altered the national
advertising market.
Spanish-language broadcasting is concentrated
in markets with large absolute numbers of Hispanics
(New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, San Francisco,
Dallas, Miami) and also with large percentage num-
bers (Austin, San Antonio, Albuquerque, Bakers-
field). The Hispanic population of the United States
was officially (at least) 16 percent as of 2011, pro-
jected by the U.S. Census Bureau to increase to 20%
in 2030, and to 30% in 2050.
Univision, a publicly traded independent com-
pany (formerly Spanish International Network or
SIN), was founded in 1962 and was the first non-
English-language network in the United States. It
owns 18 full-power and 8 low-power outlets, has
66 broadcast affiliates and is carried on about
18,000 cable systems, FiOS and both satellite ser-
vices, giving it reach into nearly all of the 210 broad-
cast markets. It has been the fifth-largest U.S.
television network for many years. Its best-known
programming
consists
of
Mexican
telenovelas
produced by Grupo Televisa, major international
sporting events—especially soccer—and Noticiero
Univision, its nightly newscast.
Its co-owned sister service, TeleFutura, schedules
to compliment Univision’s programming on another
18 full-power and 15 low-power owned stations and
34 broadcast affiliates, along with about 270 cable
affiliates. In addition to such blockbuster program-
ming as Sabado Gigante, soccer and hot telenovelas,
both networks carry newscasts and some noncom-
mercial programs. In 15 markets, their duopoly status
puts UNI/TEF stations near the top of all stations.
Univision also owns the cable network Galavi-
sión, some music services, Univision Radio and
www.univision.com, a very popular website. In
addition to its efforts to capture a younger demo-
graphic, Univision claims to have the largest undu-
plicated prime-time audience, with two-thirds of its
viewers unavailable to any other network.2 During
hot soccer matches, Univision sometimes leads ALL
U.S. networks in prime time in adults 18–49. One
year, the highest recorded rating for Univision (a
35.9) was a tribute to the murdered Tejano singer,
Selena. As a further measure of its influence, the con-
cept for the Univision serial, La Fea Mas Bella, was
licensed and re-introduced on ABC as “Ugly Betty.”
Telemundo (TEL) is the second-largest producer
of Spanish-language television programming in the
world, and the second-largest Spanish-language tele-
vision network in the United States. Founded in
1954, Telemundo has about 160 broadcast and
cable affiliates. As a symbol of the growing impor-
tance of the Hispanic advertising market, Tele-
mundo was purchased by NBC in 2002 and gained
substantial financial support for program produc-
tion, both for its own affiliates and for shows for
international distribution. Because of its majority
stake (51%) in NBCUniversal, Comcast now owns
Telemundo, solidifying the network’s domestic pres-
ence on about 600 cable systems, in addition to
ownership of six full-power and five low-power sta-
tions with 50 broadcast affiliates. This combination
gives TEL video presence in about a quarter of U.S.
television markets. Its popular movies, reality pro-
grams, talk shows and telenovelas make it the
No. 2 network TEL offers the largest amount of
bilingual
programming,
with
English
subtitles,
because it distributes internationally as well as tar-
geting U.S. Spanglish speakers.
Another
Spanish-language
network,
Azteca
America began operations in 2001. Headquartered
in Los Angeles, this network has approximately
60 affiliates, receives some of its programming from
its sister network in Mexico, and reaches nearly all
the Hispanic market in the States. The Hispanic pop-
ulation is younger than the population as a whole, a
particular advantage for broadcasters who can attract
them. Its median age is 27.4, versus the overall
278
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
median population age of 36.8, and the Hispanic
audience has a higher percentage of young adults
and children, making it ideal for national consumer
advertisers. Traditional package-brand advertisers
now allocate larger budgets to reaching this audience,
and the profit potential of Spanish-language networks
and their stations has become self-evident. For exam-
ple, at times, in Los Angeles, Miami and Fresno
ratings, Univision stations have led their markets
in adults aged 18 to 49 and adults aged 18 to 34
across the entire broadcast day. Combined with the
increasing household income of Hispanic families,
Spanish-language broadcasting is a growth segment
in an otherwise-mature (and threatened) broadcasting
business.
The Network–Affiliate
Agreement
Each party to an affiliation makes specific promises
to the other party; the legal document binding both
parties is called an affiliation agreement (and some-
times programmers go around moaning that they
can’t do something because of “the agreement”).
To summarize, the network agrees to provide its
program service to the affiliate on an exclusive
basis. Exclusive means that only one station in
each market may broadcast the network’s programs
(except that refused programs can be licensed to
another station). Further, the network will pay the
affiliates a negotiated fee for broadcasting its pro-
grams. This fee is called network compensation, or
just plain comp. Network compensation can easily
exceed $1 million per station in the larger markets.
Ironically, comp is more important to stations in
the smaller markets, where it can represent up to
10 percent of total revenues and spell the difference
between profit or loss for the affiliate.
In return for comp, the affiliate promises to
broadcast the programs as delivered by the network
and to allow the network to retain about three-
quarters of the commercial time within each network
program (to sell the time in the national market). The
exchange of local commercial airtime for network
programming is the justification and foundation for
the entire network–affiliate relationship. This is the
central idea of the network–affiliate relationship
(see 8.3). For example, one variable in a commercial
station’s profit formula is the number of advertise-
ments it can air. Although the number of commercials
allotted to an affiliate is only about one-quarter of
the total number of ads in a given program, small
variations in that “about” can mean the gain or
loss of a lot of money for the station.
As you probably know, the commercial breaks
for the local station are called station breaks or adja-
cencies. In a half-hour program, the affiliate’s com-
mercials come at the end of the program; the
network’s commercials fall within the more desir-
able real estate—within the program itself. In an
hour-long program, half the affiliate’s commercials
fall at the end of the program, half within, while
(again) all the network’s commercials occur within
the program. Thus, hour-long programs have more
value to stations—ratings being equal—because
some of the “within spots” can sell at higher rates.
8.3
The Soi-Disant “Networks”
T
he scramble for programming and the oversupply of
local stations has resulted in the creation of self-
described television networks, such as occur in radio
broadcasting. These are not networks in the true sense of
the word; they are national programming or syndication
services that can be used to fill low-rated time periods.
Low-rated stations that cannot afford competitive prices
for syndicated programs and lack the ratings to attract
barter advertisers make considerable use of them. ION
is one exemplar (and MNTV comes close). Another such
program supplier is Bounce TV, appealing to black
American audiences. Bounce debuted in 2011, with
affiliated stations reaching about half the domestic U.S.
viewing population either via cable, satellite or broad-
casting. Such quasi-networks don’t pay compensation,
don’t have newscasts, and usually don’t sell time in the
national spot market. Their programming is either very
local or purchased from syndicators. If there is national
advertising in the shows, the syndicators put it there.
CHAPTER 8 Television Station Programming Strategies
279
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Tension between a network and its affiliate gov-
erns the entire relationship. In the network-affiliate
detente, each party thinks that the other is getting the
upper hand in the deal. The networks believe that the
affiliates are reaping windfalls from obtaining high-
quality and commercially attractive network programs
plus receiving compensation. In contrast, the affiliates
grouse that the networks are hogging most of the com-
mercial inventory during network programming as
well as piggybacking on the affiliates’ success and rep-
utation in the market for news and local programming.
These arguments raged back and forth for decades,
indicating that the relationships were roughly equal
in strength. Of course, in markets where the affiliate
is competitively superior (because of strong news per-
formance or such outside factors as signal strength or
lack of strong competitors in the market), its resent-
ment of the network is correspondingly higher than
in a market in which the affiliate is weak.
In truth, networks and affiliates have long had
need of each other. Under the traditional network
model, each party trades what it has for what it
needs: The network needs local affiliates to gain access
to the market, and affiliates need the economies of scale
that enable the network to provide the big-budget
entertainment/sports/news programming that affiliates
would otherwise be unable to produce on their own.
What lies on the horizon may not fit this model. As
the internet captures more of television viewers for pro-
gramming other than TV shows, and as both produc-
tion and comp costs rise, the industry may be forced to
adopt something close to the syndication model …
where the highest bidder gets each program. But for
most stations, at least the bigger, more profitable
ones, that day lies in the fuzzy future, not nearby.
Preemptions
Occasionally, an affiliate might decide not to air
(i.e., might preempt) a network program for any of
a number of reasons. Most commonly, a station
might preempt when it
■has a local news emergency that requires live,
on-the scene coverage.
■decides to air a program it produced on its own,
such as a local parade, local news special, sporting
event and the like.
■deems the content of the network program inap-
propriate for local viewers.
■wants to keep all the advertising time and revenue
for itself (which occurs most frequently on week-
ends during the Christmas shopping season, when
local stations try to maximize commercial revenue
during the busiest advertising time of the year).
Usually, when an affiliate preempts a network
show, the station will reschedule the program in
another time period (called delayed carriage) but
will lose whatever compensation accompanied the
regular airing (not all programs qualify for comp).
If the affiliate refuses to clear (air) the program at all,
a Big-Four network will then offer it to another sta-
tion in the market in order to have some audience in
the market for the program and its ads. As you can
imagine, the networks keep careful track of exactly
how many preemptions each affiliate makes, and
that number can be a powerful bargaining chip at
the time of affiliation agreement renewal or when
affiliates request higher compensation. To protect
themselves, affiliates negotiate in advance for the
right to preempt a limited number of programs dur-
ing the year.
It is important to recall that networks are not
licensed by the FCC—only stations are—and affili-
ates must keep their eyes on their next license
renewal dates by offering some programming in
the public interest. Sometimes an affiliate contests
its network’s complaints about preemptions on the
grounds that the substitute programs better served
the community’s interests and made the affiliate a
stronger station in the market. This is a compelling
argument when a network repeat episode is pre-
empted in favor of a local news special about educa-
tion in the region; it is a plausible argument when a
network is preempted in favor of a championship
game in which a local college team is playing; and
it is a weak argument if the network is preempted in
favor of a syndicated entertainment program, broad-
cast solely for the purpose of selling more commer-
cials to improve the station’s quarterly revenues.
280
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
News and Local Programming
“News is what someone, somewhere
wants to suppress; everything else is just
advertising,”
— Alfred Lord Northcliffe, British press
magnate from the early part of the last
century
Television, like its parent radio, was originally
developed as a community-oriented medium, serving
both local viewers and advertisers. Limited by unre-
liable equipment and the financial/organizational
constraints of an infant industry, early television
was predominantly a live, local medium. The early
days of television were experimental, thrilling, ago-
nizing and just plain chaotic.3
When the U.S. Congress passed the Commu-
nications Act of 1934, it established the FCC as
broadcasting’s licensing and regulatory authority,
authorizing the Commission to regulate broadcasting
“in the public interest, convenience, and necessity.”
As a matter of philosophical and practical forbear-
ance, the FCC has historically given broad latitude
to stations in the programming area to meet their
statutory obligations, even though the epicenter of a
station’s mandate remains serving the public interest.
The surest path to public service has been through
news and local programming. Television news is
omnipresent and its prospects for the future are rela-
tively undiminished (why is explained in this next sec-
tion), but there is always some criticism of its quality
and presentation (see 8.4).
The Role of Local Newscasts
Newspapers devote only a minority of their pages to
news reporting. Did you know that this so-called
newshole amounts to no more than 20 percent of
newspaper space? The rest of papers consist of
advertising
and
features
(syndicated
columns,
Sudoku, Dear Ann or Abby, comics, Miss Manners,
crossword puzzles and so on), and a big chunk of
what is euphemistically called “news” is sports.
Though television is justifiably criticized for its
excessive interruption by commercials, in its defense,
we should note that it allots about 75 percent of its
newscasts to programming content and only about
25 percent to commercial time. You may think that
is far too much, but it pays the bills.
The real competition for both newspapers and
television is really the internet, of course. It supplies
news (and not so news) reports on demand, and there
stories can be contracted or expanded in a live-like
format for as long as the user is interested. Such flex-
ibility and user control has driven many people away
from both print and television news—except in times
of disaster when television (usually) shines.
In addition to the obvious community benefits
of having news content on the air, local news
8.4
The Not Real News
O
ne of the most enduring criticisms of television
news is that it is not “real news”: that television
news is somehow counterfeit when compared with print
journalism. Many complaints about contemporary tele-
vision journalism begin with the cliché, “Edward R.
Murrow would be spinning in his grave if he saw tele-
vision’s coverage today of [insert issue of choice].” Then
the critic offers what Murrow’s opinion would have
been, were he still alive to have one. Interestingly, Mur-
row himself clearly anticipated the distinctiveness and
limitations of the new medium and said, in effect, “Tele-
vision news is a combination of show business, adver-
tising and news.”4
Television journalism, being so invasive in our lives, is
often compared on an apples-to-apples basis with print
journalism, a comparison which is unfair to both.
Newspapers have been regularly published in America
for nearly 300 years, protected by the First Amendment
from punishment or licensing restrictions, while television
has been plugged in for nearly 70 years as a captive of
its technological, economic, competitive and especially
regulatory environments. Of course, just as some news-
papers are trashy and some world-class, with all degrees
between, so television stations vary in quality, commit-
ment and competence.
CHAPTER 8 Television Station Programming Strategies
281
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
programming serves the broadcaster’s commercial
objectives quite well in the following six ways:
1.
Risk mitigation. When a station buys a syndi-
cated program, the result of that purchase can be a
hit, a dud or something in between. Admittedly, no
station sets out to deliberately buy a failure in the
syndication marketplace. No matter; regardless of
the ratings of the program, the station must honor
its contract and continue to pay the broadcast
license fee and continue to air the barter commer-
cials, even if the program is taken off the air. News
programs, in comparison, are rarely abject failures
and can nearly always be resuscitated by a “news
doctor.”
2.
Exclusivity of product. No competitor can steal
a station’s newscast or copy the name of the news-
cast. The names, faces and personalities of the on-air
talent are exclusive to the station, too.
3.
Brand-building. The newscast’s content and
production values can be styled so as to match
the station’s desired market identity, which
results from its entire mosaic of network program-
ming, syndicated programming, news/local pro-
gramming and other community exposure.
Affiliates that are number one in news generally
are number one in their markets in prime time as
well. How much their news ratings are attributable
to their network’s appeal in prime time and how
much the prime ratings can be linked to the
affiliate’s news success is debatable; what is not
debatable is that local news and prime-time success
are linked.
4.
Customization of product. In response to mar-
ket forces beyond their immediate control—such as
time of day, competing programs, changing popular
tastes—the station can alter its newscast’s content
and format. For example, the news can be modified
to offer more or less of hard news or softer cover-
age (such features as health or personal finance
stories), or the weather report can be expanded or
given more prominence in the newscast. If those
alterations do not work, the original format can be
restored and other changes put into place. No net-
work or syndicated program can offer such a
luxury.
5.
Cost containment. Any locally produced tele-
cast is a budgeting challenge to a business as sen-
sitive to cash flow as a broadcast station. News is
particularly expensive because of the need for
sophisticated news-gathering electronic equipment,
on-air talent, newscast sets, and behind-the-scenes
producers, editors and so on. The start-up price
tag is high, but such costs can be accurately esti-
mated and budgeted—unlike the syndicated mar-
ket, where the law of supply and demand causes
fluctuations from year to year in the price of syn-
dicated shows. In addition to reliable budgeting,
the cost of adding an additional newscast is
incrementally small; most of the expenses (equip-
ment, sets, talent) are fixed and therefore already
covered. Adding another half-hour of news in
some cases might require only an additional news
crew consisting of a single reporter and a photog-
rapher. (This is a lesson well learned from all all-
news cable channels and continuous online
reporting!)
6.
Revenue enhancement. News programs can be
enormously profitable for stations. First, unlike
the limited amount of commercial inventory
allowed to stations in network and some syndi-
cated programs, the station owns all of its news-
cast inventory and, if budgetary needs require, can
easily expand that supply by shortening the
newscast and adding commercial time. Second,
advertisers usually object to their products’ com-
mercials being placed during controversial net-
work or syndicated programs. An airline,
understandably, won’t want to sponsor the movie
Airplane, just as a travel agency will probably
avoid Titanic. Such programs are said to be on an
advertiser’s hit list.
Newscasts, fortunately, are usually not hit-
listed, and a large universe of potential advertisers
is available for the sales department to approach.
A third benefit is that the advertising community
regards news as the most prestigious category of
television programming. An image-conscious com-
pany that would reject the notion of advertising in
an entertainment program might well consider
advertising in a news program as an acceptable
alternative. Stations use their newscasts as bait, as
282
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
a means of enticing new or reluctant potential cli-
ents to expanding their advertising to more parts of
the television schedule.
As of 2011, there were 968 stations offering
local
news,
with
approximately
26,500
staff
employed in news departments. Generally speak-
ing, the larger the market, the more competitive
the product: Nearly 60% of station news depart-
ments turned a profit, and almost half of all station
revenue
was
generated
during
news
programs
(though
revenues
don’t
look
that
good
every
year). Industry polls showed that the average net-
work affiliate was up to 5½ hours of news each
day by mid-decade. This spotlights the changing
nature of the station business: As audiences drift
away to cable/satellite networks and internet activ-
ities, stations use news to strengthen their brands
and turn a profit. The old days of “noblesse
oblige” in news are long gone: It’s all about the
money. In 2011, the FCC released an alarming
report about the state of local television news.5
The report was scathing, indicating that while the
amount of news and the number of news outlets in
a community might be increasing, the amount of
local investigative news had not. The report equally
criticized the FCC itself for a lack of proper over-
sight in its responsibilities as overseer of licenses of
the public’s airwaves. Only four times in its history
has the FCC denied a license renewal to a station
on the grounds of failure to fulfill public interest
obligations.
One of the unintended after-effects of the pay-
tv age has been that some consumers are left with
over-the-air (OTA) viewing as their only choice,
and these viewers tend to be poorer and less-
well-educated, the downscale market. The OTA
component has been variously estimated at between
8%
and
14%
of
the
total
viewing
audience,
although current levels of MVPD subscribers sug-
gest that the true amount is nearer 8%. But the
point is that minorities make up much of this
group: Specifically, 24% of the Asian market,
17% of the black market, and 23% of the Hispanic
market watch OTA only. Overall, twice as many
homes with less than $30,000 annual income watch
over-the-air television exclusively. This group is
more likely to watch local news than national
cable news, although local television news is largely
a combination of sensationalistic criminal reports
and fluff.
Local TV news has taken on the visage of
radio, deploying teasing strategies to keep the
viewer watching, while spooning out as diluted a
mixture of information as possible to keep them
watching. Given that down-scale viewers watch
disproportionately more television, this is an exam-
ple of entertainment masquerading as news. Across
the country, news consultants spout templates of
cookie-cutter wisdom while driving out local inter-
ests and accents. No longer are reporters true jour-
nalists;
most
are
hit-and-run
news
readers
or
attractive people looking to move up to a larger
market. Many local news readers open their pro-
gram by saying, “thank you for joining us.” Rather
an insult to the viewers. Some misguided stations
have even offered contests for newswatchers. The
desperation of some stations to hold on to their
viewers
is
sometimes
painful
to
watch…but
we do.
Other Local Programming
There are two basic categories of local programs:
regularly scheduled shows (mostly produced out of
the news department, such as public-affairs discus-
sion programs and weekend sports wrap-ups) and
special events (such as ball games and parades).
Some nationally important programs that are pro-
duced locally still exist—mostly in the biggest mar-
kets
for
such
special
events
as
Philadelphia’s
Mummers’ Parade on New Year’s Day, the Boston
Marathon and so forth—but local programs no lon-
ger drive the financial or programming goals of a
station, and the news department produces the few
that remain, even in the largest markets. The vener-
able Chronicle, at 7:30 P.M. weekdays on Boston’s
WCVB, for example, has been on the air since
1984 and is the only large-market, locally produced
newsmagazine program in America. The exception
illuminates the void (see 8.5).
CHAPTER 8 Television Station Programming Strategies
283
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
For group-owned stations, local production can
be a laboratory, a means of field-testing programming
before a launch in syndication (because that’s where
the really big bucks are). For instance, Oprah Winfrey
hosted a local talk show on WLS-TV in Chicago
before her program went to national syndication in
1986. Maury Povich and Regis Philbin reached syndi-
cated fame after their respective programs’ successes
at local stations. At the other end of the personality
spectrum, Howard Stern had a test run on local tele-
vision in New York (WWOR-TV), years before his
program went to national broadcast syndication in
the late 1990s, and ultimately found its level on late-
night cable and then satellite radio.
Syndicated Programming
To fill the time periods when its network does not
supply programs, a station usually must enter the
syndication marketplace for substitutes (spend lots
of money). See Chapter 6 for a detailed discussion
of the syndication processes for off-network and
first-run programs.
The Prime-Time Access Rule
In an attempt to encourage stations to live up to
their public service mandate and, not incidentally,
make
the
network–affiliate
relationship
more
8.5
Why So Little Local?
L
ocal programming has four main liabilities. They are
primarily related to its labor and cost structures.
1. Labor-intensive. In contrast to the physical simplicity of
airing a network or syndicated program (which can
require—at most—one or two technicians to supervise
master control, videotape machines and digital ser-
vers), a local program can require some dozens of
personnel working over weeks or months to plan, pro-
duce and edit just one program. Even the most modest
of programs requires personnel to host, write, edit,
produce, direct and crew the production.
2. Cost-intensive. Budgeting is complex for a local pro-
duction: There must be an accounting for talent fees,
production crew, equipment, insurance, storage, con-
struction, rentals and all other related expenses of the
production, all of which are borne by the station. To
keep the production’s on-air “look” comparable with
network and syndicated programming, the show’s
budget must not skimp. Although television is said to
be a “forgiving” medium for production quality stan-
dards, the local program would defeat its own pur-
poses if it looked amateurish. Occasionally, some
production costs can be recouped if the station is able
to syndicate the program to other stations. The most
frequent example of this is when a sporting event gets
syndicated to a regional cluster of stations.
3. Advertising considerations. If the local program is a one-
time-only telecast, it might be difficult to find advertisers
willing to buy time in it. Advertising agencies desire
predictability; they want to have some pre-telecast notion
of the kind of program they are buying and some realistic
estimation of what the program’s ratings will be (to justify
the advertising buy to their clients, who are usually much
more careful with spending their own money than the
advertising agencies are). Unless the production is a reg-
ularly scheduled program or a local traditional event, the
advertiser might shy away from a novel program. This is
particularly true of national advertisers, who generally
will not sponsor an unknown local program. Local
advertisers, however, are more likely to support a local
program because their advertising is less ratings-sensitive
than that of national businesses. Local businesses can
measure advertising success by other factors, which are
sometimes as basic as an increase in the number of tele-
phone calls or customer traffic at their stores.
4. Promotion intensive. Unlike the help they get for pur-
chased programming from networks or syndicators,
stations are solely responsible for promoting their own
products. Heavy promotion of a local production,
especially if it meets with resistance from the sales
department (because promos use up time), is danger-
ous; it could result in a disproportionate creative effort
for a minimal revenue return.
284
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
balanced, in 1970 the FCC issued a regulation
that chopped off one hour of prime-time television
per night. (Until then, network prime had started at
7 P.M. Eastern/Pacific/6 P.M. Central/Mountain and
aired for four hours.) The 7 to 8 P.M. hour was
dubbed prime-access time, and the regulation was
called the Prime-Time Access Rule (PTAR).
Under PTAR, the commission limited affiliates
to three hours nightly of network programming and
prohibited stations in the largest 50 markets from
airing any off-network syndication in prime access.
(An exception was made for network news programs
so that they would not count toward the three hours.
A second exception was made for Sundays because,
at the time, the networks aired family-oriented pro-
gramming on the most heavily viewed night of the
week, reasoning that seems silly today.) The FCC
naively imagined that the 7 to 8 P.M. time period
would be occupied by local productions, public-
affairs shows and more local news.
Of course
the “rule
of unintended conse-
quences” applied. Rather than produce more (low-
rated) public-affairs programs, local stations realized
that they had just been handed a great gift. They
could now run syndicated programs (so long as
they were not of the off-network variety) in what
was formerly prime-time territory, and they got to
keep all the extra commercial inventory and the rev-
enue that went with it!
Although PTAR was repealed in 1995, it is
highly unlikely that the Big Three networks will get
their lost hour back. Access is the highest-viewed
non-network time period during the day, and sta-
tions generate too much commercial revenue to
acquiesce in returning the time to the networks.
Now that off-network reruns can air in access in
any market, the increase in potential programs has
driven prices down for both off-network and first-
run programming, and local stations make even
more money.
Off-Network Syndication
Unlike other tangible properties for which a price can
be established (such as land, automobiles, textbooks
and even personal services), there is no inherent value
to any given television program. Ultimately, the mar-
ket value of a program is set by the price at which the
buyer’s offer price and the seller’s acceptance price
overlap. As explained in Chapter 6, a program enter-
ing the syndication marketplace can sell at wildly
varying prices, depending on such factors as a sta-
tion’s programming needs, the demographic “fit” of
the program, the financial resources of the station,
and the competitive landscape in the market. There
is no set formula for calculating a price based on
market size or location. Programs are not a fungible
commodity where comparison shopping can be
undertaken; each program is different, and its syndi-
cation performance is unpredictable.
The syndication contract is an exercise in simple
mathematics. The syndicator sells the exclusive right
to air the program in one of two ways—on a weekly
license basis or on a per-episode basis.
1.
Weekly license. This is the most commonly
structured form of syndication. The station pays a
weekly rate for the program (paid monthly), which
is satellite-fed to the station. There is barter adver-
tising in the program, where the syndicator has sold
advertising time within the program, and the station
has no say in the scheduling of individual episodes.
The station must play the program once every day.
(The station may choose to contract to play the
program twice a day if the license fee is increased,
usually by about 50 percent.)
2.
Per episode. This is the original method, in
which the station enjoys more control over the
scheduling of the program. As long as the syndicator
gets paid (monthly), it does not care whether the
station airs the program every day, twice a day, or
not at all (called resting or shelving). There is gen-
erally no barter in this method. The station contracts
for a specific number of telecasts over a stated
period of time. In general, the station may play each
episode up to six times before additional residual
rights kick in.
In either case, when a program is sold into
off-network syndication, it enters the marketplace
upward of two years before its actual syndication
CHAPTER 8 Television Station Programming Strategies
285
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
date on the air. For example, when Everybody
Loves Raymond launched on the CBS network in
1996, it was immediately evident that it would
have a future in syndication. Eyemark, the pro-
gram’s syndicator, began the sales process in 1998,
anticipating a syndication start date of 2000. From
that date and until the eventual network run ends,
episodes of Raymond will air on both the network
and in syndication.
Once enough network episodes have accumu-
lated (usually after four seasons of 22 new episodes
each), approximately 90 episodes are released into
syndication. So, in the fifth year of network produc-
tion, typically, a program begins its syndication life.
In network seasons five through cancellation, the
program is simultaneously in syndication. As each
network year ends, and the network’s broadcast
rights expire and return to the syndicator, those
22
episodes
pour
over
into
the
syndication
contract, adding to the number that the local station
is able to air.
While a program is still on the network, the sta-
tion benefits in three ways from having the syndi-
cated version:
■National exposure. A network previously spent
heavily to promote the show as a hit, not only on
its own network but also through advertising in
the rest of the media. The national name recogni-
tion rubs off on the syndicated version of the
program.
■New episodes. Every year the station gets the
rights to the previous season’s network episodes,
which were broadcast only twice each. These
“new” episodes (new to syndication, anyway) are
underexposed because even fans of a program
cannot be expected to catch every episode during
its network run.
■Advertiser access. Advertisers are businesspeople.
They crave predictable results. They know and
respect the drawing power of network programs,
but if a network asks too much money for com-
mercials, advertisers know that they can buy spots
for less money in the same program at the syndi-
cation level, and the commercials will still be seen
nationally.
From an economic standpoint, syndicated pro-
grams pose both opportunities and perils. On the
opportunity side, the big benefit is the commercial
inventory. In off-network syndication (off-net, for
short), the station keeps most (if not all) of the com-
mercial time, creating the possibility of generating
more revenue from airing a syndicated program
than a network one.
Another benefit lies in brand-building for the
station. During non-network dayparts for affiliates
(and ALL the time on stations without a network),
stations have the entrepreneurial challenges of select-
ing and scheduling programs of strong appeal to
their viewers. Each station works with blocks of sit-
coms, movies, talk shows or court shows, perhaps
with a mix of sports and news, to develop a particu-
lar identity in the minds of the local audience.6
For the afternoon lead-in to local evening news,
affiliated stations can often acquire syndicated pro-
grams that are more complimentary to their high-
profile afternoon and evening news programs than
those their network provides. Finally, stations can
use syndicated programs to cater to local tastes. Net-
works have to program for a national audience or
audiences reached by their owned stations, which
tend to be in the largest markets necessarily having
different demographic and socioeconomic character-
istics than small-city and rural America. The syndi-
cation marketplace makes available programs that
might be a better fit for regional or market tastes.
At the same time, there are perils. When an indi-
vidual station commits to licensing a syndicated pro-
gram, it bears the entire financial risk of that
decision. If a network program fails, the network
will eventually replace it, at no cost to the affiliate.
If a syndicated program fails, the station is still obli-
gated for all the costs of the program throughout the
contract period (and has to run any prepaid ads).
The station also has to cover the cost of promo-
tion for its syndicated commitments, usually “spend-
ing” some of its immensely valuable commercial
inventory. In contrast, network programs generate
national exposure and national publicity—to the
eventual downstream benefit of local stations. On a
network schedule, a given program is aired on the
same day, at the same time, everywhere: 60 Minutes
286
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
is on every CBS station on Sundays at 7 P.M./6 cen-
tral, for example. In contrast, syndicated programs
are on the air at different times everywhere. Although
syndicators do support their programs with advertis-
ing and promotion (to add value to their barter
spots), there is no comparing that effort with a net-
work advertising campaign, and a station must bear
the lion’s share of promoting the program locally. If
an off-network program has no barter spots in it, the
syndicator will have no financial incentive to spend
any money on advertising.
Another risk lies in the absence of exclusivity.
Once a program is on a network, it seldom moves
to another network. A local affiliate can be confi-
dent its network hit will continue to be aired on its
station for the length of the program’s run. In con-
trast, a syndicated program is under the control of
the syndicator. A first-run syndication contract can
be as short as one year and often is as short as two
or three years. Once the contract period is over, the
syndicator can move the program to another station
that offers to pay more, and there is little loyalty to
stations in the syndication business.
Movies
By the time a local broadcast station can air a syndi-
cated movie, the film’s appeal is often exhausted from
overexposure. As a result, a once-valuable program
franchise has been co-opted by bigger and deeper-
pocketed cable competitors. Today it is highly unusual
to discover a movie on local television that one has not
had many opportunities to see elsewhere. Movies in
syndication have devolved; once a marquee attraction
carrying a premium purchase price, movies are now an
economy-of-scale program choice, a low-cost product
for a moderate return on the investment. The situation
differs for affiliates of the Spanish-language networks,
where movies imported from South and Central
America may still be fresh for American audiences.
Infomercials
The infamous program-length commercials, euphe-
mistically called infomercials, sell everything under
the sun—kitchen appliances, weight-loss “systems,”
real-estate seminars, exercise equipment and self-
improvement courses. Infomercials are the “elephant
in the parlor” of television that station executives
prefer not to discuss. These misfits of the program-
ming world are pilloried in the industry, ridiculed by
the public, and parodied on programs ranging from
Saturday Night Live to The Simpsons (“Hi, I’m
Troy McClure, and you might remember me from
other infomercials such as Smoke Yourself Thin
and Get Confident, Stupid!”).
So why would a station air such easy-to-scorn
programs? The answer is that infomercials are usually
paid for in advance, and thus they provide quick cash
to stations. No station brags about airing these pro-
grams, but at the end of a budget period, a station
can preempt a program in a low-rated time period
and sell the time period to an infomercial provider
for a rate far in excess of what the station could oth-
erwise generate in revenue. Most infomercials run in
such out-of-the-way time periods as overnight and
early mornings on weekends, although occasionally
one will pop up in plain sight—for example, opposite
a Super Bowl or other mega-telecast. And the lowest-
ranked stations in a market are the most likely to fill
part of their days with infomercials.
How can the infomercial provider afford to pay
such a premium rate? The success of an infomercial
depends not on its rating but on the so-called
response rate, the number of persons who call the
toll-free number and sign up for a service or order
the merchandise. No matter how seemingly odd the
product being pitched appears, rest assured that
somewhere there is a person on the phone right
now ordering it. Infomercials are proof, indeed,
that television continues to be the world’s most
influential advertising medium.
Station Dayparts
There are 24 hours in a day, 168 hours in a week,
8,760 hours in a year. It is literally impossible for pro-
grammers and advertisers to work with every one of
all these hours on an individual basis, and not every
hour in the day is equally important. For example, on
any station, 9 P.M. is a far more significant time period
CHAPTER 8 Television Station Programming Strategies
287
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
than
2
A.M.
In
the
name
of
efficiency
and
expediency, for the benefit of all parties in the busi-
ness—programmers and advertisers alike—the hours
of the day have been grouped into dayparts. The
dayparts represent the approximate behavior of the
imaginary typical American television household.
The best-known daypart, of course, is prime time.
Although it might at first seem to be an arbitrary divi-
sion, the grouping of hours of the 24-hour day into
dayparts generally reflects the presumed lifestyles and
viewing patterns of the average American viewing
household. The generally accepted dayparts and
their time periods appear in 8.6.
Although necessarily arbitrary, the division of
the day into dayparts does indeed reflect large
portions of most people’s lives. For example, most
people awaken in the morning between 6 and 9 A.M.
(corresponding to the early-morning daypart), get off
to work or school by 9 A.M. (start of daytime), and
return home in the afternoon between 4 and 6 P.M.
(early fringe). About two-thirds of American house-
holds watch television during the evening, peaking
around 9 P.M. (prime time), although peak viewing
by teens and young adults occurs later. Between 10
and 11 P.M., viewing levels begin tapering off as
families and older people prepare for bed, then drop
precipitously after 11 P.M. (late fringe).
Broadcasters and advertisers must agree on these
dayparts, which are established by Nielsen Media
Research, in order to conduct the multibillion-dollar
business of setting advertising rates and selling com-
mercial time at America’s more than one thousand
commercial television stations. In addition to config-
uring advertising expenditures and revenue, the day-
parts also set the boundaries for the programming
strategies that capture the time, money and effort of
broadcasting producers and executives.
Early Morning (6 to 9 A.M.)
As a lead-in to network morning news programs
(Today, Good Morning America, The Early Show)
that commence at 7 A.M. local time, many network
affiliates air local news (or the early early network
show). In response to the evolution of American life-
styles toward more working couples, single working
parents and longer commuting times, America’s
workday is starting earlier and ending later. Although
HUT levels are modest at dawn, most people who are
awake before 7 A.M. are awake for a reason: They are
preparing to go to work. These people are likely can-
didates for news because they are employed (and are
disproportionately commuters), and they therefore
meld the desirable advertising markers of income
and education to the accompanying lifestyle and pur-
chasing patterns of working people. In response to
the availability of these viewers, advertisers are
attracted to early-morning news programs.
These viewers usually cannot commit to watching
an entire program, however, so the information is fre-
quently repeated, with headline, traffic and weather
updates occurring throughout the hour or half-hour
newscast. This kind of format is called a “news
wheel.” In fact, viewers listen to the morning news
as much as watch it while they get dressed, prepare
8.6
Time Periods and Dayparts
6 to 9 A.M.
Early morning
9 A.M. to 12 noon
Morning
12 noon to 4 P.M.
Afternoon
4 to 7 P.M.
Early fringe
7 to 8 P.M.
Prime access
8 to 11 P.M.
Prime time
11 to 11:35 P.M.
Late fringe
11:35 P.M. to 2 A.M.
Late night
2 to 6 A.M.
Overnight
These dayparts are standard for the eastern and Pacific
time zones. In the central and mountain time zones, the
dayparts change slightly: Essentially, prime time starts an
hour earlier and ends an hour earlier, and early fringe,
access, and late fringe move correspondingly an hour to
accommodate the earlier hours of prime time.
Central Time Differences:
4 to 6 P.M.
Early fringe
6 to 7 P.M.
Prime access
7 to 10 P.M.
Prime time
10 to 10:35 P.M.
Late fringe
10:55 P.M. to 2 A.M.
Late night
288
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
breakfast, shoo schoolchildren out the door and pre-
pare to leave the house themselves. The video product
is treated as background chatter, much like radio. In
larger markets that have the longest commute times,
the early-morning news starts as early as 5 A.M.
The 7 to 9 A.M. time period has traditionally been
a network preserve. Today has been on NBC for
60 years and Good Morning America on ABC for
nearly 40 years, deeply embedding viewing patterns.
Most daytime viewing is habitual viewing, and
the networks try to establish that habit as early in
the day as possible. CBS affiliates have suffered the
most anguish in this daypart because their network
has had only indifferent success over the years with
its many morning efforts (see Chapter 7). Its affiliates
obviously want their network to succeed, but they
cannot wait indefinitely for it to do so; thus, lack of
clearance exacerbates the network’s problems.
During the first decades of television, when
most television markets had only three stations, a
network program could not finish worse than third
in the ratings. Today, with nearly every available
channel allocation licensed to an operating station,
a
network
program
can—embarrassingly—place
beneath a syndicated program, falling to fourth,
fifth or worse in the ratings. Despite CBS’s expendi-
ture of tens of millions of dollars to build a success-
ful morning news franchise, many CBS affiliates are
preempting their network’s Early Show. They are
producing their own local news programs or sched-
uling syndicated programming more attractive to
their lead-out audience at 9 A.M.
In deliberate contrast to their network competi-
tors, FOX affiliates blaze their own trail. In an
attempt to capture a share of news-related advertis-
ing dollars, FOX affiliates in most markets avoid a
head-on competition with network affiliates, instead
producing a news product heavily weighted toward
local news, local entertainment and personalities. In
many markets the distinct FOX formula works to
great success, beating the traditional network news-
casts. The FOX strategy is that to copy the approach
of CBS, NBC and ABC is futile; the international/
Washington/New York orientation of the networks
is both redundant and unimportant to viewers more
interested in events in their own towns.
At 7
A.M., UNI carries Despierta America
(“Wake Up, America”), which is the Hispanic equiv-
alent of Today or Good Morning America, and con-
tains
talk,
entertainment
and
half-hourly
news
updates. Over on Telemundo, the morning offering
is Levantate (“Arise!”). The newsholes of these pro-
grams, however, tend to be even smaller than that of
the English-language morning “news” programs.
Affiliates of the smaller networks counterpro-
gram this daypart with syndicated entertainment,
predominantly sitcoms or reality programming (or
the dreaded infomercials). Using entertainment is
an effective strategy: it avoids competing with the
news business and concentrates on the smaller audi-
ences of children and adults who don’t watch news.
The business strategy of these stations is not so
much to maximize profit as to minimize program-
ming costs in a low-priority daypart.
Morning (9 A.M. to 12 Noon)
The Big Three networks do not program the entire
three-hour morning block; the supply varies from
one to two hours, depending on the network. As a
cost-sensitive measure as well as a nod to the reality
that generating a morning audience is difficult, NBC
in 2007 extended Today for a fourth hour, to 11 A.M.,
CBS has continued with The Price Is Right in late
morning, and ABC airs The View at 11 A.M. Affiliates
then complete their lineups with a mixture of first-run
programs, talk and local news. The scheduling strat-
egy is to complement the demographic appeal of pro-
grams supplied by the network.
With a relatively low HUT level providing a
shaky foundation for success, the attrition rate for
syndicated morning programs is high. Programmers
do not have the luxury of allowing a program suffi-
cient time to attract its audience. There are no “out
of town” tryouts, unlike in the motion picture or
theatrical industries. If a program fails to attract a
stable audience within a reasonable period of time,
then, like their network counterparts, station pro-
grammers move it to another time period or, more
often, cancel it.
An intriguing characteristic of both morning
and afternoon daytime is that if a new program
CHAPTER 8 Television Station Programming Strategies
289
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
can weather the first couple of years of attracting a
loyal audience, a kind of “TV inertia” takes over,
and the program enters “Video Valhalla,” remaining
on the schedule seemingly permanently. (The Price
Is Right, for example, has been on the CBS daytime
schedule since 1972.) Viewers during daytime tend
to be homemakers, senior citizens, students and shift
workers. Although they have large blocks of time to
watch programs, they are not fully attentive to the
programs. So producers structure their programs to
enable viewers to join, depart and rejoin a daytime
program easily; that is why game shows have lots of
noise and require minimal levels of sustained con-
centration and why soap opera plots proceed so
slowly.
For the rest of the morning, UNI carries Quien
Tiene la Razon? (Who is Right?), in which guests
relate their respective sides of a personal conflict/dis-
pute, to be resolved by the moderator. Following is
Casos de Familia, a program about familial stresses.
The rest of the daytime schedule on both Univision
and Telemundo mirror the staple of daytime pro-
gramming:
relationship
programs,
soap
operas
(“novelas”), game and talk shows.
Afternoon (12 Noon to 4 P.M.)
The only local newscasts before evenings are generally
around the noon hour, a vestige of an era when more
adults were home midday, and they have shifted to
focus on office workers. In addition to reporting on
that morning’s news stories and aggregating more
news-targeted ad dollars, the midday news promotes
the station’s other programming, particularly the late
afternoon news.
The four main choices for the afternoon time
period are soap operas, court shows, talk and
game shows (see 8.7). For affiliates of the Big
8.7
The Beloved Soaps and Games
S
oap operas are the most venerable program format,
but nonetheless, few are left. ABC’s General Hospital
debuted in 1963. On NBC, Days of Our Lives premiered
in 1965. Of all the networks, CBS soaps have had the
greatest longevity until recently; now only The Young and
the Restless is left (see Chapter 7). Networks and adverti-
sers love soaps for the same reasons:
Because they are seriously habit forming (Fans of soap
operas watch not for years but for decades … and, in some
cases, for generations), and because that viewing loyalty can
be translated into consumer loyalty when the same products
sponsor the same soap for many years. Advertising relies on
repeated messages to be effective. A viewer watching the
same program every weekday for years, with the same pro-
ducts advertised over and over, is a rare commodity in an
increasingly fragmented advertising environment.
Lest one conclude that all first-run television in daytime is
devoted to exploiting the dark or voyeuristic side of human
nature, there are more lighthearted categories of programs.
The popularity of program formats is cyclical: Just as soaps
were fading, games rose again. Game shows might be out
of favor for some years, then return to popularity seemingly
overnight. Game shows are traditional and quintessential
daytime television fare. They are suitable for all viewers; the
content is mostly questions and answers; viewers can play
along at home—and feel superior when the contestants
muff an easy question.
To keep the pace of the game interesting, game shows
are usually a half-hour in length. Research has shown that
the best companion program for rounding out the hour is
another game show. That is why so many game shows are
found together in a one-hour block. Even though technology
has ramped up the production values of game shows, the
basic elements remain unchanged: question/answer for-
mat, relatively low skill level, vicarious viewer participation
and a clear payoff or disappointment. None of life’s
ambiguities for game shows; every game produces a win-
ner or a loser.
Speaking of winners, even though one might think that a
cash prize would be a more desirable or useful prize, an
under-realized appeal of prizes is the “fantasy” aspect: the
opportunity to win a dream vacation, a world cruise or an
expensive car. The vicarious enjoyment of watching a
contestant win a fabulous prize is always greater than
watching someone win cash money.
290
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Three, after the midday break for local news, the
afternoon daypart is the mother lode for soap
operas. (Network executives get irritated when
“the soaps” are referred to as such, preferring to
have them called “daytime continuing dramas.”)
Affiliates of ABC will certainly carry General Hospi-
tal. Affiliates of CBS will doubtless air The Young
and the Restless. Affiliates of NBC will carry Days
of Our Lives. The Hispanic stations follow the same
pattern, using first-run or rerun telenovelas in the
afternoons. These Spanish-language serials resemble
soaps in their close focus on individual emotional
ups and downs, but they have a much shorter life-
span (maybe a year or so) and contain a more obvi-
ous moral or educational point about families or
society.
The remaining stations in a market counterpro-
gram with various judges (Judge Judy, Judge Alex,
Judge David Young, Judge Joe Brown) and justices.
If the best court shows are not available, stations
usually go for talk such as Martha or The Ellen
Degeneres Show, or in urban markets for off-
network sitcoms such as Everybody Hates Chris or
Tyler Perry’s House of Payne. Otherwise, hundreds
and hundreds of episodes of old game and reality
shows are available as reruns, but talk dominates.
Needless to say, the afternoon is the most
programmatically stable and consistent daypart for
viewers, networks, and advertisers. Talk programs
have become a mainstay of daytime program sche-
dules, but the mortality rate for such syndicated talk
is high. Approximately 80 percent of all syndicated
shows that make it to broadcast do not make it to
year two. But once a program has established itself
as an audience favorite, it can stay on the air for
almost as long as the distributor wants. Even if a
popular host departs, the program can remain if
the format is popular (see 8.8). The daily syndicated
talk show Live with Regis and Kathie Lee enjoyed a
successful 12-year run and even survived the depar-
ture of Kathie Lee Gifford in 2000. Kelly Ripa
joined the program (retitled Live with Regis and
Kelly) in 2001, and the ratings increased. Then,
Regis finally retired in 2011, ending more than a
half-century on television.
Another popular daytime program category is
court shows, in which a real or ersatz judge hears
disputes and rules on them. The appeal of programs
8.8
Filling the Air with Talk
T
alk-show formats run the emotional spectrum. At one
extreme is the soufflé of nearly lighter-than-air content:
interviews with celebrities publicizing their latest movie,
television program or successful drug rehab (for example,
Live with Regis and Kelly). In the middle are decorating
and homemaking hints (Martha) or light humor with chat
(The Ellen Degeneres Show). At the other extreme is the
exploitative treatment of guests’ troubled psyches or rela-
tionships, where personal and interrogatory confrontations
delight or repel viewers (for example, Montel Williams,
Tyra Banks, Jerry Springer). Industry research indicates that
there is a vicarious appeal to these exploitative programs:
Viewers at home, no matter how troubled their own
personal circumstances, feel relieved that their own lives
are not as pitiful as those of the victimized guests who
are telling their tales of woe to Jerry Springer on national
television.
Why are talk shows so common (in both senses of the
word) in television syndication? The major reason is cost or,
more accurately, lack of cost. Syndicated talk programs are
relatively inexpensive to produce; in contrast to scripted
shows, talk programs are seemingly improvised. There are
no screenwriters, only low-paid “researchers”; there is no
expensive location shooting because all programs are shot
in studios; there is no cast of expensive stars, usually just
one or two hosts; and many hosts are paid less than “stars”
(but not Oprah—see 8.9) because the more relaxed
schedule allows them to take on other work after that day’s
program is taped. In contrast, the shooting schedule for a
scripted Hollywood program requires 12-hour days,
script rewrites, memorization of lines, laborious camera
setups and so on. The low cost threshold makes it easier for
a talk-show producer to adjust the content to appeal to
viewers’ changing tastes and interests.
CHAPTER 8 Television Station Programming Strategies
291
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
8.9
Oprah Winfrey
B
orn in Kosciusko, Mississippi, in 1954 to unmarried
teenagers, Oprah Winfrey lived the first six years of
her life in rural poverty with her grandmother. At the age of
6, she moved to Milwaukee’s inner city to live with her
mother who worked as a maid and was on welfare. She
was molested by her cousin, uncle and a family friend at
the age of 9 and became pregnant at the age of 14 but
lost the baby. She was then sent to live with her father in
Nashville, Tennessee.
This is not a very likely resume for one of the most
influential women in America and, according to Forbes,
the richest African-American of the twentieth century. As
the story goes, while attending a party at a ranch in
Montecito, California, she fell in love with the location
and wrote a check for $50 million to buy the 42-acre
estate. At the same time, according to urbanmecca.com,
she is the most philanthropic African-American of all
time. She has helped raise hundreds of millions to fight
AIDS in Africa and to fund a girls’ school in South
Africa. Her Angel Network alone has raised more than
$50 million dollars, and since she covers all adminis-
trative costs, 100 percent of donations go to charity.
But that is the widely publicized background of Orpah
Gail Winfrey. (Named after a person in the Bible’s
Book of Ruth, she found her name hard to pronounce
and spell, so she shifted the p and the r and became
Oprah.)
On the other hand, her bios say, her grandmother
taught her to read by the age of 3, she skipped two of
her earliest grades, and she won a scholarship to attend
Nicolet High School at age 13. In Tennessee, she was
an honor student, voted Most Popular Girl, placed second
in the nation in dramatic interpretation, secured a full
scholarship to Tennessee State University, and won the
Miss Black Tennessee beauty pageant. Her broadcast
career began at Tennessee State on a local radio station.
When she started to anchor the news at Nashville’s
WLAC-TV, she was not only the youngest anchor, but also
the first black woman anchor in the station’s history. In
1976 she moved to Baltimore to coanchor WJZ’s six
o’clock news, and then cohosted a local talk show and a
local version of Dialing for Dollars. In 1983 she moved to
Chicago to take over WLS’s low-rated morning talk show
AM Chicago. Within months the show had passed
Donahue and was Chicago’s highest-rated talk show.
Renamed The Oprah Winfrey Show in 1986, Oprah
decided to go national at a time when the experts “knew”
the country was not ready for a black woman host of a
talk show.
In the preceding year, the country had been intro-
duced to Oprah. Her role as Sofia in The Color Purple
won her a nomination for best supporting actress—but a
nationwide TV talk show host? Many of the stations that
picked up her syndicated program were last in their
markets with nothing to lose. Astoundingly, Oprah
quickly passed Phil Donahue, the reigning talk show
king, and soon had double his audience. Critics and
experts were perplexed, and most reacted with left-
handed compliments at best. Time magazine wrote,
“Few people would have bet on Oprah Winfrey’s swift
rise to host of the most popular talk show on TV. In a
field dominated by white males, she is a black female of
ample bulk.” A TV columnist referred to her as “a
roundhouse, a full-course meal, big, brassy, loud.” The
Wall Street Journal was marginally kinder when it
reported: “It’s a relief to see a gab-monger with a fond
but realistic assessment of her own cultural and religious
roots.” But it was Newsday who hit the nail on the head
when a columnist wrote, “Oprah Winfrey is sharper than
Donahue, wittier, more genuine, and far better attuned to
her audience if not the world.”7
Since that time Oprah has founded a successful
production company, cofounded the cable television
networks Oxygen and own, published two successful
magazines, produced a musical version of The Color
Purple, founded a website visited by 3 million people
monthly, cowritten five books, developed a channel for
satellite radio, and agreed to produce two new reality
shows for ABC. To quote Bill O’Reilly, “I mean this is a
woman that came from nothing to rise up to be the most
powerful woman, I think, in the world … and she’s done
it on her own.”8
William J. Adams, Ph.D.
Kansas State University
292
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
like Judge Judy is twofold: First, the personality or
character of the magistrate is entertaining; second,
the actions and reactions of the litigants are heart-
rending, comical or just plain irritating. In any case,
for societal good or ill, such programming makes for
compelling television. A good court program is one
part confrontational talk show (“Your Honor, he
stole my pen.” “I did not.” “He did, too, Your
Honor.” “Did not.”), one part game show (who
wins the ruling?) and one part (a small one) intro-
duction to the U.S. legal system. The overwhelming
litigiousness of our society is mirrored in the court
shows appearing on television as of the date of this
writing: The People’s Court, Divorce Court, Judge
Judy, Judge Jeanine Pirro, Swift Justice with Nancy
Grace, Judge Karen’s Court, Judge Alex, Judge
Browne, Judge Mathis and Cristina’s Court.
The “reality” program craze, kicked off by Sur-
vivor in 2000, spawned daytime progeny in the form
of “relationship” shows. Television has a proud leg-
acy of relationship shows: The Dating Game (1965),
its direct spinoff, The Newlywed Game (1966) and
Love Connection (1984) all drew on our natural curi-
osity about the personal lives of others. In the twenty-
first century, that has all changed. The relatively
sweet, innocent relationship programs of the past
that masqueraded as game shows have yielded to
voyeuristic hook-up segments, focusing less on locat-
ing Mr. Right and more on finding Mr. Right Now.
Afternoons fill with talk because it is absolutely
the cheapest programming, and the easiest format to
change if ratings are low. Occasionally, a station will
run a sitcom that failed in a higher-revenue time
period or a sitcom that has outlived its usefulness
and is being programmed purely for amortization
purposes.
Early Fringe (4 to 7 P.M.)
This daypart’s unusual name harkens back to the
first 25 years of commercial television, when this
time
period
immediately
preceded
prime
time
(which started an hour earlier than it does today).
Therefore, the hours before prime time were said
to be on the “fringe” of prime time and, thus, early
fringe.
From the networks’ perspectives, early fringe is a
low-priority time period, so program time is returned to
the local stations.9 From 4 to 7 P.M. (4 to 6 P.M. central/
mountain time), the networks rely on their affiliates to
schedule local news or syndicated talk. Industry
research has consistently demonstrated that the best
lead-in program for a newscast is … more news! This
is makes sense: Viewers who are predisposed toward
watching any one newscast are interested in news and
therefore more likely to watch an additional newscast
than would a viewer who doesn’t usually watch the
news. The results of this research happily match the
budgetary facts of life for news production: It’s expen-
sive to start a news operation but relatively economical
to expand it. Over the last 15 to 20 years, newscasts
have replaced expensive and unpredictable syndicated
programs at 5 P.M. In the largest markets—New York,
Los Angeles, Chicago and Philadelphia among them—
some newscasts start as early as 4 P.M.
A station can generate more advertising revenue
in early fringe than in prime time with a judicious
combination of programs. HUT levels during early
fringe, while not as high as those in prime time, nev-
ertheless average two-thirds of prime viewing. Espe-
cially during winter months, viewing spikes upward
once darkness falls. In this early fringe period, sta-
tion programming strategies generally have either a
news or an entertainment orientation. As the after-
noon progresses and older children return home
from school, followed by employed adults, the aver-
age age of the audience increases, and so does the
appeal of the programs. This technique of matching
program content to gradually aging demographics is
called aging an audience, and most stations, whether
news- or entertainment-oriented, follow this pattern
in the daypart (as the networks do in prime time).
The most content-malleable of programs, news-
casts vary their topics over the course of this daypart
to go along with the audience. The earlier afternoon
newscasts tend to be lighter on news, emphasizing
feature stories and afternoon rush-hour reports that
reflect the interests of the available audience. As the
afternoon wears on into early evening and more
paycheck-earners return home, the news becomes
harder-edged, with more news content and less
fluff.
CHAPTER 8 Television Station Programming Strategies
293
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
News stations surround their newscasts with
news-compatible programs. These programs might
be female-oriented programs such as Dr. Oz or Dr.
Phil or court shows like Judge Judy or People’s
Court. For years, Oprah Winfrey was a program-
ming juggernaut. Oprah was the center of the syndi-
cated
talk
world
until
her
decampment
from
broadcast to her own “OWN” (Oprah Winfrey Net-
work) in 2011 (see 8.9). Her program was scheduled
to devastating effect in most markets at 4 P.M. to
funnel viewers into the local newscast. Oprah’s rat-
ings frustrated competing stations’ attempts to get
ratings traction in the late afternoon. Only when a
program with an equally strong personality came to
the television screen was Oprah challenged.
Stations that decide not to compete head-
to-head against the Big Three affiliates’ newscasts
usually
opt
to
counterprogram—with
comedy.
While news attracts an audience that trends older,
with higher-than-average incomes and education—
by contrast, comedy audiences in early fringe are
younger, but they are also less affluent and less
well educated. One might find young-skewing sit-
coms or talk shows appearing at 4 or 5 P.M. (Tyra,
Wendy Williams), followed by slightly older or fam-
ily sitcoms opposite the news programs (Frasier,
Everybody Loves Raymond, Friends, The Simpsons,
King of Queens ), which in turn are followed by the
strongest sitcoms on the station’s schedule in access
(Seinfeld).
Whether a station is programming from a net-
work, syndicated or news/local source, it wants to
retain as many of its viewers as possible through
the sequencing of programs in its schedule. As
explained in Chapter 1, this is called audience
flow: The strategy of scheduling programs similar
enough in appeal that current viewers will stay
with the next program while new viewers tune in.
As the audience composition changes during the
day, the program lineup changes along with it. But
as 8.10 discusses, the strategy of seeking flow has
been eviserated by the growth of multiple program-
ming providers and mobile devices.
Prime Access (7 to 8 P.M.)
In television’s infancy, prime time started at 7 P.M.
(6
P.M. central/mountain time). As the industry
reached adolescence, most of television’s partici-
pants—stations,
advertisers,
producers—believed
that the networks exercised a stranglehold on both
the access to the airwaves and the pricing of adver-
tising and production. After years of lobbying pres-
sure, in 1970 the FCC imposed the Prime-Time
Access Rule (PTAR). In essence, PTAR prohibited
stations from running more than three hours of
8.10
Flowing Away
S
urveys show that about three-quarters of computer users
report watching at least one entire television program
online, and about half watch shows that they never saw
previously on television. Although men are usually thought
to be more technology- and adaptation-friendly, research
has shown that women equally report having watched
“television” programs online or on a mobile device.10
Flow is not as critical a concept as it once was. Before
cable brought multiple channels to the home screen and
before ubiquitous remote control handsets made channel
changing a push-button procedure, the viewer had to
physically rise from the sofa to change the channel. The
incentive to change the channel had to be greater than the
inertia to remain on the sofa. Once a channel was
selected, the viewer tended to stay with that station for the
rest of the evening, and programming executives obsessed
over the idea of program flow. Today, with hundreds of
viewing options available and the ability to change chan-
nels as easily as pushing a button, viewers can surf chan-
nels at whim. In addition, DVRs make saving programs or
stopping momentarily (without missing anything) easily
possible, and mobile media make industry-created
“schedules” a thing of the past. Flow is a fading
programming strategy even for stations, and the objective
of consumer retention now takes place in an infinitely
more challenging universe.
294
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
network-originated entertainment programming per
night during prime time. (Recall that the FCC can-
not regulate networks; the FCC’s writ extends only
to the stations it licenses. Networks are not licensed
and therefore cannot be regulated by the FCC. There
is a backdoor, however; the FCC can regulate the
stations—that is, the O&Os—that a network owns.)
The impulses behind PTAR were twofold, and
while the first was idealistic, the second was as subtle
as a blow to the head. The first impulse was to create
opportunities for stations to produce their own local
programs, given that their mandate from the FCC was
to operate in the public interest. This opening gave
stations access to prime time; hence the name of the
new daypart: prime access or just access.
The second impulse behind the rule was to cre-
ate a more level playing field between the following:
■The networks and their affiliates
■The networks and the advertising community
■The networks and the program production
community
After initially celebrating their victory over their
network partners, suddenly affiliates realized that
they had to come up with one hour of programming
each night. Not only was making programs a costly
time- and labor-intensive proposition, but it turned
out that the public as a whole wasn’t interested in
watching the second-rate programming that was
produced.
Into the breach came the program producers,
creating new programs for what formerly was
prime time. The viewers were there, the advertisers
were there, and the games and magazines appeared.
A handful of first-run syndicated shows (Wheel of
Fortune, Jeopardy!, Entertainment Tonight, Extra,
Access Hollywood, Inside Edition!) have dominated
the ratings in this time period for many years. The
magazine shows are hybrid programs consisting of
entertainment, show business and celebrity news
wrapped in a newscast format. The upside is that,
unlike sitcoms in syndication, which can be expen-
sive and risky, magazine programs are plentiful, and
the rough equivalence of supply to demand results in
stable purchase prices. Plus, entertainment talk and
celebrity news never seem to go out of style, which
means steady ratings and predictable advertising
purchases, an ideal scenario for a business character-
ized by novelty, fads and the fickleness of public
tastes. As a result, new shows have a tough time
breaking through. Demographics play a key role in
selecting programs, especially for stations that can-
not buy the top show but can counterprogram to a
different advertising target (for example, men aged
18 to 49).
Prime Time (8 to 11 P.M.)
This marquee time period for the networks is dis-
cussed in detail in Chapter 2. Viewing levels are
highest, industry prestige is highest and potential
advertising revenue is highest during this daypart,
and for Big Four affiliates, profit margins are higher
than in other dayparts. Affiliates preempt these most
visible of network-supplied dayparts carefully—only
with cause.
There is local programming in prime time; it is
news. FOX, CW and MNTV supply their affiliates
with only two hours of programming nightly, not
three as the older networks and Hispanic networks
do. FOX, in particular, compels its affiliates to pro-
gram local news immediately after two hours of
prime time—at 10 P.M. eastern/Pacific, 9 P.M. cen-
tral/mountain. This is not just a bold counterpro-
gramming move (news against three entertainment
choices): It allows FOX affiliates get a one-hour
jump on the affiliates’ late newscasts as well; many
early risers cannot stay awake past 11 P.M. to watch
news.
Many affiliates of the smaller networks, with
only a two-hour supply of network prime-time pro-
gramming, follow the path of FOX. News depart-
ments are a profit center for major broadcast
stations, and the facilities and output of a big news
department can be leased to a smaller station in the
market that lacks the budget to produce its own
newscast. Many MNTV and CW stations thus out-
source their newscasts, airing news produced for
them by larger stations (usually the local FOX,
CBS or NBC affiliates). These newscasts are not
CHAPTER 8 Television Station Programming Strategies
295
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
time competitive for the Big Three affiliates but run
at the earlier hour while these affiliates still carry
network shows. All of the advantages of newscasts
come together with an early late newscast.
■It counterprograms the broadcast and many cable
networks.
■It gives the station a one-hour jump on the affili-
ates’ local news.
■It gives access to broadcast-wary advertisers.
■It fulfills a station’s public service requirements.
■It gives a high-ratings track record in the time
period.
■It displays the station’s identity in a high-visibility
time period.
Another advantage, albeit more minor, that
comes from the news franchise is the occasional
practice of repeating the late-fringe newscast during
the overnight hours. While it might at first seem that
a news rerun is stale programming, there are viewers
who did not watch the original telecast, and the
“news-lite” content of much local news does not
detract from its timeliness. Also, there is no pro-
gramming cost for a repeat, unlike the cost (in dol-
lars or advertising time) of an outsourced program
from a syndicator.
Late Fringe (11 to 11:35 P.M.)
As dayparts are delineated to reflect the typical
behavior of the “average” viewer, a new daypart
comes into play at 11 P.M., as older viewers begin
getting ready for bed and younger viewers eventually
turn from the internet to television. Late fringe is
another example of the interconnectedness of the net-
work–affiliate relationship. The local affiliates of
ABC, CBS and NBC rely on their networks to pro-
vide popular programs during prime time, thus gen-
erating a strong lead-in audience for local late news.
Even though news viewing for any given station is
acknowledged to be a form of habit, viewers do not
always act like they are “supposed to.” Local affiliate
late-news ratings can spike up or head downward,
depending on the network lead-in. HUT levels,
however, start dropping precipitously around 11 P.M.
(10
P.M. central). The Big Three networks, after
three hours of prime programming, take a rest and
throw the time period back to their affiliates, which
invariably program their own local news.
With three hours of prime-time programming
momentum as a lead-in, late fringe is a key ratings
and revenue daypart for a Big Three affiliate. In the
early days of television, late news was regarded as
little more than an update of the early-fringe news-
cast, but in recent years, with the advent of the
24-hour news cycle and cost efficiencies in news
production
technology,
late-news
programs
are
regarded as separate programs and are important
profit centers.
As a revenue-enhancement technique, affiliates
of the Big Three networks stretch their newscasts
to 35 minutes in late fringe, creating another com-
mercial break. Going to all that trouble to add just
one more commercial break might not seem like a
dramatic addition, but over the course of one year,
the arithmetic compounds into large multiples. If
four commercials are placed in that extra pod five
days a the week, 52 weeks a year, that translates
into 1,040 extra commercials in a year. If a large-
market station charges only $2,000 for a commer-
cial, adding just one more break means $2,080,000
gross dollars in a year—with virtually no additional
costs to generate that revenue! An intelligent media
executive can turn a minor scheduling change into a
financial “force multiplier.”
Not everyone wants to watch the coverage of
human debasement that much of local news consists
of immediately before going to sleep, and some
viewers already watched an earlier newscast. These
viewers are likely customers for the many kinds of
entertainment programs. Stations not airing news
have a wide choice of syndicated programs to offer
viewers uninterested in news and information just
before going to sleep. Late fringe is a strong time
period for stations without a network feed; strange
as it seems, the strongest ones often outperform local
affiliate news. FOX-owned stations during the last
few years have adopted the strategy of acquiring
top-performing (and expensive) off-network sitcoms
as a counterpunch to what they see as the uniformity
of local news product. The Office and Seinfeld work
296
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
well here. Even stations with smaller program bud-
gets can select from a wide range of first-run barter
programs with appeal to some part of the demo-
graphic spectrum.
With the rise in the popularity of talk shows,
another effective programming move has been to
schedule a second, repeat telecast in late night for
viewers unable to watch the original telecast during
the day. Oprah, for example, used to be rerun late at
night in several large markets, including New York,
Los Angeles, Chicago and Philadelphia. Smaller sta-
tions also rerun daytime content, soaps, games and
sitcoms—or turn to older movies.
For the programming executive, one advantage
of late fringe over early fringe is that late fringe
reaches an elusive quarry—men (particularly young
men) aged 18 to 49 or 25 to 54. Men watch less
television
overall
than
women
or
children—
calculated either by hours spent watching or variety
of programs viewed. Young men, in particular, are
more likely to watch narrow categories of broadcast
programs: sports, some action-oriented movies and
action-oriented reality programs. In late fringe, how-
ever, men are available, and in addition to sports they
do watch comedies and risqué, first-run late-night
programs, making these shows ideal for stations
that choose to go after young men in that time
period.
Late Night (11:35 P.M. to 2 A.M.)
Affiliates of CBS and NBC virtually always clear
their network’s programming during this daypart—
The Tonight Show with Jay Leno, followed by Late
Night with Jimmy Fallon; and The Late Show with
David Letterman, followed by The Late Late Show
with Craig Ferguson. Counterprogramming with
more serious fare, ABC covers the newsbeat with
Nightline, followed by the entertainment of Jimmy
Kimmel Live. The overwhelming majority of Big
Three affiliates are content because these programs
attract larger audiences than they could lure with
first-run or off-network syndicated programs. More-
over, the program content is not as restricted as it is
in prime time because there is no measureable chil-
dren’s audience at such a late hour.
For the competing stations, late night is an ideal
time period to experiment with offbeat syndication
ideas. HUT levels are relatively low, so a failed idea
will not hurt much financially, and an unexpected
hit can generate a long-term occupant of a late-
night time period. Expectations are not very high;
there are disproportionately more men available,
and if a program is a hit, it can make money in the
daypart and perhaps even be moved to a daypart
that generates higher revenues.
Overnight (2 to 6 A.M.)
Networks do not program first-run entertainment
overnight because HUT levels are way too low to
justify the costs of daily production and distribution.
Thus, overnight becomes an arena for repeated tele-
casts of syndicated programs and repeated newscasts
as well as a sanctuary for failed programs or old
movies to fill the long predawn hours.
Although HUT levels are at their nadir (about
10 percent) and the time period is a low priority,
stations wisely do not completely ignore these
hours for three reasons. First, in the 24-hour
world, some viewers are always available at all
times, and advertisers can still be found to buy com-
mercial time, even if at very low rates. (Commercial
spots run in very cheap time periods are rather affec-
tionately called “a-dollar-a-holler.”) Even if an over-
night commercial costs as little as 20 dollars, a small
news station may air two dozen of them per hour or
100 per overnight period. Multiply $20 by 100
commercials a night, seven nights a week, 52
weeks a year, and the result is a not inconsiderable
$728,000 per year. Every time period counts, and
every dollar counts.
A second important reason for not ignoring over-
night is more tactical. If the station signs off the air,
the local cable company might use the now-empty
channel space to carry a service with content that
might alienate the broadcaster’s regular viewers
when they turn the television on the next day. The
content could be as mild as a home-shopping channel
or as spicy as an adult movie service. Suffice to say
that the station wants to keep control over all pro-
gramming coming from “its” cable position.
CHAPTER 8 Television Station Programming Strategies
297
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Third, if a station signs off, the few viewers who
were still watching at that hour will turn away to
another channel. When they turn the set on again,
it will be on a different channel. Why invite custo-
mers to sample a competitor? There is enough free
or cheap programming, combined with old movies,
to fill up the overnight schedule. All else failing,
another format ideally suited for late night is that
of
the
infamous
program
category
known
as
infomercials.
Between midnight and daybreak, little locally
produced news exists. The syndicated Poker After
Dark is as popular in the middle of the night as any-
thing could be. If stations want news overnight, they
either clear the overnight services offered by ABC
(World News Now) or CBS (Up to the Minute) or
go into the syndication marketplace to broadcast,
for example, CNN’s broadcast service or specialized
newscasts offered by other program vendors. Finan-
cial newscasts are becoming increasingly popular,
given the universal viewer interest in the subject of
money and the advertiser attraction that upscale
viewers represent.
Weekend Programming
On Saturdays and Sundays, networks readjust their
programming
away
from
their
heavy
viewers
(women) to attract the demographic that watches
most of its television during the weekend: men. Pre-
dictably, sports programming dominates the screen
on weekends, especially on affiliates of ABC, CBS,
FOX, NBC, TeleFutura, Telemundo and Univision.
Advertisers are willing to pay a premium rate to
attract men, who watch little in prime time but
account disproportionately for expenditures on big-
ticket items (automobiles, financial services, sporting
equipment) and specialty purchases (alcohol, men’s
personal care). Even with relatively low HUT levels,
affiliates find their adjacencies in top network sports
events enormously valuable. If a station’s network is
not providing sports programming, odds are that
the affiliate is counterprogramming with female-
oriented movies or similar syndicated fare, although
a few stations go after teens with weekly syndicated
dating programs.
Station Promotion
A station’s two constituencies, viewers and adverti-
sers, need to be continually reminded of the existence
of specific station programs. While the promotion
manager is ultimately responsible for promoting,
advertising and publicizing the schedule, the pro-
grammer’s intimate knowledge of program audiences
and viewing behavior may be invaluable for design-
ing on-air promotional announcements.
On-Air Promotion of Programs
Among all the mass media available for publicizing a
lineup, the station’s own air time is the most effec-
tive for reach- and cost-efficiency. The station’s loyal
viewers can easily be located in the market—they are
already watching the channel! The station can then
redeploy its unsold advertising time by scheduling
on-air promos. To ward off the sales manager’s
pressure to preempt important promos to place
last-minute commercial buys, stations will often
reserve a position for a promo, called a fixed spot.
Very generally speaking, these fixed spots are the
equivalent of a 30-second spot in each network
hour or a 30-second spot in each half hour of syndi-
cated programs. A promo might be dedicated to one
program or to two or more programs. The latter is
called a combination spot, or combo spot. With
sales pressure always on, stations favor combo
spots for two reasons: It is more efficient to promote
as many programs as possible in one space (or
amount of time), and using combo spots increases
the chances of program flow.
The trend in the last several years has been
toward fewer on-air promos. Since many former
independents have aligned with the newer networks,
much of their promotion comes from their networks
in prepackaged spots. Also, consolidation has com-
pelled corporate owners to eschew the long-term
strategy of brand-building in favor of running
more commercials (and thus fewer promos) to meet
short-term financial targets. Having said that, the
fundamental principles apply. The most practical
way to design an on-air promotion strategy is to
remember that “like goes to like.” In other words,
298
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
similar programs or programs with similar audi-
ences should be promoted toward each other. The
trade name for this technique is cross-promotion.
The station sets its priorities for on-air promotion
according to two criteria: the potential profitability
of the program and the importance of the program
to the station’s overall branding strategy.
One category of programs generally fits both
criteria: local news. Local news is one of the station’s
most significant profit centers, and because it is
produced at the station, this program genre totally
customizable in content, audience appeal and com-
mercial format. Moreover, news programs remind
viewers of other news programs; therefore it makes
sense for the 7
A.M. network news to contain a
promo for the 12 noon news. The noon news likely
will promote the next news program at 5 P.M. The
early-fringe
newscast
will
promote
the
next
newscast, and during prime time, there will likely
be several reminders to “stay tuned for the late
news.”
There are two general kinds of promos: topical
and image. For newscasts, a topical spot is a promo
about a specific story: the update on the day’s big-
gest trial, or a live shot of a traffic accident accom-
panied by a promise of coverage of the wreckers
hauling away the vehicles during the next newscast.
A topical promo is timely and story-specific. By con-
trast, an image spot for news should create a general
impression of the news product’s overall identity in
viewers’ minds. Typical image spots might be fast-
paced scenes of anchors in motion who are inter-
viewing people out in the field, prodding unseen
faces over the telephone to make dramatic revela-
tions, then racing to the news set with their hot stor-
ies just in time for the beginning of the program.
(Irrespective of whether this is what they actually
do, such promos are designed to create positive
images of experienced, professional journalists.)
Topicals and image spots are also the norm for
non-news program promotion. After the news pro-
mos are scheduled, the remaining promo time is allo-
cated according to station needs. Most often, the
lion’s share of promos belongs to the programs
that produce the highest revenues, for example,
those programs during early fringe and access.
Lastly, those programs “on next” usually get a
promo—a vestige of the time when the forces of pro-
gram flow were stronger than they are today.
Promotion in Other Media
Outside
media—radio,
newspapers,
billboards—
traditionally occupied a large proportion of the tele-
vision station’s advertising efforts. Over the last sev-
eral years, however, the downstream effects of
deregulation have created many unintended (and
unforeseen!) consequences, largely as a by-product
of concentrated media ownership. Today, when
companies can own up to eight radio stations in a
market, radio ad rates are too aggressive (meaning
very high) for television stations to afford the same
kind of saturation radio campaigns seen just a few
short years ago.
Cable, too, is starting to price itself out of the
broadcast advertising market, particularly in those
markets with a heavy concentration of ownership
or an aggressive interconnect (electronic connection
among a consortium of separately owned but geo-
graphically contiguous cable companies). Although
the price per commercial seems beguilingly low on
many channels, the number of viewers per cable pro-
gram is so small that it drives the cost-per-viewer
price inefficiently upward. In short, television is a
victim of its own attractiveness as an advertising
vehicle. Compared with other media, television
remains the most cost-efficient buy for both reach
and frequency, but that efficiency is declining.
One solution for most stations has been to
develop enticing internet sites that both supply
extended content for viewers who want more news
and program information, and promote the station’s
news, programming and overall image. The down-
side of internet promotion is that only viewers who
make the effort to go to the site are exposed to the
promotion, and network sites tend to be bigger lures
than local station sites—except in the area of local
weather and local events. Thus most web program-
mers place sidebars that promote entertainment
alongside key news items—to draw the user’s atten-
tion to additional content that is above and beyond
what drove the person to the site.
CHAPTER 8 Television Station Programming Strategies
299
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
What Lies Ahead for Stations
Predicting the future of the local television station busi-
ness has been difficult for the last decade. On one
hand, the technology is moving away from program-
source scarcity to program-source abundance. On the
other, parent media corporations continue to derive
predictable—if not outright superior—returns from
their affiliates.
Digital Technology
The number-one threat to over-the-air broadcasters
(as well as advertising-supported subscription televi-
sion) comes from technology that frees the viewer
from the addiction of passive viewing: DVRs, tablets,
smart phones and video-on-demand. Although these
technologies have done little harm to broadcast rev-
enues so far, their household penetration is climbing
swiftly. Losing control of viewers spells the eventual
end of commercial breaks as they presently exist
because DVRs allow viewers to “skip over” breaks
entirely.
The remarkable thing is that digital television
and DVR use is not diffusing slowly the way new
media technologies have in the past—instead, in a
period of less than three years, digital totally sup-
planted analog television. The newest generation of
converters allows for storing lots of recorded pro-
grams in memory and represents a marriage between
the computer and the television set, a plus for cable
and satellite viewers but not for broadcast stations.
On the other hand, the predominant motivation
to watch television is to relax. Given their history
with new technologies, it is clear that much of the
American audience is unwilling to read any instruc-
tions, learn any sequences or steps, or wait for their
TV set’s operating system to boot up. The safe money
says that new media innovations should bend over
backward to accommodate loyal viewers in such a
way that they won’t need to know about bandwidths
or protocols—so they can swim in the digital stream
without understanding it. All of this is predicated on
the effective design of very smart converters and their
remote controls, of course, and because there are so
many ifs, broadcasters must watch and worry.
Competing Newscasts
It is an axiom of the business that news will continue
to be a mainstay of television programming into the
indefinite future. Television’s eternal appeal is that it
is a “live” medium. No other medium has the imme-
diacy of television. Increasingly sophisticated and
miniaturized technologies give stations a level of
production quality and time-responsiveness that
were unimaginable only a few short years ago.
The main challenge will be competition, not just
at the local level—where competitors are expanding
and upgrading their news product—but also from
competing industries jumping into the news busi-
ness. One of the viewer benefits arising (albeit indi-
rectly) out of the massive consolidations in cable
ownership in the 1990s is that many cable franchises
in large markets now offer around-the-clock local
news channels of their own (such as News 12 Long
Island and many others; see Chapter 9). To varying
degrees, these local news channels are like mini-
CNNs. They represent a serious threat to the domi-
nance of broadcasting as a local medium. Their lack
of network commitments means they can cover
ongoing local stories as they unfold during the day,
whereas broadcasters usually are forced to wait until
their regularly scheduled newscasts.
Moreover and maybe worse, local cable news
shows can undercut the relatively high advertising
rates of broadcast newscasts by offering more com-
mercial availabilities, lower spot rates and more flex-
ible packaging opportunities to local advertisers.
What is particularly grating to affiliates is that
some of these national and local news outlets are
owned by their own network partners! (For exam-
ple, News Corp. owns Fox News Channel as well as
the FOX Broadcasting Network; Time Warner owns
CNN as well as New York 1 News.)
Other emerging competitors are the internet and
mobile media. Use of the internet for news program-
ming offers the ultimate of both extremes: global
instantaneous distribution and individualized news
products for the consumer. At present, the web’s
news capability rests largely in distributing news
that was originally generated for television or print
and then was adapted for the internet, accompanied
300
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
by mountains of professional and amateur blogging.
It was thought that true news competition would
wait until computers were as easy to use and as plen-
tiful as television sets, but then Wi-Fi proliferated,
making computers mobile. People began accessing
news from practically anywhere they could open a
portable computer. Next, cellphones, personal assis-
tants (Blackberrys) and music players added video to
their equipment, meaning internet access could be
truly anywhere, anytime, if a bit reduced in size.
At this writing, the major media companies are
extending themselves into all these new media, using
their branding power to stake claims to content
areas in an attempt to follow the audience wherever
it goes. Although internet-generated news products
are not yet profit centers for their participants, the
ultimate profits and marketing advantages of these
new media are too potentially enormous to be
ignored, and that leaves broadcasters nervous.
Channel Migration
As of February 19, 2009, all analog television trans-
mission stopped, and television stations began send-
ing
digital
signals.
The
largest
stations
(and
networks) broadcast now in high definition—which
uses the entire allotted bandwidth—but many sta-
tions have chosen standard definition with the
option of multiplexing additional signals. So far,
the options for paid use of that extra bandwidth
are scarce, but it was expected to be the savior: to
become a revenue stream that would cover the enor-
mous cost of digitalizing station facilities. But the
FCC will eventually require some number of hours
of HDTV (rather sooner than later) and is likely to
limit
reselling
or
reusing
channel
bandwidth.
Because of pressure from other users of the airwaves,
the FCC may also reclaim bandwidth resources from
stations long before many are ready to give them up.
The Mutation of Broadcasting
Although broadcasting has traditionally been a free
service, the American consumer is increasingly
becoming accustomed to paying for media. Smaller
companies
owning
stations
in
markets
with
network-owned stations but not producing pro-
grams themselves face heavy leverage and conse-
quent pressure to sell to the larger companies. The
traditional local orientation of broadcasting has
begun to flicker, to be rekindled by industries that
have economies of scale on their sides: cable and
the internet. These competitors now provide not
only local service but also increasingly customized
entertainment
and
news
content
to
individual
consumers.
Broadcasting of some sort will stay around
because it is universal and free, which is in the
nation’s best interest, but the number of stations
per market is likely to fall drastically in another
decade or so. For the immediate future, however,
local broadcasting will remain a highly profitable
business, although its owners are likely to squeeze
every dollar of profit they can from it now.
Nonetheless, the maturation of the television
industry means that the original business model of
distant networks and local affiliates is disintegrating.
Competition from newer media means that free tele-
vision has to resign itself to no longer being the big-
gest and gaudiest float in the television parade.
Video entertainment has become global, instanta-
neous and customizable in a way unimaginable just
one generation ago. Local stations were once the
sole gatekeepers, and now they survive by fitting
themselves into those niches in which they can be
competitive.
Despite the fears of media Cassandras who
prognosticate the end of broadcasting, however, his-
tory tells us otherwise: Television did not kill off the
movie industry, FM radio did not eliminate AM,
cable
did
not
eliminate
local
broadcast,
and
satellite-delivered television did not defeat cable.
Instead, each industry had to adapt itself to the
new challenge. Like many businesses, broadcasting
is organic: It expands, contracts, mutates into differ-
ent forms. Unlike many businesses, broadcasting is a
fascinating mix of technology, creativity and com-
merce. The cumulative impacts of computers, digital
technology and regulatory changes will be strong
but not fatal.
CHAPTER 8 Television Station Programming Strategies
301
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Notes
1. This disproportionate amount of discussion of FOX’s
raid indicates the level of root-and-branch disruption that
FOX caused in the relatively calm of an oligopoly network
landscape. It was as if a starter’s gun had fired, and all
networks and affiliates scrambled for new partners.
Murdoch’s audacity created turbulence, which distracted
his competitors, thus leveling the playing field for him. The
raid gave FOX a chance to be sampled by new viewers
and, not incidentally, to deeply wound a major competi-
tor. If there was any doubt about Murdoch’s intentions
when he started his network in the 1980s, it was now clear
that the game was being played for keeps. And he did it
again after CBS and Time Warner closed UPN and the WB
and cozied up to form the CW. FOX’s left-out stations got
their own competing network, MNTV.
2. NSI, 2/14-2/20/11, as cited in TV News Check
(tvnewscheck.com).
3. For an unsurpassed anthology of hilarious, believe-it-
or-not stories of television during its first decades, read
The Box: An Oral History of Television 1920–1960 by
Jeff Kisseloff (Viking Press, 1995). The book is currently
out of print, so try a library.
4. Murrow (1908 to 1965) was one of the earliest broad-
cast journalists to achieve professional notoriety and, later,
celebrity. Murrow joined the CBS Radio Network in 1935
and was sent to Europe in 1937. He is most remembered
for his on-scene reporting of harrowing Nazi Luftwaffe
bombing raids in London during World War II. Morrow
moved to television after the war. His onscreen news
career notched highs (with his award-winning documen-
tary series See It Now) and lows (he hosted Person to
Person, an early personality-interview program, during
which Murrow often looked physically stricken to be
interviewing celebrities rather than newsmakers).
5. Federal Communications Commission, Information
Needs of Communities: The Changing Media Landscape
in a Broadband Age, 2011.
6. Information from 2011 Ownership Survey and Trend
Report, as cited in TV News Check, June 6, 2011.
7. In their affiliate incarnations, however, stations are
somewhat hamstrung because they are legally committed
to air the programs their networks distribute and must
work around those. Moreover, when stations are located
in more socially traditional parts of the country, and a
network program is “too cool for the room” (that is, has
content inappropriate for the audience), the stations still
must clear it—in the absence of an overwhelmingly com-
pelling reason that justifies preemption (and the outlay for
a substitute show).
8. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OprahWinfrey, p. 2,
for these quotes.
9. Early fringe is outside prime time, so the networks
technically could fill it like the other parts of daytime, but
good luck getting this profitable time back from the
stations!
10. http://mediamatters.org/items/200610240003, 17
October 2006.
302
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A P T E R9
Basic and Premium
Subscription Programming
Susan Tyler Eastman and Douglas A. Ferguson
Chapter Outline
Competing Content Networks
The Proliferating
Nonbroadcast World
Subscribers by Channel
Foundation and Niche
Subscription Services
Types of Premium Subscription
Services
Video-On-Demand
Competition among Program
Services
Selecting Strategies
Economics and Technology
Program Types
Genres on Advertising-Supported
Channels
Genres on Premium Channels
Launching a Network
Scheduling Strategies
Basic Channel Scheduling
Premium Channel Scheduling
Evaluating Apples
and Bananas
Comparison Problems
Nonbroadcast Audience
Measurement
The Many Channels
Major Subscription Networks
Premium Networks
Hyping Subscription
Networks
Audio Services on Cable
Twisting Paths for the
Future
Notes
303
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C
able content networks are popping up every-
where. Once exclusive to cable systems, cable
networks are now carried not just by satellite and tele-
phone companies, but also appear online. You can
watch MTV on your tablet, if you spring for the
app. Many companies that own cable program net-
works first operated local cable systems in the United
States but moved into content ownership as the cable
installation business matured. Now the owners of
content networks sell the carriage rights to competi-
tors. Why would they do that? The answers are chan-
nel proliferation, government regulation and need for
revenue.
Competing Content Networks
Subscription content networks is an overall term
that encompasses all kinds of television program
services requiring fees to subscribe and distinguishes
them from the media distribution services (MVPDs).
The subscription networks traditionally provide pro-
grams organized in 24-hour channels that come by
satellite to the MVPDs who in turn put them onto
their wires or beam them out wirelessly. Those
structured networks are usually accompanied by
access to unstructured on-demand programming.
The MVPDs pay monthly fees to include specific
subscription networks on their services and charge
their subscribers enough to cover those fees (see
Chapter 3). The subsets of basic cable networks
and premium cable networks refer to those with
and without advertising, respectively (although a
very few “basic” networks don’t have ads), plus
premium networks usually require extra subscrip-
tion fees.
Commonly called cable networks to distinguish
them from broadcast networks (a distinction largely
irrelevant to viewers but crucial to owners), a huge-
seeming variety of subscription networks appear on
the two satellite services, on the various teleco ser-
vices, and online sites carrying web series and movies,
as well as in very different arrangements and selec-
tions on the hundreds of U.S. cable systems. Many
also appear in some variation on distribution systems
in other countries. Of course, the 8 percent of U.S.
households still receiving only over-the-air signals (if
without internet access) cannot see any subscription
networks—only local broadcast stations.
Some companies that provide nationwide sub-
scription programming have adopted the word net-
work in their names, trumpeting that they possess
the primary characteristics of a big network and
likening themselves to the long-familiar broadcast
networks. Being a network lends prestige while
invoking images of great size and the likelihood of
subsidiary services. Others use the word channel.
Such program services are saying that they occupy
a full channel on television sets (no sharing) and that
they are centralized; that they distribute simulta-
neous programming, carry advertisements and sell
adjacencies (if advertiser-supported), and that they
are retransmitted to homes via MVPD services.
Whatever a content service is called and however it
is delivered, all are generically subscription (or
cable) content networks.
Totaling maybe 100 in the 1990s, the number
of distinct subscription networks had expanded
to more than 200 (or perhaps 300) by first decade
of the 2000s. Enumerating networks, however,
depends on what you include and exclude (see
9.1). One problem is differentiating between parent
companies, networks and channels. NBCUniversal
(itself owned by MVPD Comcast) owns the NBC
broadcast network as well as Telemundo, and they
both appear on cable systems, but NBC appears via
a local affiliated station and so may Telemundo (and
thus their carriage as stations is legally required), but
in markets with no local Telemundo affiliate, the
network can appear as a cable channel. (Generally,
broadcasters
avoid
the
term
“cable
networks”
because they come under different FCC rules than
those applying to broadcast networks). But that’s
not the whole picture: NBCUniversal owns all or
part of several subscription channels, including
USA Network (which is solely a cable network),
Bravo, Syfy, Chiller, Oxygen and Sleuth, while par-
ent Comcast also owns E!: Entertainment and
FEARNet. Comcast systems may also carry a dedi-
cated “Comcast Channel” that promotes the net-
work itself. In addition, NBCUniversal also owns
Universal HD, a hi-def only channel. The industry
304
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
counts all these channels separately for purposes of
Nielsen ratings. But then there are other kinds of
channel multiplication.
The Proliferating Nonbroadcast
World
Technical advances make possible both duplication
and splintering of various kinds. First, fiber technology
has such great capacity that it readily permits simulta-
neous distribution of the same channel three ways:
analog, digital and HD, so all established broadcast
and cable networks were duplicated in three formats
until recently. Even digital-only cable networks can
exist in both standard digital and HD. And 3D is com-
ing, necessitating another feed of each network,
although analog will soon drop away completely.
Are TNT and TNT HD one or two networks? Tech-
nically, they take up two bandwidth channels.
Second, fiber’s immense capacity has led estab-
lished networks to create or buy up digital niche
channels to see what attracts audiences. A&E Tele-
vision Networks, for example, owns the classic Bio
(formerly Biography) and History channels, but
acquired or invented the digital Crime & Investiga-
tion Network, History en Espanol and Military His-
tory Channel. Many digital niche channels, such as
Jewelry TV, Cooking Channel and Military History
Channel, do not yet exist in HD, so some have two
versions and others just one.
Third, digital fiber can easily carry multiplexed
signals, so several digital networks split their pro-
gramming into separate virtual channels—each carry-
ing
a
rotating
sliver
of
programming
such
as
thematically chosen movies—called splinter channels.
Did you know there are 17 versions of Showtime?
Not only are there separate channels for Showtime,
Showtime 2, Showtime Showcase, Showtime Beyond,
Showtime Extreme, Showtime Family Zone, Show-
time Next and Showtime Women, but each comes
in East and West (time zone feeds). Plus there is
Showtime On Demand. And all or some feeds can
be available on a single MVPD (FiOS carries all 17).
Do 17 channels comprise just a single premium
network—or should they be counted as 17 separate
ones? The industry usually counts Showtime as one,
because it doesn’t care: there’s no advertising. Non-
movie channels also split into multiple content channels
targeting different audiences: National Geographic
Channel also comes with National Geographic Wild,
but they are usually counted as two.
Fourth, there are East and West time zone feeds
for the premium networks, and on some MVPDs
subscribers can watch either feed, such as Starz
Edge and Starz Edge West or HBO Signature or
HBO Signature West. In Washington, D.C., politi-
cians like to be able to see what is being fed in
their home towns so all feeds appear there.
Fifth, there are foreign language feeds of Ameri-
can channels for citizens who want their U.S. televi-
sion in another language (as distinct from all the
imported
foreign-language
networks
from
other
countries). CNN comes in Spanish, as does Fox
Sports, Discovery, Playboy, Toon Disney and others.
Some foreign language feeds consist of audio overlays
and subtitles; others are separate splinter channels.
And finally, some smaller broadcast networks
duplicate themselves as cable channels, even though
one of their broadcast affiliates may also appear as a
station filling a channel on the same MVPD. Ion
Television does this, presumably to increase national
viewing of its infomercials.
Subscribers by Channel
At least 200 subscription television networks exist,
and of those, nearly half reach a minimum of
50 million U.S. homes, making those the ones on
which most advertisers will pay to place commercial
spots. The top 30 of those networks, such as TBS,
ESPN, USA, The Food Network, The Weather
Channel, Discovery, Nickelodeon and the others
listed in 9.1, have become household words because
they appear on virtually every cable system in the
United States and on both satellite and the main
telco systems. Each of the top 30 has more than
100 million U.S. subscribers, and many are closing
in on 200 million worldwide. Since there are only
about 116 million TV households in America and
of those, 107 million (92 percent) subscribe to
CHAPTER 9 Basic and Premium Subscription Programming
305
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
some kind of multichannel system, reaching 100 mil-
lion is not far from reaching nearly everybody.
Moreover, the numbers in 9.1 are for both cable
and satellite but do not include telco subscribers or
other small services (see 9.2).
Foundation and Niche Subscription
Services
National subscription networks can be differentiated
in terms of how established they are and whom they
target. Foundation networks—generally the earliest,
most firmly established, and most popular entries
in the field—reach about a 100 million U.S. sub-
scriber homes each via cable/satco/telco or other
MVPDs. The very largest (TBS, the Weather Chan-
nel, Discovery, Nickelodeon, CNN and ESPN) are
in hundreds of millions homes worldwide. About
25 subscription channels are considered the founda-
tion networks.
The second broad group consists of the niche or
theme networks. Some of major networks began life
as theme networks and grew into channels that serve
more than a niche. Comedy Central is an example of a
theme network that became a foundation network.
When a cable network gets into that Top 25 list year
after year, it is firmly established. If a new cable, satellite
9.1
Top 30 Cable Programming Networks,
2012 (cable and satellite only)
Services
Subscribers
TBS
105,400,000
ESPN/ESPN HD
104,400,000
USA
104,400,000
Food Network
104,200,000
HGTV
103,900,000
ESPN2
103,800,000
Weather Channel
103,900,000
TLC
103,800,000
CNN
103,800,000
Discovery Channel
103,700,000
Nickelodeon/Nick
103,600,000
FOX News
103,600,000
TNT
103,600,000
Spike TV
103,600,000
MTV
103,400,000
VH1
102,800,000
Lifetime Television
102,700,000
Disney Channel
102,700,000
TV Land
102,600,000
A&E
102,300,000
CSPAN
102,100,000
E! Entertainment
101,900,000
FX Network
101,800,000
Syfy
101,500,000
Comedy Central
101,400,000
Cartoon Network
101,200,000
History
101,100,000
CNBC
100,900,000
ABC Family Channel
100,900,000
Travel Channel
100,200,000*
*Animal Plant, AMC and MSNBC are close behind with 99 million
and 98 million subs.
2012 Estimates from SLN Kagan, 2011, and Nielsen Media
Research, Inc., 2011.
9.2
Multichannel Reach
T
he cable industry no longer publishes the precise
percentages of viewers who receive the cable net-
works over alternate delivery systems (ADS), perhaps
because terrestrial competitors to cable are growing
while cable system penetration has halted expansion.
Other published sources, such as the FCC, tend to be
somewhat out of date. As a consequence, the most
accurate subscriber information (as in 9.1) comes from
Nielsen ratings and combines cable and satellite but
omits AT&T and Verizon, other smaller competitors and
online subscribers.
As was pointed out in Chapter 3, overall cable pen-
etration of the U.S. TV households has stayed almost
stable for a decade at nearly two-thirds (close to 66 per-
cent) of multichannel households: that’s 70 million
households subscribing to cable. Penetration from ser-
vices such as DirecTV and DISH has levelled at about
30 percent of multichannel homes (another 32 million
subscribers), and AT&T and Verizon currently account for
about 5 percent more (another 5+ million subscribers).
306
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
or telephone system wants to offer potential subscribers
at least one of every kind of channel, it will begin by
seeking to license all the foundation networks.
True niche networks usually either have a single
program content type (all music, all shopping, all
travel) or target a defined demographic group (just
children, just Spanish speakers—groups numbering
in the tens of millions) using a mix of program
types. SOAPnet, Golf Channel, VERSUS, SPEED,
Sundance Channel, the Travel Channel and BET
are niche networks.
Currently, the hot type of niche network is the
branded subniche network, which is the product of
further specialization within a theme network by a
well-known media company. Investigation Discov-
ery is a clear example. Subniche channels are man-
aged as a group and owned by one parent company
or network. Most notably, Discovery Communica-
tions, which operates the Discovery Channel (foun-
dation) and TLC (formerly The Learning Channel)
launched several branded subniche services (Discov-
ery Health, Discovery Science, Discovery Kids, Dis-
covery Times, Discovery Home, Discovery Wings
and so on), all using the Discovery name. Other net-
works, such as A&E and Nickelodeon followed Dis-
covery’s lead, developing additional channels. To
Lifetime, A&E added Lifetime Real Women; to the
classic Nickelodeon, the company added Nick Jr.,
Nick 2, Nicktoons and TeenNick. (Once sufficiently
established, instead of more splintering, Discovery
changed several channel names to broaden or clarify
content: Wings became The Military Channel; Kids
became The Hub for teens, Science lost the word
Discovery in its name, Health became Fit & Health
and so on.)
Subniche services are made possible by cheaper
satellite time resulting from digital compression.
As outlined in Chapter 3, digital compression en-
courages a process called multiplexing, distributing
several different channels simultaneously, usually 12
digital channels squeezed onto the bandwidth for-
merly used by one old analog channel. In some
cases, the “new” services run the same programs as
the main network; they are merely scheduled at dif-
ferent times. In other cases, programs are subdivided
by target audience, and each channel focuses on one
target audience. The splintering phenomenon occurs
particularly in premium services: HBO now provides
programming for nine subniche channels: HBO2,
HBO Signature, HBO Family, HBO Comedy, HBO
Zone, HBO Latino, HBO on Demand, HBO Home
Satellite and HBO HDTV. In addition to the 17
Showtimes and 9 HBOs, there are 14 different
Encores.
As the spread of newer technologies permits
greater proliferation of channels, the strategy of
channel spinoffs (into subniches) is becoming more
commonplace. For example, in addition to FX, Fox
spun off a new branded business news channel
called Fox News Channel (digital and HD) and a
movie spinoff, Fox Movie Channel. Even more
widely known are its multiple sports channels (Fox
College Atlantic/Central/Pacific, Fox Soccer Channel
and FSN Prime Ticket).
Microniche networks target even more special-
ized population subgroups, including the hearing-
impaired viewers and foreign-language speakers.
Some of these have the same content as another
channel but include sign language and subtitles or
are in another language. Others have a lot of origi-
nal programming. While Spanish-language itself is
hardly a subniche these days, channels appealing to
viewers with a Latino, or Columbian or Mexican or
Caribbean orientation constitute microniches. For
example, Sur Mexico, Sur Peru, ESPN Deportes,
Canal Sur, Bandamaz and others appear on U.S.
cable systems. In Chicago and Detroit, channels in
other language groups such as Polish or Armenian
require microniche channels. Satellites and cable
carry the Filipino Channel and AZN (targeting
Asians). Then there’s Kung Fu HD, MOJO, Rave
HD, Rush HD, Treasure HD, and Water Channel.
All this is probably more than you wanted to know!
Some microniches provide programming that is
a further differentiation of a niche service (women’s
sports, independent films) and thus are both narrow
in content and targeted in audience. As streaming
video opportunities expanded via broadband inter-
net connections (see Chapter 4), a few of these
microniche
channels
(in
particular,
TRIO
and
Lime) shuttered their cable/satellite channels and
moved onto the web.
CHAPTER 9 Basic and Premium Subscription Programming
307
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Virtually all basic subscription networks carry
advertising; the smaller ones carry as much as they
can get. A very few services, notably C-SPAN,
C-SPAN 2 and C-SPAN 3, are basic cable networks
but without advertising. Because their content con-
sists largely of government meetings, hearings and
discussion shows on which elected and appointed
government officials appear, they are offered as a
noncommercial public service on the lowest level of
subscription services (in hopes of forestalling gov-
ernment regulation of commercial programming).
The C-SPAN group is owned by the parent compa-
nies of several large cable networks, but also carried
by the satcos and telcos.
Types of Premium Subscription
Services
Premium services is an umbrella term for a group of
specialized entertainment services that provide special
or “premium” programming to about 70 million U.S.
cable, satellite or telco subscribers who pay additional
fees above the basic MVPD service cost. Premium
services primarily offer unedited movies and original
productions in a commercial-free format.
Premium movie and sports channels number
about 15, not counting their splinter services. The
five with the largest number of subscribers are
HBO, Encore, Showtime, Starz!, Max (Cinemax)
and The Movie Channel. Another five, HDNet,
Flix, Epix, Turner Classic Movies and The Sundance
Channel, also reach large audiences. Still others are
mostly on-demand channels or in limited distribu-
tion. Then there’s Netflix, described in detail in
Chapter 4, which is certainly a direct competitor to
all pay television channels.
Details on the number of premium subscribers
are generally not available, largely because the abso-
lute number of pay subscribers also began declining
in the early 2000s (so the companies keep the totals
secret). We do know that the total number of sub-
scriptions to the collective top five had reached 70 mil-
lion by 2008 and has stayed largely flat since. Of
those, HBO has about 30 million. Its problem is
that competitor Netflix had about 23 million subscri-
bers as of 2011, but its subscribership was continuing
to grow. (At any rate, not even HBO has the penetra-
tion of any of the top 25 basic cable networks who
reach around a 100 million subscribers each.)
The premium television field has long had three
distinct components:
1.
Pay-cable networks, which charge viewers a
monthly subscription “premium” (traditional pay)
2.
Pay-per-view (PPV) services, which charge on a
program-by-program basis
3.
Video-on-demand (VOD) services, which usu-
ally charge per-program-viewed, similar to PPV,
and are available in several subvarieties or
formats, but that offer more viewer control
and often DVR-like functionality
The key difference to consumers is that classic
premium cable means buying a group of movies over
a month (pay-per-month), whereas PPV and VOD
mean purchasing just one program at a time (pay-
per-use). One difference is that PPV normally con-
sists of movies while VOD includes a huge body of
television programs of all kinds.
This chapter differentiates the services by payment
method (by month or by use), but at the time of this
writing, the distinctions among them are becoming
very fluid. Many premium services of the pay-
per-month variety are being relabeled subscription-
video-on-demand (SVOD), and many pay-per-view
services have switched to VOD as systems digitized.
Video-On-Demand
PPV was once thought to be the “killer application”
of cable, but the industry had turned to video-
on-demand in the early 2000s, and VOD households
have grown along with digitalization. Just to confuse
us all, the video-on-demand name is currently
applied to four somewhat different formats:
1.
VOD, the true digital kind, which delivers
movies or programs as the consumer asks for
them, for a per-program fee
2.
FVOD (Free-VOD), where some content is
available without charge to entice subscribers
to become more comfortable with the idea of
on-demand programming
308
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3.
SVOD (Subscription-VOD), where a separate
monthly fee is charged (for example, Showtime
on Demand and HBO on Demand) but the
movies come as requested over the month
4.
Download-to-own, an internet venue that
relies on broadband connections but offers
the same programming as basic and premium
cable channels
One important limitation to on-demand is that
neither all movies nor all TV programs are available.
The movie studios and television program distribu-
tors hold back many shows, requiring each MVPD
to negotiate a selection of programs for its VOD ser-
vice. If a show originally had advertising in it, those
ads transfer to VOD, expanding the reach of those
messages. While shows from all four networks may
appear on the largest on-demand services, only some
of their programs are included. For three reasons,
major MVPDs constantly seek to expand and
update their television and movie listings. First, an
attractive on-demand lineup forestalls DVR use, and
second, carrying the current hits keeps viewers from
turning to competing online streaming services. A
third reason is that MVPDs are able to insert differ-
ent commercials into television program breaks.
This is a valuable source of revenue because the
ads can be targeted to specific groups of subscribers.
One programming problem is that many network
executives fear that feeding strong product to VOD
will cannibalize their main networks and give them
little in return. At the same time, MVPDs press hard
to persuade networks to move hit series to their
VOD menus, thus competing with Netflix for the
valuable replays.
Systems that charge for VOD find subscriber
resistance to paying twice for the same program.
Digital and HD subscribers already pay for all chan-
nels in their monthly bills. For example, the cable
operator charges about $.50 per month for MTV
(hidden in the total bill), which includes The Real
World, so why would viewers want to pay again
for that show on VOD?
Convenience, however, is the real selling factor
because on-demand comes whenever the subscriber
wants it. Free VOD has great appeal for children
and teens who like watching many episodes of
favorite series or some sport at one time and don’t
care if they are “old” or repeats. Cable operators
expect VOD to be the kind of service to which view-
ers are strongly attracted, once they try it.
From the standpoint of the end-user’s experi-
ence, true VOD operates largely the same as most
MVPDs: recorded programs are stored in DVRs,
with play, pause, stop, fast-forward and rewind
capabilities, but fast-forward may be disabled in
key VOD shows to prevent skipping commercials.
Usually viewers can watch all or part of any movies
as often as they wish during a 24- or 36-hour period.
One of the major reasons for implementing on-
demand is to cut down on churn (subscribers who
start and stop their premium subscriptions faster
than the network would prefer, a process that adds
to the business costs). The industry’s assumption is
that if more options and more conveniences are
available to consumers, they will be more likely to
continue paying for a service.
Internet
services
such
as
CinemaNow
and
Movielink offer internet-based VOD services, as
does Netflix (see Chapter 4). The days when VOD
meant only “cable” are long gone, and the internet
may win this battle eventually, as consumers learn to
turn to their computer or tablet screens for television
as readily as to large HD screens.
Comcast has been able to leverage its full or
part ownership of such niche networks as Home &
Garden Television, Food Network, Cartoon Net-
work, the History Channel and E! Entertainment
Television to create demand for VOD. Even sports
networks associated with the NBA and the NFL
make older game replays and highlights available
on VOD, and multicultural programming is particu-
larly popular, especially Hispanic programs (see
Time Warner’s FVOD in 9.3). FVOD is now viewed
enough that Nielsen already measures aggregate lin-
ear cable networks separately from VOD viewership
of individual programs. VOD revenue today is in the
billions.
With SVOD, subscribers may get the best of
both worlds for the same subscription price. They
get (1) a packaged “live” service for watching highly
promoted first telecasts of premium programming
CHAPTER 9 Basic and Premium Subscription Programming
309
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
and (2) using a different distribution system, a video-
on-demand version of the same programs. The pack-
aged service is like a conventional real-time linear
network where scheduling is important. The VOD
version has two methods of delivery, depending on
the cable operator. The first method warehouses the
programs on a central video server located at the
headend building of the cable provider and makes
the content available whenever the viewer requests
it. Niche or “lightly viewed” networks are consid-
ered the best for early implementations of switched
digital video, a relatively new technology that directs
channels only to customers who want to view them
at that time. The second system relies on decentra-
lized storage, housed in set-top boxes equipped with
high-capacity disk storage, if viewers have DVR
equipment. The operator downloads the material,
where it can be retrieved on demand. Either way,
viewers can watch what they want, when they
want it, for only a monthly fee. They can choose to
watch the first-available “live” version or choose
another time to view a replay.
If all these kinds of VOD sound complicated, it
is because this decade is the shakeout period in
which new delivery and reception technologies are
battling to win. Because cable subscribers are more
accustomed to paying monthly for tiers of services
than paying for each use, SVOD successfully bridges
the two models. Anyone who has had the option of
paying a single price for entry to all amusement rides
at a county fair versus a per-ride cost understands
the appeal of SVOD over VOD, even when it is
called “free.”
Services such as HBO that cling to the premium
pay-per-month model use SVOD as a way to
enhance the value of their programming. Disney
(which owns ABC Family, ESPN, the Disney Chan-
nel and other services) is reluctant to give away the
added value of its programs by making them avail-
able on demand, so it has resisted SVOD. At the
other end of the spectrum, World Wrestling Enter-
tainment launched WWE 24/7 as an SVOD service
to leverage its 75,000 hours of professional wres-
tling. As long as subscribers are willing to pay an
additional $4.95 or so a month for SVOD access
to basic channels, such channels will resist the
trend toward pay-per-use, the true VOD. Having
unpredictable amounts of revenue is what under-
standably scares content suppliers.
Furthermore, on-demand is not limited to cable,
satellite and telephone television. Even conventional
broadcasting stations can be part of this brave new
world through online services, second channels nego-
tiated from cable operators in return for retransmis-
sion consent or, they hoped, multiplexed digital
channels using a spectrum set aside for HDTV (but
Congress soon put an end to this practice: HD spec-
trum is only for HD). Starting in 2005, CBS-owned
stations offered CBS on Demand service to compete
with HBO on Demand and TBS on Demand. The
internet variety, download-to-own VOD, is more
suited to the type of streaming distribution described
in Chapter 4 but offers programming identical to that
offered on basic and pay services.
Competition among Program Services
When
considering
advertiser-supported
services,
what real difference exists between CBS and USA
networks? Both target a broad audience, both
carry a mix of rerun and original shows, both
9.3
Time Warner Cable’s
“Start Over”
T
ime Warner Cable has its own FVOD feature called
Start Over, an on-demand application that allows
customers to jump to the beginning of a program in
progress without any preplanning or in-home recording
devices. When tuning to a Start Over–enabled show in
progress, customers are alerted to the feature through an
on-screen prompt. By pressing “Select” on the remote
control, the program is immediately restarted from the
beginning (but without the ability to skip commercials).
Recently, some HD channels have become “start
over’ enabled. About 70 percent of Time Warner’s
digital subscribers use Start Over, and the idea was
awarded an Engineering Emmy at the 2007 Consumer
Electronics Show.
310
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
carry live sports, both have theatrical and first-run
movies, and both have sitcoms and game shows. The
obvious difference is the presence or absence of news
programming, but another modest difference lies in
the better than 98 percent reach of a broadcast net-
work versus the 92 percent reach of the top sub-
scription networks (and much smaller reaches for
smaller ones). But most important, broadcast net-
works still outspend the cable networks, with each
of the Big Four networks spending far more on con-
tent than any subscription program services. Broad-
cast network programs garner the most press and
social network attention individually and as a
group.
One way to understand the multichannel pro-
gramming business is to consider the wholesaler–
retailer analogy: National cable networks are like
coast-to-coast wholesalers in that they sell their
product—programming—to regional and local out-
lets, the wired (or wireless) cable system program
operators,
satellite
services,
telcos
and
others.
MVPDs are like retailers because they sell their
product—television programming services—to con-
sumers, home by home and subscriber by subscriber.
The wholesalers have four functions:
1.
Licensing existing shows or financing original
programming created by Hollywood’s studios
or independent producers, or in conjunction
with international joint-venture partners
2.
Packaging programming in a form acceptable to
consumers (by providing interstitial promotions
such as wraparounds, titles, on-air hosts and
graphics)
3.
Delivering programming by satellite to MVPDs
4.
Supporting their products with national
advertising and promotion and by supplying
advertising materials and co-op dollars at the
local system level
Program content services actively compete for
fresh content; there are more outlets than top quality
new programs. The licensing of many American tele-
vision programs and movies follows a pattern begin-
ning with the most profitable U.S. markets and
ending with international distribution. Basic cable
networks bid directly against local broadcast sta-
tions (and each other) for the rights to movie
packages
and
hit
off-network
television
series.
Because of the way original contracts for most series
are written, most basic cable networks pay much
lower residuals than broadcast stations do. Resi-
duals, as discussed in Chapters 2 and 6, are payments
to the cast and creators every time the program is
reshown. Licensing fees for cable networks can be
several hundred thousand dollars per episode (which
may seem expensive but is far lower than for big
broadcast stations). As a result, basic cable television
has become a key aftermarket in the progression of
sales of movies and serial programs, generating
hundreds of millions of dollars in profits for U.S.
and foreign program distributors.
In addition, the largest cable networks have
consistently outbid broadcasters (stations and sta-
tion groups—as explained in Chapter 6) to get first
rerun rights to newly available hour-long adventure
and drama series and even some half-hour situation
comedies. (As discussed in Chapter 2, hour-long
series are less useful in rerun to broadcasters, and
even such a hugely successful action series as CSI
has underperformed many half-hour sitcoms in sta-
tion reruns.) All this heavy-duty competition for
content has driven the top cable networks into pro-
ducing their own signature series. Although produc-
tion costs are very high, the reward comes from
having
promotable
content
(“See
X
here
and
nowhere else!”). Such series are normally produced
in conjunction with advertisers so costs are under-
written. Putting out a new series without underwrit-
ing commonly means that producers have to wait
for a ratings track record to develop, a long process
that demands very deep pockets.
A few theatrical films have gone straight from
theaters to cable networks, and many European tele-
vision series go directly to cable. Spike TV imports
Japanese shows dubbed in English or cloned. Cable
also has become a foremarket for some programs
that later appeared on U.S. broadcast stations. For
example, Politically Incorrect migrated from Com-
edy Central to ABC in 1996 (although Bill Maher
eventually took his show to HBO to escape censors
and controversy).
CHAPTER 9 Basic and Premium Subscription Programming
311
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The battle for movies after their theatrical
appearance rages on. The established premium
channels get access to theatrical movies long before
they are offered to most basic cable networks (and
broadcasters), but the window for the hottest
movies doesn’t come soon enough to suit HBO
and Showtime. Because video sales and rentals
have been a cash cow for the major studios, the
popular movies exhaust the DVD market before
the premium networks are given access to them.
The pay-per-use services, being the newest guys on
the block, would be low on the totem pole in the
bidding for Hollywood’s movie output except for
the fact that most are owned by the same parent
companies as the established pay channels, so
most deals are packages for all channels owned by
one company.
Of all the problems associated with on-demand,
the delayed release windows (for movies and broad-
cast TV series), as well as a general lack of fresh
content, are especially frustrating for programmers
because they have no control over them. Delayed
windows helped prevent pay-per-view from taking
off a decade ago, and they hamper VOD growth
now. Most movies currently have VOD or PPV
release windows about 45 days after a film goes to
DVD (and the video stores). Many movies that are
highly popular in rental and sales are completely
withheld from premium networks, sometimes for
decades. Currently hot TV series tend to be released
in just a handful of episodes, the rights to older epi-
sodes expiring (to go into syndication) and the rights
to the newest episodes protected and not yet avail-
able. Rights owners have to find a balance between
availability to maintain interest and the highest rev-
enue streams.
As media conglomerates grow larger, competi-
tion favors the giants. Vertical integration in combi-
nation with digitalization of cable systems has
eliminated the shelf space shortage and created con-
tent shortage instead. The clout that comes with
enormous size has improved the owned channels’
ability to license top programs and produce original
shows, but movies are the lifeblood of the premium
services, and rapid access to them continues to be a
barrier to growth.
Selecting Strategies
To fully understand programming strategies, it is
first necessary to grasp the economic fundamentals
of multichannel service as described in Chapter 3
and expanded here. Unlike the broadcast model of
maximizing the audience size, the multichannel
model seeks to maximize subscriber revenue. On
one hand, VOD programmers need not choose
their content carefully because there’s room for so
much programming. On the other hand, selection
of programs for most subscription networks is far
more constrained (see 9.4). And in both cases, only
so many programs can be actively promoted.
Economics and Technology
The programming side of the business has matured
to the point that selection decisions related to the
subscription networks have become secondary to
many MVPDs. All carry as many content services
as they can manage, including every foundation net-
work and the main theme channels and as much
VOD as is available. Their focus has turned to
expanding HD subscriptions with the long-term
goal of shifting all channels to hi-def and turning
off mere “digital” service. At the turn of the century,
the MVPDs’ primary concern was expanding their
media dominance via high-speed internet service and
Voice-over-Internet (VoIP) phone service; now it is
upgrading subscribers to all HD and even 3D, while
enhancing for-pay VOD.
For multichannel network programmers, the key
to maximizing revenue in the programming realm is
to generate the greatest value for the bread-and-
butter subscriber who probably wants choice and
convenience—but who may not need phone or
broadband services and may feel unable to afford
HD service right now. Although pressure to upgrade
to HD surrounds the business, this programming
textbook focuses on the traditional two revenue
streams (subscriptions and advertising) in media.
Advertising is one of the two main revenue
streams for virtually all basic cable networks. Agen-
cies base their buying decisions on reach, frequency,
selectivity and efficiency. Subscription channels are
312
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
slowly approaching universal reach, and they offer
tremendous format selectivity. It is ironic that cable
and satellite networks have stolen away much of the
broadcast audience by offering a proliferation of
choices because the huge constellation of channels
now works against the kind of mass audience view-
ing that supports big-dollar advertising. In turn,
online media services threaten cable’s revenues.
Targeting specific audiences is great, but efficiency
gets lost as smaller and smaller groups of viewers
produce diminishing returns in selectivity. As more
nonbroadcast networks splinter and launch, find
distribution and ultimately, acquire broader house-
hold
penetration, subscription
program services
have begun to feast on themselves in the same way
they consumed broadcast network share.
Carriage fees are the other main support of sub-
scription networks. In most arrangements, the cable
operator pays a monthly license fee to the program
supplier, and these fees normally expand in each
contract renegotiation. In order for large systems
with more potential viewers to pay more than
small systems, cable network license fees are usually
structured as per-subscriber, per-month charges to
the cable operator. The typical fees range from
about $.15 per subscriber for services such as
Country Music TV to about $1.00 per subscriber
for more popular services such as CNN. For
advertising-supported networks, a tension exists
between getting the national penetration necessary
to attract advertisers and keeping the carriage fees
high enough to pay the bills. At $.40, A&E’s license
fee is about on par with that of Lifetime Television,
which is way below that of TNT. The high price of
sports contracts has driven up the cost of all chan-
nels that bid high for telecast rights, driving TNT’s
carriage fee above $1.00 per subscriber. Fox Sports
Network 1 carries a rate of $2.25 per subscriber, per
month, while its second regional network charges
around $1.00. ESPN charged between $4.50 and
$5.00 per month by 2012.
Many new channels pay one-time-only launch
fees and offer free carriage to appeal to potential
cable operators. For example, E! Entertainment paid
operators $7 per subscriber and gave free carriage
when it launched the Style Network. Originally, the
9.4
Ted Turner and CNN
C
able, satellite and telco subscribers have a healthy
selection of news channels today. Fox News is the
ratings leader, but viewers can also choose among
MSNBC, HLN (Headline News), the business news
channels CNBC and Fox Business, and even the sports
news specialist, ESPN News. The grandfather of cable
news, of course, is CNN. Launched in 1980, CNN was
critical in helping bring viewers to cable television in the
1980s, and before the advent of Fox News, it was an
influential and well-respected monopoly position in the
field. Ted Turner, who created CNN, has been honored
as a visionary, in part for his effort in developing a
24-hour television news service—which many at the
time said “couldn’t be done.”
In fact, Turner’s vision had a great deal more to do with
economics than public service. Turner, ironically, never
liked television news. He built his early success in Atlanta
broadcast television by counter-programming local news,
offering viewers re-runs of old network sitcoms like
Gilligan’s Island, and was once quoted as saying, “I hate
news. News is evil. It makes people feel bad.”
But Turner was an exceptionally astute businessman. He
surveyed the available niche markets in cable programming
at the time and concluded that all the lucrative genres had
been tapped. He told his new CNN President, Reese
Schonfeld: “There are only four things that television does,
Reese. It does movies, and HBO has beaten me to that. It
does sports, and now ESPN’s got that. There’s the regular
kind of stuff, and the three networks have beaten me to that.
All that’s left is news! And I’ve got to get there before any-
body else does, or I’m gonna be shut out.” In later years
Turner would also create the Cartoon Network and subse-
quently comment that while CNN received most of the
accolades, the Cartoon Network was always more
profitable.
Patrick R. Parsons, Ph.D.
Pennsylvania State University
CHAPTER 9 Basic and Premium Subscription Programming
313
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Fox News Channel paid $10 per subscriber to be
added to DirecTV’s lineup. By the late 1990s, paying
launch fees was such an established inducement sys-
tem that DBS providers were charging new networks
an average of $6 per subscriber.
On the premium channels, feature films are
licensed to networks in one of two ways: per-
subscriber
charges
or
flat
fees.
Per
subscriber
means that the film’s producer or distributor negoti-
ates a fee per customer for a specific number of runs
within a fixed period, the number varying with the
presumed popularity of the film. Such a fee is based
on the number of subscribers who had access to the
film (though not necessarily the number who actu-
ally saw it). In a flat-fee arrangement, the parties
negotiate a fixed payment regardless of the number
of subscribers who have access to the film.
Once the premium cable networks grew large
enough that the amounts for movies were substan-
tial, they usually abandoned the per-subscriber for-
mulas and negotiated flat-fee arrangements with the
program suppliers. The flat-fee method is also used
for acquiring original programming. In PPV and
VOD, however, the cable operator pays a per-
subscriber fee to either the studio or service pro-
vider, necessitating large enough fees to users to
cover their costs. By 2012, the big concern in the
industry was how to configure and reimburse costs
for multiple media use of the same movie by a single
user. If subscribers pay over and above their MVPD
service fees to get HBO (most of which goes back to
HBO to cover the cost of licensing the movies it
airs), should those subscribers have to pay again
for the same movies if they choose to watch them
on tablets or online? Generally no, IF the MVPD
has the hardware and software to track individual
movies and IF the online or tablet viewers can iden-
tify themselves as the MVPD’s subscribers. (Another
ID number for all of us to carry around?)
Program Types
Although the subscription networks license many off-
network shows and air movies already shown on the
broadcast networks, they also carry unique multi-
channel programs. Signature programs and vignettes
characterize specific networks and are often produced
by them to play only on those networks. In addition,
subscription networks increasingly choose to license
first-run series, keeping them out of station syndica-
tion and away from other subscription networks. (At
the same time, a broadcast network may replay epi-
sodes of its hit series on a sister cable network; total
exclusivity has gotten so pricey that sharing programs
makes economic sense.)
Signature Programs
Tough competition for viewers drives most subscrip-
tion networks to strive for signature programs,
unique programs or a pattern of programs that dis-
tinguish a network from its competitors. Signature
programs create a well-defined image for the net-
work and breed a set of expectations for both audi-
ences and advertisers. These expectations, whether
positive or negative, help viewers select which chan-
nels to watch and lead advertisers and their agencies
to expect that advertisements on some channels will
or won’t be effective. A lack of program definition,
or an absence of signature programs, killed off sev-
eral early cable services.
Four major types of signature programs appear
on cable program services. The first consists of original
movies or series not shown elsewhere, also called
made-for-cable movies and programs. Although they
are expensive to produce, they are highly promotable
and attract new viewers more than repeat program-
ming does. A second type of signature programming
consists of narrow theme genres, such as all live night-
club comedy or all shop-at-home or all cooking shows.
BET’s Comic View is an example of the comedy night-
club genre. A third type consists of programs for a
niche audience, or viewers with a narrowly defined
set of interests or within a targeted demographic
group. For example, Spike TV sought a young male
audience with Maximum Exposure. The fourth and
least common type of signature programming consists
of the cable exclusive, programs shown once or twice
on the broadcast networks but not shown before on
cable. A fifth type consists of long-running popular
programs whose hosts or personalities have become
household names. See 9.5 about CNN’s Larry King.
314
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Sometimes signature genres cut across various
networks. For example, such channels as the Travel
Channel, ESPN2 and Bravo all caught poker’s wave
of popularity in the early 2000s with Celebrity
Poker Challenge and World Poker Tour. The Travel
Channel and Bravo temporarily diverged from their
central programming mission to boost short-term
ratings because of pressure from advertisers to
attract larger audiences, and the result was far
greater than anticipated.
Less temporary overhauls in signature program-
ming occur, too. American Movie Classics switched
from pre-1980 classic movies to modern-day clas-
sics, to the consternation of some system operators
who wanted the movie content to stay different from
mainstream movie channels (but, doubtless, to the
joy of Turner Classic Movies). Another major
change took place in 2004, when the Game Show
Network condensed its name to GSN and got rid
of classic and neoclassic game shows in favor of
interactive gaming and reality-based content. Proba-
bly the most dramatic makeover for a cable channel
was in 2003 when the National Network (TNN,
formerly the Nashville Network) rebranded itself a
second time as Spike TV, the first network for men
(or so it claims). Then Spike TV dropped the “TV”
in order to project an image suited to online and
tablets as well as traditional television (although list-
ing companies retain the “TV”).
House-remodeling
and
room-makeover
pro-
grams gradually became signatures for HDTV and
TLC, including House Hunters, Property Virgins,
My First Place and Curb Appeal: The Block. Then
cake and cupcake baking shows led to the rise of
Food Network; programs about muscle cars and
fancy car values (e.g., What is My Car Worth?)
became signatures for Spike TV. Spike TV even
managed to turn car interest into a game show
with Repo Games.
And some prime-time successes on the major
broadcasters have transferred effectively to cable
networks.
ABC’s
hit
with
personal
makeover
shows such as Extreme Makeover led TLC to signa-
ture programs of What Not to Wear and Say Yes to
the Dress. PBS’s success with Antiques Roadshow
morphed into American Pickers on History, Life-
time’s Pawn Stars, TLC’s Hoarding and Pawn
Queens and others, some of which will doubtless
fade away, but a few will weave themselves into
defining channel images.
9.5
Larry King
U
ntil his retirement in late 2010, Larry King Live was
CNN’s top-rated and most-visible program for more
than two decades. Airing in the peak viewing hour
(9:00 P.M. EST), King was known for his high-profile guests
(including the last six U.S. presidents) and his “soft” ques-
tioning style. Some argue that Larry King’s ability to book
big names was directly a result of his one-sentence ques-
tions and jovial nature. King contends his show was not
journalism but “infotainment,” pointing to his wide range of
guests (ranging from Marlon Brando to Pete Rose to J. K.
Rowling), encompassing a considerable swath of Ameri-
can interests. Critics maintain that the rise of King’s pro-
gram represents a notable shift from hard news to soft news
stories on television. Many of his programs in later years
featured animal guests or explored perceived non-issues
such as paranormal activity.
Initially trained in radio broadcasting, King’s CNN
program premiered in 1985, with peak interest occurring
in 1993 when a debate on free trade between Ross Perot
and Al Gore reached the largest cable TV audience in
history, a record that held for more than a decade (until
ESPN acquired the Monday Night Football contract in
2006 and routinely surpassed it). King’s show was also
different from most other television talk programs in that it
allowed for live call-ins from viewers at home, encourag-
ing a conversational and easygoing format. Larry King’s
work was been richly rewarded; he is one of the few
people to receive Peabody Awards for his work in both
radio and television.
Andrew C. Billings, Ph.D.
Clemson University
CHAPTER 9 Basic and Premium Subscription Programming
315
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Vignettes
Another common cable genre consists of vignettes,
also called interstitials, meaning the programming
bits between the regular programs. Traditionally a
staple of premium services, this type of short-form
filler programming appears between movies that
end at odd times, and vignettes have also found
their way onto basic program services. The Hall-
mark Channel offered a “Tell Us Your Story” cam-
paign in association with Valentine’s Day one year,
featuring
the
best
viewer-submitted
stories
of
romance and love on its subscription network and
online platform. Although the primary purpose of
vignettes is to promote branding, they also serve as
backdoor pilots or ways to push viewers to online
programs and websites.
Many basic networks use interstitials even
though the airtime could be sold to advertisers.
For example, Perspectives on Lifetime, a series of
editorials and interviews tied to issues such as
breast cancer awareness or events such as Black
History Month, contributes to the overall mosaic
of the channel. Lifetime has even experimented
with live hosting between programs to achieve a
seamless look with no commercials on the hour or
half hour, thus keeping viewers away from their
remote controls. Turner Classic Movies shows vin-
tage filler called One Reel Wonders between fea-
tured movies.
Movie studios also use interstitials to promote
theatrical films by showing the first several minutes
of the film to tease the audience into going to the
box office. Universal Pictures paid USA to show
the first 10 minutes of the movie Dawn of the
Dead. In a similar move on the internet, Warner
Brothers showed the first nine minutes of Taking
Lives online at Yahoo! Movies to whet potential
moviegoers’ appetites.
The growing popularity of the clip culture (see
Chapter 4) on websites like YouTube and Revver
may add to the importance of vignettes. As online
videos further shorten the attention spans of many
viewers, cable networks can be expected to expand
the use of interstitials for content or promotional
purposes.
Originals
Despite the continued use of off-network program-
ming, the dominant trend for subscription networks
(and superstations) is toward more commissioned,
coproduced or solely produced original program-
ming (Monk and The Closer are two broadly popu-
lar examples). With the exception of signature
reruns like Law & Order: SVU on USA, Without a
Trace on TNT, Everybody Loves Raymond on TBS,
and CSI: Miami (plus The Sopranos) on A&E, off-
network programming has largely migrated from
prime time to other dayparts. It appears especially
in daytime and access.
With few exceptions as mentioned above, origi-
nal series are what successfully brand a network by
defining and distinguishing it from competing ser-
vices. In the last decade, such networks as A&E,
Syfy, USA, Lifetime Television, FX, TLC, Bravo,
MTV and even ESPN have dramatically increased
their budgets for original programming, especially
creating programs for Friday and Saturday nights
when the broadcast networks offer weaker shows
than usual. USA, for example, has a big investment
in the series Silent Partners and two comedies, On
We Go and We the Jury. A&E has followed its
successful Intervention with Obsessed. TBS plans
original shows every night of the week as lead-ins to
late-night Conan. Syfy carries originals such as
Being Human, Face Off and Alphas to support its
original ongoing successes of Warehouse 13, Eureka
and Haven. Netflix has its own signature series
House of Cards. And even YouTube and PlayStation
are investing big dollars in original programs.
Collectively, the subscription networks spent
about $15 billion for original programming in
2006, and that amount is expected to grow, but
with total pay subscribership flat or declining, it
may not grow quickly. As with previous Summer
Games, in the winter of 2012, NBC heavily cross-
promoted
live
Olympic
coverage
on
co-owned
Bravo, CNBC, MSNBC, Telemundo and USA.
Although the segments of the Games appearing on
the basic cable networks were noncompetitive with
NBC because they occurred outside prime time, car-
rying such a high potency mega-event live improved
316
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the channels’ international visibility as well as their
domestic viewing (and advertising sales), and the
original nature of the content contributed to their
positive branding.
Genres on Advertising-Supported
Channels
Some basic services such as USA, TBS, TNT and
ABC Family consist of a broadly appealing mix of
program forms (full service) similar to those of
broadcast television, scheduled by daypart. Along
with
the
superstations
WGN
America
and
WWOR,1 they are among the most popular cable
networks. Nearly every genre of program seen on a
broadcast network has been tried by full-service
cable networks, although not all have proved
equally successful. Despite the shift to more original
programming, hit off-network syndicated hours
such as Law & Order and its spinoffs persist in pop-
ular with the audiences of broad-appeal networks.
Because these cable networks generate most of
their income from the sale of commercial time,
they must select programs that will appeal to the
same mass audience sought by the broadcast net-
works. Most subscription networks, however, espe-
cially the newer services, are niche (or theme) and
subniche services. They must select programs that
have a particular type of content or that target a
specific psychographic group.
ESPN’s signature program, SportsCenter, is a
flexible sports-talk program that can appear live a
dozen times a day or be cut back or rerun when
live sporting events take up center stage (see 9.6).
After obtaining live NFL games, ESPN became a
major network competing (alongside ABC) for
such megasports events as NBA, NHL and MLB
games; soccer; boxing; and NCAA college football.
The network has had limited success with such series
as Playmakers, Tilt and SportsCentury. It has also
begun producing under the umbrella of ESPN
Films, which is known for such documentaries as
30 for 30.
Once the home of all-day/all-night music videos,
MTV now combines signature programs (for exam-
ple, Punk’d, Teen Mom, Sun of a Gun) with reality
shows (Real World, I Used to Be Fat) and music-
based favorites (America’s Best Dance Crew). Writ-
ing about signature programs on MTV is difficult
because the trend has been for its shows to move
very quickly, often within a year, from being a phe-
nomenal success to being yesterday’s news (for
example, Jackass). A similar situation exists on
Comedy Central, another favorite of fickle youth,
where only South Park and The Daily Show with
Jon Stewart have much staying power. MTV and
VH1 have a hot new competitor, Palladia (formerly
MHD), carrying mostly live rock concerns and
replays, along with the weekly music performance
series Uncompressed.
On Lifetime, romantic made-for-cable movies
predominate, mostly about relationships and the
“woman-in-danger.” Its prime-time schedule has
reruns of Reba, along with a full slate of successful
original series, including Army Wives, Drop Dead
Diva and Project Runway. USA wins awards for
Monk and The Closer and has some success with
Fairly Legal, but also schedules regular reruns of
NBC shows like JAG and Law & Order: SVU, sup-
plementing them with half hour comedies (We the
Jury, TGIM) and original series (The Enclave, The
Exceptions). History, formerly The History Chan-
nel, is characterized by older documentaries about
battles, airplanes and ships in past wars, as well as
by colorful hosted documentaries that investigate the
warfare, art and other remnants of ancient Roman,
Greek or other civilizations, although some of that
material has moved to The Military History Chan-
nel,
which
competes
with
Discovery’s
Military
Channel. One recent two-hour original special sur-
veyed the entire 600 years of the Dark Ages.
Syfy has filled its early-evening schedule with
reruns of hour-long series such as Stargate SG1,
Eureka, Sanctuary and Star Trek: The Next Gener-
ation, using an uncommon scheduling twist: Starting
in mid-afternoon, it airs five or six previous episodes
in a row, culminating in one new episode in prime
time (if any are available). The popular Stargate
series eventually spawned Stargate Atlantis and
then Stargate Universe. Battlestar Galactica and
Andromeda were also highly successful with scifi
fans, but after a couple of years or so, these limited
CHAPTER 9 Basic and Premium Subscription Programming
317
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
series completed their storylines, so many old disas-
ter movies are slotted in, and Wednesday nights
filled with Ghost Hunters or other paranormal
shows. Later in prime time and weekends, Syfy airs
a plethora of horror films, full of monsters and
death in scary varieties. In another twist, it has an
original series called Hollywood Treasures where
hosts hunt for artifacts and memorabilia from old
movies (especially old science fiction) and 1960s
TV series, which are then auctioned off on Hulu.
Three Scripps’ owned channels, The Travel
Channel, the Food Network and Cooking Channel,
seem to interweave some of their programming. The
Travel Channel now goes beyond travelogues, having
hit it big with World Poker Tour, but also carries Man
v. Food, Triple Rush (about bicycle messagers in NYC)
9.6
The Sports Fan’s Program: SportsCenter
E
SPN’s venerable SportsCenter has aired continuously
since the sports channel’s inception in 1979, and had
reached more than 36,000 unique episodes by 2012.
The program currently appears over 24 hours each day,
(thanks to replays on ESPN’s ancillary station, ESPNEWS),
providing a mix of game highlights, recaps, top stories,
commentary, analysis and predictions. At its start, many
television experts claimed that an entire program devoted
to sports was too narrowly defined and doomed to can-
cellation, but the joke was on them. SportsCenter evolved
into a national and international phenomenon, part of not
just one but several television channels of all-sports news,
talk and events from ESPN, Fox Sports Regional and other
networks.
When fresh game news is scarce, SportsCenter fills
slow days with such attention-grabbers as Chris Berman’s
“2-Minute Drill,” which looks forward to the weekend’s NFL
games with analysis and predictions. Other examples of
SportsCenter-specific formats have included the “Budweiser
Hot Seat,” in which a guest is asked some particularly
probing/interesting questions; “Contender or Pretender”
where analysts determine whether a currently successful team
or player can continue to excel; and “Top 10 Plays,” which
can range from the best plays of a particular day to the worst
plays of the week to the 10 best catches by a centerfielder.
SportsCenter not only analyzes games but has influ-
enced the way games are played in small ways. For
example, the number of slam dunks has increased in pro-
fessional basketball because they are more likely to make
ESPN’s highlight reel. The same can be claimed for spec-
tacular dives to catch baseballs. The program has also had
an impact on vocabularies ranging beyond sports. Most
fans know that “going yard” is a home run and that
“boo yah” is host Stuart Scott’s catchphrase when describ-
ing the action. SportsCenter’s Chris Berman gave a twist to
the long tradition of nicknaming athletes, as with his Bruce
“Eggs” Benedict and Jose “can you see” Cruz.
SportsCenter has become the broadest brand of sports
news and is sometimes referred to as “The Big Show”—
handling the most important sports, with niche sports inter-
ests being served by complementary ESPN news shows,
such as Baseball Tonight and College Football Gameday.
Starting first on SportsCenter, these shows all now include a
scrolling “Bottom Line” ticker to supply ongoing and just-
past game scores for several sports. SportsCenter incorpo-
rates other ESPN programming into the show by having
commentary from Tony Kornheiser and Michael Wilbon
from Pardon the Interruption and integrates itself into ongo-
ing games with a “SportsCenter 30 at 30 update,” in
which fans get 30 seconds of the top headlines within a
college basketball telecast, for instance.
While SportsCenter had dozens of solo and paired
anchors in its earliest days, ranging from George Grande
to smooth Bob Ley and chatty Chris Berman—today it has
roughly 30 anchors, supported by a large team of repor-
ters. Some notables, such as former Late, Late Show host
Craig Kilborn, moved into non-sports television, and others,
such as Good Morning America’s Robin Roberts, moved to
broader news formats. No single sports program wields the
international influence that SportsCenter does. With its
clever animated graphics, it is now offered in multiple ver-
sions ranging from a Canadian-oriented show to Spanish-
language offerings on ESPN Desportes.
Andrew C. Billings, Ph.D.
Clemson University
318
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
and Ghost Adventures. Food Network has a winner in
Emeril Live and Tough Cookies, but also carries a
show called Have Cake, Will Travel. Cooking Channel
gets some Emeril magic via The Originals with Emeril,
along with Unique Sweets and Eat St.
HGTV (Home & Garden Television) has found
several hits in its schedule of home redecorating and
fix-up shows, including Property Virgins, My First
Place, For Rent, Holmes on Homes, Selling New
York and the parallel Selling LA. If you like these
shows, you tend to watch them all, day after day.
In some contrast, Spike TV features police videos
and movies about men doing dangerous (but heroic)
things, such as in its hit Blue Mountain State.
The Discovery Channel has drifted away from
stories about pivotal inventions (for example, Indus-
trial Wonders) into motorcycle shows (American
Chopper and Gut Busters), along with Cops &
Coyotes, and an New Yorkers-only game show called
Cash Cab. Meanwhile, much corporate attention
shifted to its two Spanish-language channels, Discov-
ery en Espanol and Discovery Familia, and the newer
Investigation Discovery. The latter debuted a sort-of
documentary called I Married a Mobster (probably
not to be confused with VH1’s fictional series Mob
Wives). Discovery’s other sister service, TLC, has had
its own signature shows for several years, entitled
What Not to Wear and Say Yes to the Dress (in vari-
ous sizes), and followed them with Pawn Queens and
Sister Wives. Bravo has come a long way from its
days as a fine arts channel. It has captured the reality
contest genre with its signature competitions in Proj-
ect Runway, Top Chef and Top Design.
Genres on Premium Channels
In the days of analog television, every cable system in
the United States offered at least one premium service.
And if a system had only one pay channel, the odds
are very high that it was HBO (formerly, Home Box
Office). HBO achieved its leading position through its
early entry into pay television in 1972 and early
adoption of satellite delivery in 1975. (Showtime
began in 1976 and moved on the bird in 1978, but
never quite caught up.) HBO then consolidated these
early leads through aggressive national marketing
campaigns in the 1980s that competitors could not
afford because of their smaller audience bases. Rela-
tively few systems carried just Showtime, Flix, Encore
or one of the other pay services.
With HBO in the primary role for many years,
the competition among the others focused on secur-
ing shelf space as the second or third (or even fourth)
service provider on the local cable system’s menu of
premium offerings. And then cable became all-
digital like the satellite services, with room for all,
especially in various kinds of VOD. Today, HBO’s
main competition comes from co-owned Cinemax,
The Movie Channel, Showtime, Flix, Starz and
Encore, and all of these services, including HBO,
have taken advantage of compressed video delivery
and spun off handfuls of additional channels, rang-
ing from just four to dozen or more, with a high of
17 variations of Showtime.
Selection strategies for premium networks differ
from those for basic networks. Because viewers pay
extra per channel (or per sets of channels, such as 8
to 12 Encores), they have higher expectations of the
programming on premium channels, which leads to
enormous investments in such original series as the
award-winning The Sopranos, followed by True
Blood, Entourage, Treme and Game of Thrones. In
addition to original series and movies, HBO carries
large quantities of more or less successful enter-
tainment specials. Those networks competing with
HBO—particularly Showtime—target their movies
to more carefully defined audiences and directly
counterprogram HBO’s lineup, at least on the main
channels. Differentiating themselves through acqui-
sition of exclusive rights to hit movies and develop-
ing
appealing
and
promotable
original
shows
has become key to the premium services’ competitive
strategies. Besides spinoff channels, differentiation
via
promotion,
and
original
content
strategies,
some
premium
networks
have
adopted
time-
shifting as a strategy by using staggered start times
(see the discussion of bridging in Chapter 2).
Nonetheless, both Netflix and VOD threaten
these pay movie channels. People’s lives vary so
much that one month they might watch several
movies and another none at all. So much is available
for free and much more on premium VOD that
CHAPTER 9 Basic and Premium Subscription Programming
319
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
subscribers wonder why they need also pay an extra
monthly fee for one or a group of premium channels
that they might or might not watch. However, its
original series might save HBO, in one form or
another—perhaps as an online service.
Movies
The staple of premium cable networks, including
PPV and VOD, remains the Hollywood feature
film, aired soon after theatrical release. The rapidity
with which a film can be offered to subscribers is
central to establishing a premium service’s viability
and value. While the pay-per-use services generally
present top movie titles a few months after their ini-
tial domestic theater distribution, by contrast, the
usual exhibition window for the monthly premium
channels is 6 months after theatrical release (with
the broadcast networks following at 18 months).
VOD distributors are very eager to get their win-
dows earlier than home video, but Hollywood wor-
ries about piracy and lost revenue.
None of the national premium services as yet
carry commercials. With rare exceptions, films are
shown unedited and uninterrupted, including those
rated PG-13 and R (containing strong language and
behavior normally censored on broadcast televi-
sion). The VOD services and at least Cinemax on
the pay side also run films in the NC-17 category
(formerly X-rated).
Entertainment Specials
Selecting performers to star in original specials for
the pay-per-month channels and choosing properties
to adapt to the television medium requires an in-
depth
examination
of
subscribers’
expectations.
Because the major broadcast networks can offer
opportunities to see leading entertainers, either on
specials or late-night talk shows, premium program-
mers are forced to seek fresher, more unusual enter-
tainers and material. They have several options,
especially the following:
1.
Using performers who are well known but
who appear infrequently on broadcast network
television
2.
Using performers often seen on broadcast tele-
vision but who rarely headline their own
programs
3.
Developing programs and artists unavailable on
broadcast television
For performance specials, every effort is made by
premium producers to preserve the integrity of a com-
plete performance—without the guest stars, dance
numbers and other window dressing sometimes used
by to widen the audience base. At their best, these
shows are vivid reproductions of live performances
(and the practice has been copied by Palladia and
other music channels). Premium cable’s time flexibil-
ity also permits nightclub acts and concerts to run
their natural lengths, whether they are one hour and
11 minutes or one hour and 53 minutes. The private
nature of pay viewing also allows for telecasting
“edgy” adult-oriented comedy (for example, Dennis
Miller, Chris Rock) and dramatic material unsuitable
for airing on broadcast television (The Sopranos).
Sports
The third major component in pay programming is
sports. ESPN offers six ESPN-PPV channels on most
cable and satellite systems, along with five other chan-
nels, with competition from four Fox sports channels,
and another ten or so specialized sports channels
(Tennis Channel, Speed Channel, Versus, NFL Net-
work, The Golf Channel, Big Ten Network and such-
like). HBO and Showtime traditionally scheduled
major, big-ticket, national sporting events in prime
time. Indeed, HBO was long known to carry the top
boxing matches until economics drove them to PPV.
Premium programmers are divided about the value of
sports to premium channels, because sports blur a
movie network’s image. In consequence, neither The
Movie Channel nor Cinemax ever carried sports.
Because of the broadcast networks’ financial strength
and audience reach (and a general consensus that cer-
tain events like the Super Bowl should stay on over-
the-air television), ABC/ESPN, Fox, CBS, and NBC
still manage to acquire the rights to most major sport-
ing events. Thus the pay-per-month premium net-
works often have to settle for secondary rights or
320
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
events of lesser national interest (and the old ones go
to Versus and other sports channels). Nevertheless, an
audience can be found for some sports that broadcast
television does not adequately cover, such as middle-
and heavyweight boxing, regional college sports, track
and field, swimming, diving, soccer and equestrian
competitions.
Big-ticket boxing and wrestling have been pro-
gramming staples for pay-per-view packagers for
many, many years. For some years, the relatively
small universe of pay-per-view-equipped homes took
PPV out of contention for major events. But digitali-
zation brought PPV and VOD to all homes so they
gobbled up major boxing matches (generating over
$100 million for a single high-profile match), and
DirecTV began carrying live NFL and NHL games.
These sporting events continue to achieve record buy
rates and revenues, and they fuel subscriptions to
PPV, which caused ESPN to enter the PPV competi-
tion in a big way. The key to success in sports now
lies in having strong branding, along with extensive
local and national marketing efforts.
PPV Specialties
Interactivity is one way to enhance original PPV
offerings. For example, Playboy TV has had much
success with its call-in show Night Calls, which gen-
erates significant revenue (and thousands of phone
calls). Cable operators get 70 to 80 percent of the $8
to $10 per-program-viewed cost of adult PPV pro-
gramming (compared with 50 percent of the $4 cost
of typical movies), so adult programming is their
most bankable asset.
Launching a Network
As the digital tiers have filled, cable, satellite and
telco providers are no longer eager to bring on new
services unless they can be bundled with existing ser-
vices from the subscription content networks with
big muscle, such as Disney, Viacom or Comcast.
By 2003, observers had declared the end of the era
of new network launches. Still, some new channels
have emerged since that year: Versus (a Fox-owned
sports action channel), G4 (a Comcast-owned video
gaming
network),
NBATV,
TV
One
(targeting
African-Americans) and a few others. But compared
with the 25 channels that launched between 2000
and 2005, only one network (Sleuth) launched in
2006, only one in 2007 (Chiller, dedicated to the
horror genre), two in 2009 (MLB Network and TV
One from Time Warner), for example. Maybe the
declaration was only a little early.
More typical is the big name launch in 2011 of
OWN, Oprah’s channel, and the two-channel merger
and fine-tuning that produced Discovery’s Fit &
Health. Most new introductions now occur on the
internet and presume a substantial wait until the
interest and revenue build before any shift to cable.
To get on the MVPDs, the first element in strat-
egy for a start-up network is to pay launch fees to
cable/sat/telco providers, typically $10 to $12 per
subscriber. A related approach allows such large
MSOs as Comcast and Viacom to become partners
in the venture. With the periodic megamergers of
media industries, fewer players are controlling larger
and larger pieces of the multichannel universe.
Another way to facilitate distribution of a new chan-
nel is not to charge cable systems for carriage for a
few years. As was pointed out in Chapter 3, some
cable networks have launched by reversing the tradi-
tional model of carriage; in other words, by paying
MSOs a monthly per-subscriber fee for carrying
them. Because of excessive start-up costs in the
range of $40 million to more than $100 million,
there have always been difficulties launching a new
cable network.
Nonetheless, certain incubation strategies have
become traditional for gaining shelf space for new
cable networks. One is sheltering launches to help
new networks establish themselves before moving
full speed ahead. Americana Television, a 24-hour
country lifestyle channel, got its start as a part-time
service on Nostalgia Television. Viewers could
watch a BET on Jazz program on BET before Jazz
Central launched. Turner Classic Movies showed up
on TNT, and Cable Health Club was initially part of
the Family Channel—the pattern Discovery Channel
followed with its health channel, that later merged
with FitTV. NewsTalk Television launched with
4 million part-time homes as well as 3 million
CHAPTER 9 Basic and Premium Subscription Programming
321
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
full-time homes. Of course, big names such as MLB
don’t require any shelter.
To gain sampling, newer networks have also
turned to satellite for distribution, because DISH
and DirecTV offer many more channels than many
cable systems. One final strategy, and a solution to
the low distribution problem for new networks, is
piggybacking or sharing a channel with another ser-
vice. American Movie Classics gave Romance Net-
work a slot on Sunday afternoons and incubated
American Pop on Saturday nights.
Regardless of shelf space, and regardless of
whether a cable or online launch, a high mortality
rate will continue among new services. No matter
what a network’s programming entails, limited distri-
bution into America’s subscription and broadband
households make it difficult to cover operating
costs. Thus, three basic ingredients are needed in
order for a network to survive: a good programming
idea, smart people behind the idea and money. In
addition, new program services need to be flexible
with regard to tiering, pricing and packaging.
Overcrowding in the subscription cable environ-
ment will inevitably have two outcomes. First, cable
operators will remove (or displace to less desirable
locations) older foundation services that have become
stale in favor of new services; and second (and more
common), start-up services will sell out to other
(larger) networks, thus merging their top content or
serving as a splinter version of the key network. In
addition, because of the high cost of maintaining a
single network’s infrastructure and purchasing or
producing
programming,
a
service
that
is
co-
marketed (and usually co-branded) simultaneously
with several other networks reduces sales, marketing
and engineering/production costs. Further, it helps to
be able to lose money through sister companies.
Scheduling Strategies
Subscription networks come in two broad types:
advertiser-supported basic cable networks (CNN,
ESPN) and premium networks, those that require
an extra fee above the regular monthly MVPD sub-
scription. But as Chapter 3 explained, and you
probably know only too well, MVPDs now offer a
dozen or more packages with fees determined by
whether the channels are merely digital or HD or
3D and how many and which channels are included.
Moreover, some packages mix basic and premium
digital services and then repeat the same channels
at a higher price levels in various HD groupings.
Nonetheless, most MVPDs reserve some chan-
nels for pay-per-use (PPV, VOD). Many experts
expect all channels (excepting the lowest level carry-
ing local television stations) to become on-demand
offerings eventually.2 As more and more consumers
get their television from apps on tablets or pay for
special internet content, it is expected that they will
become accustomed to paying for each “use” (view-
ing) of a content channel. However, the total-
VOD-day isn’t here yet, and most subscribers accept
the pattern of many channels for a single package
fee, even if they don’t watch all or many of them.
Basic and premium cable networks need to
follow
the
same
general
practices
outlined
in
Chapter 1: conserve resources, form habits, control
audience flow, schedule shows to be compatible
with viewer lifestyles and maximize breadth of
appeal. Until the day when viewers truly can choose
anything, anytime—when VOD and DVRs make
scheduling irrelevant—the linear scheduling aspect
of the programmer’s job will be crucial to the suc-
cess of a program service.
Basic Channel Scheduling
The advertiser-supported networks have adopted
several program scheduling ideas that have appeared
for a short time on broadcast services but better suit
the special needs of subscription program suppliers.
These include program marathons, blocking, zoning
and other alternatives to ratings that build the net-
works’ appeal to advertisers.
Marathons
Subscription networks often use marathons—all-day,
all-night, continuous program scheduling of the same
series—to counterprogram major broadcast events
like the Super Bowl. Marathons are also scheduled
322
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
during holidays, protracted bad weather periods, or
any time viewers are likely to turn into “couch
potatoes.” There have been plenty of examples: Lead-
ing up to and on Mothers’ Day, TBS gave viewers a
Leave It to Beaver marathon with Barbara Billings-
ley, the actress who played Beaver’s mother, as the
host; Nick at Night provided a Coach marathon
starting after the end of the Super Bowl in hopes of
snaring
football
fans
who
liked
the
old
ABC
sitcom about a college athletic director. During the
2007 Super Bowl, TNT ran 13 hours of The Closer,
which performed well during the actual game.
Marathons can generate exposure for a newly
acquired show as well as remind viewers that a pop-
ular show appears on the network.
Because
the
networks
promote
marathons
heavily, they usually perform well—even better
than the average programming—which can lead to
increased advertising sales. In one case, a marathon
briefly generated a signature program for VH1 when
I Love the 70s devoted an hour to each year of the
decade; this resulted in the nostalgia sequels I Love
the 80s and I Love the 90s. VH1 previously enjoyed
marathon success with its Behind the Music series on
defunct or controversial music groups.
Blocking
Some networks have adopted blocking strategies to
lure mainstream audiences away from network
affiliates. TNT’s daytime programming is called
“Primetime in Daytime” and features reruns of such
off-network programs as Charmed, ER, Judging
Amy and Law & Order. At one time, these shows
were syndicated only to broadcast stations. Now
such scripted dramas go to subscription networks,
while broadcast stations concentrate on first-run
syndication and off-network sitcoms.
In another variation, several basic cable net-
works schedule multiple episodes of a single series
in one block starting in early evening and going on
for several hours. Spike TV has blocked as many as
three or four episodes of CSI on some evenings, and
USA has put several episodes of Law & Order: Spe-
cial Victims Unit in sequence on an evening. Other
channels repeat a single episode all day to be
convenient for all kinds of viewers. A&E, Syfy and
History, among others, follow these general pat-
terns. And amusingly, Syfy varies the season of Star-
gate SG-1 in such blocks, mixing up first-season to
sixth-season episodes (so the characters’ hair is first
long and then inexplicably short and then long
again, and costumes change without rationale).
Homogeneity, Zoning and Roadblocking
Cable has developed criteria other than ratings for
selecting and scheduling national and local services
and for attracting advertisers. Cable executives gen-
erally emphasize the demographic or psychographic
homogeneity of viewers of a particular service. MTV
viewers, for example, are alike in age and interests;
Lifetime viewers are mostly women; Spike goes after
men. Viewers of cooking shows, house fixing-up
shows, historical or science programs and so on
probably share several interests (that advertising
can appeal to). A second and related strategy is zon-
ing, dividing an interconnect into tiny geographic
areas to deliver localized advertising, which permits
local businesses to purchase low-cost ads that reach
only their neighborhoods.
Another strategy is roadblocking, scheduling the
same ad (or promotional message) on many cable net-
works at the same time so the advertiser’s message blan-
kets most cable channels (and sometimes broadcast
networks, too). This practice occurs at the national
level (so all viewers might see the same spot at the
same time) and at the regional level (using inserts on a
single cable interconnect). Roadblocking, in theory,
keeps grazers from using their remote controls to
avoid commercials because many viewers quickly give
up surfing when the same commercial message appears
on channel after channel. But the strategy works for
program promotion, too. For example, on one June
day at 9 P.M., all nine of NBCUniversal’s broadcast
and cable networks ran the same the two-and-a-
half-minute teaser for the movie King Kong. Similarly,
in 2010, all Nickelodeon channels simultaneously
ran a promo for The Last Airbender.
Cable networks are analogous to radio stations
in a single large market—both numerous and frag-
mented. No one can deny their collective media
CHAPTER 9 Basic and Premium Subscription Programming
323
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
reach, but few can figure a way for each individual
program service to compete with any of the individ-
ual broadcast networks. Only the biggest MVPDs
can buy up very large numbers of cable networks
and market them as a group to advertisers but indi-
vidually to viewers. Most cable programmers must
focus their strategies on hard-to-reach audiences,
just as radio programmers do.
Premium Channel Scheduling
The need to schedule movies is likely to be the first
aspect of traditional programming to succumb to the
advent of the widespread availability of PPV or
VOD. Nevertheless, some viewers would rather
choose a channel and see what’s there than pick
from a menu, so some pay channels will stay with
a schedule for the foreseeable future.
Rotation
Preplanned multiple reuse of content used to be a
major difference between traditional premium and
broadcast television; now both broadcasters and
large cable networks lay out a multiplatform design
before a new show goes on the air. As pointed out in
Chapter 2, only when a show becomes a hit or
develops a cult following are such plans actually
implemented.
Most pay services offer a range of 20 to 100
movies per month, some first-run and new to the
schedule (premieres), some repeated from the preced-
ing month (carryovers), and some returning from
even earlier (encores). In the course of a month,
movies are typically scheduled from three to eight
times on different days and at various hours during
the daily schedule. Different movie services offer vary-
ing numbers of monthly attractions, but all services
schedule most of their programs more than once.
(Programs containing nudity or profanity, however,
rotate only within prime time and late night on most
networks.) The viewer, therefore, has several oppor-
tunities to watch each film, special or series episode.
These repeat showings maximize the potential audi-
ence for each program. The programmer’s scheduling
goal is to find the various complementary time slots
that deliver the greatest possible audience for each
attraction during the course of a month—not neces-
sarily in one showing.
Unlike the monthly pay-cable networks, pay-
per-view services rotate rapidly through a short list
of top-name Hollywood hit films. The same movie
may air as few as four or as many as ten times in a
day. This occurs because PPV, like VOD, markets
“convenience viewing.” PPV networks either rotate
two to four major movie titles a day, some across
multiple channels, or run the same movie continu-
ously all day. As the number of channels available to
pay-per-view increases, the trend is to assign one
movie per channel, thus emulating the “multiplex”
theater environment.
Title Availability
Balancing the number of major films and lesser-
known but promotable titles every month, then add-
ing a handful of encore presentations, is one of the
key challenges a premium movie programmer faces.
A crucial factor in preparing the lineup is title avail-
ability. Most films with good track records at the
box office are obtained from major film distributors,
but an increasing number can be purchased from
independent distributors and producers.
Usually it does not make economic sense for stu-
dios to hold a film in theatrical release for more than
a year, but occasionally video sales disrupt the pat-
tern and delay a film’s availability as already
explained. Hot Disney movies for children usually
do well in DVD sales, as do some cult films that
bomb in theaters but appeal to DVD buyers. The
home video sell-through is a film priced to be bought
rather than rented by consumers. (For rentals, the stu-
dios receive revenues only from the initial purchase of
each tape by the retailer.) Successful sell-throughs of
extremely popular films, even at much lower whole-
sale prices, are a distributor’s dream—and the studios
maximize revenues by delaying premium television
release until the first stage of video sales has passed.
Time constraints on the use of films also affect
steady product flow, including how long and when a
film is available to pay services. Commercial broad-
cast television buyers, for example, traditionally had
324
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the financial clout to place time limitations on dis-
tributors’ sales of films to premium services. The
broadcasters would seek early telecast of key films
to
bolster
their
ratings
during
Nielsen
ratings
sweeps, shortening the period of time during which
the films were available to premium networks. The
number of such key films of interest to the broadcast
networks has been dropping, however, as their rat-
ings deteriorate because of increased home video
and premium penetration.
Some desirable films are unsuitable for broadcast
sale altogether, increasing their pay-television staying
power. Films such as the Emmanuelle series, although
not recent, crop up again and again because they
never enter broadcast windows. Therefore, distribu-
tors allow premium networks to schedule them as
many times as they like for as long as they like.
Occasionally, the major pay-per-month services
disagree about whether to schedule a movie after it
has already had a commercial broadcast network
run. HBO and Showtime have found a following
for these movies when they are shown unedited
and without commercials. Some survey research
even demonstrates viewer support for reshowing
films that have been badly cut for commercial televi-
sion presentation or that have exceptionally strong
appeal for repeat viewing. Almost all premium ser-
vices also show selected off-network movies, often
drawing sizable audiences.
Exhibition Windows
As explained earlier, distributors create a distribu-
tion window for a film’s release when offering it to
the premium services. The programmers negotiate
for a certain number of first-run and second-run
plays
during
a
specific
time
period,
generally
12 months. For example, a given film may be
made available to a pay-cable service from April to
March. It might premiere in April, encore in August,
and then play again the following March to com-
plete the run. Programmers must project ahead to
see that the scheduled play periods for similar films
from different distributors do not expire at exactly
the same time. Generally, premium services don’t
want to waste their scarce resources by running
five blockbusters, four westerns or three Kevin Cost-
ner films in the same month. Such clustering can be
advantageous, however, when older films can be
packaged and promoted as special “festivals.”
Broadcast television’s scheduling practices, orga-
nized around the delivery of commercial messages,
differ broadly, resulting (mostly) in the once weekly
series in prime time and stripped programs and
nightly newscasts outside of prime. It used to be the
pattern that in broadcasting, an episode was shown
only twice in one year, and the largest possible audi-
ence was sought. As already explained in Chapter 2,
episodes are now repeated on the networks more
than twice (even tripled or stripped) and on associ-
ated cable channels, plus may be available online.
Some premium networks have adopted the short-
length formats of broadcast television, such as
episodes of Weeds on Showtime and Six Feet Under
on HBO. The shorter lengths (not to mention the
sometimes provocative content) help these first-run
shows get sold internationally and to move later
into domestic syndication. Most pay programs, how-
ever, run to their natural lengths, ending when and
where the material dictates rather than running in
fixed segments to accommodate commercials. Even
with series programs, frequent repetition and rotation
throughout the various dayparts set premium pro-
gram scheduling apart from broadcast scheduling.
Also, broadcasters set their schedules for an entire
season—pay-per-month and pay-per-view set them
one month at a time.
Monthly Audience Appeal
Another major contrast between broadcast and pre-
mium programming services lies in their revenue-
generating strategies. As already noted, to maximize
ad revenues, commercial networks and broadcast
stations program to attract the largest possible
audiences every minute of the programming day.
Premium cable networks, in contrast, try to attract
the largest possible cumulative audiences over the
period of a month.
The lifeblood (read daily operating revenues) of a
pay service is its direct subscriptions. Pay-per-use ser-
vices must satisfy their customers movie by movie,
CHAPTER 9 Basic and Premium Subscription Programming
325
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
event by event, or night by night. Pay-per-month ser-
vices must satisfy their subscribers month to month,
throughout the year, forestalling disconnections. A
premium service’s success is not determined by the
audience ratings of its individual programs but by
the general appeal and “satisfaction levels” of its
overall schedule. Insofar as quantitative measures
such as ratings reflect that appeal (especially for
one-shots like boxing matches or a live Sheryl Crow
concert), they are useful in gauging response. In cable
and satellite service, however, where subscribers must
be persuaded to pony up month after month, qualita-
tive measures take on greater importance.
One important qualitative measure is subscriber
turnover. Because both schedules and subscriber
billings are arranged by the month, viewers tend to
evaluate programming in month-long blocks. Sub-
scribers will most likely continue the premium ser-
vice for another month if:
■They use their pay service two or three times a
week.
■They see benefits in its varied viewing times or on-
demand availability.
■The service runs commercial-free, uninterrupted
program content.
■The service runs unique entertainment programs
and theatrical feature films.
The pulse of PPV and VOD success is measured
by buy rates. Careful matching of buy rates and
titles offers both the pay-per-view or on-demand dis-
tributor and the system operator a tool for fine-
tuning scheduling and promotion plans. Providing
viewers have plenty of PPV or VOD choices, they
can always find something to watch. In contrast,
month-to-month services have different problems.
While discontinuing a month-to-month pay service
seldom reflects dissatisfaction with one or two indi-
vidual shows, viewers disconnect when they feel that
the service as a whole is lacking. Customers repelled
by violence, for example, may disconnect a movie
service if a large number of a particular month’s
films contain a great deal of violence. A family
may
determine
that
its
desire
for
wholesome,
G-rated fare is not being filled by the programming
mix of one particular movie service and so will
cancel after a trial month or two.
Movie Balancing Strategies
Selecting programs that will appeal to different target
audiences through the course of a month becomes the
challenge for most pay-per-month programmers. For
example, if a particular month’s feature films have
strong appeal to teenagers and men 18 to 49, the
obvious choice for an entertainment special is a
show that appeals to women. Premium programmers
break down their audiences as follows:
1.
Urban-rural classifications
2.
Age groups of 18 to 24, 25 to 49, and 50þ
3.
Gender
By scheduling programs each month that will
appeal to all these groups, the premium programmer
theoretically creates a “balanced” schedule.
Films subdivide into several groups with overlap-
ping appeals and are usually scheduled by considering
either their timeliness or their appeals. The major
audience attractions for monthly schedules are the
premieres—that is, the films that were recent box-
office hits and are being offered for the first time on
that premium service. These films may be rated G, PG
or R by the movie industry. The second sets of films
placed in a pay-per-month channel’s schedule are the
major G- and PG-rated films. This establishes a strong
pattern of family and children’s appeal in the sched-
ule. The third group of films has varied adult audience
appeals. Films without notable box-office success usu-
ally fall into this category. They are repeated slightly
less frequently than premieres and G-rated hits.
Other films that were not major theatrical hits
may still rate as important acquisitions for premium
services. Viewers may value seeing a film on televi-
sion that they might not be willing to pay $8 to $10
to see in a movie theater. Foreign films fall into this
group. Also, if a premium network feels that a par-
ticular film has appeal to a segment of its audience,
it doesn’t matter whether it was originally made for
home video or made for broadcast television; films
in both categories increasingly show up on premium
schedules. Another growth category is film classics.
326
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Film Placement
On the pay-per-month channels, the general rules of
thumb for film scheduling include beginning week-
night programming at 7 or 8 P.M. and starting final
showings (of major offerings) as late as 11:30 P.M. to
12:30 A.M. Those networks concentrating on the over-
night daypart employ still later final showing sche-
dules. For most of the premium movie services, an
evening consists of three to five programs, depending
on individual running lengths. Entertaining short sub-
jects, elaborate animated titles and promotional spots
for other attractions fill the time between shows. All-
movie
networks
especially
favor
movie-oriented
shorts, such as interviews with directors or location
tours. Using 16 or more new films each month (not
counting carryovers of the previous month’s late pre-
mieres) usually means scheduling four premieres each
week, gradually integrating first-, second-, third- and
up to sixth-run presentations week by week. This pat-
tern gives viewers a constantly changing lineup of
material from which to choose—and new movies
appear every week on the pay-per-month channels.
Counterprogramming broadcast network sche-
dules is another strategic consideration. For exam-
ple, on Tuesday nights when CBS scheduled a
string of male-appeal dramas (NCIS, The Unit and
Without a Trace) and NBC carried Dateline NBC
and two Law & Order shows, premium networks
tended to schedule female appeal films. Taking
another tack, preceding or following a popular
broadcast network show with a program of the
same genre on pay cable creates a unified program-
ming block for viewers (requiring channel switching,
an easy move with remote controls). Beginning pro-
grams on the hour as often as possible—especially
during prime time from 8 to 11 P.M.—makes it con-
venient for viewers to switch to and from pay cable.
Films and specials containing mature themes are
usually scheduled at later hours than G-rated films,
even though pay television is not bound by broad-
casting’s traditions. PG features are offered through-
out premium schedules. Magazines and program
guides encourage parents to prescreen all films
rated PG, PG-13 or R early in the week to decide
which are appropriate for their children to watch
on subsequent airdates. This presumes several silly
things: that parents have the time to pre-watch
movies, that web-adept children cannot defeat chan-
nel safeguards, and that they do not watch anything
they want at other people’s homes or online.
Evaluating Apples and Bananas
Audience evaluation remains iffy in the cable indus-
try. Inadequate viewing data hampers many national
advertiser-supported networks in selling time—espe-
cially the newer niche services. Although the total
number of a system’s subscribers is always known
more or less accurately, and the most popular services
are rated by Nielsen, determining how many subscri-
bers view the less popular nonpay channels has tradi-
tionally been a problem on most systems.
Comparison Problems
Cable penetration stands at about 60 percent of U.S.
homes. In addition, another 27 percent or so of
homes are connected to the subscription networks
via direct satellite service, and 5 percent get the
same channels from telcos, wireless cable or some
other small business. (Collectively, 92 percent of
homes get service from MVPDs.) Individually, how-
ever, audience ratings for most cable/satellite net-
works (excluding the top-10 services) have only
occasionally exceeded 1 or 2 million television house-
holds at a time. In fact, the top five or so cable net-
works garner 3 to 4 million households each in prime
time (about the same as a 3 or 4 rating among all 116
million television households). Although the com-
bined audience for ad-supported subscription net-
works regularly exceeds that of all commercial
broadcast networks, the broadcast business is still
very healthy. Because many advertisers continue to
buy spots one channel at a time, the combined cable
network ratings are not much comfort to them.
Nonbroadcast Audience Measurement
As is explained in Chapter 5, ratings for subscription
networks really represent three audience measure-
ments. One measure is the audience watching a
CHAPTER 9 Basic and Premium Subscription Programming
327
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
particular program at a given time, measured by aver-
age quarter hour (AQH) ratings and shares as in
national broadcast ratings. A second measure is the
cumulative audience that watches a given program in
all of its showings because some program services
repeat shows. When all viewers of repeat showings of
a program (such as a movie) are summed, the audience
for that one program may exceed a competing broad-
cast station’s audience in one market. The third and
perhaps most important measure to subscription
networks is the cumulative audience for a channel.
Although people meters have benefited the established
cable networks by increasing their reported share of
prime-time viewership, they reveal little about the
viewing of less popular advertiser-supported services.
Subscription networks must commission their own
research to understand viewing by such demographic
subgroups as children, teens and ethnic minorities.
Measuring Cable/Satellite Viewing
The overriding problem in evaluating cable program
audiences is that local audience shares cannot be
compared directly with local over-the-air audience
shares. As 9.7 shows, cable franchise areas differ in
size and shape from markets defined according to
broadcast station coverage patterns (DMAs). This
type of map prevents advertisers from comparing
cable’s effectiveness with that of broadcasting and
other media in one market.
To be measured on a national level, Nielsen
currently requires a subscription network to be avail-
able in about 3.3 percent of U.S. TV households (about
3.7 million homes) to qualify for its national cable TV
ratings report, the Nielsen Cable Activity Report
(NCAR). Further, to show up in the report, the net-
work has to generate at least a 0.1 rating in its coverage
area (the number of households a channel reaches).
Although in total the programs on all subscription
networks have averaged more than a 25 Nielsen
prime-time rating in the last several years, most viewers
apparently watch the established broadcast services.
The weekly cumes still favor the broadcast channels
despite gains in subscription network viewing (see
9.8). Further growth in the number of channels will
make increases in individual network ratings difficult.
Programmers and consultants are divided over how to
best increase audience size: Some believe that heavy
series production is necessary (USA); others argue for
original movie production, heavy promotion and more
effective scheduling (TNT).
The cable industry reports its own ranking of
top
shows,
which
are
based
on
multichannel
homes, not all television homes. The rankings in
9.9 come from these so-called cable ratings, but the
ratings shown in the table are based on household
ratings. In 2004 Nielsen changed the way it mea-
sures multiplexed premium channels, no longer
aggregating the different channels showing the
same program (for example, Entourage) on cable
and satellite systems. Instead, Nielsen began report-
ing ratings for each “plex” separately.
The goal for basic and premium programmers is
to count the number of people who make a return
visit to their channels on a regular basis. Perhaps
because of the influence of measuring the enduring
appeal of web pages, the cable industry has borrowed
an internet term to describe the viability of a channel:
stickiness. A website that holds its viewers is said to be
sticky, like a real spider web, and now programmers
discuss the stickiness of their channels. It’s a new
word for an old concept: giving the target audience
what it wants so it will come back for more.
Measuring VOD Use
Surveys and audience sampling are unnecessary for
gauging on-demand programming. Two-way capabil-
ities in most cable systems allow accurate tracking of
buy rates, and the satellite and telephone services have
their own usage records. However, this is proprietary
information, compiled by each separate MVPD sys-
tem. No combined measures exist, and estimates of
all VOD and PPV use are not wholly reliable.
The Many Channels
This section looks at content of the various kinds of
subscription services widely available in the second
decade of the twenty first century. It divides them
into
15
general
types
of
advertising-supported
328
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
9.7
Map of Broadcast Market Showing Cable Franchises
Courtesy of Cable Media, Inc. Used with permission.
CABLE MEDIA, INC.
A Division of SMS, INC.
CHICAGO’S CABLE SOURCE
Cable television avaliabilities
across Chicagoland cable
systems, and the country.
For local cable advertising
in any and all U.S. cable
television households.
Refer to Chicago’s
Cable source.
CABLE MEDIA, INC.
CHAPTER 9 Basic and Premium Subscription Programming
329
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
services and two kinds of premium services by
adapting grouping patterns used by FiOS, U-verse
and Comcast, and supplemented by Wikipedia! Of
course, the list is incomplete (we don’t want you to
fall asleep!), but you will find most you know here.
Major Subscription Networks
Foundation
As already described in 9.2, these channels are found
on nearly every multichannel service in the United
States, so most people are probably quite familiar
with their content. There are the long-established
channels that appear on virtually every MVPD’s
lineup: TBS, ESPN, Food Network, USA, ESPN2,
HGTV,
The Weather Channel, TLC,
Discovery
Channel, MTV, Fox News, Nickelodeon, Spike TV,
TNT, Disney Channel, A&E, CNN/HLN, Lifetime
Television, C-SPAN and VH1. Of these, only the
Food Network is a relative newcomer. These 20 net-
works capture the largest audiences, spend the most
money and have the most visibility in the United
States and abroad. (Cutting off the so-called founda-
tion networks at 20 instead of 25 or 30 is entirely
arbitrary and based solely on one year’s subscriber
rolls. Some networks in the next dozen are equally
well known and may swap places in any given year.)
Children’s
For a while, only one or two channels targeted to chil-
dren found their way onto the cable/satellite lineups.
Nowadays, several choices are available—some more
family-oriented than purely for kids. Nickelodeon has
added Nick Jr., Nicktoons and Teen Nick (Noggin
seems to have been swallowed). After Nickelodeon
and Disney Channel, the best known are Cartoon Net-
work, Discovery Kids, TeenNick.com, Boomerang,
FUNimation, PBS Kids Sprout, plus HD versions of
Disney XD (see 9.10). There’s also Anime Network,
BabyFirstTV, Cbeebies, Familyland, Hallmark Chan-
nel, the Hub, qubo, pets.tv, Sorpresa and TV Land.
Documentary/Educational
In addition to TLC and Discovery in its various
forms, Animal Planet fits here, along with Crime &
Investigation Network, History, Military Channel,
Military History Channel, National Geographic
Channel and National Geographic Wild, Science
Channel, PBS World, and Bio (formerly Biography).
Some university towns have local cable channels
they support, often of this educational sort (for
example, UCTV by the University of California
and BYU TV by Brigham Young University).
Entertainment
This broad group varies from very adult program-
ming down to comedy and over to science fiction.
A&E, generally considered a foundation service, fits
here, as does Adult Swim, BBC America, BET, Bravo,
9.8
Nielsen Television Activity Report
Broadcast Affiliates
Average Weekly Cume %
NBC
75.7
CBS
74.9
ABC
74.6
FOX
70.1
WB
44.7
UPN
37.2
Cable Networks
Average Weekly Cume %
TBS
39.0
USA
38.3
TNT
38.2
FX
29.6
A&E
28.3
DISC
27.6
SPIKE TV
27.5
ESPN
27.2
NICK
26.8
LIFE
26.5
COMEDY
26.5
AMC
26.4
Nielsen Media Research Television Activity Report, NHI, first quarter,
2006. www.tvb.org/rcentral/MediaTrendsTrack/tvbasics/10_
Reach_BdcstvsCable.asp.
330
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
9.9
Top Cable Shows, February 2007 Top 10 Cable TV Programs (Total Day)
Rank
Program
Network
Total U.S.
Household Rating
Total Viewers
1
WWE Raw
USA
3.4
5,975,000
2
WWE Raw
USA
3.3
5,706,000
2
Prime Movie (Montana Sky)
LIF
3.3
4,767,000
4
SpongeBob
NICK
3.1
4,809,000
4
Monk
FX
3.1
4,856,000
6
Fairly Odd Parents
NICK
2.9
4,431,000
7
SpongeBob
NICK
2.7
3,916,000
8
SpongeBob
NICK
2.6
3,838,000
8
Fairly Odd Parents
NICK
2.6
3,871,000
10
Fairly Odd Parents
NICK
2.5
3,404,000
10
Fairly Odd Parents
NICK
2.5
3,459,000
10
Drake & Josh
NICK
2.5
3,432,000
10
Hannah Montana
DSNY
2.5
3,695,000
Nielsen, www.nielsenmedia.com (retrieved for February 2007). Consult http://tvbythenumbers.zap2it.com for any week to get current
numbers.
9.10
Are Kids (Still) Watching TV?
W
ith MySpace, Neopets, Gaia, YouTube and blog-
ging, it’s not surprising if one wonders whether kids
have time to watch plain old television, whatever service it
comes from. A recent study by the Kaiser Family Founda-
tion found that “new” media such as computers and video
games have not displaced the use of “old” media such as
television and music. In fact, for better or worse, the
amount of time spent viewing TV per day was three times
greater than the time spent with any other medium. So, yes,
kids are still watching TV, and they are watching cable,
Nickelodeon and Disney in particular. Despite the broad-
cast network’s efforts, these two networks garner the lion’s
share of kids and tweens. With kids ages 2–11, Nick’s
Sponge Bob SquarePants gets top ratings, and its iCarly
and Drake and Josh are popular with teens. Disney also
captures tweens 9–14 with such live-action series as Jessie
and Wizards of Waverly Place. But television for kids is
not all escapades and cartoons.
Concerns about children’s health and wellness have not
gone unnoticed by cable programmers. Nickelodeon’s
2006 “Let’s Just Play” campaign centered on a five-month
miniseries that documented real kids’ efforts to make their
lives healthier, and the “Let’s Just Play” website encourages
kids to join the challenge and implement an action plan for
living a healthier lifestyle. In honor of the Worldwide Day
of Play, Nickelodeon goes dark for three hours to encour-
age kids to “get up, go out, and go play.” “Rescuing
Recess” is part of Cartoon Network’s “Get Animated” ini-
tiative to get kids active, healthy and involved. The network
introduced the first annual National Recess Week in 2006,
concluding with a new “Operation R.E.C.E.S.S” episode
of the network’s series, Codename: Kids! Next Door. The
“Get Animated” website features information on how to eat
like a superhero and games that kids can play both inside
and outside. Whatever the broadcast networks are doing
has so far not made much of a dent in the distribution of
ratings.
Nancy C. Schwartz, Ph.D.
The Academic Edge, Inc.
CHAPTER 9 Basic and Premium Subscription Programming
331
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Chiller, Comedy Central, E! Entertainment Televi-
sion, FEARnet, FX, FSN, here!, Lifetime, Logo, Oxy-
gen, ReelzChannel, Sleuth, SOAPnet (if it’s still alive),
Spike, Syfy, TBS, Telemundo, TeleFutura, truTV (for-
merly Court TV), TNT, Univision, WE tv, Wedding
Central, and others. In fact, it’s hard not to think of
virtually all television as entertainment, especially if
you have a dry sense of humor.
An almost singular channel, MTV’s Logo debu-
ted in 2005. Devoted to gay and lesbian programming,
Logo carries mostly series and films that previously
aired on other broadcast and cable networks or
appeared only in movie theaters (see 9.11).
Foreign
Until the availability of digital channels, the only
way to receive foreign-language channels was to
live in a very large city or stay at a Disney hotel.
Nowadays, dozens of options have found their way
9.11
Narrowcasting to the Gay Community
T
he 8-year run of NBC’s hit Will & Grace (1998 to
2006) brought a successful gay title character to the
prime-time landscape for the first time. The Emmy-winning
show in turn spawned other programs on cable featuring
gay or lesbian characters. Showtime followed up with an
adaptation of the British hit Queer as Folk, which ran for
five years in the early 2000s. Overlapped by another
long-running series The L Word (2004 to 2009), these
shows brought the premium network some of its highest
Nielsen ratings. Bravo found similar rating success with the
makeover show Queer Eye for the Straight Guy.
The popularity of these programs was convincing evi-
dence that a niche audience existed for gay-, lesbian-,
bisexual- and transgender-themed (GLBT-themed) program-
ming, and soon whole cable networks with programming
targeted to gay and lesbian viewers appeared. The first
network, here!, began in 2002 as a video-on-demand
service or a premium subscription channel on most cable
and satellite systems. Its biggest hit is Dante’s Cove, a
dramatic series that mixes the soap opera and horror gen-
res. Movies and documentaries are the other popular sta-
ples of here!’s on-demand programming.
Q Television Network (QTN) was the second cable net-
work to target a GLBT audience. Begun in 2004, the short-
lived QTN aired primarily in such urban markets as New
York, San Francisco and Seattle, carrying a range of variety,
talk and music programs. The most popular of its original
shows, The Queer Edge with Jack E. Jett, was a variety show
that mixed music and comedy. QTN was unable to gain
carriage outside the largest urban markets, and after being
plagued by rumors of financial problems and impropriety by
its executives, it went dark in May, 2006.
Launched in 2005, the Logo channel became the third
channel targeting GLBT (or LGBT) audiences. Owned by
media giant Viacom in its MTV Networks division, Logo
found a secure place with most cable providers across the
country. Carriage came easily because the channel was
swapped for Viacom’s fading VH1 Mega Hits, a digital
channel already slotted on hundreds of cable systems.
Logo’s programming is a mix of original and syndicated
programming, including documentaries, music videos,
reality television and travel programming. Its successes
include the reality series Coming Out Stories, the African-
American themed Noah’s Arc, and the animated series
Rick & Steve: The Happiest Gay Couple in All the World.
Logo has captured its greatest Nielsen ratings success with
RuPaul’s Drag Race, a competition reality program
launched in 2009 in which contestants vie to become the
next “drag superstar.” As a result of RuPaul’s Drag Race’s
huge popularity, Logo has spun off two related programs
which have, in turn, become ratings winners: RuPaul’s Drag
Race: Untucked and RuPaul’s Drag U. Logo partners with
CBS News to bring coverage of gay-themed news topics
to the cable network. Logo has also become an internet
presence by providing three LGBT-themed websites and by
having its programming downloadable from iTunes. Logo
programming is also available via video-on-demand, and it
provides a wireless platform for Sprint and Verizon.
Reaching beyond television, Logo has also been in part
responsible for the theatrical release of two motion pictures,
including the film version of its hit series Noah’s Arc.
James Angelini, Ph.D.
University of Delaware
332
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
onto the lineups of both satellite services and some
cable MSOs in very large metropolitan areas (FiOS
concentrates more on very local news channels).
Many world networks have high production values
and serve two functions: They bring homeland com-
fort to ex-patriots while also providing native-born
Americans with chances to learn about other cul-
tures. The best-known channels include ART (Arab
Radio & Television), Asian American Satellite TV,
BBC America, TV Asia and TV Japan. Then there
are a slew of Spanish-language channels appealing
to Spanish-speaking immigrants and to people who
want to keep up or improve their language skills, as
already described.
Lifestyle
Lifestyle channels are the niche and subniche channels
that instantly remind viewers they are not watching
regular broadcast television. The content is very spe-
cialized, but so are the advertising and viewers. A few
examples are DIY (Do It Yourself) Network, the Out-
door Channel, the Cooking Channel, as well as The
Africa Channel, Planet Green, Recipe TV, Style Net-
work, Travel Channel, Wealth TV, Casa Club TV,
Discovery Fit & Health, Fashion TV, HGTV, Halo-
gen, Ovation, and Oprah’s darling OWN.
Movies
Then there are a seeming excess of movie channels.
A double handful of advertising–supported movie
channels appear on some basic cable and satellite
services. These include AMC (used to be American
Movie Classics), Hallmark Movie Channel, Lifetime
Movie Network, Fox Movie Channel, Turner Clas-
sic Movies, Reelz Channel, HD Net, HD Theater
and, maybe on some systems, the Sundance Chan-
nel, VeneMovies, Cine Latino, Flix, Epix, plus IFC
(Independent Film Channel). Most of the really big
name movie channels require paying a premium.
Music
Channels that offer different music formats have
grown
beyond
the
limited
MTV/VH1/CMTV
options of the early 1990s. Now six different varia-
tions of the trailblazing MTV service coexist and
two VH1s have survived. Defeated by the popular
CMT (Country Music Television), TNN morphed
out of music into Spike TV. Some of the other
widely-distributed music channels are Centric (for-
merly BET Jazz), BET Hip Hop, BET Gospel, Z
Music Television, A3 Network (a dance and night-
life channel), Fuse, Great American Country, Har-
mony Channel and Palladia. Then there’s DMX,
the digital audio service that comes with DirecTV,
Sirius that comes with Dish, and Muzak and Music
Choice. Music, music, everywhere, even on TV!
News
What were once just CNN and CNN Headline
News have now expanded to several options. Fox
News battles head to head with MSNBC, each tak-
ing
the
opposing
political
slant.
CNBC,
The
Weather Channel and three channels of C-SPAN
are available nearly everywhere. Sports news comes
from ESPNews, of course. In addition, two channels
vie for the business-news market: Bloomberg Televi-
sion and Fox Business Network. U.S. distribution of
foreign-owned news channels has also expanded
over the years, ranging from BBC World News to
the controversial Al Jazeera (see 9.12). In addition,
there are hundreds of local public, educational and
governmental (PEG) channels, especially in and near
major cities and college towns. In the Washington,
DC, area, for example, FiOS carries at least 27
hyperlocal PEG channels.
Religion
Depending on where you live, you may think the
number
and
variety
of
religion
channels
has
increased greatly in the past decade; digital shelf
space made this possible on cable, and still more
variants exist only online. Current cable examples
are Church Channel, EWTN (Eternal Word Net-
work), Shalom TV, TJC (the Jewish Channel), Gos-
pel Music Television, JCTV, the Word Network,
TBN (Trinity Broadcasting Network), I-Life, INSP
(Inspiration), Smile of a Child and Three Angels
CHAPTER 9 Basic and Premium Subscription Programming
333
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Broadcasting Network. Sometimes MVPDs group a
few religious channels with TV Land, ABC Family
and the Hallmark Channel, creating a “Family” sec-
tion of service. This is probably an unhappy linking
for Hallmark and ABC as well as for the more for-
mally religious networks.
Sex
Soft-core pornography still abounds on multichan-
nel services. Social norms that used to discourage
the proliferation of such services are eroding, espe-
cially with reformers’ attention focused on hard-core
internet pornography. Another key to the popularity
9.12
The Phenomenon of Al Jazeera
S
ince its start up in 1996, Al Jazeera has had difficulty in
shaking the public perception that it sympathizes with
Al Qaeda and provides favorable treatment to extremist
and terrorist groups. Started by the Emir of Qatar, Sheik
Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani, Al Jazeera was envisioned as
a means of encouraging democracy in the Arab world
through the introduction of controversial views on an
independently-run 24-hour television news service. Despite
its pledge to bring objective news reporting and a freer
news media, in many countries the public perceived Al
Jazeera as a propaganda vehicle for Al Qaeda and simi-
lar extremist groups. This view stigmatized the network,
ultimately forcing temporary shutdowns of its field offices in
many Arab countries. Indeed, two of its offices were
bombed by American troops.
Over time, however, Al Jazeera expanded beyond
Arabic news reporting to include Al Jazeera Sports 1 and
2, Al Jazeera Children’s Channel, Al Jazeera Documentary
Channel, Al Jazeera Mobasher (a channel similar to
C-SPAN) and a pan-Arab newspaper. It even spawned
several Arabic-language television competitors: Al Arabiya
out of Saudi Arabia, Al Kawthar from Iran, and German
and French Arabic-language news and entertainment sat-
ellite channels, along with BBC programming in Arabic.
CNN now sponsors an Arabic-language website in the
Near East, with others in Russian and Spanish, but other
American efforts to compete in Arabic via Al Hurra have
been unsuccessful.
In order to change its image, in 2006 Al Jazeera added
Al Jazeera English, an English-language news channel made
available around the world. This channel provides interna-
tional news coverage 24-hours a day, drawing on news
offices in Qatar; Washington, DC; London; and Kuala
Lampur. Twelve hours of its daily programming originates in
the Qatar offices while four hours come from Al Jazeera’s
other news offices. By hiring experienced journalists away
from such established world news providers as the BBC and
CNN, Al Jazeera English sought to give a credible voice to
underrepresented parts of the world. Its stated goal is to
cover controversial stories not always fully reported by the
Western news media. Al Jazeera English provided unprece-
dented English-language coverage within both Gaza and
Israel during their 2008–2009 conflict as well as during the
turmoil in Egypt in 2011. It is estimated that, as of 2012, Al
Jazeera English can be accessed in every major English-
language market, is available as a television channel in over
100 countries worldwide, and appears in more than 130
million homes. It is live-streamed online and available on
Android phones and tablets.
Because its public profile in the United States has
been persistently negative, penetration into this country
has been poor. Only one satellite service (DISH) and only
three local cable providers in the United States carry Al
Jazeera English (no major cable operators have it). The
network is available as a television channel in Toledo,
Ohio; Burlington, Vermont; and Washington DC.
However, public perceptions of Al Jazeera (and Al
Jazeera English) seem to be evolving. Testimony provided
by U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee in 2001 took a broader view.
Clinton stated that “viewership of Al Jazeera is going up in
the United States because it is real news…you feel like you
are getting real news around the clock instead of a million
commercials and, you know, arguments between talking
heads and the kind of stuff that we do on our news that is
not providing information to us.” Because journalists as a
group make considerable use of the internet to gain back-
ground and perspectives, a more positive view of Al
Jazeera English is emerging.
James Angelini, Ph.D.
University of Delaware
334
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
of soft-core porn is a very relaxed view of “porn” by
twenty-somethings, who no longer see social stigma
associated with viewing pornography. Not counting
all that is available online, the widely available cable
choices include Adult Swim, Hot Choice, Playboy
TV, Pleasure, Spice and TeN (The Erotic Network).
In some locations these are restricted to PPV.
Shopping
Home shopping channels continue to attract view-
ers, but the number of services has leveled off since
1990, largely because competition from the internet
has
drawn
away
many
customers.
The
long-
surviving options include HSN (Home Shopping
Network), Home Shopping Spree (Spree!), QVC
and Shop at Home. In addition, channels linked to
department store chains appear on some MVPD’s
outlets, such as JCPenney shopping channels on
Time Warner Cable.
Spanish-Language
Unlike the “foreign” category, this programming
reflects the mainstream of Hispanic and Latino
viewers in the United States. Advertisers are keenly
interested
in
this
growing
population
segment.
Latino or Hispanic programming is found on Gala-
visión and three hybrid broadcast/cable networks,
Univision, Telemundo and TeleFutura. Univision
regularly
often
outdraws
the
English-language
broadcast networks in many markets. There are also
Spanish-language versions of some foundation ser-
vices, such as Discover en Espanol and History en
Espanol, plus such Spanish-only channels as Azteca
America, HITN (Hispanic Information and Tele-
communications Network), Mexicanal, Mega TV,
WAPA America and Cine Latino. In addition,
many channels come with the option of an English
or Spanish audio feed.
Sports
ESPN, ESPN2, ESPNU and ESPN Classic are still the
top purveyors of cable sports, but they get plenty of
competition these days from Versus, NFL Network,
NHL Network, NBA TV, Big Ten Network, Fox
College Sports, CBS Sports Network and MSG Net-
work, plus all the regional sports channels operated
by Fox. The most recent trend is to differentiate each
channel by the sport itself, rather than solely by lea-
gue or channel owner, although branding from NFL
or Fox always helps. Because men are a difficult-
to-reach advertising target, the revenue potential is
very high. On the other hand, sports rights fees con-
tinue to skyrocket (see Chapter 7). Besides the ESPN,
Fox and major league channels named above, the
Tennis Channel, FUEL TV, the Golf Channel, the
Speed Channel, the Sportsman’s Channel and Yes
HD attract sizable audiences of fans.
Superstations
Local stations with sports and movies can get
national attention when distributed by satellite to
distant cities. As mentioned in Chapter 3, the FCC
has called a halt to the proliferation of superstations
but grandfathered the biggest ones: KWGN, WGN,
WPIX, WSBK and WWOR. These originate in very
large cities and bring urban news and big-time
sports. WTBS in Atlanta is now considered a local
station, and its sister network, TBS (once a supersta-
tion), became a foundation network.
Premium Networks
The number of pay-per-month channels leveled off
when the two kinds of pay-per-use were fully rolled
out, and then froze or even shrank when Netflix and
other online movie services gained users. Each pre-
mium channel has worked hard at establishing a sig-
nature program and pushing its brand images, while
fighting to maintain market share.
HBO/Max
Owned by Time Warner, HBO encompasses seven
pay-per-month channels already mentioned as its sub-
niche services (HBO, HBO2, HBO Signature, HBO
Family, HBO Comedy, HBO Zone and HBO Latino)
plus HBO On Demand. Time Warner also owns
HBO’s sister service Max (formerly Cinemax) and its
CHAPTER 9 Basic and Premium Subscription Programming
335
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
subparts, MoreMax, ActionMax, OuterMax, 5Star-
Max, ThrillerMax, WMax, plus @Max and Max
On Demand. (The sole focus of Cinemax is movies.)
HBO has moved far from the movies-only channel
that began in the 1970s. It differentiates itself from
other “movie” channels by scheduling original pro-
gramming in drama, comedy and sports that is much
acclaimed by critics and viewers. HBO has won many
dozens of Emmys, Golden Globes and Oscars for such
programs as The Sopranos, True Blood and Sex and
the City, stealing the limelight from the Big Four
broadcast networks. Most recently, its drama Game
of Thrones seems headed to a new raft of awards.
HBO appears on virtually every cableco/satco/telco
system in the United States, as does Showtime, and
HBO is distributed internationally to more than 170
countries, including HBO Canada, HBO en Español,
HBO Ole, HBO Brazil, HBO Asia, HBO Central
Europe and dozens more place-related names.
Showtime/The Movie Channel/Flix
CBS Corporation owns Showtime and its movies-
only channels Flix, The Movie Channel and the Sun-
dance Channel. Showtime’s strategy is to make major
studio deals, having learned a tough lesson in the
1990s when other premium channels kept it from get-
ting new, big-draw theatrical movies. The channel’s
other strategy is to compete with HBO for the top-
boxing draws. Showtime won several Golden Globe
Awards for its original series Weeds. Showtime’s sub-
niche channels are Showtime 2, Showtime Showcase,
Showtime Beyond, Showtime Extreme, Showtime
Next, Showtime Women, Showtime FamilyZone,
along with The Movie Channel and TMC Xtra. In
addition, three on-demand/PPV channels (Showtime
on Demand, The Movie Channel on Demand, and
Showtime PPV) appear on many cable and satellite
systems. In 2007 Showtime introduced Showtime
Interactive 2.0 on the DISH Network.
Encore, Starz and MoviePlex
Liberty Starz owns Starz Encore, which comprises
17 channels of cable- and satellite-delivered pre-
mium movie channels. The cornerstone of Starz
Encore’s programming strategy is to lock in studio
releases of theatrical movies for several years,
although the associated costs of this strategy had
put the company in financial jeopardy in the early
2000s, causing subsequent rebranding efforts to
gather more subscriptions. Like most other premium
movie channels, Encore added the Encore name to
all of its six channels, ending up with the basic
Encore plus Encore Action, Encore Drama, Encore
Love, Encore Mystery, Encore Westerns—all with
East and West feeds—and an on-demand channel.
Encore is distributed even more widely in the United
States than HBO because some subscribers can get it
as part of a digital tier as well as a premium stand-
alone or packaged with Starz. However, only the
main Encore channel is HD; the others are digital
only. On the other hand, most of the movies they
show are in older formats anyway.
Starz’s makeover was more dramatic, opting for
cohesive graphics packages across all channels,
dropping the annoying exclamation point, and even-
tually shifting all channels to HD. Starz Theater
became Starz Edge that focused on young men by
showing four films at fixed times all week. Two
channels were merged into Starz Kids and Family
to make room for a new channel called Starz Com-
edy. And to fit in with the new look, Black Starz was
renamed Starz InBlack, leaving Starz Cinema as the
only Starz channel to keep its original name. Unlike
other premium movie channels, Starz carries some
banner advertising across some of its programs, a
practice that stirs criticism and contradicts its all-
movie promotion.
MoviePlex replays one of Encore’s seven chan-
nels each day in the week (all Encore Western one
day, All Encore Love the next and so on), but
accompanies them with interstitials and a lot of pro-
motion. The Plex idea gave rise to two simulcast
channels—IndiePlex that carries only independent
films and RetroPlex that carries only older movies.
MoviePlex’s distribution is limited largely to DISH
and Comcast systems. In contrast, both Encore and
Starz appear on all the major MVPDs, including
DirecTV, DISH and FiOS, but unlike HBO and
Showtime, Starz and Encore are distributed almost
exclusively in the United States.
336
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Pay-Per-View/Video-On-Demand
At one stage, PPV and VOD channels were consid-
ered separate and discrete companies, but all have
been folded in as arms of the main channels. Unlike
VOD, PPV services show the same movie or event to
all subscribers at the same time and charge an extra
premium for these events. Besides movies as on Starz
On Demand, PPV carries primarily major boxing,
wrestling and other fighting events (specifically
UFC, Ultimate Fighting Championship). HBO has
had the most success with PPV, generating huge rev-
enues for top matches. Every MVPD now includes
some
VOD channels
where subscribers
choose
among the available episodes of recent and older
television shows and movies. The selection is limited
by the rights holders so as not to undercut their
main broadcast and cable channels and DVD sales.
Hyping Subscription Networks
Like the broadcast networks, basic and premium net-
works require sophisticated marketing. Although
some newer networks naturally focus on acquiring
new viewers, the usual strategy is to retain existing
viewers while developing new services. Above all, pro-
moting brand identity is the key marketing goal, as in
such phrases as “Lifetime—Television for Women”
and “Spike TV! The First Network for Men.”
All subscription services use on-air tune-in and
cross-channel promotion. Tune-in promotion en-
courages viewers to stay with the channel for upcom-
ing
programs.
Cross-channel
promotion
allows
regular viewers of one cable channel (or website) to
learn about the shows on another program service.
Most of these efforts are accomplished using auto-
mated equipment with insert capability that can
introduce one channel’s promos into another chan-
nel’s program lineup in predetermined time slots. In
addition, automated flow-titling has been adopted by
many channels. This form of on-air promotion places
an overlay on one side at the bottom of the screen
naming the next program coming up. To the annoy-
ance of viewers, such overlays sometimes obscure a
crucial part of the story content and certainly draw
the viewers’ attention away from the ongoing drama.
Nonetheless, like network identification bugs (logos
in the corner on live programming), automated
advance titling is probably here to stay.
Over the years, the premium channels have
developed especially sophisticated, big-budget cam-
paigns for marketing their programs year-round
using slogans, giveaways and special package rates.
The actual promotion vehicles include mass media
advertising, reminders in monthly bills (statement
stuffers) and coupons in mailers. When trying to
expand subscriptions in a local area, they may tem-
porarily unscramble their signals to give cable view-
ers a taste of what they are missing. Premium
channels seek greater buy rates by broadly (and
loudly) promoting specific events or signature pro-
grams (such as Game of Thrones on HBO) through
all available promotional vehicles. They also send a
deluge of special mailers to those who have discon-
tinued their pay channels. When successful, antici-
pating and meeting customer expectations creates
brand loyalty that is difficult to dislodge. Just how
this principle will apply in some future all-demand
age is an interesting question.
Regardless of the method, subscription network
programmers must get closely involved with the pro-
motional and marketing efforts on the air, in print
advertising and on related websites. These days, the
job of acquiring and scheduling content is tied to
making sure that an audience will be there when
the program is shown. Launching a new program
sometimes calls for innovative methods. One event
that backfired on Turner was its promotion of an
“Adult Swim” program called Aqua Teen Hunger
Force. A few fake devices that looked a lot like
bombs were placed under bridges in Boston, causing
a mild panic. Naturally, the promotion chief lost his
job over that stunt.
Audio Services on Cable
In addition to video programming, cable and satel-
lite systems provide subscribers with radio and
audio services. Like video services, radio and audio
come in both basic and pay forms and are mostly
CHAPTER 9 Basic and Premium Subscription Programming
337
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
nationally distributed. Above all others, in the U.S.
satellite radio means Sirius XM, a pay service which
can be received by mobile receivers in cars or hand
carried and by personal computers. It also has com-
petitors such as Music Choice (12 channels), DMX
(100 channels), WFMT Radio Network and Yester-
day Today.
Big cable companies such as Comcast provide
several channels of national digital audio, mostly
as part of a package of cable services. Some of
these channels carry advertising, and some do not.
There are also pay services that charge subscribers a
monthly fee for a series of specialized music chan-
nels, which are collected by the local cable or satel-
lite operator and shared between the two entities. If
people want to hear the king of shock jocks on sat-
ellite radio, for example, they’ll have to pay (see
Chapter 12).
Cable operators are understandably skeptical
about the size of pay audio’s potential as a revenue
stream for wired distribution. The buy rate for all
digital audio services runs about 15 percent of
basic cable television subscribers, and marketing
plans generally target cable subscribers who have
high-end CD units. On the positive side, newer
surround-sound and other receiver advances have
much improved reception, making more consumers
more sensitive to audio quality. This new awareness
and appreciation of audio spurred the digital audio
business, but cable audio now has plenty of compe-
tition from internet downloading, iPods and even
cell phone aps (see Chapters 11 and 12).
Twisting Paths for the Future
The last five years have brought dramatic changes in
subscription cable networks—largely resulting from
television’s digitalization and broadband growth.
Advertiser-supported cable networks have prolifer-
ated into families of niche, subniche and microniche
program channels serving subgroups of Americans.
At the same time, the subscription services feel pres-
sure toward online distribution and VOD while try-
ing to maintain their paying cable and satellite
customer bases. Finding profitable internet and
on-demand models for subscription television net-
works that will be profitable remains the active
goal.
As digitalization permits greatly increased chan-
nel capacity—and impulse technology becomes stan-
dard
for
cable
converters—a
wide
range
of
possibilities opens up for cable operators and pro-
grammers alike. Increasing numbers of cable sub-
scribers
can
now
order
a
movie,
concert
or
sporting event in an instant, and, increasingly, they
avail themselves of the opportunities. The quantity
of options increases daily, many of which are free,
not pay, at this time. Projections of 90 million VOD
homes in just a few years may entice Hollywood’s
studios to release movies to pay-per-view services
closer to their theatrical release date, truly creating
a “home box office” bonanza for movie makers and
event organizers. The key obstacle is that Holly-
wood and the big program producers receive much
of their revenue from domestic and international
syndication and are reluctant to gamble with any-
thing that threatens that honey pot.
One caveat lies in the rapid spread of online pro-
grams that allow viewers with high-speed online con-
nections to watch pirated movies. Hollywood studios
that invest $150 million for a feature film have more
to lose from pilfered content than a music company
whose product costs a fraction to make. A digital
copy is a perfect replica of the original, and faster
connections and larger hard drives encourage pirates
to defeat the copy-protection schemes designed by the
content providers. The curse of pirating generates big
headaches for producers.
In the midst of rapidly changing technologies,
programmers hunt new methods of cutting program
costs while recycling and reusing what they have in
exciting ways. Basic service strives to identify pro-
gramming with appeal to narrow slices of subscribers
in order to carve out unique services, while premium
channels adopt a low-price, high-volume strategy of
splintered services. Meanwhile, hundreds of millions
of potential subscribers in such countries as India and
China have become a powerful lure for U.S. cable
program suppliers, who can clearly see the pie at
home being split into smaller portions by increasing
numbers of hungry new services. Increasing access to
338
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
potential viewers in the once-inaccessible countries,
however, is fueling experimentation with new types
of niche services and providing hope to wannabes
who envision a world market of sufficient size to sup-
port their programming.
Nearly all newer and proposed program ser-
vices fit into the niche, subniche and microniche cat-
egories. Very few seek broad appeal. These newer
services function like radio station formats, targeting
a specific audience segment with demographically-
tied programming, talent and promotion. More
niche program services mean greater competition,
however, and in almost every category or genre,
the dominant service now has many challengers …
including the monster Netflix who directly chal-
lenges HBO and indirectly challenges all of cable.
Because of efficiencies in cross-promotion and
the reuse of original programming in multiple
media, the clearest direction for the future is
that—joint ventures, mergers and buyouts will
increasingly integrate cable program suppliers with
both the companies that distribute their wares and
with broadcast services. The trend toward building
media conglomerates that reach across media tech-
nologies and once-rigid legal boundaries, as well as
across international borders in distribution, is unde-
niably accelerating, and Comcast is leading the way.
Notes
1. Because of conflicts over program distribution rights,
the FCC grandfathered five satellite-distributed broadcast
stations but banned others from wide satellite distribution.
The five remaining superstations are WGN (now called
WGN America), WWOR-TV, WSBK-TV, WPIX-TV, and
KTLA-TV. KYUR-TV in Alaska calls itself a superstation
but is actually an affiliate of ABC and CW.
2. Camcast and Disney have bet on the monthly sub-
scription model for the next decade. In 2012, they reached
a 10-year agreement for Camcast to distribute all Disney
television content (about 70 ABC, Disney and ESPN ser-
vices). This extraordinary deal includes VOD and stream-
ing for tablets, phones and other (perheps not yet
invented) devices, and it bolsters TV Everywhere as the
business model of the future. Amy Chozick and Brooks
Barnes, “If Disney Owns It, Comcast Will Soon Be
Streaming It.” New York Times, Jan. 5, 2012, p, B2.
CHAPTER 9 Basic and Premium Subscription Programming
339
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A P T E R
10
Public Television
Programming
Glenda R. Balas
Chapter Outline
A Special Kind of Television
Program Philosophy
The Network Model
Station Scheduling Autonomy
The Carriage Agreements
Multicasting
Multiple Platforms
PBS Responsibilities
Types of Station Licensees
Community Licensees
University Licensees
Public School Licensees
State Television Agencies
Similarities and Differences
Program Production
Program Financing
The Major Producers
Balance in Selection
Syndicated and Local
Programming
Noncommercial Syndication
Noncommercial Adult
Education
Commercial Syndication
Local Production
Scheduling Strategies
Counterprogramming the
Commercial Networks
Stripping and Stacking Limited
Series
Audience Flow
Considerations at the Station
Level
National Promotion
Audience Ratings
Nielsen Data
Audience Accumulation
Strategy
Loyalty Assessment
Demographic Composition
Developments Ahead
Notes
340

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
D
o you sometimes say “I never watch public
TV”? Are you sure you didn’t devour Ses-
ame Street as a kid? Did your teacher make you
watch NOVA when you were in school? Don’t you
sometimes find yourself watching Curious George
with a sibling or Antiques Roadshow with some
older adults? Did you watch part of Ken Burns’ Base-
ball? A lot of people think they never see public tele-
vision, but they occasionally do. In fact, about half of
Americans watch something on public television at
least once a week.
A Special Kind of Television
Public television, its mission and its public service objec-
tives occupy a unique position in American broadcast-
ing. Generations of children have grown up with
Sesame Street and Mister Rogers’ Neighborhood in
this country and abroad, and adults have sampled Mas-
terpiece, NOVA and PBS NewsHour for decades. Pub-
lic TV, once known as educational television, has
become a staple among the informational and cultural
offerings in the United States, taken for granted in
many households and schoolrooms.
Public television didn’t develop overnight or
without a struggle. Critics have argued that public
broadcasting
presents
a
left-leaning
ideological
stance, caters to an elite audience, or has become
unnecessary in an age of large-capacity cable and
satellite systems, DVD distribution and internet tele-
vision. Many have questioned public funding for
public TV, maintaining that the marketplace—not
taxpayers—should provide the specialized program-
ming available on the noncommercial service.
Even U.S. presidents and members of Congress
have entered the fray, seeking to eliminate federal
funding for public television stations, PBS (Public
Broadcasting Service) and NPR (National Public
Radio). In 1972, President Richard Nixon—angered
by programming he viewed as left of center—vetoed
the system’s three-year federal appropriation and sent
word that he wanted PBS out of the “public affairs
business.” Nine years later, in 1981, President Ronald
Reagan also tried to cut the system’s funding entirely,
this time in an effort to balance the federal budget. In
both these cases, the U.S. Congress (thankfully) over-
turned the executive mandates and authorized fund-
ing. Within 14 years, however, conservatives in
Congress would take the lead to defund public broad-
casting once again, an effort repeated yet again in
2011. Ultimately, in both 1995 and 2011, late night
negotiations prevailed and saved the day for public
television. Even though public broadcasting main-
tained level funding in 1972, 1981, 1995 and 2011,
these battles were fierce and the outcomes uncertain.
(And of course, “level” means “less” as costs rise.)
These struggles speak to the tenuous and fragile qual-
ities of public broadcasting’s financial position.
Other facets of public broadcasting also point to
a less-than–rosy future for the national service. PBS
went from an average 2.0 rating overall in the 1999–
2000 season to 1.5 nationally in the 2004–05 season
and 1.2 in 2009. Underwriting support for national
programming has seriously slumped since 2001,
resulting in the loss of more than a third of all
corporate support by 2004 and the withdrawal of
several major donors for primetime programs, includ-
ing ExxonMobil, long-time supporter of Masterpiece
(that was a biggie). By 2009, underwriting for the
PBS core schedule had dropped by 50 percent.
In addition, other forms of giving have decreased,
resulting in shrinking state, university and foundation
support, as well as smaller member contributions.
These broad-based cuts to national underwriting rev-
enues were due, in part, to decisions by some sponsors
to migrate to networks and basic cable, where they
could buy call-to-action advertising. Some major-
market
stations,
including
WTTW-Chicago,
also
blamed PBS, which has not, they charge, been active
enough in securing “what we most need—powerful,
successful, innovative programming.”1
Finally, if funding is shrinking, so too is public
television, as stations either “go dark” or choose, like
KCET-Los Angeles, to leave the system entirely (see
10.7). Analysts suggest the problems confronting pub-
lic television are not new or unique to PTV and range
from financial woes in a down economy to the persis-
tent programming challenge of having enough content
of quality and variety to attract a broad audience.
Even with these sometimes crippling prob-
lems, public television stations persist, broadcasting
CHAPTER 10 Public Television Programming
341
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
multiple streams of content 24 hours a day, seven
days a week, in all regions of the country, expanding
into HD and online, and continuing to serve schools
in essential ways. On the more than 350 public tele-
vision stations that cover 99 percent of the country,
public television provides local programs and a
nightly core schedule in HD of quality arts, educa-
tion and public affairs series, supplemented by infor-
mational websites. Even though many Americans
view public television as alternative service, watch-
ing it only part of the time, more than half of the
country uses public broadcasting each month, gener-
ating a monthly broadcast audience of more than
121.9 million people. Researchers report that Amer-
icans rate public television as one of the most trusted
of all American institutions.
The following sections trace out the history, phi-
losophy and practices of this uniquely American
broadcast service, focusing on programming strate-
gies and current challenges confronting public broad-
casting. Some of these issues also resonate with public
service broadcasting in Europe (see 10.1).
10.1
Public Broadcasting in Europe
E
uropean public broadcasting has long been seen as
the ideal by a number of U.S. public broadcasters.
Public service broadcasting (as public broadcasting is
known in Europe) has historically enjoyed adequate fund-
ing, editorial autonomy and broad acceptance and sup-
port of its educational and cultural purpose throughout
Western Europe, though times got tougher during the
recent global financial crisis. As one might guess, the
establishment of successful public broadcasters in Eastern
and Southern Europe has been more difficult. While all
broadcasting services faced severe budget cuts over the
past few years, stations are also threatened by national
and regional governmental agencies that seek to use the
public airwaves as mouthpieces for their own political
agendas and policies.
Newly established public broadcasting services in Bos-
nia, Kosovo, Croatia, Herzegovina and Hungary seem
particularly at risk from political interference. For example,
in 2009, the Prime Minister of Kosovo suspended the
public license fee for RTK (Radio Televizija Kosova), virtually
eliminating the funding base for the Kosovo public broad-
caster. The suspension of this monthly fee (which had been
added to all electrical bills in Kosovo) caused the European
Broadcasting Union, which represents all public broadcas-
ters in Europe, to issue a public letter charging that this
decision endangers the broadcaster’s independence. Fur-
ther, the new Media Law established in Hungary in January
2011 has seriously undermined the independence of that
country’s public broadcaster, Magyar Televizio (MTV).
Under this law, adopted after the 2010 national elections,
Hungarian public broadcasting has been forced to alter its
editorial policy based on the composition of the Hungarian
parliament. Finally, changes in mid-2011 to the governing
statutes for BHRT (Radio-Television of Bosnia and Herzego-
vina) have granted broad powers to a governmental
Steering Committee to interfere in the public broadcaster’s
editorial and managerial issues.
Public broadcasters in Western Europe view these politi-
cal threats to public broadcasting in Eastern and Southern
Europe partly as a result of the region’s lack of internalization
of democratic process. Concerned that public broadcasting
in these countries could disappear in the next few years, the
European Broadcasting Union stepped in to provide more
than 500 hours of high quality content each year to public
service broadcasters in Eastern and Southern Europe.
Further, as reported by Eric Pfanner,* public broadcas-
ters in France, Germany, England and Italy have agreed to
provide consulting and technical assistance with their
neighbors’ transition to digital broadcasting. Importantly,
the Vienna-based South East Europe Media Organization
(SEEMO) has issued public statements demanding broad
respect for the social purposes of public broadcasting and
its role as the bedrock of democracy and public information
throughout Europe. Attitude change is likely to come slowly
and in fits and starts.
*Eric Pfanner, “Public Radio and TV Get Peers’ Help in Europe,”
New York Times, 5 December 2009.
342
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Program Philosophy
Officially established in 1967 as a national broadcast-
ing service, public television’s 125 original stations
were all committed to education and community. As
descendants of educational radio—which had its own
origins in the broadcast reform movement of the late
1920s and early 1930s2—these stations were united
by beliefs that broadcasting should not only be a pos-
itive force in society, but that it should also reside
outside the capitalist funding model that has defined
U.S. broadcasting since the mid-thirties. These foun-
dational tenets have driven public television’s pro-
gramming philosophy and ideas about audience and
purpose since the founding of public broadcasting as
a part of President Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society in
the 1960s, but they are getting a sore test today.
Nonetheless, these concepts continue to frame public
broadcasting’s struggle for adequate funding and, as
discussed in the following sections, ongoing debates
about programming.
In fact, arguments over content have persisted
within the industry since public television began.
For stations, the debate centers on the meaning of
noncommercial educational broadcasting, which is
what the Communications Act of 1934 and the
FCC call public television’s program service. Non-
commercial television service came into existence in
1952 when educational interests lobbied the FCC
into creating a special class of reserved channels
within the television allocations exclusively dedi-
cated to “educational television.”
One argument defines educational in the narrow
sense of instructional. From that viewpoint public
television should teach—it should direct its programs
to
school
and
college
classrooms and
to
out-
of-classroom students. The last thing PTV should do
is to compete for commercial television’s mass audi-
ence. Others define educational in a broader sense.
They want to reach out to viewers of all kinds with
programs that enrich lives and respond to needs. This
group perceives “instructional” television as a duty
that sometimes must be performed, but their devotion
goes to the wide range of programming the public has
come to think of as public television.
The Carnegie Commission on Educational Tele-
vision introduced the term public television in 1967.
The commission convinced many in government and
broadcasting that the struggling new service had to
generate wider support than it had in its fledgling
years. One of the impediments to such support, the
commission felt, was the word educational, which
gave the service an unpopular image. They suggested
public television as a more neutral term. Thus, a dis-
tinction has grown between instructional television
(ITV)3 and public television (PTV).
Lacking a truly national definition for public tel-
evision’s program service, a PTV station’s program-
mer must deal with the unresolved, internal questions
of what it means to be a noncommercial educational
broadcasting service. The PTV programmer must
come to grips with a station’s particular program phi-
losophy. Philosophies vary widely from one station to
the next, but two common themes persist: being edu-
cational and being noncommercial. These terms
imply that public television must directly serve “the
people”; it must be educational and different from
commercial television. One of the implications of
such a fundamental difference is that public television
programming need not pursue the largest possible
audience at whatever cost to programming. Public
broadcasting has a special mission to serve audiences
that would otherwise be neglected because they are
too small to interest commercial broadcasting. This
difference in outlook has great programming signifi-
cance. It means that the public station programmer is
relieved of one of the most relentless constraints inhi-
biting a commercial programmer’s freedom of choice.
At the same time, public television cannot cater
only to the smallest groups with the most esoteric
tastes in the community. Broadcasting is still a mass
medium, whether commercial or noncommercial, and
can justify occupying a broadcast channel and the
considerable expense of broadcast facilities only if it
reaches relatively large numbers of people. Public
broadcasting achieves this goal cumulatively by
reaching many small groups, which add up to a
respectably large cumulative total in the course of a
week. Remember, roughly 50 million U.S. television
households tune in to something on PTV each week.
CHAPTER 10 Public Television Programming
343
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Moreover, on the commercial side, PBS con-
tinues to move toward practices consistent with
for-profit media. For example, to appeal more pow-
erfully to large underwriters, PBS has expanded the
time devoted to underwriting credits and changed
their formats so they now resemble commercials. It
is telling that some corporate underwriters now use
the same spots on public television that they air on
the commercial networks and cable. PBS has also
formed
partnerships
with
commercial
entities
(DirecTV, Comcast and others) to generate income
and has commercialized its online site (pbs.org) by
selling
advertising
on
the
webpage
itself
and
throughout some of the programs streamed on the
site. Finally, as discussed later in this chapter, PBS is
exploring the option of creating internal program
breaks for placement of its own promotional spots,
a move seen by many as a first step toward within-
program underwriting content. It seems clear, then,
that PBS is not as completely “noncommercial” as it
once was … in attitude or practice.
The Network Model
Programming the national Public Broadcasting Ser-
vice is a little like trying to prepare a universally
acclaimed gourmet meal. The trouble is that a com-
mittee of 177 plans the menu, and the people who
pay the grocery bills want to be sure the meal is
served with sufficient regard for their images. Some
people coming to the dinner table want the meal to
be enjoyable and fun; others want the experience to
be uplifting and enlightening; still others insist that
the eating be instructive; and the seafood and
chicken cooks want to be sure the audience comes
away with a better understanding of the problems of
life underwater and in the coop.4
The analogies are not farfetched. A board of
appointed and elected representatives governs PBS
during three-year terms. The PBS Board of Directors
includes both professional directors, who lead public
television stations, and general directors, who repre-
sent the general public. The membership of public
television elects the professional directors, while the
general directors are selected by the PBS board,
which also appoints the PBS president and CEO.
The directors are responsible for governing and set-
ting policy for PBS. In total, the PBS Board of Direc-
tors is comprised of 27 members, including 14
professional directors, 12 general directors, and the
PBS president. The board is expected to serve 168
public television licensees operating 354 public sta-
tions all over the country and in such remote areas
as Guam, American Samoa and Bethel, Alaska.
Because PBS produces no programming, it uses
a host of program suppliers and tries to promote and
schedule their programs effectively. In addition, con-
stituencies ranging from independent producers to
minority groups constantly pressure public television
to meet their special needs. And, of course, the pro-
gram funders have their own agendas too.
In commercial television, programming and
money flow from network headquarters to affiliates.
Production is centrally controlled and distributed on
a one-way line to affiliated stations, who are paid
compensation to push the network button and trans-
mit what the network feeds. Most of the economic
incentives favor affiliate cooperation with the net-
work, placing tremendous programming power in
network hands.
In public television, money flows the opposite
way. Instead of being paid as loyal affiliates, member
stations pay PBS, which in turn supplies them with
programs sufficient to fill prime time and many day-
time hours. Stations pay membership dues to cover
PBS’s operational budget and, entirely separately,
fees to cover part of the program costs. PBS is both a
not-for-profit network and a membership organiza-
tion responsible for developing, maintaining and pro-
moting a schedule of programs while also providing
services to its dues-paying members. None of the sta-
tions are owned by the network. A public station’s
remaining broadcast hours are typically filled with
leased syndicated fare (movies; off-network reruns;
made-for-syndication series; and instructional pro-
grams for local schools), local productions and pro-
grams supplied by other public television networks.
Four noncommercial networks also distribute
programming to public stations. Once thought of
as a regional network, American Public Television
(APT, formerly Eastern Educational Network) is the
344
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
second-largest national program supplier for public
stations after PBS, and it distributes such favorites as
Globe Trekker, The Victory Garden, Agatha Chris-
tie’s Poirot, Simply Ming, Baking With Julia and
The Seasoned Traveler on digital and HD channels.
As with PBS, member stations pay APT for the pro-
grams, which then delivers the requested content to
them during off hours via satellite for local recording
and scheduling, more like syndicators. PBS, however,
delivers its programs in a prearranged schedule.
An entire week of daytime PBS programming in
2011 appears in 10.2, covering the hours from 6 A.M.
to 7:30 P.M. The daytime schedule emphasizes pro-
grams for preschool children early in the day and for
older children after school gets out. Many of these
series have run for decades and are award-winning.
10.2
PBS Daytime Programming (September 12–18, 2011)
Monday–Friday Schedule HD01
Saturday
Sunday
6:00 A.M.
Clifford the Big Red Dog
Mister Rogers’ Neighborhood
Sesame Street
6:30 A.M.
Wild Kratts
Bob the Builder
7:00 A.M.
Arthur
Curious George
Curious George
7:30 A.M.
Martha Speaks
The Cat in the Hat Knows
a Lot About That!
The Cat in the Hat Knows
a Lot About That!
8:00 A.M.
Curious George
Super Why!
Super Why!
8:30 A.M.
The Cat in the Hat Knows
a Lot About That!
Dinosaur Train
Dinosaur Train
9:00 A.M.
Super Why!
Thomas & Friends
Sid the Science Kid
9:30 A.M.
Dinosaur Train
Angelina Ballerina
Martha Speaks
10:00 A.M.
Sesame Street
This Old House Hour
Arthur
10:30 A.M.
WordGirl
11:00 A.M.
Sid the Science Kid
Antiques Roadshow
Wild Kratts
11:30 A.M.
Word World
Electric Company
12:00 P.M.
Super Why!
Baking With Julia
CyberChase
12:30 P.M.
Barney and Friends
The Victory Garden
Fetch! With Ruff Ruffman
1:00 P.M.
Caillou
This Old House
Need to Know
1:30 P.M.
Sid the Science Kid
This Old House
PBS Previews
2:00 P.M.
Dinosaur Train
Ask This Old House
Religion & Ethics
2:30 P.M.
The Cat in the Hat Knows a
Lot About That!
Hometime
To the Contrary
3:00 P.M.
Curious George
The Woodwright’s Shop
This Old House Hour
3:30 P.M.
Martha Speaks
MotorWeek
4:00 P.M.
Arthur
History Detectives
(Specials)
4:30 P.M.
WordGirl
5:00 P.M.
Wild Kratts
American Masters
5:30 P.M.
Electric Company
6:00 P.M.
Fetch! With Ruff Fuffman
History Detectives
6:30 P.M.
Nightly Business Report
7:00 P.M.
PBS NewsHour
Antiques Roadshow (repeat)
NOVA
7:30 P.M.
Courtesy of PBS.
CHAPTER 10 Public Television Programming
345
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Station Scheduling Autonomy
In public television, much clout rests with the sta-
tions. They spend their revenues as they see fit,
expecting to be treated fairly and with the deference
due any consumer. PBS, as a consequence, has a
limited ability to get stations to agree on program
scheduling. Citing the principle of localism as public
television’s
community
service
bedrock,
station
managers display considerable scheduling indepen-
dence,
ostensibly
to
make
room
for
station-
produced or acquired programs thought to meet
some local need.
After the nationwide satellite system was phased
in (1978) and as low-cost recording equipment
became available in the 1970s, stations carried the
PBS schedule less and less frequently than originally
programmed. Until a networking agreement was
worked out with the stations, no two stations’ pro-
gram schedules were remotely alike. National pro-
motion, publicity and advertising placement were,
if not impossible, extremely difficult to achieve.
Nor were corporate underwriters pleased at the
scheduling irregularity from one market to the
next.
Even though more and more stations increas-
ingly mirror the national schedule, decision making
about program content remains complicated at the
local level. The public broadcasting climate supports
multiple layers of choosing what gets on the air,
which fuels an often-animated conversation about
what audiences need and what stations should
broadcast. Those who work in programming within
the local stations consider their relative autonomy
(even from PBS) and freedom from powerful com-
mercial interests to be worth the extra effort of col-
laboration. The culture at most stations fosters
consultation
among programming,
development,
promotion and operations personnel, but the chief
programmer typically has final say in developing
programming strategies and the schedule (see 10.3).
10.3
What Do Programmers Do?
F
ranz Joachim is director of content at KNME-
Albuquerque. A 35-year veteran of public television,
Joachim got his start as a member of the student crew at
KUAT-Tucson in 1976. In subsequent years he also free-
lanced at KUAT as camera operator, editor and director,
until becoming student crew supervisor in 1984. In 1995,
he moved to WUSF/WGCU-Ft. Meyers, Florida, to take
the position of Senior Editor. Joachim joined the profes-
sional staff of KNME in 1999 as Production Manager, a
position he held until 2010 when he become director of
content at the Albuquerque station.
Joachim sees this career path, which originally
focused on production and technology management, as
particularly appropriate to his job as chief programmer at
KNME. Acknowledging that most programmers come up
through the ranks as assistant programmers, schedulers
and traffic managers, Joachim sees the PTV programming
function as becoming more complicated and demand-
ing. “The job is no longer just about programming, per
se. It’s now about content—content on air, on the web,
on the phone, and during Pledge,” he says. KNME, a
joint licensee of the Albuquerque Public Schools and the
University of New Mexico, holds two licenses, which
allows the station to broadcast four streams of content
on air and over the internet. Long committed to local
public affairs and cultural programming, the station
also produces weekly series about New Mexico politics
and culture.
KNME pulls programming from a range of sources
(including NETA, APT and PBS, as well as local programs)
to build its schedule. Selection of content and the schedule
grid are typically developed three months out by the pro-
gramming team, which includes the station’s CEO. Once
approved, the schedule goes forward then to promotions,
operations and development units, where on-air promos are
produced and scheduled and underwriting is finalized.
Joachim reports that KNME’s programming is generally
consistent with the PBS core schedule, rarely deviating from
the PBS feed by more than 5 percent over the course of the
year. When the PBS schedule conflicts with programs seen
as important to local needs, however, like all PTV, KNME
invariably chooses the localized option.
346
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The Carriage Agreements
A 1979 common carriage agreement gave some order
to this networking chaos, at least from the national
perspective. Common carriage refers to a nonbinding
agreement among stations that, in this case, established
a core schedule on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday and
Wednesday nights. During the hours of 8 to 10 P.M.
(with time zone delay feeds), PBS fed those programs
most likely to attract the largest audiences. In turn, sta-
tions committed themselves to airing the PBS core
offerings on the nights they were fed, in the order fed,
and within the prime-time hours of 8 to 11 P.M.
For several years the common carriage arrange-
ment worked well. The typical core program received
same-night carriage on more than 80 percent of sta-
tions. Core slots thus took on a premium quality;
underwriters and producers, looking for favorable
treatment for their programs, began to insist they be
assigned a time slot within the core period. Maximum
carriage was thought to mean maximum audience
size. With more core-quality programs on their
hands than available hours in the eight-hour core
period, PBS programmers were forced in the early
1980s to move some long-standing core programs
(Mystery! and Great Performances, for example) out-
side the core period to make room for other programs
in the hope that the stations would still carry the
moved shows on the feed night.
This move was partially successful; even though
same-night carriage for the rescheduled programs
fell, it was only to about 55 percent for these non-
core programs. Station programmers, however, soon
took these moves by PBS as a sign that core pro-
grams could be moved around at will, and station
independence began to reassert itself. By the 1985–
86 season, same-night carriage of the core itself had
slipped to 73 percent overall. PBS, concerned with
complaints from national underwriters that “their”
programs were not receiving fair treatment, moved
to bolster same-night carriage. In fall 1987, PBS
began a new policy of same-night carriage by
which selected, broad-appeal programs would be
designated for carriage the night they were fed.
This policy had little effect, however, because PBS
did not strictly enforce it.
In 1995 PBS once again attempted to get control
of unpredictable station scheduling. Wanting to
encourage
new
corporate
underwriting
because
Congress had reduced its federal funding, a commit-
tee of the PBS board presented the stations with a
new common carriage agreement—this time with
financial penalties. Some 40 stations refused to sign
the agreement until the penalties were removed. The
new agreement went into effect in September 1995,
requiring stations to carry certain programs within
prime time on the feed night (see the programs iden-
tified in 10.4). The agreement promised that PBS
would designate no more than 350 hours per year
for common carriage, of which stations could
choose up to 50 hours not to carry on feed night, a
10.4
Typical PBS Prime-Time Schedule (September 12–18, 2011)
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
8:00 P.M.
Antiques
Roadshow
Tavis Smiley
Nature
Antiques
Roadshow
(repeat)
Washington
Week in
Review
Tavis Smiley
Nature
8:30 P.M.
Need to
Know
PBS Previews
9:00 P.M.
(Specials)
Frontline
NOVA
PBS Previews
American
Masters
POV
Masterpiece
10:00 P.M. (Specials)
POV
NOVA
This Old
House Hour
(Specials)
Austin City
Limits
Courtesy of PBS.
CHAPTER 10 Public Television Programming
347
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
provision allowing local programming flexibility.
Within these limitations, the agreement stated a
goal of 90 percent carriage or better for designated
programs.
Most programs designated for common carriage
were receiving the requested carriage by at least 90
percent of stations by 2005, and the maximum num-
ber of designated hours had risen to 500 per year. As
for shows not designated, program managers often
tape-delay them outside of prime time, using the
vacated evening slots for other programming. As bud-
gets at the local and state levels tighten up, however,
stations are expected to use even more of the PBS
feed, finding it more cost and time effective than
local production and tape delay. As KNME’s Joachim
notes, “At Channel 5, we now have 50 people doing
what 80 used to, plus we’re now programming four
channels, not just one. We’re working to be as effi-
cient as possible, and we’re finding that PBS is recog-
nizing that and making efforts to work with us.”5
Multicasting
Digital TV broadcasts are described as long streams
of digital information or bits that can contain any
data the broadcaster wants to add to their signals.
Public broadcasters, many of whom began with sin-
gle over-the-air channels in the 1950s and 1960s, are
now able to send multiple streams of video through
the same channel’s “pipeline.” Working with com-
pressed content, some public broadcasting stations
now choose to “push” four streams of lower-
definition programming to air, while others elect to
maintain higher signal quality by broadcasting two
streams at one time, one of which is always HD.
Those stations that are duopolies, holding two
licenses, are able to broadcast four programming
lines at one time, without compromising quality.
Although some public stations have developed
their own local or regional content to fill multiple
channels, many have elected to work with four
packaged feeds developed by PBS, public stations
and established syndicators, and then transmitted
to participating public television stations via satel-
lite. These channels include PBS World and Create,
both produced by PBS, WNET-New York, WGBH-
Boston, APT and NETA. V-me is a Spanish-
language
channel
developed
in
partnership
by
V-me Media, Inc. and WNET-New York with
offices in the same building. The fourth channel is
MHz Worldview, which has studios in Falls Church,
VA, and Washington, DC. This network pulls from a
number of international channels and aggregates a
feed of public affairs programs, documentaries, dra-
mas, music and sports from Japan, Germany, China,
Vietnam, South Africa, France and Nigeria, among
others. Although stations pay a tiered price for Cre-
ate and PBS World, depending on market size, both
V-me and MHz International are free, as long as sta-
tions abide by stated rules of carriage. (V-me, for
example, requires a ten-year commitment.)
It’s clear that the technology is in place for sta-
tions to provide multiple streams of diverse pro-
gramming for multiple constituencies. Even so,
public
television’s
multicasting
efforts
generally
involve broadcasting more of the same. A review
of their schedules reveals that most stations look to
older programs and successful PTV trends in devel-
oping their streams of content. These decisions are
based in no small part on the enormous costs related
to new production. As costs rise and revenues flatten
and fall, it becomes increasingly difficult to produce
or acquire large amounts of new content. Critics also
suggest that PTV caters to a “preferred viewer” that
is largely upscale, older and well-educated. This
institutionalized notion of (much of) the public tele-
vision audience leads naturally, says scholar Patricia
Aufderheide, to PTV programs that are predictable
and “safely splendid.”6
Multiple Platforms
If multicasting is the “push” of PBS content to audi-
ences through multiple streams of programming,
multi-platforms are the numerous technologies that
allow reception. Your television set is one of these
platforms and is clearly the oldest. (In fact, color tele-
vision sets came to U.S. consumers in the early 1950s
at about the same time as “educational, noncommer-
cial” television.) But increasingly, PBS viewers also
348
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
get their programs on hand-held devices (cell phones
and digital tablets), as well as the internet. Sometimes,
they use all these “platforms” at the same time, so it
may not be uncommon for a dad to watch Sesame
Street with his children, while also (simultaneously)
viewing PBS NewsHour on his cellphone and last
week’s episode of NOVA, “on demand,” on his lap-
top. A teenaged daughter, also sitting in this family
living room, might be using her tablet to pick up the
American Masters interview with Pearl Jam’s Eddie
Vedder on PBS-YouTube.
Viewers can also follow PBS, as well as many of
their favorite shows and celebrities, on Facebook
and engage directly on Twitter with Jim Lehrer
(PBS
NewsHour)
and
Gwen
Ifel
(Washington
Week in Review). If you’re into collectibles and old
furniture, you can stay up to date with Antiques
Roadshow by subscribing to its e-newsletter, which
is dropped into your email box each month.
Even young kids can stay in touch with their
favorite children’s shows (The Cat in the Hat
Knows a Lot About That!, Dinosaur Train and
Super Why) by downloading PBS apps to their
phones and tablets and watching programs on
demand. PBS has produced at least 14 different
apps for mobile devices, and by early 2011 more
than 1 million people had downloaded the apps for
iPad and iPhone. Additionally, PBS has more than
600,000 Facebook fans and more than 700,000 fol-
lowers on Twitter. Public TV’s interactions with new
media demonstrate its exceptional desire to connect
with—and serve—its audiences.
PBS Responsibilities
Since its founding, PBS has had two key responsibil-
ities: to accept or reject programs and to schedule
those accepted. The program acceptance/rejection
responsibility is grounded in technical and legal
standards established by PBS during the 1970s.
The technical standards protect stations from FCC
violations and maintain high levels of video and
audio quality. By their very nature, they can be
applied with reasonable consistency. As the steward
for underwriting guidelines, PBS maintains rules for
on-air crediting of PBS program funders to prevent
violations of FCC underwriting regulations and to
ensure against public television’s appearing too
“commercial.” The legal standards protect stations
from libel and rights infringements and alert them to
equal time obligations that may result from PBS-
distributed programs.
Underwriting and advertising are fundamen-
tally different, although they both share some ele-
ments. The key difference is that advertising in the
form of a paid commercial usually contains a call
to action (for example, “Stop by our showroom
today”).
Underwriting
presents
the
name
and
makes neutral statements (for example, “Funding
provided by Kellogg’s, makers of quality breakfast
cereal”) that serve to reinforce brand awareness.
Over time, the length and kinds of supporting con-
tent permitted by PBS rules have become less
restrictive, and now on-air crediting is both longer
and more detailed but continues to lack action
statements, so far.
Even as public television strives to adhere to the
tenets of its early noncommercial roots, the broad-
casting service has continued to move toward a for-
profit model, particularly in its online content. The
periodic Congressional threats of defunding make
this essential. In 2006 PBS announced a newly-
developed online sales division charged with web
advertising on public TV’s national website, noting
that it would ban ads from broadcasting competitors
and be cautious about display ads and commercials
for prescription drugs and R-rated movies. Advertis-
ing on its children’s sites was to be limited, a vague
commitment.
Well, five years later, an examination of Kids
Sprouts Online revealed a site tab dedicated to adver-
tisers, carrying the slogan, “With so many engaged
parents, there’s no better place to advertise. Live
Sprouts!” Further, PBS continues to feature spon-
sorship banners on its six major web categories—
Arts, News & Views, History, Science & Technology,
Business & Finance and Home & How-To—and
allows banners, aimed at parents rather than chil-
dren, on PBS KIDS and PBS KIDS GO! Most discon-
certing to some viewers has been the insertion of ads
in programs that are streamed online.
CHAPTER 10 Public Television Programming
349
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
These decisions to commercialize part of the PBS
website are also reflected in efforts to satisfy the needs
of corporate sponsors by changing on-air guidelines
for underwriting credits to more closely resemble
those of commercial broadcasting. Public television
underwriters increasingly are using the same spots
they place on commercial venues. Further, in the
past, most public TV underwriting opportunities
have been limited to a year. Now, stations and PBS
are offering shorter sponsorship stints, including
some as short as a week for children’s programs
such as Clifford and Arthur. Critics and proponents
alike maintain the effort is to create a more “sales-
friendly” environment for companies hard-hit by
10.5
Boon or Bust? KCTS, Early HD Pioneer
H
igh definition television (also known as HD or high
def) is characterized by video resolution that is much
higher than that of standard definition (SD). In fact, HD has
between one and two million pixels per frame, which is
roughly five times the resolution of SDTV.
Since U.S. broadcasting officially “went digital” in
2009, we’ve come to expect very high image quality in the
television programs we watch. At least one channel on all
PBS stations is now broadcast in high definition, and today
much of the programming on PBS is created—through vid-
eography, editing, graphics, sound and special effects—in
high definition format, which inherently raises video quality
even on a non-HD digital channel.
Even though several PBS stations (most of them large
community stations in major markets) were innovators in
digital transition, one station—KCTS-Seattle—stands out as
a leader. The station not only took steps in 1998 (eleven
years before the mandated transition!) to broadcast some of
its schedule in digital format, but also pioneered production
in high definition. Because of a long-standing, collabora-
tive relationship with NHK, Japan’s public TV network,
KCTS was able to borrow the HD gear required to shoot
several shows, including Over California (1994) and
Chihuly Over Venice (1998). This extremely scarce HD
equipment included not only a 40-pound SONY camera—
called the “best video camera in the world”—but also a
300-pound recorder that required its own power supply.
These early HD programs, which were shot mostly by a
videographer hanging out the side door of a noisy heli-
copter, were lush “travelogues” of the countryside below.
Viewers likened the experience, with its sweeping visuals
and orchestral soundtrack, to the immersive dome technol-
ogy present in many planetarium shows.*
KCTS offered the programs (and other similar shows
that followed) to public stations as fundraisers and thus
established itself as the PBS market leader in digital
broadcasting. This reputation did not come without a price,
however. Local newspaper reports later made the case that
the expense of high-end digital production and distribution
contributed to KCTS’s massive debt and the layoffs of staff
beginning in 1998. Members of the management team
that had pushed KCTS to pioneer in digital broadcasting
retired early in 2003 in the face of widespread staff
upheaval and a station deficit of $2.5 million. Not only
was KCTS unable to pay its rent to the city of Seattle in
2002, but the Corporation for Public Broadcasting with-
held nearly $750,000 in funding in 2003 because the
station’s financial reports were late.**
How much of the KCTS financial downturn can be traced
to its early and aggressive push to “go digital” is debatable,
but it seems clear that the station’s deficits, which began as
early as 1996, were linked to early explorations and adop-
tion of expensive digital production and upgrading initiatives.
At the same time, it also seems clear that the public system as
a whole benefited from KCTS’s pioneering forays into the
digital realm, using the Seattle station’s high-def programs in
fundraising, taking cues from its digital transition and learning
from its mistakes. This case study illustrates the risk of being a
technological pioneer, particularly in such high-stakes inno-
vation as the digital transformation of a television network.
Was it worth the cost to KCTS, its staff, and the management
team that put the plan in place? You decide!
*Although PBS stations have not experimented broadly with digital
dome technology, as it is tied to a particular classroom or theatre
space and not broadcasting, PTV stations and producers have
entered into educational partnerships with air and space museums
and planetariums to share programming.
**“Trouble on Channel 9,” The Seattle Times 22 May, 2003,
retrieved at http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/news/local/links/
kcts.html.
350
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
financial woes. Of course, at the same time, it also
generates more advertising receptivity in children.
Finally, PBS announced at the PTV annual meeting
in 2011 that it was experimenting with placement of
internal promotional material in PBS programs. The
proposal was met with such outcry that PBS underwrit-
ing and programming executives agreed to back off and
just continue their research about ramifications of such
a plan. Critics suggest that internal promotion not only
violates public TV’s long-standing commitments to
uninterrupted programming, but also opens the doors
widely to in-program advertising breaks.
Old-timers remember the days when an under-
writing credit was a corporate name on a slide, fea-
tured at the beginning and close of the underwritten
program for 15 seconds. Many join contemporary
critics in suggesting that program interruption and
increased commercial content may damage public
television’s already weak support in Congress and
lead to even more reduced allocations during the
next funding cycle.
Another PBS function is warning stations in
advance of programs that contain offensive language
or sensitive scenes (nudity or violence). It makes edi-
ted versions of programs that contain extreme mate-
rial
available
to
stations.
In
rare
cases,
such
controversial programs as It’s Elementary (a docu-
mentary on gay issues in grade school) have been
canceled or postponed, but in general PBS tends
toward airing programs as produced.
Day-to-Day Management
An executive vice president heads PBS’s National
Program Service (NPS). This senior executive sets
policy for and oversees the content and array of for-
mats within the program schedule, directing long-
range development of major programs. Other man-
agers assist in the day-to-day activities of program
development, scheduling management and acquisi-
tion
of
international
programs,
while
content
departments within the NPS concentrate on the
development of news and public-affairs, children’s,
cultural and fundraising programs.
PBS Plus offers a menu of “user-pays” programs
to supplement local schedules. Other departments
deliver programs for adult at-home college education
and in-school instruction for children. Interactive and
online services, extensions of PBS’s programming,
were introduced in the mid-1990s—including Math-
line for students and PBS Online on the internet
(www.pbs.org). Thus, programming for the station
broadcasts is only part of PBS’s activities.
Satellite Distribution
The broadcast operations department manages the
daily details of the national schedule much as a traf-
fic department would at a commercial network. All
the pieces of the jigsaw puzzle must be plugged into
place across an array of satellite schedules, ensuring,
for example, that (1) the end of a 13-episode series
coincides with the start of another ready to occupy
its slot; (2) dramas with profanity or nudity have an
early edited feed available on another transponder;
and (3) replacement programs are available when,
for example, the Saturday morning schedule of
how-to programs runs short in the summer.
PBS now delivers instructional and general audi-
ence services via direct-to-home satellite channels
(TVRO) as well as the regular national program-
ming feed provided to PBS member stations retrans-
mitted by DirecTV and DISH Network, but delayed
by 24 hours to allow member stations the opportu-
nity to air the programming first. In 1999, PBS initi-
ated two other satellite program services, PBS Kids
Channel (children’s programming) and PBS U (adult
learning
service
for
college
credit)
carried
on
DirecTV. (See 10.6 for the story of the adult educa-
tional services.) In March 2004, PBS also launched
PBS HD, making public broadcasting first to provide
a fully-packaged 24/7 channel consisting entirely of
high definition and widescreen content.
PBS HD was available from local PBS stations
that had already transitioned to digital broadcasting,
as well as digital cable systems that agreed to retrans-
mit the digital signal of their local public television
stations. By the mid-2000s, 236 PBS stations were
on the air with digital signals, reaching more than
85 percent of U.S. TV households. The PBS HD chan-
nel featured a mix of new and library HD and wide-
screen programs, providing around-the-clock high
CHAPTER 10 Public Television Programming
351
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
quality content to those “early innovators” who
owned high definition receivers. This channel evolved
into HD01 (the PBS high definition feed), as all PBS
stations eventually proved capable of providing HD
programming on at least one of their channels.
By 2002, PBS Kids Channel wasn’t doing well in
competition with Viacom’s Noggin, a digital cable/
satellite channel that featured Sesame Street reruns
and other satellite channels targeting children. With-
drawal of DirecTV’s support in 2005 led to the
formation of PBS Kids Sprout and PBS Sprout On
Demand,
digital
commercial
channels
on
cable
owned by Comcast, HIT Entertainment, PBS and
Sesame
Workshop.
They
carry
such
shows
as
Angelina Ballerina,
Curious
George,
Barney
&
Friends, Bob the Builder, Teletubbies, Thomas &
Friends, Dragon Tales, Zoboomafoo and of course,
the so-essential Sesame Street. The term “PBS Kids”
returned to the main network as an umbrella brand
for
preschool
children’s
programming
(offering
Arthur, Clifford the Big Red Dog and Curious
George), along with PBS Kids GO! for early elemen-
tary kids (which provided such shows as Kidsworld
Sports, Arthur, Maya & Miguel and Wishbone).
Although not in HD as yet, all these over-the-air
and digital services are supported with clever online
sites,
www.pbskids.org,
www.pbskidsgo.org
and
www.sproutonline.com. In most markets, households
that subscribe to Comcast or DirecTV get most of these
channels; other cable, satellite and phone service pro-
viders offer some, but not all, of the PBS channels. The
internet remains a reliable source of all PBS content.
Fundraising Assistance
The Station Independence Program (SIP), a division
in PBS’s National Program Service, is big hit with
stations. The SIP schedules and programs three main
10.6
The Demise of the Adult Learning Service
P
BS began its Adult Learning Service (ALS) in the early
1980s, offering over-the-air instruction leading to col-
lege credit for more than two decades. With over 100
telecourses, the ALS was the largest source of such pro-
gramming in the world. Enhanced by the web and then
programmed as a network (PBS U), the service supplied
college credit to more than 5 million students in academic
areas including arts and humanities, business and technol-
ogy, history, professional development, science and
health, and the social sciences.
Shortly after its launch, ALS received a significant boost
from Walter Annenberg, then owner of TV Guide, who
established the Annenberg/CPB Project. For this project,
the Annenberg School of Communications gave $15 mil-
lion to CPB each year for ten years (1983 to 1993) to fund
college-level instruction via television and other new tech-
nologies. The project resulted in such high-visibility public
television series as The Constitution: That Delicate Balance,
French in Action, Planet Earth, The Africans, War and
Peace in the Nuclear Age, Art of the Western World, Dis-
covering Psychology and Economics USA, with subject
matter ranging from the humanities to science,
mathematics, and business. The net result of Annenberg’s
entry into this field was not only an increase in the number
of adult instructional programs available through ALS but
also, thanks to their above-average budgets, an increase in
production values (quality).
Colleges and universities that wanted to offer credit for
these telecourses normally arranged for local public televi-
sion stations to air the series, and all registration, fees,
testing, and supplementary materials were handled by the
school. Some of the courses used computers, and all were
keyed to special texts and study guides. ALS offered pro-
grammers one of the most challenging additions to their
program schedule. Because such programs required close
cooperation with the institutions offering credit, they
required a reliable repeat schedule that would permit stu-
dents to make up missed broadcasts. In time, however, the
wide availability of internet access ended the need for PBS
to act as distributor. Universities could email course materi-
als and video directly to individual students, irrespective of
the number taking a particular class, and now with Wi-Fi
on campuses and larger towns, people can take courses
whenever and wherever they like.
352
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
on-air fundraising drives a year, called pledge drives
(a 16-day event held annually in March and two
9-day drives held in August and December). Stations
wishing to avail themselves of the SIP service (and
most do) pay PBS additional fees for it. A key SIP
function is acquiring, funding and commissioning
special programs for use during local station pledge
drives.
Programs with emotional payoff, not necessar-
ily those programs with the largest audiences, tend
to generate more and higher pledges. Self-help pro-
grams and inspirational dramas, for example, gener-
ally make money for stations, but documentaries on
topics such as world economics do not do well. In
general, such performance events as Yanni and
Three Tenors do very well in pledge drives. As
baby boomers age and edge closer to the typical
demographic of “donor,” pledge programmers also
rely increasingly on concerts (live and on tape) by
music icons of the 1960s and 1970s, including
Joan Baez, James Taylor, Chaka Khan, Billy Joel
and the folk trio Peter, Paul and Mary.
Types of Station Licensees
One of the difficulties in describing PTV program-
ming strategies is that the stations are so diverse.
The 168 licensees operating 354 stations (lots of
which are unstaffed transmitters) represent varied
management viewpoints. More stations (that is,
transmitters) than licensees exist because in 20 states
a legislatively created agency for public broadcasting
is the licensee for as many as 16 separate trans-
mitters serving the whole state. Also, in several com-
munities, one noncommercial educational licensee
operates two television channels. In these cases
(San Francisco, Boston, Pittsburgh and Milwaukee,
among others), one channel usually offers a rela-
tively broad service of PBS programming while the
second channel is used for more specialized pro-
gramming, often instructional material. In addition,
a handful of noncommercial television stations are
not members of PBS because of signal overlap with
other PBS stations or because they dropped their
membership.
Much
of
public
television’s
diversity
is
explained by the varying auspices under which its
stations operate. Licensees fall into four categories:
community, university, public school and state
agency, and each approaches programming in differ-
ent ways.
Community Licensees
In larger cities, particularly those with many educa-
tional and cultural institutions but without a domi-
nant institution or school system, the usual licensee
is the nonprofit community corporation created for
the purpose of constructing and operating a public
television station. Because the governing board of
such a station exists solely to administer the station
(as compared with university trustees who have lots
of other concerns), many feel that community
stations are the most responsive type of licensee.
With the separation of community licensee KCET-
Los Angeles from PBS in early 2011, 85 such licen-
sees still operate in the United States (see 10.7).
Compared with other licensees, community sta-
tions have traditionally derived a higher proportion
of their operating support from fundraising activities
(including on-air auctions). As a result, their on-air
pledge-drives reflect their so very urgent need to gen-
erate funds from their viewers. Programmers at these
stations are thus more likely to be sensitive to a pro-
posed program’s appeal to donors. Certainly, they
will lean toward high-quality production values to
attract and hold general audiences. Within the com-
munity category, several stations stand apart because
of their metropolitan origins, their large size and their
national impact as producers of network-distributed
programs.
The flagship stations of PBS are located in New
York, Boston, Los Angeles, Washington, Chicago,
Baltimore, Seattle and Pittsburgh. The first four are
particularly notable as production centers for the
nation, originating such major programs as NOVA,
Nature and PBS NewsHour (see 10.8). Although
other public stations and commercial entities often
participate in their productions and financing, these
large, community-licensed producing stations gener-
ate most of the PBS schedule.
CHAPTER 10 Public Television Programming
353
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Because of comparatively high levels of commu-
nity involvement, community stations have tended
to attract larger local audiences than other types of
noncommercial licensees. Most of these stations
adopted HD technology at a rapid rate at the turn
of the twenty first century, largely because their
membership tends toward the high-end viewers of
interest
to
underwriters.
For
example,
Nielsen
reports that about half of the households in San
Francisco, one of the nation’s largest media markets,
tune weekly to community-operated KQED. With
such a high audience level, more of its viewers see
its fundraising appeals and thus contribute money to
the station. WNET, New York’s largest public tele-
vision station, is an exception among community
stations. It receives a portion of its funding from
state government.
University Licensees
Many colleges and universities have activated public
television stations as a natural outgrowth of their tra-
ditional role of providing extension services within
their states. As they see it, “the boundaries of the
campus are the boundaries of the state,”7 and both
radio and television can do some of the tasks
10.7
Stations Withdraw From PBS
I
n 2008, public broadcasting licensees included
86 community stations, 6 local public school facilities,
20 state government stations or networks, and 56 college
or university stations. Three years later, those numbers had
dropped by three, and other stations and their boards were
considering leaving PBS. KWBU-Waco, a university sta-
tion licensed to Baylor University, was the first of the three
to close. Having exhausted a $1 million line of credit,
KWBU was unable to secure additional funding from
Baylor and subsequently severed all ties with PBS, going
“dark” in 2010. Within a year, KCET-Los Angeles and
WMFE-Orlando had also decided to leave PBS. Like
KWBU (which had limited community support and only
1,600 members when it closed), the stations cited finan-
cial woes as the reason for dropping the PBS affiliation or
closing altogether.
The case of KCET is chilling. After learning that its PBS
dues would increase by more than 40 percent, ironically
because of the station’s success in generating $50 million
in donations, KCET-TV split from PBS in 2011, becoming
an independent community station. One of the country’s
oldest public stations and the PBS flagship of the nation’s
second-largest media market, KCET pioneered productions
in the arts, Spanish-language programming, education and
public affairs, so it was an enormous loss to the system.
KCET sold its historic 105,000 square-foot Sunset Bou-
levard facility to the Church of Scientology and moved into
quarters half that size in Burbank. Initially programming its
“independent” schedule with local talk and re-runs of clas-
sic films, the station adopted an eclectic international
stance by airing a range of worldwide news programs.
These daily broadcasts included IBA News (Tel Aviv), NHK
Newsline (Toyko), Russia Today (Moscow) and the Al
Jazeera English News, and the ratings are looking good.
Happily for PBS and the former KCET audience, public
stations KOCE-Orange County and KVCR-San Bernardino
enlarged their coverage areas to serve PBS viewers in the
Los Angeles area.
The fate of the huge New Jersey Network (NJN) rings
another warning bell. The 40-year-old PTV network in New
Jersey was closed by the state’s budget-cutting efforts. PBS
service to New Jersey had to be picked up by New York
and Pennsylvania stations WNET and WHYY as best they
could. Similarly, the University of Central Florida and Bre-
vard Community College teamed up to jointly provide PBS
services to Central Florida, when WMFE-Orlando closed its
PBS station in 2011.
Change is here. Another giant in the system, WTTW-
Chicago suggested that it might withdraw from PBS, while
Indiana’s eight public television stations are working on a
merger that would not only share content but also facilities
(including master control) among the stations. The stunning
losses to the PTV system help explain why PBS is altering its
policy toward commercials. Programs continue to cost what
they cost even when there are fewer (and smaller) stations
to split the expense.
354
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
extension agents formerly did in person. Fifty-five
licensees currently make up the university group.
Here, too, programmers schedule a fairly broad
range of programs, largely in HD as well as digital,
often emphasizing adult continuing education and cul-
ture. Some, typically using student staff, produce nightly
local newscasts, and many produce a weekly public-
affairs or cultural program. But these stations rarely
produce major PBS series for the prime-time schedule,
lacking both budget and permanent staffing. University-
licensed stations such as WHA (Madison, Wisconsin)
and KUHT (Houston, Texas) contribute occasional spe-
cials and single programs to the PBS schedule. WUNC-
TV at the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill
10.8
PBS NewsHour
I
n 1973 Robert MacNeil and Jim Lehrer joined together
to cover the Watergate hearings for PBS. The results
were an Emmy and a new news program for Public
Broadcasting. Unlike the commercial nightly newscasts,
MacNeil and Lehrer were actually throwbacks to Edward
R. Murrow and See It Now. Instead of doing many two-
minute stories, they concentrated on one major story and
went in-depth. They let people tell their own versions of the
story in interviews that lasted several minutes; they also
avoided sound bites and ran extended portions of news
conferences. These were usually followed by nonjudg-
mental cross-examinations that questioned what had been
said.
In 1983, the program, then called The MacNeil/Lehrer
Report, saw its only major format change as it went from
30 minutes to a full hour. It added a news summary of major
stories at the start and increased the number of in-depth stor-
ies from one to three or four, each running 10 to 15 minutes.
Because the show airs on PBS, it currently has no interruptions
(except during pledge drives). Mondays through Thursdays,
the program often wraps up with a “reflective essay.”
When Robert MacNeil retired in 1995, the show
became The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer, and in 2006,
acquired new graphics and a new version of the show’s
theme song, but otherwise stayed about the same. In 2009
PBS added rotating anchors and renamed the show PBS
NewsHour. The most recent change, instituted in 2011,
remains the most significant. After 36 years with PBS, Lehrer
stepped down as a daily anchor of PBS NewsHour, elect-
ing instead to cover specific stories and to moderate the
highly-popular Friday weekly analysis segment with Mark
Shields and David Brooks.
PBS NewsHour is one of PBS’s most successful pro-
grams, reaching over 8 million people during a week in the
United States and averaging 2.7 million viewers each
night. The program also airs in Australia, Japan and New
Zealand and is broadcast by Voice of America and Armed
Forces Radio. Keeping up with the PBS tradition of trying
new technologies, the program has archived all broadcasts
on the web since early 2000, and they can be accessed
as streaming video. In addition, audio segments are also
released in podcast form.
Strangely enough, on a network often criticized for its
left-leaning shows and a tendency to slant the news, PBS
NewsHour has been attacked for being too “mainstream”
and for having a “pro-establishment bias.” Several studies
released by Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting, a “left-
oriented” media watch group, have accused the show of
being too balanced, of favoring Republicans and business,
and of not having enough minorities. One of the group’s
major objections in 2006 was “not one peace activist” had
appeared on the show during the six months analyzed. The
2011 critique took similar issue with the lack of diversity of
viewpoint about the war in Libya, leaving “little room for
antiwar voices” and critics of U.S. foreign policy.
The PBS Ombudsman, Michael Getler, agreed, saying:
“These are perilous times. As a viewer and journalist, I find
the program occasionally frustrating; sometimes too polite,
too balanced when issues are not really balanced, and too
many political and emotion-laden statements pass without
factual challenges from the interviewer.”* In this day and
age, PBS NewsHour may have a unique distinction in
being criticized for being too fair.
William J. Adams, Ph.D.
Kansas State University
*www.pbs.org/ombudsman/2006/10/a fair analysis.html.
CHAPTER 10 Public Television Programming
355
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
produced The Woodwright’s Shop series, and other
university-licensed stations have supported short-run
series aired in the daytime PBS schedule.
As operating costs mount and academic appro-
priations shrink, some university stations turn to
over-the-air fundraising to supplement their institu-
tion’s budgets. In doing so they use tactics similar to
those of community stations, including airing pro-
grams specially produced for fundraisers. Expanded
fundraising efforts are generally accompanied by
broadening program appeal throughout the station’s
schedule, although the shows target a wide range of
small, niche audiences.
Public School Licensees
Local school systems initially became licensees to pro-
vide new learning experiences for students in elemen-
tary school classrooms. From the outset, some schools
augmented instructional broadcasts with other pro-
gramming consistent with the school system’s view of
its educational mission. By 2008 only six of these
school licensees remained. Most of them have orga-
nized a broadly-based community support group
whose activities generate wider interest and voluntary
contributions from the community at large. As a result,
the average local-school licensee now draws only about
7 percent of its income from subscriber contributions.
Naturally, programmers at these stations are
heavily involved with in-school programming—but
because they desire community support, they are
also concerned with programming for children out
of school and for adults of all ages. All of these sta-
tions transmit a digital signal but, depending on sta-
tion resources, may not yet have full HD production
capability. Due to the significant costs of converting
all studio, editing and field equipment to high defi-
nition, some stations still produce programs in stan-
dard definition and “upconvert” the video to HD.
Other than ITV series, most public school sta-
tions rarely produce original programs for PBS, and
they obtain most of their schedules from national,
state and regional suppliers of instructional pro-
gramming. Of course, they usually carry such gen-
eral (non-ITV) PBS educational children’s programs
as Sesame Street, too.
State Television Agencies
About 186 of the nation’s 354 public television
transmitters are part of state networks operated by
legislatively created public broadcasting agencies.
Networks of this type exist in 20 states (or did
until New Jersey faded away). Most of them were
authorized initially to provide new classroom experi-
ences for the state’s schoolchildren and have usually
succeeded admirably in this task. Then they augment
their ITV service with a variety of public-affairs and
cultural programs furnished to citizens throughout
their states, but rarely in HD.
State networks, such as those in South Caro-
lina, Maryland, Kentucky, Nebraska and Iowa,
are very active in the production and national dis-
tribution of educational programs. Their efforts
range from traditional school programs for primary
and secondary grades to graduate degree courses
offered in regions where colleges and universities
are few. These production efforts are thus counter-
parts to the national production centers of the
community-based licensees. Although state net-
works hardly ever produce prime-time PBS series,
they frequently join consortia generating specific
programs for series such as Great Performances.
Moreover, the Maryland Center for Public Broad-
casting does produce the long-lived PBS series Wall
Street Week.
Although in recent years these state network
stations have gotten more foundation, underwriter
and even viewer support, state legislatures still
appropriate more than three-fifths of their budgets.
This fact, plus the perception of their “community of
service” as an entire state rather than a single city,
gives programmers at these stations a different
perspective … and keeps them at risk as state bud-
gets shrink.
Similarities and Differences
It should be quite evident from these brief descrip-
tions that each category of public television station
has distinctive problems and singular opportunities
for programming. Each station type is ruled by a
different type of board of directors—community
356
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
leader
boards,
university
trustees,
local
school
boards, state-appointed central boards. Each board
affects
overall strategy
and
program personnel
differently:
■Community representatives try to balance local
power groups and foster underwriting.
■University boards, preoccupied with higher-
education programs, tend to leave station profes-
sionals free to carry out their jobs within broad
guidelines.
■School boards, similarly preoccupied with their
major missions, may pay too little attention to
their responsibilities as licensees.
■State boards try to protect their stations from
inappropriate political influences and drastic
budget cuts.
All licensees in both public TV and public
radio struggle to function with what they regard
as inadequate budgets, but there are wide funding
discrepancies between the extremes of a large met-
ropolitan community TV station and a small
public-school radio station. Significantly, all types
of stations have been forced to broaden their finan-
cial bases in recent years to keep up with rising
costs and funding while improving program quality
and quantity.
Licensees having the greatest success in securing
new funding have, in general, made the strongest
impact on national public television programming.
In
turn,
successful
public
television
producer-
entrepreneurs working through their local stations
are highly motivated to create new public television
programs with broad audience appeal in the hope of
securing still more underwriting. Such programs
increase viewership and draw more support in the
form of memberships and subscriptions.
Public-affairs programs and those of interest
only to specialized smaller audiences—the “meat
and potatoes” of public television—do not always
appeal to corporations (who usually want to avoid
controversy) and must be funded by CPB, PBS or
foundations (see 10.9). Public radio operates differ-
ently but still shares some of the same problems
(see 10.10).
Program Production
Early in its history, PBS developed a characteristic
schedule of dramatic miniseries and anthologies;
documentaries on topics in science, nature, public
affairs and history; concert performances; and a
few other types of programs, none of which ABC,
CBS, FOX or NBC offers on a regular basis. PBS’s
marketplace position has thus historically been that
of an alternative to the commercial networks.
Today, however, several cable networks (including
the Discovery Channel, A&E, the History Channel,
The Learning Channel, the Food Channel, House &
Garden) offer some programs similar to PBS’s.
From
time
to
time,
some
members
of
Congress—important critics because of CPB funding
and grants: Congress supplies public television with
about 16.4 percent of PBS’s annual revenue—argue
that PBS has become superfluous because it dupli-
cates programming available on cable. The argu-
ment lacks merit because about 8 percent of U.S.
TV households don’t subscribe to either cable or sat-
ellite, while 99 percent can receive PBS. Moreover,
fewer cable subscribers actually watch the cable net-
works that have PBS-like programs; PBS’s ratings
are two to four times larger.
Program Financing
How a program gets into the PBS schedule contrasts
dramatically with the process at its commercial net-
work counterparts. At ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC and
most cable networks, program chiefs order the pro-
grams they want, pay for them out of a program-
ming budget, then slot them into the schedule. To
minimize ratings failures, the networks first pay for
the production of pilot programs each year. Addi-
tional episodes of the most promising pilots are
ordered, and each of these series receives a place in
the schedule (see Chapter 2 for more details).
At PBS, however, program funding is far more
complex. A program may have a single financial
backer or several. More frequently than not, funding
comes from a combination of sources, especially
when the project runs into millions of dollars. PBS
will partially fund and, on occasion, fully fund a
CHAPTER 10 Public Television Programming
357
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
project out of its station program assessment funds,
but many programs must find their own backing. Of
course, producers would prefer to walk away from
PBS with a check for the full amount. But owing to
PBS’s limited purse, they must usually “shop” a
project from one corporate headquarters to the
next, perhaps even to foundations and CPB. Given
the daunting process, producers have been heard to
say that they spend more time chasing after dollars
than making programs.
Program assessment fees, now levied on PBS
member stations, were begun in the early 1990s.
They
represent
public
television’s
response
to
expanding cable network competition for the lim-
ited supply of programs to buy (see 10.11). Stations
voted to streamline the program funding process so
that newly offered productions could be snapped
up without delays. The chief program executives
now handle selected program funding as a central-
ized responsibility (in contrast to the long-beloved
10.9
Corporation for Public Broadcasting
A
lthough largely invisible to most people, the Corpo-
ration for Public Broadcasting is the largest single
source of funding for public television and radio program-
ming in the United States. This private nonprofit organiza-
tion was established with the passage of the Public
Broadcasting Act in 1967 to support and fund the devel-
opment of educational, locally relevant and culturally
diverse programs for public broadcasting. It created the
Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) in 1969 and National
Public Radio (NPR) in 1970. Most of CPB-funded pro-
grams are distributed through PBS, NPR, Television (APT)
and Public Radio International (PRI).
Though it awards federal grants, CPB has a legal
mandate to be nonpartisan and ensure objectivity on public
programming. Yet controversies continue to plague CPB. In
the mid-2000s, Democrats called for an investigation into
whether CPB violated federal law when its former chairman
Kenneth Y. Tomlinson, a Bush appointee, commissioned a
review of several PBS and NPR programs in order to
investigate liberal bias. Programs under review included the
Now With Bill Moyers show, which had been criticized for
being left-leaning. Tomlinson resigned in 2006 after inves-
tigations by CPB’s inspector general revealed he “had
made improper hires, had tried to tamper with PBS’s TV
programming and appeared to show political favoritism in
selecting CPB’s president while he was chairman.”*
In 2011, the Republican-controlled U.S. House of Repre-
sentatives passed a bill to ban government funding for NPR
and affiliated public broadcasting stations. Conservatives
claimed this would cut and control federal spending, but critics
say it was in response to earlier fallouts with NPR. These
notably include the firing of NPR news analyst Juan Williams
for remarks he made on Fox News Channel’s The O’Reilly
Factor (see 10.10) and a sting video showing NPR’s then
senior vice-president for fundraising Ron Schiller describing the
Tea Party political movement as “xenophobic.”
In the end, Congress spared the basic appropriation for
CPB, which included $430 million annually for 2011 and
2012, plus another $445 million for 2013. CPB also
retained $6 million for digital projects, which was the bal-
ance of a fund that had previously been set at $36 million
a year. Journalist Steve Behrens reported that “the late night
negotiations” also saved NPR from a Republican-led effort
to ban federal funding for public radio.**
What did not survive in the budget deliberations was
the 49-year-old Public Telecommunications Facilities Pro-
gram, a $20-million line item in the Department of Com-
merce. This longstanding public broadcasting program had
been used successfully for years by public broadcasters for
start-up funds for new stations, to replace failing transmitters
or to convert to HD. In 2010, even though more than 90
percent of the country was covered by both public TV and
NPR, the facilities program awarded grants to 30 new
public radio operations and one new PTV station.
Debbie Goh
Nanyang Technological University
*Paul Farhi, “Tomlinson Cited for Abuses at Broadcast Board: CPB
Ex-Chief Puts Friend on Payroll, State Dept. Says.” Washington
Post, 22 January 2007, p. C1.
**Steve Behrens, “CPB Survives, But Not the Facilities Program,”
Current, 18 April 2011. http://www.current.org/federal/fed1108
ptfp.html.
358
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
notion
that
program
decision
making
should
be tightly controlled by public television’s 168 sta-
tion program managers—who usually had 168
opinions).
To form this fund, stations are assessed in pro-
portion to their market size (and the loss of major-
market member stations hurts badly here). Programs
produced either wholly or in part from this fund
10.10 Financing NPR
N
PR’s firing of analyst Juan Williams in October 2010
set off a firestorm by both the right and left, who var-
iously charged that the radio network had denied Williams
his right to speak. In an appearance on Fox Channel’s The
O’Reilly Factor, Williams said he got “worried” and “ner-
vous” when he saw people in Muslim dress on airplanes.
Maintaining that Williams’ comments were inconsistent
with NPR’s editorial standards, Ellen Weiss, NPR Director
of News, promptly called Williams and told him his con-
tract was being terminated.
Even though NPR chief executive officer Vivian Schiller
agreed that Williams’ dismissal was appropriate, the ter-
mination evolved into a public relations nightmare for
NPR. The radio network received more than 23,000
emails about the incident, almost all of them negative.
Williams, a black man working in a largely white
organization, was perceived by many conservatives as a
target of liberal bias. Eventually, Weiss, a 30-year
veteran of public radio, resigned her position. Ironically,
Williams went to work for FOX, with an annual contract
of $2 million.
Five months later, public radio suffered another embar-
rassing set-back, when a conservative sting video captured
NPR’s chief fundraiser disparaging Tea Party supporters as
“seriously racist” and asserting that NPR would be better off
without federal funding, “although some stations would go
dark.” Both Ron Schiller, vice-president for NPR’s Foundation,
and CEO Vivian Schiller (no relation to Ron Schiller) subse-
quently (and immediately) resigned amid questions about
NPR’s management and calls to de-fund the radio network.
Ultimately, both Williams’ termination and the sting video
had negative ramifications for both public television and NPR.
Conservative media commentators and Republican law-
makers, in particular, used the incidents to claim that public
broadcasting was partisan and undeserving of public fund-
ing. House Republicans passed a bill in March 2011 to ban
government funding for NPR and affiliated public broadcast-
ing stations, and though defeated at the eleventh hour, the
budget bill posed a genuine threat to federal funding for
public broadcasting. Several states—including New Jersey,
Virginia and Florida—followed the lead of the House bill to
implement deep cuts in their states’ funding for public stations.
10.11 PBS Competing for Kids
C
ross-platform initiatives are not restricted to the com-
mercial networks. PBSKIDSGO.org introduced Kids-
World Sports, a website based on an international
documentary series that profiles kid-athletes who have
the talent and drive to succeed in various sports. On
the site, kids can watch short clips from the series, learn
about different sports from videos featuring real kids,
send video e-cards and compete in sport-related games.
News Flash Five, another PBS effort, is a current events
website aimed at tweens aged 8–11. It features a cast of
five kids, rendered in flash animation, who report on
national and world news, technology, entertainment, sports
and weather. On the site, kids are able to play games such
as Just the Facts (news quiz), Pin Point (finding places in the
news on a map), Match It (connecting photos to news-
makers) and Get the Scoop (news gathering and writing).
PBS’s efforts match those of Nickelodeon, the top commer-
cial channel for kids, and are far beyond the efforts of the
broadcast networks.
Nancy C. Schwartz, Ph.D.
The Academic Edge, Inc.
CHAPTER 10 Public Television Programming
359
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
carry an announcement crediting “viewers like you”
because station money is involved—a large part of
which comes from viewer contributions.
A program on PBS can—and usually does—
have multiple producers. Typically, separate produc-
tion units shoot film for partners in a coproduction
deal, as when PBS joins with the BBC to produce a
science or nature program. In such an arrangement,
both have usage rights. Rather than share a program
with a U.S. competitor, such as a cable network,
public television prefers foreign coproduction over
domestic coproduction.
The Major Producers
As already pointed out, a very large portion of PBS’s
schedule comes from series produced by or in con-
junction with three major producing stations—
WGBH in Boston, WNET in New York and
WETA in Washington, DC. In most years, these pro-
ducing stations account for well over half of PBS’s
new shows (see the list in 10.12). Other stations
contribute an occasional series or special to the
PBS schedule, but most local efforts either focus
too narrowly on a topic to be of wide national inter-
est or fall short of national standards for writing,
talent and technical characteristics because they
lack a sufficient budget. PBS seeks programs on a
par with commercial efforts in terms of content
and production quality.
British programs such as Masterpiece and Mys-
tery! have become staples of U.S. public television
because they are high-quality programs available at
a small fraction of the cost of producing comparable
fare in the United States. But they, along with other
foreign productions, occupy only a fraction of all
PBS airtime. Beside a mix of foreign producers,
international coproductions, commercial indepen-
dent producers and the three producing stations,
such producing organizations as Sesame Workshop
(formerly Children’s Television Workshop) have tra-
ditional ties to PBS.
This pattern of multiple sources has been con-
sistent over decades, although increased competition
from cable networks for foreign programs has fur-
ther squeezed PBS’s options. The greatest change in
programming in recent years has been the acquisi-
tion of funds by means of station program assess-
ment, not in the actual program sources.
Balance in Selection
Responsibility for acquiring programs falls to one of
several “content” managers, including the directors
of Factual Programming, Fiction and Performance
Programming, and Children’s Programming. They
must view sample tapes (demonstrations) and sift
through many hundreds of proposals each year.
Based on these written proposals or sample tapes
(pilot episodes are very rarely made), the manager
decides whether to purchase the program or provide
some portion of production funding.
Happily, in the case of foreign productions, a
program can be purchased ready for broadcast
because it’s already “in the can” (produced). If the
decision on a proposal for a new production is favor-
able, a small research and development grant is usu-
ally the first step, perhaps with a promise of larger
10.12
Major Producing Centers
Stations
Program Series
WGBH, Boston
American Experience
Antiques Roadshow
Arthur
Frontline
Masterpiece
Mystery!
NOVA
This Old House
WNET, New York
American Masters
Charlie Rose
Great Performances
Live from Lincoln Center
Metropolitan Opera Presents
Nature
WETA, Washington, DC
In Performance at the White
House
PBS NewsHour
Washington Week in Review
360
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
amounts to follow. Once production is under way,
the content manager will consult with the producer
during the production process to guide the outcome
toward a mutually satisfactory result. It is important
to note that, by law, PBS can order programs to be
produced, but it does not itself produce them.
Through all this, National Program Service
executives attempt to maintain
balance in the
national schedule so that the network doesn’t find
itself one season with, for example, too many sym-
phony concerts and too few investigative documen-
taries in the schedule. To better regulate the flow of
new productions into the national schedule, PBS
established the Public Television Pipeline, a manage-
ment system for monitoring and coordinating all
program development activity from the proposal
stage through delivery to PBS.
Throughout the year, the Pipeline sends signals
to producers about PBS’s overall schedule surpluses
and shortfalls as well as specific content needs. Pro-
posals are submitted and approval (and perhaps
seed money) obtained from PBS, and the final selec-
tion process is under way. Pipeline 2011, published
in Current in December 2010, included 140 projects
scheduled for production within the public television
system. A lot of juggling goes on to get something
new in the Pipeline.
Corporate Pressure
Corporate underwriters of programs invest not only
prodigious sums from corporate treasuries but also
personal effort and reputation, and they feel entitled
to choice slots in the prime-time schedule. Of course,
PBS can’t always fit a program in the time slot the
underwriter wants and still maintain a balanced
schedule.
Corporate fiscal needs can also affect schedul-
ing. Often, the underwriting corporation requires
that a program be played within its fiscal year—-
irrespective of audience and schedule needs. PBS
program executives attempt to accommodate such
cases, knowing that if they do not, the corporation
in its pique may refuse future requests for support.
The major producing stations also attempt to
influence program decisions at PBS on behalf of
their program underwriters. For those stations,
financial health depends on corporate support,
which pays for salaries, equipment loans and other
production expenses. Were just one major under-
writer to withdraw support, the financial effect on
a producing station could be devastating.
Station Pressure
Other programming pressures occur. Many stations,
for example, refuse to telecast a program at the time
fed because their programmers decide it
1.
lacks prime-time quality.
2.
contains too much profanity or violence to air
in early evening.
3.
occupies a slot the station wants for its own
programs.
4.
has little appeal for local viewers.
Although each of these reasons has merit at
times, the combined effect of 168 station program
managers exercising 168 independent judgments
has often left portions of the PBS schedule in a
shambles. PBS program executives assembling a
schedule must anticipate these concerns to minimize
defections.
Program Rights
PBS programmers must also wrestle with program
rights. In public television as in commercial televi-
sion, standard program air-lease rights are set by
contract with the producer, who owns the rights.
PBS has traditionally negotiated with producers for
as many plays as possible so that by airing the same
program several times, the typically small (per air-
ing) PBS audience snowballs. Extra plays also fill
out the program schedule.
At the same time, the program syndicator seeks
as few airings as possible over the shortest time
period to retain maximum control and resale poten-
tial for a program. A compromise between various
producers and PBS that permits four program plays
within three years is now the standard rights agree-
ment in public television.
CHAPTER 10 Public Television Programming
361
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Syndicated and Local
Programming
American Public Television (unrelated to American
Public Media which is radio) licenses a large number
of programs to PBS and public radio stations, pro-
grams such as British sitcoms; documentaries; travel,
cooking and music programs; how-to series; and
movies from Warner/Turner and 20th Century Fox
(for a more complete listing, see www.aptonline.org).
This company is a significant player in public tele-
vision programming and a prime source of entertain-
ment programs for public stations.
In addition, because of its role in formal educa-
tion, public television has had to develop its own
unique body of syndicated material to meet instruc-
tional television needs. A number of centers for pro-
gram distribution have been established to perform
the same function as commercial syndication firms,
but on a noncommercial, cooperative basis (see
10.13 for more on these centers).
Noncommercial Syndication
The abundance of ITV materials means that it is no
longer necessary to produce instructional programs
locally, except where desired subject matter is
unique to a community. Local school authorities
are usually in charge of selecting instructional mate-
rials for in-school use, although the public television
station’s staff often serves as liaison between sources
of this material and users. In addition, the state may
appropriate funds for instructional programs, giving
them to its public stations, or school districts may
contract with a local public station to supply partic-
ular ITV programs at certain times.
Noncommercial Adult Education
Quality programming for adult learners is also now
available in quantity to public stations. Beginning in
the late 1970s, various consortia began to turn out
telecourses (television courses) for integration into
the curricula of postsecondary institutions. These
efforts have centered particularly in community
10.13 Noncommercial Syndicators
T
he Agency for Instructional Technology (AIT) in Boo-
mington, Indiana, produces series for primary grades,
high school and postsecondary students. Among the best
known are All About You, Math Works, Assignment: The
World and Up Close and Natural. AIT took the lead in
developing innovative classroom programs that operate in
conjunction with desktop computers, creating the first inter-
active lessons on DVD.
Great Plains National (GPN) in Lincoln, Nebraska,
offers dozens of series for elementary and junior high use
along with a great many materials for college and adult
learning. Titles in its catalog range from Reading Rainbow
(for first graders) to The Power of Algebra, Tombs and Tal-
ismans and Truly American (for high schoolers and adults).
Western Instructional Television (WIT) in Los Angeles
offers more than 500 series in science, language arts,
social studies, English, art and history. TV Ontario also
supplies U.S. schools with dozens of instructions series,
especially in science and technology, including Read All
About It, The Landscape of Geometry and Magic Library.
Even PBS, through its Elementary/Secondary Service, offers
a slate of ITV programs, such as The Voyage of the Mimi,
Amigos and Futures with Jaime Escalante.
These not-for-profit companies fund their operations in a
variety of ways, including leasing programming they own
to stations and PBS for broadcast, selling DVDs to the gen-
eral public, and acquiring contracts from private founda-
tions and state and national agencies. For example, in
2011 AIT (for the fifth year) secured the fulfillment contract
for Jumpstart’s “Read for the Record” campaign. This
national program, funded in part by the Pearson Founda-
tion, was an effort to close the early achievement gap for
some children living in lower economic environments. Sim-
ilarly, AIT has partnered for years with the Kettering Foun-
dation and local and state organizations dedicated to
literacy and childhood education.
362
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
colleges,
led
by
Miami-Dade
(Florida),
Dallas
(Texas), Coastline Community College (Huntington
Beach, California) and the Southern California Con-
sortium. With budgets ranging from $100,000 to
$1 million for a single course, they have proven to
be sufficiently well produced to attract casual view-
ers as well as enrolled students.
Meanwhile, faculty members at other leading
postsecondary institutions began developing curricu-
lum materials to accompany several outstanding
public television program series distributed nation-
ally through PBS for general viewing. The first of
these was The Ascent of Man, with the late Dr.
Jacob Bronowski, a renowned scholar as well as a
skillful and effective communicator on camera.
More than 200 colleges and universities offered col-
lege credit for that course. Others quickly followed
(The Adams Chronicles, Cosmos, Life on Earth, The
Shakespeare Plays) as programmers discovered that
such series furnished the casual viewer with attrac-
tive public television entertainment and simulta-
neously served more serious viewers desiring to
register for college course credits.
This experience led many public television pro-
grammers to realize that too much had been made of
the supposed demarcation between ITV and PTV.
Too often during earlier years, many program pro-
ducers would not even consider producing so-called
instructional television. The first Carnegie Commis-
sion in 1965 strengthened this presumed gap by
not concerning itself with television’s educational
assistance to schools and colleges and by adopting
the term public television to mean programming
for general viewing. The narrowing of the distance
between instructional and general interest program-
ming has been highlighted by the broad use of
such public TV documentaries as Baseball and
The Civil War by Ken Burns in the classroom setting
(see 10.14).
The lesson for public television has been that ITV
and PTV programs can appeal to viewers other than
those for which they were especially intended. The
Annenberg/CPB series is only one example. Another
is Sesame Street, which was initially intended for
youngsters in disadvantaged households—yet the in-
school use of Sesame Street has been one of the
significant occurrences in kindergarten and lower ele-
mentary classrooms throughout America, leading to
new and more complex attitudes toward television in
and out of the classroom (see 10.15). Ironically, Ses-
ame Street may also contribute to the gap in knowl-
edge between advantaged and disadvantaged children
because it is widely watched (and learned from) by
already advantaged children, perhaps making the dis-
advantaged more disadvantaged.
Commercial Syndication
More
extensively
tapped
than
noncommercial
sources, however, are such commercial syndicators
as Time-Life, David Susskind’s Talent Associates,
Wolper Productions, Granada TV in Great Britain,
and several major motion picture companies includ-
ing Universal Pictures. Public television stations
sometimes
negotiate
individually
for
program
packages with such syndicators; alternatively, they
can join with the public stations through regional
associations to make group buys.
Commercially syndicated programs obtained in
this way by PTV include historical and contempo-
rary documentaries, British-produced drama series
and packages of highly popular or artistic motion
pictures originally released to theaters. Such pro-
gramming, because it was designed for general audi-
ences, is thought to bring new viewers to a public
station. Many programmers believe those new view-
ers can then be persuaded, through promotional
announcements, to watch more typical PTV fare
(and maybe, just maybe, become members).
The proportion of commercially syndicated pro-
grams in public television station schedules, nonethe-
less, averages less than 5 percent of broadcast hours.
The number stays small partly because those syndi-
cated programs that public stations find appropriate
are relatively expensive; unless the station secures out-
side underwriting to cover license fees, it usually can’t
afford them. Stations now pay as much as $100,000
for an hour of British television that cost as little as
$50,000 a few years ago. Another reason is philo-
sophical: Although much commercially syndicated
material has strong audience appeal, its educational
or cultural value is arguable.
CHAPTER 10 Public Television Programming
363
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Local Production
The percentage of airtime filled with locally produced
programming has gradually decreased over the years
as both network and syndicated programming have
increased in quantity and quality. Owing mostly to its
high cost, the percentage of total on-air hours pro-
duced solely for local use by public television stations
had declined from 16 percent in 1972 to much less
than 5 percent by the mid-2000s. Moreover, produc-
tion quality expectations have risen. More time and
dollars and better facilities must now be used to pro-
duce effective local programs.
Locally produced programs, nonetheless, are far
from extinct in public television. A survey of station
producers found that, among the 79 licensees respond-
ing, more than 3,000 programs had been produced
during the past year. Among them were weekly and
occasional nightly broadcasts devoted to activities,
events and issues of local interest and significance.
Also, many stations regularly cover their state
governments and legislators. Unlike commercial sta-
tions, which concentrate on spot news and devote a
minute or less to each story, public stations see their
role as giving more comprehensive treatment to local
matters. But news and public-affairs programs aren’t
the only kinds being produced. The survey found
stations turning out a spectrum of arts and perfor-
mance, documentaries, sports events and sports talk,
10.14 Ken Burns and PBS: A Match Made in Broadcasting Heaven?
T
here is probably no single person more closely identi-
fied with the Public Broadcasting System than Ken
Burns. Hailed for over 30 years as the most prolific, most
influential, and most awarded documentary filmmaker in
the United States, Burns has produced virtually all of his
groundbreaking films with and for PBS. And while some of
his earliest pictures were produced for theatrical release,
it’s PBS that made Burns who he is, and he’s returned the
favor many times over.
Burns is best known for his epic PBS documentary mini-
series The Civil War (1990), Baseball (1994 and 2010)
and Jazz (2001), all of which were nominated for—and in
the cases of The Civil War and Baseball, winners of—
multiple Emmy awards. But Burns’s vast filmography also
includes docs on topics as diverse as the U.S. park system
(The National Parks: America’s Best Idea, 2009), women’s
suffrage (Not for Ourselves Alone: The Story of Elizabeth
Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony, 1999), American
landmarks (The Statue of Liberty, 1985), and individuals as
different as Huey Long (1985), Thomas Jefferson (1997),
Frank Lloyd Wright (1998) and the first black heavyweight
boxing champion (Unforgivable Blackness: The Rise and Fall
of Jack Johnson, 2004). These and Burns’s other acclaimed
films skillfully interweave archival still and motion photogra-
phy, period music, interviews with experts and voice-over
narration by respected actors and historians to create what
has become a trademark Ken Burns look and feel.
Like many documentarians, Burns plays a variety of
simultaneous roles in the production of his films, serving as
not only director but also, almost always, as producer,
writer, cinematographer and even music composer. For his
troubles, he’s taken home a slew of Emmys and two Oscar
nominations and has been a nominee or winner of awards
bestowed by organizations as diverse as the Directors
Guild of America, the International Documentary Associa-
tion, the Sundance Film Festival, the George Eastman
House Museum of Photography and Film, the Western
Writers of America and the Organization of American
Historians.
But perhaps the honor (if it can be called that) most
closely associated with Mr. Burns in the minds of film-
makers and editors is as the inspiration for the so-called
Ken Burns Effect, a panning and zooming technique that
can be found in just about every one of Burns’ films as
well as those of documentarians he’s inspired. (Burns
didn’t invent the technique, but he’s used it so often and
so consistently that, for better or worse, it’s come to bear
his name.) Since Burns in his PBS documentaries uses so
many still images—archival photos mostly, but also
paintings, illustrations and clippings from old newspapers
and other stationary two-dimensional visual materials—
he’s found that he can bring his movies to life by, for
example, having his camera zoom in on one individual in
a photo, then panning across the width of the picture
364
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
history, comedy, science, nature and even (surprise)
original children’s programs.
Scheduling Strategies
Nowadays, PBS programmers want to maximize
audiences. Gone are the educational television days
when paying attention to audience size was sneered
at in public television. The prevailing attitude at PBS
recognizes that a program must be seen to be of value
and that improper scheduling prevents full realization
of a program’s potential. Member stations now recog-
nize that bigger audiences also mean a bigger dollar
take during on-air pledge drives.
Counterprogramming the Commercial
Networks
Competition, of course, is a key consideration.
There are three ways to respond to it:
1.
Offensively, by attempting to overpower the
competitor
2.
Defensively, by counterprogramming for a dif-
ferent segment of the audience than the compe-
titor’s program is likely to attract
3.
By ignoring the competition altogether and
hoping for the best
PBS has never been able to go on the offensive;
its programs lack the requisite breadth of appeal.
before coming to rest on the face of another person in the
photo, and then zooming in on or out from that second
person.
The popularity of Burns’ films has been a boon for PBS.
In fact, the initial (1990) airing of the 11-hour Civil War
mini-series attracted more than 40 million viewers, a public
television ratings record that still stands some two decades
later. (The PBS network and its member stations, recogniz-
ing the continuing appeal of The Civil War, repeatedly trot
it out during fundraising drives.) Because Burns’ work is so
well respected—and is such a reliable audience draw—in
2008 the Corporation for Public Broadcasting committed
to a 10-year agreement with Burns and his production
company, Florentine Films. Under the agreement, CPB
provided funding for the development of new Burns pro-
jects, including Prohibition (2011) as well as Vietnam (tar-
geted for 2016), biographies of the Roosevelts (Teddy,
Franklin and Eleanor) and a look at the history of country
music.
Given the continual threats of budget reduction and
even elimination that public broadcasting perennially faces,
the fact that the CPB has made such a long-term commit-
ment to the development of new Ken Burns films is encour-
aging. Indeed, Burns himself is all too familiar with funding
problems; in 2009, his long-term supporter General Motors
publicly announced that it would no longer be able to
underwrite Burns’ work. (GM, of course, is far from the only
major corporation to cut back on its financial support for
PBS and its programs.)
Indeed, the threats to public broadcasting—and, as a
result, to the continued viability of his own career—thrust
Burns into the political spotlight in early 2011. As Con-
gress yet again debated the desirability of funding PBS
during a recession, Burns wrote an op-ed piece for the
Washington Post entitled “Public Broadcasting: A
‘Luxury’ We Can’t Do Without.” In his article, Burns
defended the quality of PBS’s work, contrasting it with the
content of commercial broadcasting. “With minimal
funding,” Burns wrote, “PBS manages to produce essen-
tial (commercial-free) children’s programming as well as
the best science and nature, arts and performance, and
public affairs and history programming on the dial—
often a stark contrast to superficial, repetitive and mind-
numbing programming elsewhere.” Burns not only stood
up for PBS’s mission; he also unambiguously gave public
television credit for the existence and success of his own
work: “Many say that what can’t survive in the market-
place doesn’t deserve to survive. Not one of my docu-
mentaries, produced solely for PBS over the past 30
years, could have been made anywhere but on public
broadcasting.”
Davis Weiss, Ph.D.
Montana State University Billings
CHAPTER 10 Public Television Programming
365
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
10.15 Remembering Sesame Street
G
enerations of preschoolers, probably including you,
learned the alphabet—and a whole lot more—from
watching the Muppets. Sesame Street premiered in 1969
on National Education Television Network, now called the
Public Broadcasting Service. After 43 seasons and nearly
4,500 episodes, it’s one of the longest-running shows in
television history. Created by Jim Henson, Sesame Street is
probably the most respected educational program in the
world.
The original U.S.-produced show currently airs in 120
countries, and more than 20 international versions are pro-
duced in such countries as Brazil, Mexico, France, Turkey,
China and Russia. More than 77 million Americans watched
Sesame Street as children, as well as millions more worldwide.
One survey reported that 95 percent of all American children
watched Sesame Street by the time they were 3 years old, and
based on Nielsen ratings, the show continues to appear
among the top 15 children’s programs on television.
Sesame Street teaches letters and numbers, as well as
basic word recognition, mathematics and science, but its
goals include basic social skills. Sesame Street has worked
toward teaching children about how to make friends,
practice good hygiene and eat healthfully. Known for its
rigorous ongoing research, the program’s overall curriculum
has changed over time to reflect the problems of growing
up in America. At the same time, using witty humor and fast
pacing, the show tries to appeal to parents and older sib-
lings as well as preschool children.
While the elaborate hand-held puppets called the Mup-
pets are central to Sesame Street’s broad appeal, its live
actors keep the show grounded, and the program has led
the way in portrayals of minorities on television. The program
has been praised for its multicultural cast, as well as for the
actors’ overall longevity. Sesame Street boasts the longest-
running Hispanic character in the history of television (Luis) as
well as the longest-running character with a disability (Linda,
who is deaf) and what are believed to be the longest run-
ning African-American characters (Gordon and Susan).
The changing relationships among the people who act
the characters also get incorporated into the program. For
example, Luis married Maria, the owner of Sesame Street’s
Fix-It-Shop, and Maria later gave birth to Gabby; Maria’s
pregnancy became part of the show’s storyline. Gordon
and Susan’s story included the adoption of their son Miles.
When original cast member Will Lee, who had played
store owner Mr. Hooper, died, producers chose to include
the death of Mr. Hooper into Sesame Street’s story. The
producers believed that the inclusion of Mr. Hooper’s death
would educate children about the death of a loved one.
By the late-1990s Sesame Street’s producers had come
to the realization that the modern child had different viewing
habits than the child of the past. At the same time, the
explosion of more programming—on cable television, on the
internet and on DVDs—led to an increased level of compe-
tition for Sesame Street and wee-bit-of-a-drop (!) in the rat-
ings, so the producers took steps to make structural changes.
First was the inclusion of Elmo’s World as a miniseries during
the final fifteen minutes of every episode of Sesame Street.
This segment follows the adventures of Sesame Street’s most
popular Muppet monster, 3½ year old Elmo. In the early
2000s, Sesame Street began including more narrative and
more storylines in its modular episodes.
The popularity of the Muppet characters and the show’s
overall success turned Sesame Street into one of the earliest
and most enduring multiplatform brand names. It may also
deserve an award for being the most studied program in
history: Decades of scholars have poured over it, trying to
assess its influence and efficacy. Comic writer Michael Davis
has been quoted as saying: “Sesame Street [is] perhaps the
most vigorously researched, vetted, and fretted-over program
on the planet. It would take a fork-lift to now haul away the
load of scholarly paper devoted to the series…”*
In addition to its 118 Emmy award wins (more than any
other series in the entire history of television), including a
Lifetime Achievement Emmy in 2009, the show has won
11 Grammys, has its own theme park (Sesame Place),
publishes magazines on five continents and generates
movies, toys, books, DVDs and video games. The clever
use of Muppets, animation, music and live actors in brief
modular segments results in a broad-appeal program cap-
turing the imagination of millions of children while involving
them and their parents in the learning process.
James Angelini, Ph.D.
University of Delaware
*Davis, Michael. Street Gang: The Complete History of Sesame
Street. New York: Viking Books, 2008.
366
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Prime-time PBS shows average around a 1.2 house-
hold rating. ABC, CBS, FOX and NBC regularly col-
lect ratings of 4.5–6 (although their figures are much
smaller than a decade ago—the result of audience
defections to the many cable networks and online
services).
PBS, then, must duck and dodge, a strategy
called counterprogramming. By studying national
Nielsen data, programmers learn the demographic
makeup of competing network program audiences
so they can place their own programs more advanta-
geously. For example, a symphony performance that
tends to attract well-educated women older than 50
(upscale in socioeconomics) living in metropolitan
areas would perform well opposite FOX’s The Simp-
sons, NBC’s Deal or No Deal, or CW’s WWE Friday
Night Smackdown!, all having downscale (lower
socioeconomic) audiences. Similarly, in searching for
a slot for the investigative documentary series Front-
line, PBS did not consider for a moment the 8 to
9
P.M. slot on Sundays because football overruns
often push 60 Minutes into this slot.
PBS tries to avoid placing a valued program
against a hit series in the commercial schedules,
although there aren’t enough such slots. The net-
work also has traditionally avoided placing impor-
tant programs during the three key periods of all-
market audience measurement (sweeps) in Novem-
ber, February and May—times when commercial
television throws its blockbusters at the audience.
But because the commercial networks have cut
back on sweeps blockbusters in recent years (espe-
cially costume-drama miniseries, which lure away
many PBS viewers), PBS has grown more willing to
run an important series through a sweeps month.
This is clearly a calculated risk, a kind of TV “mine-
field”; a powerful commercial network special could
draw off so many viewers from a weekly PBS mini-
series that few would return to see its continuation
and concluding episode.
Further, because public as well as commercial sta-
tions are measured during the sweeps, PBS’s stations
demand a “solid” schedule, with a minimum of “mis-
sion programs.” This is a mildly pejorative reference to
public television’s mission to serve all Americans, spe-
cifically referring here to narrow-appeal programs of
interest only to some very small groups of viewers.
Many programs are “good for the mission” but earn
small ratings. Thus, during the sweeps, PBS now dis-
plays many of its strongest—not weakest—programs.
By the mid-2000s the top programmers at PBS
had decided to stop using ratings as a “rear-view
mirror” and had begun to state goals for their pro-
grams, using a formal process that judges prime-time
programs according to predetermined goals. Some
stations continue to be nervous about the transition
to objective standards, preferring to balance critical
acclaim and awards against audience size. Neverthe-
less, PBS must be accountable to an ever-shrinking
number of underwriters who want their programs to
be seen, really seen.
Stripping and Stacking Limited Series
A standard among PBS’s offerings, the limited series
includes both nonfiction and fictional miniseries (as
explained in Chapter 2, limited series have continuing
topics with a fixed number of episodes, usually rang-
ing from 3 to 12 or more). Some notable examples in
recent years include Texas Ranch House; Jean-Michel
Cousteau:
Ocean
Adventures;
African-American
Lives; and Ken Burns’ The War. Most limited series
appear once a week in prime time, much as weekly
series are scheduled on commercial television.
Because short-run series lose viewers across the
first few weekly telecasts, however, PBS schedulers
have experimented with alternative play patterns in
the hope of staunching the dropoff. Borrowing jar-
gon from computer technology, they asked whether
limited series scheduling could be made more “user
friendly.” Experiments with the Holocaust series
and Shoah in 1988 showed that limited series that
have sufficiently engaging material lend themselves
to airing on consecutive nights, a practice known
in commercial television as stripping. This ploy not
only attracted at least as many viewers as tuned in to
similar programs on a weekly basis but also encour-
aged viewers to spend significantly more time watch-
ing the series. Moreover, the episode-to-episode
ratings dropoff disappeared.
Which limited series receive special treatment
and which must air in the usual once-a-week way
CHAPTER 10 Public Television Programming
367
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
has hinged on a decision about what “sufficiently
engaging material” means. This is in part a function
of production budget, advance promotion, casting,
subject matter and less well-recognized variables
such as timing, quality and appeal to the public tele-
vision audience. Such decisions cannot be supported
by audience research alone; the programs must be
screened (watched) as well. Ultimately, the chief pro-
gram executive now makes the call.
When a limited series has too many episodes for
convenient stripping, PBS bunches episodes together,
stacking two episodes per evening. Ken Burns’s epic
on World War II, The War, for example, was sched-
uled in this pattern, thereby limiting the magnitude
of nightly commitment on the part of viewers. PBS’s
practice is to schedule limited series on a maximum
of
five
consecutive
nights
(although
The
War
required seven evenings).
Audience Flow
Certain PBS series are especially dependent on audience
flow from a strong lead-in. New, untried programs
especially need scheduling help. The Ring of Truth, a
six-part series on the scientific method, for example,
was not expected to build a loyal following the way a
predictable series such as Washington Week in Review
has. Thus it was placed following an established, suc-
cessful science series, NOVA, which regularly draws
large audiences (large, that is, for public television)
and itself has no need of a powerful lead-in.
Particularly in need of a lead-in boost—on a
regular basis—is another PBS staple, the umbrella
series. These are anthologies of single programs
with loosely related content that appear under an
all-encompassing title (or umbrella) such as Ameri-
can Experience (history programs) or Great Perfor-
mances (ballet, plays, operas, orchestral music,
Broadway shows and so forth). Because the material
offered under the umbrella changes from week to
week, the audience never knows what to expect.
Clearly, the format works against habit formation.
Thus, it is essential that a strong audience be intro-
duced to each week’s episode, if not by costly media
advertising (usually out of public television’s reach),
then by a substantial lead-in.
Considerations at the Station Level
A public television program schedule is notable for its
variety; it is meant to serve the total population over
time but not the complete needs of the individual
viewer. Although this is also true of commercial sta-
tions, it especially applies to public television schedules.
Because they usually are so focused in content, PTV
programs
tend
to
be
watched
by
small,
often
demographically-targeted population segments. Seek-
ing the most opportune time slot for reaching those tar-
get groups is the local program manager’s challenge.
No U.S. PTV programmer ever builds an entire
schedule from scratch nowadays. Rather, the man-
ager’s ongoing responsibility is to maintain a sched-
ule while considering the following factors:
1.
Licensee type, as each carries its unique pro-
gram priorities
2.
Audience size and demographics
3.
Competition from commercial stations, other
public television signals and cable networks
4.
Daypart targeting, such as daytime for chil-
dren’s programs and instructional services, and
early evenings for older adults
5.
Program availability
No single element overrides the others, but each
affects the final schedule. Public television programmers
seek programs that meet local audience needs and
schedule those programs at times most likely to attract
the target audience. Because all audience segments can-
not be served at once, the mystery and magic of the job
is getting the right programs in the right time slots. High
ratings are not the primary objective; serving the appro-
priate audience with a show they will watch that adds to
the quality of their life, is.
National Promotion
Still another consideration is the importance of
national promotion. Fledgling programs and episodes
of an umbrella series need extra help for viewers to
discover them. Although an effective lead-in program
is essential, advertising and promotion can alert other
368
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
potential viewers to a new program and persuade
them to try it. Unfortunately, public television bud-
gets permit little advertising, sometimes none. Sadly,
only a few underwriters include some promotional
allotment in their program budgets.
Still another PBS practice is to carefully schedule
on-air promotion announcements for a particular
program in time slots where potential viewers of
that program (based on demographic profiles) are
likely to be found in maximum quantity. Such on-
air promotion is crucial because it reaches known
viewers of public television, but its effectiveness is
somewhat hampered by public television’s limited
prime-time reach. In one week, a massive on-air
campaign promoting one program could hope to
reach at best only 20 to 25 percent of all television
households, and far fewer would actually watch.
Audience Ratings
Public television must constantly demonstrate its
utility. Many have contributed to its continuance—
Congress, underwriters, viewers. If few watch, why
should contributors keep public television alive?
Programmers have come to realize that critical
praise alone is insufficient; they need tangible evi-
dence that audiences feel the same way. That most
convincing evidence comes from acceptable ratings.
Nielsen Data
PBS evaluates the performance of its programs with
both national and local viewing data, each having its
own particular usefulness in analysis. National audi-
ence data are provided by the Nielsen People-Meter
service (NPM), and the Nielsen Station Index (NSI)
provides the individual market data. In the past,
PBS’s limited research budget permitted the purchase
of only one national audience survey week per month.
Forty weeks therefore went unmeasured. (The com-
mercial networks, as described in previous chapters,
purchase continuous, year-round national data.) Even
though restricted, NSI’s Metered Market Service pro-
vided PBS with a comparatively inexpensive proxy
for daily national ratings because 66 percent of the
country’s TV households were within measured
markets.
Beginning in 2010, however, PBS finally began
a fulltime ratings subscription with Nielsen. The
subscription has provided ongoing and detailed
viewer information about such programs as Front-
line, Antiques Roadshow, Masterpiece, NOVA and
even Sesame Street. PBS apparently moved to more
frequent and in-depth information about its viewers
to supply more and better data to corporate under-
writers (as well as help PBS programming).
Commercial network programmers, to the irrita-
tion of advertising time-buyers, have traditionally
inflated affiliates’ ratings by stunting with unusually
popular specials and miniseries during the sweeps
weeks. These higher ratings provide the local affiliates
with an opportunity to raise advertising rates. PBS
programmers schedule some new programs during
sweeps but rarely stunt for an entire four-week
period. PBS does, however, try to schedule a represen-
tative mix of PBS offerings during each of the
national survey weeks. No more than one opera is
permitted, for example, nor are too many esoteric
public-affairs programs scheduled during that week.
Not being entirely “holier than thou,” PBS does
practice some stunting during its pledge drives. Just
as networks stunt for economic reasons, so too does
public television. The difference is structural: Rather
than raise revenue by selling advertising time on the
basis of ratings, PBS stations raise revenue by direct,
on-air solicitation of viewer contributions. Programs
specially produced for the drives are scheduled
alongside regular PBS series. To an extent, larger
audiences mean larger contributions, but a low-
rated program may find a small but appreciative
audience and prove a lucrative fundraiser. At the
same time, high ratings (relative to the whole sched-
ule) have considerable appeal to uncommitted fund-
ing agencies and potential underwriters.
Audience Accumulation Strategy
PBS strives for maximum variety in its program
schedule to serve as many people as possible at one
time or another each week. Unlike commercial net-
work programs, not all public television programs
CHAPTER 10 Public Television Programming
369
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
are expected to have large audiences. Small audiences
are usually acceptable so long as the weekly accumu-
lation of viewers is large, an indication that the “pub-
lic” is using its public television service. And so, an
important element in assessing PBS’s programming
success is its weekly cumulative audience, or cume.
This statistic, along with time-spent-viewing, com-
prises the two basic elements of audience data.
The most important data come from the cumes.
Nielsen defines a cumulative household audience as
the percentage of all U.S. TV households (undupli-
cated) that have tuned in for at least six minutes to a
specific program or time period. (Six minutes is a
minimum figure, the “ticket” for admission into
the cume. Even if the viewer watches for 50 minutes,
or leaves and rejoins the audience five or six times
during a telecast, that person is still counted only
once in the cume, provided the six-minute minimum
has been met.)
A more typical statistic for public television
than cumes are average audience ratings. For the
major ongoing series in 2010, the composite average
ratings were as follows: nature and science pro-
grams, 2.3 rating; dramas, 1.8; musical perfor-
mances, 1.1; news and public affairs, 1.2. Based on
prior experience, PBS programmers apply informal
guidelines for what rating levels constitute adequate
viewing. Because ratings are not the sole criterion by
which PBS program performance is evaluated, how-
ever, failure to meet predicted levels never triggers a
cancellation. Repeated failure to earn the minimum
expected cumes, though, could eventually result in
nonrenewal.
Loyalty Assessment
PBS researchers also study audience loyalty (tenac-
ity) as a way to evaluate a program, something com-
mercial entities pay little attention to. Using ratings
from Nielsen’s metered markets, it is possible to plot
an audience’s course across a single program or
across an entire multiweek series. If the audience
tires quickly of a program, the overnight ratings
will slip downward during the telecast (a fate to
which lengthy programs are especially susceptible).
If the audience has weakened in response to the
appeal of competing network programs—such as
when a special starts a half hour after a PBS
show—the overnight ratings will suddenly drop at
the point where the competing special began.
This
information
tells
the
programmers
(roughly, to be sure) the extent to which their pro-
gram has engaged viewers. Noncompelling pro-
grams are vulnerable to competition. Shows failing
this test have to be scheduled more carefully when
repeated, preferably opposite softer network compe-
tition (like in the middle of the night).
The National People-Meter Service, in addition
to TV ratings and cumes, provides a different but
equally valuable analytical statistic: the number of
minutes spent by people (or households) viewing a
single program or even a whole multi-episode series.
This time-spent-viewing figure reveals how much of
a production was actually watched, in contrast to
the cume, which simply tells how many watched.
As mentioned previously, some miniseries earn
higher time-spent-viewing figures when stripped on
consecutive nights than when scheduled weekly.
Demographic Composition
Another useful way to evaluate a program is by
observing exactly who is watching. If a program is
designed for the elderly, did the elderly in fact tune
in? When African-Americans were the goal, did suf-
ficient numbers switch on the program? Although
households tuning to public television each week
are, as a group, not unlike television viewers gener-
ally, audiences for individual programs can vary
widely in demographic composition. Programs such
as NOVA and Masterpiece attract older, college-
educated, professional/managerial viewers because
these programs can be intellectually demanding.
Demanding shows are numerous on PBS, thus its
cumulative prime-time audience composition reflects
this
tendency.
Many
programs,
though,
have
broader-based followings, among them Nature and
This Old House.
PBS’s evening programs have also been found
to have an age skew (tendency) favoring adults
35 years of age or older. Few young adults, teen-
agers or children watch in prime time. The reason
370
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
for this skew probably lies in the nature of the even-
ing schedule, which, despite the occasional light
entertainment special, consists largely of nonfiction
documentaries. According to CBS’s top research
executive:
Our analysis shows that over age 35, you
get an adult programming taste. Under age
35, you still have a youth orientation. It is
only when people reach their mid-30s that
their viewing tastes become more like older
adults’…. And their appetite grows for
news and information programming.8
Still, public television’s overall (24-hour-a-day)
cumulative audience demographically mirrors the
general population on such characteristics as educa-
tion, income, occupation and racial composition.
That is partly because it is a large audience, with
more than half of all U.S. TV households tuning to
public television each week and about four-fifths
tuning in monthly. Another reason for PBS’s broad
profile is that the overall audience includes the view-
ers of daytime children’s and how-to (hobbies and
crafts) programs, many of whom are not frequent
users of the prime-time schedule.
Public television representatives frequently are
called upon to explain a seeming paradox: How
can public television’s audience duplicate the demo-
graphic makeup of the country when so many of its
programs attract the upscale viewer? The question is
second in importance only to that of how many peo-
ple are watching; it is often tied to charges of elitism
in program acquisition, implying that PBS is not
serving all the public with “public” television.
PBS replies that it consciously attempts to pro-
vide alternatives to the commercial network offer-
ings; to do so, the content of most PBS programs
must make demands of viewers. Demanding pro-
grams, however, tend to have less appeal to viewers
of lower socioeconomic status (as well as to younger
viewers). The result is underrepresentation of such
viewers in certain audiences. This underrepresenta-
tion is, however, on balance, only slight and limited
largely to prime time, being offset in the week’s
cumulative audience totals for other programs hav-
ing broader appeal.
Critics often overlook the fact that underrepre-
sentation does not mean no representation. NOVA,
for example, is watched each week in some 900,000
households headed by a person who never finished
high school. Even operas average nearly 300,000
such downscale households in their audiences.
Audience statistics serve a unique function: jus-
tification of public television. Commercial broadcas-
ters and cable operators justify their existence when
they turn a profit for their owners and investors;
public broadcasters prove their worth when survey
data indicate the public valued (that is, viewed) the
service provided.
Developments Ahead
Some people in the noncommercial field believe the
public television station of today will become the
public telecommunications center of tomorrow—a
place where telecommunications professionals han-
dle the production, acquisition, reception, duplica-
tion and delivery of all types of noncommercial
educational, cultural and informational materials in
all kinds of media and stand ready to advise and
counsel people in the community. In this scenario,
existing public television stations will transmit,
stream or podcast programs of broad interest and
value to relatively large audiences scattered through-
out their coverage areas; and they will also feed
these and other programs to local cable channels
and transfer programs of more specialized interest
via the internet for use in schools, colleges, libraries,
hospitals, industry settings or in use on homes.
Clearly this is a view that has vision and pur-
pose. It describes a project that could excite Ameri-
cans and provide genuine informational service for a
range of populations. Currently, however, little
political or industry will exists to take on such an
ambitious project. Rather, public broadcasters will
continue to struggle to “keep up” with the industry’s
digital advancements and to maintain the status quo
in corporate, member, foundation and governmental
support.
In coming years, emphasis will likely be placed
on maintaining most of public television as it is,
CHAPTER 10 Public Television Programming
371
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
rather than expanding stations into centers of large
public telecommunications complexes. To this end,
we will likely see limited growth—probably even
more shrinking in overlapping markets—of the
quantity of noncommercial television stations, even
in areas of minority broadcasting (think Alaska,
Indian concentrations, islands, as well as under-
served rural areas). Analysts also predict that more
stations will either close or separate from PBS in the
coming decade. Public television, they suggest, is
“overbuilt,” characterized by a redundancy that
seemed helpful in past years when individual sta-
tions provided just a single stream of programming
and the internet wasn’t a part of television viewing.
With the loss of funding provided by the Public
Telecommunications Facilities Program (see 10.9),
fewer avenues will exist for funding upgrades, mak-
ing digital catch-up the main focus of effort. And
finally, industry insiders look to increased commer-
cialization of the entire system, as stations seek out
new ways to fund existing services.
The coming years, then, will pose multiple chal-
lenges (a polite word for threats) to those who hold
public television licenses across the country. Even as
these dilemmas surface, however, public broadcas-
ters are expected to embrace HD, online, on demand
and eventually 3D, seeking ways to extend their
stations’ public services for PBS audiences. As the
digital age advances, at least the major public broad-
casters will be able to offer even more streams of
programming through multiple digital platforms,
squeezing smaller stations that cannot follow suit.
Nonetheless, an increased amount of content will
be provided on-demand; and stations will be encour-
aged to follow the lead of WNET-New York and
Spanish-language channel V-me in offering special-
ized services for specific populations.
In order for public broadcasting to achieve its
public service potential and move beyond the limita-
tions imposed by broadcast towers, the social value of
noncommercial, educational video service must be
continually reaffirmed by policymakers, public broad-
casters and the American public. Public television can-
not advance into the new media environment of the
mid-twenty-first century without such affirmation.
The public service, and particularly the educational
value of this institution, is founded on the principle
that a certain portion of the public’s airwaves should
be reserved for noncommercial, educational use.
Public financing was a key element of that
founding assumption, and billions of dollars have
been invested in making public television available
to the entire nation. To continue as the national
resource that it has become in broadcasting, public
television must further extend its mandate to addi-
tional media technologies. The educational, infor-
mational and cultural functions of public television
are certain to play a key role in achieving that objec-
tive (see 10.16).
A renewed focus on its educational mission will
guide PBS’s program selection
and fundraising
efforts in the future. One of its successes, Arthur,
targets school-age children on weekday and Sunday
mornings and is the most watched children’s pro-
gram in all of television, among young children.
PBS usually has six of the top-10 preschool pro-
grams on U.S. television, including Barney and
Friends, Dragon Tales, Teletubbies and others.
On the other side, public television is seeking
wide-appeal programs, much like commercial net-
works, that can attract underwriting. One such effort
was Slavery and the Making of America, a four-part
documentary produced by WNET in New York,
which was underwritten almost entirely by the
New York Life Insurance Company. These programs
may signal directions for the future. As with all
broadcasters, however, the operative strategy for
public networks and stations is alternative means of
program distribution via the internet, mobile media,
and interactive CD- and DVD-ROM.
By 2020, PTV will still be around but may be a
smaller collective force on the national and local
scenes because it faces daunting competition for
product and funds. On the hopeful side, additional
digital and online channels along with exciting
program ideas, coupled with digital compression
and HD pictures, may revitalize the noncommercial
television industry. You never know. In the late sev-
enties, PBS President Hartford Gunn advocated
three network services for public television, each
targeting different audiences and purposes. Video
technology—with digital compression capabilities
372
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
and new distribution opportunities—may finally
have caught up with his vision.
Notes
1. June-Friesen, Katy, “Surge of Channels, People Meter
Chaos Depress PBS Ratings,” Current, 8 Dec 2008,
retrieved at http://www.current.org/audience/aud0822pbs.
shtml.
2. The broadcast reform movement was an effort by a
loosely-organized coalition of not-for-profit broadcasters
to maintain a large portion of the radio spectrum for
public, not commercial, use. The movement—begun in the
late 1920s—generally disbanded after the Wagner-Hat-
field Amendment (which would have set aside a fourth of
the spectrum for non-profit use) failed in 1934.
3. ITV in this now old-fashioned usage should not be
confused with ITV meaning “interactive television” or
“internet television.”
10.16 KUED’s Digital Asset Management—A Case Study
A
s early as the mid-1990s, former PBS president Bruce
Christensen was advancing a compelling argument
that the future survival of public television would be
determined by the system’s ability to return to its roots—
educational television. Envisioned by its founders as an
educational institution that deserved a place beside the
public library, public schools and the system of higher
education, the local educational television station was
seen as a learning resource for the communities they
served.
By the late-1990s, the multichannel media landscape
contained an enormous array of new delivery systems,
and new niche television channels within the commercial
sector were successfully attracting television viewers away
from what had become known as public television. The
arrival of the internet made the situation even more compli-
cated as television programmers scrambled to understand
the changing viewing patterns and preferences of the tele-
vision audience. However, the transition of television from
analog to digital production and transmission afforded
public television stations with an unprecedented opportunity
to reconceptualize the entire television program production
process, and some stations did so effectively.
At public television station KUED in Salt Lake City, the
transition to digital and HD meant a complete technical
rebuilding of the station from the ground up. But this enor-
mous challenge also created the opportunity for station
personnel to rethink how programming was produced and
the multiple audiences that the station could serve beyond
its regular digital television channels. According to KUED’s
Director of Production, Ken Verdoia, the conversion to dig-
ital HD totally revolutionized the way the entire staff defined
their mission–seeing KUED as much more than a television
station, but rather as a genuine educational institution in
service to a worldwide audience.
As one of the nation’s leading producers of long-form
documentary programs, KUED prides itself in its reputation as
“Utah’s best storyteller.” Today, from the moment a program
is conceived, KUED producers begin imagining the docu-
mentary program not only as it will be broadcast as a fin-
ished television program, but also the multiple educational
objectives the program content might fulfill and the media that
might best serve them. Since mid-2009, the KUED produc-
tion staff has been systematically categorizing and archiving
program content for delivery online. The station’s commitment
to Digital Asset Management has completely revised the way
production teams perform both in the field and back in the
studios and editing suites, as the cataloging of raw footage
from every production is now standard practice.
As part of the CPB’s American Archive Inventory Project,
KUED is not only cataloging and archiving every new pro-
gram segment it produces, but has undertaken the challenge
of cataloging and archiving all finished programs and raw
footage that still exists from the station’s 53-year production
history. The goal is to deliver the station’s entire digital library
to the viewing public online, around the clock.
While the completion of this ambitious project is still
several years away, when finished it will provide an
extremely invaluable demonstration of the educational
potential of the local public television station in the lifelong
learning of humans around the globe.
Robert K. Avery, Ph.D.
University of Utah
CHAPTER 10 Public Television Programming
373
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4. Credit for this analogy and other portions of the chapter
goes to S. Anders Yocum, Jr., who was at that time director
of program production for WTTW in Chicago and an early
contributor to this chapter, as published in Broadcast Pro-
gramming (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1980).
5. Joachim, Franz, “Personal Interview,” 20 June 2011,
Albuquerque, NM.
6. Aufderheide, Patricia, The Daily Plant: A Critic on
the Capitalist Culture Beat. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 2000.
7. This particular expression was coined by President
Charles Van Hise of the University of Wisconsin in the
early 1900s, but all land-grant colleges espouse similar
traditions.
8. Quoted in Townsend, Bickley, “Going for the Middle:
An Interview with David F. Poltrack,” American Demo-
graphics, March 1990, p. 50.
374
PART FOUR
Television Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
P A R T5
Audio Programming
Practices
Part Five Outline
Chapter 11
Music Radio Programming 377
Chapter 12
Information Radio Programming 429
375
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
This page intentionally left blank 

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A P T E R
11
Music Radio Programming
Gregory D. Newton and Matthew T. Kaiser
Chapter Outline
The Shifting Ground
A Little History
Terrestrial Radio
Cable Radio
Satellite Radio
Online Audio
Broadcast Radio and the Internet
Choosing a Format
Comparing Technical Facilities
Defining the Competitive Market
Identifying Target Audiences
Knowing the Available Budget
Estimating Potential Revenue
Step-by-Step Selection
Process
Implementation
The Station Sound
The Anatomy of the Clock
The Music
The Clock in Practice
Controlling “the Sound”
Marketing and Promotion
News and Other Nonenter-
tainment Programming
The Big News Question
Journalistic Content
Network and Syndicated
Programming
Concerts and Specials
Feature Syndicators
What’s Coming for Radio?
Notes
377
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I
s radio dead? Googling that phrase turns up well
over 100,000 results—ranging from newspaper
and magazine articles to blogs to song lyrics. In fact,
radio has proven to be a very hardy survivor. Its his-
tory is one of continual adaptation and innovation,
driven by changes in technology, audience tastes and
lifestyles and the industry’s economic structures. Suc-
cessful programmers have reinvented “radio” every
generation (or even more often), and stations continue
to be a vibrant part of the media landscape for many
listeners.
The Shifting Ground
Indeed, radio listening is still substantial—attracting
more than 90 percent of the U.S. population in every
age demographic each week.1 Radio revenues actually
increased in recent years, and industry experts project
continued increases in the years ahead (through
2015). Although listeners may spend a bit less time
each day with their favorite stations, in part due to
the sheer number of alternative audio and other
media choices, radio remains a central portion of the
daily media diet for most people.
Nevertheless, changes that rattle radio’s founda-
tions erupt more frequently. It’s hard to overstate
the impact of media consolidation that came out of
the 1996 Telecommunications Act. For station
groups, who the competition is has altered. It used
to be that a program director (PD) was responsible
for one or maybe two stations, and the competitors
were the other stations in the same local (geo-
graphic) market that were broadcasting in a similar
(or identical) format, or that were targeting the same
demographics. The competition was owned by
somebody else, and disc jockeys worked for a single
station (or maybe were heard on-air on co-owned
AM and FM stations). But a single owner can now
control five, six or even eight stations in a single
market. Most of the listening in a market is typically
controlled by two or three owners. The most direct
“competitor” may be across the hall rather than
across town, and the on-air talent is likely working
for several stations during each day, in the local
market and perhaps also far across the country.
PDs working with station clusters need to
understand their company’s vision of the radio mar-
ket and the roles of their particular stations in their
company’s overall strategy. In other words, pro-
grammers are brand managers—responsible for all
of the elements that position each co-owned station
and with the strategic goal of dominating listening
within a demographic category or a set of formats.
Most major group owners specialize in one or more
formats. These specialties may be in one or two
related formats that nearly always appear in any
market they participate in—even though they may
have a dozen or more formats across all of their sta-
tions. Alternatively, the owners may have a true for-
mat
specialization
strategy
in
which
all
their
properties are programmed in a very narrow format
range. For example, Clear Channel dominates the
contemporary hit radio market whereas Cumulus is
a country music leader, although both owners have
stations programming many other formats. Taking a
more audience-focused approach are companies like
Univision Radio, the largest operator of Hispanic-
oriented stations, and Radio One, the country’s larg-
est owner of stations targeting African-American
and urban audiences.
Two factors, the superfast growth of digital
media platforms—particularly internet streaming
and mobile phone applications—and the conver-
gence of various media forms, make it essential to
now take a broad view of the elements that make
up successful radio programming. First, the audience
now has a plethora of new listening choices that did
not exist just a few years ago or were not generally
available in the car, radio’s most important listening
location. Second, mobile apps have dramatically
expanded the range of listening options for anybody
with a smartphone (and an adequate data plan),
although broadcast radio retains some inherent
advantages.
Despite the fragmented, complex and rapidly
changing landscape of contemporary radio pro-
gramming, the more things change, the more we
see that (at least some) things stay the same. Key
elements of the tried-and-true programming formu-
las that worked in the past remain successful (not
only for broadcast stations but for many of their
378
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
competitors
and
imitators).
Thus,
programmers
need to understand the history of the industry—
what worked, what didn’t, and how radio has sur-
vived by continually reinventing itself—as well as
the new elements in the competitive environment
that also shape their opportunities to build and
serve an audience.
A Little History
In the beginning, there was broadcasting, and broad-
casting consisted of AM radio stations. There were
fewer stations (and far fewer competing media) than
now, and it was possible to appeal to an extremely
broad audience through a strategy of providing a
little of something for everybody. Stations typically
programmed not only some live music but also com-
edies and dramas, news and talk programs, farm
information, game shows, soap operas and a great
variety of other programs for people of all ages.
Some of the programming was produced locally,
but much of it came from local and regional net-
work sources that sprang up to serve the growing
new medium. The industry quickly recognized the
economic advantages of producing one program
for many stations versus many programs for many
stations; and the first stars of the new medium were
created as successful programs were carried on more
and more stations.
Then came television. Television took many of
radio’s
entertainment
programs,
and
much
of
radio’s audience followed their favorite stars to tele-
vision. “Radio is dead,” said some. “It is old-
fashioned. Who wants just sound when you can
also have pictures?” But radio was not dead.
Instead, a new style of programming emerged. The
local radio station no longer tried to supply all types
of programming to all people some of the time but
instead offered the most important programming to
some of the people all of the time. The format
approach created a new golden age for radio.
The first music format was top 40 radio. It is
difficult to say with certainty who really invented
top 40, but Todd Storz and Gordon McClendon
are the two programmers who are generally believed
to have respectively created and perfected the
approach. Rick Sklar and Bill Drake are other lead-
ers among the early programmers who significantly
advanced the elements of the format. The original
top 40 format was not music genre specific. From
pop to country, a top 40 station played a little bit
of everything, as long as it was a hit, and adjusted
the music rotation by times of day (dayparting) to
cater to the available audience. Music fans now
had a place to hear the most popular songs of the
day, any time they wanted to tune in. There was, of
course, also some regional variation—the most pop-
ular songs in Nashville were likely to be somewhat
different from the most popular songs in Chicago or
New York City.
Over time, the number of stations and the com-
petition for listeners increased. FM stations devel-
oped in a different part of the spectrum and
offered better audio quality. And some programmers
asked whether it was a bit strange to have a country
song alongside a rock song followed by a jazzy bal-
lad. Radio stations soon found it necessary to fine-
tune their formats to target a specific audience
(segmentation)—fans of particular types of music.
Thus, top 40 radio stations focused increasingly
on the most popular pop (and rock) songs but still
kept room in their playlists for the occasional cross-
over country or rhythm & blues song, while other
stations adopted different niche formats. At first,
there
were
four:
country,
album-oriented
rock
(AOR), urban or R&B, and middle-of-the-road
(MOR). Now, fans of particular broad types of
music could find what they wanted on the radio
any time they wanted to listen. Those with wide-
ranging tastes still had top 40 stations.
Radio continued to thrive, and because it
looked like a good business, still more stations
came on the air through the 1980s as the number
of FM listeners surpassed AM. As more and more
stations competed for listeners, they needed to find
new ways to attract audiences. Thus, the four niche
formats produced offspring, alone or sometimes in
tandem, while the “mainstream” parents also con-
tinued to thrive. From country came traditional
country and “young country.” AOR spun off classic
rock, active rock and alternative. MOR led to adult
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
379
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
contemporary (AC), oldies, soft (or Lite) rock, beau-
tiful music/easy listening and adult standards (the
old middle-of-the-road, or MOR). Then program-
mers began merging elements of existing formats
into new hybrids. Urban and top 40 (now known
as contemporary hit radio, CHR) combined created
a format originally referred to as “CHurban” but
that is now known simply as rhythmic CHR.
Urban plus AC can be divided into urban AC,
smooth jazz/new age, and urban oldies formats.
AC and CHR? That’s hot AC and adult CHR.
Stations and formats continued to multiply
through the 1990s, fragmenting the audience even
further. Programmers responded by further subdivid-
ing and combining musical genres and other pro-
gramming elements into new niche formats in the
larger (and some of the smaller) markets. Rock, alter-
native and AC playlists were merged into an adult
album alternative (AAA) format. In turn, pop songs
from alternative artists and hot AC were combined
into modern AC. Alternative plus some programming
elements that are more CHR than AC leads to mod-
ern rock. Once alternative existed for a decade or so,
it was obviously time for alternative with a classic
rock approach, thus classic alternative (or modern
gold). Pop mixed with a little classic rock and an
AC presentation style creates classic hits (“the best
music of the ‘80s, ‘90s and today”). Oldies multiplied
into specific ‘50s, ‘60s, ‘70s and ‘80s formats (or ‘50s/
‘60s and ‘70s/‘80s in some markets). Contemporary
Christian, and then Christian AC and Inspo emerged
from traditional gospel, AC and CHR elements.
American radio’s family tree also became more
global as various Hispanic formats appeared, similar
in their structure to existing CHR, AC and country.
Latin music formats (including regional Mexican
and Caribbean music as well as contemporary and
gold-based Spanish-language) appeared in niche var-
iants, and Spanish-language news/talk formats grew
rapidly—leading the market in some areas of the
United States. Formats have exploded in the past
few years. Billboard lists four separate Spanish-
language charts, reflecting the diversity of cultures
and music often lumped under the umbrella terms
Hispanic and Latin. And as with Anglo formats,
there is frequently some crossover between particu-
lar formats (see 11.1).
To get some idea of the musical artists that are
characteristic of each format (or who cross over for-
mat boundaries), consult the charts in trade publica-
tions such as Billboard (www.billboard.com), Radio
Info (www.radio-info.com), Friday Morning Quarter-
back (www.fmqb.com) or All Access Music Group
(www.allaccess.com).
11.1
Spanish-Language Radio Formats
S
panish-language radio formats are found in large
regions of the United States, especially the West,
Southwest and Southeast, as well as in most major cities.
Four of the most common formats are the following:
■
Tejano. The term itself refers to Texans of Mexican
descent; the music is native to South Texas. The music
and the instruments reflect not only traditional Spanish
and Mexican influences but also the presence in South
Texas of other European immigrants in the nineteenth
century, particularly Germans, Czechs and Poles.
Thus, Tejano music draws on Mexican folk, polkas
and waltzes, as well as on contemporary Latin and
rhythm and blues influences.
■
Regional Mexican. This format features the traditional
music of Mexico from the past 100 years. It embraces
several specific styles, including ranchero, banda and
Norteña (a musical cousin of Tejano historically
rooted in northern Mexico).
■
Tropical. The music is primarily from (or influenced by)
Spanish-speaking cultures in the Caribbean. It also
has influences from some northern countries in South
America as well as Central America. Music styles
include salsa, cumbia and merengue, among others.
■
Latin pop and Latin rhythmic. These are the Spanish-
language versions of the standard CHR formats, draw-
ing on the most popular music in many Latin styles.
380
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The past three decades also brought additional
competitors to the music and audio marketplace,
including cable radio, satellite radio, HD radio,
streaming audio, mobile applications, and such
social media as MySpace and Facebook. The major
differences between these media and what have been
traditionally called radio stations are that broadcast
radio and HD radio retain a local focus, even if they
incorporate national news networks and syndicated
music and information; and they are available to the
audience at no additional cost beyond a receiver.
Cable radio and satellite radio, on the other hand,
require
a
subscription
fee
and
are
essentially
national services available in identical form all over
the country. Streaming audio and mobile applica-
tions for devices like the iPad and various smart-
phones
are
a
mix,
with
connections
to
local
stations’ content as well as possible programming
from all over the country (and the world).
The thousands of audio services available online
run the gamut from simply repeating the program-
ming of local radio stations to offering web-only
broadcasts of every imaginable sort, all with a
potentially global audience. Along with all of the
formats offered by broadcasters, these services pro-
vide other music not widely available—traditional
jazz, blues, world beat, reggae, show tunes, blue-
grass, folk, classical, kids. There is even a satellite
channel and other services dedicated to unsigned
bands. Some services, like Pandora, use complex
algorithms to customize music rotations for listeners
(much like various consumer web sites “suggest”
other products you might like based on past cus-
tomer behavior). Streaming audio content is best
conceived as “all of the above.”
Good programming is carefully designed to
appeal to particular listeners, and tastes vary from
region to region and among markets in a region.
For example, the top-rated station in New York
City has an adult contemporary format, with classic
hits, two CHR rivals and a tropical station rounding
out the top five. In Chicago, meanwhile, news and
talk are more dominant—occupying three of the top
five slots—while the top music formats are urban
AC and hot AC. Just 90 minutes north in Milwau-
kee, on the other hand, the top five stations are
news/talk, country, oldies, CHR and either classic
rock or mainstream AOR (depending on just how
one chooses to view recent ratings). If you head
south to Memphis, gospel appears among the top
five or six stations along with urban, urban AC
and country. In Dallas, regional Mexican and con-
temporary Christian are among the top formats
along with CHR, country and classic hits. Such
strong differences mean that a smart program direc-
tor always tailors a station’s programming to the
available target audience within the market it serves.
The advertising value of different audiences (or, for
some services, the audience’s ability and willingness
to pay a subscription or software fee), the station or
service’s technical facilities, and the existing compe-
tition in the market also affect programming choices.
Terrestrial Radio
Since the turn of the century, digital audio broad-
casting (DAB) has been supplementing both terres-
trial AM and FM analog broadcasting, improving
the sound quality of each. Although most other
countries have adopted a digital radio system that
uses a different portion of the spectrum—and that
therefore makes digital broadcasting incompatible
with existing radio (such as the Eureka 147 system
used in much of Europe) in those countries—the
United
States
has
chosen
to
create
an
in-
band-on-channel
(IBOC)
system
that
operates
within the current AM and FM spectrum allocations
and is totally compatible with existing AM and FM
systems. Thus, unlike with broadcast television, no
date for ending analog AM and FM broadcasting in
the United States has been established.
The U.S. IBOC technology is licensed to equip-
ment manufacturers and stations by iBiquity Digital
(www.ibiquity.com), and stations broadcasting a
digital radio signal have to pay annual royalties to
iBiquity. Referred to as HD radio (note the parallel
to high-definition television in the name—something
already familiar-sounding to consumers), it is multi-
plexed along with the primary analog FM or AM
signal and requires a special HD receiver. Digital
FM allows for inexpensive simulcasting (repeating
the main signal, ads and all) at startup. This can be
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
381
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
followed by the creation of specialty signals for local
news, sports and other content for narrow niches, or
the use of content from other co-owned stations,
perhaps from other markets (multicasting) on sec-
ondary (HD2, HD3 and HD4) channels if the
broadcaster has the desire to split the bandwidth.
As of mid-2011, fewer than one in five U.S. sta-
tions were broadcasting a digital signal (see 11.2).
Digital authorizations from the FCC amounted to:
1646 FM stations
297 AM stations
2 FM translators
1 Low Power FM
Cable Radio
Many U.S. cable systems and DirecTV and Dish (the
two TV satellite services) offer dozens of digital
audio channels alongside digital television. These
are large packages of nationally syndicated channels
from such companies as DMX (formerly Digital
Music Express) and Music Choice. In addition,
DirecTV and DISH offer satellite radio program-
ming on some of their programming tiers. Cable
audio thus comes in a dizzying array of formats,
ranging from bluegrass to rap to salsa to gospel to
pop Latino, just as internet audio does.
The disadvantage of cable radio for most peo-
ple is that reception requires a wireline (or satellite
dish) in a house or office. The advantages are that
these audio services come automatically along
with certain tiers of television service and are
available all the time, although some, such as
DMX, are pay services. MusicChoice also provides
many of the same channels both on cable and
online. The online availability of the service thus
makes music available to subscribers not only at
home but also anywhere they can access a broad-
band connection.
11.2
The Slow Adoption of HD Radio
S
tations broadcasting HD radio were mostly the mem-
bers of the “HD Radio Alliance” that formed in 2005 to
promote the service—CBS Radio, Clear Channel Radio,
Greater Media, Emmis, Entercom, Bonneville International,
Beasley Broadcasting, Buckley Radio and WBEB- FM Phi-
ladelphia. With relatively few stations and thus little com-
pelling programming incentive beyond the already
available analog choices, it’s not surprising that few con-
sumers have purchased digital receivers, although there
are several choices available for consumers.
One other major factor slowing the adoption has been
the slow pace with which the automotive industry has
added receivers with HD radio as either standard or
optional equipment in their new car lines. As of 2011, HD
radio was available from 17 auto manufacturers, repre-
senting 109 car models. That may sound like a lot—but
represents no more than one-third of the models available
(GM and Honda are most notable among those completely
absent). More important, HD capability was included in the
standard receiver in just 54 of those new car models.2
One additional concern that delays a shift to HD Radio
by both AM and FM broadcasters has been the inability to
maintain their existing coverage areas (the geographic
areas where listeners can receive an adequate signal).
With analog broadcasting, a station’s signal gradually
fades in quality farther away from the transmitter, creating a
fringe area at the outer reaches where some listening is
still possible. However, a digital signal is subject to a cliff
effect—the signal is either of sufficient quality for the
receiver to reproduce or it is not. The FCC tried to address
this problem through a rule-making that resulted in a 2010
order that permitted greater power levels and improved
coverage for digital transmissions. But so far, this has had
little effect. Broadcasters are a stubborn group, it seems.
There are other problems for radio programmers con-
sidering a move to digital. The processing required, at both
the transmitter and receiver, creates a delay of several sec-
onds compared to analog signals—no small concern for
stations who regularly broadcast live promotional events or
sports. The delay means talent on location (in the field)
monitoring the on-air signal for cues would be several sec-
onds behind what was happening back in the studio.
Slotting in commercials without accidentally covering up
reporting sometimes becomes next to impossible.
382
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Satellite Radio
DARS (digital audio radio service) refers to high-
powered national satellite signals that require only
a small receiving antenna that is especially suited to
cars and mobile media. At the start of the 2000s,
Sirius and XM were two competing satellite-radio
providers licensed by the FCC. Each provided more
than 100 channels of audio service nationwide to a
combined total of nearly 14 million paying subscri-
bers (for $12.95 a month). Like most large radio
companies today, both were publicly traded cor-
porations and eventually were forced by economics
to merge in 2008, becoming SiriusXM.
Although their individual subscriber bases had
grown rapidly by 2007, a great deal of subscriber
churn had also occurred. The two services had
tried to distinguish their programming by introduc-
ing original live talk and sports, and to make things
worse, both had marketed themselves as different
not only from terrestrial radio but from each other.
Moreover, each had signed deals with substantial
rosters of cable networks that supplied news, sports,
music and other content, and each had various
exclusive
agreements
with
consumer
electronics
manufacturers and retailers and with specific car
manufacturers. In addition, XM provided Major
League Baseball games, and Sirius had the infamous
Howard Stern (see Chapter 12).
But by 2007 it had become clear that the national
market could support only one service. Because their
receiving equipment was not compatible, the two
combined companies had to juggle various program-
ming options for current subscribers by repurposing
channels on each system and creating a dizzying array
of tiers of service. Depending on their receivers and
interests, subscribers can choose from packages deliv-
ering between 120 and 180 channels for a monthly
charge ranging from $12.95 to $16.99. Over half of
the channels are dedicated to various music formats,
most of which are commercial-free; the rest offer
news, information, sports, foreign language content
and other special programming from former terres-
trial radio stars like Bob Edwards, Howard Stern
and Opie & Anthony as well as multimedia stars like
Oprah and Martha Stewart. Access to the content
from the featured stars is the primary cost difference
among most of the tiers. SiriusXM programming is
also available online, either as a value added bonus
of a satellite subscription or as a stand-alone
offering.
Online Audio
Widespread adoption of broadband internet service
has opened several opportunities for online distribu-
tion of audio content. These can generally be
grouped into two categories. The first, streaming or
webcasting, is akin to traditional radio program-
ming because content is delivered in real-time over
the network to a computer. Some of the streams
available are the programming of terrestrial radio
stations, but there are also many, many online-only
services ranging from professionally formatted chan-
nels from big companies like AOL to offerings that
could be fairly described as hobbies. Those providers
have the advantage of not needing a license from the
FCC and are happily without content oversight by
the government other than that imposed by defama-
tion or obscenity statutes. However, as with all digi-
tal audio services (including satellite radio), online
services pay music performance royalty fees to the
record labels and recording artists beyond those
that apply to analog terrestrial radio, making the
economic structure of this market more difficult.
The issue of copyright has limited some of the
potential of online music. However, a more open
online space is taking form. In particular, the British
service Spotify launched its U.S. service in 2011 with
a library of over 15 million songs. The service pre-
sents listeners with the closest thing yet to “any
song, anytime, anywhere” (or any song anywhere
for the 10 percent or so of Spotify users willing to
sign up for the service’s paid version that grants full
library access from any device). While it’s clear that
personal, portable music devices from the Walkman
to the iPod have cut into the amount of time listeners
spend with radio (and have limited the ability of
radio stations to stake out musical turf to call their
own), the bandwidth costs of mobile data plans and
the requirement to purchase a premium subscription
to use Spotify on a mobile device may yet limit how
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
383
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
much additional damage a service like Spotify—
where the music resides in the cloud—can do to
radio.
While that online audio market is growing, only
about one-third of the U.S. population 12þ reports
listening to streaming audio in the past month as of
2011.3 Most online listening occurs on desktop or
laptop computers in offices or homes although inter-
est in, and access to, audio on mobile devices (smart-
phones, tablets) is increasing. Compared to broadcast
or satellite coverage, wireless broadband internet con-
nections are less widely available. However, wireless
providers continue to expand the networks. When
wireless broadband is ubiquitous for subscribers, the
“radio” marketplace potentially expands from a few
dozen or scores of choices within a local market to
tens or hundreds of thousands.
Nonetheless, limits on mobile subscribers’ data
plans may check their willingness to devote large
blocks of listening time to online radio on smart
phones. That will, in turn, curb the short-term
growth of online listening as people increasingly
move their overall online use to mobile platforms
and have to make choices about how to allocate
data usage. Although audio doesn’t consume as
much data as video, a heavy listener could easily
run over the allotments of many carriers’ lower tiers
of service, and that’ll hurt when the bill comes in.
The second type of online audio service, collo-
quially known as podcasting (the result of the Apple
iPod’s early dominance of the audio player market),
is archival in nature. Prerecorded content is down-
loaded from a provider’s website to a computer and
can then be transferred to another listening device.
Podcasts are therefore more mobile at this time than
streaming services. However, because of licensing
problems, podcasts seldom include popular music
and are primarily filled with the spoken word…
lots of them.
Broadcast Radio and the Internet
It is absolutely imperative that a radio station have a
strong presence online. While this may seem like
common sense in today’s environment, some broad-
casters still shun online, seeing it as a distant second
to their terrestrial signal. Such operators have a
deeply
entrenched
“old
school”
mentality
that
makes digital integration a struggle if not downright
impossible. They argue that it’s the over-the-air sta-
tion that pays the bills and efforts to put in place
‘secondary media’ would cannibalize their listening
audience. Incredibly shortsighted, these broadcasters
will quickly find that they face the very real problem
of becoming irrelevant to listeners and, in the not so
distant future, obsolete. The changing digital land-
scape is making such traditional concerns as market
size and geographic location into afterthoughts.
After all, with an internet connection, you can be a
part of the CHR community on Z100 in New York
or KISS-FM (KIIS are the actual call letters) in Los
Angeles just as easily as you can KTRS-FM in
Casper, WY, or Q-102 in Albany, GA, even if you
live in Indiana or Texas.
As its history shows, radio stations have repeat-
edly been forced to adapt to technological changes
and increased competition for the audience and
advertisers. The internet is quite literally the latest
in a long line of challenges facing programmers
searching for a big enough piece of the audience
pie. In the 1990s, radio still enjoyed several advan-
tages, particularly portability, over early attempts to
distribute programming online. The development of
wireless internet services (Wi-Fi) and small portable
audio players (like the iPod Nano which also con-
tains an FM tuner) are removing the portability
advantage of traditional broadcasting. To maximize
their audience and the value of their programming,
smart programmers leverage their existing audience
goodwill and brand recognition in order to aggres-
sively court the online and mobile audiences while
not forgetting the traditional (and larger) broadcast
audience.
Indeed,
this
symbiotic
relationship
between on-air and online is one of the most difficult
for programmers to figure out. The problem facing
all of them, from the smallest local markets to larg-
est national groups, is how to best compete effec-
tively. And that often means competing for every
available listener, including the relative fewer online,
in the increasingly fragmented market.
Oddly, for an industry whose past norm was
change and adaptation, radio has been extremely
384
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
slow to accept the online world as a viable extension
of a station’s brand. The current problem may stem
from the fact that there continues to be no clear right
or wrong answers as to how to approach digital
integration. Consolidation in the 1990s further
clouded the situation. Many utility players and
younger staff members who would previously have
been given the reins of digital media were instead
eliminated to maximize profits. Certainly another
consideration is the financial risk; many managers
were hesitant to be innovative with no guarantee
of a return to the bottom line (see 11.3).
Finally, by 2000, radio stations and associated
companies like Arbitron and Nielsen seemed to
sense the changing environment and began a furious
game of catch-up. The farsighted feared that the
window of opportunity for attracting and profiting
from the new media audience might close before
they could develop a serious presence in that
environment.
At first, the stations that did have an online
presence did little more than put up rudimentary
websites that, at their most technically advanced,
offered listeners the ability to email requests to the
station or possibly provide screen names so they
could instant message the jocks in the control
room. The majority of these sites were often the
product of one poorly equipped and already over-
loaded staff member at the station or done as trade
(a service or goods provided in return for advertising
time on the station) by the station’s internet service
provider (ISP). The results generally gave listeners
little reason to visit once, let alone return for subse-
quent visits. Moreover, stations and listeners alike
were often frustrated by the technological problems
that made it difficult to deliver high-quality content,
usually stemming from insufficient bandwidth. The
bad news was that stations actually offering pro-
gramming online found that it an expensive way to
reach only a few listeners.
However, as bandwidth became a more afford-
able commodity to the average broadcaster, and as
online content became an increasingly important
portion of the average consumer’s media consump-
tion, it became clear (to most insiders) that radio
would have to adapt once again if it expected to
remain a viable option in a sea of ever-increasing
choices. The stations that were most successful in the
mid-2000s realized that by offering compelling orig-
inal content, they were able to attract audiences that
actually helped increase traditional station listener-
ship and as a bonus, online provided an additional
outlet for revenue to advertisers. During this time,
the added revenue streams from digital properties
and
station
events
became
known
as
Non-
Traditional Revenue or NTR.
It is important to remember, however, that for
each additional stream a station puts online, there
are additional royalty costs associated with their
broadcast. Currently, there is a “per performance”
royalty rate scale in place with varying rates for
broadcasters, statutory webcasters and pureplay web-
casters that is approved for modest yearly increases
through 2015. Each time a song “airs” in a digital
stream in 2012, broadcasters are expected to pay
$.0020 per performance per listener, with that rate
increasing to $.0025 by 2015. While a fraction of a
cent per play per listener might not seem like a tre-
mendous amount, those costs easily (and quickly)
add up, leaving some broadcasters feeling that online
streaming is not a financially viable business decision.
Some larger companies not only support online
streaming, but actively promote mobile phone applica-
tions (apps) that provide easy access to a station’s con-
tent. Some individual stations have launched their own
branded apps, but apps that aggregate many stations
and other audio content nationally or even globally
dominate the market. Clear Channel Communica-
tions, one of the most aggressive companies in the
mobile environment, released its I Heart Radio app,
which provides access to a stable of more than 750
stations from coast to coast. Listeners have the ability
to select by market or format and to stream the sta-
tion’s online content. CBS Interactive’s radio.com,
TuneIn Radio and Public Radio Live Stream are
other widely used apps, each offering access to hun-
dreds or even thousands of audio streams.
Many barriers to expanding a station’s reach in a
crowded terrestrial environment disappear in the digi-
tal world, but going digital is not without new dangers
for broadcasters. A question raised briefly earlier in
this section is the idea of geography, more specifically
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
385
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
“who really is the audience of our station?” This used
to be much clearer before the internet: “Our audience
is anyone who listens to country music as far as our
signal travels,” and that answer sufficed for decades.
However, broadcasters streaming online have the
potential for national and even global reach. As wire-
less internet access expands around the world, the
number of consumer devices capable of accessing
11.3
Online Strategy
A
s radio’s attitude towards digital media changed and
the right technology became more accessible,
broadcasters were forced to develop strategies for pro-
gramming in a new environment. The simplest was to
merely rebroadcast the over-the-air signal in an online
stream—commercials and all. The streaming audience
remains largely popular among at-work listeners. As more
people accessed to audio through their computers, cell
phones and music players, streaming audio became a
viable competitor to broadcast radio. Happily, when a
station streams itself, the online version can be jointly mar-
keted as a sister-service to advertisers. For more information
on the streaming audio market, consult Radio and Internet
Newsletter (updated five days a week at www.kurthanson.
com).
Simply rebroadcasting a station, though, can cause big
trouble because not all commercials are licensed for
streaming online. This seems counter-intuitive; you might
think that any opportunity to put a commercial in front of
more ears would be a clear advantage to the advertiser.
And while that may be the case, many national spots use
union talent to voice and produce their commercials, and
under union regulations, the spots are only licensed for use
at the specific over-the-air times and dates that were pur-
chased by an advertising agency or via a station barter
agreement. While obviously not the best-case scenario
both legally and ethically, some stations elect to broadcast
these commercials on their internet stream anyway until
presented with a cease-and-desist order.
Savvy broadcasters contract with an ad insertion ser-
vice, which allows selective online preemption of commer-
cials. Companies like Ando Media provide software that
allows stations to target certain streamed commercials and
replace them with other inventory. Public Service
Announcements (PSAs), other local spots (say, for a local
car dealer sold in addition to their on-air advertising
schedule), and streaming exclusive content can be used as
filler. Web exclusive songs, for example, that are not
available in any other format—including the over-the-air
broadcast—provide an exclusive audio element to promote
and to reward listeners.
A more complex strategy for programming radio online
goes far beyond rebroadcasting the terrestrial signal to
offer a wide-array of additional content. This includes on-
demand content, video and additional audio streams. Such
aggressive strategies seem to win with consumers and give
listeners a definitive source for “discovery” of music, which
has always been a strong suit of terrestrial radio. Content-
rich websites should include numerous features of use or of
interest to audience members. Some stations integrate
online playlists within their websites and give answers to
most-common-listener-questions like “What song are you
playing right now?” or its more frustrating variation, “What
was the song you played last Thursday right after the
weather forecast?” In addition, websites can showcase
local community information, coupons from local merchants
and online-only promotions. Advertisers who choose to
participate in online-only campaigns find they are typically
more affordable than their over-the air counterparts. They
also give the advertisers the ability to provide more infor-
mation about their products than can fit into traditional :30
or :60 commercials. Some stations will go so far as to
create an online “virtual mall” in which many local retailers
feature their products (for a fee, of course) or where they
hold “half-off” promotions that give the station’s listeners the
chance to purchase gift cards or restaurant certificates for
half price. These ideas provide more affordable opportu-
nities for advertisers, as well as another NTR revenue
stream for stations.
Online sister-stations can take several forms, including
subniche formats designed to superserve one or more frag-
ments of the broadcast station’s audience. For example, a
“new country” station can offer an online stream of “classic
country” to serve the audience portion that prefers the clas-
sics, but which may not be large enough to sustain the rat-
ings needed for a terrestrial station.
386
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
U.S. radio services multiplies, along with analytic pro-
grams that track online listenership down to the sec-
ond. These virtually limitless possibilities have become
very real for broadcasters.
But here’s the kicker: Even in the online world,
success for broadcasters is tied to a conscious decision
to target content to a specific group at the sacrifice of
being “all things to all people.” Where on-air and
streamed online traffic reports in Dallas are invalu-
able to someone trying to make it to work on time
in that city, someone listening online from Raleigh or
even London is necessarily alienated by the unfamil-
iar and useless information. One of radio’s inherent
strengths continues to be localism, which means keep-
ing people informed of what is going on in a specific
community
or
group
of
communities,
however
defined. Broadcasters cannot turn their back on the
communities in which they exist simply to cater to the
global population. Indeed, many now impose geo-
graphical boundaries on their content while still mak-
ing it accessible from anywhere in the world. For sta-
tions that want to put in the effort and target a
broader audience, it is technically feasible to separate
purely local content out of online audio and fill the
time with something more global in nature.
Currently, there are more than 13,000 radio
stations on the air in the United States alone, with
countless more in every country on Earth. While
online presence is a part of the larger picture, the
remainder of this chapter tightens its focus to terres-
trial broadcast radio. The storyline consists of a pro-
posed scenario about whether or not to buy and
program a station in the hypothetical market. The
problems and the principles for finding solutions dis-
cussed here, however, are fully applicable to the pro-
gramming decisions of today’s cable, satellite and
online audio services because they compete in the
same or similar marketplaces (see 11.4 and 11.5).
11.4
Dominant Players
T
here has been a lot of commentary about consolida-
tion in radio, but how dominant are the top radio
companies? There are different ways of measuring that, but
in 2009, only Clear Channel and CBS reported more than
$1 billion in revenue ($2.35 billion for Clear Channel,
$1.2 billion for CBS). The top three groups generated
revenues totaling $4.4 billion (if one combines the revenue
generated by the now merged Cumulus and Citadel sta-
tions). The remaining six companies in the top ten
accounted for $1.6 billion … or about 72 percent of what
Clear Channel alone did in the last full reported fiscal year
before work began on this chapter (see 11.5).
Dominant Content Providers
Clear Channel
Clear Channel Communications, founded in 1972, has
two operating divisions—Radio and Outdoor Advertising.
Of primary interest here, the radio division is the largest
group owner in the U.S., currently operating more than
850 stations in approximately 150 markets (including 89
of the top 100). That figure is substantially reduced from its
post-Telecommunications Act peak of more than 1,200
stations, however. Economic factors and other strategic
considerations led the company to sell a number of stations,
primarily in smaller markets, between 2007 and 2010.
Although Clear Channel’s stations run the full gamut of
formats, they have particular strengths in CHR, AC and
News-Talk. In addition to the stations and their companion
websites, the company’s assets also include a leading
smartphone app, iheartradio. It also owns about 140 sta-
tions in Australia and New Zealand (owned in partnership
with local entities); Premiere Radio Networks, which syndi-
cates approximately 90 radio programs including Rush Lim-
baugh, Ryan Seacrest, Steve Harvey and Delilah. Besides all
that, it owns Katz Media Group, a leading advertising rep
firm with more than 3,000 radio and TV clients; RCS, a
leading provider of broadcast software including the most
popular music scheduling application—Selector; Inside
Radio, a radio industry trade publication; and Clear Chan-
nel Total Traffic Network and CCC News Networks.
Cumulus
In 2011, Cumulus Media, the country’s second largest
group owner by number of stations, acquired Citadel
(Continued)
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
387
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Broadcasting, the third largest radio group in the U.S. The
combined group has more than 550 stations reaching 120
markets, including 8 of the top 10. Ranked by number of
stations, there is now a very big gap between the top two
radio companies and everybody else. The new Cumulus
combined Citadel’s format strengths in Country with
Cumulus’ larger station roster.
The company also includes all of the former Citadel
Media (and former ABC Radio Networks), a major syndi-
cator whose offerings include Imus in the Morning,
American Country Countdown, ESPN Radio, ABC News
and Sports, and ESPN Deportes as well as other Spanish-
language programming (some in partnership with Hispanic
digital content provider Terra).
CBS
In contrast to Clear Channel and Citadel, CBS has focused
almost exclusively on large market stations—of their 130
properties, 129 are in markets among the top 50 DMAs
(the exception is KEZN in Palm Springs, CA). As a result,
even though the number of stations owned is much smaller
than the totals for Cumulus or Clear Channel, CBS is a solid
number 2 in radio revenue.
In addition to the stations, the company also has its own
mobile app (radio.com) which includes a number of channel
offerings from outside the CBS group. Although late entering
the online universe under former head Mel Karmazin (who
didn’t see streaming as important to the business), all CBS
stations now offer live streams of their programming as well
as a multitude of other digital offerings. Perhaps best known
for their flagship News and News-Talk stations such as
WCBS (New York), WBBM (Chicago), KMOX (St. Louis),
WCCO (Minneapolis-St. Paul) and KCBS (Los Angeles), the
company also has significant programming strength in vari-
ous adult-leaning pop and rock formats—classic hits, AC,
Hot AC, adult hits and alternative/AAA.
Univision
Univision Radio was created in 2003 when television
company Univision completed its acquisition of Hispanic
Broadcasting Corporation. The radio unit, part of Univision
Local Media, is now the largest Spanish radio network in
the U.S., operating 70 stations in 17 markets, including all
of the top 10. Their primary growth since 2003 has come
through the acquisition of English-language stations in the
largest Hispanic markets in the U.S. Those stations are then
reformatted and launched as Hispanic.
The formats include the following: Adult Contemporary (in
the Hispanic version, some combination of Romántica, bal-
lads, international pop hits and top 40); Regional Mexican
(Banda, Ranchera, Mariachi and Norteña music); Tropical
(a “Latin beat” music format from the Caribbean that includes
salsa, merengue, cumbia and reggaeton genres); Tejano
(music performed by Tex-Mex/Chicano groups (conjuntos)
that is a cross between contemporary Rock/Ranchera/
Country, with lyrics in both Spanish and English and poten-
tially appealing across ethnic boundaries); Hip-Hop (Hip-Hop
music culture today has obviously grown far beyond its urban
roots, reaching all segments of American society); and
RadioCadena Univision-News/Talk/Sports AM Network.
In addition to their own stations, Univision syndicates a
number of their personalities and shows to Spanish-language
stations in other markets, including Eddie “Piolín” Sotelo,
whose Piolín por la Mañana originates weekday mornings
on KSCA and is syndicated to approximately 50 markets;
Javier Romero, who hosts a music-intensive morning show that
also features lots of interviews in Miami, El Desayuno Musi-
cal; Raul Brindis, whose morning show originates at KLTN in
Houston; and New York’s Luis Jimenez, host of a morning
show that is stylistically similar to many English-language
morning offerings, with prank calls, musical parodies, com-
edy characters and sketches and listener telephone calls.
Westwood One
Also in 2011 (a busy year), Westwood One merged with
Triton Media Group, the parent company of Triton Radio
Networks (which included Dial Global), Triton Digital
Media and TM Studios. The merged company created the
largest provider of radio content in the U.S. Its services
include the following:
■
Thirteen format offerings are available as 24/7 “turn-
key” programming or in more customized structures.
■
More than 200 syndicated programming choices
available for almost any programming hole, from short
features lasting no more than a couple of minutes
(e.g., Ask Dr. Phil, Late Show Top Ten, Talking Points
with Bill O’Reilly, Weather Channel Radio Network)
11.4
Dominant Players (Continued)
(Continued)
388
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
to weekly one- to two- hour programs (such as Beatle
Brunch, Dave Koz, House of Blues Radio Hour,
countdown shows for country, CHR and AC formats,
and MTV Tres, a Spanish-language countdown) to
syndicated personalities for Monday–Friday dayparts
(Kevin & Bean, Bob & Sheri, Rocsi on the Radio, The
Billy Bush Show).
■
Special programming built around several entertain-
ment events such as the Grammy Awards, the Acad-
emy of Country Music Awards and the BET Awards,
with packages tailored to particular formats.
■
National broadcast rights for a number of top sports,
including the NFL, NCAA football and basketball,
and the major PGA tournaments.
■
A range of digital services and products provided by
Triton Digital Media, including content management
system (CMS) architecture, streaming management,
web analytics, mobile apps, texting and email services,
game and audience loyalty elements, and ad insertion.
■
A rep firm.
■
And all of TM Studios’ services include commercial
jingles; radio, TV and online imaging packages,
music libraries; production music; and show prep and
comedy services.
NPR
National Public Radio (NPR) is the largest producer and dis-
tributor of public radio programming in the U.S., but it differs
in significant structural ways from its commercial counter-
parts. NPR is not a network with affiliate stations, but rather a
membership organization that provides programming and
other services to its member stations. And its business model
is very different. Unlike commercial networks or syndicators,
NPR carries no advertising in its broadcasts (although like
other public media, it can—and does—include advertising
on its non-broadcast platforms such as the website).
Instead, broadcast revenue comes from a combination
of philanthropic grants, government funding, program fees
from member stations and underwriting (as explained in
relation to PBS in Chapter 10). Underwriting is a form of
support where businesses make donations to NPR (or local
public radio stations) to support either the general operation
of the service or, more often, a specific program. In return,
they receive brief statements on air thanking them for the
support and, one assumes, the goodwill of listeners to the
program. These “thank you” announcements are called
underwriting spots, not commercials; and, unlike commer-
cials, they are governed by specific FCC restrictions limiting
what can be said about the business in several ways.
While music is a relatively minor element of the pro-
gramming offered by National Public Radio (although this
varies among public radio stations), NPR is notable for a
number of the shows they produce and/or distribute. These
include All Songs Considered (and the All Songs Considered
24/7 Music Channel online and mobile service); long-
running favorites like Marian McPartland’s Piano Jazz,
Mountain Stage, The Thistle and Shamrock and World
Café; and various concert recordings from South by South-
west, Bonnaroo, the Village Vanguard and other locations.
NPR has also been a technological pioneer in radio.
They were among the first to develop satellite distribution of
programming to stations in the 1980s and, more recently,
have been leaders in the rollout of various online and
mobile applications for getting audio content to audiences.
American Public Media
American Public Media is the parent organization for Minne-
sota Public Radio, Southern California Public Radio and Clas-
sical South Florida. Beginning with the launch of a single
classical music station in Minnesota in 1967, they have grown
to operate 43 radio stations and 32 translators in Minnesota,
Iowa, Wisconsin, Michigan, South Dakota, North Dakota,
Idaho, California and Florida (making them the largest owner
and operator of public radio stations in the U.S.).
The second-largest producer and distributor of public
radio programming, American Public Media is the largest
producer and distributor of classical music programming in
the country, offering a full-range of content for classical
stations from a 24-hour, seven-day-a-week classical music
service to Performance Today, a daily two-hour classical
music program, to weekly programs and specials. They
also provide a number of other prominent programs
including that all-time favorite A Prairie Home Companion,
The Splendid Table, Marketplace and Being.
Like NPR, it is considered an innovator. In addition to
developing a wide range of new media platforms and
content, APM was the recipient of the first Knight News
Innovation EPpy Award for their Public Insight project. This
project, which has been rolled out to many other major
(Continued)
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
389
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
public radio and TV stations, develops and applies
social media techniques to engage the public and tap its
insight with the goal of producing significant journalism
featuring stories and perspectives from every facet of
experience.
PRI
Public Radio International is the third major distributor of
noncommercial radio fare in the U.S. Established in 1983
as American Public Radio, PRI understandably changed its
name to Public Radio International in 1994 (it was con-
stantly confused with APM). It distributes over 400 hours of
programming weekly to approximately 800 stations in the
U.S., as well as across other media platforms—including
SiriusXM’s Public Radio Channel. Although its best known
programs are talk-based (including This American Life,
Michael Feldman’s Whad’Ya Know, BBC World Service
and Bob Edwards Weekend), it also produces and/or
distributes a number of music and music-oriented talk pro-
grams. These include Echoes (a mix of instrumental, world
music and impressionistic jazz recordings along with Living
Room Concerts recorded in artists’ homes), Afro-Pop
Worldwide (the music of Africa, the Caribbean and the
Americas), Soundcheck (covering music of all genres, fea-
turing interviews, listener phone calls and studio perfor-
mances), Jazz After Hours and the Pittsburgh Symphony
Orchestra.
Ancillary Services
Arbitron
For most stations, networks, syndicators and advertisers,
Arbitron is the provider of radio audience information in the
U.S., in both local markets and nationally. Local radio rat-
ings are available both in local station/advertiser form and
for networks (Arbitron Nationwide). The national network
rating service is known as RADAR. The company was also
the developer of the Portable People Meter (PPM) device
that has replaced diaries as the primary means of gathering
radio ratings data in many markets (see Chapter 5 for a full
discussion of PPM), and that has led to various forms of
cross-media audience measurement. The company also
provides consumer behavior research (such as such as life-
styles, shopping patterns and media behavior) through their
Scarborough Research division. Its methods enable mar-
keters and media companies to develop much more com-
plex profiles of their consumers on a local, regional and
national basis.
Billboard
Billboard Magazine, part of the Billboard Information
Group (a division of Nielsen Business Media) is published
weekly. Following its acquisition of Radio & Records, its
became the leading trade publication for the music and
radio businesses, although the scope of its coverage
extends beyond pure music to include much of the enter-
tainment industry. Along with news, analysis and trend
reporting, it features widely-watched charts of music sales,
airplay and downloads developed with data from
Nielsen SoundScan and Nielsen Broadcast Data
Systems. The company has separate online presences
for industry pros (billboard.biz) and consumers/fans
(billboard.com).
Billboard.biz houses the full collection of weekly charts
and all of the articles printed in each week’s magazine, a
database of all Billboard articles, reviews, features and
special reports dating back to 1991, as well as weekly
album, singles and video charts dating back to 1984 and
year-end charts dating back to 1946. Billboard.com is
more of a typical consumer entertainment news site, with
music news, videos and a limited selection of weekly
charts.
Jacobs Media
Jacobs Media is a Detroit-based media research and con-
sulting firm. Although there are many prominent radio con-
sultants, Jacobs Media stands out in a couple of ways. First,
in addition to its status as the preeminent rock radio con-
sultancy and creator of the Classic Rock format, its staff has
also worked extensively with public radio stations and
NPR—likely the only major consultant to have a significant
client base in both the commercial and noncommercial
sectors. Second, its was one of the earliest voices in radio
to recognize the importance of mobile applications, and
the J_acApps service that Paul and Fred Jacobs began has
developed hundreds of mobile apps for both commercial
and noncommercial stations, groups and networks, as well
as other companies.
11.4
Dominant Players (Continued)
390
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Choosing a Format
The heart of most radio stations continues to be
their music, however distributed, and the principles
guiding on-air have counterparts for cable, satellite
and online-only radio. In all cases, the program
director’s job is essentially a continuous cycle of
analysis, design and implementation. The first step
in analyzing a market is a thorough evaluation of
all stations (or competing services) and their current
programming. This information can then be used to
modify or replace existing program formats or to
decide which property to buy and what to do with
it after purchase. Such an evaluation, in the context
of the company’s overall strategy, takes into account
the following factors: (1) the technical facilities of
each station or service, (2) the character of the
local or national market, (3) the delineation of a tar-
get audience, (4) the available budget and (5) the
potential revenue. Once completed, this evaluation
will determine which music format is commercially
viable and which can best help the station or service
succeed in a given market.
Comparing Technical Facilities
Unlike television, radio isn’t going fully digital anytime
soon. Industry deals still focus on traditional AM and
FM analog technology. Therefore, the old rule holds for
now: The best over-the-air facility has the best chance to
succeed. Going head-to-head with a similarly formatted
competitor that has better facilities is almost always a
big mistake. For AM stations, power (strength of sig-
nal), frequency (lower in the band is better) and any
license limitations (reduced power or eliminated night
service and directional requirements) are the key factors.
For FM stations, power and antenna height are the cru-
cial considerations. Generally, these elements determine
signal quality.
11.5
Station Groups by Revenue
Emmis Communications
0
500,000
1,000,000
1,500,000
2,000,000
2,500,000
3,000,000
3,500,000
4,000,000
4,500,000
5,000,000
Bonneville International
Radio One
Univision
Cox Radio
Entercom Communications
Cumulus Broadcasting
Citadel Broadcasting
New Cumulus (+ Citadel)*
CBS Radio
Clear Channel Communications
Rest of Top 10
Top 3
2009 Radio Revenues (000)
Radio Revenues (000)
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
391
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
A clear, undistorted signal is less tiring to the
listener than one that is distorted, faint or accompa-
nied by natural or artificial interference. All other
qualities of similar formats being equal, the station
or service with the best signal will be the listener’s
choice. Emotional fatigue unconsciously sets in after
a period of straining to hear a program with a noisy,
uncomfortable signal.
An FM station with 100,000 watts of effective
radiated power (ERP) and that has its antenna assem-
bly mounted on a 1,000-foot tower is a much better
facility than a station with the same power but with
the antenna mounted on a 500-foot tower. An AM
station with a power of 50,000 watts on a clear chan-
nel (820 kHz) is a much better technical facility than
a station with 5,000 watts of power at 1570 kHz.
Usually the low-power station is at the mercy of the
higher-power station. A 5,000-watt facility with a
talk or news format may be very vulnerable to a
same-format
station
broadcasting
at
10,000
or
50,000 watts because the more powerful station will
provide a listenable signal over a larger area.
This rule of thumb does not hold in all cases.
For example, a 5,000-watt facility at 1600 kHz
might easily fall victim to a 1,000-watt station at
710 kHz. In AM, both power and dial position are
important. The lower the frequency, the greater the
range of the AM signal. A 1,000-watt AM station at
710 kHz might easily reach a bigger population than
a 10,000-watt station at 1600 kHz.4
In FM, tower height and power are the principal
considerations, and antenna height is generally the
most important (a station with a higher antenna
using lower power will generally cover more area
than a station with more power but a much lower
antenna). However, the terrain is also an important
factor; hills can block FM signals. Three classes of
FM have been developed (see 11.6).
Defining the Competitive Market
Before any discussions of the opportunities that exist
within a market can take place, it is absolutely essen-
tial that a complete and thorough market analysis be
11.6
Classes of FM Stations
T
here are three broad classes of FM stations, although
there are also subclasses, and not all stations use the
class maximums. Class A stations are permitted a maximum
of 6,000 watts—or 6 kilowatts (kw)—ERP with a maximum
antenna height-above-average-terrain (HAAT) of 100
meters, which provides a signal radius of approximately
18 miles. Class B stations (located in the more densely
populated eastern United States) have a maximum ERP of
50 kw and a HAAT of 150 meters. Class C stations are
located primarily in the flat parts of the western United
States and are permitted up to 100 kw and a maximum
HAAT of 600 meters. These stations may have a signal
radius of 60 miles or more. Dial position is much less
technically important in FM, although stations at the center
of the dial get more sampling. An FM station at the upper
fringe of the band (the lower portion from 88 to 92 MHz is
reserved for noncommercial stations) needs an advertising
and promotional blitz when altering its format.
For many years, AM was the king of radio. AM stations
were tops in ratings, regardless of format. Beginning in the
1970s, FM replaced AM as the music format champion.
Music simply sounded better on FM because of the techni-
cal differences between the two bands. Furthermore, FM
doesn’t fade under bridges or inside urban skyscrapers and
doesn’t suffer from weather interference the way AM does.
To survive, AM turned toward full-service programming,
including elements of news, talk, sports, satellite or syndi-
cated programming, ethnic (non-English-language), and
religious (preaching and gospel music) content. The sta-
tion’s technical facility plays an important part in the initial
decision about whether to enter the music programming
competition. It would be aesthetically foolish and econom-
ically disastrous to pit, say, an AM station against a full-
power FM station in the contemporary rock field. Always—
having the best or one of the best facilities in the market is
crucial to beating the competition.
392
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
completed. As discussed in Chapter 5, Arbitron
(www.arbitron.com) data is an invaluable resource
in this process that provides an immense amount of
information ranging from demographic breakdowns
of current stations to format performance and criti-
cal reception in the market. All of this data compiled
together will paint a clear picture of the competitive
landscape—what competition exists in the market,
what formats are present, and where the format
holes or underserved demographics may be. Further,
it will identify the key players in the market and
identify the strengths of each.
The first step is identifying geography: “Where
will the radio station in question exist?” Although
the internet makes it possible to hear programming
almost anywhere, most of the audience will be from
the local area, and so that area is generally the first
concern of programmers. However, this process is
not as simple as merely identifying the city. Arbitron
makes clear distinctions among radio markets across
the country, and nearly every viable radio station
falls into more than one geographic category. Note
that Arbitron reviews, and sometimes changes, these
market definitions on an annual basis.
To review the relevant material from Chapter 5,
the Metro Survey Area (often referred to simply as
“metro” or “the metro,”) is defined as counties
where the sum of the percentage of listening and the
percentage of commuting is 70 percent or more, pro-
vided that a minimum of 55 percent of the listening in
the county is credited to stations that are home to the
existing metro radio market. The Area of Dominant
Influence, or ADI, includes all counties adjacent to
the Metro where measured listening is predominantly
to the stations from that metro. All counties are
exclusive to one ADI (in other words, are assigned
to one, and only one, ADI). However, the assignment
can change over time if listening patterns change. The
Total Service Area (TSA) includes the outlying coun-
ties that often directly border the counties in the ADI
that have significantly less total listening to stations in
a market but are still served by the stations in that
area. The Designated Market Area (DMA), similar
to the ADI but defined by Nielsen and not Arbitron,
is the area that makes up the television viewing mar-
ket, and will often contain counties well beyond the
reach of a terrestrial radio station but served by tele-
vision stations in the market. Once these areas are all
identified on a map, a Coverage Map (how far a sta-
tion’s signal will travel from its tower) of the station
should be placed over top of the market map to iden-
tify how the station in question relates to the different
categories. These will be important not only in under-
standing what areas the station will cover, but also in
estimating potential revenue, which is covered later in
this section.
Because these are man-made geographic bound-
aries, it is likely that a station may service areas that
fall in more than one ADI or TSA (or, in some
densely
populated
areas,
even
more
than
one
metro). For example, the Brunswick market on the
coast in Southeast Georgia is at the far north end of
the Jacksonville, Florida DMA. The signals of the
stations based in the metro (a one-county metro,
Glynn County) do not simply stop at the county
line, but broadcast into areas north toward Savan-
nah, areas that are outside of the DMA. In this case,
the TSA actually straddles two different DMA’s:
Savannah, Georgia, and Jacksonville, Florida. To
see the market breakdown in the city you live in,
or in the geographic area you are most familiar
with, look for the most recent Arbitron map in the
radio reference library at http://www.arbitron.com/
radio_stations/reference_metroinfo.htm.
The next step in completing the radio market
analysis is to compile a list of all of the radio stations
that currently exist in the metro, any construction
permits (CPs) that may have been granted or are
pending with the FCC, and those stations in both
the TSA and DMA that may provide fringe compe-
tition. This list should include important statistics
for each station that include but are not limited to:
service (AM or FM), frequency (98.7 Mhz, for
example), signal strength (in watts), antenna height
above average terrain (for FM stations), format,
owner and ratings.
One common methodology helps to represent
some of this data in graphic form to make the analysis
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
393
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
easier. A demographic profile of each station and each
ownership group is represented in a set of bar graphs to
show what percentage of listenership a station has in
each of the six standard demographic groups. The
bars in such graphs display the age “leaning” of a sta-
tion’s audiences, suggesting the industry name of skew
graphs. Arbitron is the principal source of these data. If
using a hard copy of the Arbitron ratings book, this
information can be found already completed in the
6 A.M. to midnight, Monday through Sunday page.
This information can also be obtained online through
Arbitron’s TAPSCAN software (by subscription only)
that will create these or any other reports on demand.
While Arbitron is the preeminent source, any audience
analysis service that provides demographic separation
will have the necessary information. Skew graphs for
two stations in the hypothetical market that is consid-
ered in this chapter are shown in 11.7.
Once the market is identified, coverage maps
are created, and demographic profiles are assem-
bled, program strategists can begin the work of iden-
tifying what opportunities exist in the market. They
can quickly decide what demographic groups are
best served by which stations and groups, and there-
fore which stations will represent major competi-
tion. Compare the examples from the hypothetical
market in 11.7. KAAA, a rock station, is skewed
male (nearly 70 percent) and young (more than
half the audience is younger than 35 years of age).
KIII, a soft AC, is nearly the opposite. Their audi-
ence is nearly all female and older (almost 60 per-
cent between 35 and 64 years of age).
Graphs for the Big Sky and RadioEast station
clusters appear in 11.8. Although the individual sta-
tions vary, group patterns emerge here. Both groups
skew male overall, but Big Sky more so. There are
also significant differences in the age breakouts.
RadioEast is strongest for ages 35 to 54, while Big
Sky’s stations appeal to younger listeners. These dif-
ferences reflect the existing formats of the stations in
each group, but more important, they provide impor-
tant strategic information about the marketplace for a
potential new entrant (including any reformatted sta-
tion within one of these groups). In order to maximize
the advantages of group ownership, it is essential not
only to look at the formats of individual stations but
also to consider how the programming and audiences
for each station fit together in the group. Different
groups try to leverage different audience segments.
One may focus on capturing the female audience
across several age categories; another may try to dom-
inate a specific age demographic for both men and
women. It cannot be overstated that most such deci-
sions are based on financial considerations relating to
potential revenue, as well as how likely programming
decisions may or may not attract advertisers.
Identifying Target Audiences
It is not enough to study population graphs and other
research data about a market’s radio listeners. Radio
is essentially a lifestyle medium. Listeners choose sta-
tions, at least in part, because the station’s image
reflects their self-image: their tastes, their values and
their interests. It is important to go into the commu-
nity to find out specifically what people are doing,
thinking and listening to. It is helpful to observe life-
styles by visiting restaurants, shopping centers, gas
stations, nightclubs, bars, parks, sports arenas and
other places where people go to have a good time.
Don’t think of observation as a task reserved for
times of change, however. Being active in the commu-
nity, and especially in the areas of most importance to
the audience, is not a one-time or occasional effort but
an ongoing process to keep programmers in touch
with listeners and all aspects of their lives. Street pres-
ence, as both a promotional exercise and a research
tool, is critical to the success of most music stations.
Personal interaction with the members of the
audience and community is important and can pro-
vide valuable insights, but programmers should be
careful not to generalize too much from that kind
of anecdotal evidence (and should never assume
that their personal tastes reflect the target audience’s
taste). Therefore, formal research using careful sam-
pling procedures should supplement personal inves-
tigation. Most cities have research firms that can be
hired to make special studies, and many national
firms specialize in broadcast station research. Psy-
chographic profiles (listener lifestyles and values)
394
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
11.7
Station Skew Graph Samples: KAAA-FM and KIII-FM
KIII-FM
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Teens
M 18+
W 18+
M 18–24
M 25–34
M 35–44
M 45–54
M 55–64
M 65+
W 18–24
W 25–34
W 35–44
W 45–54
W 55–64
W 65+
Percentage of Total Audience
KAAA-FM
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Teens
M 18+
W 18+
M 18–24
M 25–34
M 35–44
M 45–54
M 55–64
M 65+
W 18–24
W 25–34
W 35–44
W 45–54
W 55–64
W 65+
Percentage of Total Audience
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
395
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
11.8
Station Skew Graphs for RadioEast and Big Sky
Big Sky
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Teens
M 18+
W 18+
M 18–24
M 25–34
M 35–44
M 45–54
M 55–64
M 65+
W 18–24
W 25–34
W 35–44
W 45–54
W 55–64
W 65+
Percentage of Total Audience
RadioEast
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Teens
M 18+
W 18+
M 18–24
M 25–34
M 35–44
M 45–54
M 55–64
M 65+
W 18–24
W 25–34
W 35–44
W 45–54
W 55–64
W 65+
Percentage of Total Audience
396
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
can provide additional invaluable information for
programmers about target audiences.
A study assessing current formats in the market
using lengthy, in-depth interviews might get interest-
ing responses: too many commercials, bad commer-
cial production, too much unfamiliar or repetitive
music, obnoxious contests, can’t-win contests or
DJs who talk too much. A station getting answers
like these is ready for a major overhaul (or is vulner-
able to new competition). However, research is
merely one tool in the programmer’s arsenal. Any
study should be carefully weighed before being
used to make important decisions.
As an example of the kind of findings that prove
useful, a broadcast station may identify its typical
over-the-air listener as a male, 30 to 40 years old, in
a professional career who earns $75,000 to $100,000
a year, drives a Lexus or other upscale car, drinks
imported or craft beer, goes out at least twice a
week to a good restaurant, and plays golf. The station
can sell this audience to advertisers that have the
same target. Station promotional efforts, from con-
tests to events, would tie in elements of lifestyle with
the programming on this particular station.
Knowing the Available Budget
In addition to a program director, the usual hit music
operation requires one or more air talents along with a
production director and, perhaps, a music director. Sal-
aries vary widely, even within market classes, and are a
function of the station’s results (ratings and ad revenue),
the individual’s job history and the individual’s negoti-
ating skills. In a medium market of 500,000, the
program director may earn as much as $50,000 a
year—more if she or he also handles an air shift. The
morning DJ probably gets $50,000 to $80,000, and a
popular afternoon drivetime DJ may get up to $40,000.
The production director’s salary is probably between
$30,000 and $50,000 per year, and the other five or
six jocks fall in a somewhat lower range.
In the top-10 markets, stations would likely have
to double or triple these salary figures to get the
required talent. Top morning show talent for a large
market can easily run well into six figures, with super-
stars earning a million dollars or more annually. Suc-
cessful PDs can likewise command six-figure salaries in
a major market. But talent is often expected to do more
for that money than they used to have to do, in every
market. The afternoon drive jock is probably also
recording midday, afternoon or evening shows (voice
tracking) for as many as five or six other stations in
addition to making a promotional appearance or two
for the station each weekend. In smaller markets, they
may also be doubling as sales personnel.
In addition to staff salaries, management must
expect substantial ongoing costs for promoting and
advertising. Moreover, a station often employs vari-
ous consultants to help with specific areas of the
operation—legal, technical, management, personnel,
marketing and sales as well as programming—and
all of these consultants are useful or even essential
at one time or another. Some consultants are practi-
cally required on an ongoing basis—for example, a
communications
law
firm
in
Washington,
DC,
should handle proceedings with the FCC and keep
the station advised of changes in the requirements
for operation or of any licensing changes pending
before the commission for stations in their market.
Engineering consultants with experience in going
before the commission are necessary when the station
is applying for a new license or at any subsequent
time when the station makes a change to its facilities
that requires FCC approval. Programming consul-
tants can provide important insights on a regular or
occasional basis by finding market voids and spotting
competitors’ weaknesses (or your own). They may
even assemble a staff to work up a specific format.
Consultation is (Whew!) expensive, however. An
engineer may charge $700 a day plus expenses; a pro-
grammer may charge $3,000 a month on a three-
to-six-month contract. For a complete station overhaul,
consultants range from $400 to $1,000 a day. A neo-
phyte licensee may be literally unable to start up without
using one or more consultants, and even experienced
operators will frequently rely on the expertise consul-
tants provide. (As you can imagine, sharing such exper-
tise has been one pressure toward or byproduct of
consolidation.) A great deal of highly specialized knowl-
edge and experience must be brought to bear immedi-
ately once the FCC has given the licensee authority to
operate the station following construction or, more
commonly, a license transfer.
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
397
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Estimating Potential Revenue
It’s a cold, hard reality, but programming decisions are
based primarily on their revenue potential. Maximiz-
ing advertising revenue is normally the goal of the sta-
tion’s owners, and the value of a station and its
programming is found in the value of the audience to
advertisers. Program directors need some understand-
ing of basic business principles in order to be effective.
Good programming (along with good promotion and
a few other factors) should deliver a good, salable audi-
ence. That is what determines the success (or failure) of
a station (unlike commercial-free services).
In addition to cable, satellite and online radio
competing for audiences, television, outdoor, direct
mail and those few remaining newspapers compete
with radio for many of the same advertising dollars.
The increasing number of stations and audio services
has fragmented the available audience more than
ever, making survival even more difficult. Broadcast
radio is generally viewed as a mature medium, dem-
onstrating little revenue growth.
Although total revenues for the industry have
gone up in recent years despite the recent recession,
this factor is rapidly affected by dips and rises in the
overall economy. Radio’s percentage of total advertis-
ing dollars has been around 6 to 8 percent for dec-
ades, and consolidation did not improve that figure
as many had hoped it would (leading many of the
largest groups to divest some of the stations they per-
ceived as less important, often in smaller markets).
On the other hand, the new competition hasn’t
particularly hurt it, as yet—largely because most ser-
vices are supported by subscriptions rather than by
advertising, or they have limited availability to audi-
ences compared with broadcast radio, or because
they don’t accept advertising (or only very limited
amounts). The picture may not stay this way.
It is important to keep in mind that commercial
media compete intensely for local advertising reven-
ues. In any area, advertisers most desire the 18- to 49-
or 25- to 54-year-old audience (although as the baby
boomer generation ages past 60, some advertisers and
programmers are beginning to target those older
demos). In radio, the audience subdivides into 10- to
15-year
segments
that
specific
formats
target.
Following Arbitron’s pattern, most radio audience
segments end in a 4. If particular advertisers are not
seeking all listeners 25 to 54, then they generally want
a subset of that market; some seek subgroups of 25 to
34, 25 to 44, or 35 to 54. For example, many night-
clubs and other entertainment venues target audi-
ences aged 18 to 24 or 18 to 34.
Selected advertisers, such as banking, financial
institutions and packaged vacations, may seek listen-
ers aged 55 to 64. For the most part, though, older
people are seen as set in their buying habits, and
regarded as saving money rather than spending it; it
is presumed that they have probably bought just
about everything they are ever going to buy. This per-
ception is not necessarily accurate, however, because
people are living longer, healthier, more active lives.
Many advertisers are most interested in the large
population bulge represented by the baby boomers.
They see that market as having money, responding
to advertising and receptive to buying, even if it
means going into debt. Stations have tended to track
the boomer generation and adjust their music formats
to continue to appeal to this group as it ages. This has
resulted in continued heavy play of late ‘50s, ‘60s and
‘70s music (oldies or classic rock, as well as AC for-
mats that feature plenty of songs from that era), which
capitalizes on the hit songs of the baby boomers’
teens-through-20s years. The next largest population
bulge, the boom echo, were teens and 20s themselves
from roughly the mid-80s to shortly after the turn of
the century. Their music is also well represented, in
various alternative and rock formats as well as con-
temporary country and Hot AC.
Step-by-Step Selection Process
Format strategy can be examined by working through
a hypothetical market—say, a metropolitan area of
slightly more than 1 million people, with 19 commer-
cial stations licensed to the city or to nearby suburbs.
The market also includes four noncommercial stations:
three public radio stations affiliated with colleges and a
contemporary Christian station. (The different nature
of noncommercial operations is discussed in Chapter
10.) See 11.9 for a list of commercial stations in this
398
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
11.9
List of Stations, Formats, Facilities, Owners and Ratings in the Hypothetical Market
(6 A. M.–Midnight, Monday–Sunday)
Station
Format
ERP/HAAT
Frequency
Owner
Share 12+
Cume (00)
M 18–34
W 18–3
M 25–54
W 25–54
KAAA-FM
97 kw kW/375m
Big Sky
8.2
24.6
8.4
12.6
3.9
Rock
100.7
1475
559
329
558
309
KBBB-FM
6 kw kW/100m
Big Sky
2.3
0.8
0.8
2.7
2.7
Smooth jazz
98.1
446
41
39
147
156
KPPP-FM
100 kw/325m
Big Sky
5.6
7.6
10.7
5.6
6.7
Hot AC
99.1
1423
329
409
379
465
KSSS
1 kwD/1 kwN
Big Sky
1.5
2.9
0.1
3.2
0.4
Sports
620
386
89
9
217
39
KSSS-FM*
6 kw/90 m
Big Sky
1.7
3.8
0.4
4.0
0.4
Sports
105.1
401
120
31
263
52
KCCC-AM
1 kwD/1 kwN
HugeCo
1.3
1.4
2.0
1.1
1.2
Variety
1320
309
63
79
70
97
KDDD-FM
100 kw/300 m
HugeCo
10.9
10.5
18.5
5.4
11.6
CHR
102.9
2268
443
575
434
692
KIII-FM
100 kw/425 m
HugeCo
3.9
1.3
3.8
2.6
7.1
Soft AC
94.9
918
97
174
219
389
KKKK-AM
5 kwD/5 kwN
HugeCo
6.5
2.0
1.4
5.3
3.5
News/talk
1010
1207
77
65
329
254
KLLL-FM
100 kw/425 m
HugeCo
6.1
6.6
11.1
4.6
7.9
Hot country
102.1
1249
223
334
301
412
KOOO-FM
98 kw/350 m
HugeCo
7.6
5.0
6.6
6.8
8.1
Country
96.3
1401
162
256
326
441
KRRR-AM
5 kwD/5 kwN
HugeCo
1.1
0.1
0.1
1.3
0.5
Talk
910
359
10
11
90
43
KFFF-FM
100 kw/400 m
RadioEast
5.4
3.4
7.9
4.0
9.2
AC
104.3
1201
149
268
285
500
KGGG-AM#
50 kwD/50 kwN
RadioEast
1.4
0.2
0.1
1.4
0.6
Oldies
1490
392
21
14
92
67
KGGG-FM#
100 kw/275 m
RadioEast
5.8
1.4
2.4
6.2
6.9
Oldies
92.7
1156
86
82
351
387
K J J J-FM
100 kw/300 m
RadioEast
6.5
7.7
4.3
12.4
6.1
Classic rock
107.7
1199
258
180
584
359
KNNN-AM
1 kwD
Hometown
3.7
4.1
5.5
2.5
4.5
Urban
1110
513
90
129
104
166
KHHH-AM
2.5 kwD/.5 kwN
Faith
0.9
0.2
0.5
0.8
0.8
Religious
780
252
21
11
69
63
KEEE-FM
100 kw/250 m
OK Ltd.
4.4
3.3
1.7
4.1
2.9
Classic country
93.5
730
86
78
186
174
*Simulcast approximately 75%.
#Simulcast approximately 90%.
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
399
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
hypothetical market. Boldfacing shows the leading sta-
tion in each demographic group.
The market is typical of many medium and
large markets, with three significant group-owned
station clusters. The remaining commercial stations
in the market are owned by small groups, with addi-
tional properties located in other markets. Of the
three groups, HugeCo controls the most stations in
the market and is one of the biggest national station
groups, with several hundred stations covering all
market sizes. Big Sky is also a major group with
around 200 stations nationally, primarily in medium
and a few large markets. RadioEast is a relatively
small company, family controlled with fewer than
20 stations, most in medium and small markets.
This is their largest cluster and second-largest
market.
After a period of rapid consolidation, program-
ming and station rankings in the hypothetical mar-
ket have been fairly stable for the past couple of
years. The last station acquisition took place two
years ago when RadioEast bought into the market.
The last format change (KIII’s move to soft AC from
alternative) took place at about the same time. There
is
relatively
little
competition
within
formats;
KDDD-FM, KAAA-FM, KOOO-FM and KKKK-
AM have generally been the ratings leaders for
quite some time.
Station facilities are remarkably equivalent. Of
the AMs, only one station is a daytimer (KNNN),
although KHHH does have a restricted nighttime
pattern. In the FM band, all are high-powered class
Cs with the exception of Big Sky’s KBBB and KSSS,
both of which are class A stations licensed to nearby
suburbs of the metro city. Most of KSSS’s program-
ming is simulcast on KSSS-AM as well as on four
other AM stations around the state (billed as the
Sports Monster Radio Network). Big Sky recently
added a translator for KBBB on the opposite side
of the metro area to improve coverage.
Even taking into account the relatively poor
nature of its facility, Big Sky believes KBBB is under-
performing in its present/smooth jazz format and is
considering a format change. Given the makeup of
the market, what are the best options? Is there a
format
that
could
improve
Big
Sky’s
overall
competitive situation? What groups are unserved in
the population? See 11.10 for a description of the
population distribution in the hypothetical market.
First, let’s look at the competitive structure of
the market. Big Sky’s existing primary strength is
in the male demos; it has the number-one station
(KAAA) among men aged 18 to 34 and 25 to 54.
Between the rock and sports stations, it has nearly
35 percent of the 18 to 34 male demographic and a
20 percent share of men aged 25 to 54. With classic
rock and oldies formats, RadioEast is also strong in
the male demographics, but has primarily an older
audience (remember the skew graphs?). Meanwhile,
because of its size, HugeCo has effectively covered
the full age range on the female side. Big Sky has
only one female skewing station, hot AC KPPP,
which is a distant third among women aged 18 to
34 behind HugeCo’s CHR KDDD and hot country
KLLL. Among women aged 25 to 54, KPPP is sev-
enth, also trailing HugeCo’s mainstream country
KOOO, RadioEast’s AC KFFF, and oldies KGGG.
Given that overview, let’s look at potential for-
mat holes in the market. We can eliminate the news
11.10
Selected Population
and Demographic Estimates
Total metro population: 861,000
Total DMA population: 1,300,000
DMA Racial/Ethnic Population Estimates
White
77.0%
Black
10.0%
Hispanic
5.0%
Asian
3.0%
Native American
5.0%
Women
51.4%
Men
48.6%
Teens 12–17
10.5%
18–24
11.3%
24–34
16.5%
35–44
18.7%
45–54
16.4%
55–64
10.6%
65þ
16.0%
400
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
and talk formats right away. They’re expensive to
program, requiring large staffs unless you offer pri-
marily syndicated or network fare; and with two sta-
tions covering that territory, there are already
enough
stations
in
the
market
providing
that
programming.
We can also eliminate country off the top.
Although this is a strong market for county music,
there are already three stations in the format, with a
combined 18 share of persons 12þ. Each station has
carved out its own audience niche, and no single
station seems to have a segment large enough to fur-
ther subdivide. Moreover, the two most successful
country stations are owned by HugeCo, and their
combined promotional and programming strength
would represent a substantial barrier for any new
competitor
to overcome.
Big Sky should
look
elsewhere.
The situation in AC is similar, except that no
owner has more than a single station in the format.
KFFF, KIII and KPPP represent a combined 15 share
(and a whopping 23 share among the primary target
audience, women aged 25 to 54), and their formats
are spread across the range of AC programming. A
fourth station would be competing head-to-head
with one—and, to some extent, with all three plus
CHR KDDD (which, like many CHR stations,
sounds more like an AC format during weekdays
in order to better capture at-work adult listeners).
There could be some small niche available, but the
competition in this segment, although indirect, is
most likely a significant factor in KBBB’s current
low ratings. Moreover, we certainly want to avoid
potentially cannibalizing our existing female audi-
ence on KPPP.
In the rock category, Big Sky is dominant
(KAAA). Oldies and classic rock belong to competi-
tors, but those are generally one-to-a-market for-
mats
(although
an
oldies
hybrid
might
be
a
possibility). Combining the sports stations (KSSS-
AM and FM) with KAAA, Big Sky has very strong
male numbers. Perhaps it would be possible to fur-
ther increase our younger male demographic power
with an alternative format or add some older listen-
ers with a AAA format? The rock audience will gen-
erally accept alternative music on their station,
although the reverse is often not true, and KAAA
plays some alternative music. Most likely, moving
KBBB to alternative would simply take audience
from KAAA, leaving little or no net gain.
There are several possibilities, however. One
option would be an older-skewing music format
like adult standard. This audience is not well served
by existing programming, but that is because an
older audience (55þ) is often difficult to sell to
advertisers. Another possibility is urban or urban
oldies, currently available only on an AM daytimer
with poor facilities. According to the U.S. census
data, the market has a substantial minority popula-
tion (approximately 10 percent black and 5 percent
Hispanic), and the urban format can also have sub-
stantial appeal for white ethnic audiences. One of
the Hispanic formats might succeed if it had that
market all to itself, although implementation is diffi-
cult for a company without previous experience in
that marketplace because of language and cultural
barriers.
Finally,
there’s
CHR,
currently
represented
by the 12þ market leader KDDD with a share of
10.9 percent. That big share of the audience is a
tempting target, and the opportunity for Big Sky to
strike at the market’s biggest group is a battle many
program directors would relish. Moreover, the CHR
(or the urban) audience would be a good fit for
KPPP if there were some minor tweaking of its for-
mat, and this could potentially strengthen Big Sky’s
relatively weak overall female numbers without Big
Sky having to simply steal from KPPP’s existing
audience (although there would undoubtedly be
some audience sharing).
Thus, an urban hybrid (rhythmic CHR or urban
AC) looks to be the best opportunity in the market.
Census data indicates a substantial younger popula-
tion—57
percent—within
the
target
age
range
for contemporary music (28 percent in the core
demographic between 18 and 34 years of age, plus
11 percent aged 12 to 17, and another 18 percent
aged 35 to 44; slightly more women than men in all
ages). Most of this audience is currently served by
relatively few stations because the majority of sta-
tions chase the mid-adult demos. The existing
urban station would not be a significant competitor
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
401
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
because of its facility. In addition, picking rhythmic
CHR rather than true urban would allow the new
KBBB to attract listeners from the large KDDD audi-
ence and potentially turn them into listeners whose
first preference is KBBB (P1s in rating terminology—
the core listeners of a station).
Implementation
A format change will necessitate a new station iden-
tity (new call letters, which would require an FCC
application, and a fresh slogan), new music and
probably new air talent. Moreover, the work will
have to happen quietly, behind the scenes, in order
to avoid tipping off the other stations (and media
reporters) in the market. That means some (or even
all) of the work must be done away from the station
or at times when few, if any, other staff are around.
The program director’s first step is to settle on the
station’s target audience and identity.
Branding and positioning are complicated mat-
ters, but in simplest terms, the station needs to create
an image in the audience’s minds that matches the
audience’s self-image. In other words, the station
should fit into the listeners’ desired lifestyle in all
regards, from the music to the logo and slogan to
the DJ patter between songs. Who is the typical lis-
tener, the highly valued P1? In this case, imagine a
young (20- to 30-year-old) adult, most likely female,
who works in a professional or technical field; she
enjoys music (with a danceable beat), clubs, movies
and sports; drives a small, sporty car; is interested in
fashion; dines out several times a week; exercises
regularly; and enjoys traveling.
Next, we’ll need to consider, in consultation
with the general manager and other corporate
executives, whether current Big Sky personnel (at
KBBB or perhaps KPPP, or at another station out-
side the market) are suited to the new format. If so,
those people may be quietly brought into the process
as needed. If not, there will be that much more work
for the PD and the one or two other managers who
are aware at this point of the impending change. The
air staff can be hired prior to the debut but doesn’t
have to be. Some stations change format, then
gradually add air talent as they can be located and
hired. In the interim, the station operates either with-
out DJs or by utilizing voice tracking.
Some stations have used the initial launch
period to make a splash in the market by offering
extended commercial-free stretches or other special
programming that lasts a few hours to a few days.
But beware of setting up inappropriate audience
expectations with this strategy. Whatever manage-
ment does needs to both encourage the target audi-
ence to sample the station and begin the process of
building an affinity with that audience.
Building the station’s music library is another
task to be accomplished before the format goes on
the air. Developing rapport with record company
promoters is one way to receive music (see 11.11 to
get a sense of the risks). When the music director or
program director makes contacts with friends in the
music business, the station gets on their call schedules
and mailing lists. This ensures that the station will
receive all the current material promptly, in many
cases prior to the actual release date. Most important,
however, is becoming a reporting station for trade
journals. Getting current CDs is fairly easy for sta-
tions in larger markets and others that report their
airplay to major trade outlets because the record
labels will happily provide them. There are also
more specialized trade journals, such as CMJ (www.
cmj.com), and reporting airplay to those magazines
can also be a way to ensure music service (see 11.12).
To prepare a new contemporary format, the sta-
tion needs the previous 6 to 12 months of releases.
Performance licenses (requiring annual royalty fees)
should be obtained from each of the three traditional
performance rights organizations (PROs): ASCAP
(www.ascap.org), BMI (www.bmi.com) and SESAC
(www.sesac.com). The licenses grant the station the
right to play nearly all popular music, a necessary
expense for music stations. The PROs then distribute
most of the money to the music’s copyright holders
(music publishers and songwriters), based on surveys
reporting the amount of airplay.
If the station plans to stream its signal online,
separate licenses are required from ASCAP, BMI
and SESAC. More significantly, streaming requires
paperwork to be filed with the U.S. Copyright Office
402
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
(www.copyright.gov) along with a small fee, and
additional performance royalties are due to the
record labels and musicians. That separate perfor-
mance
right
is
acquired
from
SoundExchange
(www.soundexchange.com), an organization formed
to manage those digital copyrights for the record
labels much as the traditional PROs track airplay
and collect and distribute money for songwriters.
When assembling the music library, someone
will have to dig for the recurrents and the gold—
especially the latter. Because of their age, physical
copies of these recordings may be scarce. Promoters
and distributors are often out of stock and in some
cases, discs are simply out of print. In a pre-digital
world, it could have taken months to build the gold
library, and these recordings would have been kept
under lock and key to forestall avid collectors
among staff members. This remains true today for
the few stations that still play compact discs on the
air, use carts (audio cartridges), reel-to-reel or even
on special occasions, actual vinyl records. While cer-
tainly not commonplace for everyday use, many
facilities still possess the ability to use one or more
of these now antiquated technologies.
If nothing more than for ease and sound quality,
most radio stations’ audio functions are completely
digital. This is especially true for the music library if
the desired format is already in use by the company
11.11 Pay-for-Play
R
ecord companies rely on about 1,000 radio stations
in the largest markets to expose their records and thus
influence music sales, although online exposure is now also
significantly influencing sales. Dozens of songs are
released weekly, but only a handful of slots open on most
radio station playlists. To call attention to new releases, the
record industry enlists promotion specialists who introduce
the product to radio programmers. Some of these promo-
ters are label employees; others are independent contrac-
tors, often called “indies.”
One promotion strategy used to be called “Pay-for-Play”
but that term (and the associated practices) are in bad
odor. Some indies were paid by major labels to get songs
on major station playlists, and payments varied based on
the station’s market size. Bonuses were paid when songs
were added during a desired week, a song’s rotation
increased or a song reached a certain position on the
playlist. Indies paid the station for the right to “represent”
them by getting the station exclusive releases, prizes or
other promotional considerations. The indies guaranteed
promotional payments to the stations, then billed the record
companies.
This sounds smelly, but the “Pay-for-Play” strategy was
technically not payola because indies didn’t pay DJs to
play specific songs; they wrote their contracts with partici-
pating stations. However, the word indies has been tarred
because it has been used for both highly questionable
“Pay-for-Play” promotion (read payola) as well as legitimate
promotion by independent contractors.
In genres that don’t rely on mass audiences, indepen-
dent promoters are effective and generally work fully within
the law. Texas, for example, has its own blend of roots
country music, and about a dozen promoters target radio
stations in the state. The Americana format—a hybrid of
country, roots and folk—has promoters dedicated to its
stations. Christian and college broadcasters have their own
cadres of indie promoters.
Some indies are paid by artists and smaller labels to
represent them in small markets in the hope of gaining
notice by larger stations. Money is not usually passed on to
stations at this level (though one wonders where it goes …).
Labels can also bypass promoters and programmers to
deal directly with big station groups at the corporate level.
Fees are considered “sponsorship” when songs are pre-
viewed by corporate programmers or “showcases” when
new talents perform.
The internet has certainly facilitated the success of local
artists and bands by giving thousands of groups a chance to
find an audience. Artists are creating their own promotions via
websites, and of course social networks can build fan support
and regional popularity. Moreover, the enormous inpact of
videos going viral on YouTube can’t be overestimated.
Frank Chorba, Ph.D.
Washburn University
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
403
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
in another market. Online file transfers, flash mem-
ory devices and cheap digital storage make compil-
ing an initial music library a process that may take
only a day or two as opposed to months. It should
be noted, however, that a music library is never
“complete,” but rather is continually changing with
music being added and removed almost daily.
Some stations employ the use of gold services such
as TM Studios’ Gold Disc™Library, a complete oldies
library available on compact disc. Although it is an
additional programming cost to the station, a pur-
chased library offers savings in time and convenience.
Each disc contains upwards of 20 songs, and provides
an expansive collection of “the hits.” In a newer incar-
nation, TM Studios (tmstudios.com) provides various
catalogues of oldies and currents in both compact disc
and on demand formats, including the popular Prime
Cuts discs that are mailed weekly to the station. TM
Studios also provides a comprehensive collection of
online services that provide on-demand download
capabilities. Depending on how far back a station will
need to go for music, another online service may pro-
vide all of the necessary audio needed for the library. A
straight-ahead CHR whose gold category may only go
back three to five years would likely find everything
needed to complete the library in a service (or combina-
tion of services) like Play MPE (plaympe.com), New
Music Server (newmusicserver.com) or Radio Currents
(radiocurrents.com). These services are available to pro-
gram directors music directors and operations man-
agers through an agreement between the station and
the service for providing digital audio licensed for
broadcast use, and may contain audio in all categories
from gold to currents.
Another option that may be preferable when put-
ting a station on the air with brand new facilities is to
simply purchase a digital automation system with a
complete (or nearly complete) music library pre-loaded
in the system. Wide Orbit (wideorbit.com) is one such
company. In addition to WO Automation for Radio,
they also own the rights to automation software like
Scott Studios 32 and Maestro (products formerly
owned by dMarc and Google). Another major provider
is RCS (rcsworks.com), owned by Clear Channel,
which offers automation products like Zetta and
NexGen in addition to the widely used music scheduling
software Selector. They can include the music itself (for
an additional charge, of course).
Digital automation systems are dedicated com-
puters that are used solely for running the radio sta-
tion, and often contain a central server with hard-
drive audio storage and a separate machine that
acts as the user interface and playback machine in
each of the station’s control rooms. All of the music,
station imaging, promos and commercial inventory
can be first hosted on the server, and are streamed
over the local network to the computers in the con-
trol room for storage and playback on air. This is
especially efficient in the case of audio files that are
used on more than one station in the cluster. Take,
for example a commercial for a local car dealer:
Rather than loading the car commercial on to each
of the station’s machines individually, the spot can
be placed on the server and then distributed to one
or all of the on-air machines in the building (or
maybe be sent farther away). This double redun-
dancy can also be a lifesaver in the event of a cata-
strophic failure of one of the local machines in a
control room. In a digital environment where no
physical copy exists, backups (and backups of back-
ups) are essential.
11.12 Measuring Airplay
D
isagreements about airplay decisions and how the
quantities of spins are reported have been an
onoing problem for both radio and the music industry.
Because of flagrant abuses in the past when stations and
local retailers individually reported figures, nowadays
sales figures and airplay (spins) are monitored by such
independent tracking organizations as Nielsen Broad-
cast Data Systems and Mediabase Research. Outside
monitoring presumably prevents unscrupulous program-
mers from reporting that they played certain songs more
or less frequently than they really did. Subsequently,
station play figures are compiled into charts for various
formats, and reported in trade magazines like Billboard.
Frank J. Chorba, Ph.D.
Washburn University
404
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Initially, the program director will need to tem-
porarily act as the music director in order to struc-
ture the music when revamping a station or flipping
formats. Later, those duties can be transitioned to
one of the jocks who will act as the music director
(MD). In a typical setup, the music director works
for the program director, overseeing music research,
taking calls from record company promotion reps
and independent promoters, and preparing pro-
posed additions and deletions to the playlist. The
program director has the right to make the final
call, but the music director does the background
work.
The Station Sound
As you might guess, the four main elements that go
into creating the sound of a radio station are the
music, the jocks, the imaging and the commercials
(spots). The art of radio programming is finding
just the right balance as these elements come
together,
and
that
balance
in
turn
determines
whether the final product is great, mediocre or
downright terrible. Clearly, no one “right way” to
program a radio station exists (or we’d all listen to
the same stations). Rather, each PD has his or her
own style that influences the overall sound and gives
each station its own unique personality. Most pro-
grammers will specialize in one specific format, or at
most a handful of formats, but what works in one
format probably doesn’t work in another, and the
same problem exists from market to market. One
common key, however, to programming success in
all formats is good research, driven by the listeners.
Ultimately, the listeners decide the success or failure
of a PD each time a new ratings book is released
(and a lot of tension precedes the release of each
book!).
To illustrate how the basic process works, this
chapter presents a model that combines aspects of
systems used by radio stations across the country.
This system represents one plan for programming a
rhythmic CHR station that is designed to achieve
maximum attractiveness to the target demographic
of Adults 18-34.
The Anatomy of the Clock
One of the program director’s major responsibilities
is to construct one or more clocks that serve as tem-
plates for each hour of a station’s programming. So
called because it resembles the face of a clock, it cre-
ates a graphic representation of the formula by
which the station is built to achieve the desired
“sound.” A clock will divide any given hour of pro-
gramming into portions for music (by category), sta-
tion elements (jock chatter, weather, news, imaging
and promos), as well as commercials. It will also
provide specific placement (in minutes) for each of
the elements that make up the hour. For instance,
commercial breaks may be scheduled to always fall
at 20 and 50 minutes after the top of the hour, with
weather being the last element in the 20 break.
The PD also will create as many clocks as are
needed: one for an hour with no news, another for
an hour with two newscasts, another for an hour
with one newscast, another for an hour with 10
commercial minutes (or 12 or 16 or however many
the station allows and could sell). Clocks are a way
to effectively manage dayparting—that is, estimating
who is listening at a particular time of day and what
their activities are, and then programming directly to
them.
The most common dayparting strategies use
Arbitron-defined standard dayparts: Morning Drive
from 6 A.M.–10 A.M., Middays from 10 A.M.–3 P.M.,
Afternoon Drive from 3 P.M.–7 P.M., Evenings from
7 P.M.–Midnight, and Overnights from Midnight–
6 A.M. Each daypart may have its own clock or
multiple clocks. Conversely, there may be one
clock for morning drive, and the same clock may
be used throughout the rest of the day.
The Music
Our hypothetical rhythmic CHR will use five major
music categories: power, current, recurrent, power
gold and gold, though other stations or formats
might employ additional categories. Some program-
mers might also further divide the categories by
tempo, style, genre or—in the case of formats with
substantial gold libraries—by era.
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
405
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The Model
Any contemporary music station can use this basic
formula ranging from CHR to rock and AC, country
or urban. It would require significant modification,
however, to work for an oldies or classical format.
Power.
This category contains approximately ten top
songs, played at the rate of four to eight each hour. (The
rotation would be slower, one to three each hour, in
most non-CHR formats.) Rotation is controlled so that
the same song is not played at the same time of day on
consecutive days. Rotation time, or the time that elapses
before the cycle of ten songs begins again, will likely vary
by daypart ranging from as little as 75 to 90 minutes in
the late afternoon and evening in our rhythmic CHR
format to as much as six or eight hours in some AC or
rock formats. The exact rotation is decided by the pro-
gram director. The songs in this category are the most
popular of the day and receive the most airplay. They are
selected weekly based on the following:
■How they test during call-out research with the
station’s audience
■Their national airplay rankings and audience test
scores from services like BDS Radio (bdsradio.
com, airplay charts available at radio-info.com)
■Local sales (to a lesser degree, but still may pro-
duce “local hits”)
Area record stores can be contacted weekly for
sales information, which they record by bar code. In
smaller markets, rankings of sales and airplay in
trade magazines often play the biggest part in deter-
mining playlists (see the “Music Research” section
of this chapter). In bigger markets, telephone testing
was traditionally used to measure popularity, but
the popularity of cell phones among young listeners
and restrictions on calling out have diminished the
use of this option. In a call-out, a sample audience
hears part of a song, almost always “the hook,” and
is asked to evaluate it. Many stations also now use
online panels of listeners to evaluate songs.
Current.
This category contains the remaining 20
or so currently popular songs. They are played at the
rate of three or four per hour (in an hour with no
commercials, five might be played). Some stations
subdivide this category by tempo or mood, placing
slow songs in one group and fast, upbeat ones in
another; other programmers subdivide by popular-
ity, grouping those moving up in the charts sepa-
rately from those that have already peaked and are
moving down in the charts. The same research meth-
ods used to determine the power songs determine
those in the current category. Together, the powers
and currents form the station’s current playlist of
about 30 songs.
Recurrent.
This category contains songs that are no
longer powers or currents but have been big hits within
the last two years. (Some rock and AC stations may
keep songs for up to three years in the recurrent
section.) These songs get played at the rate of two to
four per hour, depending on commercial load and
desired rotation time in the first two categories. Some
stations limit this category to 30 records played at the
rate of one an hour; others may have as many as 100
songs, playing them twice an hour. Songs usually move
into this category after being powers or currents, after
a short “resting” period (where the song is not played
on the station at all) of anywhere from one to four
weeks depending on the song. A few songs will be
dropped from the library and never make it to the
recurrent category, predominantly novelty records
that are burned out (listeners have tired of them) and
records that stiffed (failed to become really big hits).
These songs should be tested periodically for audience
burnout by telephone call-out or web-based research.
Power Gold.
This category contains records that
were very big hits in the past three to ten years.
There may be anywhere from 100 to 300 of these
classics, and they are played at the rate of one to
three per hour, depending on commercial load and
format. The songs are recycled every few days with a
few “new songs” from the library of power golds
being added, and others being removed ensuring this
category always stays fresh. These are the “never-die”
songs, often by core artists in the format, that will
always be recognized by the target audience and imme-
diately identified as classics. They greatly enhance the
format because listeners get the impression that the
406
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
station airs a broad range of music. Because there are
so many of them, auditorium research is the best way
to test these songs for desirability, recognizability and
burnout, but they may occasionally also be rotated
through call-out or web tests.
Gold.
The gold category contains the “best of the
best” from the past 10 to 15 years that are not in the
recurrent or power gold categories. This group of
200 or so titles is played at the rate of maybe one
an hour, depending on format and commercial load.
In some formats, they may disappear entirely for cer-
tain dayparts (in the case of our hypothetical rhyth-
mic CHR, we probably would not schedule many, if
any, in afternoon drive and evenings). Songs in this
group are carefully researched, usually with audito-
rium tests, to make sure they appeal to the station’s
target demographic group and are not suffering
from burnout. Stations can extend their gold catego-
ries by not including in the active library every song
that meets their criteria for airplay. Rotating songs
in and out of the active gold library every few
weeks—or creating subcategories that rotate at dif-
ferent speeds—can increase the audience’s sense of
musical variety on the station—while maintaining a
consistent sound.
A final category, oldies, may complete the
record library for some formats (although CHR sta-
tions omit it entirely). Oldies comprise the largest
group because it covers the greatest span of time—
all the hit songs from the 1950s up to 10 or 15 years
ago. As many as 600 songs may be in the group, and
they are played at the rate of one to two per hour in
some formats. The commercial load and the number
of older listeners the station wants to attract will
determine how many oldies get played. Songs in
this group had to be hits at the time they were
released and must continue to be popular. Program-
mers for AC and oldies stations subdivide songs in
this category according to the dates the songs were
originally
hits.
The
year categories
listed
here
roughly parallel major historical shifts in the style
of popular music:
■Mid-1950s to 1964
■1965 to 1972
■1973 to 1980
■1980 to the early 1990s
It is important to manage the rotations carefully
within gold, power gold and oldies categories,
because there is never any “new” music from these
periods; that is to say, you can’t go back in time ten
years and release a new song. There are only a cer-
tain number of songs that will exist in these catego-
ries, which is why program directors will hold some
of them back, playing only 30 to 50 at a time when
the library has more than 200 titles. This little trick
enables the listener to still find discovery (or the
“man, I haven’t heard this song in forever”) factor
that exists with older songs. There are no “new
oldies,” so programmers have to be smart about
their use.
Finally, it is important for programmers to real-
ize that a song that is a huge hit in one market can
be a dismal flop in another. This is especially impor-
tant for a PD to remember when moving to an unfa-
miliar city.
The Research
In case we haven’t said this often enough, the key
ingredients in designing a successful format are care-
ful planning, ongoing local research and a willing-
ness to adapt to changing audience tastes and
competition. Although music tastes within a format
tend to be more homogenized nationally today than
in the past, because of video music channels on
cable, the mobility of the population and consolida-
tion in the music and radio industries, successful
programmers are always aware of—and take advan-
tage of—market-specific variations. Music stations
may employ one or more people to handle call-out
or web-based research and to assemble statistics, or
the music director may work with specialized con-
sulting services.
The
more
objective
information
that
the
researcher gathers, the easier it is for the program-
mer to evaluate the record companies’ advertising
and sales. Record promoters naturally emphasize
their products’ victories, neglecting to mention that
a record died in Los Angeles or Kansas City. The
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
407
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
station must depend on its own research findings to
rate a piece of music reliably.
As explained in Chapter 5, call-out and web-
based research gets reactions directly from radio lis-
teners. Two versions of the technique are used—
active and passive. In active call-out research, the
names of active listeners are obtained from lists of
contest entrants or regular listeners who volunteer to
be part of a web panel. The passive version selects
names at random from the telephone directory (see
11.13).
Another method of radio research, primarily for
the gold and recurrent parts of the library, is audito-
rium testing. Several companies specialize in this
kind of audience research. Typically, they bring a
test group to a large room and ask them to evaluate
music as excerpts are played. As many as 300 songs
may be tested, with the audience writing their
responses on special forms or punching in responses
electronically. The tabulated results will be broken
down demographically and usually provide valuable
information to programmers about which songs to
play in which dayparts and which songs may be
wearing out for the target audience. Additional
questions can be asked; for example, “What station
do you listen to most?” “Second most?” “Who has
the best news/the best sports/the best personalities?”
“What is the most irritating?” and so on.
Web-based systems have made research more
accessible to small- and medium-market stations
than traditional telephone or auditorium testing
because web testing is less expensive. The process
begins similarly to that of active call-out telephone
testing. A station recruits a sample of audience mem-
bers willing to participate in testing (in this case, via
on-air announcements or the station’s website).
Once the panel is assembled, the program director
uploads the song hooks to the website weekly (or
11.13 Call-Out Research
W
hen calling randomly selected people out of the
telephone book, the first step in an interview is to
qualify the person—that is, to make sure the person is in the
target demographic and listens to, or prefers, the kind of
music the station plays. In either case, respondents are asked
to listen to excerpts (hooks) from the songs being researched
and to rate them on a scale from 1 to 5 as follows:
1 ¼ “Hate it.”
2 ¼ “Dislike it.”
3 ¼ “Don’t care.”
4 ¼ “Like it.”
5 ¼ “My favorite record.”
Research will also assess the extent to which a record might
be burned out by asking listeners whether they are “tired” of
hearing the song. (A high burnout percentage tells a PD that the
song might need to be retired from the active library, either
temporarily or permanently.) When a sample is completed
(100 calls is typical), the votes for each number on the scale
are tabulated. The various totals are then manipulated to obtain
interpretations in terms of ratios or percentages.
For example, assume 100 listeners are called within a
week, and 30 records are discussed. Twenty-four listeners
say they like song number five, and 36 say it is their
favorite record; 11 said they didn’t like it, 6 didn’t care,
and 9 hated it. Fourteen had never heard it before (a very
high recognition rate of 86 percent). Song number five thus
has a total score of 325 and an average response of
3.78—this song is scoring very well with that core audi-
ence. It should definitely be high in the playlist, and
depending on its age, trend and the scores of other current
songs, it might qualify for the power category.
When doing call-based research of any kind, it is cru-
cial that the questions be asked in the right manner. It is
important to make the respondents understand that they are
being asked to help determine the station’s music selection.
Because the station is their favorite, they should be pleased
to have the opportunity to shape its programming even
more to their liking. During a music interview, respondents
can also be asked to comment on other things they like or
dislike about the programming. This requires a sympathetic
ear on the part of the researcher. No arguing back
allowed.
408
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
even more frequently if needed) and then sends out
an email to the sample group announcing that the
music is ready for their assessment. The listeners
then complete the testing at their convenience, and
the results are made available immediately to the
program director and music director.
The Rotation
Regardless of format, music stations must control
rotation, or the frequency of play of different kinds
of songs. For many years, stations used a flip card
system (really!). Each song was placed on a 3  5
index card in a file box, sometimes separated into
different categories of music. DJs were instructed
to play the next available and appropriate song
and place the flip card at the back of the stack.
Surprisingly, the basic system hasn’t changed
much, but music scheduling software allows for a
much more sophisticated means of tracking what
song is played, and where it is played in regard to the
other elements surrounding it. By placing “restrictions”
on songs, the music director and program director cre-
ate exactly the flow they want. By combining airplay
data with ratings information, programmers can track
how the music flow impacts audience flow as well as
how frequently the audience is really hearing a song.
Computers can be used to do the following:
■Follow a category rotation
■Restrict some songs to particular dayparts
■Balance up-tempo and down-tempo songs
■Avoid the scheduling of two songs by the same or
similar artist too closely together (for example a
power gold by Justin Timberlake followed by a
gold from NSync)
■Prevent songs from playing too close to the same
time every day
■Prevent adjacent songs of the same type (such as two
“old school” songs or two rhythm-and-blues songs)
Adherence to such restrictions leaves most of
the control in the hands of the program director
rather than in the hands of the on-air personality—
whose focus should be on his or her performance
between songs rather than on selecting music. The
jocks as well as the program and music directors
can get printed lists (paper logs) of all the songs to
be played, although it is far more common to display
the log on a computer monitor in the studio. Expe-
rienced talent with a good understanding of the for-
mat may sometimes be given the flexibility to make
alterations to the schedule, but not all PDs are com-
fortable giving up that control. Similarly, freehanded
jocks who think they may be able to skirt the system
and add or delete songs at their leisure are often
caught when the program director runs reconcilia-
tion reports that compare what was supposed to
play with what actually did play.
When setting up the rules for the format, the PD
must balance concerns about the sound of the sta-
tion with the ability to schedule music. The more
rules that are in place, the more difficult it becomes
to schedule each day without breaking one or more
rules. In setting up the rotations for various music
categories, it is especially important to watch the
relationship between the number of songs in the cat-
egory, the rotation speed and the clock structure.
The program director must make sure the categories
are not cycling in time frames that are multiples of
each other, which would lead to categories synchro-
nizing and the same songs playing together in a pat-
tern. In the example of our hypothetical station, the
power category is set to turn over every 90 minutes.
Thus, the current category should be rotated at a
pace to avoid turning over at 3 or 4.5 hours
(which would synchronize to the second or third
power
rotation
at
90
minutes).
Good
choices
would be 3.5 or 5.5 hours, keeping given songs in
the categories out of sync for substantial lengths of
time. Gold and recurrent categories generally have
enough titles and slow enough rotation that syn-
chronization is not a major issue, but programmers
should still be aware of unintended patterns.
Superior program directors will manually “mas-
sage” the log prior to its final approval, personally
reviewing the music song by song to catch any of the
above-mentioned unintended patterns. While schedul-
ing software usually eliminates these, the computer
only knows to do what you tell it to do. Even with
sufficient restrictions and rules outlined in the software,
different songs by the same artist may unintentionally
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
409
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
be scheduled as the first song out of a commercial
break. Should this happen three times in a five-hour
airshift, it may seem to the listener that an abnormal
amount of music is being played by that artist, espe-
cially if the jock calls it to their attention. By personally
reviewing the log, the PD can almost completely elimi-
nate such errors.
The Jocks
Station personalities make up a large portion of the
overall “sound” of the radio station, and along with
the imaging, is what truly gives a station its own iden-
tity. Once there was the big-voice boss who told the
listener this was a Big Announcer, but this style faded
in the early 1970s. Now there are SCREAMERS!!!
(sometimes derogatorily referred to as pukers) who
try to wake the very young. Then there are the
shock jocks, the adult-male-oriented personalities
who court FCC retribution daily (see 12.5 in Chapter
12, which discusses indecency in radio program-
ming). But most contemporary stations rely on con-
versational jocks who just talk normally, as they
would with any friend, when they open the micro-
phone switch. What they talk about, and the attitude
with which they convey the information, is what
makes each talent and format distinctive.
Typically jocks will work in shifts following (or
on a slight variation of) the standard daypart schedule:
Morning Drive from 6 A.M.–10 A.M., Middays from
10 A.M.–3 P.M., Afternoon Drive from 3 P.M.–7 P.M.,
Evenings from 7 P.M.-Midnight and Overnights from
Midnight-6 A.M. The challenge for the PD is to make
each daypart its own distinct entity, appropriate to the
audience’s characteristic activities at that time, while
simultaneously keeping the station’s sound consistent
across all dayparts. The most important ingredient in
making daypart distinctions is the personality of the
jock assigned to each time period, followed by the
appropriate adjustments to the music rotation and
other programming elements. Neither the PD nor the
air talent should ever lose sight of the fact that consis-
tency is the primary goal. For key attributes of each
daypart, see 11.14.
Under the direction of a strong PD, a kind of
“sameness” will develop among all the jocks in a
specified format without the drabness or dullness
normally associated with sameness. In this context,
sameness means consistency and not predictability.
A listener who tunes in to the station at odd hours
should always hear the same sound and get the same
feeling from the station that they get when tuning
into the station driving to work in the morning or
on the way home in the afternoon. The listener
should know what kind of programming to expect,
and a well programmed station will deliver no mat-
ter the day or daypart.
The best air talent offers enough of herself or
himself to the audience that a relationship develops,
and the kind of familiarity translates into more regular
listening. Listeners should feel as if they have a trusted
friend with them in the car or at work when listening
to the station. This relationship is especially true on
country and adult contemporary stations, and while
still a factor is less of a consideration on CHR sta-
tions. The true test is when jocks have the opportunity
to interact with listeners at station events: Do the lis-
teners initiate conversation recalling intimate details
or things that were said on air weeks ago, or do
they think it’s just a person wearing a polo shirt
with the station logo on it? Jocks are station person-
alities and should have personalities that are funny,
informative, trustable and most of all likeable. With-
out these characteristics, the jock is nothing more than
an announcer, and announcers are a dime a dozen.
The ever-increasing demand from owners to cut
expenditures and post higher earnings at radio sta-
tions nationwide leads some programmers to con-
sider going as far as eliminating some, most or all
local air talent order to pass those savings to the
bottom line. While this obviously
would save
money in the short term, a successful station can’t
survive for long playing just music and commercials.
Radio needs personality to succeed—otherwise, the
listener is more likely to plug in an iPod or fire up a
service like Pandora so as to skip the commercials
altogether. Technology has provided one partial
solution to this dilemma: the invention of a process
known as voicetracking, or the pre-recording of
some or all of a jock’s talkpoints during a shift.
One or two people can voice track an entire day’s
programming on a station before going off to do
410
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
production, engineering or sales; or one air staffer
can provide voice tracks for many stations in a
local or regional group, perhaps in addition to a
live shift on one station.
Using the internet, it is technically easy for the air
talent to be in Dallas and upload voice tracks to stations
in Michigan, Florida and Oregon. (But beware the
accent … People in Oregon don’t talk like people in
Dallas.) Not only can this provide budgetary savings
for the local station, but it also offers the opportunity
to use better-quality air talent than would otherwise
be affordable in many small and medium markets.
Large-market talent may be available to voicetrack
stations for as little as $100 per week.
The downside is the potential for losing what
radio is best at—being live, local and immediate. If
a station is voicetracked from a distant source and
has competition that is well programmed, live and
local, history says unequivocally that the nonlocal
station will lose. If management decides to voice-
track, it would be best to limit it to off-peak hours
like overnights, weekend mornings and nights if pos-
sible and to make every effort to ensure the talent
localizes the content. Ideally, the voicetracks should
be recorded as close to the actual airtime as possible
in order to provide the most up-to-date information.
The Imaging
The first step in positioning the station in the listener’s
mind is establishing a name and call letters, which will
then be used in the imaging or audio vignettes placed
throughout the hour to establish the identity of the
station. Often this will employ a mix of dial position
and call letters, as well as a tag line or slogan
that further establishes the station’s image such as
“Jacksonville’s #1 Hit Music Station,” or “Today’s
Best Country.” The name should reflect the lifestyle
and attitude of the target audience, and the call letters
should be easily recognizable and easy to recall.
Gordon McLendon, an early innovator of the
top-40 format, was one of the first broadcasters to
recognize the value of sayable call letters. His first
big station was KLIF, Dallas, originally named for
Oak Cliff, a western section of the city. The station
call was pronounced “Cliff” on the air. Then there is
KABL (“Cable”) in San Francisco, KOST (“Coast”)
in Los Angeles, and KEGL (“Eagle Radio”) in Fort
Worth. These call letters are memorable and distinc-
tive brand identities and get daily usage.
Other call letters may not stand out as much, but
have a history or geographic tie-in to their metro ser-
vice area. WCOL in Columbus, Ohio, employs the
first three letters in the city’s name, and WPTI in
Greensboro, North Carolina takes its calls from the
region known as the Piedmont Triad. Other times,
the calls will give clues to the station’s history: In
Charleston, West Virginia, WVSR’s calls recall the
day when the station was known as “Super 102,”
and the calls stood for the Valley’s Super Radio.
Today, nearly every city has a “Magic,” a
“Kiss” and a “Mix.” More recent variants include
names like “Alice” (KALC, a Hot AC station in
Denver) or the Jack/Bob/Mike/Dave/Tom “anti-
radio” or “we play everything” formats that origi-
nated in Canada and have spread to other countries
(although with mixed results).
Stations often combine their call letters and dial
position in on-air identifiers—especially if they are
rock stations. In Indianapolis, rocker WFBQ calls
itself Q95, and rhythmic CHR WBBM in Chicago
is B96. This practice generally involves rounding
off a frequency to the nearest whole number (102.7
as 103, or 96.9 as 97). The increase in the numbers
of stereo receivers with digital dial displays, how-
ever, has discouraged the use of rounding off.
Most stations now give their actual dial location
on the air, such as Rock 100.5 (“Rock One Hun-
dred Point Five”), KATT in Oklahoma City.
The Attitude
Aside from the station personalities, the imaging is
the only other element that really can set a station
apart from its competition. These pieces of audio
are used in various places throughout the broadcast
hour and “position” the radio station, and will estab-
lish the attitude of the station. For example, rock sta-
tions will almost always use a deep male voice with
phrases like “everything that rocks,” and attitude
statements like “turn it up, and rip the knob off.”
Adult Contemporary stations conversely will use a
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
411
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
more
conversational,
upbeat
station
voice
with
phrases like “more music while you work,” or
“today’s hits and all your favorites.”
The imaging will always incorporate the name
of the station in some way, and can be used in the
form of sweepers, liners and jingles. In the past,
imaging could last as long as 30 seconds, but the
recent trend is to keep them as short as possible—
sometimes as short as 5 or 8 seconds. The PD will
work closely with the imaging director, who is often
11.14 Key Personalities of Dayparts
M
ORNING DRIVE: Most morning jocks are friendly,
funny and entertaining, all keys to relating to the
target audience. Morning jocks generally talk more than air
talent in other dayparts because their shows are especially
service oriented. Morning-drive air talent are more than
mere jokesters—they provide the day’s survival information
to the audience: how cold (or hot) it will be, whether it will
rain (or snow), what time it is, frequent updates on traffic
problems that will keep them from dropping the kids at
daycare and getting to work on time and so on. Reports of
a pile-up on one expressway give listeners a chance to
switch their commuter routes—and the station a chance to
earn a brownie point.
Traditionally, morning drive lasted from 6 to 10 A.M.,
and it is still defined that way by Arbitron. For PDs and
morning jocks, however, the reality could be different.
People are spending more and more time in their cars as
the suburbs surrounding many large urban areas continue
to sprawl outward. Commutes take new forms (suburb to
suburb rather than suburb to city), and people’s work
schedules have changed to incorporate flex time or earlier
(or later) shifts. As a result, the real “drivetime” has
extended. In many markets, traffic builds to significant vol-
ume by 5:30 or even 5 A.M. Therefore, most large-market
stations and some midmarket stations begin their morning
shows at those earlier times. Some also end earlier, getting
to their midday programming by 9 A.M.
Morning jocks are often paired in teams of a lead DJ
and a sidekick—someone to bounce jokes off of—or a co-
anchor who can add to the act—commonly a male plus a
female. On most stations, the morning jock is the only per-
former permitted to violate format to any appreciable extent
(the “morning zoo” approach). Indeed, morning can be
almost music-free on some music stations. Normally, morn-
ing drivetime personalities are also the most highly paid,
but with that pay comes greater pressure. They have a
greater responsibility than other jocks because the
audience is bigger in the time period than at any other time
of day, and stations earn a substantial part (if not a major-
ity) of their revenue during that daypart. For most stations, “If
you don’t make it in the morning drive, you don’t make it at
all.” But how far are you willing to go to make it?
In many major markets, shock jocks rule the morning air-
waves, at least among the male audience aged 18 to 49.
These hosts (almost all are men) target that group with a mix
of crude sexual humor and innuendo, risqué audience phone
calls and titillating interviews with pop culture icons from
athletes to porn stars. Some of the best known, such as
Howard Stern and Opie & Anthony, have left broadcast
radio for less restrictive satellite or online services. And the
shock format is not confined entirely to mornings. Although
some stations downplay personality in favor of heavy doses
of music after 9 A.M., some practitioners of crude humor have
found success (at least for limited times) in afternoon drive-
time or evenings. Most large or medium markets probably
have at least one performer, local or via syndication, that
might be described in this vein. Some of the more well-
known names often associated with this style (or who have at
least attracted regular attention from the FCC for on-air
antics) besides those listed above include Doug “Grease-
man” Tracht, Mancow Muller and Bubba the Love Sponge.
The question for programmers is always, “What is best
for the station in my situation?” A number of factors affect
the decision as to whether the station should go the shock
route—including the target audience and the market’s taste
for the material, the talent’s track record (in terms of ratings
and FCC enforcement), and the station owner’s content
policies and expectations for revenue. These performers
can be consistent moneymakers, but the price can be
steep. Some advertisers will shy away, no matter how big
the ratings get. There is no easy answer, nor one that is
correct for all stations in all markets. Programmers need to
carefully juggle competing needs when selecting morning
talent. If you were programming a low- or mid-rated rock
412
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
one of the on-air personalities or the production
director, to establish the overall idea, and then the
imaging director will complete the clips and place
them
into
the
automation
system
for
use
in
rotation.
Most stations will use sweepers between songs
during music sweeps (hence the name). These
short, highly produced imaging elements include
the call letters, an identifying slogan, or air talent
identifier. They move the audience from one song
station with a so-so morning show, and Mancow was
available in your market, what would you do?
MIDDAY: The midday jock is frequently conversational in
style, warm and friendly. Incidental services (requiring talk)
during this daypart normally are curtailed—although not
eliminated—in favor of longer music sweeps. Most of the
audience is at work or school. Music rotations may be slo-
wed and more recurrents, golds and oldies added so as
not to seem too repetitious to the all-day, at-work audience.
Although there is still out-of-home listening during the
10 A.M. to 3 P.M. period, Arbitron data show that the
majority of listeners are at home or at work. Many midday
jocks capitalize on the dominantly female audience by
using liners (brief continuity between songs) that have
special appeal to women and by talking about what the
listener might be doing at home or after work. At-work listeners
may also be targeted through daytime-specific promotions
(giving away lunch to everybody in the office after entrants
have mailed in business cards or faxed in requests, for exam-
ple). Noontime may lend itself to special programming as
people leave the office or take a break from work; for example,
the all-request “dinner” hours popular on many country, AC,
oldies and rock stations.
AFTERNOON DRIVE: The afternoon jock (3 to 7 P.M.)
is more up-tempo, as is the music rotation during this period
if the station is dayparting. Teens are out of school, and
adults are driving home from work. In small markets, this
necessitates a delicate balance between teen-oriented
music and music suiting the moods and attitudes of the
going-home audience. Again, weather and traffic are
important in this period (especially traffic), although not
quite as much as in the morning. Information is more likely
to take the form of the afternoon jock alluding frequently to
evening activities—about how good it is to finish work and
to look forward to whatever events people in your audience
will be a part of that evening—a concert, a ball game, a
movie sneak preview and so on. By Thursday, and cer-
tainly on Friday, weekend plans become a focus.
EVENING: More teens and young adults are available to
listen at night, making this daypart especially strong for
CHR and urban stations, as well as younger-skewing rock
or country stations. The ability to use listener phone calls on
the air, juggling the phones along with music and every-
thing else, is an essential ingredient of many CHR evening
jocks’ shows. They may open the request lines and play
specific records for specific people, get listeners to intro-
duce songs or play along with pranks, or engage in short
funny bits (with the calls always edited before playback).
Because the majority of adults over 25 are doing
something other than listening to the radio (most often
watching television, dealing with children and household
chores and so on), AC stations, older rock outlets and other
adult formats may try slightly altering their programming in
the evening to attract an audience. Syndicated programs
such as Delilah or Rockline offer programming that is dif-
ferent yet similar enough to have broad appeal for the AC
or rock audience.
OVERNIGHTS: Only large-market stations typically still have
live air talent in overnights, from midnight to 6 A.M. But
regardless of whether the shift is live or voice tracked, the
jock’s attitude is usually one of camaraderie. “We’re all up
late tonight, aren’t we? We have to work nights and sleep
days.” This jock must commune with the audience: the taxi
drivers, revelers, police officers, all-night restaurant and
grocery store workers, insomniacs, parents up giving
babies two o’clock feedings, shift workers at factories,
bakers and the many others active between the hours of
midnight and 6 A.M. The commercial load is almost nil
during this period, so the jock can provide listeners with a
lot of uninterrupted music. If they’re not voice tracking it,
many stations will run network or syndicated material here
to save on costs or use some of this time period to offer
public-affairs programming.
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
413
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
to the next while reminding them of the station
they’re listening to (for diary purposes) and reinfor-
cing the station’s image, often by making aural
connections between other elements of popular cul-
ture and the station. Companies like TM Studios
(www.tmstudios.com) can provide produced imag-
ing spots or just the production elements (music,
sound effects, drop-ins from popular movies or
TV shows) for local producers to use in creating
these important pieces. Music skills as well as
creative audio production abilities are valuable
commodities in this regard. Some companies will
differentiate between different types of sweepers
by assigning them different names including stabs
or quickies, or categorize them into (a) sweeps,
(b) sweeps, and (c) sweeps.
Liners serve a similar imaging and transitional
purpose but are simple scripted voice tracks or live
reads without music or effects. They can be used to
promote upcoming station events, music coming up
after the break, or a general image for the station.
To be effective, however, liners must be kept fresh,
constantly rewritten and replaced.
Singing jingles, sometimes as long as 30 or
60 seconds, were frequently the centerpiece of
station imaging in most formats other than AOR
prior to the mid-1980s. Companies like JAM
Creative
Productions
(www.jingles.com)
still
produce short, custom radio IDs and jingles that
consist of a few bars of music with the station
call letters and identifying slogan sung over them.
Producers create several versions for use between
songs of different tempos and in different day-
parts. Stations that purchase a jingle package
generally receive not only complete jingles but
also the individual components (music tracks,
vocal elements, and so on) that they can remix
themselves. Although available for nearly any for-
mat, they are seldom used today except on oldies,
AC and country stations (as well as some news
and talk outlets). Historically-minded readers can
find examples of older jingles at both the JAM web-
site and at www.pams.com (PAMS Productions
was one of the original jingle producers in the
1950s).
The Spots
Just as there is no one “right” way to program a
radio station, there is no single set of clock formulas
that will drive a station to the top of the market.
Remember that a change in one area of the clock
will also change other aspects of the clock. Increas-
ing the number of commercials per hour to satisfy
demands for higher revenues means less room in a
given hour for music. Less music on a music inten-
sive station means fewer listeners, which in turn
leads to lower ratings, and then to lower revenues
in the long run. Spot loads will vary considerably,
depending on the format. For example, news-talk
stations historically carry the heaviest spot loads—
potentially as many as 18 or 20 minutes per hour.
Music intensive stations, however, generally do best
running between 8 to 12 minutes per hour. This
number may increase slightly during morning drive
when music is less of a focus (and the ads have
greater value).
Finding this delicate balance is often the work
of intense negotiation between the PD, the sales
manager and the general manager. Once an agree-
ment is made, there should be no deviation from the
plan until the time comes for a re-negotiation of the
current terms. Most companies will decide on one of
two systems by which to set the number of avails in
an hour, either by units or by time.
In a unit system, there is a definite number of
avails in a given hour, regardless of the duration of a
spot. Most radio commercials are either (:30) or
(:60) in length, but in a unit system, length is of little
concern. If the consensus of management is to run
three stopsets an hour with three avails per stopset,
there are only ever nine avails per hour, and stopsets
can be filled with any combination of spots. For
example, the stopset could only ever be as long as
three minutes (three sixty’s), or as short as a minute
and a half (three thirties). The stopset could also be
comprised of two sixties and a thirty, or two thirties
and a sixty, but never more than three commercials
running back-to-back. This strategy is employed
more often by programming-driven companies, and
often times both the listener and the advertiser win;
414
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the listener knows that the commercial breaks are
usually short, and the advertiser knows they won’t
be lost in the clutter. Also by limiting the number of
avails, a station can charge a premium price for each
of the avails because fewer exist.
In a time system, management agrees to allow
for a certain number of minutes per stopset. Using
the previous example of three stopsets an hour, now
with three minutes of avails per stopset, the commer-
cial load could significantly increase, and spot dura-
tion is of the utmost concern. In this scenario, the
stopset will still only be a maximum of three minutes
in length but could contain as many as six spots per
break, or conceivably as many as eighteen in a given
hour if all of the spots are (:30) in duration. Accord-
ing to a stopwatch, the same duration of time has
passed (three minutes) but perceptually the listener
has endured as many as six commercials in one
break. The danger in this scenario is that listeners
will perceive the station as having “too many com-
mercials,” and may be inclined to tune to another
station as soon as they hear the first commercial.
For the station’s relationship with advertisers, there
can be concerns about perceptions of clutter.
In these cases, stations may try to change lis-
tener perception by having long music sweeps.
Remember a change to one area of the clock
means changes to other areas of the clock. Stations
running “10 songs in a row,” or “50 minute music
hours” leave room for only one or two very long
breaks. A listener staying through a ten-song sweep
will have been tuned in for 35 to 45 minutes, or
three quarter hours. The tradeoff is the six- or
eight-minute commercial break that follows and
the second long stopset that will come up after just
one or two more songs. The strategy may work, at
least in the short run, if everybody in the market
follows
along.
The
risk
is
that
a
heavier-
than-normal spot load opens a station up to attack
by a “more music” competitor.
Perceptions that audiences consider commer-
cials to be, at best, a necessary evil, have led stations
to have kicked off new formats with no commercial
load whatsoever. In 2004 Nine-FM (WRZA, 99.9)
launched in Chicago with 9,999 songs in a row and
a promise to restrict the commercial load to just nine
units per hour afterward. A risk-filled tension
always exists between the number of commercials
and the number of interruptions that can be toler-
ated. Setting the audience up to believe that commer-
cials will be non-existent or severely restricted makes
the likelihood of long-term station success very lim-
ited—the revenue has to come from somewhere, and
advertising is usually the most efficient means of
generating substantial revenue (if you have a sub-
stantial audience). One key to understanding radio
programming strategy is to compare stations with
regard to commercial load and the number of inter-
ruptions per hour (stopsets). Because advertising is
necessary to keep the lights on, management must
establish a policy that is reflected in clocks and
stick to it (see 11.15).
The Clock in Practice
Once all of the elements are established—the music
is assembled into categories, the station imaging is in
place, the number and duration of stopsets are
decided upon and the air talent is selected—then
11.15 Quality in Commercials
S
pot quality and production is critical to the station
and advertiser’s success. Too often, radio spots
(including promos and PSAs) are full of clichéd copy and
fail to grab the audience’s attention. Listeners don’t so
much hate commercials as they hate poorly executed,
pointless commercials that don’t address a recognizable
need of the audience. Commercials should sell the
audience on the product or service by explaining how
that product or service fills some need or desire, and they
must complement the format rather than clash with it.
Stations that will take any spot so long as it’s paid for, or
rely on poorly or untrained salespeople as copywriters
and producers risk alienating their audiences and failing
in the long run. Stations best serve their audiences and
their advertisers by making sure that the commercials
they run fit the format, address the target audience
directly, and are creative, effective selling tools aired in
a relatively uncluttered environment.
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
415
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the PD can finalize the clocks and prepare them for
broadcast. The clock can be created in scheduling
programs like Selector, and the computer “knows”
that at six minutes after the hour it should play the
next power song. Because the computer plans ahead,
it will adhere to the usual restrictions, making sure,
for example, that another song by the same artist
has not played recently and is not scheduled too
closely in the future.
Besides structuring information (news, weather,
traffic), promos and commercials, the clock also
structures the music for a given hour. The music por-
tion of an hour depends on the number of commer-
cials to be aired. A commercial-free hour, for
example, requires many more songs than an hour
with 14 spots. A clock for a basic morning-drive
hour designed to handle one newscast and 16 minutes
of commercials appears in 11.16. This leaves room
for up to 10 or 11 songs, depending on how much
the DJ talks (if the station has a star morning person-
ality, there may actually be a clock with little or no
music scheduled). The music for this morning hour
with approximately 10 songs might consist of four
powers, two currents, two recurrents, one power
gold and one gold. The service elements—news,
weather, traffic—are spaced more or less evenly
throughout the hour. As is typical of a contemporary
music station, news has been placed in the middle of a
quarter-hour. Station imaging, promotion and identi-
fication elements, either recorded or voiced live by the
air talent, occur between every song.
The clock in 11.17 is intended for an early-
evening show. The music selection contains 12 songs
made up of six powers, two currents, two recurrents,
one power gold and one gold. Note the long music
sweep from before the top of the hour until approxi-
mately 20 or 22 minutes past. This selection fits a
CHR or urban contemporary station but would be
different on a rock or mainstream country station
(where the rotation of currents would be slower and
more golds would be played). A midday clock might
look similar to this one but with more golds and
recurrents scheduled to slow down the current rota-
tion a bit so at-work listeners aren’t hearing the same
song four or five times. The rotation pace of the
currents would then pick up again during afternoon
drivetime and evening.
Once the music log is completed using the clock
as the template, it is merged with the traffic (com-
mercial) log to create one seamless schedule known
as a broadcast log that then is loaded in the on-air
computer in the control room. In some cases, the log
may even include scrollable live copy or other per-
formance notes for the air talent. The automation
software then will take over and play the log element
by element until the jock in the control room stops it
to talk on air. In voicetracked environments, the
automation system will simply keep on running
until interrupted. In some stations, the automation
software is put in “auto” at 7 P.M. on a Friday,
and is left running unattended until the morning
team shows up on Monday.
11.16
Morning Drive
ID Music Sweeper
Music
Liner/Promo
Music
Music
Sweeper
Music
Commercial
News
3 Commercials
Music
Sweeper
Music
Liner/Promo
Music
6 Commercials
Music
Promo
Commercial
Music
6 Commercials
Traffic/WX 
Traffic/WX
Traffic/WX 
11.17
Evening Hot Clock
ID Music Sweeper
Music
Liner/Promo
Music
Sweeper
Music
Liner
Music
5 Commercials
Music
Sweeper
Music
Liner/Promo
Music
6 Commercials
Music
Liner
Music
5 Commercials
Music
416
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Controlling “the Sound”
Many of the tricks used by program directors to con-
trol the sound of a radio station are not immediately
noticeable to listeners but greatly affect the presenta-
tion of a station on-air. Perhaps you’ve heard a sta-
tion that just sounds better than its competition, but
you don’t know why or can’t quite put your finger on
it. That sense is the cumulative result of all of the
small factors that contribute to “the sound.”
Part of controlling the sound is the processing
that is placed on the station. Once the audio stream
leaves the control room, it passes through a series of
audio processors before making it to the transmitter
and eventually over the air. Most of the processors
that are used in broadcast facilities have endless set-
tings, and a good program director will work with
the engineer to get the processing just right. Often-
times this processing will use significant compression
on the audio signal, making it “sparkle” when it hits
your receiver.
Another trick programmers will use is speeding
the music—just slightly—before it is placed into the
automation system. It was falsely believed for many
years that top 40 stations sped up the playback
speed on their turntables slightly to fit more music
(or spots) into an hour, but that wasn’t the reason.
Instead, programmers speed music both to give their
station more energy and thus take energy away from
their competition. If you hear a song on a station
that is speeding music, then tune in to the competi-
tion, that same song on the competition’s station
seems to drag on which makes the competing station
seem slow and boring (the kiss of death).
Even on an iPod or CD, the music will never
sound the same as it does on the radio station speeding
the music. A famous example was a song released
called “Baker Street” by Gerry Rafferty in 1977.
Most stations playing that record sped the song up
significantly, and in that context the song was a huge
hit, making it to #2 on the Billboard hot 100. How-
ever the album, “city to city” was one of the most
returned albums in music history, because the song
never sounded the same at home as it did on the
radio. If people returned records because the songs
didn’t sound the same, then it is likely that the same
perception would exist when comparing, for instance,
two CHR stations. The listener will choose the one
that makes them feel better and more energetic.
Another consideration for program directors is
the overall tightness of the radio station—that is,
how quickly the station moves from one element to
the next. In the past, this was a trademark of a good
DJ in the studio who was “jockeying” records, carts
and tapes while also talking on air. In today’s radio
environment where almost everything is automated,
the degree of tightness falls back on the program
director. Tightness is achieved by placing trip tones
or aux marks on the audio files before they are
loaded into the automation system. These trip
tones are inaudible cues that tell the computer it is
time to begin playing the next element on the log.
Without the use of trip tones, the song (or sweeper,
commercial or voicetrack) would completely fade
out to “dead air” before beginning the next element
(Eeek!). The more dead air, the more listener fatigue
sets in. Subconsciously, the listener feels exhausted
just from listening to the station in part because of
the constant, jerky starting and stopping of audio.
With proper trip tones placed on all audio, a smooth
fade happens between all elements; when one song
fades out, another begins before reaching dead air.
This also helps to aid in the pacing of a station,
keeping it moving forward and not stopping or los-
ing momentum.
Every program director has his or her own style
that influences “the sound” of the radio station and
helps to provide the station with its own unique per-
sonality. No two program directors will use the
same list of tricks and procedures to make their sta-
tions unique. As discussed at the beginning of this
section, ultimately the listener decides the PD’s suc-
cess or failure when a new ratings book is released.
Marketing and Promotion
The modern radio station pays almost as much
attention to marketing as to programming. Market-
ing is essential for keeping a station from simply dis-
appearing in the crowd. A carefully designed and
executed social media strategy is critical for drawing
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
417
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
listeners to the community the station wants to cre-
ate, and stations continue to use television, newspa-
pers, billboards, bumper stickers, bus cards, cab tops
and other graphic media because they also help
reach the target audience. Promotional stunts have
long been the special province of pop radio and
involve the cooperation of programming personnel.
If this chapter’s hypothetical station were trying to
launch in a large market, the station might need as
much as $2.5 million the first year for promotion.
Station promotion takes two forms: on-air and
off-air. On-air promotion is suited for retaining
current listeners through reinforcing their positive
image of the station or extending the amount of
time they listen through contesting or other incen-
tives. Social media are also suited for image
reinforcement and are the best means of building
a stronger relationship with your existing audience.
But social media platforms can also be used to
attract new listeners—if your existing audience
will serve in the messenger role. Creating evange-
lists out of your most dedicated listeners can be
very effective—we all respond more favorably if
we get a recommendation from somebody we
know and trust. For a new station, attracting
new
listeners
without
that
personal
touch
is
increasingly difficult in a cluttered market space
and requires a significant investment in off-air pro-
motion, often in conjunction with on-air stunts and
events, to have any chance of success. Going viral is
the goal.
Off-air alternatives include billboards, televi-
sion, online and direct mail. The first two are useful
for broad market awareness; the latter two for
more targeted campaigns. In a medium-sized mar-
ket (500,000), television and billboard advertising
might run $25,000 a month for good exposure. It
may cost five times that in a Dallas- or Chicago-
sized market. Not only are unit prices higher in
large markets but more territory must usually be
covered. Reaching the whole population in one
market with a set of painted billboards may require
35 billboards, for example, although a similar
showing in Dallas would require 125 billboards
at an average cost of several thousand dollars
each per month.
Some markets are now utilizing digital bill-
boards which, though more expensive per month,
give the station the ability to change what is on the
billboard weekly or even daily. Television advertis-
ing, which is even more expensive but often neces-
sary for launching a new format, can help generate
the kind of top-of-mind awareness among the audi-
ence that drives ratings. Occasionally, a radio sta-
tion will be able to trade advertising with a
television station, offering mutual promotion of
each other’s programming.
Station promotion can have three possible
goals: to build audience share (by extending the lis-
tening of the current audience), to build cume (by
attracting new listeners), or to simply enhance the
audience’s expectations of the station without hav-
ing to meet an immediate ratings goal (positioning).
In any case, it is essential that the promotional effort
be focused on the listener and the specific goal if it is
to succeed. Too often, promotions happen because
of advertisers’ or a station’s own economic concerns
rather than through a focused attempt to achieve
one or more of these three goals (see 11.11, which
discusses the way the industry pays to get songs on
the air).
Contests can build the station’s share of audi-
ence if they are constructed to extend a listener’s
time spent with the station (see 11.18). Thus, their
elements need to stretch over multiple quarter hours
(but be careful not to overdo it). To build the cumu-
lative audience, a sufficient budget is needed for
reaching and enticing potential listeners with bill-
boards, print or television or direct mail. In addition,
stations should concentrate their efforts on one pro-
motion at a time. Multiple concurrent promotions
simply dilute the impact of each and may confuse
and frustrate listeners. At the same time, plenty of
FCC rules and regulations apply to contests and
other station promotion (see 11.19).
Community involvement projects are as impor-
tant as contests for programming and promoting a
successful radio station. The station must be highly
visible at local events to gain a strong, positive, local
image. The event should be one that is of significant
interest for the station’s target audience and that fits
their lifestyle and the station’s image. The following
418
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
are community promotions that, depending on the
format and market, might benefit both the station
and the community:
■The station’s van (often wrapped or decaled with
the station’s logos, armed with CDs, bumper
stickers and T-shirts) sets up a tent and broadcasts
live outside a venue before a big concert.
■Station jocks emceeing community events or the
county fair.
■Two or three jocks take the van and sound
equipment to the beach (or a public park) on the
Fourth of July to provide music and “freebies” to
listeners and friends.
■Stations near rivers or lakes may purchase (or
more likely hire) a boat to cruise around passing
out t-shirts, drink coozies or other recreation
goodies to people who are listening to the radio
station on weekends in the summer.
■The station runs announcements and then helps
collect clothing and other items to benefit the vic-
tims of a recent tornado by letting people drop off
goods at the station and has the station van parked
at different collection points in the community.
Radio stations will also seek out various charity
events in the community that also matter to the lis-
teners. For example, in most communities, radio
11.18 Contesting
T
he traditional promotional stunt is the contest, but the
industry favors the term “word game.” Many people
think they cannot win contests, but they like to play games.
For many stations, a contest approach emphasizes a
superprize of $25,000 or more. Such amounts can be
offered only a few times each year (during the Arbitron
survey sweeps). And because a station cannot afford to risk
losing the big prize on the first day of the game, winning
has to be made difficult.
Traditional promotion theory holds that people are more
likely to think they can win a small prize than succeed in a
$25,000 treasure hunt or win a safe containing $50,000.
With a superprize, one person is made happy, but thou-
sands are disappointed. Thus, it would be better to break up
the $25,000 prize into $250 prizes and scatter them
through a more extended period. But the growth of huge
national station groups has added an interesting twist. Those
stations regularly pool resources and jointly run a contest
with larger daily or weekly prizes than would be possible for
a single station or single market cluster. Thus, instead of giv-
ing away $102 (or whatever number corresponds to a sta-
tion’s dial position) in the birthday game, a station may
award several thousand dollars to the one hundredth caller.
The catch is that the same prize is being offered simulta-
neously by the morning jocks on dozens or hundreds of sta-
tions across the country, making the odds of winning
infinitesimal, although many in the local audience may not
realize it unless they listen very carefully to the contest rules.
There are three steps to properly promoting a contest:
(1) Tell ‘em you’re gonna do it: “It’s coming—your chance
to win a zillion dollars!” (2) Do it: “Listen every morning at
7:20 for the song of the day. When you hear it played
later in the day, be the first caller at 555-0000 and win the
money!” (3) Tell ‘em you did it: “KPPP congratulates Mary
Jones of your town, winner of a zillion dollars in the KPPP
song-of-the-day game!” (and preferably include Mary’s
hyperexcited response to winning as part of the message).
It is important to avoid giving exact addresses on the air.
The station might be legally culpable if a robbery or other
crime occurs. Also, in order to discourage possible
unpleasantness for their listeners, many DJs do not use the
last names of callers on the air.
Exercise caution when recording and airing telephone
conversations. It is illegal to record and play back a
phone call unless the person being recorded is informed of
the recording and consents before recording starts or
could reasonably assume from circumstances that the call
might be recorded and aired. Thus, most stations avoid
call-outs because the phone-call target does not respond
spontaneously after going through the consent process.
Listeners who call in to the studio phone line, however, are
assumed to be aware that their voice may go out on the
air. Management should seek legal counsel on call-out
questions and should write specific instructions for pro-
gramming personnel on how call-out calls are to be
handled.
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
419
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
stations are heavily involved in events like Relay for
Life, and will align themselves with large national
charities like the American Cancer Society, Ameri-
can Red Cross or the National Diabetes Association.
Some stations will also leverage their audiences to
put on radiothons once a year to benefit charities
like St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital or Chil-
dren’s Miracle Network. It is perfectly acceptable for
11.19 Constraints on Programming and Promotion
R
adio broadcasters have to be aware of myriad rules,
regulations and guidelines. To keep up with them,
radio programmers read trade journals, retain legal coun-
sel specializing in communication law, and join the
National Association of Broadcasters (NAB) as well as
state broadcast organizations. Programmers have to be
aware of legal constraints that may limit their ingenuity.
Illegal or unethical practices such as fraud, lotteries, plug-
ola and the like can cost a fine, a job or even a license.
Contests and Games The principal point to remember
about on-air contests and games is to keep them open and
honest, fully disclosing the rules of the game to listeners.
Conniving to make a contest run longer or to produce a
certain type of winner means trouble.
The perennial problem with many brilliant contest ideas is
that, by the FCC’s definition, they are lotteries—and adver-
tising of lotteries is explicitly prohibited by federal law
(although there are many exemptions for things like legal
commercial casinos and Indian gaming, charity bingo nights,
and state lotteries). If your contest includes a prize, requires
some form of consideration and is a game of chance, it is a
lottery and probably illegal. (Consideration here refers to
payment of some kind—which could be money or extraordi-
nary effort—that needs to be made in order for someone to
be allowed to participate in a contest.) Consult the station’s
lawyers or the NAB legal staff if there is the slightest question.
Because of the way it conducts national contests across
multiple stations in the group, at least one large group has
also run afoul of the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) rules
regarding deceptive advertising practices. The stations were
accused of misleading listeners about the nature of the con-
test and their chances of winning by failing to make the
multimarket, multistation nature of the contest sufficiently clear
in the rules (which must be broadcast several times each day
during the run of the promotion) and by broadcasting the
winners’ comments without identifying them as residents of
other markets (thus implying they were local residents).
Sounds That Mislead Similarly, opening promos or com-
mercials with sirens or other attention-getting gimmicks (such as
“Bulletin!”) cause listeners to believe unjustifiably that they are
about to receive vital information. Listener attention can be
gained in other more responsible ways that do not offend FCC
rules or deceive listeners. Monitoring locally produced com-
mercials or promos for misleading production techniques is
especially important. Similarly, hoaxes perpetrated by air tal-
ent, even in the name of entertainment, can result in FCC pen-
alties. For example, a station in St. Louis was cited for airing a
phony emergency alert (on April Fool’s Day) that claimed that
the United States was under attack. Particularly offensive in the
commission’s view was the DJ’s use of the actual emergency
alert tone at the beginning of the bit to heighten the realism.
Plugola and Payola Fifty years ago, the radio industry
was rocked by a series of payola scandals involving some
of the industry’s biggest names and stations, in which bribes
were paid by record promoters to DJs in return for playing
certain songs on the air. The bribes could be in the form of
cash but just as often involved drugs, sex, trips or other
inducements. Although a number of reforms were imple-
mented in the 1960s, record promotion (the attempt to
influence airplay) remains a high-stakes, high-pressure part of
the music and radio businesses. Similarly, announcers who
“plug” their favorite bar, restaurant or theater (in return for
goods or services) are asking for trouble for themselves and
the licensees (plugola). Certainly, any tainted jock is likely to
be fired instantly. Most responsible licensees require air per-
sonnel to sign statements once every six months confirming
that they have not been engaging in any form of payola or
plugola; some require drug tests for their employees.
Program Logs Any announcement associated with a
commercial venture should be logged as commercial matter
(CM), even though the FCC has done away with require-
ments for program logs per se. Logs have many practical
applications aside from the former legal requirement,
including advertising billing, record keeping, format main-
tenance and format organization.
420
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
a station to ask listeners to donate to a cause, and
most listeners are happy to oblige for their favorite
station, but care should be taken to not ask listeners
to give too much or too often as it may have the
opposite effect and alienate the listener.
Many station owners now expect promotional
efforts (aside from those done for charity) to directly
generate nontraditional revenue for the station.
These events are similar to traditional promotion in
the ways they try to connect the station to the audi-
ence’s lifestyle. But nowadays, the station’s sales
staff (or a single, dedicated NTR account executive)
works with the promotion director and PD to put
together a package that will involve several large
advertisers in an event. The projects can take many
forms, but a typical one for many is the “Taste
of …” The stations sell sponsorships to food and bev-
erage distributors, which gain the sponsors plenty of
visibility on all promotional literature and often
exclusive rights in their product category to sell at
the event (a single beer distributor, for example).
At the same time, the parent station group can
use the event to promote several of its adult formats
(AC, news/talk, country, some variants of rock and
urban) on its other stations. Local restaurants can
purchase booth space to offer their products. Live
music or other entertainment can be involved, creat-
ing an additional potential revenue stream in the
form of tickets for attendance (but be sure the sta-
tion can at least cover the cost!).
Some stations will go so far as to build entire
promotions in an NTR environment. For example,
a sales rep may get a local car dealership to agree to
trade a Jeep Wrangler in exchange for being given
the promotion plus the cost of additional advertis-
ing, and a local marina or powersports dealer is
brought on board to trade a JetSki with a similar
arrangement. The station makes money on the
advertising schedule and now has a Jeep and a JetSki
to giveaway, simply for mentioning the dealers in
airtime that would have already been dedicated to
a promotion. Theoretically, everyone wins: the sta-
tion has a great grand prize to give away just in time
for summer (and makes money), and because of the
listener’s frenzy to try to win the grand prize, the
advertisers build name recognition (and hopefully
sell additional vehicles) by being associated with the
promotion.
The key to strong promotion of a station is vis-
ibility, and the station should be everywhere the tar-
get listener would be in the community. This is
becoming an increasing struggle for those stations
who continue to cut back both promotion and air
staff. Radio stations need people to succeed, and
those stations that find ways to retain their staff
and keep the station visible will be those that suc-
ceed in the coming years.
News and Other
Nonentertainment Programming
The FCC has no formal requirements for nonenter-
tainment
programming,
although
licensees
are
required to ascertain the problems, needs and inter-
ests of their communities (by whatever means they
deem appropriate) and to provide programming that
addresses those issues. Each station’s public file must
contain a quarterly list of programming that the
licensee has broadcast to meet those needs.
Stations targeting younger listeners often do not
want to carry news, believing that their listeners are
bored by it. (However, adult-oriented stations must
provide information to their audiences, especially
during morning drivetime.) News, public affairs
and “other” nonentertainment programming create
a flow or continuity problem for the format. The
complaint is, “We have to shut down the radio sta-
tion to air that junk.” Junk, of course, is any pro-
gramming not directly related to the music format.
However, that assumes that all nonentertainment
content must be long form. The programmer’s trick
is weaving into the format an appropriate kind and
amount of nonentertainment material, which can be
effectively woven into any format. Much important
information, from traffic and weather reports to
upcoming events in the community, can be dished
out in 60, 30 or 10 seconds, for example. Public
service announcements (PSAs) are both nonenter-
tainment and community-oriented programming,
and a station can make significant contributions to
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
421
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the community welfare with an aggressive PSA pol-
icy. The key for programmers is to be as careful and
deliberate about the choices they make with this
material as they are with their music. These nonen-
tertainment elements should be as timely and rele-
vant to the lives of the target audience as the
music. The morning jock shouldn’t be wasting sev-
eral minutes rehashing the weekend on Monday
morning—he or she should be letting listeners
know whether to grab their umbrellas or their sun-
glasses as they struggle to get out their doors and off
to work. On Thursday and Friday, the afternoon-
drive talent should be focused on events coming up
that weekend as well as on helping the audience
avoid the overturned semi at the airport freeway
exit.
Radio
will
probably
always
be
a
service
medium, and broadcasters will always differ on
what constitutes community service. In a competi-
tive major market served by a number of communi-
cations media such as newspaper, cable, television,
radio, MMDS, LPTV and DTH satellite, the FM
radio station that plays wall-to-wall rock music is
doubtlessly providing a service, even though it is
solely a music service. When the audience has so
many options for music, from iPods to satellite
radio, a programmer must ask just what it is that
the station provides that will convince the audience
to listen. In information-poor markets, owners may
elect to mix talk shows with music, air editorial
comments on community affairs, and in general pro-
vide useful information to the community. The ser-
vices and information provided should be based on
competitive market factors, the owners’ and man-
agers’ personal choices, and a realistic understand-
ing of the role a radio station can play in the
particular market situation.
The Big News Question
Do listeners want news on music stations? Early
studies by consultants concluded that a large per-
centage of rock listeners were “turned off” by
news. These same listeners also hated commercials,
PSAs and anything else not related to music and fun.
Some
studies
found,
however,
that
everybody
wanted lots of news on their music stations. More
contemporary views hold that the task for program-
mers is to find news and information that is relevant
to the target audience because it will provide an
important component in the overall station identity.
Listeners do value information—but only if they
understand how it is relevant to their lives right
now.
Some thinking on news scheduling hinges on the
habits of listeners and Arbitron’s method of calculat-
ing ratings by the quarter-hour: The idea is to hold a
listener for at least five minutes in any quarter hour
by playing some music so that the station will get
credit in a listener diary even if the listener tunes
away at news time. News is therefore often placed
in the middle of one or two 15-minute periods each
hour. This strategy assumes that a significant num-
ber of listeners are turned away by news. Music sta-
tions, especially those targeting younger listeners,
have generally eliminated newscasts except in morn-
ing drivetime.
Journalistic Content
Having decided where to put news, the programmer
must then decide how to handle it. For some sta-
tions, it is enough to have jocks (or sidekicks) rip
and read newswire copy as it comes out of the
machine.
Some
have
been
tempted
to
satisfy
the need for local news by simply stealing from the
local
newspaper
or
USA
Today.
Programmers
tempted to go this route should be aware, however,
that stations have been successfully sued under copy-
right law for engaging in this practice. Although the
facts of the news cannot be copyrighted, the specific
expression of those facts can be.
On a slightly more elevated level, there are now
local news services available that will provide local
and regional news (including traffic and weather) for
any station willing to pay for the service. The best
known of these is Metro, a service that Westwood
One sold to Clear Channel in 2011. The advantage
to the station is the ability to deliver timely and valu-
able local information at less than what it would
cost to hire its own news staff. The disadvantage is
the loss of any exclusivity. The same reporter filing
422
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the story for your station on the downtown fire and
resulting traffic jam at 8:05 A.M. is likely to be on
your competition at 8:08 (or 8:03).
Another option is to enter into a joint agreement
with one of the local television stations or the local
newspaper. The local evening television news anchor
or a sports reporter may be a valuable addition to the
radio station’s morning show, and the teaming has
promotional advantages for each company. Some
clustered stations have adopted a variation of this
cross-promotional approach if the cluster includes a
news or news/talk AM station—the FM music sta-
tions get their morning news from the AM station
news staff. Opinions are divided about the advisabil-
ity of identifying the anchor as from the FM or the
AM station during an FM newscast; some stations
believe that maintaining a single brand identity is cru-
cial to the station’s image and success, while others
trade on the legitimacy associated with the news sta-
tion by identifying the anchor as being from that sta-
tion. The lack of exclusivity is still an issue.
Programmers who set the highest goals for
themselves do well to hire at least two persons to
staff the news operation who trade anchoring and
reporting duties during the day. This news operation
would be extremely luxurious for a music station,
however. The typical full-time news staff in radio
stations
throughout
the
country—if
they
have
one—is one person, perhaps supplemented by part-
time stringers or a service. And even at stations that
have a news staff, the news staff is most likely serv-
ing multiple stations in a market.
Network and Syndicated
Programming
For economic reasons or other factors, stations may
not wish to locally program 24 hours a day, 7 days a
week. Thanks to digital technology, satellites and the
internet, national or regional programming is easily
available from either a radio network or a radio syn-
dicator. Both offer similar types of programming, but
they can be distinguished by the nature of the rela-
tionship between the program supplier and the local
station. Networks provide an integrated, full-service
product (music, news, air talent, national spots, other
features) that airs simultaneously on all affiliated sta-
tions, while syndicators provide one element (a single
program, a music service and so on) to individual
stations that may sometimes air the material at differ-
ent times.
National
and
regional
syndication
can
be
divided into three categories: short form, long form
and continuous music formats. A program of suffi-
ciently broad appeal can run in more than one for-
mat (thus increasing the odds that the supplier will
be able to sell the program in most markets). Sta-
tions use short-form programs as spice in the sched-
ule, airing most longer syndicated fare on weekends
or at night (some network material may air in other
dayparts). Many syndicators and networks also pro-
vide material not only for broadcast but also for
online platforms (podcasts, website content, etc.).
Short-form offerings include individual network
newscasts as well as syndicated programs and series.
Many syndicators provide material not only for
broadcast but also for online platforms (podcasts
and other digital content). Familiar long-form pro-
gramming includes shows that run several hours on
a daily or weekly basis, for example, Cumulus’
American Country Countdown with Kix Brooks or
American Top 40 with Ryan Seacrest from Premiere
Radio Networks (a Clear Channel subsidiary). In
addition to Cumulus and Premiere, major national
syndicators include Dial Global (www.dial-global.
com), Westwood One and United Stations (www.
usrn.com).
Continuous music formats are just what the
name suggests—24-hour, 7-day-a-week music selec-
tions. Until the late 1970s, stations programmed
their own music or purchased long-form all-music
programming
tapes
from
such
syndicators
as
Drake-Chenault. Syndicated formats are available
from a number of companies, including many of
those mentioned above. The increased availability
of satellite delivery in the 1980s brought a new
type of national music programming service—the
full-time,
live
network
radio
format.
Modern
satellite-delivered networks supply the combined ser-
vices of a traditional network (news and advertising)
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
423
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
and a formatted program service (music and enter-
tainment
programs).
Satellite
Music
Network
(SMN) was the first provider of real-time satellite
radio in ten different music formats, including two
versions of country, two rock formats, two formats
targeted toward adult African-Americans, two adult
contemporary formats, one version of nostalgia and
one version of oldies. That service was eventually
consolidated with ABC Radio (www.abcradio.com),
and is now owned by Citadel. Dial Global, part of the
TM Studios company, is another major provider of
network music formats. There are others who offer a
limited number of formats, including United Stations.
The decision to go with one of these services
instead of locally generated programming can reduce
operating costs by one-half. About half of all com-
mercial stations use at least some national or regional
radio programming, from overnight filler to 24-hour
turnkey operations (in turnkey arrangements, man-
agement is turned over to another entity). Although
local
programming
is
desirable,
nationally
pro-
grammed song selections are based on the kinds of
professional research that smaller local stations find
difficult to afford. Using a network or syndicated for-
mat package, a small-market station can achieve a
consistent “big-market” sound with a recognized
appeal to audiences and advertisers.
Network formats offer a complete package that
includes practically everything but local commer-
cials. Syndicated formats at their most basic provide
only music that is intended for use on fully auto-
mated stations. A station running a syndicated for-
mat may choose to run without air talent or may use
local air talent, or for an additional fee the syndica-
tor may also provide voice-tracking service. Unlike
networks, format syndicators traditionally do not
sell commercial time or produce newscasts.
Network formats are generally available on a
barter basis (two minutes per hour is the norm),
although stations in unrated markets or brand-new
stations may be required to take the service on a
cash-plus-barter contract. Full-time satellite program-
ming eliminates the need for large staffs, large facilities
and large equipment budgets. In the most extreme
form, current digital automation systems allow sta-
tions to replace a complex of air studios, production
studios and a programming/production staff of several
people with a small production studio (for local com-
mercials, weather forecasts and so on), an on-air com-
puter and a staff of one or two. In smaller markets,
going with such a service may allow a reformatted
station to break even in less than a year.
Like a locally produced format, the network or
syndicated service operates from a clock, each hour
following a set pattern of music sweeps, some com-
bination of mandatory and optional stopsets and
perhaps other material (jingles, sweepers and so
on). The typical network clock shown in 11.20
might be used in the daytime for an oldies or AC
format. There are 11 minutes of avails in three stop-
sets: 2 minutes for the network (the first minute in
each mandatory break) and 9 for the local station.
Also note the long music sweep (or two long sweeps
if the local station doesn’t take the optional break at
about 35 minutes after the hour), and note the
opportunities for localization (liners to be recorded
by the network air talent as well as things that can
be done within the station breaks).
Local stopsets and other content are triggered at
the local station by a network command using subau-
dible tones (different tones can be used to trigger dif-
ferent local elements). After the three- or four-minute
11.20
Network Clock
Music
Sweeper
Music
Liner 
Music
Jingle
Music
Sweeper
Music
Liner 
Music
Network 
Promo
Mandatory 
Break
Music
Jingle
Music
Liner
Music
Liner
Music/Opt. 
Break
Sweeper
Music
Jingle
Music
Liner
Music
Mandatory 
Break
Sweeper
Music
Jingle
Music
Legal ID
424
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
break, the station’s automation system then seam-
lessly rejoins the network at the appropriate point.
For liners, the network channel is kept open, so the
liner plays over the music as a song fades or the intro
begins.
In the late 1990s, many of the networks and syn-
dicators settled on a single technological standard for
satellite receivers provided by StarGuide Digital Net-
works (www.starguidedigital.com). At each manda-
tory break, the local station must fill the time with
local content, such as commercials, promos, PSAs,
weather and traffic. The network then uses this time
to send important information (last-minute changes in
the network’s lineup of air talent or the network’s
spot log, for example) or other material (such as cop-
ies of the network commercials for use in hours where
local stations are not using the full network feed) to
the affiliated stations using their regular channel. In an
optional break, the network will program a precisely
timed song so stations that don’t have local spots
scheduled there can continue with music.
It’s a system that can be a bit awkward at times
for the network PD—after all, how many songs in a
particular format remain popular and run exactly
3:30? The timed song is generally a secondary gold
or oldies because the programmer wouldn’t want to
miss playing a top current hit in its regular rotation.
The key to successfully operating with a satellite-
delivered format is effective localization—making the
station sound like a part of the community even
though the programming isn’t locally produced. Net-
works offer major-market-quality personalities, thor-
oughly tested and carefully scheduled music and
(sometimes) network news.
Another part of their service is aimed at helping
stations localize the product, but it is always up to
the local station to direct the effort. At the request of
the local station, network talent will record local
station IDs, liners and other voice tracks (intros to
weather or news, contest wraps so that the tenth
caller sounds like she’s talking to the network DJ
and so on). These are then sent to the local station
for insertion in the programming. Most stations
have their call letters or slogans voice tracked by
the appropriate network talent. Placed at the start
of every break, song intro or backsell (telling the
audience what music is coming up or what just
played), the slogan sounds to the listener like the
network DJ is at the station. Most of this process
is really common sense and involves little more
than the kinds of things a programmer would do if
the air talent were indeed at the station (for example,
having the air talent repeat the call letters or slogan
when coming out of music, so the station and music
are associated in the listener’s mind).
But it’s surprising how many stations fail to fol-
low through and wind up sounding like a satellite
station because they create localizing material too
infrequently or irregularly. Others make the mistake
of completely eliminating local programming and
production personnel, leaving account executives to
write and produce commercials and the receptionist
to voice track a weather forecast a couple of times a
day—employees who are often without the training
or talent to effectively execute those tasks.
Local information remains important: regardless
of the market, people still want the weather forecast;
they want survive-the-day information like traffic
during the morning and afternoon drivetimes, and
they expect the local radio station to provide it. Many
network-affiliated stations adopt a middle-ground
approach, running local information in morning dri-
vetime and perhaps during one or two additional
shifts during the day while using the satellite primar-
ily at night and on weekends. Most networks require
the affiliated stations to air the scheduled network
spots, however, even during hours when the station
is not airing the network programming.
One downside to running full-service satellite-
delivered music programming is the lack of control
at the local station. Sometimes the network person-
ality talks too much or makes inappropriate com-
ments.
One
station
became
upset
when
the
network DJ (in Dallas) told Christmas listeners to
“avoid the crowds and stay in today,” which was
then followed by local commercials asking people
to do exactly the opposite! By choosing a format
syndicator, a station may exert more control because
the music and all other program elements (especially
DJ tracks) can be located (and therefore altered or
eliminated as needed) at the station. The price of
such control, however, is paying someone to mind
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
425
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the format, to handle voice tracking and ads. For
locally controlled stations, this is not a huge con-
cern, and format syndication works well. For an
automated station with a distant owner and a skele-
ton staff, however, the network format is a better
option.
Concerts and Specials
Special music programs have long been popular with
both stations and advertisers. Concerts command
premium prices because they provide exclusive access
to top-ranked music in a live setting. Some acts are
particularly valuable because they cross over a variety
of station formats (for example, from country to AC,
like Shania Twain or Alternative to CHR, like Green
Day), making it fairly easy for some music shows to
air on at least one station in most markets. Since the
mid-1990s, however, only a few musical megastars
have been able to attract audiences on the scale nec-
essary for both meeting the costs associated with
national production and distribution and justifying
local stations’ preemption of regular programming.
(Access to these rare concerts and major performers
remains beyond the financial reach of most local sta-
tions on an individual basis.)
Syndicators capable of recording such shows
generally offer them to stations on a barter or
cash-plus-barter basis at prices ranging from $25 to
$50 per hour in small markets to several hundred dol-
lars per hour in large markets. Networks may include
these music specials as part of the full-service network
programming of music, news and sports. Networks
can also go into the syndication business, offering
music specials on a station-by-station basis.
As with any other type of network program, the
key to revenue for a music special or concert series is
the size of its cleared audience. Fitting a particular
concert or series of concerts to a demographic cate-
gory that matches a salable number of affiliates is
very difficult. Most of these programs target either
the youth demographic, aged roughly 18 to 34 (it
may include teens), or the adult demographic, aged
25 to 54. Each group presents programming pro-
blems, and local stations can be understandably
reluctant to preempt traditional programming that
they know will deliver a given audience and amount
of revenue for an unknown. Stations will expect a
careful fit between special programs and their regu-
lar formats. Contemporary radio listeners have
many choices and are ready to push a button if the
sound or voices are too staid, too serious or other-
wise perceived as “not for them.”
For a network that seeks musical concerts and
specials, three alternative strategies exist:
■Produce many shows of varied appeal to capture
fragments of the youth or adult audiences.
■Concentrate on the relatively small number of
stars that appeal across the broadest format
spectrum.
■Buy or produce programs that have unique, broad
appeal.
The third strategy is often the most economi-
cally efficient, although many national programmers
also follow the first strategy to at least some extent.
For
example,
countdown
shows target
specific
groups who will listen to a wide variety of music
over the course of the show. Countdown shows suc-
ceed best as regularly scheduled weekend features,
and audiences tend to seek them out. These unique
music programs usually clear the broadest range of
affiliates, which makes them potentially the most
profitable syndicated programs and competitive
with top-rated radio sports.
Feature Syndicators
Radio broadcasters may use features to attract a spe-
cific target audience during mornings, evenings or
weekends. Most popular syndicated feature programs
are brief inserts such as the ET Radio Minute, Late
Show with David Letterman Top-Ten List and CBS
HealthWatch. Stations producing their own program-
ming include short features to add spice and variety
to programming and use the longer programming to
fill unsold or low-audience time periods.
Syndicated features are as varied as their produ-
cers, which include many of the companies previously
mentioned in this chapter: Dial Global, Cumulus,
Premiere
Radio
Networks
(www.premiereradio.
com), Westwood One and United Stations are
426
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
among the biggest. A few major-market stations also
syndicate their talent (for example, KLOS in Los
Angeles offers morning duo Mark & Brian to stations
in other markets).
One of the most important types of feature pro-
gramming today is the syndicated morning show.
Several successful major-market morning shows
have made the transition to national syndication,
including Kid Kraddick (Dallas), Rick Dees (Los
Angeles), Mancow Muller (Chicago) and Bob &
Tom (Indianapolis). As with the other programming
discussed in this section, a syndicated morning show
can offer small- and medium-market stations talent
that would otherwise be far beyond their reach,
albeit at a still significant cost in cash and avails.
A wide range of styles are available, from Bob
& Tom’s Midwestern, occasionally risqué, humor to
the outrageous and frequently offensive style of
Mancow. As with all choices, programmers should
be aware of the tastes and interests of their audience
and market when selecting a syndicated morning
show. All of the shows can point to significant rat-
ings successes; most have also failed in some markets
where they were on the wrong station or the show
was just not appropriate for the market.
Many companies that syndicate long-form for-
mat packages also supply short features that fit
within their long formats and provide other prep
services for local air talent (entertainment news,
joke services, other short items that can be used on
the air). The short features are also made available
to other stations in the same market on a format-
exclusive basis. If a feature is format-exclusive, that
same short feature can be sold to more than one
station in a market if their formats differ, but only
one rock or one country or one talk station can
license the program. This arrangement assumes non-
duplicated listeners.
What’s Coming for Radio?
It’s clear that “radio” will no longer be delivered
only via broadcast transmission but also via other
wireless (and wired) services. While the greatest
threat to radio as it existed is 4G wireless broadband
services because they will further fragment the audi-
ence and reduce the time spent with other media
including radio. At the same time, terrestrial broad-
casters retain significant competitive advantages
over many of the competing technologies, because
radio remains free to the listener, plus stations have
the
ability
to
make
use of
those
same next-
generation platforms to distribute their content to
listeners who prefer those platforms.
Changing technology and listener lifestyles have
left local stations with no exclusive property in
music genres or key artists to be used as a competi-
tive driver in a market. That’s not to say that music
will disappear as a programming staple. It remains
attractive to a large audience and is a very cost-
effective way to fill time. But personality and local
service—the things offered besides the music on a
station—has always been the soul of successful
radio. These are things that Pandora, Spotify and
similar newer entrants to the audio space do not
(and probably will never) offer. Thus, many local
stations will best be able to fend off the challenge
from newer services by emphasizing their people
and their local commitment, along with their free
cost to the audience and their availability every-
where their audience wants them to be.
On the other hand, stations have to be present
in
the
mobile
space
(smartphones,
tablets)
as
audiences—especially younger audiences—move more
(and, in some cases, all) of their media use to those
platforms. Apple leads that market as we write this;
but the lead is shrinking rapidly and the Android oper-
ating system will almost certainly be the dominant
mobile platform by the time you’re reading this
chapter (and Blackberry may have disappeared).
In any case, stations will probably need to have apps
running on at least a couple of platforms so the only
real question is which one is the most important—
where to start when you launch something new? The
answer to that question, as has been the case for radio,
begins by understanding on what devices and where
your audience is most likely listening.
Convenience (as defined by the listener) will be
the primary driver for strategic decision making in
almost every case. The mantra recited by leaders in
most media companies is “the content you want,
CHAPTER 11 Music Radio Programming
427
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
anytime, anywhere.” While there are still occasional
licensing hurdles to overcome before that ideal can
be realized, those barriers are fewer for radio than
for other media businesses. The radio companies
that survive will do so by not only creating compel-
ling broadcast fare but also through the develop-
ment of mobile apps and by taking advantage of
distribution platforms in addition to the broadcast
signal—by making that content available in a wide
range of forms and engaging listeners in whatever
way that listeners prefer.
The industry consolidation that followed the
1996 Telecommunications Act has permanently
and fundamentally altered the strategies and eco-
nomics of radio programming and thus the day-
to-day nature of the work the employees of those
groups perform. Owners and programmers seek to
counter the technological pressures fragmenting the
audience by finding different ways of engaging their
fans. This requires leveraging their best talent across
not only multiple stations (probably in multiple mar-
kets) but also across multiple platforms. Your morn-
ing jock or team doesn’t just do four or five hours on
the air. She, he or they (or, more likely, their pro-
ducer) will certainly also be expected to produce
high-involvement content for all the other platforms
including the station’s website, perhaps a daily pod-
cast (or series of podcasts) available for listeners to
download or stream to their smartphone or tablet or
desktop. Personas or characters they create could be
extended into other media, from video to games that
listeners can play on their mobile device—either
within a station app or as a stand-alone … anything
that keeps the audience engaged.
The nature of ownership is also changing.
Although there may be some exceptions (Cumulus),
most radio owners are no longer looking to emulate
the Clear Channel approach of the past decade.
Indeed, even Clear Channel slimmed down after
the company was taken private, shedding many
smaller stations and some other lines of business.
Rather than trying to dominate everywhere, groups
such as Merlin (a large market example) and Town-
square Media (a small-market example) are focused
on more narrowly defined geographic, demographic,
product and market-size segments; or on providing
services to companies in those markets (such as
Triton Digital). Other entrepreneurs are individuals
or groups focused primarily on new media audio
opportunities presented by the spread of 4G net-
works and platforms. All of them are hoping to
prosper in the changing marketplace; and, most
importantly, none of them believe that “radio is
dead.”
Notes
1. Arbitron, “Radio Today 2010,” p. 87. This study is
available at www.arbitron.com.
2. See http://ibiquity.com/automotive for updated figures.
3. Arbitron and Edison Media Research, “The Infinite
Dial 2011.” This study is part of an annual series and is
available at www.arbitron.com and www.edisonmedia
research.com. See more recent versions of this study for
updates on listening patterns.
4. In the United States, the AM band runs from 520 to
1710 kilohertz (kHz), with station allocations spaced at
10-kHz intervals. The FM band runs from 88 to 108
megahertz (MHz), with allocations spaced every .2 MHz
beginning with 88.1 (then 88.3, 88.5 and so on through
107.9), although the lower 4 MHz (88.1 through 91.9) are
reserved for noncommercial educational (NCE) stations
only. Note that interference concerns will prevent assign-
ments of stations on adjacent frequencies within a market.
428
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
C H A P T E R
12
Information Radio
Programming
Matthew S. Pierce and Robert F. Potter
Chapter Outline
Information Versus
Entertainment Radio
Identifiable Personalities
Branding Stations and On-Air
Personalities
The Rise of Information
Radio
Cost Decline in Distribution
Technology
The Abandonment of the
Fairness Doctrine
Embracing Formerly Taboo
Topics
Migration to FM
Mobile Phones
Synergistic Advertising
Environment
Information Programming
Formats
All-News Formats
Network-Delivered Newscasts
News Scheduling Priorities
Talk Formats
Heritage Talk
Politics/Issues Talk
Sports Talk
Success Talk
Hot Talk
Urban Talk
Faith Talk
Spanish/Foreign-Language Talk
Health and Help Talk
Technology Talk
The Content Infrastructure
Hosts
Callers and Listeners
Commercial Interests
On-Air Talk Techniques
Telephone Screeners
Controversy, Balance, and
Pressure
Information Formats on
Public Radio
What Lies Ahead
Notes
429
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
J
ust what is meant by information radio? It is tradi-
tionally viewed by broadcasters as a fairly expan-
sive term encompassing various formats where the
spoken word—rather than music—makes up the main
content feature. These formats occur on satellite radio
channels and the internet as well as on analog and digi-
tal terrestrial broadcasting, and are known individually
by such names as talk, news, news/talk and sports talk.
All fall under the larger umbrella of information radio
but raise the following question for programmers: What
is the overall goal of information radio—is it to educate
or to entertain its audience?1
Information Versus
Entertainment Radio
A quick first answer is that with a name like infor-
mation radio, the format must be designed to edu-
cate (and that sounds boring). However, some
industry analysts believe all radio formats—not just
delivering the news or talk about issues—function to
educate and are thus a form of information radio. If
this sounds extreme, consider that about 14 percent
of the broadcast stations in the United States are
officially programmed as what the industry calls
information radio, that is, full-time talk, news or
sports (Ahh: not so boring to fans). Add to that
another 12 percent of stations categorized as pro-
gramming religious or Christian formats offering a
focused type of information (in the form of sermons,
religion-themed talk shows, call-in prayer shows and
so on) to an audience with a specific psychographic
profile. Of the remaining 74 percent of stations,
most schedule some talk, some news or some sports,
typically during drivetimes, in late night and on the
weekends, even though their “official” formats are
some sort of music programming. In addition, sur-
prisingly, more than 90 channels on the SiriusXM
satellite service focus on information rather than
music. Even noncommercial radio stations—those
that we usually associate with classical music,
opera and jazz—devote substantial portions of
their programming to delivering information in the
form of large news blocks (Morning Edition and All
Things Considered), interview shows (Talk of the
Nation, Fresh Air with Terry Gross and The Tavis
Smiley Show), comedy (A Prairie Home Companion
and Wait, Wait … Don’t Tell Me!), and call-in talk
shows such as the hilarious Car Talk.
Even the most highly targeted “all music” sta-
tions provide generous amounts of information to
their audiences in the form of pop psychology,
humorous stories and discussions of “what’s hot,”
all presented in the latest lingo of the target audi-
ence. These stations know that, even though they
tie their brand images closely to their music mix, to
succeed in the ratings they still must offer substantial
amounts of useful information to their listeners—
such
as
traffic,
weather
and
lifestyle
news—
especially during drivetime dayparts.
If you are still having trouble thinking of all
radio as information radio, consider that more than
one-fifth of the average commercial radio station’s
airtime is set aside for advertising and promotion—
almost all forms of which contain spoken informa-
tion about products, services or the station itself.
Even commercial-free public radio uses enhanced
underwriting announcements between programs.
Furthermore, the on-air signal is only part of a
modern radio station’s or satellite service’s business
strategy. Stations and their program hosts now take
advantage of multiple distribution paths to reach an
audience. Podcasts, online streaming and apps for
smartphones and tablets make content available to
listeners whenever and wherever they want to listen.
A station’s or satellite service’s reach now goes
beyond the radio waves that carry its signal.
The challenge for content providers, whether
they are traditional broadcast stations or webcas-
ters, is to “monetize” these various distribution
paths (often referred to as platforms). That means
finding a way to make money from the content no
matter how it is delivered. For example, advertising
may support a talk program delivered to listeners
over an AM broadcast station, but that same con-
tent can be provided commercial-free to a listener’s
smartphone through an app that requires a subscrip-
tion fee to access the content.
Consultant Kipper McGee observes that tradi-
tional broadcasting seeks to import listeners to a
430
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
station by encouraging them to tune to the station’s
frequency (“Hear weather and traffic on the 10s!”),
but now broadcasters also have the opportunity to
export their stations’ content to listeners in ways
that allow them to consume the content on their
own time schedule.2
Station websites have evolved from simply
offering information about station events, biogra-
phies of station DJs and personalities, and details
on movies, concerts and other happenings in the sta-
tion’s city of license. Now they export content
through daily podcasts, free downloads and live
streams of the station’s broadcast signal. Websites
encourage greater interaction with visitors and link
to social media sites such as Facebook.
Chicago music station WXRT, for example,
invites listeners to become an “XRT VIP” and
“access
exclusive
experiences
and
XRT
ticket
giveaways.” VIPs get access to the “XRT VIP
lounge” where they can earn points by participating
in station promotions, filling-out surveys, using
advertisers’ coupons and clicking through to adver-
tiser websites. Earned points can then be used to
enter contests, participate in online auctions or
trade for prizes.
The VIP lounge has elements of popular social
media games and gives listeners an incentive to par-
ticipate in marketing campaigns they might other-
wise avoid. WXRT “monetized” its website by
creating a place where businesses can reach potential
customers.
So, a lot of information is being disseminated by
radio stations and their personalities, regardless of
format, both on and off the air. However, many
industry consultants believe it’s more important for
all stations—even those that are formally informa-
tion formats—to focus on being a source of enter-
tainment for listeners. These analysts suggest that a
station can dominate in ratings and revenue only
when it is programmed as a form of audio entertain-
ment. The most successful news/talk/sports pro-
grammers
require
their
air
talents
to
remain
focused on the entertainment value of their presenta-
tions. According to consultant Holland Cooke, both
information stations and popular music stations
“play the hits,” but in information radio that
means discussing the hot topics and news that the
audience really wants to hear.3 This attitude puts
off serious news junkies, but it makes money.
Just as Chapter 11 discussed how hot songs are
tracked by music station programmers in trade
magazines like Billboard, information station pro-
grammers refer to publications like Talkers Maga-
zine (www.talkers.com), which offers a Week in
Review feature listing the top-10 people, issues and
topics
being
discussed
on
information
stations
across the country. Only programmers and hosts
who recognize the importance of presenting these
issues in an entertaining way are likely to succeed
big time.
There are plenty of examples in radio history of
talk-radio personalities who took themselves too
seriously, abandoned their focus on the entertain-
ment value of their presentations, and suffered reve-
nue and ratings decline. One personality who
suffered from this lack of focus on the entertainment
value of her show is Dr. Laura Schlessinger. Her
increasingly strident anti-homosexual rhetoric in
the late 1990s resulted in censure by the Canadian
Broadcast Standards Council, a loss of several key
U.S. affiliates, and the loss of several national adver-
tisers, including the biggie of Procter & Gamble,
which withdrew support from her proposed televi-
sion show.
Controversy again swirled around Schlessinger
in 2010 when she used a racial epithet 11 times
while responding to a caller on her radio show.
She apologized the next day and then announced
she would stop hosting a radio show at the end of
her contract, saying she would be freer to speak her
mind through books, a YouTube channel, blogs and
her website. Nonetheless, in 2011 she copied the
path of other program hosts too controversial for
broadcast radio and moved her show to satellite
radio.
At a radio industry conference, a panel of news/
talk programmers clearly explained the entertain-
ment value of their programs. One programmer
summed it up this way: “All highly rated radio is,
first, entertaining, and in radio there’re only two
ways to entertain an ear—with spoken words [as
in] news/talk or with music. When we got our staff
CHAPTER 12 Information Radio Programming
431
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
to realize their spoken words had to be as entertain-
ing as the music down the street, or the movie on
HBO, we started to have success.”4
To a certain extent, then, all radio formats have
information as a key ingredient. For some formats,
the most engaging way to deliver information is to
present it between musical segments the audience
will find appealing. In information formats, of
course, the majority of the broadcast day is filled
not with music, but with the spoken word, and the
formats are growing in popularity among program-
mers and listeners—in the form of all-news, all-talk
or the combination of the two known as news/talk.
Consider that in 1980, only 75 radio stations in the
United States offered full-time information program-
ming. By 1985, that number had grown to only 100
stations. Then, during the next 25 years, the number
of stations officially programming the information
format skyrocketed! The Broadcasting Cable Year-
book 2010 listed 2,793 full-time news, talk and
news/talk stations—moving ahead of the number
of stations with country music formats.
This surge in the number of stations is not the
only sign of the format’s popularity. Arbitron’s
Radio Today 2010 reported that information radio
also had the second-highest 12þ share of all formats
in 2009, with an average 12.9 percent of those lis-
tening to the radio at any time tuning to an informa-
tion station. That was just behind country music’s
13.4 percent share of 12þ listeners. During the his-
toric 2008 presidential election year, information
radio had the largest share of 12þ listeners.
Perhaps even more important, large portions of
those listening to information programming are in
the demographic segments desirable to many adver-
tisers. Moreover, advertisers believe their commer-
cials are more effective in information formats
because listeners are more engaged with the content,
making it more likely they will actually pay attention
to the messages being delivered in advertisements.
Do you agree?
Information radio has become popular with
programmers because it is a format that really
engages listeners. One reason for its persistent pop-
ularity is the presentation of timely “hit” topics.
However, much of the driving force behind the
format undoubtedly comes from the on-air person-
alities who present the topics in compelling, interest-
ing and often controversial ways.
Identifiable Personalities
Among
dominant
information
formats,
talk
is
almost always live and delivered by identifiable
personalities. Having recognizable individuals is
extremely
important.
Research
has
repeatedly
shown that the most loyal radio listeners seek
feelings of pseudo-friendship or imagined personal
relationships
with
media
personalities.
These
relationships are evidenced by unexpectedly intense
love/hate reactions to national talk hosts such as
Howard Stern, Rush Limbaugh, Tom Joyner, Jim
Rome, G. Gordon Liddy, Dr. Joy Browne and Phil
Hendrie. An emotional connection, whether positive
or negative, has been shown to be absolutely neces-
sary for sustained listener involvement and long-
term ratings and revenue success. A list of selected
nationally syndicated and satellite radio talk hosts
from Talkers Magazine’s “Heavy Hundred,” along
with their web addresses, appears in 12.1.
Often even local personalities can develop siz-
able loyal followings. These hosts tend to be long-
time residents of the broadcast city. They know the
history of the area, and long-time local listeners
develop a sense of having “grown up” with them.
Even those new to the area become attracted by
how tuned in to the happenings of the city such
local personalities are—they know about everything
from family activities happening in the coming week
to the hot-button local political issues.
Sometimes information stations that have a
comparatively small share of the listening audience
can still be successful because of the connections
they make with their niche audiences and the loy-
alty that follows. For example, consider WVON-
AM (Chicago). Rarely does the talk station register
more than one percent of the available listening
audience. However, the station has remained suc-
cessful by developing close ties between its local
personalities and its primarily African-American
audience. According to communication scholar
Catherine
Squires,
who
spent
time
observing
432
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
WVON talents and listeners, the station sustains a
loyal audience that counts on the station to “talk
their talk” when it comes to issues of concern and
interest to the African-American audience in the
third largest market in the United States. So loyal
is the WVON audience, in fact, that Squires
reported listeners were willing to make financial
contributions to the station when its advertising
revenues were lower than anticipated.5 Although
some of those listed in 12.2 have begun to branch
out to national audiences via syndication, their
reputations
initially
developed
by
establishing
long-term relationships with listeners in their local
markets.
Branding Stations and On-Air
Personalities
Carrying a syndicated show with an identifiable
national personality and developing local talents
for the surrounding hours—who then become local
household names—should be the goals of every
12.1
Popular Nationally Syndicated or Satellite Radio Talk Hosts
Talk Personality
Description
Website
Glenn Beck
“High-profile star of the current conservative talk media
genre. King of controversy.
www.glennbeck.com
Jim Bohannon
“Seasoned late-night broadcaster with journalistic qualities.
Political moderate heard in syndication.”
www.jimbotalk.net
Sean Hannity
“A multimedia mega star in conservative talk. Solid mainstay
of the genre.”
www.hannity.com
Clark Howard
“Respected consumer advocate and personal financial
advice expert.”
www.clarkhoward.com
Don Imus
“Legendary talk media personality still performing daily syn-
dicated morning show simulcast on cable news/talk TV.”
http://www.wabcradio.com/
showdj.asp?DJID=40880
Laura Ingraham
“A major fixture in the world of conservative talk entertain-
ment. Top female in talk radio.”
www.lauraingraham.com
Rush Limbaugh
“Twenty-three years in syndication and still the most important
talk show host in America.”
www.rushlimbaugh.com
George Noory
“Ubiquitous purveyor of late-night paranormal and oddities
chat.”
www.coasttocoastam.com
Dave Ramsey
“A media superstar in the world of personal financial advice
and multi-media industry icon.”
www.daveramsey.com
Randi Rhodes
“Progressive talk radio pro earning success in national
syndication”
www.therandirhodesshow.com
Jim Rome
“Still the ‘champ’ of nationally syndicated sports talk radio.”
www.jimrome.com
Michael Savage
“Boisterous talk radio personality heard on more than 300
affiliates.”
www.michaelsavage.com
Dr.Laura Schlessinger
“Still an important player with legendary status. Unique per-
sonal advice host. Heard exclusively on satellite radio.”
www.drlaura.com
Bev Smith
“Important player in African American targeted talk radio.”
www.aurnol.com
Howard Stern
“King of satellite radio and ‘pop culture’ talk. Still a multi-
media superstar and one-of-a-kind radio legend.”
www.howardstern.com
CHAPTER 12 Information Radio Programming
433
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
information radio programmer. How does a pro-
grammer identify the right ones?
Arbitron’s research revealed an important fact
about strong personalities: Listeners will find them
on the dial even if they change stations in the mar-
ket. In other words, listeners are often more loyal to
the personality than they are to any individual sta-
tion. A successful program host creates his or her
own unique style or “brand.” Just as consumers
often become loyal to a particular brand of laundry
detergent and other products, they can also become
loyal followers of a popular on-air personality.
Once a program host has created a unique
brand with a loyal audience, he or she can deliver
content on many platforms and monetize them to
generate profits. In the early days of the internet
and before the rise of social media sites, syndicated
talk programs used periodic newsletters as a source
of revenue for the host and/or syndicator. Rush
Limbaugh, for example, offered yearly subscriptions
to his monthly newsletter The Limbaugh Letter for
purchase on his website (www.rushlimbaugh.com).
Limbaugh still offers the traditional newsletter, but
he has expanded his offerings to take advantage of
new digital platforms.
Subscribers to “Rush 24/7” are given access to
audio and video podcasts through the iTunes library,
including downloads of his minute long “Morning
Updates,” archives of his complete programs for the
past four weeks, live streaming video of him during
his radio show, and commercial-free versions of his
radio program. (That’s a LOT of Rush.) In addition,
subscribers can download documents discussed dur-
ing the show, related articles and audio, plus other
reference materials. A free app is available for subscri-
bers who want to consume the content on their
smartphones or tablet computers. The 24/7 package
even claims to include a super-secret email address
that allows subscribers to reach Limbaugh directly.
Some stations or personalities, on the other hand,
send out newsletters free of charge in an attempt to
make more personal connections with their listeners
while also developing databases of contact informa-
tion for future direct marketing campaigns. Kim
Komando, host of a weekly syndicated tech-talk
show, also sends out daily computer tips and weekly
newsletters via email to millions of people who have
signed up for the free service on her website (www.
komando.com). Komando also offers alternate access
to content through a subscription service called
“Kim’s Club.” For a monthly fee, club members get
access to podcasts, streaming audio and streaming
video of her (radio) program. Club members are
also automatically entered into show contests.
What was once a business of attracting listeners
to a broadcast station to boost advertising sales has
now become a multi-platform marketing operation.
Content is now recycled and repackaged to generate
profits long after the program host has said “Good-
bye, until tomorrow” to his or her broadcast station
listeners.
Scott Betram, program director for Rockford,
Illinois, station WROK-AM, is an example of a
broadcaster who recognizes the importance of main-
taining these many digital platforms. “Website,
streaming audio, Twitter, Facebook—they all help
put WROK on the computer or cell-phone or iPad
of listeners every day. It helps brand us as a news/
information/opinion source that will continue to
provide content even when the consumer is away
from the radio.”6
12.2
Popular Local Hosts
New York
WNYM
www.am970theapple.com
Curtis Sliwa
Los Angeles
KFI
www.kfi640.com
Bill Handel
KABC
www.kabc.com
Larry Elder
Chicago
WVON
www.wvon.com
Cliff Kelley
WGN
www.wgnradio.com
Garry Meier
WLS
www.wlsam.com
Roe Conn
San Francisco
KGO
www.kgoam810.com
Ronn Owens
Dallas
WBAP
www.wbap.com
Mark Davis
434
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Many hosts have further capitalized on their pop-
ularity by writing books. For example, Howard Stern’s
Private Parts, Limbaugh’s The Way Things Ought to
Be, Michael Savage’s The Savage Nation, and Dr.
Laura Schlessinger’s The Proper Care and Feeding of
Husbands not only gave those hosts another stream of
income, but the publicity the books received likely
directed new listeners to their radio programs. Public-
ity surrounding a new book can be substantial. For
example, talk-show host Mitch Albom’s Tuesdays
with Morrie, a memoir of his time spent with one of
his former college professors, lasted over five years on
The New York Times best-seller list! And every copy
sold mentions his daily syndicated radio show origi-
nating on WJR-AM in Detroit.
Knowing about syndication agreements is crucial
for programmers. National hosts who have developed
brands that can generate the most revenues sell them-
selves for fixed periods of time—one year, two years,
etc. Beginning the next round of negotiations with the
syndicator at exactly the proper time gives an edge. To
continue a station’s association with the personality,
locking the agreement up early (before a competitor
moves in) is an important strategic move.
However, if a programmer, sales manager and
general manager decide that a new agreement with
the
syndicator
is
not
cost-effective
because
of
increases in the contract costs or decreases in pro-
jected sales revenue (see Chapter 3 for a related dis-
cussion of television syndication), it is better to
know sooner rather than later that the station may
lose that personality from its programming lineup. It
is also not a bad idea to estimate when competitors’
national syndication contracts will be renegotiated.
It could be that a favorite personality might unex-
pectedly become available as a result of failed nego-
tiations with a competing station, and a clever
information programmer would be ready to act
quickly to sign that big-name personality, knowing
that his or her loyal audience will follow.
The strong loyalty between listeners and person-
alities also impacts the information programmer’s
relationship with local hosts. Often, management
insists on noncompete clauses in contracts with the
most
popular
“franchise”
personalities.
These
clauses prevent local personalities from leaving one
station and going to another in the same market
without a lot of time (sometimes a year or more)
passing. The logic behind these clauses is that having
noncompetes in place will prevent the personalities
from bringing their stations’ strategic secrets—along
with their loyal listeners—to competitors.
This approach is not without its critics, many of
whom argue that noncompete clauses have a negative
effect on station morale that does far more harm than
any “strategic secrets” that may get into the competi-
tion’s hands. The American Federation of Radio and
Television Artists (AFTRA) continues to lobby state
legislatures and Congress to outlaw noncompete
clauses
in
broadcasters’
employment
contracts.
Arizona, California, Connecticut, Illinois, Massachu-
setts, Maine and New York are among the states that
have made these noncompete clauses unenforceable.
Still, the initial motivation for noncompete clauses
should not be lost amid the controversy: Once a sta-
tion has a successful local personality on its airwaves,
the programmer needs to try to do everything possi-
ble to keep that person there!
The rise in the number of recognizable person-
alities and the greater loyalty they command are,
indeed, important reasons behind the increase in
the number of information stations and their ratings
successes over recent years. However, other factors
also led to the popularity of the format among pro-
grammers and the listening public.
The Rise of Information Radio
Aside from social and cultural influences contributing
to an interest in information radio, several technolog-
ical, economic and policy changes have also played a
role, especially affecting terrestrial broadcast radio.
The six key factors are summarized in 12.3.
Cost Decline in Distribution
Technology
The shows of Rush Limbaugh, Dr. Laura Schlessinger,
Ed Schultz or others wouldn’t be available today with-
out the dramatic drop in the cost of distributing
broadcast-quality audio over long distances that
CHAPTER 12 Information Radio Programming
435
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
occurred in the early 1980s. Prior to that time, radio
network operators were forced to pay premium fees to
the telephone monopolies for land-based distribution.
This created the “chicken and egg” question common
to most new technologies: Which will come first, the
nationally-distributed radio personalities or the expen-
sive distribution system? By the mid-1980s, commer-
cial satellites magically appeared in the sky, and thanks
to the much lower cost of satellite distribution, national
syndication of unproven programming became eco-
nomically feasible for the first time. One of the earliest
of these shows was Limbaugh’s talk show, and in an
interview, Limbaugh noted that his popular show airs
during the midday daypart, as opposed to perhaps the
more strategically advantageous slot of morning or
afternoon drivetime. This occurred because satellite
time was only available during the midday hours
when his syndicated show was first developed.7
The Abandonment of the
Fairness Doctrine
Fairness was another problem. Prior to 1987, the
FCC’s Fairness Doctrine required radio stations to
cover all sides of controversial public issues equally.
In application, this severely limited the topics aired
on talk radio because station owners feared lawsuits
or complaints at license renewal time by those who
felt they were treated “unequally.” Indeed, both
sides of a controversial issue would often claim less
than equal treatment. Because of this, few station
owners were willing to take the risk of programming
anything more than the blandest kinds of talk.
Rather than risk complaints at renewal time, it was
easier to avoid all controversy.
The Fairness Doctrine was merely an FCC pol-
icy that had not been made law, so the FCC could
decide to drop it at any time, and that time arrived
at the height of deregulation under the Reagan
administration. Although many members of Con-
gress and some lobbyists fought to write the Fairness
Doctrine into law, each of three attempts ended in
failure. After several years, it became clear that the
Fairness Doctrine was not likely to return, and
broadcasters subsequently felt increasingly free to
engage in even the most outrageously slanted forms
of talk programming.
By the early 1990s, radio talk hosts had more free-
dom than ever before to advocate one view of a contro-
versial issue and ridicule opposing points of view. Show
hosts could take—or even distort—one side of an issue
and demean opposing perspectives, often with tremen-
dous success in audience ratings. Such talk was appar-
ently much more interesting than talk that tried to be
fair or equal to both sides (see 12.4). Despite com-
plaints of extremism, the FCC decided to rely on the
marketplace to provide fairness. In theory, if one sta-
tion took one side of an issue, other stations in the mar-
ket would program opposing views to attract the
disaffected audience. Overall fairness would be found
across the dial, rather than forced on each individual
station as had been the case before.
By 2000, journalists, media scholars and even poli-
ticians were commenting that talk radio—particularly
at the national level—had become primarily a haven
for such politically conservative hosts such as Rush
Limbaugh, G. Gordon Liddy, Ken Hamblin and Sean
Hannity. Although this was no problem for the conser-
vatives in the audience, polls showed that almost three-
quarters of liberals felt that the information radio
format did not provide balanced programming.
Many conservatives pointed to failed programs hosted
by such liberal icons as Mario Cuomo and Alan
Dershowitz as evidence of the marketplace at work.
However, in 2004, Air America Radio debuted
on stations in New York, Los Angeles, Chicago and
12.3
Factors in the Rise of Talk
Radio
1. Decline in distribution costs due to satellite
technology
2. Repeal of the Fairness Doctrine in 1987
3. Acceptance of formerly taboo topics
4. Migration of music-oriented audiences to FM
5. Proliferation of cellular phones
6. Attraction of format for advertisers
436
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
San Francisco and was touted by some as the begin-
ning of syndicated “liberal radio.” Relying on easily
identifiable personalities, Air America Radio signed
on with dayparts hosted by comedians Al Franken,
Janeane Garofalo and Public Enemy rapper Chuck
D. With the Fairness Doctrine now a distant mem-
ory, such “one-sided” left-leaning programming
content became just as fair as the conservative
radio that had been around for decades.
Despite reaching 2.1 million listeners on 75
affiliates, in 2006 the company filed for bankruptcy
claiming it had lost more than $40 million in the two
years since signing on. On top of that, the network
also lost Franken—by far its highest-profile host—
who resigned to run for the U.S. Senate in Minne-
sota. Still, in early 2007 Air America was purchased
by Stephen Green, a real-estate entrepreneur who
guaranteed to bring what he called an “underper-
forming asset with unrealized potential” to profit-
ability.8 His effort also failed, and Air America—as
live radio—folded in early 2010.
The failure of Air America reignited the debate
about why conservative talk radio was dominating
the format. Conservative talkers pointed to the
demise of Air America as proof that Americans
reject liberal ideals and have no interest in listening
to progressive talk show hosts. However, former Air
America employees blamed the network’s failure on
a series of owners and managers with little broad-
casting business experience.9
Proponents of progressive talk radio note that
many liberal or left-leaning personalities are doing
well. Air America alumus Randi Rhodes left the net-
work to be syndicated by Premiere Radio Networks
that also syndicates conservative Rush Limbaugh’s
program. Rachel Maddow moved from Air America
to a prime time show on the MSNBC cable network.
Progressive hosts Ed Schultz and Stephanie Miller
who chose to remain independent of Air America
remain nationally syndicated.
Embracing Formerly Taboo Topics
Although the elimination of the Fairness Doctrine
removed most government-imposed restrictions on
the nature of talk programming, several social and
cultural events in the 1990s appeared to give broad-
casters the public’s permission to stretch the limits of
what is considered acceptable on radio in another
direction. What had once been confined to the
12.4
Blogs ‘n Talk Radio
F
or listeners eager to have their say on radio, the surest
way is through the web. Recognizing that a daily
smorgasbord of opinions and ideas flow freely online, talk
radio programs like Open Source and Air America are
turning to bloggers to provide content for their shows.
Open Source, distributed by Public Radio International,
draws on comments and information posted by bloggers
on its website, www.radioopensource.org. Bloggers sug-
gest ideas for the program, recommend guest speakers and
questions, and even appear as guest speakers. According
to its site, Open Source sees itself not as “a public radio
show with a web community” but “a web community that
produces a daily hour of radio.” To date, about 40 stations
(out of nearly 10,000) carry the program, whose topics
range from global warming to national service in America
to Groundhog Day to what to do in outer space.
Bloggers are also playing bigger roles in balancing and
policing the air waves. For an independent talk radio show
like Air America, which was created during the 2004 pres-
idential elections to counter conservative talk radio shows
like The Rush Limbaugh Show and The Sean Hannity Show,
bloggers’ input is critical because the show doesn’t employ
its own reporters. In 2007, hundreds of blogs demanded
that advertisers pull their ads from San Francisco-based radio
station KSFO-AM after several of its talk show hosts allegedly
made racist and violence-inciting remarks. Audio clips of the
shows were posted on blogs—and some were sent to
advertisers, causing companies like Bank of America and
Mastercard to stop advertising with the station.
Debbie Goh, Ph.D.
Nanyang Technological University
CHAPTER 12 Information Radio Programming
437
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
seamier sections of porn magazines, internet chat
rooms and X-rated movies was by the late 1990s
suddenly fair game. Media frenzies such as the
O. J. Simpson trial, the Jon Benet Ramsey murder,
and the Clinton impeachment hearings encouraged
on-air listeners to vent their reactions to topics as
intense as murder, child sexual abuse and oral sex.
Many
programmers
heard
from
citizen
action
groups outraged by the sordid and often sexual
details being broadcast during morning drivetime—
not coincidentally the times when parents drive their
kids to school with the radio on. Most of these pro-
grammers held their ground against such groups,
claiming First Amendment protection of the “infor-
mation” being broadcast. The truth for many, how-
ever, was that regardless of the programmers’
opinions about the Bill of Rights, many of the per-
sonalities who caused such an outcry with their titil-
lation were also generating huge ratings numbers
and advertiser revenue.
In early 2004, however, things began to change.
Some content aired on broadcast stations seemed to
go too far. One was a radio stunt created by Opie &
Anthony (former talkers on WNEW in New York)
in which listeners were encouraged to have sex in
public places. At first, this seems no more shocking
than other stunts hosted by syndicated personalities
on hundreds of stations across the country. Still,
when the Opie & Anthony bit resulted in a broad-
cast “play-by-play” of copulation—at New York
City’s St. Patrick’s Cathedral during a mass—the
ever-elusive line of public acceptability was crossed.
Then, Janet Jackson and Justin Timberlake had a
“wardrobe malfunction” that led to Jackson’s breast
being exposed to 800 million people during CBS’s
2003 Super Bowl halftime broadcast. Shortly thereaf-
ter, the FCC began to strengthen its public stance
against indecency. Congress, too, began to give the
FCC a bigger club to swing at station owners who
allowed their personalities to be overly prurient: The
legislators increased indecency fines from a measly
$27,500 to as much as $500,000. This greatly
increased the motivation of station owners to keep
their personalities on a shorter leash. In the past,
many had decided that the small fines were a price
they were willing to pay for ratings success (see 12.5).
12.5
Indecency Eventually Costs Infinity
W
hen does programming result in a broadcaster
making a million-dollar “voluntary contribution” to
the United States Treasury? When it’s indecent. Since the
late 1980s, the FCC had been frequently issuing notices of
apparent liability (fines) against Infinity Broadcasting for
Howard Stern’s allegedly indecent broadcasts. Infinity’s
president, Mel Karmazin, first reacted by saying the com-
pany would refuse to pay the fines, claiming that Stern’s
program content was protected by the First Amendment. But
in 1995, Infinity Broadcasting finally agreed to pay (and as
a reward, got its record of indecent broadcasts expunged).
Two developments brought about the Infinity settlement.
First, in 1995 the U.S. Court of Appeals in Washington,
DC, upheld the FCC’s ban on indecent broadcasts in the
daytime and evening (between 6 A.M. and 10 P.M.). Sec-
ond, and much more important, Infinity was trying to buy
nine radio stations (in addition to the 22 it already owned).
Unfortunately (or fortunately, depending on your point of
view), the purchase would require the FCC’s approval.
After Karmazin failed to persuade the commissioners to
lighten Infinity’s penalty, he then agreed to the $1.7 million
“contribution” while claiming his intention was to “conserve
the time, expenses and human resources of the parties”
involved. Howard Stern called the settlement “extortion”
and the “biggest shakedown in history.”
The actual amount paid, negotiated down to
$1,175,000, was the largest fine ever paid by a broad-
caster. Of course, it pales when compared with the value
of the stations Infinity acquired as a result of the settlement
($375 million) or Infinity’s $3 billion value. If you won’t
laugh, I’ll tell you that Infinity also agreed to establish a
program to educate its on-air personnel about the FCC’s
indecency actions. Educate Howard Stern?
And Infinity has morphed into CBS Radio to clean up its
name.
Lindsy E. Pack, Ph.D.
Frostburg State University
438
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Increased reaction against vulgar conversation
led radio ownership giant Clear Channel Communi-
cations to drop The Howard Stern Show from several
markets and to fire long-time morning host Bubba
the Love Sponge in early 2004. These moves have
forced even the milder talkers who rely on innuendo
rather than blatantly sexual topics to rein in their
content. For example, Tom Griswold, one-half of
the Bob & Tom Show, said that the show is “not
going to take the chance of being anywhere near the
line. We’ve pulled way, way back.” The current goal,
according to Griswold, is to produce a show “that a
soccer mom can listen to with her kids in the car.”10
The pendulum may have swung back to caution
when it comes to bad taste on information stations.
However, public taste is fickle, and daring program-
mers have made names for themselves and their sta-
tions by pushing the envelope. That may be the
reason why Stern’s show was immediately picked
up by competitors in four of the markets where
Clear Channel removed him from the airwaves. Even-
tually, however, the three big-mouths—Stern, Bubba
the Love Sponge, and Opie & Anthony—moved to
satellite radio, safe from all FCC restrictions.
Migration to FM
Another important factor in the rise of the informa-
tion format was the drastic migration of listeners
from the AM to FM bands. In the largest markets,
audiences began abandoning AM stations for FM
stations in the early 1970s. Those music formats
that had proved successful on an AM station were
rapidly duplicated by FM stations with higher qual-
ity sound and then got higher ratings. By the late
1980s, it was clear no all-music format could survive
on the AM band. As Chapter 11 points out, pro-
gram directors of AM music stations were quick to
find that when AM and FM stations offer similar
music programming, the bulk of the audience will
choose to listen to the FM stations, leaving the AM
stations struggling for advertisers and revenue.
At roughly the same time as the Fairness Doctrine
was abandoned by the FCC, many AM stations faced
financial pressures unseen since the advent of televi-
sion, leading radio personalities to start supplying
strong, one-sided political opinions or sexual innu-
endo rarely before heard. By the mid-1980s, with a
nothing-left-to-lose philosophy, AM stations, even in
large markets, were willing to gamble on unknown
syndicated talk personalities. Visionary talk syndica-
tors initially offered the programming for free (in
exchange for clearance of the commercials), and
local AM station owners were thus able to cut the
expense of paying a local personality. Although
almost no one in the industry believed daytime talk
programming on AM could succeed, much less draw
audiences back from FM, there really were no other
viable programming options.
While
information
programming
gave
AM
radio a new lease on life, new dynamics are shifting
talk radio onto the FM band. Just as AM radio
found it could not compete with music formats
against FM stations, FM now must compete with
digital platforms that allow consumers to listen to
all of their favorite music on cells, MP3s and tablets.
Internet music services like Pandora allow listeners
to customize their music listening experience, and
webcasters now offer a variety of streaming music
on the internet that is easily accessible through wire-
less portable devices. Listeners, particularly younger
people, have stopped letting radio stations decide
which songs they should hear. FM then has to go
after whoever will best please its advertisers.
While FM stations are facing the reality that
they are no longer the preferred platform for music
delivery, AM stations are coping with a listening
audience that is aging and technical problems that
can make hearing AM stations sometimes difficult.
The population of older people who are accustomed
to listening to AM radio is shrinking, yet they are
not being replaced by younger people because most
don’t listen to AM radio. This is a particularly diffi-
cult problem for AM because advertisers most want
to reach younger listeners.
AM signals are more susceptible to interference
and static than FM from things like thunderstorms
and various kinds of machinery. AM signals also
have a harder time penetrating the steel structures of
big-city skyscrapers where thousands of potential lis-
teners work. Finally, many AM stations must reduce
their power or sign-off at night when AM radio
CHAPTER 12 Information Radio Programming
439
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
waves travel farther to avoid interfering with other
stations on their frequencies that have been given a
higher priority by the FCC. As you can imagine, this
is a major problem when those stations carry sporting
events that last into the evening hours! These AM
reception problems, the need for news/talk formats
to grow younger audiences, and the migration of
FM’s music formats to digital platforms are triggering
the shift of news/talk formats to FM.
Mobile Phones
Most talk shows depend on call-in listeners. Until the
1990s, talk shows had low levels of participation, espe-
cially during the peak periods of the morning and after-
noon drivetimes. To people who have always owned a
cellular telephone, this may seem illogical, but keep in
mind that mobile phone technology was not widely
used until the 1990s. Luckily for the format, just as
the content of talk on radio was becoming more inter-
esting, cell technology emerged to allow easier partici-
pation by listeners...wherever they were. The ability of
broadcasters to offer free cell-phone calls to the sta-
tion’s phone numbers (in return for running advertis-
ing for the cellular service) made it easy for listeners call
in any time of day—but especially during their morn-
ing and afternoon commutes.
Moreover, it quickly became standard procedure
for the hosts of many talk shows to move callers on
cell phones to “the top of the list,” thereby giving the
impression that the opinions of cell-phone callers had
a greater chance of being aired—and leading more
and more commuters to chime in. The proliferation
of cell phones has been a boon for information pro-
grammers because research shows listeners are more
likely to tune in when they can call in, even if most
are unlikely to actually call.
Synergistic Advertising Environment
Information radio provides an environment uniquely
attractive to radio advertisers. For one thing, the audi-
ences tend to be more loyal to the format than audi-
ences of other formats. This, coupled with the fact
that in many smaller markets only one information
station exists, means that listeners are less likely to
tune out during commercial breaks. Music stations,
on the other hand, often have many competitors
both within and between their formats. Even more
detrimental to advertisers are those music stations
that promote a “more music, less talk” format. This,
in effect, equates talk (that is, the information that
happens between music, such as commercials!) with
negative emotions and invites listeners to tune out
once a commercial set starts.
On information stations, however, commercials
seem less of an interruption and are merely more
information that the station wants to impart to its
audience. Thus, given equally-sized audiences on
both a talk station and a music station, advertisers
are willing to pay a higher price to place their com-
mercials on the news/talk/sports station—because
more of the listeners will stay tuned during the com-
mercial breaks.
Although the synergies between programming
and commercial content have undoubtedly contrib-
uted to the talk format’s rise in popularity, changes
in the media environment mean that information
programmers may need to reevaluate their strategies
on commercial spot loads. First, more minutes of
commercials are broadcast per hour on information
stations than on any other format. While originally
viewed as a benefit to station owners, commercial
clutter has reached an all-time high: Marketing mes-
sages appear in more and more places all the time,
and consumer fatigue may not be far behind. Infor-
mation listeners may eventually become less forgiv-
ing of an overload of commerce.
Furthermore, the popularity of the format has
brought competition from other sources hoping to
capitalize on the public’s desire for information. Lis-
teners can now find information programming in the
form of news, talk or sports talk from multiple radio
stations in a single market, not to mention web-
based talk networks, satellite-delivered radio, cable
television networks and podcasts. Loyalty to a par-
ticular source is likely to go down in this competitive
environment. The wise information programmer
will try to convince upper management that ultimate
station success may be as much a factor of keeping
listener loyalty as maximizing the number of com-
mercials played per hour.
440
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Information Programming
Formats
Before discussing individual formats specifically, a
reminder of how syndication delivery works in the
media industries may be helpful. (For a more in-
depth discussion, see Chapter 3.) Although many
programmers initially think of television when they
hear the word syndication, a vast number of highly-
rated syndicated radio shows exist as well. Any of
the formats described in the following sections could
either originate in the local station’s studio hosted by
local personalities or, instead, be delivered by a
national personality via satellite by such companies
as Premiere Radio Networks, Westwood One and
Citadel Media.
Many syndicated shows that once relied on only
terrestrial broadcast signals for distribution struck
deals with satellite radio services. For example,
Sean Hannity and Glenn Beck are syndicated to
AM and FM broadcast stations via satellite by
Premiere Radio Networks, but also have their
shows distributed directly to listeners on the Patriot
channel of Sirius/XM satellite radio.
This satellite radio presence, along with web-
based delivery, podcasting and the growth of syndi-
cated radio, has all but obliterated a clear line of
distinction between traditional network radio and
syndicators. Premiere and Westwood One are syndi-
cation companies, while ESPN Radio is a traditional
network. According to some, there is no difference
between such entities, especially in radio. When a
single personality such as sports talk host Jim
Rome appears on hundreds of stations via syndica-
tion, the impact for advertisers on a show is the
same as the impact of Colin Cowherd, whose pro-
gram is available only to ESPN Radio affiliates. Few
of the tens of thousands of people listening across
the nation care whether a show is coming from a
network or a syndicator or appears online (see
12.6). The distinction may continue to remain
important to some programmers, however, because
of the prestige and branding associated with being
12.6
Wi-Fi Radio
T
housands and thousands of audio services are
streamed over the internet—simulcasts of many AM/
FM broadcast stations, internet-only webcasters, and radio
stations from foreign countries. You can listen to these
internet audio streams over a computer, tablet or smart-
phone that has access to the internet.
Wi-Fi radios look and act more like traditional AM/
FM tabletop or clock radios but link to internet radio sta-
tions through a wireless access point using Wi-Fi technol-
ogy. Unlike a wireless carrier’s wide area network (WAN)
that covers several miles around each of its tower sites, a
Wi-Fi “hotspot” is a local area network (LAN) with a range
of only a few hundred feet that is intended to be an
extension of a nearby wired internet connection. So Wi-Fi
radios will only work if they are within range of a Wi-Fi
hotspot.
With a broadcast radio, listeners can quickly tune up
and down the AM or FM band looking for programs that
interest them. A Wi-Fi radio must know the specific web
address of any audio service you want and then connect
itself to that service’s own computer (called a “server”). You
must then wait several seconds to establish the digital audio
stream, so it’s not practical to browse internet audio offer-
ings on a Wi-Fi radio.
To help listeners search through the thousands of audio
services available on the internet and quickly access their
favorites, Wi-Fi radios usually interact with a portal or
aggregator web site such as Reciva Internet Radio (www.
reciva.com), or vTuner Internet Radio (www.vtuner.com).
These sites catalogue and organize internet audio services
by location, language and genre. Listeners visit the sites to
browse through audio services and designate their favor-
ites. Those favorites then appear as “presets” on their Wi-Fi
radios much like favorite radio stations are assigned to
buttons on car radios.
Internet connection ° Modem ° Wireless router °
Wi-Fi radio waves ))))))) Wi-Fi radio
CHAPTER 12 Information Radio Programming
441
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
an affiliate of a highly regarded and widely recog-
nized network such as ESPN Radio.
As a result of the vastness of the national audi-
ence, radio remains a gold mine for talented syndi-
cated entertainers. For example, in 2008, Premiere
signed Limbaugh to an eight-year contract extension
reported to pay him $38 million per year plus a
$100 million signing bonus. That same year, Sean
Hannity signed a five-year contract reported to be
worth around $100 million. The reason for paying
such enormous fees to syndicated personalities is
that they generate huge advertising revenue. Talk
show hosts like Limbaugh have fiercely loyal audi-
ences (see 12.7) who are very responsive to adverti-
sers who support the programs.
One worry is that paying such big bucks for
superstars in national syndication deals will leave
talented newcomers no place to develop their skills
on local radio. Michael Harrison, publisher of Talk-
ers Magazine, said, “It’s really sad that so much
12.7
Rush Stumbles But Doesn’t Fall
R
ush Limbaugh started his radio career at the young
age of 16, working as an afternoon drivetime disc
jockey in his hometown of Cape Girardeau, Missouri.
After a relatively nondescript career in music radio and a
short stint in the advertising office of the Kansas City Royals’
baseball team, he found his voice as the host of a political
talk show in Sacramento, where he tripled the ratings for
his time slot. Eventually, The Rush Limbaugh Show, with its
decidedly conservative political stance, found an audience
at stations across the nation. Today more than 20 million
listeners tune in each day to hear Limbaugh pontificate on
his self-proclaimed E.I.B. (Excellence in Broadcasting) Net-
work. Limbaugh’s success in the 1990s spread to other
media, too; he authored two books that were bestsellers
and hosted a syndicated television program for a while.
Although his politically-focused TV show was eventually
canceled, in 2003, he had another shot at TV stardom—
this time as a commentator for ESPN’s Sunday NFL Count-
down. Limbaugh said he wanted his role to be providing
the “fan’s perspective” on what long-time ESPN sportscas-
ters Chris Berman, Chris Mortensen and other announcers
said during the show. It was understood among cable
programming insiders, however, that ESPN had hired the
talk host to do what he did best: generate controversy.
After only five appearances, Limbaugh did just that. Dur-
ing a preview of a Philadelphia Eagles game, Limbaugh
commented that Eagles quarterback Donovan McNabb’s
abilities had been overrated by the media because he was
an African-American. In hindsight, what may have been
more shocking than the claim itself was that none of the other
hosts (two of whom were African-Americans) challenged
Limbaugh on it. Nor were they instructed to do so by the
ESPN producers, either during that segment or after the sub-
sequent commercial break. Although Berman and other
sportscasters on the show later made public statements
denouncing Limbaugh’s comment, ESPN executives did not.
Less than one week later, however, Limbaugh resigned.
Personal troubles continued that year for the man who
often says his “talent is on loan from God.” In October the
newspaper tabloid The National Enquirer published a story
claiming Limbaugh’s former housekeeper had provided his
employer with thousands of prescription pills over the
course of four years. A short time later, Limbaugh
announced on his radio program that he was addicted to
prescription painkillers and was checking himself into a
rehabilitation program. According to Limbaugh, the drugs
had first been prescribed to him by his doctor following
spinal surgery six years earlier. This prompted a state
investigation and attempts to unseal his medical records to
determine whether he used his public personality to “shop”
for physicians who would provide him with the drugs.
After 30 days in rehab, though, Limbaugh was back
and as bombastic as ever. What is remarkable is the extent
to which Limbaugh’s audience remained loyal. Survey
research found that more than 90 percent of his regular
listeners said they listened to him as much now as they had
before the scandal. According to the researcher who con-
ducted the study, there was “no increase in defections or
negative comments even at the height of the most negative
publicity. The majority of his regular listeners are still rock-
solid behind him.”11
Robert F. Potter
Indiana University
442
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
money will go to the superstars and so little to the
new talent.”12 However, some predict the next crop
of talented talk personalities will come from digital
platforms, not the traditional route of working their
way to national syndication from smaller market
broadcast stations. Personalities who can prove
their talent by building a unique brand with a loyal
audience through podcasting or web streaming will
catch the attention of syndicators looking for the
next big talk personality.
All-News Formats
Amid the earlier discussion of personalities and com-
mentary, it is easy to forget that some radio programs
do not comment on the news but simply deliver it.
Radio did not become a primary source for news cov-
erage until World War II, when radio technology,
although still new to many, became the source of
the
memorable
voices
of
Edward
R.
Murrow,
William Shirer and the other great war correspon-
dents who offered listeners the sounds of battle and
bombing. Today, the use of radio to keep in touch
with what is happening in the world and in local
communities remains popular. In such major markets
as Chicago (WBBM-AM), New York (WCBS-AM)
and Philadelphia (KYW-AM), all-news stations are
consistently among the most highly rated.
The all-news format consists of continuous
newscasts, usually in 20- or 30-minute segments,
for 24 hours each day. One example is WINS-AM
(New York), whose slogan for a long time was, “At
10-10 WINS, give us 22 minutes and we’ll give you
the world.” Because stations following this format
repeat news cycles over and over, they tend to
attract listeners for short periods of time—only
long enough to hear one or two of the cycles. By
the second time, most listeners recognize that the
content is nearly identical to what they heard only
minutes before. This means the all-news format is a
high-cume, low-TSL format; in other words, it
depends on high cumulative ratings to counteract
low time-spent-listening numbers. Because cume rat-
ings are based on the number of unduplicated listen-
ers who tune in, locally produced all-news stations
are normally found just in larger markets with big
enough population bases to generate the needed
audience flow.
Given that listeners are constantly tuning in and
out of all-news stations, commercials, program ele-
ments and promos must be scheduled much more fre-
quently than in other formats in order to obtain an
effective frequency among the constantly changing
audience. While station managers and air talent will
get “sick of hearing the same thing over and over and
over,” the program director must look out for the
typical listener, who tunes in for perhaps 20 minutes
a day and relies on the heavy frequency in order to be
sufficiently exposed to the information.
Another important philosophical decision for
an all-news programmer is to decide on an optimal
ratio of different types of news: hard news, enter-
tainment news, economic news, human-interest stor-
ies and so on. Some all-news programmers insist
that as many stories as possible should contain a
local angle. In other words, even if the story focuses
on something taking place overseas, such as the
2011 Pacific earthquake and tsunami, in order to
get on the air the story must be written in such a
way as to have a simple, clear answer to the ques-
tion, “How does this affect our local audience?”
This is often accomplished by the presence of an
“exemplar,” a local resident or expert either affected
by or offering their opinions on the story.
Other programmers make sure their content
contains an ample supply of news about motion pic-
ture celebrities, television stars, famous athletes and
sex scandals. To them, “news” is the type of infor-
mation that can be talked about in the break room
at work or with a friend you meet for lunch. For
these reasons, stories about international relations,
macroeconomic policy, scientific discovery—news
that cannot easily be put directly into a human con-
text—is seldom covered.
Network-Delivered Newscasts
Most large-market stations are now so tightly for-
matted that they want newscasts more tailored to
their format than any network can provide. In
response, the traditional radio networks have shifted
CHAPTER 12 Information Radio Programming
443
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
from delivering newscasts to becoming sources of
original sound bites. Stations then use the network
sound bites to craft their own custom newscasts.
Increasingly, network news material is delivered
not by a local anchor or as part of a traditional news-
cast but by a sidekick to the station’s drivetime per-
sonality. One model for the newscaster as sidekick is
Robin Quivers, who began as a newscaster but who
now is, in effect, one of the team of co-hosts of The
Howard Stern Show on satellite radio. Using mem-
bers of the wacky “morning zoo” team as newscas-
ters may make traditional journalists shudder, but the
practice has increased program consistency, reduced
audience turnover and resulted in increased ratings.
As local stations increasingly model their formats
after Stern/Quivers or Imus/McCord, entertainment
environments become the primary sources of local
and national news on radio.
Ironically, what were once the great radio net-
work news departments have assisted in killing them-
selves off by passing along sound bites of everything
from presidential addresses to Hollywood stars push-
ing their latest productions. In 2004, however, Fox
News surfaced as a radio power on stations owned
by Clear Channel Radio, reviving network-delivered
newscasts in about 400 markets. Bringing its uniquely
conservative slant, Fox builds radio interview shows
around current and former cable news hosts such as
Brian Kilmeade and Alan Colmes.
In smaller markets and on less successful sta-
tions in larger markets, network newscasts can still
be heard in their entirety. Because these stations
have much smaller audience sizes, the radio net-
works could not survive financially if these were
the only audiences their national advertisers could
reach. Stations that choose not to carry the news-
casts in full (mostly major-market affiliates) are
required by network affiliation contracts to at least
broadcast
the
commercials
that
were
included
within the newscast. Stations receive private feeds
of the commercials from the networks for local
recording and insertion into local programs. They
also receive schedule information from the network.
They must then schedule the network’s commercials
in time periods equivalent to when they would have
aired in the newscasts. After these replacement
commercials air, station personnel produce affida-
vits for the networks affirming the times and dates
the network spots ran (as proof so their advertisers
pay the bills).
News Scheduling Priorities
Because the programming of all-news stations is
based on repeating cycles, scheduling considerations
tend to be tighter than for talk stations. On the aver-
age, news occupies about 75 percent of airtime on
an all-news station. The basic elements of newcast-
ing at an all-news station include the following:
■Hard news copy
■Recapitulations (recaps) of major stories
■Question-and-answer material from outside
reporters
■Results of public opinion polls
■Telephone actualities from exemplars
Earthshaking news developments on a global or
national scale are not necessarily uppermost in the
audience’s notion of what is news. During morning
drivetime, weather and traffic reports should be
emphasized as they will determine how listeners
start their day. A typical urban schedule runs in
this way: time announcements at least every 2 min-
utes; weather information (current and forecast) no
more than 10 minutes apart; traffic information
every 10 minutes; plus, interspersed, related infor-
mation such as school closings, major area sports
events and so on. In other words, the top priority
in any all-news format is local, personal, service pro-
gramming. Item repetition slows during midday as
average listener TSL increases, and is stepped up
again during afternoon drivetime (4 to 6 P.M.).
Predictability is important in news programming
because the audience will get used to coming to the
station at specific times for program elements such as
weather, traffic and sports. During drivetimes, in fact,
many all-news stations develop on-air slogans that
emphasize when listeners can count on hearing what
matters to them most during their commute to work.
For example, WWJ-AM (Detroit) gives its listeners
“traffic and weather together on the 8s,” meaning
444
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
listeners know that they can tune into the station at 8,
18, 28, 38, 48 and 58 minutes past each hour and be
sure to get the information they need.
Talk Formats
Just as there is format fragmentation in music radio
(discussed in Chapter 11), traditional talk has frag-
mented to include hot talk, advice talk, business
talk, sports talk, success talk and other niche formats.
Such variations of talk radio differ in approach,
sound, and “attitude” and appeal to quite different
audiences. Most consultants now identify at least ten
major talk formats, shown in 12.8 and described in
more detail in this section.
Heritage Talk
Heritage talk stations typically are 50,000-watt clear
channel stations that have included at least some talk
programming for 40 years or more (see 12.9). Twenty
years ago, these were classified as full-service stations
with a mix of news, talk, sports and midday music.
Increasingly,
these
stations
have
moved
to
all-
information formats with emphasis on local news,
weather, traffic, sports and local talk. They are also
able to attract the highest rated of the nationally syn-
dicated talk programming, primarily because of the
wide signal coverage they have at night. These stations
typically carry heavy commercial loads, often up to
20 minutes an hour.
Politics/Issues Talk
Political talk occupies a formidable spot on any list
of information radio formats. Rush Limbaugh is cer-
tainly the king of the genre, but there are many other
well-known syndicated personalities out there, such
as Sean Hannity, Michael Savage, Glenn Beck and
Ed
Schultz.
Politics/issues
talk
is
sometimes
described as programming hosted and listened to
by “angry white men”—leaning to either the left or
the right politically. However, that characterization
is not altogether accurate. There are examples of
successful hosts of color in this format, such as
12.8
Ten Top Talk-Radio Formats
1. Heritage talk: Traditional news/talk formats, mostly
on the AM band. Broad appeal with mix of news,
sports, talk, health and financial features.
2. Politics/issues talk: Discussion of the latest issues
coming from Washington, DC, around the world, or
from the local city and state.
3. Sports talk: Discussion of the issues surrounding
major team sports of interest to men: football, base-
ball and basketball. Often also supplemented with
play-by-play and “guy talk.”
4. Success talk: Formerly, money talk or business radio.
A mix of investment and personal advice for financial
success. May include talk about upscale travel,
recreation and relaxation.
5. Hot talk: Younger demographic appeal with
sexually-oriented content. Found on FM stations, but
mostly on satellite radio and digital platforms.
6. Urban talk: Similar to heritage talk but with African-
American appeal. Tends to be in urban areas.
7. Faith talk: Also called “religious radio.” Used to be
exclusively Christian, but now characterized by a
growing multitude of faiths.
8. Spanish/foreign-language talk: Similar to heritage
talk but appealing to the needs of the demographic
audience that speaks the programmed language.
One of the fastest-growing formats.
9. Health and help talk: Advice given to callers
about anything from health to finances to home
improvement. Includes many syndicated weekend
programs.
10. Technology talk: Initially limited to discussion
of computer and networking issues, but expanding
to include discussions of all types of electronic
gadgets.
CHAPTER 12 Information Radio Programming
445
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Lincoln Ware on WDBZ in Cincinnati and Jo
Madison, “The Black Eagle,” on WOL-AM in
Washington, DC, who can also be heard on SiriusXM
satellite radio. At the local market level, Ray Talia-
ferro was the first black talk-show host in a major
market. He started in talk radio in 1967 and joined
KGO-AM (San Francisco) in 1977 where he has been
talking politics in the Bay Area ever since.
Many programmers find success by scheduling
female hosts who can intelligently communicate a
political viewpoint to an audience. Progressive talker
Randi Rhodes broadcasts live from Washington, DC,
during afternoon drivetime and is syndicated nation-
ally by Premiere Radio Networks. Diane Rehm of
National
Public
Radio (NPR)
and
WAMU-FM
(Washington, DC) has been effectively discussing
political issues on the air for more than 30 years.
The Laura Ingraham Show is syndicated by Talk
Radio Network, and its host was described by Talk-
ers Magazine as the “leading nationally-syndicated
female political talker [with a] razor wit.”13
Scholars have recognized that political talk
radio is more effective than many other forms of
mass media at generating a sense of solidarity and
community among its audience members. Many
believe the format provides “a venue for a public
that feels ignored, isolated, alienated, and powerless
to channel their anger concerning…actions by polit-
ical elites… .”14 Politics/issues talk stations can also
take the lead in affecting political attitudes and
social change. Some believe that the impeachment
hearings of President Clinton would never have
come about had it not been for hosts of political
talk radio keeping listeners focused on the Clinton/
Monica Lewinsky scandal. Others believe the his-
toric recall election of California governor Gray
Davis would not have occurred had it not been for
the efforts of such political talk stations such as
KSFO (San Francisco), KTZK (Sacramento) and
KFI (Los Angeles). These stations not only consis-
tently raised the topic of public dissatisfaction with
Davis, but also actively collected listener signatures
on petitions that led to the eventual recall.
Sports Talk
Sports talk radio is a rising star in information radio.
Growing from only a handful of stations dedicated
12.9
Heritage News and Talk
I
n the mid-1960s, the foundation for all-news radio was
laid by two major broadcasting groups. The first was
Group W, the Westinghouse Broadcasting Company,
which converted three AM stations—WINS (New York)
and KYW (Philadelphia) in 1965 and KFWB (Los Angeles)
in 1968—to an all-news format. CBS followed suit with
several of its owned-and-operated AM stations, first at
WCBS (New York), KCBS (San Francisco) and KNX (Los
Angeles), and later at WBBM (Chicago), WEEI (Boston)
and finally WCAU (Philadelphia).
By the mid-1990s, hundreds of stations, mostly AM,
were identifying themselves as all-news or news/talk sta-
tions, and the format was spreading beyond major cities
into smaller markets. Although the all-news format is
dependent on local programming, network affiliation pro-
vides coverage most local stations cannot supply. In addi-
tion, a growing number of syndicators supply both affiliated
and nonaffiliated stations with news services and
programs.
The term talk station was generally adopted when
KABC in Los Angeles and a few other major-market stations
discarded their music formats around 1960 and began
airing information programming featuring the human voice.
KABC started with a key four-hour news and conversation
program, News/Talk, from 5 to 9 A.M. KGO in San Fran-
cisco later adopted the name of that program to describe its
overall format. KGO used news blocks in both morning
and evening drivetime and conversation programs
throughout the balance of the day. KABC focused on live
call-in programs, interviews and feature material combined
with informal and formal news coverage. KABC first pro-
moted itself as “The Conversation Station,” but news/talk
stuck as the generic industry term for stations that program
conversation leavened with news during drivetimes.
446
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
to sports programming, there are now more than
one thousand commercial sports talk stations on
the air, with some major markets supporting at
least two sports talk stations. The vast majority of
these stations are AM, but a few FM sports talk sta-
tions exist as well. Some of the leading stations
in this genre include WFAN-AM (New York),
WSCR-AM (Chicago) and WIP-AM (Philadelphia).
The growth of sports talk has been fueled not
only by the overall success of information radio but
also by the sports format’s appeal to men in the 25
to 54 and 18 to 34 age groups, two elusive demo-
graphic groups much sought by advertisers. Another
huge factor in sports talk’s success was the develop-
ment of a syndicated radio network as a brand
extension of the cable television network ESPN.
ESPN Radio is carried on hundreds of affiliates in
the United States, with many of them airing the
feed around the clock. Beyond getting the allure of
the ESPN brand, affiliate programmers acquire some
of the hot personalities that viewers are familiar
with, such as Mike and Mike (Mike Greenberg and
Mike Golic), Doug Gottlieb, and Brian Kenny.
ESPN Radio is not the only full-time syndicated
sports talk source: Sporting News Radio and Fox
Sports Radio also reach millions of listeners each
on hundreds of affiliates in North America.
Often, programmers who affiliate with these
networks choose not to schedule all of the available
programming, electing instead to schedule local
hosts to discuss professional, minor league, colle-
giate and even high school sports of interest to the
local market. Of course, play-by-play coverage of
pro and college games is an important element, but
other popular sports talk staples include scoreboard
shows, interview shows and talk programs with a
sports slant. Ultimately, decisions in this format,
just like any other, must be made according to the
desired target market of the programmer. For exam-
ple, some ESPN Radio affiliates felt that the net-
work’s The Tony Kornheiser Show skewed too old
for their programming strategies and opted instead
to go after The Jim Rome Show, a stand-alone talk
show syndicated by Premiere Radio Networks.
Rome’s in-your-face style as he “gives his take to
the clones” (translation for those unfamiliar with
the show: “states his opinion to his listeners”) is
viewed as more attractive to the 18 to 34 male
demographic. Similarly, The Herd with Colin Cow-
herd was picked up because it is a faster-paced show
skewing to younger males.
Sports programmers agree that a successful
sports talk station is more than just discussion of
sports. In fact, some consultants prefer to call the
format “guy talk” because what makes the format
work is a combination of the games themselves and
a celebration of the lifestyle that goes with them. The
fun surrounding a football game is far more than
just going to the game. The game becomes an excuse
for a day-long or weekend-long party with tailgat-
ing, road trips and barbecuing. In sports radio, cap-
turing on the air the lifestyle of the sports fans is
what really makes this format work. Sports talk per-
sonalities commonly discuss movies, celebrities, pol-
itics, music and much more—as well as sports. In
fact, ESPN Radio’s morning drivetime show—Mike
& Mike in the Morning—even has a daily stock
report because the programmers at the network rec-
ognize that many of the males in their target market
are interested not only in sports but also in business
and investing.
Success Talk
This format, also known as money talk or business
radio, offers listeners a mix of investment and per-
sonal advice for financial success. Segments include
discussion of stock trading, retirement planning,
insurance issues and taxes. Some programmers of
success talk also include programs that focus on
health and recreation, chic travel and vacations,
and upscale entertainment. Just like the sports talk
format, some stations choose to sign on to a 24-hour
syndicated network
such as Bloomberg Radio.
Others, however, use a mixture of nationally syndi-
cated
personalities
(Clark
Howard
and
Dave
Ramsey)
and
locally
known
financial
gurus.
Although stations in this format rarely deliver large
ratings, those that succeed do so because they con-
vince advertisers that the listeners are very loyal and
upwardly mobile. One of the best known of these
shows appears only on the weekends: Bob Brinker’s
CHAPTER 12 Information Radio Programming
447
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Moneytalk,
which
focuses
on
financial
advice.
Examples of stations that program the success for-
mat include WBIX-AM (Boston) and KBNP-AM
(Portland, Oregon).
Hot Talk
This format focuses on discussions of sexual issues
that are presented in a titillating way to appeal to the
male audience. Hot Talk programmers are trying to
develop a sound that expresses a “rock and roll”
attitude without the music. However, the format
has mostly retreated to satellite radio and digital
platforms after the government’s crackdown on
indecent content on broadcast stations.
It will come as no surprise that Howard Stern is
one of the most successful hosts of talk radio with a
“rock and roll” attitude. His move to satellite radio
in 2006 left opportunities for others to grow even
larger in their broadcast popularity, although the
window of opportunity seems to be closing. The
Adam Carolla Show With Teresa Strasser replaced
Stern on KLSX (Los Angeles) when he moved to sat-
ellite. However, Carolla lost his job in 2009 when
CBS radio converted the station from Hot Talk to a
Top 40 music format. Corolla is now showing
success as a podcaster (www.adamcarolla.com).
Tom Leykis, a legendary name in the hot talk for-
mat, was also a casualty at KLSX. Steve Dahl, who
was a hot talker at WCKG-FM (Chicago), also now
hosts a podcast (www.dahlcast.org).
Urban Talk
Stations programming this format tend to be in
metro areas where the available listening audience
includes
a
large
number
of
middle
to
upper-
middle-class African-Americans. The approach usu-
ally follows that of heritage or political talk, but the
issues are those with a strong appeal to black listen-
ers. A syndicated leader is The Tom Joyner Morning
Show, which is delivered by Joyner’s Reach Media
to over 8 million listeners on more than 100 stations
(see 12.10). Although music takes up a substantial
portion of Joyner’s show, the key programming ele-
ment is the information he and his co-hosts provide
to their audience. Local stations programmed to
focus on the urban issues of their communities are
also highly popular in major urban areas. In addi-
tion to WVON-AM (Chicago), others in this format
include WOL-AM (Washington, DC) and satellite
radio’s “The Power.”
12.10 African-American Talk on Radio
T
he Tom Joyner Morning Show has made a big place
for itself in the radio syndication history books. Begun
in 1994, the show is one of the first nationally syndicated
radio programs hosted and produced by an African-
American and distributed by a nonblack network. It
reaches about 8 million listeners on some 115 stations.
Moreover, in 2003, Joyner (majority shareholder and
chairman of Reach Media) assumed control and syndica-
tion of his own show, making this a rarity in syndication—a
black-owned program.
Distributed as a four-hour morning-drive radio program,
The Tom Joyner Morning Show appeals to an urban con-
temporary audience of affluent adults. It schedules a mix of
oldies urban music, guests from politics and entertainment,
and multiple local tags or promos to give the show a
“hometown feel.”
Tom Joyner, the self-proclaimed “hardest working man
in radio,” made his name a household word with African-
Americans while raising money for black colleges and
other political causes. A daily segment called “It’s Your
World” is one of the few present-day radio soap operas.
Listeners say following the on-again, off-again relationships
of various characters keeps them on the edge of their seats,
and the rating books show that the segment certainly keeps
them tuned in.
George L. Daniels, Ph.D.
University of Alabama
448
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Faith Talk
This format has long consisted primarily of talk pro-
gramming that focuses on Christian topics. Stations
typically have a combination of syndicated program
elements from such nationally known clergy as Max
Lucado, T. D. Jakes and Joyce Meyer; they are
accompanied by national and local political talk
hosts offering their positions on topics from a Chris-
tian worldview. The faith talk format is expanding,
however, with many more beliefs now represented.
Some broadcast stations program exclusively Jewish
talk and Catholic
talk, supported by national
Jewish and Catholic network programming. Jewish
Moments in the Morning has been on New York/
New Jersey’s community radio WFMU since 1977
(www.jmintheam.org), and online sources include
www.jewishradio.com. Those of the Muslim faith
can also find a talk-radio outlet on the web at
www.radioislam.com, and Bahais can listen to
www.bahairadio.org. Moreover, podcasting pro-
vides for listeners a wealth of information across a
wide range of religious and spiritual topics.
Spanish/Foreign-Language Talk
This format, similar to the urban talk format, is one
where the information being provided focuses on the
needs of those whose native language is not English.
Although
the
largest
markets
may
have
low-
powered AM stations programming information in
almost any native tongue, by far the dominant and
fastest-growing
foreign-language
talk
format
is
Spanish. The popularity of this format has grown
rapidly along with the number of Spanish-speaking
people in the United States and has been recognized
by national networks.
Univision Radio owns or operates 70 radio sta-
tions in top markets across the country. Its strategy
is to acquire English-language stations in markets
with
the largest Hispanic
populations and
re-
launch them with Spanish language formats. Univi-
sion also syndicates its popular KSCA-FM (Los
Angeles) program Piolin por la Manana (Piolin in
the Morning) hosted by Eddie “Piolin” Sotelo.
ESPN recognized the importance of this grow-
ing demographic when it launched ESPN Deportes
Radio,
an
around-the-clock
national
Spanish-
language sports radio network that serves Hispanic
sports fans in the United States. The network has 44
affiliates throughout the country, reaching nearly
60 percent of the Hispanic population in the U.S.
The network is also available via SiriusXM Satellite
Radio. Of course, regardless of the language, many
information stations now stream their signals over
the web, giving non-English speakers easy access to
foreign-language talk stations from around the globe
with the click of a mouse.
Health and Help Talk
Although it is rare to find a station that programs this
format exclusively, many programmers find that a
regular offering of some type of advice to listeners is
a good addition to their broadcast schedule. The type
of advice varies widely and is usually limited only by
the host’s expertise. Advice programming contains
information on nutrition, health, relationships, home
improvement, sexuality, the law—the list is almost
endless. Some syndicated weekday leaders in this
area include Duke and the Doctor (for health-
related concerns) and Dr. Joy Browne (for relation-
ship issues). Also in this category falls the network
devoted to serving the nation’s truckers who are
often on the road during the overnight hours. The
Midnight Trucking Radio Network reaches all of
the United States and over 75 percent of Canada
and Mexico, thanks to overnight broadcasts on many
50,000-watt stations in the United States (see 12.11).
Often, shows falling in the health/help talk cate-
gory air only once a week—usually on the weekend.
Well-known nationally syndicated examples include
At Home With Gary Sullivan, a show about home
improvement, and On the Garden Line. Many such
weekend shows also produce “daily minutes” offer-
ing tidbits of advice to listeners while also promoting
their long-form weekend programming.
Technology Talk
Originally referred to as “internet talk,” this format
has now expanded to include discussions of anything
to do with computers and technology. Although it is
CHAPTER 12 Information Radio Programming
449
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
unlikely that a programmer will choose to focus on
this topic 24 hours a day, weekly programs focusing
on computers have been highly successful. The Kim
Komando Show is a weekly syndicated show remark-
able not only for explaining technical issues about
computers in very simple terms to callers but also
for being hosted by a very knowledgeable female per-
sonality in a stereotypically male-dominated genre.
The Content Infrastructure
Most information radio formats are constructed to
showcase different types of content during different
dayparts. Heritage talk stations, for example, sched-
ule a heavy load of news during morning drivetime
(from 5 to 9 A.M. or 6 to 10 A.M.) and again during
afternoon drivetime (from about 4 to 6 P.M. depend-
ing on the market). The rest of their program days
are devoted to various kinds of talk programs and
often include some type of sports programming.
Although news and talk stations are often seen
as similar because their spoken-word formats are so
distinct from music stations, they are in fact very
different from one another. The all-news program-
mer oversees the equivalent of a single program that
recycles for 24 hours throughout each day, whereas
talk programmers fill most of their days with diverse
shows lasting from one to six hours. The talk
programmer must also consider the gratifications
desired by various kinds of talk listeners. Some are
attracted by the personality of such hosts as Schles-
singer or Limbaugh. Others use talk radio primarily
as a way to gather information. While some listen to
hear viewpoints that differ from their own, many
appreciate hearing their own opinions validated by
the program host.
The programming infrastructures for both news
and talk formats, however, are usually created on
computers and form the skeletons on which hang
the sections of hard news, features, talk programs,
game coverage, sports commentaries, editorials and
so on. At all-news stations, newscasts are repeated in
20-, 30-, 45- or 60-minute sequences, although most
stations prefer the shorter 20-minute cycles. Cycle
length affects spot and headline placement; time,
traffic, weather and sports scheduling; major news
story development; and feature scheduling. Advan-
tages and disadvantages are inherent in all lengths;
which cycle pattern a programmer chooses depends
on local market conditions, staff capability, editorial
supervision, program content and commercial load.
As mentioned earlier, information formats usu-
ally program a larger commercial load than music
stations because the spots seem less intrusive. Typi-
cally, each hour on an information station contains
12 to 18 minutes of spot announcements. Talk sta-
tions tend to have fewer breaks per hour, and often
12.11 Midnight Trucking Radio Network
C
alling itself the “national clearinghouse of informa-
tion, thoughts, and opinions of the American Truck
Driver,” the Midnight Trucking Radio Network (MTRN)
airs nightly from midnight until 5 A.M. on 60 affiliates. The
number of MTRN affiliates may seem miniscule com-
pared to the hundreds of stations carrying The Rush Lim-
baugh Show. However, the network can actually be
heard in almost every market of the country because ten
of its affiliates broadcast on 50,000-watt clear channel
transmitters that have tremendous geographic reach dur-
ing the overnight hours. This national reach is also
expanded by MTRN’s availability on mobile devices and
the web.
MTRN hosts Eric Harley and Gary McNamara take
calls from truckers and deliver information precisely tar-
geted toward their specific audience, including hourly
reports of weather along the nation’s highways,
announcements of road closings and construction delays,
news about legislation affecting the trucking industry, and
daily maintenance tips. They also take calls from truckers
behind the wheel during segments focusing on everything
from semi-truck insurance issues to the latest in truck tech-
nologies. So, as the network’s website (www.midnight-
trucking.com) says, “Whether you’re behind the wheel or
just can’t sleep, you’re never alone … when you’ve got The
Midnight Trucking Radio Network.”
450
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the number and location are dictated by the pro-
grams’ syndicators. All-news stations, especially
those with frequent news and traffic updates, may
run as few as one or two spots in breaks coming
every five minutes or less.
Hosts
In the all-news format, many of the on-air talent are
experienced journalists. Some have spent years in tele-
vision or print news prior to joining a radio staff.
Sometimes, radio hosts have many information careers
going at once. Mitch Albom hosts a syndicated talk
show and writes for the Detroit Free Press. Brian
Kilmeade hosts a three-hour talk show on Fox News
Radio just after completing duties as a co-host of Fox
and Friends on the Fox News cable network. Talk
hosts are sometimes experts in their particular field
(for example, the doctors or scientists in the health/
help talk format), but usually could best be described
as generalists. They have developed the ability to grasp
a subject’s essence. The host of a general-interest issues
talk program will discuss world and local affairs, poli-
tics, medicine, economics, science, history, literature,
music, art, sports and entertainment trivia—often on
a single show. It thus becomes a vital part of the host’s
daily preparation to keep abreast of current events and
to have at least some familiarity with a wide range of
topics. Hosts can subscribe to “show prep” services to
receive background information and summaries of
news events and political happenings.
Callers and Listeners
It is important for an information programmer (any
radio programmer, really) to remember that people
who are motivated enough to call the station and try
to get on the air represent only a small fraction of the
audience. According to surveys by the Times Mirror
Center for the People and the Press, only 11 percent of
Americans say they have attempted to call a talk-radio
program; of these, only 6 percent report that they
made it on the air. It is common for show producers
and screeners to choose callers to put on the air
according to their likelihood of offering an interesting
perspective on the topic being discussed or saying
something that may hit a nerve with the host or
other listeners. Programmers should keep in mind
that, although the audience may like listening to this
controversy, most people will not hold such extreme
viewpoints. Callers do not provide an accurate profile
of listeners, but station personnel frequently become
so focused on calls that they forget about the larger
audience—which should be their prime concern.
Switching the emphasis to the listening audience usu-
ally makes ratings go up. What is known about the
talk-radio listener appears in 12.12.
Commercial Interests
Of all radio formats, talk is the most vulnerable to
the appearance of what is really unscheduled com-
mercial matter. Payola and plugola have long been
associated with the music industry, but the talk for-
mat offers greater opportunities for such abuses. An
hour of friendly conversation presents frequent
chances for the on-air host to mention a favorite
resort or restaurant or to comment on a newly
acquired automobile. Moreover, the program host
is often in the position of booking favored business
acquaintances as guests. The on-air personality
receives many offers from potential guests and
local businesses, ranging from free dinners to dis-
counts on major purchases. Policies aimed at pre-
venting regulatory violations must emphasize that
12.12 Demographic Profile of News/
Talk/InformationRadioListeners
1. Almost 60 percent of the audience is male.
2. More than three-fourths are age 45 or older.
3. Three-fourths have attended college, with 44 per-
cent holding college degrees.
4. Almost two-thirds live in households earning more
than $50,000.
5. More than two-thirds own their homes.
Radio Today 2010: How America Listens to Radio, Arbitron
Marketing Communications, 2010, retrieved from
http://www.arbitron.com/home/radiotoday.htm.
CHAPTER 12 Information Radio Programming
451
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
management will severely penalize culprits. Stations
often require their on-air talent and producers to
sign affidavits showing that they understand the
law on these points, and some hire independent
agencies to monitor their talk programs for abuses.
More than one station has reinforced this message
by billing on-air performers for the time when their
casual conversations became “commercials.”
However, guests representing commercial enter-
prises may certainly appear on the station. It is
appropriate, for instance, for a local travel agent to
discuss travel in mainland China or for the proprie-
tor of a health food store to present opinions on
nutrition. And, obviously, many personalities on the
talk-show circuit have something to sell—a book, a
movie, a sporting event, a philosophy and so on.
Some mention of the individual’s reason for appear-
ing is appropriate because it establishes the guest’s
credentials. An apt reference might be, “Our subject
today is the popularity of computer games, and our
guest is Dr. Ted Castronova, author of a new book
entitled Synthetic Worlds.” A gray area arises on
those occasions when the host seems to be strongly
encouraging listeners to buy the book. If the host has
no financial interest in the publication, however, a
claim of violating FCC regulations is unlikely.
On-Air Talk Techniques
Call-in programs are the backbone of talk radio.
They can also be complicated to produce, especially
if a program has a dozen phone lines to deal with.
To help the on-air personality run a smooth show,
the call screener or producer has become a vital part
of the talk-radio staff. The screener is partly a
“warm-up artist” for the host—building up the call-
er’s enthusiasm and excitement so that it comes
through in the caller’s interaction with the host—
and partly serves as a traffic cop.
Telephone Screeners
Screeners add substantially to station budgets, but a
station can control its programming only through
careful screening. Many hosts and programmers
view airing “cold” or unscreened calls as a danger-
ous practice. Jim Bohannon of Westwood One, on
the
other
hand,
prefers
the
spontaneity
of
unscreened calls, saying to his listeners, “If you get
in, you get on.”
The screener for a talk program functions as a
gatekeeper, exercising significant control over the
information that reaches the air. Screeners con-
stantly manipulate the lineup of incoming calls, giv-
ing priority to more appropriate callers and delaying
or eliminating callers of presumably lesser interest.
The screener asks each caller a series of questions
to determine whether the call will be used: “What
topic do you want to talk about? How do you feel
about it? Why do you want to speak on the air?” At
the same time, the screener determines whether call-
ers are articulate, whether their comments are likely
to promote the flow of the program, and whether
they possess some unique quality that the host and
audience will find appealing (see 12.13). In the case
of The Dr. Laura Show, for example, the screener
prompts callers to begin by thanking the host and
tries to get each one focused on a specific question to
ask.
The screener also asks for the caller’s name.
Most stations prohibit the use of full names to fore-
stall imposters from identifying themselves as prom-
inent people in a community and then airing false
statements to embarrass the individuals they claim
to be. Another job for the screener is to filter out
the “regulars” who call the station too frequently
as well as those unable or unlikely to make a coher-
ent contribution. When screeners must dump a cal-
ler, they say something like, “Thank you for calling,
but I don’t think we’ll be able to get you on the air
today.” Callers thus dismissed and those asked to
hold for long periods often complain of unfair treat-
ment, but the screener must prevail, insisting on the
right to structure the best possible conversational
sequence. The most effective screeners perform
their jobs with tact and graciousness, but a few call-
ers always go away mad.
When a program depends on callers, what hap-
pens in those nightmare moments when there are
none? For just this emergency, most talk-show
hosts maintain a clipping file containing newspaper
452
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
and magazine articles saved from their general read-
ing to provide a background for monologues when
no calls come in. Another strategy is the expert
phone list, a list of 10 or 20 professionals with
expertise in subjects of broad appeal. Resorting to
the list should yield at least one or two able to
speak by phone when the host needs to fill time in
order to sustain a program.
Controversy, Balance, and Pressure
Although information radio programmers get many
opportunities for creative expression, they also must
devote considerable time to administration. Because
the station deals almost constantly with public-
affairs issues, its programmers spot-monitor the sta-
tion’s programs for compliance with FCC rules, and
to avoid legal problems such as slander. A program-
mer, however, having many other duties as well,
rarely knows as much about the minute-by-minute
program as heavy listeners do. Therefore, digital
backup systems must be established. Many stations
keep archived recordings of previous broadcasts in
order to respond to complaints made by the public.
Talk stations frequently find themselves the tar-
gets of pressure groups, activist organizations and
political parties trying to gain free access to the sta-
tion’s airtime. Although most partisans deserve some
airtime in the interest of fairness and balance, man-
agement must turn away those seeking inordinate
amounts of airtime. Because of this, and the fact
that an effective talk station frequently deals with
controversial issues, management can expect threats
of all kinds from irate audience members. A pro-
voked listener will demand anything from a retrac-
tion to equal time, and on occasion, someone will
threaten legal action.
Potential
lawsuits
usually
vanish,
however,
when management explains the relevant broadcast
law to the complainant. Review of the archived pro-
gram proves very handy in these situations. When
the station is even slightly in the wrong, it is good
policy to provide rebuttal time for an overlooked
point of view.
12.13 Host Displays
V
arious systems are used for the screener to signal to
the on-air host which incoming call is to be aired next.
Most talk stations now utilize computer software they have
developed themselves or a commercial product. Using
computers shifts greater program control to the on-air host.
The computer display indicates the number and nature of
the calls prepared for airing as well as the first name,
gender and approximate age of each caller, and it may
specify the point the caller wishes to discuss. The host can
then alter the complexion of the program by orchestrating
call order.
The display also frequently includes material of practical
conversational value, such as the current weather forecast
and news headlines. Hosts often use a timer to monitor call
length, and many hosts cut a caller off, as politely as pos-
sible, after 90 seconds to two minutes to keep the pace of
the program moving. Listeners will tune out a poor phone
call on a talk station just as they would a weak song on a
music station. Thus, hosts must control the on-air subject
matter and the flow of program material rather than let
callers dictate the programming. The point is to move the
show along rather than get bogged down making sure
each caller gets his or her “full” say.
Almost all talk stations use an electronic unit that delays
the programming about seven seconds to allow the host or
audio board operator to censor profanity, personal attacks
and other questionable utterances. The on-air host generally
controls a “cut button” that diverts offensive program mate-
rial, although the engineer should have a backup switch.
Because the program is delayed, the screener instructs all
callers to turn off their radios before talking on the air. If they
fail to do this, callers hear their voices coming back at them
on a delayed basis and cannot carry on a conversation,
causing the host to exclaim, “Turn your radio down!” Lis-
tening only on the telephone, callers hear the real-time
program material and can talk normally with the host.
CHAPTER 12 Information Radio Programming
453
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
A primary ingredient in the recipe for success in
any talk format is commitment at the top—at the
station management level. A timely and innovative
music format can catapult a station from obscurity
to the number-one ranking during a single rating
period. Talk stations and all-news stations, on the
other hand, generally take years to reach their
potential. Once success is achieved, however, the
talk station enjoys a listener loyalty that endures
long after the more fickle music audience shifts
from station to station in search of the hits. High
figures for time-spent-listening and long-term stabil-
ity in cumulative ratings demonstrate audience loy-
alty in the information format.
Information Formats on
Public Radio
Until now this chapter has focused on programming
commercial information stations—a task that is ulti-
mately guided by the specific goal of gathering either
a large audience or one with an extremely desirable
demographic and psychographic profile that can then
be sold to advertisers. The discussion now turns
toward another type of information radio, the public
stations, usually guided more by delivering what the
programmers believe is important information than
by the struggle to gain high ratings.
Information programming is among the most pop-
ular formats on public radio stations—at least during
large blocks of the day. Talk shows such as Car Talk
and A Prairie Home Companion attract large, loyal
audiences (see 12.14). Similarly, news programs such
as All Things Considered and Morning Edition are
popular and trusted sources for millions of Americans.
Because of their popularity, the potential for earning
commercial revenue from these shows is great. How-
ever, public stations are prohibited from airing adver-
tisements and explicitly committed to serving as an
alternative to commercial broadcasting by providing
programs for specialized, small-audience needs. Instead
of selling commercial spots, the major public radio net-
works sell their programs to affiliates (the member sta-
tions), who must in turn find funds from local
underwriting by businesses and from listener donations
during periodic pledge drives. The three major net-
works, National Public Radio (NPR), Public Radio
International
(PRI)
and
American
Public
Media
(APM), also look for underwriting from national com-
panies and foundations in order to fund their produc-
tion operations and keep the program acquisition fees
charged to affiliates as low as possible.
Sometimes, donations to the national public net-
works can create a catch-22 situation. This was
experienced in a grand way in 2003. In January of
that year, NPR received a $14 million grant from the
John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation.
At the time it was the largest grant the public radio
network had ever received. Only a few months later,
it was announced that Joan B. Kroc—late million-
aire widow of the founder of the McDonald’s restau-
rant chain—had bequeathed more than $200 million
to NPR; it was one of the largest individual gifts to
any cultural organization in history and far oversha-
dowed the extraordinary MacArthur gift. Referring
to Kroc’s gift, NPR’s President Kevin Klose said,
“This remarkable act of generosity will help secure
the future of NPR as a trusted and independent
source of news,” but he also worried that news of
the gift would keep listeners of local stations from
making individual contributions, something that
would severely hurt the local affiliates because
none of the gift would go directly to the local level.15
Unlike affiliates of traditional commercial net-
works, public radio stations are free to choose pro-
grams from any source, including from the three
major national competitors, PRI, NPR and APM. Indi-
vidual public radio programmers often decide that
their local audiences are best served by airing NPR’s
Morning Edition followed immediately by APM’s
business news program Marketplace Morning Report.
More important than allegiance to one network are a
station’s philosophy toward its audience and its fund-
raising capability, degree of localism, and integrity.
As in public television, the nature of the licensee
determines many of the station’s goals. About
60 percent of public radio stations have colleges
and universities as their licensees, while about one-
third are licensed to independent community organi-
zations, 6 percent to local school districts or local
454
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
governments, and 4 percent to state governments.
Because most public stations rely on NPR, PRI and
APM for much of their information programming, a
brief look at each appears in 12.15, 12.16 and
12.17. Pacifica, one of the most influential of public
station groups, is described in 12.18.
A myriad of other sources for programming—
informational
and
otherwise—are
available
to
noncommercial
radio
programmers.
WFMT’s
Beethoven Satellite Network, the Association of
Independents in Radio (AIR) and a variety of station
programming consortia that have emerged to pro-
vide program elements. The appetite is strong for
more information programming than NPR, PRI,
APM or any commercial outlet, for that matter, can
supply.
12.14 A Companion to Prairie Home Companion
“I
t’s been a quiet week in Lake Wobegon, Minnesota,
my home town.” For almost 30 years, those words
have introduced listeners to the lives of the most famous
nonexistent residents of Minnesota’s most famous nonexis-
tent town. Those are also the words associated with
Garrison Keillor, one of the world’s greatest living storytel-
lers. But few could have seen his genius in the beginning.
The name A Prairie Home Companion was borrowed
from the Prairie Home Cemetery in Moorhead, Minnesota,
back in 1969 when Keillor was doing a morning show on
Minnesota Public Radio. While researching the Grand Ole
Opry for an article, Keillor had one of those incredibly
brilliant moments that most others would have considered
insane. His idea was to produce an old-fashioned radio
variety show. Never mind that live radio plays had been
declared dead for more than 20 years. NPR wasn’t inter-
ested, but about five years later, with the help of the more
adventurous Minnesota Public Radio, Garrison Keiller’s first
variety broadcast occurred on the campus of Macalester
College in St. Paul. There were 12 people in the audience.
As they say, the rest is history.
News of the seemingly innovative program quickly
spread by word of mouth, audiences grew, and a decade
later the show moved into a larger St. Paul theater (later
renamed the Fitzgerald Theater) where it has been—with
brief interruptions—ever since. Those interruptions included
renovations in 1986, Keillor’s retirement from radio in
1987 to marry and move to Europe, and the period from
1989 to 1993 when the show was broadcast from New
York under the name Garrison Keillor’s American Radio
Company.
Today, alongside Garrison Keillor, a small group of
people keep the show going. These include Pat Donohue,
Andy Stein, Richard Dworsky, Arnie Kinsella and Gary
Raynor (making up Guy’s All-Star Shoe Band), and Tom
Keith and Fred Newman handling sound effects. Tim
Russell, Sue Scott and Erica Rhodes contribute as actors.
These people, along with a seemingly endless list of guest
stars (the show is considered one of the most significant
outlets for all genres of folk music) keep the only regularly
scheduled live radio variety show in the United States fresh
and innovative every week.
People everywhere now know about “The Catchup
Advisory Board” (a compromise between the two spellings
of catsup and ketchup) and “natural mellowing agents,”
The Professional Organization of English Majors, Be-
Bop-A-Re-Bop Rhubarb Pie, the Café Boeuf, and Ralph’s
Pretty Good Grocery (where “if you can’t find it, you can
probably get along without it”). Guy Noir and Dusty and
Lefty have become household names; Dusty and Lefty even
have their own sponsor (Prairie Dog Granola Bars—“health-
ier than chewing tobacco and you don’t have to spit”). Per-
haps the reason the program seems to speak to so many
people, and has lasted so long, are its regular looks into the
ordinary lives of the citizens of the fictional Lake Wobegon.
Carried by about 500 radio stations and listened to by
nearly 4 million people in the United States, A Prairie Home
Companion has become a worldwide broadcasting phe-
nomenon, aired in different versions by New Zealand’s
National Radio, WRN in Europe, BBC 7 in England and
RTE in Ireland, among other places. It has also become the
flagship program for its distributor, American Public Media,
which challenges NPR for the public broadcasting crown.
William J. Adams, Ph.D.
Kansas State University
CHAPTER 12 Information Radio Programming
455
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
12.16 Public Radio International
I
n 1983 a group of five stations formed a second public
national radio network called American Public Radio
(APR). Minnesota Public Radio, KUSC-FM in Los Angeles,
KQED-FM in San Francisco, WNYC AM/FM in New
York and WGUC in Cincinnati initially joined together to
market and distribute programs they produced and to
acquire other programming to distribute to affiliates. The
name was changed to Public Radio International (PRI) in
1994 to help end confusion between APR and NPR and
also to underline the network’s interest in importing and
exporting radio programs in the international
marketplace.
Today, PRI programming is carried by over 880 affiliated
stations. Its content is also available on pri.org through a
smartphone app and podcasts. Its stated mission is “to serve
audiences as a distinctive content source for information,
insights and cultural experiences essential to living in our
diverse, interconnected world.”16 Although well-known for its
music programs, it is telling that the first goal PRI claims is to
provide information. PRI distributes news programs such as
BBC World Service, The World and America Abroad. It
also has the urban-talk program The Tavis Smiley Show, the
popular storytelling program This American Life and health
information shows such as Zorba Paster on Your Health.
12.15 National Public Radio
A
private, nonprofit corporation, NPR contributes pro-
gramming to more than 900 nonprofit radio stations
that broadcast to communities in all 50 states, Puerto Rico,
the District of Columbia and even the Virgin Islands. It
programs two channels on SiriusXM Satellite Radio, pro-
duces multiple international services heard in more than
150 countries, provides programming for Armed Services
Radio and operates NPR FM 104.1 in Berlin, Germany.
The considerable international reach of NPR’s informa-
tion programming through satellite delivery is now extended
through digital media platforms. NPR.org presents con-
stantly updated news, streaming audio, downloadable
multimedia content (including video and photojournalism)
and podcasts. NPR has launched several apps for smart-
phones and tablet computers.
In the United States, each NPR station is itself a pro-
duction center, capable of producing and distributing pro-
gramming to the entire system. Each station mixes locally
produced programs with those transmitted from the national
production center. A combined satellite and internet content
distribution service allows better-quality transmission of
existing programs. The high quality of national programs
frequently entices stations to use NPR’s offerings.
NPR schedules news, public affairs, arts, music and
drama programs to fit into whatever formats member sta-
tions choose. The news programs Morning Edition, All
Things Considered and Weekend Edition are its most
distinguished trademarks and the core of its program ser-
vice. NPR also successfully programs talk about politics
and social issues with shows such as Talk of the Nation
and Fresh Air. NPR also has provided leadership in music
and arts programming for the public radio system with
such shows as From the Top, JazzSet, Radiolab and live
broadcasts of musical events from Europe and around the
United States. It has provided stations with in-depth
reporting on education, bilingual Spanish news features,
and live coverage of Senate and House committee
hearings.
However, not everyone applauds NPR programs. Con-
servative members of Congress complain that NPR’s pro-
grams have a liberal bias (denied by NPR) and have
proposed prohibiting any federal funds from being used to
pay for NPR programs. While NPR does not receive fund-
ing directly from Congress for its operations, its member
stations rely on grants from the taxpayer-funded Corpora-
tion for Public Broadcasting (CPB) to help pay NPR pro-
gramming fees. Threats to NPR funding rise and fall
depending upon which political party controls Congress.
Efforts to cut-off funds and growing pressure to reduce
government spending mean NPR and public radio stations
across the country need to rally listeners periodically to
contact Congress in support of public broadcasting.
456
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
That was certainly part of the logic behind the
1999 FCC rules that introduced noncommercial
low-power FM (LPFM) radio service. LPFM consists
of stations with either maximum power levels of
just 10 watts (reaching areas with a radius of 1 to
2 miles) or 100 watts (reaching areas with a radius
of approximately 3.5 miles). Despite vigorous lobby-
ing against the idea by National Association of
Broadcasters (NAB)—who were concerned that the
presence of even low-power transmission towers
would interfere with existing commercial broadcast
station signals—today hundreds of LPFM stations
broadcast information programming to local com-
munities. Most are programmed by educational
facilities, local church groups or city governments.
Finally, the government is, itself, in the noncom-
mercial information radio business. The National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
broadcasts local weather information over 1,000
NOAA stations in the 160-megahertz band, and
state governments operate numerous Highway Advi-
sory Radio (HAR) stations within the AM broadcast
band (see 12.19 and 12.20).
What Lies Ahead
When it comes to the future of information radio,
perhaps the most obvious statement is that the for-
mat is not going to disappear any time soon. Our
society has developed a high level of urgency about
obtaining relevant news and information. How-
ever, programmers might wonder whether tradi-
tional terrestrial radio is going to disappear now
that content can be delivered on multiple digital
platforms.
In simpler times, programmers only worried
about competition from the radio stations in their
markets and had the straightforward task of attract-
ing listeners to their stations’ frequencies and keep-
ing them listening for as long as possible. Now that
cell phones and computers have evolved into wire-
less multimedia devices, consumers can access audio,
video, text and more from around the world in the
palm of their hands and listen, watch or read on
their own terms. Programmers must now export
content to listeners rather than just importing listen-
ers to the content on radio stations.
12.17 American Public Media
A
merican Public Media (APM), the parent organi-
zation for Minnesota Public Radio, Southern Cali-
fornia Public Radio and Classical South Florida, is the
largest owner and operator of public radio stations and
produces more than 20 public radio programs that are
heard on nearly 800 stations. APM is the largest pro-
ducer and distributor of classical music programming in
the United States. It is home to the immensely popular
variety show A Prairie Home Companion, as well as the
weekday business show Marketplace. Other talk/infor-
mation programs produced and distributed by APM
include American RadioWorks, The Story and Being
(featuring “conversations about life’s deepest
questions”).
12.18 The Pacifica Group
T
he Pacifica stations—WBAI-FM (New York), WPFW-
FM (Washington, DC), KPFT-FM (Houston), KPFA-FM
(Berkeley) and KPFK-FM (Los Angeles)—pioneered the
news and public-affairs format for noncommercial public
radio. The Pacifica Foundation, licensee of the stations in
this group, has a specific social and political purpose that
influences its approach to news and public affairs. Listeners
have little difficulty recognizing the far left-wing political
predisposition, and Pacifica is open about its philosophy.
Its network’s mission is “to promote peace and justice
through communication between all races, nationalities
and cultures.”17
These stations were especially successful during the late
1960s and early 1970s when the nation was highly politi-
cized over Vietnam and Watergate. In their reporting of that
war and the surrounding issues they demonstrated the vital role
played by broadcasting that is free from commercial restraints.
Pacifica stations played a similar role during the brief Persian
Gulf War and continued with vocal criticism of the United
States’ invasion and occupation of Iraq and Afghanistan.
CHAPTER 12 Information Radio Programming
457
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Broadcasters will hang onto the traditional
radio advertising business model as long as possible
while they struggle with learning how to best make
money from digital platforms like podcasting, web
streaming and smartphone apps. Some form of mul-
tiplatform strategy has become crucial, but at pres-
ent, user payments for apps get divided among
several parties, leaving only a trickle for stations.
However, advertisers are likely to be less than
pleased if listeners prefer commercial-free digital
downloads
over
listening
in
real
time
to
the
advertiser-supported version on the radio. Broadcast
programmers need to work closely with sales man-
agers and general managers to develop business
models that maximize both audiences and revenue.
Programmers will also be wondering where they
will find the talent necessary to attract a loyal audi-
ence and build a brand that can be marketed on
multiple platforms. No matter how content is deliv-
ered, it will always be essential to have compelling
personalities who can attract listeners. And those
new talk-radio personalities will likely be found
with loyal followings on digital platforms rather
than working their way up from small market
broadcast stations. Some may see a brighter future
building their own empires on digital platforms
rather than sharing profits with station owners and
syndicators.
Finally, talk radio programmers will continue
seeking
ways
to
attract
younger
audiences
that
12.19 NOAA Weather Radio
N
OAA Weather Radio is a nationwide network of
radio stations broadcasting continuous weather
information direct from a nearby National Weather
Service office. NOAA Weather Radio broadcasts
National Weather Service warnings, watches,
forecasts and other hazard information 24 hours a day.
Under the FCC’s new Emergency Alert System,
NOAA Weather Radio has become an “all hazards”
radio network, making it the single source for the most
comprehensive weather and emergency information
available to the public. NOAA Weather Radio
broadcasts warning and post-event information for
both natural (such as earthquakes and volcano activity)
and technological (such as chemical releases or oil spills)
hazards.
Known as the “Voice of the National Weather Service,”
NOAA Weather Radio is provided as a public service by the
Department of Commerce’s National Oceanic and Atmo-
spheric Administration. The NOAA Weather Radio network
has more than 1,000 transmitters that cover the 50 states,
adjacent coastal waters, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands
and the U.S. Pacific Territories. NOAA Weather Radio requires
a special radio receiver or scanner capable of picking up the
signal. Broadcasts are found in the public service band at these
seven frequencies (MHz): 162.400, 162.425, 162.450,
162.475, 162.500, 162.525 and 162.550.
12.20 Highway Advisory Radio
A
long highways people see bright orange signs with
flashing lights along the side of the road. Such signs
read, “Motorist Advisory When Flashing: Tune Radio to
1610 AM” (or some similar frequency). This is an invita-
tion to listen to Highway Advisory Radio (HAR) stations.
HAR stations give motorists a wide variety of information,
such as details about the latest highway construction
and maintenance projects, details on local traffic and
weather conditions that may impede travel, locations
of upcoming rest stops and descriptions of local points of
interest.
These broadcasts are possible as the result of an FCC
authorization for “Travelers’ Information Stations.” Accord-
ing to FCC regulations, radio frequencies 530 through
1700 kHz may be used by governmental entities and parks
districts to inform the public about traveler safety informa-
tion. There are some limitations, however, such as the out-
put power of HAR stations cannot exceed 10 watts, and
transmissions may not interfere with any existing commer-
cial stations (which is why HAR stations are usually at the
very far ends of the AM band). In addition, identifying the
commercial names of businesses is prohibited.
458
PART FIVE
Audio Programming Practices

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
advertisers say they prefer. As the baby boom ages and
AM radio station audiences get older, look for more
talk radio formats to migrate to the FM band. With
more people preferring to listen to music on MP3
players and through web streaming services, FM
broadcast stations will have to reinvent themselves
just as AM radio did when music formats migrated to
FM.
It would be easy to count radio out, but it has faced
challenges before and adjusted to continue being a via-
ble medium. “I believe there is a future for traditional
radio, but we also have to remember we’re in the com-
munications business, not the radio business,” says
Jerry Bader, the news/talk program director for Mid-
west Communications. “The challenge for radio is to
use print and video formats to grow the on-air product
to the new platforms, not just move them over.”18
Notes
1. Credit goes to former authors Robert F. Potter and
Joseph G. Buchman for much of this discussion of infor-
mation’s multiple meanings and other portions of this
chapter.
2. Kipper McGee, Kipper McGee, LLC, introduction to
“Digital Media Workshop” at the 13th annual New
Media Seminar, March 19, 2010. Retrieved 26 May 2011
from http://www.podjockey.com/2010/04/08/2010-new-
media-seminar-videos/.
3. Smith, Andy, “A Whole New Wavelength,” Providence
Journal-Bulletin, 13 July 2003, p. E-1.
4. Personal communication from Rollye James, talk-show
host and radio consultant, to Joseph G. Buchman, Phila-
delphia, PA, May 2000. Quoted from Buchman’s chapter,
“Information Radio Programming,” in the sixth edition of
this book.
5. Squires, C. R., “Black Talk Radio: Defining Commu-
nity Needs and Identity,” Harvard International Journal
of Press/Politics 5(2), 2000, pp. 73–95.
6. As quoted in “The Big Questions: A special report on
the state of news/talk radio,” Radio Ink, 16 May 2011.
7. Marcucci,Carl, “Numero Uno: Rush!” Retrieved 25
July 2004 from www.rbr.com/interviews/rushrlimbaugh.
asp.
8. “Green Brothers Close Deal to Buy Liberal Talk Radio
Network Air America,” Associated Press Worldstream, 6
March 2007. Retrieved from Lexis-Nexis.
9. Stelter, Brian, “Liberal Radio, Even Without Air
America,” The New York Times, 25 January 2010, p. C1.
10. As quoted in “‘Bob & Tom Show’ Pulls Back from
Edgy Content,” Associated Press wire story, 26 February
2004. Retrieved from Lexis-Nexis.
11. The quote is from Dr. Rob Balon, CEO of The
Benchmark Company, in “Study: Rush Limbaugh’s Audi-
ence Remains Solid,” Radio & Records Online, 3 Febru-
ary 2004. www.radioandrecordsonline.com.
12. Personal communication from Michael Harrison to
Joseph G. Buchman, 27 April 2000. Quoted from Buch-
man’s chapter, “Information Radio Programming,” in the
sixth edition of this book.
13. “The 100 Most Important Radio Talk Show Hosts in
America—Class of 2004.” Retrieved 26 July 2004 from
www.talkers.com.heavy.html.
14. Hoffstetter,C. Richard, “The Skills and Motivations
of Interactive Media Participants: The Case of Political
Talk Radio.” In Erik P. Bucy and John E. -Newhagen
(eds.), Media Access: Social and Psychological Dimensions
of New Technology Use. Mahawah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2004,
p. 211.
15. Kaltenbach,C., and McCauley,M. C., “Public Radio
Gets Bequest of More Than $200 Million; Donation Is
from Widow of McDonald’s Founder,” The Baltimore
Sun, 7 November 2003, p. 1A.
16. Quoted from the Public Radio International (PRI)
website. Retrieved 1 June 2011 from http://www.pri.org/
pri-facts.html.
17. Quoted from the Pacifica Network website. Retrieved
1 June 2011 from http://www.pacificanetwork.org/radio/
content/section/4/40/.
18. As quoted in “The Big Questions: A special report on
the state of news/talk radio,” Radio Ink, 16 May 2011.
CHAPTER 12 Information Radio Programming
459
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Annotated Bibliography
This is a selective, annotated listing of recent books, arti-
cles, guides, reports and trade magazines on broadcast and
cable programs and online programming published since
2006. Additional citations of books, articles and websites
appear at each chapter’s end under Notes. See also Internet
Media Sites. For publications relevant to programming
prior to 2006, consult the bibliographies to the previous
editions of this book.
Abbott, Jon. Stephen J. Cannell Television Productions:
A History of All Series and Plots. Jefferson, NC:
McFarland, 2009. Compilation of Cannell’s work in
television with brief discussion of its impact.
Albarran, Alan B. Management of Electronic Media, 3rd
ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 2006. Textbook for
teaching management of new and mature media
businesses.
Albarran, Alan B., Chan-Olmstead, Sylvia M., and Wirth,
Michael O. (eds.). Handbook of Media Management
and Economics. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2006. A syn-
thesis of current research and industry practice relating
to media management.
Alten, Stanley. Audio in Media, 8th ed. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth, 2008. Techniques and principles of audio
production from planning to post-production.
Arbitron Cable Television Study: Exploring the Consu-
mer’s Relationship with Cable TV. Columbia, MD:
Arbitron, Inc., 2006. Report of a telephone survey
taken in 2006 describing use and distribution of new
media and cable in subscribers’ homes.
Aylesworth, John. The Corn Was Green: The Inside Story
of Hee Haw. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2010. History
and impact of the television comedy Hee Haw.
Banet-Weiser, Sarah, Chris, Cynthia, and Freitas, Anthony
(eds.). Cable Visions: Television Beyond Broadcasting.
New York: New York University Press, 2007. Com-
prehensive survey of the limits and opportunities in the
new video media.
Baym, Geoffrey. From Cronkite to Colbert: The Evolution
of Broadcast News. Boulder, CO: Paradigm Publishers,
2010. Analysis of the changing news culture at CBS
television and its effects.
Beaty, Bart, and Sullivan, Rebecca. Canadian Television
Today. Alberta, Canada: University of Calgary Press,
2006. Discussion of challenges facing the Canadian televi-
sion industry and government in the face of cable impor-
tation, high-speed internet access and mobile media.
Bennett, James. Television Personalities: Stardom and the
Small Screen. New York: Routledge, 2011. Insightful
view of television celebrities, their rise to stardom and
their impacts.
Berman, Margo. Street-Smart Advertising: How to Win
the Battle of the Buzz. New York: Rowman &
Littlefield, 2006. Advice on the creative side of
marketing strategy.
Billboard: The International Newsweekly of Music and
Home Entertainment. New York, 1894 to date,
weekly. Trade magazine of the radio industry. www.
billboard.com.
Bissell, Tom. Extra Lives: Why Video Games Matter. New
York: Pantheon, 2010. Academic essays on the mean-
ing and experiences of video game playing.
Blakeman, Robyn. Integrated Marketing Communication:
Creative Strategy from Idea to Implementation. New
York: Rowman & Littlefield, 2007. Textbook on
building brand equity.
Broadcaster Magazine. Toronto, Canada, 1942 to date.
Canadian trade magazine covering the radio, television
and cable industries, with special emphasis on current
news.
460

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Broadcasting & Cable Market Place (replaced Broadcast-
ing Yearbook in 1992). Washington, DC: Broadcasting
Publications, 1935 to date, annually. Basic trade
directory of radio and television stations and support
industries; added cable in 1980.
Broadcasting & Cable: The Business of Television. New
York: Reed Business Information, 1931 to date,
weekly. (Cable added in 1972; radio and Washington
politics dropped in 1992.) Major trade magazine of the
broadcasting industry; see especially Special Reports on
cable, children’s television, digitalization, high-
definition TV, internet technology, journalism, media
corporations, radio, reps, satellites, sports, syndication
and television programming.
Broadcasting and the Law. Knoxville, TN: Perry Publica-
tions, 1972 to date, twice monthly. Newsletter and
supplements explaining findings of the Federal Com-
munications Commission, courts, and Congress affect-
ing broadcast operations.
Burgess, Jean, and Green, Joshua. YouTube: Online Video
and Participatory Culture. Polity Press, Cambridge,
Mass., 2009. Scholarly assessment of the societal
functions and politics of YouTube from a social science
perspective.
Butler, Jeremy G. Television: Critical Methods and Appli-
cations, 3rd ed. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2007. Intro-
ductory textbook about the production of television
programs and commercials from a critical and cultural
media perspective.
By the Numbers: Street & Smith’s SportsBusiness Journal
(weekly). Street & Smith since 1998. Ongoing updating
of events and facts about sports, especially televised
sports.
Cable Services Directory. Washington, DC: National
Cable Television Association, 1978 to date, annually
(title varies). Directory of information on individual
cable systems, including amounts and types of local
origination.
Cable Strategies. Monthly trade magazine concentrating
on the operations and marketing of local cable services.
Denver, CO, 1986 to date.
Cable Television Business (formerly TVC). Biweekly trade
magazine covering cable system management. Engle-
wood, CO, 1963 to date.
Cable World. Denver, CO: Cable World Associates, 1988
to date, weekly. Trade articles on national cable pro-
gramming and other topics from a managerial
perspective.
Chambers, Todd. “ The State of Spanish-Language Radio.”
Journal of Radio Studies 13 (Winter 2006), pp. 34–50.
Update on radio stations and programs targeting the
Hispanic market.
Chan-Olmstead, Sylvia M. Competitive Strategy for Media
Firms: Strategic and Brand Management in Changing
Media Markets. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2006. Review of
the analytic frameworks behind current industry practices
with application to the products of the electronic media.
Children’s Educational Television, FCC Consumer Facts.
Federal Communications Commission, 11 December
2006. www.fcc.gov/cgb/consumerfacts/childtv.html.
Summary report of research findings about children’s
viewing of television and commercial advertising.
Cohen, Noam. “ Bloggers Take on Talk Radio Hosts.”
The New York Times. 15 January 2007, p. C3. Anal-
ysis of reactions to the excesses of right-wing radio talk
based on blogged messages.
Collins, Kathleen. Watching What We Eat: The Evolution of
Television Cooking Shows. New York: Continuum, 2009.
An exploration of cooking programs’ shift from education
to entertainment and their impact on social attitudes.
Comm/Ent: A Journal of Communications and Entertain-
ment Law. San Francisco: Hastings College of the Law,
1978 to date, quarterly. Law journal containing articles
summarizing the law on specific issues, including
broadcasting and new technologies.
Communications & Convergence Review. Published by
Korea Information Society Development Institute,
Gwacheon, Korea, since 2009. A journal of multidis-
ciplinary research about convergence of technologies,
users, applications and regulations relating to mobile
and online media and other forms of electronic
communication.
Community Television Review. Washington, DC:
National Federation of Local Cable Programmers,
1979 to date, bimonthly. Newsletter of the NFLCP for
local cable programmers. Covers public, educational,
and government access television on cable and local
cable origination.
C-SPAN Update. Washington, DC: C-SPAN Network,
1982 to date, weekly. Newspaper of program content
and issues affecting the broadcasting of public affairs
on radio and television.
Current. Washington, DC: Public Broadcasting Service,
1981 to date, weekly. Washington newspaper focusing
on public broadcasting. www.current.org.
Daily Variety. Hollywood/New York: Variety, 1905 to
date, daily. Trade newspaper of the film and television
industries. Daily version of Variety magazine that is
oriented toward film and television production and
programming.
Annotated Bibliography
461
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Darnell, Simon C., and Wilson, Brian. “ Macho Media:
Unapologetic Hypermasculinity in Vancouver’s ‘Talk
Radio for Guys.’” Journal of Broadcasting & Elec-
tronic Media, 50 (Fall 2006), pp. 444–466. Contextual
analysis of on-air programming of MOJO Radio.
David, Nina. TV Season. Phoenix, AZ: Oryx, 1976 to
date, annually. Annotated guide to the previous sea-
son’s commercial and public network and major syn-
dicated television programs.
DBS News. Washington, DC: Phillips Publishing, 1983 to
date, monthly. Newsletter covering international regu-
latory, technical and programming developments in
direct broadcasting.
De Vito, John, and Frank Tropea. Epic Television Mini-
series: A Critical History. Jefferson, NC: McFarland,
2010. An analysis of the blockbuster miniseries and
their impact on the industry and culture.
Dominick, Joseph R., Sherman, Barry L., and Messere,
Fritz. Broadcasting, Cable, the Internet, and Beyond:
An Introduction to Modern Electronic Media, 5th ed.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 2007. Up-to-date edition of
this basic text, with several chapters on programming
and the internet.
Duncan, James H., (ed.). American Radio Quarterly Rat-
ings Reports. Cincinnati, OH: Duncan’s American
Radio, Inc., 1976 to date, quarterly plus supplements.
Industry sourcebook for radio ratings and program-
ming information for all markets, with extensive tables
and charts.
———. Duncan’s Radio Market Guide. Cincinnati, OH:
Duncan’s American Radio, 1976 to date, annually.
Companion reference volume on the revenue ratings
histories and projections for 173 markets, including
market descriptions and many charts and tables.
Eastman, Susan Tyler, Ferguson, Douglas A., and Klein,
Robert A. (eds.). Media Promotion and Marketing, 5th
ed. (formerly Promotion of Marketing for Broadband,
Cable, and the Web). Boston, MA: Focal Press, 2006.
Strategic planning for marketing networks, stations,
cable systems and websites to audiences and
advertisers,
Edgerton, Gary R., and Jeffrey P. Jones (eds.). The Essential
HBO Reader. Lexington, KY: University Press of Ken-
tucky, 2008. Essays interpreting major films carried by
HBO and assessments of their importance and impacts.
Erickson, Hal. Encyclopedia of Television Law Shows:
Factual and Fictional Series About Judges, Lawyers
and the Courtroom, 1948–2008. Comprehensive list-
ing of law-related television series, including actors,
producers, ratings history and plot synopses.
Farhi, Paul. “ Tomlinson Cited for Abuses at Broadcast
BoardL CBS Ex-Chief Puts Friend on Payroll, State
Dept. Says.” Washington Post, 22 January 2007, p. C1.
Federal Communications Commission. Tenth Annual
Report: In the Matter of Annual Assessment of Com-
petition in the Market for the Delivery of Video Pro-
gramming [MB Docket No. 03-172]. Washington, DC:
28 January 2004.
Fentuck, Mike, and Varney, Mike. Media Regulation,
Public Interest, and the Law, 2nd ed. Edinburgh, UK:
Edinburgh University Press, 2006. British perspective
on law and the media.
Gomery, Douglas. The Studio System. Berkeley, CA: Uni-
versity of California Press, 2005. Overview of the history
of the Hollywood Studios and the movies they made.
Grant, August E., and Meadows, Jennifer H. (eds.). Com-
munication Technology Update, 10th ed. Boston, MA:
Focal Press, 2006. Latest in a quickly updated series on
the newest media technologies, written by academics
and media experts in their specialties.
Green, Andrew. From Prime Time to My Time: Audience
Measurement in the Digital Age. London, Warc, 2010.
Scholarly assessment of the problems of television
ratings.
Greene, Doyle. Politics and American Television Comedy:
A Critical Survey from I Love Lucy through South
Park. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2008. Analyses of the
broad sweep of comedy television, stressing political
implications.
Greven, David. Gender and Sexuality in Star Trek: Alle-
gories of Desire in the Television Series and Films.
Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2009. Analysis of gendered
images and language in this classic set of programs.
Groebel, Jo, Noam, Eli M., and Feldmann, Valerie. (eds.).
Mobile Media: Content and Services for Wireless
Communications. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2006.
Scholarly chapters discussing the likely content, poli-
cies, economics and business models of the new mobile
media in international markets.
Ha, Louisa S., and Ganahi, III, Richard J. Webcasting
Worldwide: Business Models of an Emerging Global
Medium. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2006. Examination
of the business practices of webcasters around the
world.
Halper, Donna H. Icons of Talk: The Media Mouths That
Changed America. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press,
2009. Analyses of the major talk radio and television
figures and their individual and collective impact.
Hausman, Carl, Benoit, Philip, Messere, Frank, and
O’Donnell, Lewis B. Modern Radio Production:
462
Annotated Bibliography

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Production, Programming, and Performance, 7th ed.
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 2007. Handbook for intro-
ducing students to producing and performing on radio,
including programming aspects.
Holmes, Su. The Quiz Show. Edinburgh: Edinburgh Uni-
versity Press/New York: Columbia University Press,
2009. Analysis of television quiz shows in Great Britain
and America, from a British perspective.
Howard, Herbert H. Ownership Trends in Cable Televi-
sion. Washington, DC: National Association of
Broadcasters, 1987 to date, annually. Continuing
comparative series on the 50 largest cable multiple-
system operations; tables and charts.
International Journal on Media Management. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum and the University of St. Gallen,
Switzerland (Institute for Media and Communications
Management), 1999 to date. Scholarly articles on
management and economics of media in many coun-
tries, especially focusing on the transition from old to
new media.
Jermyn, Deborah. Sex and the City. Detroit, MI: Wayne
State University Press, 2008. Analysis of the classic
television series Sex and the City.
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media. Washington,
DC: Broadcast Education Association, 1955 to date.
Scholarly journal covering research in all aspects of
television and radio broadcasting, especially emphasiz-
ing those topics with industry impact.
Journal of Consumer Research. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, 1974 to date. Interdisciplinary journal
reporting empirical studies and humanistic analyses
that describe and explain consumer behavior.
Journal of Mass Media Ethics: Exploring Questions of
Media Morality. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 1986 to date,
quarterly. Essays, reports, and literature reviews about
ethical issues of interest to professionals and scholars.
Journal of Radio Studies. Washington, DC: Broadcast
Education Association, 1991 to date. Scholarly articles
on historical and contemporary radio, including
programming.
Keith, Michael C. The Radio Station: Broadcast, Satellite,
and Internet, 7th ed. Boston, MA: Focal Press, 2007.
Newest edition of this classic guide to the business of
running radio stations. Emphasizes station operations
and marketing, satellite radio, web radio and
podcasting.
Keith, Michael C. Radio Cultures: The Sound Medium in
American Life. New York: Peter Lang Publications,
2008. Scholarly analysis of the influence of radio on
American culture.
Lochte, Bob. Christian Radio: The Growth of a Main-
stream Broadcasting Force. Jefferson, NC: McFarland
& Co., 2006. Brief history and analysis of the surge in
Christian-oriented radio talk.
Lotz, Amanda D. The Television Will Be Revolutionized. New
York: New York University Press, 2007. Analyses and
explications of the impact of the convergence of prime-time
television and the computer on the media industry.
The LPTV Report. Butler, WI: Kompas/Biel & Associates,
1985 to date, monthly. Trade magazine that is the
official information channel of the Community Broad-
casters Association, an organization of low-power
television broadcasters.
MediaPost’s TV Board: “Big Thoughts on the Future of
the Small Screen.” MediaPost Publications, www.
tvboard@mediapost.com. Near daily blogs from Jack
Myers and others about advances and problems in
media, advertising and technology.
Meizel, Katherine. Idolized: Music, Media and Identity in
American Idol. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press, 2011. Analysis of the production techniques of
this blockbuster television show and its impact on
other programs and the television business.
Multichannel News: The Newspaper for the New Elec-
tronic Media. New York: Reed Business Information,
1980 to date, weekly. Trade newspaper of regulatory,
programming, financial and technical events affecting
electronic media.
NAB News. Washington, DC: National Association of
Broadcasters, 1989 to date, monthly. Reports during
the 1989 to 1990 period on developments in federal
regulation, ratings research and other matters affecting
broadcasters, later becoming a report on the NAB
convention.
NATOA News. 1980 to date, bimonthly. Newsletter of
the National Association of Telecommunications Offi-
cers and Advisors and the National League of Cities.
Short reports on current events affecting local cable
franchise regulation and technology, including legisla-
tive updates.
NATPE International Newsletter (formerly NATPE Pro-
grammer). Washington, DC: National Association of
Television Program Executives, 1990 to date, monthly.
Trade newsletter of the national programmers’
association.
The New York Times. 1850 to date, daily. National
newspaper covering business and entertainment aspects
of broadcasting, cable television and the internet.
NRB Magazine. Manassas, VA: National Religious
Broadcasters Association, 1968 to date, nine times per
Annotated Bibliography
463
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
year. Magazine emphasizing evangelical broadcasting
on radio and television, with informal style.
Palmer, Shelly. Television Disrupted: The Transition from
Network to Networked Television. 2nd ed. Boston,
MA: Focal Press, 2008. Examines the changing tech-
nologies, business rules and legal issues of television,
directed toward professionals and business executives.
The Pay TV Newsletter. Carmel, CA: Paul Kagan Associ-
ates, 1983 to date, weekly. Trade summaries of analy-
ses and events affecting premium cable television.
Pondillo, Robert. America’s First Network TV Censor:
The Work of NBC’s Stockton Helffrich. Carbondale,
IL: Southern Illinois University Press, 2010. Explication
of Helffrich’s influence on NBC’s policies regarding
explicit and implied sexuality, indecency and race in
series, movie and comedy during the 1950s.
Producers Quarterly. Port Washington, NY: Producers
Quarterly Publications, 1991 to date. Trade magazine
for executives in the movie and television production
business. Covers developments in production technol-
ogy and animation, production problems and success
stories, and interviews with producers.
Radio Ink. Biweekly magazine for radio managers, 1998
to date.
Radio and Internet Newsletter (RAIN). Free, daily web-
based commentary on issues, published by Kurt Han-
son, 1999 to date. www.kurthanson.com.
Radio & Records: The Industry’s Newspaper. Los
Angeles, 1974 to date, weekly. Trade magazine of the
record industry, ranking songs and albums. Available
online at www.radioandrecords.com.
R&R Ratings Report. Los Angeles: Radio & Records,
Inc., semiannually. Special reports on the state of radio
programming.
RadioWeek. Washington, DC: National Association of
Broadcasters, 1960 to date, weekly. Newsletter on
matters affecting radio broadcasters, including pro-
posed changes in federal regulations and standards.
Raney, Arthur, and Bryant, Jennings (eds.). Handbook of
Sports and Media. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2006.
Comprehensive scholarly analyses of mediated sports’
history and development, economics and marketing,
coverage and audiences, and critical issues by major
scholars.
Robinson, Tom, and Anderson, Caitlin. “ Older Charac-
ters in Children’s Animated Television Programs: A
Content Analysis of Their Portrayal.” Journal of
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 50 (Spring 2006),
pp. 287–304. Descriptive analysis of portrayals of
older characters in cartoons, revealing negative mental
and physical characteristics that feed into harmful
stereotyping by children.
RTNDA Communicator. 1946 to date, monthly. News-
letter of the Radio-Television News Directors
Association.
SkyResearch. Monthly trade magazine concentrating on
the satellite industry. Golden, CO, 1994 to date.
Sterling, Christopher H., Bernt, Phyllis W., and Weiss,
Martin B. H. Shaping American Telecommunications:
A History of Technology, Policy, and Economics.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2006. An authoritative expla-
nation of the stages of telecommunications develop-
ment. Covers policy decisions, innovations and
regulations.
Sterling, Christopher H., and Keith, Michael C. Sounds of
Change: A History of FM Broadcasting in America.
Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press,
2008. Definite chronicle of FM radio, its influence on
government regulation, politics and society, and its
major figures.
Stolarz, Damien, and Felix, Lionel. Hands-On Guide to
Video Blogging and Podcasting. Boston, MA: Focal
Press, 2006. Covers technology, production techniques,
licensing and launch instructions for podcasts and
video blogs, including uses in business, education and
entertainment.
Strangelove, Michael. Watching YouTube: Extraordinary
Videos by Ordinary People. Toronto, Canada: Uni-
versity of Toronto Press, 2010. Examples of the range
and types of unusual videos on YouTube. Also, www.
watchingyoutube.com.
Stratyner, Leslie, and James R.Keller (eds.). The Deep End
of South Park: Critical Essays on TV’s Shocking Car-
toon Series. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2009. Essays
explicating the elements that create this program’s
impact and symbolism, as well as its implications for
understanding American culture.
The Television Audience. Northbrook, IL: A. C. Nielsen
Company, 1959 to date, annually. Trends in television
programming and audience viewing patterns.
Television Digest. Washington, DC: Warren Publishing,
Inc., 1945 to date, weekly. Trade summary of events
affecting the television business.
Television Week (formerly Electronic Media). Chicago:
Crain Communications, 1982 to date, weekly. Trade
periodical covering topical news in broadcasting, cable,
and new media technologies. Available online at www.
tvweek.com.
TVI: Television International Magazine. Universal City,
CA: TVI Publishing Company, 1956 to date. Daily
464
Annotated Bibliography

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
media news on the internet derived from the major
international news service. Print and online at www.
tviNews.net.
TV Today. Washington, DC: National Association of
Broadcasters, 1970 to date, weekly. Newsletter
addressing matters of interest to broadcast station
members, including developments in technology,
regulation and member services.
Variety. New York and Hollywood, 1925 to date, weekly.
Trade newspaper covering the stage and the film,
television and recording industries.
Vorderer, Peter, and Bryant, Jennings. Playing Video
Games: Motives, Responses, and Consequences.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2006. Psychology of mediated
game playing as entertainment; includes simulations,
gambling and role-playing games.
Webster, James G. “ Audience Flow Past and Present:
Television Inheritance Effects Reconsidered.” Journal
of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 50 (Spring 2006),
pp. 323–337. Scholarly replication of an earlier study
of audience flow between back-to-back programs;
finds the same predictors and strength of influence
20 years later.
Webster, James G., Phalen, Patricia F., and Lichty,
Lawrence W. Ratings Analysis: The Theory and
Practice of Audience Research, 3rd ed. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum, 2006. Authoritative description and analysis
of audience ratings data for industry and scholarly
users of ratings. Covering applications, collection
methods, and models for data analysis—especially for
electronic media.
Wimmer, Roger D., and Dominick, Joseph R. Mass Media
Research: An Introduction, 9th ed. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth, 2011. Updated version of this classic text
on applied research methods in mass media, empha-
sizing broadcasting; includes survey methods and peo-
ple meter ratings.
Yuan, Elaine J., and Webster, James G. “ Channel Reper-
toires: Using Peoplemeter Data in Beijing.” Journal of
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 50 (Summer 2006),
pp. 524–536. Report of regression analysis of minute-
by-minute viewing in China, showing that total time
spent with television and cable subscriptions explained
65 percent of variance.
Zettl, Herbert. Television Production Handbook, 9th ed.
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 2006. Update of the
widely-used classic text that introduces students to the
skills and techniques of producing television programs
(including high-definition video) in the studio and
field.
Annotated Bibliography
465
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Internet Media Sites
This list was current for 2012 and is continually updated on
the home page link for this textbook, searchable from http://
media-programming.com. If you encounter difficulties with
any of the addresses below, try entering the minimal URL
address by preceding it with http:// and then deleting any
material after the .com portion.
General Interest Sites
www.zap2it.com/tv/
www.broadcastingcable.com
www.disney.com
www.fcc.gov
www.hollywoodreporter.com
www.mediaweek.com
www.nab.org (broadcast industry)
www.natpe.org (programming industry)
www.ncta.com (cable industry)
www.sbca.com (satellite industry)
www.sia.org (satellite industry)
www.tvb.org (TV broadcast industry)
www.newscorp.com
www.timewarner.com
www.viacom.com
www.warnerbros.com
For other media organizations and associations, see the list in
1.22 on page 36 of this textbook.
Updates and News Summaries
tv.yahoo.com
tv.zap2it.com
www.adweek.com
www.allcommunitymedia.org (Alliance for Community
Media)
www.billboard.biz/bbbiz/industry
www.bitpipe.com
www.broadcastingcable.com
www.cable360.net/
www.ctam.com
www.dsl-forum.org
www.kagan.com
www.mediapost.com/publications/
www.multichannel.com
www.newschannels.org
www.soapcentral.com
www.sportsbusinessjournal.com
www.tvguide.com/
www.tvnewscheck.com
www.tvweek.com
www.variety.com
www.zap2it.com/tv
Schedules
tvlistings.zap2it.com
www.allmytv.com
www.allyourtv.com
www.clicktv.com
www.tvguide.com/Listings/
www.tviv.org/Category:ProgrammingGrids (best source of
current and historical program grids)
Ratings Research
tvbythenumbers.zap2it.com/
www.adage.com (Ad Age online)
www.arbitron.com
www.billboard.biz/bbbiz/charts/currentsingles
www.katz-media.com
www.krgspec.com/ (Katz Media)
www.MediaMetrix.com (comScore)
www.ncta.com
www.nielsenmedia.com
www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/top10s/television.html
www.nielsen.com/us/en/measurement/online-
measurement.html
www.tvweek.com
www.zap2it.com/tv/ratings/
466

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Broadcast Networks
www.abc.com
www.cbs.com
www.cwtv.com
www.fox.com
www.iontelevision.com
www.mntv.com
www.nbc.com
www.pbs.org
www.telefutura.com
www.telemundo.com
www.thecw.com
www.univision.com
Cable
abcfamily.go.com
dsc.discovery.com
espn.go.com
soapnet.go.com
www.aetv.com
www.amctv.com
www.bet.com
www.bravotv.com
www.cartoonnetwork.com
www.cbn.org
www.cinemax.com
www.cnbc.com
www.cnn.com
www.comedycentral.com
www.disneychannel.com
www.eonline.com
www.foodtv.com
www.foxnews.com
www.fxnetworks.com
www.galavision.com
www.hbo.com
www.hgtv.com
www.historychannel.com
www.lifetimetv.com
www.money.cnn.com
www.msnbc.com
www.mtv.com
www.nationalgeographic.com/tv/channel
www.oxygen.com
www.playboy.com/pbtv
www.ppv.com or www.indemand.com
www.scifi.com
www.showtimeonline.com
www.soapcentral.com
www.sportsbusinessjournal.com
www.spiketv.com
www.superstation.com
www.tbn.org
www.tnt.tv.com
www.turnerclassicmovies.com
www.travelchannel.com
www.trutv.com
www.usanetwork.com
www.vh1.com
www.vvtv.com
www.weather.com
www.wewomensentertainment.com
Public Broadcasting
www.aptonline.org
www.cpb.org
www.current.org
www.npr.org
www.pbskids.org
www.pbs.org
www.pri.org
Satellite
www.directv.com
www.dishnetwork.com
www.newschannels.org
www.sbca.com
Radio
www.allaccess.com
www.billboard.com
www.citadelmedianetworks.com
www.clearchannel.com
www.cumulus.com
www.npr.org
www.radio-info.com
www.siriusxm.com
Online
video.aol.com
www.amazon.com/gp/video/ontv/ontv
www.atom.com
www.blockbuster.com/download
www.chooseandwatch.com
www.crackle.com
www.funnyordie.com
www.hulu.com
www.itvt.com
www.movielink.com
www.netflix.com
www.streamingmedia.com
www.vodpod.com
www.vudu.com
www.youtube.com
Internet Media Sites
467
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
About the
Contributing Authors
William J. Adams, professor of Communication in the
School of Journalism & Mass Communication at Kansas
State University, has a B.A. from Brigham Young Univer-
sity, an M.A. from Ball State University, and a Ph.D. from
Indiana University. He teaches, researches and writes
about programming, and especially focuses on network
television programming for prime time and on motion
pictures. Professor Adams has published extensively as a
journalist and scholar. His work includes chapters in the
area of television and movie programming in eight editions
of Media Programming: Strategies and Practices (Wads-
worth, 1985 to 2013); on promotion in Promotion &
Marketing for Broadcasting & Cable (Focal Press, 2006);
and on movies in Research in Media Promotion (Erlbaum,
2000). He has also published articles in the Journal of
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, the Journal of Com-
munication and the Journal of Media Economics. Profes-
sor Adams brings considerable historical expertise in
television programming to his analysis of present-day
prime-time strategies at the major networks. He can be
reached at wadams@ksu.edu.
Robert B. Affe, senior lecturer in Telecommunications and
International Studies at Indiana University, also directs the
Telecommunications Management Institute. His teaching
and research center on advertising, management and
international media issues. A former television executive
and attorney, he was educated at Georgetown University
(A.B.) and the New York University School of Law (J.D.).
After admission to practice before the New York State
Supreme Court and the District of Columbia Court
of Appeals, he practiced communications law in
Washington, DC. Drawn to the business of television, he
subsequently helped to launch or rebrand stations in sev-
eral major markets. While in Florida, Professor Affe
taught courses in communications law and media man-
agement at the University of South Florida and recently
lectured at several leading Chinese universities, including
Peking University. He has published chapters in several
telecommunications texts, including six editions of Media
Programming: Strategies and Practices (1993 to 2013). He
can be reached at raffe@indiana.edu.
Glenda R. Balas is associate professor and chair of the
Department of Communication and Journalism at the Uni-
versity of New Mexico. She holds a B.A. in Mass Commu-
nication and an M.B.A. from Eastern New Mexico
University and received her Ph.D. from the University of
Iowa. Prior to a career in academics, Dr. Balas worked in the
non-profit and public broadcasting sectors, spending more
than a decade in public information, programming and
development at public television stations KCTS-Seattle and
KENW-Portales, NM. Her research interests include the
history, theories and practices of mass communication,
focusing particularly on U.S. public broadcasting. Work in
this area includes journal articles in Critical Studies in Media
Communication, Journal of Communication Inquiry and
Democratic Communique, as well as a book entitled
Recovering a Public Vision for Public Television. Professor
Balas presented the Leah Vande Berg 2007 Lecture on Media
at the University of Iowa. In Spring 2009, she was a Fulb-
right Scholar at Dalhousie University, Nova Scotia, Canada,
where she focused on the study of public broadcasting in
Canada. Dr. Balas can be reached at gbalas@unm.edu.
468

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Robert V. Bellamy, professor in the Department of Jour-
nalism & Multimedia Arts at Duquesne University in Pitts-
burgh, has his B.A. from Morehead State University, his
M.A. from the University of Kentucky, and his Ph.D. from
the University of Iowa. His teaching and research interests
include television programming and promotion, media
globalization, media and sports, and the impact of techno-
logical change on media industries. He has professional
experience as a NATPE Fellow and program consultant to
KLRT in Little Rock, Arkansas, and as a newscast pro-
ducer, air talent and engineer for stations in Lexington and
Morehead, Kentucky. Professor Bellamy has published
widely about sports and television, network branding, U.S.
media economics and institutions and international media
communication, including chapters in such books as Sport,
Public Broadcasting and Cultural Citizenship (Routledge,
2012), The Twenty-First Century Media Industry (Lexing-
ton, 2010), the Handbook of Media and Sports (Erlbaum,
2005), Artificial Ice (Garamond, 2006), Promotion &
Marketing for Broadcasting & Cable (Focal Press, 2006),
Research in Media Promotion (Erlbaum, 2000), Television
and the American Family (Erlbaum, 2000), Media-Sport
(Routledge, 1998) and the last four editions of Media Pro-
gramming: Strategies and Practices (Wadsworth, 2002 to
2013). His research appears in such publications as the
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, the Journal of
Communication, the Journal of Sport & Social Issues and
Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly. Professor
Bellamy is coauthor of Centerfield Shot: A History of
Baseball and Television (University of Nebraska Press,
2008) and Television and the Remote Control: Grazing on
a Vast Wasteland (Guilford, 1996), and coeditor of The
Remote Control in the New Age of Television (Praeger,
1993). He is a member of the Editorial Board of NINE: A
Journal of Baseball History and Culture. He can be reached
at bellamy@duq.edu.
Susan Tyler Eastman, professor emerita of Telecommuni-
cations at Indiana University in Bloomington, has her B.A.
from the University of California at Berkeley, her M.A.
from San Francisco State University, and her Ph.D. from
Bowling Green State University. She is senior author/editor
of nine editions of Media Programming: Strategies and
Practices (Wadsworth, 1981 to 2013), five editions of
Promotion & Marketing for Broadcasting & Cable (Focal
Press, 1982 to 2006) and Research in Media Promotion
(Erlbaum, 2000). Professor Eastman has published over a
hundred book chapters and scholarly articles, most of
which focus on the structural, content and industry factors
affecting programming and promotion in television, radio
and cable. She has served on several editorial boards, and
her articles have appeared in such journals as the Journal
of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, Critical Studies in
Mass Communication, the Journal of Communication, the
Journal of Applied Communication Research, the Howard
Journal of Communication, the Sociology of Sport
Journal, the Journal of Sport & Social Issues and
Communication Yearbook. She can be reached at
eastman@indiana.edu.
Douglas A. Ferguson is a professor in the Department of
Communication at the College of Charleston, South Caro-
lina, where he served as the inaugural chair. His B.A. and
M.A. are from the Ohio State University and his Ph.D. from
Bowling Green State University. Early in his career, he was
program director of NBC-affiliated WLIO (TV) and a sta-
tion manager. In addition, he was program director for a
local origination cable channel in Bay City, Michigan, that
carried local game shows, children’s shows, sporting events,
movies and off-network syndication. He teaches, researches
and writes about programming and promotion on the
internet and other new media technologies and has authored
several chapters on aspects of information technology, eco-
nomics and media programming. He coauthored The
Broadcast Television Industry (Allyn & Bacon, 1998) and
coedited three editions of Promotion & Marketing for
Broadcasting & Cable (Focal Press, 1999 to 2006) and five
editions of Media Programming: Strategies and Practices
(Wadsworth, 1997 to 2013). Professor Ferguson’s scholarly
work has been published in the Journal of Broadcasting &
Electronic Media, Communication Research, Journalism
Quarterly and Communication Research Reports. He can
be reached at fergusond@cofc.edu.
Matthew T. Kaiser holds a B.A. from the University of
North Carolina at Greensboro and an M.A. from Ohio
University, where his research focused on interrelationships
among radio programming, telecommunication law and
regulations, and management. He is presently an on-air
talent for market leader WQBE-FM, owned by Bristol
Broadcasting Company, and an account executive for their
five station cluster in Charleston, WV. Additionally, he
serves weekends as on-air talent for Golden Isles Broad-
casting in Brunswick, GA. He is both a Certified Radio
Marketing Consultant (CRMC) and Certified Digital Mar-
keting Consultant (CDMC) through the Radio Advertising
Bureau. He combines an interest in digital and social media
with a strong reverence for terrestrial broadcasting, accom-
panied by familiarity with marketing and consumer behav-
ior. He can be reached at matt@kaiseraudio.com.
About the Contributing Authors
469
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Timothy P. Meyer, professor, holds the John P. Blair
Endowed Chair in Communication and is Chair of the
Communication Program at the University of Wisconsin-
Green Bay. He received his B.A. from the University of
Wisconsin and his M.A. and Ph.D. from Ohio University.
Before joining the University of Wisconsin-Green Bay, he
taught at the University of Texas at Austin and the Uni-
versity of Massachusetts, Amherst. He actively consults in
marketing and advertising research and works in organi-
zational and management communications. Professor
Meyer is coauthor of Mediated Communications: A Social
Action Perspective (Sage, 1988). He has published
numerous chapters and articles on programming and
marketing in edited books and such major scholarly jour-
nals as the Journal of Communication, the Journal of
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, the Journal of Market-
ing and the Journal of Advertising. He has contributed to
seven editions of Media Programming: Strategies and
Practices (Wadsworth, 1989 to 2013). He can be reached
at meyert@uwgb.edu.
Gregory D. Newton is associate director of graduate studies
in the School of Media Arts & Studies at Ohio University.
In addition to conducting research in media programming
and television law, he teaches courses in programming,
management, and law and regulation in the Department of
Telecommunications. He is the faculty advisor for Ohio
University’s online student radio station, cern.com, and has
several years of radio station experience, serving as opera-
tions manager, program director and production director as
well as air talent for several stations with AC, CHR, oldies,
country, big band, jazz and news/talk formats. He holds a
B.A. from Northern Illinois University, an M.A. from
Northwestern University, and a Ph.D. from Indiana Uni-
versity. Professor Newton has published in the Journal of
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, the Journal of Commu-
nication, the Journal of Radio Studies, the Journal of Media
Business Studies, the Journal of Promotion and Marketing
and the Journal of Applied Communication Research. He
has contributed to four editions of Media Programming:
Strategies and Practices (Wadsworth, 2002 to 2013). He
can be reached at newtong@ohio.edu.
Matthew S. Pierce lectures in the Department of Telecom-
munications at Indiana University while also serving as a
member of the Indiana House of Representatives. He has a
B.A. and J.D. from Indiana University. He is licensed to
practice law in Colorado, the District of Columbia,
Indiana and Pennsylvania. After serving in a variety of
staff positions for the Indiana House of Representatives, as
a member of the Bloomington, Indiana, City Council and
then as chief of staff for Congressman Baron Hill (9th
District-Indiana), he was first elected to the Indiana House
of Representatives in 2002 and has been reelected every
two years since then. Representative Pierce also serves on
the board of directors of Bloomington’s community radio
station, WFHB. His teaching centers on media industries
and management and the history of media development.
He can be reached at mspierce@indiana.edu.
Robert F. Potter is an associate professor in the Depart-
ment of Telecommunications at Indiana University, fol-
lowing several years on the Telecommunication & Film
faculty at University of Alabama. He teaches in the area of
telecommunication programming, advertising, marketing
and management. His primary research interest lies in
cognitive processing of audio in media messages. He was
also a radio professional for a decade, primarily in the
programming and promotion departments at a CHR sta-
tion in the Pacific Northwest. His B.A. and M.S. degrees
are from Eastern Washington University and his Ph.D. is
from Indiana University. Professor Potter has contributed
to the last three editions of Media Programming: Strategies
and Practices (Wadsworth, 2006–2013). His research is
published in Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media,
Communication Research, Media Psychology, the Journal
of Advertising, and the Journal of Interactive Marketing.
He can be reached at rfpotter@indiana.edu.
John von Soosten is program director and air personality
for SiriusXM Satellite Radio’s “On Broadway” music
channel, based in New York City. He was for many years
the senior vice president and director of programming for
Katz National Television, part of the nation’s largest tele-
vision representative firm, dealing with syndicated pro-
gramming. Before joining Katz in 1984, Mr. von Soosten
was vice president and program manager of Metromedia’s
WNEW-TV, New York (now WNYW-TV), and before
that, he was production manager at the same station and
production technician at WOR-TV, New York (now
WWOR-TV). He also has consulted for program syndica-
tors and software companies and authored numerous
magazine articles about the business of television and
radio. His B.S. is from Ithaca College and his M.S. from
Brooklyn College, and he taught television production for
many years at the college level. He brings a wide experi-
ence with syndicated television programming from the
perspective of hundreds of U.S. stations and their foreign
counterparts to his chapters in seven editions of Media
Programming: Strategies and Practices (Wadsworth, 1989
470
About the Contributing Authors

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
to 2013). Mr. von Soosten has been president of the
National Association of Television Program Executives
(NATPE), a director of the International Radio Television
Society (IRTS), a vice president of the International Radio
Television Foundation (IRTF), and chairman of the
NATPE Educational Foundation. He can be reached at
johnvons@msn.com.
James R. Walker, professor in the Department of Com-
munication at Saint Xavier University in Chicago, has his
B.A. and M.A. from Penn State University and his Ph.D.
from the University of Iowa. He has many years of expe-
rience as a producer and host of a daily consumer affairs
program aired on public television. His teaching and
research have focused on television programming prac-
tices, the effectiveness of television program promotion,
televised sports, and the impact of remote control devices
on television viewing behaviors and the television industry.
His most recent book is Centerfield Shot: A History of
Baseball on Television (University of Nebraska Press,
2008) with Robert V. Bellamy, Jr. Professor Walker
coauthored The Broadcast Television Industry (Allyn &
Bacon, 1998) and Television and the Remote Control:
Grazing on a Vast Wasteland (Guilford, 1996), and
coedited The Remote Control in the New Age of Televi-
sion (Praeger, 1993). In addition, he has published more
than 30 articles in national and regional journals, includ-
ing the Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media,
Journalism Quarterly, Nine: A Journal of Baseball History
and Culture and the Journal of Popular Culture. He has
contributed to the last four editions of Media Program-
ming: Strategies and Practices (Wadsworth, 2002 to
2013). He can be reached at walker@sxu.edu.
Michael O. Wirth is dean of the College of Communica-
tion and Information at the University of Tennessee,
after many years as director of the School of Communi-
cation and professor and chair of the Department of
Mass Communications and Journalism Studies at the
University of Denver. He was also a Senior Fellow of the
Magness Institute for cable telecommunications. He has
been a visiting professor at Renmin University in Beijing,
Zhejiang University in Hangzhou, and Curtin University
of Technology in Perth, Australia. Professor Wirth is an
internationally known expert who teaches and does
research in the areas of cable telecommunication and
broadcast economics, management and regulation. He
has provided consulting services for a number of multi-
channel television distributors, television networks and
station groups. For five years, he hosted a public affairs
program on Denver television for KWGN-TV. His B.S.
came from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and his
M.A. and Ph.D. from Michigan State University. He is
coeditor of the Handbook of Media Management and
Economics (Laurence Erlbaum, 2006), coauthor of
Costs, Benefits, and Long-Term Sustainability of
Municipal Cable Television Overbuilds (GSA Press,
1998), and he has published numerous research articles
in such periodicals as the Journal of Broadcasting &
Electronic Media, the Journal of Media Economics,
Journal of Regulatory Economics, Information Economics
and Policy, Quarterly Review of Economics and Business
and the Journal of Economics and Business, as well as in
scholarly books. He has contributed to three editions of
Media Programming: Strategies and Practices (Wads-
worth, 2006 to 2013). Dr. Wirth can be reached at
mwirth@utk.edu.
About the Contributing Authors
471
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Index to Program Titles
Note: This is a guide to specific television,
radio, cable, and online programs and movies
mentioned in the text. (Television, radio, and
cable networks appear in the General Index.)
ABC World News, 260, 261
ABC World News Now, 262, 298
Academy Awards, 81
Access Hollywood, 209, 295
According to Jim, 59
The Adams Chronicles, 363
African-American Lives, 367
Agatha Christie’s Poirot, 345
Alias, 209
Alice in Wonderland, 86
All in The Family, 65
All My Children, 255
All Things Considered, 430, 454
Alphas, 316
Amateur Hour, 75
Amazing Grace, 29
The Amazing Race, 69
American Chopper, 319
American Dad, 58
American Idol, 6, 11, 12, 48, 50, 53, 54, 57,
59, 62, 68, 69, 72, 73, 75, 84, 117, 150
American Idol Rewind, 108
American Masters, 349
American Pickers, 315
America’s Best Dance Crew, 317
America’s Dumbest Criminals, 209
America’s Funniest Home Videos, 13
America’s Most Wanted, 59
America This Morning, 262
Amos ‘n’ Andy, 19
Andromeda, 73, 317
The Andy Griffith Show, 108
Angelina Ballerina, 352
Antiques Roadshow, 315, 349, 369
The Apprentice, 58
Are You Smarter Than a Fifth Grader?,
59, 84
Army Wives, 317
Arrested Development, 59
Arthur, 352, j372
The Ascent of Man, 363
AssaultCube, 142
As the World Turns, 255
The Bachelor, 59, 65
Baking with Julia, 345
Barney & Friends, 352, 372
Baseball, 363
Battlestar Galactica, 317
Battleswarm, 142
Becker, 58, 81
Being Human, 316
Ben Casey, 82
Beverly Hills 90210, 238
Beyond Protocol, 142
The Big Bang Theory, 80
Big Brother, 65, 70, 72
Bill O’Reilly, 50
Bionic Woman, 76
Blue Mountain State, 319
Bob the Builder, 352
The Bold and the Beautiful, 27
Bones, 65, 81
The Brady Bunch, 240
Bridging, 59
The Brotherhood of Poland, N.H., 58
Buffy the Vampire Slayer, 54
Burn Notice, 75
Café World, 148
Call of Duty, 142, 148
Candid Camera, 84
Cape, 62
Car Talk, 430, 454
Cash Cab, 319
The Cat in the Hat Knows a Lot About That!,
349
CBS Evening News, 260, 261
CBS Morning News, 262
CBS Up to the Minute, 262, 298
Celebrity Apprentice, 69
Celebrity Poker Challenge, 315
Charmed, 323
Cheers, 223
The Chevy Chase Show, 266, 268
The Chew, 250
Chuck, 76
CityVille, 140, 141, 148
The Civil War, 363, 364–365
Civ World, 140
Clifford the Big Red Dog, 352
The Closer, 117, 316, 317, 323
Colbert Report, 268
Cold Case Files, 59, 60, 66, 240
Combat Arms, 142
Coming Out Stories, 332
Conan, 268, 316
Cookie Jar TV, 263
Cops, 59
Cops & Coyotes, 319
Cosby, 13, 79
The Cosby Show, 88, 240
Cosmos, 363
Cougar Town, 64
Coupling, 66
Criminal Minds, 209, 277
Cristina’s Court, 293
CrossFire, 142
CSI, 12, 50, 57, 75, 78, 80, 81, 84, 209, 210,
240, 241
CSI: Miami, 207, 316
CSI: New York, 60
Curb Appeal: The Block, 215
Curious George, 352
Daily Show, 268
The Daily Show with Jon Stewart, 12, 317
Dancing with the Stars, 11, 59, 65, 68, 84
The Dating Game, 293
Dawson’s Creek, 88, 209
Days of Our lives, 290, 291
Deadliest Catch, 50
Deal or No Deal, 11, 59, 65, 255, 367
Desperate Housewives, 59, 60, 78, 88
472

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Dinosaur Train, 349
Divorce Court, 209, 293
The Doctors, 209
Dog the Bounty Hunter, 209
Donahue, 257
Dr. Kildare, 82
Dr. Oz, 209, 210, 249, 294
Dr. Phil, 209, 210, 249, 257, 270, 294
The Dr. Laura Show, 452
Dragnet, 80
Dragon Tales, 352, 372
Drake and Josh, 331
Drop Dead Diva, 317
The Early Show, 256, 257, 258, 262, 288, 289
Early Today, 262
Eat St., 319
Ed, 75
The Ed Sullivan Show, 71
Ellen, 207
The Ellen DeGeneres Show, 257, 291
Emergency, 82
Emeril Live, 319
Emmanuelle, 325
The Enclave, 317
Entertainment Tonight (ET), 16, 28, 71, 207,
209, 214, 295
Entourage, 319
ER, 58, 60, 79, 82, 88, 323
Eureka, 62, 97, 316, 317
Everybody Hates Chris, 291, 294
Everybody Loves Raymond, 207, 209, 210,
211, 286, 316
The Exceptions, 317
Extra, 209, 295
Extreme Makeover: Home Edition, 59, 315,
5454
Extreme Makeover: Households, 67
Face Off, 316
Face the Nation, 262
Fairly Legal, 317
Family Guy, 58, 207, 209, 211
Family Law, 73
FarmVille, 6, 140, 141
Fear Factor, 11
Firefly, 63
FishVille, 148
The Flintstones, 240
Football Night in America, 250
For Rent, 319
48 Hours Mystery, 259
Frasier, 61, 108, 294
Fresh Air with Terry Gross, 430
Friday Night Lights, 65, 87
Friday Night Smackdown, 367
Friday Night Videos, 253
Fridays, 269
Friends, 29, 53, 58, 81, 88, 209, 221–223,
294
Fringe, 269
FrontierVille, 141
Frontline, 85, 369
Full Tilt Poker, 142
Game of Thrones, 319
General Hospital, 290, 291
George Lopez, 81, 268
Geraldo, 257
Ghost Adventurers, 319
Ghost Hunters, 318
Ghost Whisperer, 277
Glee, 53, 54, 57, 60, 63, 81, 88, 150, 167
Globe Trekker, 345
Good Morning America, 256, 257, 262, 288,
289
The Good Wife, 52
Grammy Awards, 81
Grand Theft Auto, 142
Great Performances, 347, 356
Grey’s Anatomy, 60, 78, 82, 84, 167, 240
The Guiding Light, 255
Gunsmoke, 71
Gut Busters, 319
Have Cake, Will Travel, 319
Haven, 316
Hawaii 5-0, 65
Heridas de Amor, 60
Heroes, 65, 75
Hill Street Blues, 88
Hoarding, 315
Hollywood Treasures, 318
Holmes on Homes, 319
Holocaust series, 367
Home Improvement, 74, 79
House, 57, 59
House Hunters, 315
House of Cards, 316
How I Met Your Mother, 81
iCarly, 263, 331
I Love Lucy, 240
I Love the 70s, 323
I Love the 80s, 323
I Married a Mobster, 319
Industrial Wonders, 319
Inside Edition!, 295
Intervention, 316
The Invisible Man, 234
Issues and Answers, 262
It’s Elementary, 351
I Used to Be Fat, 317
Jackass, 317
Jack Benny Show, 62
JAG, 75, 317
Jean-Michel Cousteau: Ocean Adventures, 367
Jeopardy!, 11, 141, 184, 209, 210, 213, 255,
295
Jericho, 87
The Jerry Springer Show, 209, 213, 257
Jersey Shore, 50
Jesse, 29
Jimmy Kimmel Live, 266, 268, 297
Joe Millionaire, 84
Journeyman, 76
Judge Alex, 291, 293
Judge David Young, 291
Judge Jeanine Pirro, 293
Judge Joe Brown, 209, 291, 293
Judge Judy, 181, 207, 209, 291, 293, j294
Judge Karen’s Court, 293
Judge Mathis, 293
Judging Amy, 75, 81, 323
Kart Racer, 142
Kidsworld Sports, 352, 359
King Kong, 323
King of Queens, 58, 79, 294
King of the Hill, 60
La Fea Mas Bewlla, 60
The Last Airbender, 323
Last Call with Carson Daly, 266
The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson,
266, 297
Late Night with Conan O’Brien, 197
Late Night with David Letterman, 257
Late Night with Jimmy Fallon, 197, 266,
297
The Late Show Starring Joan Rivers, 266,
268
Late Show with David Letterman, 266
The Late Show with David Letterman, 197,
297
Law & Order, 54, 59, 71, 75, 78, 81, 210,
241, 323, 327
Law & Order: Criminal Intent, 75
Law & Order: SVU, 59, 75, 81, 234, 316,
317, 323
Leave It to Beaver, 323
Legend of the Seeker, 73
Leprechauns, 86
Let’s Make a Deal, 256
The Life of Riley, 80
Life on Earth, 363
The Lion King, 263
Live with Regis and Kathie Lee, 291
Lost, 59
Love Connection, 293
The L Word, 332
The MacNeil/Lehrer Report, 355
MADtv, 269
Mafia Wars, 140, 148
Magnum P.I., 81
Malcom in the Middle, 88
The Man show, 268
Man Up Stand Up, 209
Index to Program Titles
473
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Man v. Food, 318
Marketplace Morning Report, 454
Married … with Children, 88, 240
Martha, 291
M*A*S*H, 81
Masterpiece Theatre, 86, 360, 369, 370
Mathline, 351
Maya & Miguel, 352
Medium, 60
Meet the Press, 262
The Mentalist, 12, 52, 75, 84, 88
Merlin, 62, 86
Mob Wives, 319
The Mole, 70
Monday Night Football, 60, 83, 250
Monk, 65, 209, 234, 316, 317
Morning Edition, 430, 454
Mundo de Fieras, 60
Murder, She Wrote, 79
Mutant X, 73
My First Place, 315, 319
My Mother the Car, 80
Mystery!, 347, 360
Nanny 911, 68
Nature, 353, 370
NBA Inside Stuff, 253
NBC Dateline, 68, 84, 85, 257, 259, 327
NBC Nightly News, 129, 184, 260, 261
NCIS: Los Angeles, 12, 63, 71, 75, 129,
327
The Newlywed Game, 293
News Flash Five, 359
News Sunday, 262
Next Top Model, 68
Night Calls, 321
Nightline, 261, 266, 267, 297
Nip/Tuck, 75, 235
Noah’s Arc, 332
NOVA, 353, 369
NYPD Blue, 81
Obsessed, 316
The Office, 64, 81, 84, 167, 296
Oliver Beene, 60
One Life to Live, 255
On We Go, 316
Oprah, 9, 16, 27, 249, 257, 294
The Originals with Emeril, 319
The Other Side, 249
The Passion of the Christ, 87
Pawn Queens, 315, 319
Pawn Stars, 315
PBS Newshour, 349, 353, 355
PBS Online, 351
People, 71
The People’s Court, 209, 293
Perspectives on Lifetime, 316
Pokémon, 265
Poker After Dark, 298
Pokerstars, 142
Politically Incorrect, 267–268, 311
Power Rangers, 265
The Practice, 81
A Prairie Home Companion, 430, 454,
455
The Price is Right, 256, 289, 290
Primetime, 60, 84
Prime Time Live, 259
Prison Break, 57, 59, 65
Project Runway, 317, 319
Property Virgins, 315, 319
Providence, 75
Punk’d, 317
Pushing Daisies, 235
Queer Eye for the Straight Guy, 332
Real World, 317
Reba, 59, 68, 78, 317
Repo Games, 315
Report on Syndicated Programs, 184
The Revolution, 250
Rick & Steve: The Happiest Gay Couple in
All the World, 332
The Ring of Truth, 368
Roar, 70
Roseanne, 79, 88
RuPaul’s Drag Race, 332
Sabado Gigante, 15, 50, 81, 247, 278
Sanctuary, 317
Saturday Early Show, 262
Saturday Night Live (SNL), 81, 124, 253,
268–269, 287
Saved by the Bell, 263
Say Yes to the Dress, 315, 319
Scooby Doo, 265
Scrubs, 59, 68
The Season Traveler, 345
Secret Agent Man, 65
Seinfeld, 53, 61, 74, 79, 81, 134, 209, 211,
236, 294, 296
Selling LA, 319
Selling New York, 319
Sesame Street, 352, 356, 363, 366, 369
7 Bridges for 7 Brothers, 75
7th Heaven, 71
Sex and the City, 209
The Shakespeare Plays, 363
Shark, 60
Shoah, 367
Silent Partners, 316
The Simple Life, 63
Simply Ming, 345
The Simpsons, 58, 71, 181, 183, 184, 207,
238, 240, 287, 294, 367
The Sims Online, 142
The Single Guy, 29
Sister Wives, 319
Six Feet Under, 75, 325
60 Minutes, 12, 47, 60, 84, 85, 250, 259
Slavery and the Making of America, 372
Smallville, 50, 54, 57, 64, 71, 76, 81
The Sopranos, 316, 319
South Park, 167
Soy Tu Duena (Women of Steel), 50
SpongeBob SquarePants, 263, 265, 331
SportsCenter, 317
Sports Illustrated for Kids, 263
St. Elsewhere, 82
Stargate Atlantis, 317
Stargate SG1, 73, 209, 317
Star Gate Universe, 97
Stargate Universe, 317
Star Trek, 14
Star Trek: The Next Generation, 317
Star Trek: Voyager, 209
Sunday Morning, 262
Sunday Night Football, 60, 250
Sun of Gun, 317
Supernatural, 71
Super Why, 349
Survivor, 6, 11, 13, 59, 60, 62, 65, 68, 69,
70, 73, 84, 150, 257
Survivor: Vanuatu, 84
Swift Justice with Nancy Grace, 293
The Talk, 259
Talk of the Nation, 430
Talkshow with Spike Feresten, 269
The Tavis Smiley Show, 430
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, 265
Teen Mom, 317
Teletubbies, 352, 372
Temptation Island, 70
10 Things I hate About You, 81
Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles,
235
Terra Nova, 59
Texas Ranch House, 367
TGIM, 317
That 70’s Show, 59, 68, 81, 184
The Daily Show, 129
30 Seconds to Fame, 269
This Old House, 370
This Week, 262
Thomas & Friends, 352
Til Death, 68
TMZ, 209
The Today Show, 12, 256, 257, 259, 262,
288, 289
The Tonight Show with Jay Leno, 266, 267,
297
Top Chef, 319
Top Design, 319
Touched by an Angel, 78
Tough Cookies, 318
Toy Story, 263
474
Index to Program Titles

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Trapper John, 82
Treme, 319
Triple Rush, 318
True Blood, 50, 319
24, 108, 209
21 Hottest Stars, 68
20/20, 12, 84, 85, 257, 259
Two and a Half Men, 50, 53, 67, 73, 81, 88,
208
Tyler Perry’s House of Payne, 291
Tyra, 294
Ugly Betty, 60, 209, 240
Unique Sweets, 319
The Unit, 327
Veronica Mars, 235
The Victory Garden, 345
The View, 257, 289
Voice, 65
Wait, Wait … Don’t Tell Me!, 430
Wall Street Week, 356
The Wanda Sykes Show, 269
The War, 367, 368
War at Home, 58
Warehouse 13, 62, 75, 316
Warstorm, 148
Washington Week in Review, 349, 368
Weeds, 325
Wendy Williams, 294
The West Wing, 65, 79
We the Jury, 316, 317
What is My Car Worth?, 315
What Not to Wear, 315, 319
What’s My Line?, 71
Wheel of Fortune, 16, 209, 210, 238–239,
255, 295
Wheel of Fortune 2000, 263
Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?, 11, 13, 59,
65, 68, 88, 238, 255
Wide World of Sports, 251, 252
Will & Grace, 332
The Wilton North Report, 266, 268
Wishbone, 352
Without a Trace, 81, 210, 240, 277, 316,
327
Wizards of Waverly Place, 331
The Wonderful World of Disney, 71
The Woodwright’s Shop, 356
World Poker Tour, 315, 318
WWE Smackdown, 97
X-Files, 14
The X-Files, 209
The Young and the Restless, 254, 255, 291
Zoboomafoo, 352
Zoey 101, 263
Index to Program Titles
475
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
General Index
Note: Reference to topics and subjects as well
as proper names of importance to program-
ming are listed below, but some redundant
references to the major broadcast networks
and the Federal Communications Commis-
sion were not included. Consult the appro-
priate chapters and chapter content outlines.
A&E (Arts & Entertainment), 16, 19, 22
ABC, 7, 8, 9, 14, 15, 17, 24, 46, 49, 53, 55,
276–277
Access, defined, 124
Access centers, 124–126
Active/passive (A/P) people meters, 159, 190
Adjacencies, 279
Adult album format (AAA), 380
Adult Learning Service (ALS), 352
Advances, 76–78
Advertiser-supported basic cable networks, 322
Advertising, 312–313
paid, 79
prime-time game of, 50–55
programming and, 9
Advertising interconnects, 117
Advertising-supported channels, genres on,
317–319
Affiliates, 274
network-affiliate agreement, 279–280
network programming for, 275–279
preemptions and, 280
Affiliation agreement, 279
African-American talk radio, 448
Agency for Instructional Technology (ATI),
362
Air America Radio, 436–437
Albom, Mitch, 451
Album-oriented rock (AOR) format, 379
Al Jazeera, 334
All-news formats, 443–445
Amazon Instant Video, 133
American Federation of Radio and Television
Artists (AFTRA), 435
American Movie Classics, 315
American Public Media (APM), 389–390,
454, 455, 457
America One, 274
Amortization, 230
declining-value, 231
schedules, 231–232
straight-line, 231
Anchoring strategy, 57
Animation, development process for, 265
Antennas, 108–109
AOL Media Network, 134
Apple TV, 131
Appointment viewing, 62–64
Apps, TV, 139–140
Arbitron, 171, 174, 185, 201, 390
Areas of Dominant Influence (ADIs), 174, 393
Arledge, Roone, 82, 83
ASCAP, 402
ASI Entertainment, 161–162
Association of Independents in Radio (AIR),
455
Associations, 36
AT&T, 29, 92, 126
Audience Analysis, Inc. (AAI), 185
Audience churn, 113–114
Audience flow, 147, 214
Audience loyalty, 370
Audiences
appealing to interests of, 22–23
diminishing, 50
flow, 20–21, 57
network, aging of, 55
qualitative research of, 163–166
targeting, 55–64
wants of, 10–13
Audio services, on cable, 337–338
Auditorium research, 165
Auditorium testing, 408
Aux marks, 417
Avatars, 142
Average audience ratings, 370
Average quarter-hour (AQH) audiences, 179
Azteca America, 278
Backselling, 425
Bader, Jerry, 459
Banner ads, 151
Banners, 194
Barter payment method, 232–233
Basic cable networks, 304
Beck, Glenn, 441, 445
Beethoeven Satellite Network, 455
Berlin, Irving, 9
Betram, Scott, 434
Bible, 76
Bidding, 229–230
Bidding price, 229–230
Big Seven Studios, 31
Big Sky, 401
Billboard Magazine, 390
BitTorrent, 105
Black Entertainment Television, 8
Blip.tv, 15, 136
Block, Dick, 13
Blocking strategy, 58–59, 323
Blogs/bloggers
talk radio and, 437
tracking, 160
Bloomberg Radio, 447
Blunting strategy, 60
BMI, 402
Bohannon, Jim, 452
Boldfacing, 400
Bookmarking, 147
Books. See Market reports (books)
Bounce TV, 279
Branded subniche networks, 307
Brandimetrics, 160
Branding, 18, 80
Bridging strategy, 59–60
British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), 15
Broadcasting, mutation of, 301
Broadcasting & Cable, 46
Broadcast networks, 304
Broadcast windows, 325
Brooks, Tim, 79
Browne, Joy, 449
476

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Bubba the Love Sponge, 411, 439
Bühler, Karl, 163
Burns, Ken, 364–365
Business radio, 447–448
Cable Act (1984), 39
Cable Act (1992), 38, 112, 114
Cable compensation, 38
Cable network license fees, 312
Cable networks, 7, 15, 304. See also Sub-
scription content networks
subscribers by channel, 305–306
Cable penetration, 327
Cable programming, 119
Cable radio, 382
Cable syndication, 207
Cable systems, 93–94
Cable television
audio services on, 337–338
community access on, 124–126
effects of consolidation and, 269–270
local-origination news programming,
120–124
local origination on, 119–124
penetration measures, 191–192
ratings services, 189–192
regional news services, 122
sports and, 82–83
syndication and, 233–234
Cablevision, 113
Call-out research, 165, 408
Call screeners, 452
Capping, 130
Carey, Drew, 256
Carlin, George, 39
Carriage agreements, public television pro-
gramming and, 347–348
Carriage fees, 313
Cash license fees, 230
Cash payments, 230–231
Cash-plus-barter, 232–233
Casting tape, 265
Castronova, Ted, 452
CBS, 7, 8, 9, 14, 15, 24, 30, 46, 53, 55,
276–277, 388
Cell phones. See Mobile phones
Censors, 89
Central Florida News 13 (CFN 13), 123
Channel lineups, 116
Channel matching, 114
Channel repertoire, 19
Children’s programming, 263–268
Children’s Television Act (1990), 263, 264
Christensen, Bruce, 373
Chuck D., 437
Churn
in cable, 191
rates, 113–114
Citadel Media, 441
Clear Channel Communications, 378, 385,
387
Click fraud, 195
Click-through measurement, 194
Clip culture, 136–137, 316
Clocks, radio, 405
Clones, 70
Clusters/clustering, 109
CNN, 8–9, 306, 313
CNN Headline News, 15
The CollegeHumor Network, 134
Colmes, Alan, 444
Combination spots, 298
Comcast, 7, 8, 92, 115
Comcast/NBCUniversal, 46
Comcast Network, 123
Comedies, 12
Comedy Central, 8, 14
Commercial media, main function of, 4
Common carriage, 347
Common channel lineup, 116
Community access, on cable, 124–126
Community access centers, 124
Community licensees, 354
Compatibility, programming and, 18–19
The Complete Directory of Prime Time Net-
work and Cable TV Shows (Brooks),
79
Comp (network compensation), 279
ComScore, 171–172, 193–194
Concept testing, 161
Consolidation, effects of, and cable, 269–270
Contagion of ideas, 164
Content
disposable, 149
emergent, 149
evergreen, 149
online, 148
promoting, 150–151
scheduling, 149–150
Content clustering schemes, 115
Contests, 149
radio, 419, 420
Continuous music formats, 423
Continuous season approach, 70
Converters, 102
Cooke, Holland, 431
Copyright, 38–39
online music and, 383
Copyright Act (1976), 112
Copyright Law (1976), 38
Copyright royalty fees, 111–112
Cord cutters, 132
Corporation for Public Broadcasting (CPB),
358
Cost per involvement (CPI), 194–195
Cost per point, 226
Cost per thousand (CPM), 226–229
Countering strategy, 60
Counterprogramming, 20, 215, 327, 367
Country format, 379
Court programs, 293
Court-room dramas, 81
Coverage Map, 393
Cowherd, Colin, 441
CPT (Household and Persons Cost Per 1000
Report), 220
Crackle, 134
Crime dramas, 80, 81
Cross-channel promotion, 337
Cross-media, 7
Cross-media scheduling, 62
Cross-promotion, 46, 47–48, 80, 147
c3 ratings, 160
Cumes, 151
Cumulative audience (cume) estimates,
179–180
Cumulus Media, 387–388, 426
Cuomo, Mario, 436
CW, 7, 14, 16, 24, 46, 277
Dailymotion, 136
Daypart Audiences, 180
Dayparting, 18, 146, 150, 379
Dayparts, 287–298
afternoon, 290–293
early fringe, 293–294
early morning, 288–289
late fringe, 296–297
late night, 297
morning, 289–290
overnight, 297–298
prime access, 294–295
prime time, 295–296
time periods, 288
weekend programming, 298
Daytime talk shows, 257–259
Dead air, 417
Deal points, 215–216
Decision making, network, 87
Declining-value amortization, 231–232
Deep Dish TV Network, 125–126
Delayed carriage, 280
Dershowitz, Alan, 436
Designated Market Areas (DMAs), 105, 174,
220, 393
Dial Global, 426
Diaries, 168–170, 201
Digital audio broadcasting (DAB), 381
Digital audio radio service (DARS), 383
Digital broadband delivery, 36
Digital media, 4–5
Digital must carry, 40, 105
Digital niche channels, 304
Digital video recorders (DVRs), threat from,
160–161
Digital wave, 273
Digitization, 4
DirectTV, 92, 94, 100
Discontinuous change, 143
Discovery, 305, 306
DISH Network, 94, 100, 104–105
Disney (Walt, Corp.), 30, 31, 46, 112–113
Disposable content, 149
General Index
477
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
DMA TV Trends by Season, 221
Double jeopardy, 74
Double-runs, 22
Doubling strategy, 59
Download-to-own, 309
VOD, 310
Drake, Bill, 379
Dramas, 11, 12
court-room, 81
crime, 81
medical, 82
Dramatic anthology, 86
Duplication, 305
DVRs (digital video recorders), 5, 6
Early-morning newscasts, 256
Ebersol, Duncan, 253
Emergent content, 149
Enhanced viewing, 138–140
Enhancement, 129, 138
Enmeshed media, 7
Entertainment channels, 119–120
Entertainment specials, 81
Episode testing, 161
Equal-time rule, 35
ESPN, 8, 305, 306
ESPN Deportes Radio, 449
ESPN Radio, 447
Evaluation, 26–27
strategies, 117–118
Evening newscasts, 259–261
Evergreen content, 149
Executive producers, 210
Facebook, 4, 9, 29, 105, 134, 138
Fairness Doctrine, 35
abandonment of, 436–437
Faith talk, 449
Family sitcoms, 13
Fan sites, 80
Farnsworth, Philo T., 124
Feature films, 16, 208
Federal Communications Commission (FCC),
29, 41, 48
fundamental must-carry rules, 40
Net Neutrality Rules, 105–106
Over-the-Air Reception Devices Rule,
108–109
Fiber optics, 99
Film L.A., 55
Financial interest rules, 48
FiOS, 96–97, 98, 126
First Amendment, 35, 39
First-run programs, 207, 208
Fixed spots, 298
Flat fees, 313
Flay, Bobby, 124
Flickr, 136
Flipping, 21
Flix, 336
Flixster, 46
Flow, 20–21, 57, 147, 294
FM stations, 391–392
classes of, 392
migration to, and rise of information
radio, 439–440
Focus group research, 163–165
The Food Network, 124, 305
Foreign language feeds, 305
Format programming, 238
Formats
adult album, 380
album-oriented rock, 379
all-news, 443–445
continuous music, 423
country, 423
middle-of-the-road, 379–380
talk-radio, 445–450
urban, 379
Foundation networks, 306
4G, 127
FOX, 7, 8, 9, 14, 17, 24, 46, 49, 55, 238,
276–277
Fox Sports Radio, 447
Franchise programming, 75, 80
Franchises, 106
Frank, Betsy, 56
Franken, Al, 437
Fraud, 39
Free carriage, 313
Frequency analysis, 180
Full scripts, 76
Funnyordie, 134
Futures, 215
FVOD (Free-VOD), 308–309
FX network, 19
Galavision, 154
Galaxy Explorer, 219
Galaxy Lightning, 219
Galaxy Navigator, 221
Galaxy ProFile, 221
Gambling, 149
Games, 149
Game shows, 13, 84, 255–256, 290
Garofalo, Janeane, 437
General managers, 4
Genre, 13
GetGlue, 140
Gold services, 403
Golic, Mike, 447
Google, 7, 17, 29
Googleþ, 134
Gottlieb, Doug, 447
Grazing, 21
Great Plains National (GPN), 362
Green, Stephen, 437
Greenberg, Mike, 447
“Green” strategies, 6
Gregory, David, 262
Griswold, Tom, 439
Group owners, 29, 31
Group ownership, 34
Groupthink, 164
Habit formation, programming and, 19–20,
147
Hallmark, 90
Hamblin, Ken, 436
Hammock strategy, 58
Hannity, Sean, 436, 441, 445
HBO/Cinemax HD, 8
HBO/Max, 335–336
HD radio, 381
HDTV (high definition television), 5,
100–101, 350
Head, Sydney W., 13
Health and Help Talk, 449
Heritage talk, 445, 446
Herzog, Herzog, 163
High Advisory Radio (HAR), 458
High definition (HD) television. See HDTV
(high definition television)
Home Shopping Network, 109
Homes passed (HP), 191
Homogeneity of viewers, 118, 323
Hooks, 165
Horizontal stripping, 62
Hot talk, 448
Households using television (HUTs),
176–179
House-remodeling programs, 315
Howard, Clark, 447
HTR (Household Tracking Report), 220
Hulu, 15, 46, 133
Hulu Plus, 133, 145
HUT (Households Using Television
Summary Report), 220
Hybrid Fiber/Coax (HFC) systems, 98
iCloud, 133
Ideal demographics, 55–56
Ifel, Gwen, 349
Image spots, 299
In-band-on-channel (IBOC) system, 381
Indecency, 39, 438
Independent stations, 274
Infinity Broadcasting, 438
Infomercials, 18, 287
Information programming, 12
on public radio stations, 454–457
Information radio. See also Radio
all-news formats, 443–445
branding stations and, 433–435
content infrastructure, 450–452
demographic profile of listeners of, 451
embracing formerly taboo topics and,
437–439
future of, 457–459
identifiable personalities and, 432–433
information vs., 430–435
migration to FM stations and, 439–440
mobile phones and, 440
478
General Index

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
on-air personalities and, 433–435
on-air talk techniques of, 452–454
popular local hosts, 434
programming formats of, 441–443
rise of, 435–440
synergistic advertising environment of, 440
talk formats, 445–450
Interactive games, 129
Interactivity, 103
International syndication, 207, 236–239
Internet, 5–6, 14. See also Online
programming
broadcast radio and, 384–387
program sources on, 15
Internet television, 101
Interrconnect, 299
IntoNow, 140
ION, 277, 279
Ion, 24
iPad, 131
iPod Touch, 131
iTunes, 7, 133
Jackson, Peter, 52
Jacobs Media, 390
Jakes, T. D., 449
JAM Creative Productions, 414
Jingles, 414
Joachim, Franz, 346
Jocks
dayparts and, 412–413
station sound and, 410–411
John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foun-
dation, 454
Justice Department, 29
Justin.tv, 136
Karmazin, Mel, 438
Katz Comtrac system, 221–223
Katz Media Group, 212
Keillor, Garrison, 455
Kenny, Brian, 447
Kilmeade, Brian, 444, 451
King, Larry, 315
Klein, Paul, 55–56
Klose, Kevin, 454
Komando, Kim, 434
Kroc, Joan B., 454
KUED television station (Salt Lake City), 373
Langschmidt, Wally, 159
Late-night newscasts, 261
Late-night talk/variety shows, 266–268
Late-night weekend entertainment, 268–269
Launches, 321–322
Launch fees, 313
Lead-in strategy, 57–58
Lehrer, Jim, 349, 355
Levinson, Barry, 76
Libel, 39–40
Licensees
community, 353–354
public school, 356
university, 354–356
License fees, 71
Liddy, G. Gordon, 436
Lieberman, Gary, 152
Lifespan, program, 71
Lift, 115
Limbaugh, Rush, 434, 435, 436, 437, 442
Limited series, 68–69
Linchpin strategy, 59
Line producers, 210
Liners, 414
Lineups, channel, 116
Listener fatigue, 417
Live action programs, development process
for, 265–266
Livestream, 137
Living Standards Measure (LMS), 198
Local avails, 111
Local books, 169
Local cable channels, 119
Local-into-local service, 104
Localism, 36–38
Local news, 299
Local-origination (LO) channels, 119–124
Local-origination (LO) news programming,
120–124
Local programming, 283–284
Local programs, 14, 16
Logo channel, 332
Logs, program, 420
Lore, lure of, 13–14
Loss leaders, 46
Lotteries, 39
Lottery programs, online, 149
Low-power FM (LPFM) radio service, 457
Lucado, Max, 449
MacNeil, Robert, 355
Maddow, Rachel, 437
Made-for-cable films, 208
Made-for-TV films, 208
Made-for-TV movies, 84, 86, 87
Madison, Jo, 446
Magazines series, 84, 85
Maher, Bill, 268, 311
Marathons, 322–323
Marketing. See also Promotion
one-to-one, 152
of radio stations, 417–421
Market reports (books)
Daypart Audiences section, 180
Program Audiences section, 181
Time Period Averages section, 180
Mashup, 136
Massively multiplayer online games
(MMOG), 141, 142
McGee, Kipper, 430
McLendon, Gordon, 379, 411
McManus, Sean, 135
Media
main function of commercial, 4
major players of, 29
Media Audit, 152, 186
Media Metrix, 151, 193–194, 194
Media Rating Council (MRC), 170
Medical dramas, 82
Megavideo, 134
Meme, 137
Merchandising, 144
Metro Area, 174–175, 393
Metro Rating Area (MRA), 174
Meyer, Joyce, 449
Microniche networks, 307
Middle-of-the-road (MOR) format, 379–380
Midnight Trucking Radio Network, 449, 450
Military History Channel, 8
Miller, Stephanie, 437
Miniseries, 84–86
short-form, 86
Minnesota Public Radio, 455
Miso, 139
MNTV, 279
Mobile phones, information radio and, 440
Mobile wallets, 107
MobiTV, 134
Money talk, 447–448
MonitorPlus (Nielsen), 169
Monopoly, 35–36
Moonves, Leslie, 112
Morning magazines, 256–257
Morning magazine shows, 258
The Movie Channel, 336
Movie-of-the-week, 208
MoviePlex, 336
Movies, in syndication, 287
MPEG-4, 102
MPEG-21, 107
MPEG-2 transmission, 102
Muller, Mancow, 411
Multicarriage, 105
Multichannel multipoint distribution service
(MMDS) operators, 96
Multichannel video programming distribu-
tors (MVPDs), 29, 35, 39, 92–93, 304
economic considerations, 109–114
evaluation strategies, 117–118
future of, 126–127
legal considerations of selection strategies,
103–109
marketing considerations, 114
on-demand programming and, 126
promotion strategies, 118–119
scheduling strategies, 114–117
selection strategies, 97–103
technical considerations, 98–103
Multi-Network Area Report (MNA), 67
Multiplatform programming, 252
Multiplatform strategy, 54–55
Multiple system operators (MSOs), 29, 32–33
General Index
479
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Murdoch, Rupert, 32–33
Music research, 165
Must carry issue, 104–105
MyNetworkTV, 7, 16, 24, 46
MyNetworkTV (MNTV), 14
MySpace, 136, 138
NAD (National Audience Demographics
Report), 220
Napster, 105
Narrative stories, 11
NASCAR, 252
National Association of Broadcasters (NAB),
40, 420, 457
National Association of Television Program
Executives (NATPE), 13, 37
pitching contests, 217
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin-
istration (NOAA) Weather Radio, 457,
458
National People-Meter Service, 370
National Public Radio (NPR), 389, 454, 455,
456
National sales reps, 212–213
local reports for, 220–221
national reports for, 219–220
rules for syndicators and, 216–217
specialized program analysis for, 221–223
National spot advertisers, 213
NBC, 7, 8, 9, 14, 15, 17, 24, 46, 53, 55,
276–277
NBC Live, 139
NBC Universal, 7
NBCUniversal, 8, 30, 31
Netflix, 25, 132–133, 145
Net net, 227
Net neutrality, 105
Net Neutrality Rules, 105–106
Network-affiliated stations, 274
Network compensation (comp), 279
Network programs, 14–15
radio, 423–427
Networks
decision making, 87
launching, 321–322
soi-disant, 279
New England Cable News, 121, 123
New Music Service, 404
News, 281–283
Newscasts
network-delivered, 443–445
role of local, 281–283
NewsChannel 9 (NC8), 123
News Corporation, 30, 32–33, 46, 49, 113,
138
News 12 Networks, 122
News programming, local-origination,
120–124
News services, regional cable, 122
New York 1 News (NY1), 122
Nexstar Broadcasting Group, 112
NHSI (Nielsen Hispanic Station Index
report), 221
Niche networks, 306–307
Nickelodeon, 22, 305, 306
global branding by, 238
Nielsen BuzzMetrics, 160
Nielsen Cable Activity Report (NCAR), 328
Nielsen Media Research, 19, 54, 151, 169,
185, 201, 217
trap of overreliance on, 203
Nielsen//NetRatings, 192–193, 194
Nielsen People-Meter service (NPM), 369
The Nielsen Pocketpiece, 66–67
Nielsen Scantrack, 169
Nielsen Station Index (NSI), 220, 369
Nielsen Survey Index Area (NSI Area), 174
NM Incite, 160
Noncommercial syndication, 207
Noncompete clauses, 435
Nonnarrative reality programs, 11
Nonprime programming
genres of, 250
sports, 250–253
Nonprime-time dayparts, 246–248
scheduling, 248–250
Non-Traditional Revenue (NTR), 385
Northwest Cable News (NWCN), 122
NPower, 219–220
NPR (National Public Radio), 341
NSI Report on Devotional Program Audi-
ences, 221
NSI Report on PBS Program Audiences, 221
NSS Pocketpiece (National Syndication Ser-
vice), 220
NTAR (Television Activity Report), 220
NTI (Nielsen Television Index), 219
NTI Pocketpiece (The Neilsen Television
Index Pocketpiece Report), 219
Obscenity, 39
Occupational comedies, 81
Off-air promotion, 418
off-cable, 207
Off-network programs, 207, 208
Off-network series, 16
Off-network syndication, 285–287
Off-syndication, 207
Ohio News Network (ONN), 123
Oldies, 407
On-air promotion, 79–80, 418
On-demand services, 110
On-demand television, 5, 101–102
One-to-one marketing, 152
Online audience samples, 162
Online audio, 383–384
Online content, 148
selecting, 148–149
Online panels, 151
Online program guides, 140
Online programmers, 145
Online programming. See also Internet
defined, 143
economics of, 144–146
geography and, 143–144
Online programs, 14
promotion of, 17–18
Online promotion, 79
Online research services, 192–195
terminology, 194
Online syndication, 207, 234–236
Online video, ratings services, 172, 173
Open Source, 437
Operational bandwidth, 99
Opie & Anthony, 412
Original programming, 47, 316–317
Output deals, 237
Overbuilds, 36
Overnight news, 261–262
Overnights, 64–65, 169
Over-the-Air Reception Devices Rule,
108–109
Over-the-top (OTT) services, 130
Owned-and-operated stations (O&Os), 31,
34–35, 46, 274
Oxygen network, 19, 292
Pacifica stations, 457
Page impressions, 194
Page views, 194
Paid advertising, 79
Paid search placement, 147
Palmer, Shelly, 148
Paramount, 31
Passive people meters, 201, 202
PAX sevice, 277
Pay-cable networks, 308
“Pay-for-Play” promotion, 403
Payola, 420
Pay-per-view (PPV) services, 308, 337
PBS, 7, 14, 15, 17
PBS (Public Broadcasting Service), 341. See
also Public television programming
audience ratings, 369–371
Ken Burns and, 364–365
fundraising assistance and, 352–353
HD and, 350
model, 344–345
National Program Service (NPS), 351
national promotion and, 368–3369
program financing and, 357–360
program production and, 357–361
responsibilities of, 349–353
satellite distribution, 351–353
scheduling strategies, 365–368
stations withdrawing from, 354
types of station licensees, 353–357
Peer-to-peer communications (P2), 105
People (magazine), 80
People meters, 158–159, 170, 201, 202, 328
active/passive (A/P), 159, 190
passive, 201, 202
portable, 190
480
General Index

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Persons Tracking Report (PTR), 220
Persons using radio (PURs), 176, 179
Persons using television (PUTs), 176, 179
Per subscriber charges, 314
Petry Media, 212
Phased rollout strategy, 99–100
Philo Awards, 124
Piggybacking, 322
Pilots, 76–78
Pilot testing, 161
Pitching, 229
Pittsburgh Cable News Channel (PCNC),
120–121
Play MPE, 404
Pledge drives, 352–353
Plugola, 420
Podcasting, 384
Political talk radio, 445–446
Poniewozik, James, 55
Portable media players, 131
Portable people meters (PPM), 190
Portals, 147
Preemptions, affiliates and, 280
Premiere Radio Networks, 426, 441
Premieres, 70
Premium cable networks, 304
scheduling for, 324–327
Premium networks, 322
Encore, Starz, and MoviePlex, 336
HBO/Max, 335–336
pay-per-view/video-on-demand, 337
Showtime/The Movie Channel/Flix, 336
Premium services, 308
genres on, 319–321
Prime-access time, 285
PRIME Next, 186
Prime-Time Access Rule (PTAR), 294–295
Prime-time access rule (PTAR), 284–285
Prime-time advertising, 50–55
Prime-time hours, 47
Prime-time programs, 47
Prime-time ratings, 64–67
Prime-time sports, 81–82
Production companies, 210
Production methods, 74
Product placement, 54, 161
Product Placement Measurement, 54
Product tracking, 169
Professional Web videos, 136–137
Program content services, 311
Program directors, 4, 8, 378
Program guides, online, 140
Program logs, 420
Programmers
decision-making for, 158–161
economic influences on, 28–29
ethical influences on, 40–41
job of, 346
ownership influences on, 29–34
regulatory influences on, 34–40
technological influences on, 28
Programming
children’s, 263–268
decision process of, 223–226
defined, 4
economics and technology of, 312–314
elements of, 18–23
format, 238
goal of, 8
information, 12
lore of, 13–14
model of, 23–27
multiplatform, 252
myth, 13
payment for, 230–233
process of, 8–9
radio, 378–379
sports, 250–253
step-by-step procedure for process of, 11
structural considerations, 14–18
syndicated, 284–287
as unique product, 9–10
unscripted, 83–84
weekend, 298
Program repetition, 118
Programs
acquisition of, 213–217
concepts, 76
conservation of, 21–22
costs and, 73–75
defined, 4
development process, 77
extensions for, 22
flow, 21
lifespan of, 71
local, 14, 16
multiplatform strategies for, 22
network, 14
new, selection of, 75–79
online, 14
pivotal numbers for, 71–73
prime-time, 47
production methods for, 74
promotion of, 17–18, 79–80
renewal of, 70–75
scheduling and, 16–17
scripts for, 76
signature, 15
sources of, 273–275
stripping, 19
syndicated, 14, 15–16
Program services, 274
competition among, 310–312
Program testing, 161–163
Promotion, 26
content and, 150–151
need for, 17–18
off-air, 418
on-air, 79–80, 298–299, 418
online, 79
of online programs, 17–18
in other media, 299
“Pay-for-Play,” 403
print, 80
of radio stations, 417–421
station, 298–299
strategies, 118–119
of subscription content networks, 337
Promotion testing, 162–163
Public Radio International (PRI), 390, 454,
456
Public school licensees, 356
Public television, defined, 363
Public television programming, 341–342.
See also PBS (Public Broadcasting
Service)
carriage agreements, 347
commercial syndication, 363
in Europe, 342
future of, 371–373
local production, 364–365
multicasting and, 348
multiple platforms and, 348–349
noncommercial adult education, 362–363
noncommercial syndicated, 362
PBS model, 344–345
philosophy of, 343–344
station scheduling autonomy and, 346
Q Television Network (QTN), 332
Qualitative research, 158
audience, 163–166
radio, 163
Quality, defined, 11
Quantitative research, 158
Quivers, Robin, 444
Radio. See also Information radio
AM stations, 391–392
blogs and talk, 437
cable, 382
competitors to, 381
contesting, 419
defining competitive market for,
393–394
dominant players in, 387–390
estimating potential revenue, 398
feature syndicators, 426–427
FM stations, 391–392
formats, 379–380
format selection for, 391–398
future of, 427–428
HD, 381–382
history of, 379–381
identifying target audiences for, 394–397
implementing format for, 402–405
knowing available budget for, 397
marketing and promotion, 417–421
network programming, 423–427
news and, 421–423
nonentertainment programming and,
421–423
General Index
481
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Radio (continued)
online strategy for, 386
programming/promotion constraints, 420
ratings services, 171–172, 185–189
satellite, 383
Spanish-language formats, 380
special music programs, 426
station groups by revenue, 391
station sound, 405–417
step-by-step format selection process for,
398–402
syndicated programming, 423–427
syndication, 207
terrestrial, 381–382
Wi-Fi, 441
Radio Currents, 404
Radio listening, 378
Radio One, 378
Radio programming, 378–379. See also
Programming
Radio’s All Dimension Audience Research
(RADAR), 171
Ramsey, Dave, 447
Rankers, 185
Rating points, 226
Ratings
defined, 176
time slot, 74
Ratings books, 168–170. See also Market
reports (books)
Ratings books, radio, 185–186
demographic breakouts section, 187–188
Metro Audience Trends section, 186–187
time-spent-listening (TSL) section,
188–189
turnover section, 189
Ratings period, 168
Ratings research, 159
Ratings services, 166–174
cable, 189–192
future challenges of, 202–205
limitations, 195–202
measurement computations, 176–180
radio, 171–172, 185–189
television, 168–170
terminology, 174–175
Reach analysis, 180
Regional cable news services, 122
Regulatory wave, 272–273
Rehearsal shows, 266
Rehm, Diane, 446
Reiner, Rob, 76
Repetition, program, 118
Rep programmers, 212, 213
bidding and, 229–230
local reports for, 220–221
national reports for, 219–220
specialized program analysis for, 221–223
station management and, 217–219
Reps. See National sales reps
Repurposing content, 21
Reruns, 21
Reserve prices, 229
Retransmission consent, 38, 106
Retransmission consent fees, 106
Revenues, projecting, 226–230
Revver.com, 15
Rhodes, Randi, 437, 446
Rip and read newswire copy, 422
Ripple Effect TV, 23
Roadblocking, 117–118, 323
Room-makeover programs, 315
ROSP (Report on Syndicated Programs),
220
Rotating strategy, 62
Rotation scheduling, 324
Rotten Tomatoes, 46
Royalties, 38
Sample composition, 201–202
Sample size, 195–197
Sandwich, 58
Satellite radio, 383
Satellite systems, 94, 95
Savage, Michael, 435, 445
Scarborough Research, 186
Scheduling, 16–17, 25
content, 149–150
prime-time practices, 67–70
strategies, 114–117
Scheduling churn, 78–79
Scheduling strategies
anchoring, 57
blocking, 58–59
blunting, 60
bridging, 59–60
countering, 60
doubling, 59
hammock, 58
lead-in, 57–58
linchpin, 59
rotating, 62
seamless, 61–62
strip sampling, 62
stunting, 60–61
supersizing, 61
Scheiffer, Bob, 262
Schiller, Vivian, 359
Schlessinger, Laura, 431, 435
Schultz, Ed, 435, 437, 445
Schweitzer, George, 204
SCOLA, 124, 125
Screeners, telephone, 452–453
Screening, 164
Scripts, 76
full, 76
Seamless strategy, 61–62
Sears, 54
Selection, 24–25
Sellout rate, 227
Server-side audits, 151
SESAC, 402
Set-top box (STB), 159–160
Set-top converters, 102
Share, defined, 176
Shopping services, 109
Short-form miniseries, 86
Showrunner, 208, 210
Showtime, 336
Signature programs, 15, 311, 314–316
Silverman, Fred, 17
SiriusXM, 39, 383, 449
Sitcoms, 11
family, 13
Situation comedies, 80, 81
Skew graphs, 394
Sklar, Rick, 379
Slingbox, 131
SOAPnet, 22
Soap operas, 253–255, 290
Social bookmarking sites, 147
Social media, 204
Social networking sites (SNS), ratings
services, 172
Social networks, 138–139
Soi-disant networks, 279
Sony, 31
South African Advertising Research
Foundation (SAARF), 159
South African Broadcasting Corporation
(SABC), 27
Spanish/foreign-language talk, 449
Speeding the music, 417
Spike TV, 315
Spinoffs, 307
Splinter channels, 15, 305
Splintering, 305, 307
Sporting News Radio, 447
Sports
cable and, 82–83
prime-time, 81–82
SportsCenter, 318
Sports programming. See also Programming
in multichannel environment, 250–252
non-live-event, 252–253
nonprime, 250–253
Sports talk radio, 446–447
Spots
combination, 298
fixed, 298
topical, 298
Spot tracking, 169
Sprint TV, 134
Standard error (SE), 196
StarGuide Digital Networks, 425
Star-studded specials, 81
Start Over, 310
State television agencies, 356
Station breaks, 279
Station Independence Program (SIP),
352–353
Station management, rep programmers and,
217–219
482
General Index

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Stations
affiliates, 274
channel migration and, 301
competing newscasts and, 300–301
digital technology and future of, 300
independent, 274
network-affiliated, 274
owned-and-operated, 274
promotion and, 298–299
Station sound, 405–417
anatomy of clocks, 405
clocks in practice for, 415–416
controlling, 417
imaging and, 411–414
jocks and, 410–411
music and, 405–407
research and, 407–409
rotation, 409–520
spots and, 414–415
tightness of, 417
Stern, Howard, 39, 412, 435, 438, 444
Stewart, Jon, 317
Storz, Todd, 379
Straight-line amortization, 231–232
Strategic Media Research (SMR), 162
Streaming, 130, 146, 383, 386
Stripping, 367
Stripping programs, 19, 68, 214
Strip sampling strategy, 62
Stunting strategy, 60–61
Subscription content networks, 15, 304. See
also Cable networks
children’s, 330, 331
documentary/educational, 330
entertainment, 330–332
foreign channels, 332–333
foundation, 330
future and, 338–339
home shopping channels, 335
hyping, 337
lifestyle channels, 333
movies channels, 333
music channels, 333
news channels, 333
nonbroadcast audience measurement,
327–328
religion channels, 333–334
scheduling strategies, 322–324
sex channels, 334–335
Spanish-language channels, 335
sports channels, 335
superstations, 335
Success talk, 447–448
Summer schedules, 69–70
Sunday news interviews, 262–263
Supersizing strategy, 61
SVOD (Subscription-VOD), 309–310
Sweepers, 413–414
Sweeps, 64–65, 168
Syfy Channel, 22, 97, 317
Syndicated exclusivity rule (syndex), 38, 108
Syndicated genres, 208, 209
Syndicated programming, 284–287
radio, 423–427
Syndicated program reports, 181–184
Syndicated programs, 14, 15–16, 207
Syndication, 207
cable, 207
cable and, 233–234
chain, 207–213
future of, 239–241
international, 207, 236–239
noncommercial, 207
off-network, 285–287
online, 207, 234–236
radio, 207
Syndicators, 207, 210–212, 214
bidding and, 229–230
local reports for, 220–221
national reports for, 219–220
negotiation and, 229
rules for reps and, 216–217
specialized program analysis for,
221–223
Tablets, 106
Talkers Magazine, 431
Talk-radio formats, 445–450
Talk shows, 291
TAPSCAN, 185
TAR (DMA Television Activity Report), 221
TBS, 16, 305, 306
Technology Report (Neilsen), 151
Technology talk, 449–450
Technorati, 160
Telecommunications Act (1996), 48
Telecourses, 362–363
TeleFutura, 7, 14, 15, 24, 46, 278
Telemundo, 7, 14, 24, 46, 278
Telenovelas, 15, 81
Telephone coincidental method, 199–200
Telephone screeners, 452–453
Telephone systems, 94–97
Telephony, defined, 94
TeleRep, 212
Televisa, 15
Television
HD (high definition), 5
industry pressures on, 41–42
networks, 7
on-demand, 5
ratings services, 168–170
Television programming services, 311
Television quotation data (TvQs), 165–166
Television Without Pity (TWOP), 140
Tennis Channel, 8
Terkel, Studs, 125
Terrestrial radio, 381–382
Texas Cable News (TXCN), 122
Theater-style testing, 161–162
Theatrical feature films, 84, 86
Theatricals, 208
Third-party processors, 185
3D, 101
Tiering, 150
Time Period Averages, 180–181
Time slot ratings, 74
Time-spent-listening (TSl) section, of radio
ratings books, 188–189
Time Warner, 30, 46, 49, 112–113
Time zone feeds, 305
TNT, 16, 19
Toledo 5/WTO5, 120
Topical spots, 299
Total Service Area (TSA), 393
Tracht, Dough “Greaseman,” 412
Tracking, 180
Treatments, 76
Trinity Broadcasting Network (TBN), 274
Trip tones, 417
TruTV, 194–195
Tune-in promotion, 337
Tunerfish, 139
Tuning inertia, 20
Turner, Ted, 313
Turner Classic Movies, 315, 316
Turnover, 189
TvChaser, 140
TvChatter, 139
TV Guide, 80, 140
Twitter, 138–139
Umbrella series, 368
UNI, 17, 24
United Stations, 426
Universal access, 103–104
Universal channel lineup, 116
Univision, 7, 8, 14, 15, 46, 265, 278
Univision Radio, 378, 388, 449
Unscripted programming, 83–84
UPN, 24, 277
Urban format, 379
Urban talk, 448
USA, 16, 19, 305
Us (magazine), 80
U-verse, 96–97, 116, 126
Variety, 46
VCAST, 134
Veoh, 136
Verdoia, Ken, 373
Verizon, 126
Vertical integration, 48–55
Vevo, 134
Viacom, 30, 46, 270
Viddler, 136
Video gaming, 140–143
ratings services, 172
Video-on-demand (VOD), 5, 98, 308–310,
337
Video-on-demand (VOD) services, 308
Video online use, 137
Video programming, 93
General Index
483
www.ebook777.com

free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Viewers, homogeneity of, 118
Vignettes, 314, 316
Vimeo, 136
VimeoPlus, 136
ViP (Viewers in Profile report), 220
Viral video, 137
Virtual advertising, 54
Virtual channels, 116
Virtual worlds, 142
Visits, 194
Voice of Internet Protocol (VoIP), 126
Vudu, 134
Wallace, Chris, 262
Wal-Mart, 134
Walters, Barbara, 257
Ware, Lincoln, 446
Warner Brothers (WB), 29, 31, 46, 277
Washington Post Company, 274
Weather Channel, 21
The Weather Channel, 305, 306
Web-based video-on-demand, 134–135
Webcasting, 383
Web programs, 129–130
providers of, 132–138
Weekend magazines, 262
Weiss, Ellen, 359
Western Instructional Television (WIT), 362
Westwood One, 388–389, 426, 441
What’s On app, 140
Wide Orbit, 404
Wi-Fi, 40, 41, 127, 384
internet content, 130–132
radio, 441
Wiki, 150
Williams, Juan, 358, 359
Wimmer Research, 186
Window, 16
Winfrey, Oprah, 9, 76, 292
WTO5/Toldeo 5, 120
Xbox 360, 131
Yap.TV, 139
Yfrog, 136
YouTube, 4, 7, 15, 105, 134–136, 137
Zap2It, 140
Zapping, 21
Zipping, 21
Zoning, 117, 323
Zukerberg, Mark, 138
Zynga, 140–141, 144, 149
484
General Index

